Restricting International Trade in the

National Artistic Patrimony:
Economic Rationale and Policy

Instruments

 ’   *

This article examines the rationale for restricting the international trade in art belonging to the na-
tional artistic patrimony. The meaning of national patrimony is analysed, and rationales for state
funding and interventions in the art market are analysed in light of the nonprivate beneﬁts that this
category of art produces. Distributional concerns about the international movement of art are con-
sidered. The second part of the article provides a taxonomy of restrictions used to prevent art objects
leaving a nation, namely export restrictions, import regulations, and tax policies and incentives.

1      
  

1.1 :     
The notion of the existence of a national artistic patrimony that is jeopardized if
part of it is sold, especially for export abroad, is one of the most pervasive themes
in debates surrounding trade in art. What, though, belongs to the national patri-
mony? What is the case for the state either purchasing and/or preventing the sale
of objects belonging to the national artistic patrimony? What are the means by
which it can attempt to bring this about? These questions are the subject matter
of this article.

Our focus here is on unique or nonreproducible art, namely paintings, sculp-
ture, and other art or historic artifacts. Paintings and sculpture are unique; each
original work is distinctive even if it is copied or produced in the “style” of an-
other artist. In economic terms this means that there are no close substitutes for
the goods. This uniqueness, coupled with high relative durability, makes these
works “collectors’ items,” for which there is a strong secondary market. A highly
distinctive feature of this form of art is that although there is a primary market
where artists (producers) sell directly to “ﬁrst” consumers, the bulk of trading is

*Department of Economics, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

32

     33

on secondary markets between consumers and consumers.1

Not all unique art, of course, belongs to the national patrimony. In most
countries there is an age requirement—say, objects of ﬁfty years’ standing or more.
Nor does all “old” art belong to the national patrimony; only art that fulﬁls some
important national function is so categorized. Thus, what belongs to the national
artistic patrimony is subjective and varies considerably from country to country.
Central to the deﬁnition, though, is that objects belonging to the national artistic
patrimony are of long standing and contribute in an integral way to the cultural
identity or tradition of a country or region. As one author puts it, the national
artistic heritage or national patrimony consists of “[o]bjects and forms of artis-
tic expression which the . . . state concerned designates as objects of cultural in-
terest, which contribute or have contributed to the present identity of a people or
group in any way whatsoever and which are characteristic of them.”2

However the national artistic patrimony is deﬁned, it can usefully be catego-
rized into two types: movable (paintings and single pieces of sculpture) and im-
movable art (collective sites, buildings, and monuments, and their attachments).
While this article will concentrate on the former, there is a certain degree of over-
lap, often caused by looting, pillaging, and even trade in legally owned items which
involves the breaking up of collective sites or monuments and leads to a consid-
erable blurring of the boundaries between movable and immovable art.3

One further point to keep in mind is the issue of where the national patri-
mony is physically located. A major part of it in Europe is in public ownership and
is housed in public museums, public institutions, or publicly owned sites. Some is
in private hands, such as private galleries or homes, some is in churches, and ﬁnally,
some objects are not yet uncovered.

A critical issue in relation to the national patrimony is the stealing and loot-
ing of part of it, especially where access is open and protection is difﬁcult to en-
force. Many international agreements address this issue, but it is a problem that has
existed for thousands of years. The looting of works of art by invading armies 
or colonizers has been a recurring theme and is topical today with many claims
arising recently from activities during the period around World War II. What is
different perhaps now is the scale of activity of privately organized thieves and
looters. The distinction between stolen art and that legally owned but exported
without proper certiﬁcation is a topic that will turn up repeatedly in this article.
The main focus of this article, though, is on two questions: (1) what is the
economic rationale for state funding/regulation in relation to the sale of objects
belonging to the national artistic patrimony; and (2) as a corollary, what restric-
tions does the state impose on the sale abroad of objects listed as belonging to the
national patrimony but owned by private individuals. The ﬁrst of these questions
draws on the welfare-theoretic framework of economics but is by its nature con-
cerned with issues which in the ﬁnal analysis are philosophical in nature: the sec-

34  ’   

ond addresses more concrete, albeit perhaps less interesting, issues and draws on
literature in the relevant law and economics areas.

1.2      
    

1.2.1 Introduction
Much of the national artistic patrimony that is in state ownership came from what
were once the private collections of wealthy royals, especially in Europe. Many of
these works of art had de facto been paid for with public money. Likewise, in the
United States, much of what is in the larger mainly private museum collections
came from donations by private individuals, often aided by tax expenditures by the
state.4 These objects are thus in state ownership or state-supported museums not
arising from any philosophical view and/or economic rationale, but simply, one
could say, by historical accident.

While the possible, but very unlikely, sale of such works of art will be dis-
cussed later in this article, what is of interest here is why the state today should
purchase, or aid the purchase of, an historical work of art that comes on the open
market and/or restrict the sale of such an artwork outside the boundaries of the
nation-state? This is the issue to be addressed in this section. It might be said that
the decision whether or not to sell objects already in public ownership is just the
mirror image of this question. As shall be seen later, though, there is an extraor-
dinary reluctance to sell art objects, either new or old, not only from public col-
lections of art but also from private art museums.

The main rationale provided by economists for state ownership or ﬁnancial
support of things such as historical works of art is that the beneﬁts from the 
existence of such objects are not just private but also nonprivate in nature. The
essence of this argument is that objects identiﬁed as belonging to the national pat-
rimony create a beneﬁt not just for those who view these objects, for which they
can be charged, but also a beneﬁt that accrues to everyone, both those who do and
those  who  do  not  view  them. This  beneﬁt,  the  nonprivate  beneﬁt,  cannot  be
charged individually to people but must be paid for, and in this particular case, the
objects owned or supported by the state are funded out of general taxation.5

Nonprivate beneﬁt is in principle a powerful argument for public ownership
or ﬁnancial support of the national artistic patrimony, based as it is on strict eco-
nomic reasoning rather than on some rhetorical special pleading. It states that
there are objects the very existence of which does create a beneﬁt, be it psychic or
of some other nature, for most of the population. It would be almost impossible
to charge people according to the beneﬁt they derive, and as such the object should
be paid for, either in whole or in part, by the state. What, though, are these non-
private beneﬁts associated with the existence of certain historical works of art?

     35

Even if they exist, what is their magnitude? (In other words how much public
money should be allocated to the purchase and/or protection of these artifacts?)
Bruno Frey has dealt with the question of ascertaining the value which the
public puts on the nonprivate beneﬁts associated with the arts at some length in an
earlier article in this journal.6 It has been shown that such nonprivate beneﬁts do
exist and that the extent of the measured nonprivate beneﬁt can often be quite sub-
stantial. It is worth therefore looking at the nature of these nonprivate beneﬁts in
some detail, as they apply in particular to the national artistic patrimony. A wide
variety of such beneﬁts have been identiﬁed, and inevitably there is more substance
to some claims than to others. For the purposes of this article, though, two group-
ings will be considered: (1) development of national or regional identity and social
cohesion and (2) an assortment of other, less important nonprivate beneﬁts.

1.2.2 National or Regional Identity and Social Cohesion
One of the arguments used most frequently in relation to the protection of the na-
tional art heritage relates to national or regional identity, that is, the extent to
which this heritage can deﬁne “those elements of national life which characterize
a country and distinguish its attitudes, institutions, behaviour, [and] way of life
from those of other countries.”7 Like the physical well-being of its people and
lands, the cultural identity of a nation must be cherished and protected, accord-
ing to this argument. The protection both of the physical and the cultural well-
being, that is, the physical and cultural capital, of a country, region, or city creates
beneﬁts for all, and these are best paid for collectively and usually owned, or sup-
ported, by the state. An important condition of such support appears to be that
the national artistic patrimony remain within the geographical boundaries of the
state or region.

Some commentators, though, have questioned the national identity argument:
“In the context of large, heterogeneous nation-states should we speak of multiple
identities or a single one? Is it valid to speak of ‘national’ identity as if all nations
were the same? Is national identity a ﬁxed entity or a changing one? These ques-
tions recall debates about the concept of ‘national character,’ long discredited, in
part because of its ingrained stereotypical assumptions.”8 In the past, national
identity has usually been ascribed to a population coextensive with the geographic
boundaries of a nation, and most European countries would consider themselves
to have a distinct national identity, with the national artistic patrimony making a
signiﬁcant contribution to this. However, many European countries are not mono-
cultural but, owing to immigration over the last century, multicultural, France and
Britain being good examples. Even disregarding immigration, countries such as
Belgium, with its Flemish and French communities, and Switzerland, with its Ital-
ian-, German-, and French-speaking groups, are also culturally divided. The real
danger of emphasizing national identity and a common cultural heritage could be

36  ’   

the exclusion of certain ethnic groups from the national cultural debate, as well as
a resistance to change over time. The United States, of course, is the quintessential
nation of immigrants. As such, people there have had to face for a long time the
issue of what “American identity” means. The matter has never been resolved, and
as such one hears far less emphasis on this argument for cultural support in the
United States than would be the case in most European countries. In fact, some
people would see an emphasis on national identity as divisive.

The national identity and related national prestige arguments, though, hold
tremendous appeal for most people, even for Americans; witness the reactions of
the population there to U.S. participation in, for example, the Olympic Games, or
the Ryder Cup in golf. Drawing on the work of sociologists, it has been suggested
that the beneﬁt of national identity is synonymous with social cohesion and har-
mony (which beneﬁts everyone), that this cohesion in turn depends on the inten-
sity of social communications within and among groups, and that members of the
same nation communicate more effectively with each other and over a wider range
of subjects than with outsiders.9 Thus it is argued that communication intensity
is fostered by a sense of national identity, and that this in turn fosters social co-
hesion and social harmony.

It is strongly argued that the existence of a national artistic patrimony con-
tributes to this sense of national identity, as it helps us to understand both who we
are and the ways of living and problems of our fellow citizens. This notion has
been captured neatly by Paul Bator: “The art of a society is both a manifestation
and mirror of its culture and the existence and awareness of a common culture is
intimately tied to the existence and awareness of a sense of community.”10 Thus,
national identity and social cohesion are linked. It has been argued regarding this
connection that in fact one of the primary functions of the arts is to act as an
agent of social cohesion and continuity:

Like language, the arts are one of the principal means by which a society
binds itself together and transmits its beliefs and standards from one
generation to another. The arts perform this function when they embody,
reinforce, and celebrate the values of their society, when they conﬁrm and
exemplify the lessons simultaneously taught by the family, by the formal
structures of education, and by the various mass media in all their variety. In
this function, the arts play a critically important role. Not only do they pro-
vide a kind of social “glue,” but they also furnish a means by which society
can identify and distinguish itself from others.11

This is indeed a very strong assertion, and it may apply with special force to less
well-off nations. Removing antiquities from the culture in which they are embed-
ded (e.g., Maya art) may deprive a community from enjoying the object’s beneﬁts
and may threaten the community’s sense of identity, alienate it from traditional

     37

sources of authority, and weaken its institutional frameworks. The loss of such tra-
ditional art may happen insidiously and gradually over many years, or, in extreme
cases—for example, in wartime or colonial exploitation—there may be sudden
and large movement. Another problem, especially with tribal and traditional com-
munities, is that Western collectors, through buying and reselling certain art-
works, transform objects that may have been intended for religious worship or
even some functional use into materialistic consumer goods. A related problem
with  the  movement  of certain  works  of art  is  that  it  may  destroy  important
records of history or even civilizations, as seen in excessive depletion, be it through
looting or whatever means, of the Maya sites. If an antiquity is left within its in-
tended site or culture, historians and scholars can often learn much more about the
artists and their techniques and generally about the culture and tradition that fol-
lowed, whereas once moved there may be much less chance to acquire such infor-
mation when the objects are researched out of context.12

This last argument suggests that the collective beneﬁts involved may apply to
a much wider group than just the indigenous population. Sites containing im-
movable art may throw light on the origins of mankind in general and thus in a
fundamental way contribute to the world population’s identity. There is no corre-
sponding “world government” to fund the purchase or upkeep of such sites, but
there are international bodies that can be used for the transfer of relatively small
sums of international money to such projects. Besides, it may strengthen the re-
solve of some countries to assist the originating country in protecting its national
patrimony against unlawful removal if all countries beneﬁt from so doing.

National or regional identity, and its contribution to social cohesion, then, are
a persuasive and indeed pervasive argument in favour of state ownership or state
support of objects deemed to belong to the national artistic patrimony. It is an ar-
gument in itself and it also has a bearing on almost all other arguments for such
ownership or regulation.

1.2.3 Other Nonprivate Beneﬁts

1.2.3.1 National Prestige

International recognition and prestige are often posited as beneﬁts of protecting
the national artistic patrimony that are related to social cohesion and national
identity and, like these, are public in nature. Few people, it is argued, would be
happy if their country “became known abroad as a cultural wasteland, a nation in
which Mammon had put beauty and art to rout.”13 This has been compared to the
billions of dollars that the United States government spent on being the ﬁrst to get
to the moon, much of which expenditure was justiﬁed solely in terms of national
feeling of achievement. It is argued that art is a “good ambassador” in that the
trade and movement of art between nations help to stimulate interest, under-

38  ’   

standing, and admiration of the originating nation.14 As such, there is a national
interest in having a collection of valuable historical art, as it ensures the country
a place in the international art and culture arena as well as perhaps making it a
major magnet for attracting tourists.

National prestige, though, is a very dubious ground on which to base a pub-
lic ownership or regulation argument. First, many more people might be concerned
about the international standing of their football team, their golf players, or their
ﬁlm or automobile industry than that of their arts sector. Professional football or
tennis, however, might exist perfectly well and therefore generate a positive beneﬁt
for others anyway, without any subsidy, whereas the art-historical sector may not
be able to sustain itself (at levels that generate national prestige) commercially
without subsidy, with the result that no positive nonprivate beneﬁt would be forth-
coming. Besides, as will be seen later, many people do not think it appropriate to
equate golf or basketball stars with historical art objects; the existence of both cre-
ates a sense of national pride, but basketball teams can be resurrected if allowed to
die, and golf stars come and go. Antiquities are unique and irreplaceable and per-
haps relate much more to the spirit and essence of a nation than do other factors.
This brings the discussion back to national identity and illustrates that national
prestige is simply a secondary argument. There is not just international prestige in
having art objects on show for visitors; these objects also provide these visitors
with an understanding of the origin and identity of the nation in question.

1.2.3.2 Economic Spillover Beneﬁts

Related to the international prestige argument is the fact that a country’s histori-
cal artistic patrimony may act as the magnet that attracts tourists to a country. 
Examples of this abound, such as the Louvre in Paris, the Pyramids in Egypt, 
the Book of Kells in Trinity College Dublin, the Zwinger in Dresden, and so on.
Tourists spend money and create major employment. Thus, by protecting these na-
tional cultural assets, everyone in the country, it is argued, beneﬁts.

It must be recognised of course that many other enterprises—such as golf or
tennis  clubs,  shopping  facilities,  and  commercial  theatre  or  amusement  parks
—may have similar tourist and employment effects.15 For example, it could be
claimed that good golﬁng facilities are a key factor in attracting entrepreneurs to
an area, with consequential beneﬁts for museums. As such, it could be argued that
the state should perhaps subsidize or own the golf courses rather than museums.
This example, while extreme, does illustrate the dangers of the economic spillover
argument. Many people, though, probably believe that the Louvre, for example,
creates beneﬁts for shops and restaurants in Paris and that the direction of causa-
tion is not the other way, and that as such economic spillover effects do exist in
relation to national cultural monuments. The primary rationale for public owner-
ship of the Louvre may never be related to such a nonspeciﬁc (to the arts) beneﬁt,

     39

but these extra beneﬁts may be important to an overall assessment of public own-
ership of, and increased expenditure on, speciﬁc national cultural monuments and
artifacts.

1.2.3.3 Option Demand: For Future and Present Generations

The essence of the option-demand argument is that there is a beneﬁt for present
generations involved in the consumption of the arts by future generations: present
generations may derive beneﬁts from knowing that the historic cultural assets can
be enjoyed by future generations. In other words, they are prepared to pay in taxes
for these assets to be preserved even though they derive no direct beneﬁt them-
selves from the existence of such objects. This argument is put forcefully by Bau-
mol and Bowen:

We have all met people who admit they have never themselves learned to
enjoy a particular art form, but felt it important that such an opportunity be
available to other members of their families. The same phenomenon has a
signiﬁcant extension to the posterity of the community as a whole. . . . 
A program to preserve the arts for the nation’s posterity is a case of indis-
criminate beneﬁts par excellence. No one can say whose descendants will proﬁt
one hundred years hence from resources now devoted to that purpose.
Neither can these beneﬁts be priced and their cost covered by an admission
charge.16

At ﬁrst glance this is a convincing argument, but is it likely that people who put no
direct beneﬁt whatsoever on the existence of such historical artifacts would be pre-
pared to spend money on such objects just in case their offspring might? Put dif-
ferently, is it likely that someone who places no value on the contribution of his-
torical art objects to the sense of national belonging or identity would expect their
offspring to do so? It seems much more convincing that if they place a high value
themselves on national or regional identity, they will pass on these values to their
offspring, and in this case would be very anxious to spend a little more to make ab-
solutely sure they continue to exist not just for their own lifetime but for that of
their offspring.

The cultural preservation case is related to another option-demand argument.
People derive beneﬁt from knowing that the cultural facility exists, thereby allow-
ing them the option at some future date of attending it themselves, either on their
own or with visitors. It is important to keep this argument separate from the other
arguments. People may want an art treasure to exist, even though they never wish
to see it, for reasons other than option demand: thus, option-demand value is sim-
ply a small subset of the existence-value argument. The national identity argument
is another, and again a much more important part of the argument; few Germans,
for example, may pay to see a Dürer painting, but many would want it to be kept

40  ’   

because of its contribution to national identity. Option-demand arguments apply
to almost all goods and services: we all like to know there is a quality restaurant
or specialist shop or tennis club in our area, if only to know that one day we, or
our children or visitors, might like to use them. Is this an argument, however, for
providing public subsidy to a restaurant, or specialist shop, or a tennis club? No,
it is not, the reason being that such activities do not have associated with them a
national identity contribution—the key deﬁning contribution, as mentioned, of
the national artistic patrimony.

1.3.     
It is possible that large collective beneﬁts are associated with the existence in the
country of certain historical art objects which the country still cannot afford to
buy, at least not in relation to what some person or institution in another country
is prepared to pay. Concern over the need to restrict the movement of art has
mainly come about, in some people’s opinion, not because of an antitrade men-
tality but rather because of such distributional concerns.17 With the tendency for
art to move from poor to rich countries, there are fears that all art will end up in
a few wealthy nations and the rest of the world be left culturally impoverished.
This, though, is part of a more general concern with the distribution of wealth
both within and between countries. Most material wealth such as real estate and
automobiles is concentrated in the hands of the top 10 percent of the world’s earn-
ers, largely in America, Europe, and Japan, so what is different if this is also the
case with historical artifacts? As argued already, historical artifacts may be very dif-
ferent from automobiles, houses, televisions, and other material goods. Access to
air and water, to one’s children, and so on is qualitatively different from access to
most material goods and is not for sale. Likewise, many people will not renounce
their religion regardless of the material cost, and history is replete with examples.
Historical artifacts, many people argue, belong much closer to the religion cate-
gory than to the cars-and-television group and as such do not have a price in the
normal sense of the word; in other words, certain things, some people argue, should
not be for sale, no matter what the price.18

Art, though, can be seen as a form of national capital. If the price obtainable
for sale or export exceeds the fair value of a work (including its nonmonetary
value), then the nation’s wealth is intact or enhanced and there is no loss in selling
it. Surely cultural capital is just like any other capital; if someone wants to buy or
sell it at a fair price, let him or her do so.

This of course must apply to that part of the cultural capital that is not col-
lectively owned, such as paintings in private hands, churches, or private art mu-
seums. In this case, a fair price must be paid, or else there is interference with the
private property rights of an individual. Indeed, it might be asked how an artifact
can form part of the national patrimony if it is in private hands. It can, if it once

     41

belonged in a public place, or in public ownership or people are otherwise famil-
iar with or attached to it. If so, then the issue really is that the state or some col-
lective domestic source ought to have right of ﬁrst refusal should it come up for
sale.

There may be a feeling, however, that since wealthy people own these historic
artifacts, perhaps they should pay back the country that made such wealth creation
possible by donating, at a lower price, the historical art object in question. In a
sense this situation applies in the United States, where there is an expectation that
wealthy individuals, aided by tax concessions, will donate to worthy causes, in-
cluding the donation of their works of art, in recognition of the fact that it was
the market economic system of that country that made such wealth collection pos-
sible in the ﬁrst place.19

If the artifact is in collective ownership, be it in a state or private museum, the
issue then arises as to when, if ever, it should be sold. A hypothetical case that has
been suggested is that of the Chinese wishing to buy Rembrandt’s Night Watch from
the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam for, say, $1 billion. Would it be sold for this ex-
traordinary price, and if not, is there any price at which it would be sold? The ar-
gument is:

Because of the identiﬁcation of the Dutch with the painting, it cannot be
sold. Time is involved as well as bonding. Some “products” need time;
people have invested in them, and once they begin to bear fruit—in the
form of feelings of love, pride, awe even—giving them up is inconceivable;
selling our friendship would be a betrayal of all we stand for. Another factor
is uncertainty. We can never be sure of the value of those special products.
How much is your child worth to you? How much do you want for your
wedding ring? Is a Nightwatch worth 100 million dollars, or 1 billion? If we
have to exchange what is precious to us, we may prefer to do so in a deal
involving some form of reciprocity. So we might lend out the Nightwatch —
but only if the Chinese were to return the favour somehow, royally, at a later
date. That way we may discover value in the deal itself, that is, in the quality
of the reciprocal exchange.20

This quotation captures a number of things pertinent to the discussion. First,
there is the point that all goods and services, as mentioned earlier, are not the same,
and that certain things quite literally do not have a price for most people. The ex-
ample of one’s child is a good illustration of this. Historical artifacts for many
people may belong to this group. Second, it is clear that many of the things that
are important to people in their daily lives are not bought in the marketplace but
received through reciprocal exchange between family members, colleagues, and
friends. Third, the point about ascertaining the value, or price at which one would
be willing to sell, takes considerable time for some objects, especially, say, family

42  ’   

heirlooms or national historical artifacts. Last, the quotation raises the concept
that over time the utility derived from some objects can change, because of bond-
ing. This brings the discussion back to the national identity argument discussed al-
ready; a feeling of national or regional identity and social cohesion generated by
art objects results in fact from such bonding.

The concept of bonding is related to the wider so-called endowment effect.21
This refers to the phenomenon that people often demand much more to give up
an object than they would be willing to pay to acquire it. The reason is that in the
case of artifacts such as paintings the nature of the service derived from the good
changes with possession. Thus there is not only the pleasure of looking at the
painting but the psychic beneﬁts associated with past “consumption” of the paint-
ing. These psychic beneﬁts do not exist at the point of purchase but build up over
time, implying that what you would therefore be prepared to sell the painting for
would be considerably higher than what you originally paid for it (even adjusting
fully for inﬂation and other factors). This has important implications for the mar-
ket in historical artifacts. It implies that in relation to these goods there is a sta-
tus quo bias, that is, a preference for the current state that biases the person or na-
tion against selling. This would suggest, then, that not enough of such objects would
enter the market, either domestic or international.

According to the earlier argument, some goods do not have a price. Using the
endowment concept above, this is simply stating that the psychic beneﬁts that re-
sult from the bonding associated with some historical works of art have a value
that approaches inﬁnity, but who is to be the judge of this? There are two distinctly
different cases here.

If the historical art object is in private hands, then whether or not the artifact
is sold, and if so at what price, as mentioned earlier, is up to the individual in ques-
tion. It may be that a nation has identiﬁed with this art object but the object does
not belong to the nation, and the only way it can be obtained is by paying the full
market price. It would run contrary to the principle of private property and indi-
vidual freedom to suggest otherwise. The issue here, then, is how the nation is to
obtain, or retain within national boundaries, the object in question, ﬁnance as al-
ways being a major factor. Other devices are used, and these will be examined later
in this article.

The second case is where the object is already owned by the state but the ques-
tion of selling it to pay for other worthy projects such as hospitals arises. There is
an extraordinary reluctance to sell works of art held in public collections or own-
ership. As one author put it in relation to the debate on international trade in art:
“Paradoxically, it is easier for art works that have been sold to leave the country
altogether than for a work in a museum to be sold and sent out of a state or city
to another place within the United States.”22 Even more paradoxically, it could be
the reluctance to sell any art object, let alone those belonging to the national pat-

     43

rimony, from national collections that is the greatest barrier to others selling.23
Once the object is sold to a collection in another country, it can in effect never be
bought back; once sold it is truly gone forever. Thus, it does not make sense to ex-
hort a country to permit one of its citizens to sell now an art object belonging to
the national patrimony in the belief that the state can buy it back when times get
better; such a choice may not exist.

      
     

.1 
Most governments use various devices, such as tax breaks, to entice individuals to
leave works of art to art museums and thereby keep the works of art in question
in the country. These tax breaks, however, apply not only to works of art but to
all donations to charitable organizations, including those to churches, schools, hos-
pitals, and other art forms such as concert halls, opera, theatre, and so on. Besides,
in relation to works of art they are not restricted usually to works of art belong-
ing to the national artistic patrimony; they apply to all works of art, be they new
or old, “good” or “bad.” There are reasons for the state to subsidize in this way do-
nations of works of art not belonging to the national patrimony, but these are not
of direct relevance to this discussion. However, some artwork purchased today will
at some later stage, because of the bonding discussed earlier, become part of the
national patrimony. Thus, unless there is state support of more recent art there will
be no part of the future national patrimony relating to more recent times—but
this is a separate issue. Some governments, however, do use the tax system to entice
people to keep objects belonging to the national artistic patrimony (mainly the
United Kingdom). While these are relatively unimportant devices when compared
with export regulations and direct purchase by the state, they will nonetheless be
looked at brieﬂy in this section. Two other devices by which states attempt to keep
objects belonging to the national artistic patrimony within national boundaries, (1)
export restrictions and preemptive rights and (2) import regulations and restric-
tions, will also be examined.24

.     
The most common form of regulation in art markets, in place in over 140 coun-
tries, with the notable exception of the United States, is restrictions on exports of
art objects belonging to the national artistic patrimony. Legislation in this area
concerns limiting, controlling, or prohibiting the export of works of art through
subjecting them to approval or notiﬁcation systems prior to export. Most coun-
tries try to limit the number of items subject to restrictions by criteria of age
and/or value to ensure they are practical to enforce. This list may be different from

44  ’   

what is listed in the national patrimony or may act as a proxy for what is in the
national patrimony where no such list exists. There is a wide variety in degree of
controls between nations but the main methods of export regulation that are in use
or that have been proposed are the following:
Embargo or Prohibition. The prohibition on export may refer either to an entire class
of items, such as all antiquities, or to some precisely deﬁned list of works. The ef-
fect of embargo is to eliminate all legal trade in listed items and as such is often
applied only to a limited number of artworks. Also, countries using embargo will
generally allow certain exceptions. For example, China prohibits the export of all
works of art except for the purpose of exhibition subject to the issuance of a spe-
cial license.25 Countries such as Colombia and Turkey also enforce prohibition of
exports unless for temporary exchange or exhibition. Prohibition can only be use-
ful for countries with strict border controls and low international trade, as export
bans raise the value of art on illegal markets, encouraging smuggling and illicit 
export.
Export Quotas. This system sets export quotas by reference to the volume of im-
ports. It was suggested by the UK Waverly Committee to try to keep a balance be-
tween the gains to the national patrimony from imports with losses through ex-
ports but was rejected and is not currently in use in any state.26
Export Licensing. This is the most ﬂexible and widely used instrument for export con-
trol, with a variety of systems in place ranging from genuine screening devices to
effective embargo in that licenses are rarely granted (“administratively enforced
embargo”). Liberal systems include that of Japan, in which the list of items re-
quiring a license is very narrowly deﬁned, or the United Kingdom, which main-
tains high age and value criteria. Strict systems are found in countries such as Italy
and Greece, in which any item deemed of subjective interest by the state requires
license authorisation.
Preemptive Rights. These are associated with export licensing. They give the state,
public museums, or other institutions the right to purchase the work of art to be
exported at either a competitive market price or one set or agreed on through ne-
gotiation. A license application is needed to defer export and allows time for po-
tential domestic purchasers to mobilise the necessary funds; this is important, as it
can often take considerable time and reﬂection to ascertain the extent of the bond-
ing and therefore the psychic collective beneﬁt that may attach to a historical ar-
tifact. National systems vary as to whether the price offered by the exporter has
to be matched, or a new price negotiated or settled by the courts. Some states, such
as Italy and Greece, retain the right to withhold the license even when the delay 
period is due and no offer is forthcoming; this is equivalent to export pro-
hibition. Others, such as France, retain this right but offer compensation to the 
owner. In states, such as the United Kingdom and Canada, however, export licenses
must be granted if the state or domestic institution does not exercise its right of
acquisition.

     45

 1.          

Minimal or no restrictions

Low level

High level

Export embargo

Barbados
United States

Japan
Switzerland
United Kingdom

France
Italy
Spain

China
Colombia
Turkey

Export Taxes. Some states also impose taxes once an export license is granted to act
as a further disincentive to export. Taxes are based on the value of the object to be
exported and vary from 5 to 30 percent in Italy and Spain and in the 15– 25 per-
cent range in Saudi Arabia. Internally in the European Union taxes are not per-
mitted, as they were found to be contrary to article 16 of the Treaty of Rome con-
cerning the abolition of customs duties.27

It is obvious that nations differ signiﬁcantly in the intentions and practices 
of their export regulation systems. Thus, the fact that one country has a par-
ticularly strict regime on its statute books does not mean that de facto such a 
system applies. Nonetheless, Table 1 does give an indication of how a sample of
countries rank against each other, probably both de jure and de facto, in severity of
restrictions.

The table shows that the United States has one of the most liberal systems,
with no legislation barring or limiting the export of art, except stolen items and
certain archaeological resources.28 This lack of restrictions could be due both to
the predominance of a free-market ideology in the U.S. economic system and to
the fact that Americans are and always have been predominantly buyers rather than
sellers of art. It is also worth noting that all of the major international art markets
lie toward the top of the table (London for Old Masters, New York for contem-
porary art, Switzerland for jewelry and antiques, and so on). Further, it is clear that
a country not rich in national patrimony will resist efforts to impose any system of
uniform export restrictions. Besides, there may be economic, and as well cultural,
factors that explain a particular country’s attitude to export restrictions. This will
also apply in relation to how a country will assist in enforcing an export regulation
applicable in another country.

.  
The use of export regulations is, as seen, only one of a range of instruments used
to protect the national artistic patrimony by keeping it within the boundaries of
the country in question. For a system of control to function properly, import reg-
ulations are perhaps a necessary corollary, which implies that states have to rely on
the co-operation of other nations—the ultimate consumers of exported art. Such
import regulations are in place to try to reduce illicit trade by making those who

46  ’   

provide a potential market agree not to purchase works they believe are stolen or
in breach of some export regulation. Each of these will be looked at in turn, al-
though clearly the main concern of this article is with import regulations relating
to objects which do not have proper export clearance.

2.3.1 Works of Art Sold in Breach of Some Export Regulation
The United States is the most signiﬁcant importing state as well as the largest mar-
ket for stolen and illegally exported art. Its policy on imports is as liberal as that
for exports, with relatively few restrictions on imports of illegally exported art 
objects.

The United Kingdom, another important collecting and exporting nation,
also does not impose controls on imports or recognize and enforce the export con-
trols of other states, claiming it would work against its status as a major interna-
tional market. The United States, United Kingdom, and other wealthy art markets
such as Japan are all major importers and, to maximize the range of acquisitions
available, generally are against import controls. While they can be forced, as will be
seen later, to deal legally with issues of stolen property, export of works of art in
breach of some regulation of the originating country does not often in itself con-
stitute an offence.

Some countries would like to see a system put in place which would bar the
import of all art whose export has not been legally authorized. Proponents of this
system claim that the United States and other big importers are major markets for
illegally exported art and, as they are economically superior to art rich states, there
is a strong incentive to sell to them even if to do so would be a violation of ex-
port laws. As a result, a “blank check control system” was proposed in the origi-
nal draft of the UNESCO Convention Document, which called for all signato-
ries to prohibit import of works of art unless accompanied by appropriate export
documentation from their country of origin. The United States rejected and de-
feated this draft, stating that it could not adopt a rule banning imports simply be-
cause their export was in violation of another state’s law.

Bator argued on the side of the United States regarding the undesirability of
such a rule.29 He claimed that it removes the decision as to what art enters a coun-
try and the decision of what scope of enforcement regime it may be practical and
desirable to operate. Systems such as this imply that one nation must enforce other
states’ export laws whatever their content even if they are highly restrictive and co-
ercive, which must always work in the direction of restricting the international
trade in art despite the wishes of the international community. It would also in-
volve a very complex, expensive, and intrusive regime to be effectively enforced, es-
pecially in the European Union, where all other interests have moved toward dis-
mantling border controls.

     47

2.3.2 Stolen Works of Art
While few nations prohibit the import of art in breach of an export regulation,
many apply selective restraints where works of art have been stolen (from their
state of origin and therefore not declared as part of their export) or where the art
objects have come from clandestinely excavated sites (the most difﬁcult to prove as
theft unless initially classiﬁed and protected under the state’s law).

In the case of stolen art, most countries, including the United States, provide
remedies in the form of judicial action giving the owner rights to sue for recovery
in the courts of the importing nation provided the owner can furnish sufﬁcient
proof of ownership and theft. Additional avenues of relief are available, includ-
ing forfeiture and seizure by customs agents for stolen and illegally imported ob-
jects. The United States has entered into bilateral arrangements with a number of
countries, which largely concern reducing trafﬁc in stolen art objects and restitu-
tion. For example, the 1970 treaty with Mexico was drafted because of growing
concern over repeated plundering of sites and illegal export of Mexican art and 
artifacts  and  mainly  deals  with  recovery  and  return. Treaties  with  Peru  and
Guatemala also deal with the return of undocumented archaeological objects and
are in place largely to protect Pre-Columbian art and artistic and religious artifacts.
Certain imports are also restricted from El Salvador, Nicaragua, Canada, Mali,
Italy, Cyprus, and Cambodia.30

Under the Unidroit Convention of 1995, illegal excavations are now treated as
equivalent to theft when they are carried out in violation of a local law. However,
as of January 2000, large states such as the United Kingdom, Japan, or the United
States have still not agreed to sign or ratify the convention.31 The United States,
though, as mentioned above, has entered into several bilateral arrangements pur-
suant to the United States’ implementation of the UNESCO Convention. Besides,
the United Kingdom, as a member of the European Union, is bound by Council
Directive 93/7 On the Return of Unlawfully Removed Cultural Objects. This
aims to achieve “minimal harmonization” by providing a mechanism for the return
of cultural goods unlawfully removed from a member state. Under this Directive
the government of a state from which the article has been removed can bring an ac-
tion for its return in the courts of the state in which it currently resides. Despite
its potential value in reducing unlawful trade, it has still not been implemented in
many states, often owing to conﬂicting legal arguments between nations regarding
bona ﬁde possession, ownership rights, rules of private law, foreign public law ex-
ceptions, and so on. As success of this return system relies on substantial co-
operation between national authorities, nonimplementation has greatly limited its
effectiveness in practice.

2.3.3 Self-Restraining Acquisition Policies
Rather than resorting to judicial action, this system involves those supplying the
demand for illegally exported goods to voluntarily decline purchase. Works of art

48  ’   

of national importance will often end up in museums, and, through international
pressure and self-interest in preserving art, most of these institutions have devel-
oped “ethical acquisition” policies. Most large museums have explicit policy state-
ments regarding acquisitions, which generally include the provision that works will
not be accepted into collections if illegal export is suspected or until some valid
title can be proven. International organizations such as the International Council
of Museums (ICOM) have been instrumental in developing ethical acquisi-
tion codes and policies with which they expect their members to comply. ICOM,
founded in Paris in 1946 and now with around 15,000 members in 147 countries,
also has a code of professional ethics, respect for which is regarded as a minimum
requirement to practice as a member of the museum profession. It states explicitly:

The illicit trade in objects destined for public and private collections
encourages the destruction of historic sites, . . . theft at both national and
international levels . . . and contravenes the spirit of national and inter-
national patrimony. . . . A museum should not acquire, whether by purchase,
gift, bequest or exchange, any object unless the governing body and responsi-
ble ofﬁcer are satisﬁed that the museum can acquire a valid title to the speci-
men or object in question and that in particular it has not been acquired in,
or exported from its country of origin and or any intermediate country in
which it may have been legally owned in violation of that country’s laws.32

Although not all museums enforce such policies (and there is no way to control the
acquisitions of private or individual collectors),33 media attention concerning ac-
quisition controversies and substantial public interest especially from potential
donors has exerted considerable pressure on large institutions to refrain from deal-
ing in unlawfully traded material. However, the problems of these self regulating
policies has been described in an analogy to a strike: “Self denying ordinances are
a tactic similar to a working man’s strike: unless a sizeable majority join in the tac-
tic, it will fail and the striker will be out of work, the museum poorer in collec-
tions. On the other hand, if the evil is perceived by large enough numbers of the
public, government regulation could be imposed—if museums fail to stem the
tide of criticisms by their own acts, legislators may take the initiative away from
them.”34

Many regulators feel legal restrictions on what museums obtain is overly rigid
and puts acquisition policies in the hands of public ofﬁcials rather than the mu-
seums themselves. Most nations use some form of indirect regulation via tax and
other ﬁnancial incentives. Museums often receive favourable tax treatment due ei-
ther to their status as charities (as in the United States) or as public storehouses of
the nation’s wealth in art. These tax incentives could be the entry point for regu-
lating museum acquisitions with favourable treatment made conditional on the
adoption of suitable policies.35

     49

There is substantial international agreement in imposing import controls if
the art is stolen, or its illicit export is damaging an important category of art or a
nation’s legitimate national patrimony. However, many feel that unless there is a
multilateral system operating, illegal ﬂows of art will continue in the direction to-
wards the countries with the least controls.

2.4 Tax Policies and Incentives
Most governments as a means to support the arts use tax incentives. In relation to
the national patrimony, ﬁnancial incentives are used as a form of indirect aid, chan-
neling funds and donations toward art institutions and thus encouraging the do-
mestic retention of works of art and reducing trade. Incentives may be designed to
discourage exports of heritage art through encouraging donations to domestic 
museums in cash or in kind or through making it more ﬁnancially attractive to
hold the object than to sell it abroad.36 Finally, tax breaks may also be offered in
return for public access and ownership by domestic institutions. Tax incentives are
generally applied to receipt of income or transfer of works of art by sale, gift, or
death.37

These tax measures though are not, as mentioned already, speciﬁc to the na-
tional patrimony and only aid the retention of art-historical objects indirectly.
Nonetheless, there are a few tax measures which speciﬁcally apply to the national
patrimony, and two of these will be discussed brieﬂy.
Conditional Exemption. An unusual set of incentives operates in the United Kingdom
in relation to, inter alia, the transfer of works of art belonging to the national
artistic patrimony; similar incentives were introduced recently in Germany. The
ﬁrst of the special tax incentives in use in the United Kingdom is called “condi-
tional exemption.” It arises when an individual inherits a work of art and the ex-
emption from transfer tax is granted subject to a number of conditions. Namely,
the work must be considered by the state to be of national artistic, historic, or sci-
entiﬁc interest;38 it must be deemed of sufﬁciently high quality to be displayed in
a public collection or be “museum worthy”; the owner must agree to keep the ob-
ject permanently in the United Kingdom and to take steps to preserve and maintain
the object and ensure reasonable public access either through allowing access in
situ in private homes or through loan to a public institution for exhibition for at
least twenty-eight days per year. Other countries attach value limits, such as in Ger-
many, where exemptions are granted up to amounts of 40,000 DM for direct in-
heritants or 10,000 DM for others. In all schemes these tax incentives promote the
dual objectives of discouraging export and increasing public access.
Acceptance in lieu. This is an incentive that allows individuals to discharge a tax debt
on asset and estate taxes by donating works of art to the state and public institu-
tions. This mechanism acts as a tax deduction, and there are usually stipulations at-
tached in terms of acceptability of items and, if remaining in situ, public loan and

50  ’   

exhibition conditions. For example, in the United Kingdom, to be considered
items must be both museum worthy and “preeminent” in their own right or as an
addition to a collection, and in Germany the work must be “exceptional” and rep-
resent the public interest.39 Governments are often strict as to which items are ac-
ceptable in lieu of taxes, as this tax incentive is more costly than others in that the
tax usually paid on transfer is lost as well as the tax deduction from estate or other
taxes owed. Again like the previous incentive, acceptance in lieu is in place to dis-
courage exports and increase public access.

 

Much of what belongs to the national artistic patrimony is already in public own-
ership, at least in Europe, or in private art museums. There are a number of ob-
jects, though, which many consider to be part of the national artistic patrimony
but which are not in state ownership or private art museums. Examples of these in-
clude private collections of historical pieces of art, objects kept in churches, and
as yet undiscovered antiquities. If these objects remain in the state there does not
appear to be an issue, even though there may be no public access to many of these
objects. Why should this be the case, and why does it become an issue only when
the objects come up for sale? It would presumably be difﬁcult to raise the issue
otherwise, as compulsory purchase by the state is not an option when they are not
for sale. Besides, once a work of art is declared for sale there is a very real possi-
bility that it will be sold abroad, given that the market for art is very much global
in nature and as such any individual country would normally form only a small
part of the purchasing power within that market. In many cases state museums or
some large private art museum will not be able, owing to lack of funds, to compete
on this global market and buy the objects in question. The alternative in this sce-
nario is to prevent or delay in some way the sale abroad of these objects.

Why the state may wish to intervene in the art market has been discussed at
some length in this article. The contribution that the national artistic patrimony
makes to national or regional identity and thereby to social cohesion is a clear non-
private beneﬁt attached to the national artistic patrimony, and this is usually the
dominant economic rationale provided for such state intervention. Other reasons
such as national prestige and option demand all relate in a fundamental way to this
key rationale.

The ways in which states can intervene in the international trade market for
works of art belonging to the national patrimony have been examined also in some
detail. Export licenses, the most common form of restriction, in many cases sim-
ply provide time for a public or private institution to compete on the open market.
The object could, for example, otherwise be sold without the institution’s knowl-

     51

edge. Besides, it usually takes much more time for a public institution to raise the
money for such a purchase than would be the case, for example, for some foreign
private institution or individual. This would be especially the case if the public in-
stitution requires both private and public contributions to raise the necessary fund-
ing. The provision of this time therefore seems reasonable provided that the time
period is not excessive and that once it has elapsed the individual is free to sell to
the highest bidder.

If this is not the case and the individual is not allowed to sell abroad, even
after the elapse of a year, say, for some this is still acceptable; as seen earlier, many
countries do not permit the sale of objects belonging to the national artistic pat-
rimony. The cost for the individual is of course a considerably lower price received;
if sold on the much smaller domestic market then a lower price is almost in-
evitable. The alternative for the individual is to sell it illegally abroad; because of
the potentially large differential between domestic and global price there will be
plenty of economic incentive to do so. But which is more inappropriate, selling the
work abroad with the full permission of the owner but not that of the state, or
selling it on the domestic market with the state’s consent but with the owner con-
strained to do so and probably receiving a much lower price? This is the central
issue in placing any constraint on the sale of works of art other than that of a de-
laying export license. For many people it may be an acceptable constraint on pri-
vate ownership and sale. 

There is a fundamental belief that artworks belonging to the national patri-
mony are outside the framework of economics—that such objects should not be
traded in the marketplace like other goods and services. Trade restrictions exist in
all societies; for example, individuals cannot legally sell hard drugs or human or-
gans in most Western societies. Exchange and capital controls have operated in
many developed countries, and in times of crisis restrictions on private actions can
be far reaching. A further factor in the case of historical art objects is that in most
cases they are probably owned by wealthy people, people who, as mentioned, may
have made their wealth in that country and who many believe should make an ap-
propriate return to the nation either by retaining historical art objects within the
country or by donating them to the state or a private art collection with public ac-
cess, with or without state assistance. For others, though, the strong belief persists
that such philanthropic gestures should be voluntary and not enforced through
some state regulation or action; the next step could be enforced appropriation of
all art objects held by wealthy individuals without any compensation whatsoever.
For those who believe that the existence of private property and its protection
under the law is a sine qua non of an economically strong and civilized society, this
would be intolerable.

52  ’   



1. See G. Schulze, International Trade in Art, 23 Journal of Cultural Economics 109– 36 (1999).
2. M. Galle, Report on the Movement of Objects of Cultural Interest in the Context of the
Single Market, EP Session Document 9 (1991).
3. See L. Prott & P. O’Keefe, Law and the Cultural Heritage Vol. 3, Movement 8– 79 (Butterworths,
London 1989).
4. See J. O’Hagan, The State and the Arts: An Analysis of Key Economic Policy Issues in Europe and the United
States (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham 1998).
5. A related issue is that the viewing of an artifact such as a painting can provide a service to
more than its owner and at no extra cost. Thus many people can view a painting and derive
pleasure from this without reducing anyone else’s pleasure. This is also a situation where state
support would be justiﬁed, especially if the numbers wanting to see or visit the artifact were
large.
6. See B. Frey, Evaluating Cultural Property: The Economic Approach, 6 International Journal of
Cultural Property 231 (1997). See also O’Hagan, supra note 4, chap. 2, for a review of the literature
relating to the measurement of the nonprivate beneﬁts associated with the arts. A spate of such
literature has emerged also since this chapter was written and has appeared in the form of pa-
pers presented to the biennial conference of the Association for Cultural Economics Interna-
tional at Barcelona (1998) and Minneapolis (2000).
7. D. Throsby and G. Withers, The Economics of the Performing Arts 177 (St. Martin’s Press, New
York 1979).
8. See V. Zolberg, Museum Culture and the Threat to National Identity in the Age of the
GATT, Trading Culture: GATT, European Cultural Policies, and the Transatlantic Market 166– 67 (A. Van
Hemel et al. eds, Boekman Foundation, Amsterdam 1996).
9. See S. Globerman, Cultural Regulation in Canada (Institute for Research on Public Policy, Mon-
treal 1983).
10. See P. Bator, The International Trade in Art 117 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1981).
11. S. Weil, Tax Policy and Private Giving, in Public Money and the Muse: Essays on Government Fund-
ing for the Arts 156 (S. Benedict ed., Norton, New York 1991).
12. Some have argued, though, for the free circulation of works of art belonging to the national
artistic patrimony. For example, it may be a way by which immigrant populations can maintain
contact with the arts and culture of their mother country (see P. Bator, supra note 10). A some-
what different point is that foreign buyers may appreciate a work of art long before it is given
any recognition at home and that this often acts as an external stimulus in the revaluation of
a nation’s own culture and art, see Prott & O’Keefe, supra note 3, at 9– 11.
13. W. Baumol and W. Bowen, Performing Arts: The Economic Dilemma 384– 85 (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, 1966).
14. See Bator, supra note 10.
15. Such reservations have been made in relation to so-called economic impact studies in the
arts. See Frey, supra note 6.

     53

16. Baumol and Bowen, supra note 13, at 383. 
17. For a good discussion of this issue see B. Frey and W. Pommerehne, Muses and Markets: Ex-
plorations in the Economics of the Arts (Basil Blackwell, London 1989).
18. A typical example of such a view would be the following: “To attempt an estimate of the
money value of the artistic content of our museums would be an intellectual vulgarism. . . .
[Art] is a service to society as free from the rules of demand and supply as the service of law.”
T. Adams, The Civic Value of Museums 47 (Shorthall, NewYork 1937).
19. See J. O’Hagan and D. Harvey, Why Companies Sponsor Arts Events: Some Evidence and
a Proposed Classiﬁcation, 24 Journal of Cultural Economics 205– 24 (2000), for a discussion of this
issue.
20. A. Klamer, Economic Aspects of Cultural Exchange, Trading Culture: GATT, European Cultural
Policies, and the Transatlantic Market 46 (A. Van Hemel et al. eds, Boekman Foundation, Amsterdam
1996).
21. See Frey and Pommerehne, supra note 17; and R. Thaler, The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anom-
alies of Economic Life (Princeton University Press, New York 1994).
22. Zolberg, supra note 8, at 171.
23. A further factor, of course, is the high cost of selling works of art, with commissions for
selling averaging around 10 percent or more of the selling price.
24. A particular problem in looking at this issue is that many measures put in place are designed
to guard against trade in stolen art historical objects; this is a rather different form of illegal-
ity from art that is traded with the knowledge and support of its owner but in violation of
some export restriction. There is fairly widespread agreement across countries that some form
of international  treaty  is  needed  to  deal  with  art  objects  that  are  stolen,  as  seen  by  the
signiﬁcant number of signatories to both the UNESCO and Unidroit Conventions. But even
here there is considerable difﬁculty, as very often the question of ownership is in dispute or un-
clear. Related to this is the question of art-historical objects which had been stolen or looted
some time in the past (e.g., such as during World War II) by invading or occupying armies and
whose ownership is now very much in dispute. The concern here is exclusively with the mea-
sures put in place to deal with trade in art-historical objects which is in breach of the laws re-
stricting such trade; the problem, as shall be seen, is that in many cases such measures are de-
signed to deal with both issues, i.e., stolen and illegally exported objects. This, though, does not
apply to measures to restrict exports, and these will form the main focus of the remainder of
this article.
25. Although nothing has been given exception since 1950.
26. Prott & O’ Keefe, supra note 3, at 483, state that the reason for its rejection was that as most
movement involved outward ﬂows, a balanced quota was little different from a prohibition of
exports.
27. The case of EC Commission v. Italy (1968) is detailed in Prott & O’Keefe, supra note 3, at
508, in which Italy’s progressive tax on art exports of 8– 30 percent was found to be contrary to
the principles of the Treaty of Rome. Italy had argued that the tax did not unduly hamper trade
and helped to compensate the nation for the loss of its national patrimony by providing funds
to use for preservation and restoration. This argument was defeated and Italian law was changed
in 1972 to remove the tax.

54  ’   

28. The United States does protect all archaeological sites on public lands (state or federal as
well as tribal). It also protects, in about half of the states, burials on private land. Objects re-
moved from archaeological sites on public land are considered stolen, as ownership is vested
in either the state or federal government or a Native American tribe.
29. See Bator, supra note 10.
30. A request for import restrictions is currently pending for Bolivia. The United States is also
of course a signatory to the 1970 UNESCO Convention, which was implemented on January
12, 1983. 
31. As of January 2000, twenty-two states (including Switzerland) had signed the convention,
although it has only been ratiﬁed by eight of these and a further four states have acceded to
it. See signatory states at <http://www.unidroit.org/english/implement/i-95.htm>.
32. ICOM, article 3.2 in ICOM Code of Professional Ethics at <http:// www.icom.org/>.
33. According to P. O’Keefe, Trade in Antiquities: Reducing Destruction and Theft 44 (UNESCO, Paris
1997), there is only one association of private collectors—the Swiss Association of Collec-
tors—and it has no code of conduct.
34. L. Hamilton, Museum Acquisition Policies, Art Law, Domestic and International 361 (L. Duboff
ed., Fred B. Rothman, New Jersey 1975).
35. In the European Union, the seventh directive did not affect the exemption from VAT for
museum imports. Exemptions such as these provide an example of such an entry point to reg-
ulate acquisitions, for example, if imports are not accompanied by suitable pedigree or proof
of ownership or legal export.
36. Again, encouraging museum ownership is analogous to discouraging exports, especially in
European institutions, which rarely if ever sell any works that have become part of their col-
lections.
37. See Christie’s, Guide du droit de l’art (Christie’s, Geneva 1998), for details on the various tax mea-
sures available in different countries.
38. Speciﬁcally, objects eligible for conditional exemption are any pictures, prints, books, man-
uscripts, works of art, scientiﬁc collections, or other things not yielding income which appear
to the commissioner of the Inland Revenue to be of national, scientiﬁc, or artistic interest.
38. In certain states such as Belgium, whilst acceptance in lieu is possible in theory, conditions
for approval are so strict—needing international recognition and depending on the succes-
sor—that the mechanism is rarely used in practice.


