The Gentili di Giuseppe Case 

in France

 *

These truly exceptional marks of generosity which have earned us
recognition have probably not done so with the “German commission
responsible for seizing Jewish property.”Were that commission informed,
perhaps it might deem it fair and proper to leave the descendants of those
generous donors the few art objects they possess. . . . This is why I am
turning to your kind mediation to endeavour to secure assurances from the
occupying authorities that our property will be respected in future.

Excerpt from a letter to the Director of National Museums from Léon
Reinach after the seizure of his family’s collection of works of art from the
Château de Chambord on July 7, 1941. The family made well-known gifts to
France, the Villa Kerilos at Antibes, the Nissim de Camondo Museum in
Paris, and prestigious collections housed at the Louvre. 

In ordering the Louvre to return ﬁve paintings in its safekeeping to the Gentili di
Giuseppe heirs, the Appeal Court of Paris found an appropriate legal solution to
the case before it. However, it proved beyond the ability of the court to fully re-
solve the moral issues surrounding the art works.1

1  

Federico Gentili di Giuseppe, a Jewish Italian businessman born in 1868, was an of-
ﬁcial representative of the Italian Ministry of Finance in Paris. An art collector
and historian, he built up a large collection of paintings, particularly Italian mas-
ters, between 1910 and 1940 at his home on Avenue Foch. He also donated mod-
ern Italian masters to the Musée du Luxembourg in Paris,2 thereby enhancing
France’s national heritage. He died on April 21, 1940, leaving his estate to his chil-
dren, Marcello and Adriana. Upon the fall of France, these heirs ﬂed. Marcello, an
astronomer, took refuge at the Pic du Midi Observatory while Adriana, her hus-
band, Raphael Salem, and their three children went to London. The Salem family

* Lecturer at Université de Bourgogne, France. The author would like to thank Corinne Hershkovitch,
attorney, for providing the decisions.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 10, No. 2, 2001, pp. 264– 275
© 2001 International Cultural Property Society

264

  265

subsequently moved to Canada and then to the United States where they remained
until the end of the war.

A creditor of the di Giuseppe estate, Julien Giraud, arguing that the heirs
showed absolutely no interest in settling his claim for ninety thousand Francs, ap-
plied to the courts (the Tribunal de première instance de la Seine) for a provisional
“testamentary” administrator to be appointed. A court order of October 29, 1940,
made in absentia since none of the family was then resident in Paris, appointed a
Mr. Moulin to administer the estate. An inventory and valuation were made and
certain assets auctioned off at the Hôtel Drouot over a two-month period com-
mencing March 31, 1941. Five paintings, including a Tiepolo, were purchased for the
account of Hermann Goering. The unexpectedly high proceeds of the sale, some
4,776,289 Francs, were then paid into the estate. After World War II some of the
works that had been auctioned were found in Goering’s collection and returned to
France to be held pending restitution by the Louvre.3

Upon returning to Paris, the Gentili di Giuseppe heirs asked the administra-
tors of the estate to render accounts. During a trip to the Louvre in 1950, Adriana
found that three paintings that had been part of her father’s collection were on dis-
play. She made several applications for their return, all of which were rejected by
the Louvre, as “trustee” of the paintings, on the ground that the heirs would ﬁrst
have to obtain a court decision nullifying the sales at auction in Spring of 1941.
This would have been virtually impossible, as there had been many purchasers and
their present whereabouts would have been difﬁcult to ascertain.4 The heirs sub-
sequently made no further attempts to assert their rights.

Forty-ﬁve  years  then  passed.  In  1995,  French  President  Jacques  Chirac,  in
marking the roundup of Jews in the Paris Vélodrome d’Hiver during World War
II, acknowledged France’s inextinguishable debt towards the 76,000 Jews deported
from France, of whom only 2,500 were to return from the death camps. He set up
a commission of inquiry into the treatment of France’s Jews, chaired by Jean Mat-
téoli, himself a former deportee and later President of the Economic and Social
Council.5 The report of the commission was published on February 1, 1999, after
three  years  of investigation  by  sixty-six  researchers.6 At  the  same  time,  Lynn
Nicholas published her book The Rape of Europa in the United States and then in
France,7 while the Direction des Musées de France, amid the commotion caused
by claims that art works were being held unjustiﬁably in France,8 organised a con-
ference at the Louvre entitled “Pillage and Restitution: the Fate of Works of Art
Removed from France during the Second World War.”

The  political  climate  had  changed,  and  the  successors  of the  Gentili  di
Giuseppe family now decided to revive their claim to the three works, together
with two others identiﬁed in the intervening period and all held by the Louvre.9
The trial court dismissed their claim, but the Appeal Court of Paris overturned
that decision in June 1999. The ﬁve works of art were returned. Concurrently,

266     

Berlin’s Gemäldegalerie returned Rinaldo Abandoning Armida by Tiepolo, which had
been sold under the same circumstances in 1941. Having reestablished their own-
ership, the family auctioned this work,10 along with those previously exhibited in
the Louvre, at Christie’s in New York on January 27, 2000.11

2   

For lawyers, the most intriguing aspect of the case was the annulment of the suc-
cessive auctions at the Hôtel Drouot from March 31 to May 29, 1941. Before dis-
cussing this ﬁnding, however, I will review the court’s ﬁndings in relation to claims
that the action was time-barred.

2.1     
The provision forming the basis for annulment of the 1941 auctions was the Sec-
ond Order of 21 April 1945 (Ordonnance No. 45-770), made under the celebrated
London Declaration of January 5, 1943, signed in London by the Allied govern-
ments.12 While making allowance for annulment, the 1945 order laid down two
measures designed to facilitate dispute settlement: a time bar and custodianship for
unclaimed property.

Article 21 of the order provides that annulment applications no longer be ad-
missible after the expiration of a period of six months from the legal date of the
end of hostilities. The limitation period, which was in fact extended until Decem-
ber 31, 1949,13 was obviously intended to remove the threat to bona ﬁde purchasers
from belated claims. In the case in point, the successors’ claim came forty-nine
years late, as the initial writ was issued on March 19, 1998. However, the court lifted
the limitation, a decision which can be better understood in light of the situation
immediately after the war.

It is worth mentioning here the mechanism set up by the French authorities,
with great dispatch, for the administration of goods returned from Germany. Ar-
ticle 23 of the 1945 order arranged for the custodianship of conﬁscated property
that was unclaimed after October 21, 1945. The intention was that ownerless prop-
erty would pass to the state in accordance with standard practice. However, the
order hardly anticipated the sheer quantity of property recovered from Germany.
More than forty-six convoys of cultural property came back to France between
August 1945 and October 1950, totalling some 60,000 items.14 Tracing owners was
a mammoth operation. No sooner had Paris been liberated than a Commission de
récupération artistique (CRA) was set up. The commission included Jacques Jau-
jard, Directeur des Musées Nationaux, who, from the outbreak of the war, had or-
ganised the removal for safekeeping of national collections, with an admixture of
private collections belonging to Jewish owners. Another member was Rose Valland,
who for four years had maintained intelligence on the German services, including

  267

the notorious Einsatzstab Reichsleiters Rosenberg (ERR),15 which specialised in
the conﬁscation of cultural property.

The commission worked in an unofﬁcial capacity, at ﬁrst, before being legally
constituted before the end of 1944.16 With the support of the Ofﬁce des biens et
intérêts privés (OBIP) it processed thousands of claims for restitution: 85,000
records were made.17 These formed the basis for the famous ten-volume catalogue
known as the Répertoire des biens spoliés, which was widely circulated in Europe
and the United States, and the existence of which goes to the heart of the recent
decision in the Schloss case.18 For more prestigious collections, the work was com-
paratively straightforward, as there were adequate records in the form of invento-
ries, insurance policies, or photographs to support claims. In this way more than
two thousand works were returned to the Rothschild family.19The task was a more
complex one, though, for less well-known items. Nonetheless, the commission
managed to identify 45,000 works, an impressive number, given the difﬁculties in
identifying a work of art from a simple written description.

The commission’s work ended in 1950,20 with two-thirds of the property hav-
ing been returned to its owners, leaving some 16,000 items as ownerless for want of
proof of title or because there were no claimants. The state decided to sell these
unreturned items, as provided for ﬁve years earlier by the declaration cited above.
The OBIP handed them over to the Administration des Domaines but not before
two thousand of the more important works (a little less than 15 percent of what
remained) were instead picked out by the Administration culturelle for inclusion
in public collections. Among these were the works of art later claimed by the Gen-
tili di Giuseppe family.

From 1948 French museums considered trying to obtain custody of certain
works of art in view of their perceived signiﬁcance to the national heritage. The
option of buying them was quickly ruled out, as the low level of available postwar
subsidies meant that nothing like the money required would be available. The de-
cree of September 30, 1949, terminating the functions of the CRA therefore set up
two “selection commissions” to pick out the most interesting works.

However, title to this property was not transferred directly to the state.21
The works were recorded on provisional inventories until such time as they
could be claimed and became known collectively as MNR (Musées Nationaux
Récupération), although in the actual registers this term designates strictly only
those works assigned to the Louvre’s department of paintings.22 The works
were then, in accordance with the decree of the Ministry of Education of Sep-
tember 30, 1949, exhibited for four years at the Château de Compiègne, and
then in national or provincial museums. By the same decree, they were recorded
on a provisional inventory made available to dispossessed persons. Provision
was also made for a statutory limitation period for making claims, but no time
was ever ﬁxed, a series of three bills on the matter being drawn up but never en-
acted.

268     

To return to the case in point, it appears that despite the initiatives of the
French authorities of the day, some owners were unable to locate their property
in time. The Gentili di Giuseppe family was unaware of the whereabouts of their
paintings until a chance trip to the Louvre in 1950. This is surprising, as the de-
cree ordered all MNR works to be exhibited at the Château de Compiègne. The
trial court did not explore this anomaly and lifted the limitation on the grounds
that the heirs, because of the threats they faced from the Nazis, had had to move
away. The heirs were therefore unable to ascertain what had happened to their
property, because it had been dispersed under circumstances that made it virtually
impossible to trace. This argument is not in dispute. Nor was it attacked in the ap-
peal court, which upheld the trial court’s decision only on the point that the action
was not barred by the passage of time.

2.2       1941
The second issue in the case was how to characterise the disputed sales at auction.
The 1945 order provided for two regimes: one applicable to conﬁscations and
forced sales, the other for operations carried out with the consent of the vendor
and relating to property that had not previously been the subject of measures out-
side the scope of the ordinary law. The distinction is not unimportant. In the ﬁrst
instance, the sale is annulled as of right. In the second, annulment depends on an
involved application of the burden of proof, and the consequences are the same
as in the general law respecting nullity as a result of the absence of consent.23 In
the Gentili di Giuseppe case, the trial court characterised the sale as an act gov-
erned by ordinary law. The appeal court disagreed and ruled it was a case of con-
ﬁscation.

2.2.1 The Trial Court’s Interpretation of the 1941 Auction as a Sale Subject to Ordinary Law
Let us begin by looking at the classical distinction between pillage and conﬁscation
made by Isabelle le Masne de Chermont and Dider Schulmann in their report on
the looting of works of art belonging to Jews in France.24 Pillage, by this deﬁni-
tion, took place outside of any legal framework. This was the case, for example,
with the actions of the ERR from July 1940, which consisted in searching and seiz-
ing works from the main Jewish art dealers in Paris.25 Conﬁscation, however unjust,
was based on legal provisions corresponding to orders that departed from the or-
dinary law in force. The Vichy government, for often ambivalent reasons, played an
essential part in this process. On July 23, 1940, it passed a law stripping those
French nationals who had ﬂed the country of their nationality.26 Then, on Octo-
ber 3 of the same year, it drew up an initial set of rules governing the status and ca-
pacity of Jews. This included a deﬁnition of Jewish identity and established the
principle of excluding Jews from all public-sector employment in occupied and
unoccupied France.27 Soon after came the creation of a Commission for Jewish Af-

  269

fairs for all of France,28 and then a second and more stringent set of regulations on
the status of Jews that extended the list of prohibited occupations.29 Jews were to
be legally incapacitated, having to be represented by a special commissioner who
was ﬁrst given the authority, and then the obligation, to liquidate his ward’s estate.30
The abhorrent principle of aryanisation had made its shameful entrance into French
law.31

In the case in point, the trial court considered that, although the writ of Oc-
tober 24, 1940, was issued six days after publication in the ofﬁcial journal of the
ﬁrst regulations on the capacity and status of Jews, the appointment of the testa-
mentary administrator to handle succession was not made on the basis of the anti-
Semitic legislation. Accordingly, the auction sales, as the immediate outcome of
the appointment of the testamentary administrator, came under the second cate-
gory set out by the order. If we follow the analysis of A. Prost et al. in the study
of the treatment of Jews in France cited above, the distinction is straightforward
enough.32 On the one hand, there is conﬁscation and forced sales, in essence all ex-
orbitant measures. On the other hand, there are deeds performed with the consent
of the interested party that were not previously governed by measures outside the
scope of ordinary law. This means, say the authors, deeds done before the ap-
pointment of special administrators on the basis of the racial laws. They go on to
explain that title II of the order confused situations arising from sales made with
apparent consent, and before the appointment of any special administrator, by
Jews who were trying to save part of their property from foreseeable dispossession.
The commentators cite the criterion established by the French Supreme Court
(Cour de Cassation) in the decision of Silberstein spouses v. Garnier.33The appeal court
had ruled that, as a result of the circumstances and the personal relationships be-
tween the purchasers and sellers at the time, the sellers had agreed to a sale. The ap-
peal court consequently characterised the legal position as falling within the ambit
of title II article 11 of the 1945 order. However, this decision was overturned by
the Cour de Cassation, which ruled that the matter came under article 1 on the
ground that a special administrator had been imposed in December 1940.

The trial court in the Gentili di Giuseppe case characterised the auction sales
as within the ambit of ordinary law, not conﬁscation, on the basis of three in-
stances of prima facie evidence. The court observed, ﬁrst, that the settlement of
the inheritance did not solely concern Mr. Giraud, the creditor who instigated the
court’s appointment of the testamentary administrator, but that there were sub-
stantial liabilities requiring rapid settlement. Second, the court observed that the
work of the testamentary administrator, Mr. Moulin, was monitored by the fam-
ily’s notary, who helped choose the auctioneer, and by an agent who was designated
by Marcello on October 17, 1941, by notarial deed in the Principality of Monaco
and who supervised the inventory operations. The trial court noted that it was not
contested that a selection was made among the many works of the deceased’s col-

270     

lection and that the ﬁnest works of the collection were not put up for sale, which
could only have resulted from an enlightened choice being made on the basis of
precise instructions. Finally, the court concluded that the relationship between the
court-appointed  administrator  and  the  family  was  nonconfrontational,  as  evi-
denced by an excerpt from a letter to the administrator from Marcello on June 19,
1941:

Further to your note of 7 June about the settlement of claims on my father’s
estate, to which I replied on 11th giving my consent, I am writing to inform
you, in my own name and in the name of my sister, Mrs. Salem, from whom
I have received power of attorney, that I hereby accept the inheritance. . . . I
would like to take this opportunity to thank you again for the services you
have rendered to us on many occasions.

Nonetheless, the presumption of duress that beneﬁts the plaintiff in such cases is
rebuttable. Evidence that a fair price was paid may, according to the same article 11,
overturn this presumption. This was the argument made by the Louvre in defense.
The burden of proof of duress therefore fell to the plaintiffs and, in the absence
of such proof, the trial court could not uphold their claim.

2.2.2 The Appeal Court’s Interpretation of the 1941 Auction Sales as Conﬁscation
The trial court’s decision was reversed by the appeal court. The distinction be-
tween the two categories posited by the order is actually much more complex than
at ﬁrst appears. Acts characterised as conﬁscation under article 1 are understood to
be acts carried out either by virtue of purported laws, decrees, and orders; by reg-
ulations and decisions of the de facto authority styling itself the government of
the French State; or by the enemy on its order or at its instigation. The vagueness
of the formulation leaves scope for wider construction of the act of conﬁscation,
which can be taken to mean an act made indirectly on the basis of legislation beyond
the scope of ordinary law. Examination of the very abundant litigation in the im-
mediate postwar period shows the uncertainty prevailing at the time about how to
characterise disputed situations properly.34

First, the consent to the sales must be speciﬁed. Although the involvement of
a  special  administrator  immediately  brings  the  situation  under  article  1,  the
owner’s intervention does not automatically mean, even if the courts were divided
on this, that the situation is subject to article 11. The Paris court ﬁnally adopted
the position of examining whether the dispossessed party was or was not the ac-
tual legal author of the disputed agreement.35 This issue of fact is obviously to be
left to the discretion of trial judges alone, who drew a distinction between ap-
parent consent, in the form of simple material assistance, of the dispossessed
party and actual consent.

We now need then to look at the cause and effect relationship between the

  271

auction sale and the measures beyond the scope of ordinary law. In the case in
point the heirs had left France. Two statutes with a discriminatory basis were di-
rectly applicable to them. On July 23, 1940, the Vichy government passed a law de-
priving French nationals who had left France of their nationality and arranging for
conﬁscation of their property. At the same time, in occupied France, including
Paris, Jews were subject to a German order of September 27, 1940, whereby a cen-
sus was to be drawn up and those who had left occupied territory were forbidden
to return.36 It was article 1 paragraph 2 of this provision that allowed the appeal
court to deduce that Adriana and Marcello Gentili di Giuseppe were both, as a re-
sult of measures beyond the scope of ordinary law in force on June 16, 1940, quite
unable to return to Paris, where their father’s succession was to be settled, unable
to appraise and freely control the estate, in particular the movable property on Av-
enue Foch, which included the disputed paintings, and unable to appear in court
to explain their position. As there was a cause-and-effect relationship between the
said measures beyond the scope of ordinary law and the sale itself, the sale was
held to be void. The Louvre duly returned the paintings to the Gentili di Giuseppe
heirs.

3 

The task of the Court of Appeal was to apply the law, without entering into con-
siderations of the equitable nature of the outcome. The legal characterisation of
a situation does not necessarily depend on the effects it produces. However, there
remains a point that needs to be examined here. At no time did the heirs contest
that the paintings were sold at a fair price, as evidenced by the insurance policies
ﬁled in the case. This is what enabled the trial court, in the absence of proof of
duress, to rule against restitution. Neither decision cites ﬁgures, but it is not con-
tested  that  the  heirs,  after  settling  the  debts,  received  at  the  time  the  sum  of
3,975,937 Francs. Any annulment of a sale in general law, unless for special protec-
tion of minors or insane persons,37 implies restitution to the position in which the
parties were before. The 1945 order makes no contrary provisions on this point.
Whichever category the acts come under, whether article 6 or 12, the owner who
recovers his or her rights must return the price paid for them. The only distinc-
tion drawn between the two situations, and one which gave cause for hesitation in
the characterisations made in the immediate postwar period, is that the purchaser
of conﬁscated property, who cannot obtain valid title, would be in a similar posi-
tion to that of a mala ﬁde receiver of stolen property and must, under the 1945
order, pay 10 percent of the refunded price to the public treasury.38

It is obvious that the defendant, the Louvre, is not entitled to recover the price,
as it did not pay for the paintings but was only involved as the temporary “trustee”

272     

of the property. As matters stand, the heirs have received the price from the auc-
tion of the paintings and recovered the paintings themselves ﬁfty-nine years later.
In ordering restitution, the Court of Appeal has also assigned the moral conun-
drum. Where once the Louvre faced the problem of what to do with works of art
to which it had no title, now the Gentili di Giuseppe family must decide what to
do about the price received for the nulliﬁed auction sale.

4 

3 July 1941

You have informed me this day by telephone that the Rosenberg
Commission intends to seize Monday 7 July next the private collections
deposited in our Château de Chambord and which belong to Israelites. This
seizure raises a problem of law which I am bound to submit to the French
government and which I have put to the Delegate General in the occupied
territories. I must therefore once again make the most express reservations
about the very principle of the declared operation.

Excerpt from a letter from Jacques Jaujard to Count Metternich, President of the
Kunstschutz, the ofﬁcial German commission for the protection of works of art.

A true moral question imposes a choice not between good and evil but between the
greater of two goods, or the lesser of two evils. The Gentili di Giuseppe case is a
startling illustration of this. That someone should recover both an object and its
price undeniably goes against principles of equity. The choice made by the appeal
court cannot have been made then on this basis. The decision came at a time when
France, through the Mattéoli Commission, was endeavouring to bring out into the
open this dark period of its history: conﬁscations, aryanisation of property, forced
sales, and the fate of works of art.39The efforts and resources invested showed that
MNR could not be systematically treated as despoiled property: the commission
found that only 10 percent of the property held by the museums belonged to that
category. However, research done to date has facilitated twenty-seven more resti-
tutions,40 in addition to those commented on in this note, showing, if needed, the
utility of reopening the records. Two questions remain: how does one account for
some property being left unclaimed, and how does one account for the attitude of
the authorities? The commission’s report gives only a partial answer: many poten-
tial claimants never returned from deportation, many were disheartened by the
complex procedures involved,41 and discrepancies between the descriptions in the
claims and the lists maintained by the ERR prevented restitutions. As for the au-
thorities, by allowing the despoiled works to be presented to the public, they were
attempting to restore the works’ symbolic function as a testament to the past.

  273

France has now recognised the responsiblity of the Vichy regime. If equity has
been sacriﬁced, it can only be for the beneﬁt of a higher ethical interest. This is the
point made by Shimon Samuels when resituating the issue of restitution within a
moral perspective.42 It is the same moral perspective that allows us to read the let-
ter quoted at the beginning of this paper in two different ways.

First, there is the moral question of the attitude of the administration. I do
not know whether Léon Reinach received an answer to his question. However, the
letter cited above shows that Jacques Jaujard had acted more than promptly, be-
cause four days earlier he had made an ofﬁcial protest to the German authorities.
All of the documents studied show that the action of the cultural administration
of the time was above reproach throughout the war. Some of those same people
worked after the war on the commission for recovery of art works.43 It is difﬁcult
to imagine in this context that after four years of dangerous resistance to pillage
and conﬁscation of cultural property that the same administration yielded to a
sudden urge to unlawfully appropriate property.

Second, there is the incommensurate moral question of the fate of persons
rather than property. Léon Reinach, his wife, and their two children perished in the
Nazi death camps.



1. For an opposing view, see J. Passa, Condamnation du Musée du Louvre à restituer des tableaux
aux héritiers des propriétaires spoliés durant l’Occupation, 2 D. 535 (1999).
2. Cf. Important Old Master Paintings, Christie’s catalogue, New York, on January 27, 2000,
152‒1.
3. See the section below on the issue of preclusion.
4. Interestingly, many commentators who would acquiesce to such an argument call for inor-
dinate efforts on the part of the administration to trace the rightful owners of looted property.
Others may ﬁnd the whole idea of a lost property ofﬁce’s having to actively search for the own-
ers of that property quite absurd.
5. The commission was ofﬁcially set up on March 25, 1997.
6. I. le Masne de Chermont and D. Schulmann, Le pillage de l’art en France pendant l’occupation et la
situation des 2000 œuvres conﬁées aux Musées nationaux, Contribution de la Direction des Musées de
France et du Centre Georges Pompidou aux travaux de la Mission d’étude sur la spoliation des
Juifs de France, 1 mars 2000.
7. L. Nicholas, The Rape of Europa (Knopf, New York 1994 (translated as Le pillage de l’Europe [Seuil,
Paris 1995])).
8. On December 16, 1996, the newspaper Le Monde ran the headline “Les musées détiennent 1955
œuvres d’art volées aux Juifs pendant l’Occupation.”
9. The Visitation from Moretto da Brescia’s studio (MNR 277), The Holy Family by Bernardo
Strozzi (MNR 290), Alexander and Campaspe in Apelles’ Studio by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo (MNR

274     

305), Card-players by a Fire by Alessandro Magnasco (MNR 798), and Portrait of a Woman by Ro-
salba Carriera (REC 73). REC designates unreturned drawings held by the Louvre’s depart-
ment of graphic arts.
10. At the same auction the Berlin Gemäldegalerie bought back for $950,000 Rinaldo abandoning
Armida, which it had bought for $400,000 from Galerie Cailleux in 1979, Art Newspaper, no. 101,
March 2000, at 66.
11. Important Old Master Paintings, supra note 2, at 154, 164.
12. A ﬁrst order on the nullity of acts of spoliation was made on November 14, 1944. See G. La-
garde, L’ordonnance du 14 novembre 1944 sur la nullité des actes de spoliation, 1 D. 452 (1945).
It was followed by the order of April 21, 1945, for the second application of the declaration of
November 12, 1943, on the nullity of acts of spoliation by the enemy or under its control and
commanding the restitution of the property to victims of such acts covered by the provision
JO 22 avril 1945, p. 2283, and then the order of June 9, 1945, for the third application of the
order of November 12 on the nullity of acts of spoliation and commanding the nullity of acts
of spoliation by the enemy or for its beneﬁt, JO 25 juin 1945. The 1943 order asserted that gov-
ernments reserved the right to declare void “all transfers or transactions relating to property,
rights and interests of whatever nature, which are or were in the territories under occupation or
the direct or indirect control of governments with which they are at war or which belong or be-
longed to persons (including legal persons) residing in those territories.”This warning applied
both to transfers or transactions in the form of outright looting or plunder and to apparently
legal transactions even when they appeared to have been conducted with the consent of the vic-
tims. Appendix to the declaration of 12 novembre 1943, on the nullity of acts of spoliation by
the enemy or under its control, JO 18 novembre 1943, p. 96. This important declaration, of de-
liberately broad scope to embrace a wide variety of legal situations, purported to act as a legal
basis to subsequent claims. It played an undeniable preventive role: French notaries in partic-
ular objectively braked the process of aryanisation of Jewish property by systematically in-
forming their clients of the risk at the end of hostilities if they wished to acquire disputed
property. M. Blocaille-Boutelet, L’aryanisation des biens, Le droit antisémite de Vichy, Actes du colloque
de Dijon, 19– 20 décembre 1994, 249 (sous la direction de Domnique Gros, Paris, Le genre hu-
main, Seuil 1996).
13. Cf. arrêté du 18 août 1945 and décret n° 47-2105 du 29 août 1947.
14. I. le Masne de Chermont and D. Schulmann report forty convoys from Munich and Wies-
baden (from August 14, 1945, to December 1949). A further six came from Düsseldorf from
March 4, 1948, to October 15, 1950, supra note 6, at 15– 16.
15. Named after the Nazi party ideologue, Alfred Rosenberg, who directed it and whose ofﬁ-
cial objective was the ﬁght against Judaism and Free Masonry by means of the systematic
seizure of prohibited books and records. From 1940 this body centralised cultural property
looted from Occupied France.
16. Arrêté du 24 novembre 1944, JO du 23 novembre 1945, p. 113.
17. I. le Masne de Chermont and D. Schulmann, supra note 6, at 15– 16.
18. Cass. crim. 4 juin 1998, pourvoi contre l’arrêt de la Chambre d’accusation de la Cour d’ap-
pel du 17 octobre 1996.
19. I. le Masne de Chermont and D. Schulmann, supra note 6, at 16.
20. Décret du 30 septembre 1949, JO du 2 octobre 1949, p. 115.

  275

21. Contrary to Austrian and Dutch laws, see Ignaz Seidl-Hohenveldern, The Auction of the
Mauerbach Treasure, 6 International Journal of Cultural Property 253 (1997).
22. The inventories bear the following main marks: RP (récupération peintures) for twentieth-
century paintings of the Musée national d’art moderne; Rec (récupération) for ﬁfteenth-
through nineteenth-century drawings of the Louvre’s Département des arts graphiques; OAR
(objets d’art récupération) for ﬁfteenth- through nineteenth-century decorative art objects of
the Département des objets d’art; RFR (République Française Récupératon) for ﬁfteenth-
through nineteenth-century sculptures, Département des sculptures.
23. See note by R. Sarraute and P. Tager, 2 D. 85 (1946).
24. I. de Masne de Chermont and D. Schulmann, supra note 6, at 4.
25. By July 4, 1940, ﬁfteen of the main galleries in Paris, including those of Kann, Rosenberg,
and Wildenstein, had been searched and looted.
26. JO du 24 juillet 1940. This law provided for the conﬁscaton and spoliation of vacant prop-
erty.
27. Loi du 3 octobre 1940, JO du 18 octobre 1940.
28. Loi du 29 mars 1941, JO du 29 mars 1941.
29. Loi du 2 juin 1941 superseding loi du 3 octobre 1940, JO du 4 octobre 1941.
30. For a full chronology of the main French and German laws relating to Jews in France be-
tween 1940 and 1941, see C. Adrieux in Le droit antisémite de Vichy, supra note 13, at 591– 92.
31. Circulaire du 15 décembre 1940 of the Delegate General of the French Government in the
Occupied Territories concerning the appointment of commissioners for Jewish businesses.
32. Antoine Prost, Rémi Skoutelsky, Sonia Étienne, with the collaboration of Fabrice Cardon,
Fabrice Launay and Sylvain Lebreton, Mission d’étude sur la spoliation des Juifs de France,
Aryanisation économique et restitutions, 58 (February 2000).
33. 4 juin 1947, Bull. civ., 1947.
34. For example, more than twelve thousand decisions were made by the end of 1947 in the dé-
partement de la Seine (Paris) alone. See Prost et al., supra note 32, at 63. 
35. Id. at 84.
36. Ordonnance du 27 septembre 1940, VOBIF du 30 septembre 1940.
37. Cf. Article 1312 of the Code civil.
38. Art. 6 al. 2.
39. The ﬁnal reports were made in February 2000, six months after the decision.
40. See, for example, the thirteen restitutions by the Louvre, Le Monde, Vendredi 17 décembre
1999, p. 33.
41. Prost et al., supra note 32, at 146.
42. Shimon Samuels, Property and Restitution—A Moral Responsibility to History, 7 Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 247 (1998).
43. See R. Valland, Le front de l’art, 236 (Réunion des musées nationaux, Paris 1997).


