International Journal of Cultural Property (2008) 15:347–370. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2008 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S094073910808020X

A Coordinated Legal and Policy
Approach to Undiscovered Antiquities:
Adapting the Cultural Heritage Policy
of England and Wales to Other
Nations of Origin
Derek Fincham*

Abstract: Blanket ownership laws, export restrictions, and the criminal law of
market nations are the default legal strategies currently used by nations of
origin to prevent the looting of archaeological sites. Although they have been
remarkably successful at achieving the return of looted objects, they may not
be the best strategies to maximize the recording and preservation of
archaeological context. In England and Wales a more permissive legal regime
broadly applied and adopted by the public at large has produced dramatically
better results than the strong prescriptive regime of Scotland, which can be
easily ignored.

This article attempts to clear up any misconceptions of the cultural policy
framework in England and Wales. It accounts for the legal position accorded
undiscovered portable antiquities, and describes how this legal framework is
perfected by a voluntary program called the Portable Antiquities Scheme
(PAS). This approach stands in stark contrast to Scotland, which has used a
legal strategy adopted by most other nations of origin.

The domestic legal framework for portable antiquities in England and Wales

is unique and differs from the typical approach. Coupled with the PAS, this
legal structure has resulted in a better cultural policy, which leads to less
looting of important archaeological sites, allows for a tailored cultural policy,
and has produced more data and contextual information with which to
conduct historical and archaeological research on an unprecedented scale.
Compensating finders of antiquities may even preclude an illicit market in
antiquities so long as this compensation is substantially similar to the market
price of the object and effectively excludes looters from this reward system.

*London School of Economics Forum for Law and Cultural Heritage, London, England. Email:
derek.fincham@gmail.com

347

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

348

DEREK FINCHAM

Although the precise number of found versus looted objects that appear on the
market is open to much speculation, an effective recording system is essential
to ensure that individuals who find objects are encouraged to report them.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years the bulk of cultural heritage scholarship has focused on the im-
portance of archaeological context. This impressive body of scholarship, which I
classify as context centered, has focused on how cultural policy can preserve con-
text.1 Authors have become increasingly concerned with how museum acquisition
policies, private law, criminal law, multilateral agreements, and codes of ethics can
best preserve objects and their surrounding contextual information. Repatriation
and restitution of previously looted objects has increasingly emerged as a major
initiative among source nations, particularly Italy. World-renowned institutions
have been embarrassed by the attention drawn to illicit objects in their collec-
tions. Massive and extensive criminal investigations have appeared with increasing
frequency, notably in the United States and Italy.2 This ought to be somewhat sur-
prising. Such extended criminal investigations are expensive undertakings and hin-
dered by the lack of transparency that permeates the antiquities trade.3 As such,
the antiquities trade must seriously consider how and in what form it can hope to
continue to exist. This trade must, it seems, finally adopt the axiom of archaeol-
ogists and heritage advocates, that an object, even if very valuable and precious, is
substantially diminished in value without its accompanying archaeological con-
text. The market may find a tenable compromise by shifting its focus to the cul-
tural policy and legal framework in England and Wales.

This article steps back from questions such as who can or should own antiqui-
ties, where they should be displayed, and whether we should evaluate the viability
of so-called universal museums or even look at whether we can or should com-
pletely erase their commodification. Rather, it examines whether a more prag-
matic approach may in fact better preserve archaeological context given finite
political will, law enforcement resources, and money. As Colin Renfrew has noted,
despite all the reform, increased awareness, and increased domestic and inter-
national legal regulation, the destruction of archaeological sites “has increased rather
than diminished in the thirty succeeding years” since the creation of the 1970
UNESCO Convention.4 This may mean these legal and policy strategies, in isola-
tion, are not the best way to prevent the looting and destruction of sites.

The domestic legal and policy framework for portable antiquities in England
and Wales may offer an important potential model for cultural heritage policy-
makers.5 Indeed, perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the policy is that it has
produced a common ground between those who support a licit trade in antiq-
uities and those who criticize such a trade and advocate repatriation. As we will

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

349

see, three things set England and Wales apart from most other nations of origin:
limited state ownership of undiscovered antiquities, compensation to finders of
the full estimated market price of their finds if the find is acquired legally, and
legalization of indiscriminate digging in many areas. Metal detecting is legal in
the United Kingdom, only prohibited in specially designated areas known as sched-
uled ancient monuments. Only limited classes of objects become the property of
the Crown when they are discovered. This legal structure, coupled with the
government-funded voluntary PAS has led to a better cultural policy, which leads
to less looting of important archaeological sites, allows for a tailored cultural
policy, and has in fact produced more important data with which to conduct
historical and archaeological research. Compensating finders of antiquities may
effectively preclude an illicit market in antiquities, so long as this compensation
is substantially similar to the market price of the object and it effectively ex-
cludes looters from this reward system.

This article begins by revisiting the typical heritage protection policies in most
nations of origin, which use blanket ownership declarations and export restric-
tions. Next it describes the domestic legal protection for portable antiquities in
England and Wales, and then describes the successful voluntary PAS and looks at
the benefits the PAS has produced in its short history. It then compares the situ-
ation in Scotland to that in England and Wales; and finally, it draws some con-
clusions and asks whether this legal and policy framework could work well in other
nations.

THE TYPICAL APPROACH OF MOST NATIONS OF ORIGIN

Most nations of origin attempt to prevent archaeological site looting by vesting
ownership of undiscovered cultural objects and restricting the export of antiqui-
ties. These are extremely important regulatory steps for securing the return of looted
objects, and the punishment of those who violate these laws. However, these mea-
sures do not create a workable or effective cultural heritage policy.6

Peru has declared all undiscovered antiquities state property.7 All pre-Hispanic,
colonial, and republican material is presumed to be cultural property but cannot
be exported unless for purposes of scientific, artistic, or cultural purposes. Egypt
has a similar declaration, which allowed for the successful prosecution of a British
antiquities smuggler and his American buyer in the United Kingdom and United
States, respectively.8 Although these national ownership declarations allow for the
prosecution of some buyers and sellers of illicit antiquities, it remains an open
question whether these prosecutions are actually protecting archaeological sites in
Egypt, Peru, and elsewhere.

Export restrictions are the other prominent regulatory approach. Italy has de-
clared state ownership of undiscovered antiquities and also prohibited their ex-
port.9 Even the most casual observer of cultural heritage policy knows that Italy

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

350

DEREK FINCHAM

has maintained a remarkably successful repatriation campaign in recent years,
achieving the return of looted antiquities from the Metropolitan Museum of Art
in New York, the Getty Villa in Malibu, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, Prince-
ton University, and prominent collector Shelby White.10 This public pressure cam-
paign will surely be adopted by other nations of origin. However, even if North
American collectors and museums stop purchasing unprovenanced antiquities, it
seems likely that demand for these classical antiquities will still exist in other parts
of the world or even domestically in these nations of origin.

The key measure of the success of these policies is whether they are actually
protecting and preserving archaeological context. Take Guatemala for example: It
has a rich wealth of cultural heritage; but the economic difficulties, civil unrest,
and remoteness of many archaeological sites all make the task of protecting sites
from looting difficult. The most prized Guatemalan objects include polychrome
artifacts, jade carvings, and stelae fragments.11 Guatemalan archaeologist Juan
Antonio Valdés describes the looting of archaeological sites as

a social phenomenon that reflects the economic state of the nation and
the lack of public awareness with regard to the meaning of cultural her-
itage. In Guatemala, ninety percent of the looting is done by illiterate
farmers from the region surrounding the site of the looting, at the in-
stigation of an intermediary or an individual who is in charge of the
looting. This person offers the farmers a way of earning a better living
. . . without informing them of the crime they are committing or the
risks they are running.12

Nationalizing these antiquities does not seem to create any appreciation of cul-
tural heritage by itself. This ownership declaration may work well, if the local pop-
ulations are aware of the penalties and are deterred by the threat of criminal
sanctions. This does not appear to be taking place, however. In 1975 Guatemala
created the Institute of Anthropology and History in the Department of pre-
Hispanic and Colonial Monuments. It was directed to guard and protect impor-
tant sites and works. Although 5000 archaeological sites are registered, Valdés
estimates that only 45 are under permanent surveillance.

Even other developed nations have the same difficulties policing archaeological
sites. In the United States the illegal excavation of sites is a major problem. One
estimate indicates that more than half of the 6000 important sites on National
Forest land in Arizona have been destroyed.13 In Virginia, 95% of Native Ameri-
can graves in the southwest part of the state have been disturbed. The National
Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, and the Bureau of Land Management collectively
estimate that of the two million sites on federal land, one-third have been looted
or vandalized.14 In 1987 the evaluating and investigating arm of Congress, the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) indicated that in the four corners area,
which consisted of 100 million acres, there were only a total of 271 individuals
employed to enforce the applicable laws.15 In 2005, describing the duties of 13
rangers tasked with policing an area of more than 12 million acres in California,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

351

Bureau of Land Management ranger Lynell Schalk remarked, “We didn’t exactly
have them surrounded.”16

Declaring ownership of antiquities and prohibiting their export are extremely
useful components to the legal response to the looting of archaeological sites, which
can and should be used to reform acquisition policies and punish those who buy
looted objects. However, these two regulatory strategies are not focused at the real
core of the problem: the looting of archaeological sites. Both are imperfect re-
sponses to damage that has already taken place. Even if national ownership dec-
larations and export restrictions work in perfect harmony with the panoply of
public and private international law, which affects them in market states, they would
not necessarily prevent illegal excavation.17 Rather, they rely on a kind of trickle-
down approach that assumes that if looters cannot sell illegally excavated objects
to foreign buyers, they will no longer disturb sites. Unfortunately, practice differs
internationally, and the crossborder movement of antiquities often means objects
are hidden or stored for many years before they are sold. This weakens both the
efficacy and deterrent effect of this complicated body of law.

Some nations do compensate finders of antiquities. Italy offers a small reward,
but not more than 25% of the value of the find, to the owner of the property
where an object was found.18 This may be a cash award or a portion of the
objects recovered. If there is disagreement over the value of the fee, a three-
person commission in which the minister of cultural property, the land owner,
and the president of the tribunal may nominate a member of the panel and the
landowner must pay the costs of the appeal. There seems to be an unfortunate
paucity of heritage scholarship on the function and effectiveness of these kinds
of rewards systems, as well as the efficacy of domestic bureaucratic structures
responsible for cultural resource management. Although such issues exceed the
scope of the present work, it may be worth devoting more attention to the ques-
tion of how source and market nations can work cooperatively to better-protect
heritage in situ.

We can contrast these typical approaches with that of England and Wales. The
trend has gradually evolved from less protection to more protection as a result
of compromise between landowners, detectorists, and archaeologists. Most na-
tions of origin have enacted blanket national ownership laws to prevent the re-
moval of objects to foreign nations but has been used primarily to secure their
return. This regulation is not necessarily a bad thing. After all, a sovereign nation
should have the right to determine which objects can and should be removed.
However, this has produced a domestic regulatory framework, which because of
its breadth is utterly unenforceable (even in wealthy nations, let alone developing
ones). The threat of criminal penalties and public shaming of acquiring institu-
tions certainly must at some level decrease looting, and these mechanisms are an
important part of cultural heritage policy. However, these strategies seem unable
to prevent looting entirely. The goal should be to maximize the preservation and
recording of archaeological context.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

352

DEREK FINCHAM

THE TREASURE ACT

In England and Wales the legal framework protecting undiscovered cultural her-
itage differs substantially from the rest of the world. It has adopted a policy that
seems to take as a given that protecting every archaeological site from looting or
accidental discovery remains a practical impossibility. England and Wales have
arrived at a cultural property policy that encourages individuals to report dis-
coveries of recently unearthed antiquities and rewards them the full market price
for objects encompassed under the Treasure Act. This policy rests on the assump-
tion that devoting resources to preservation of a limited number of important
sites produces better results. Rewarding finders is an important regulatory step.
Ideally, all nations of origin would reward the chance finds of antiquities to en-
sure these objects are not destroyed or sold. However, such a policy must be
carefully constructed to distinguish chance finds from professional looters, indis-
criminate digging, or the intentional wholesale destruction of archaeological
context.

At common law, only objects of gold or silver deliberately hidden with the in-
tention of recovery qualified as treasure trove and thus became the property of the
sovereign. Originally, the Crown’s interest in treasure trove was the prospect of in-
creasing revenue. The thirteenth-century medieval writer Henry of Bracton con-
sidered the failure to report treasure trove “a serious contempt against the king and
his crown and dignity which partakes of the nature of the crime of theft.”19 How-
ever, by the nineteenth century, the historical worth of objects became more im-
portant than their worth as valuable metals.20 As such, an incentive was needed to
ensure uninformed finders did not melt down their discoveries for their precious
metal content. In 1886 the government instituted a rewards scheme where finds
claimed as treasure trove were offered to museums and finders were paid a reward.
Of course, this was a period of extreme prosperity in much of the United Kingdom.
The system worked very well until the 1970s with the advent of metal detectors
across the United Kingdom, particularly in England and Wales. These problems
are made clear in Attorney-General for the Duchy of Lancaster v. G.E. Overton (Farms)
Ltd.21 The dispute arose when a metal detector unearthed almost 8000 coins dat-
ing from the third century a.d. in Lincolnshire. A coroner’s inquest held the coins
were treasure trove and the property of the Crown. However, tests conducted on
the coins revealed that the silver content ranged from 0.2% to 6%. The Court held
that treasure trove was limited to gold and silver objects only, base metals and
alloys fell outside the scope of treasure trove. This definition excluded many valu-
able finds and meant that historically important and valuable objects that fell out-
side the scope of common law treasure trove were not subject to crown ownership.
This result was of course open to much criticism, because the existing legal frame-
work was not valuing the historical and archaeological value of finds.22

The pressure for reform ultimately produced the Treasure Act of 1996. The Act
requires finders of certain objects to report any find to a designated coroner within

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

353

14 days. If the object is deemed treasure, the finder is entitled to a reward based
on the market price of the object. The act covers England, Wales, and Northern
Ireland. The Treasure Act replaced the old vague definition with a new objective
formulation, supplemented by the Treasure (Designation) Order. The following
objects are now considered treasure:

• Objects other than coins that are at least 300 years old and have a minimum

precious metal content of 10%

• All groups of coins from the same find at least 300 years old23
• Objects found in association with other treasure objects
• Groups of prehistoric base-metal objects from the same find

Finders are required to report treasure to the coroner within 14 days of the
discovery, or within 14 days after realizing that the find may be treasure. Under
section 8(3) of the Treasure Act, if individuals fail to report a find, they may be
imprisoned for up to three months, fined, or both. However, metal detecting is
prohibited in areas designated as Scheduled Ancient Monuments.

Because a metal detectorist is compensated for a legally acquired find, this has
the consequence of incentivizing metal detecting. In essence, public funds are
used to pay individuals to use their metal detectors and to secure these objects
for local museums. Metal detecting on scheduled monuments is a criminal of-
fense; but for an area not so designated, metal detectors can be freely used so
long as the detectorists have the permission of the landowner. Some impressive
finds have been made in this manner. A father and son metal detecting in a field
near Harrogate discovered what may be the most important Viking hoard dis-
covered in Great Britain in 150 years.24 Metal detecting is a controversial prac-
tice, which is often criticized by archaeologists and heritage advocates. Most other
European nations have banned or restricted the practice. They point to the prob-
lem of night hawking, or the illegal removal of antiquities from archaeological
sites at night, as an especially harmful practice.25 Remote sites, particularly the
Iron Age hill forts in England, are often difficult to police; and law enforcement
officers typically regard such crimes as low on their list of priorities. Although
the Treasure Act rewards finders, there are criminal penalties to deal with night
hawking and other harmful activities. The first formal protection given to im-
portant historical sites was the Ancient Monuments Protection act of 1882. It
protected sites by transferring their ownership to a body acting in the name of
the Crown. The first inspector of ancient monuments, General Pitt-Rivers, over-
saw the acquisition of 43 sites including Avebury and Stonehenge.26 Subsequent
legislation expanded and consolidated this scheme. The Ancient Monuments Con-
solidation and Amendment Act of 1913 allowed for unoccupied property to be
“taken into guardianship.”

This effort ultimately culminated in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeolog-

ical Areas Act of 1979 (AMAAA). It protects

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

354

DEREK FINCHAM

any building, structure or work above or below the surface of the land,
any cave or excavation; any site comprising the remains of any such build-
ing, structure or work or any cave or excavation; and any site compris-
ing or comprising the remains of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft or other
movable structure or part thereof.27

Section 28 creates a criminal offense for destroying or damaging a protected mon-
ument “knowing that it is a protected monument” and “intending to destroy or
damage the monument or being reckless as to whether the monument would be
destroyed or damaged.”28 Using a metal detector on a scheduled ancient monu-
ment is a criminal offense as well.29

It also introduced the designation Areas of Archaeological Importance, which
are sites of historic significance that receive heightened protection by forcing de-
velopers to permit archaeological access prior to building.30 The AMAAA places
limits on development, and provides criminal penalties for the removal of antiq-
uities from designated areas. This is similar to the protection erected by many
developing source nations. Limits are placed on the exploitation and development
of areas of archaeological or historical importance.

No legislation requires sites be excavated by professional archaeologists. The
AMAAA only requires works to scheduled monuments to be authorized by the
Secretary of State.31 The relevant U.S. legislation, the Archaeological Resources Pro-
tection Act, applies to all archaeological resources and sites on both federal and
Native American land, whereas in England and Wales the controls of the AMAAA
apply only to monuments scheduled for protection.32 There are criminal penalties
under the AMAAA, with a maximum fine on a summary conviction of £5000.33
Using a metal detector in a protected place carries only a £200 fine, hardly enough
to disincentivize the looting of monuments. The only offense that carries a prison
sentence is the act of damaging a scheduled monument.34 This stands in stark
contrast to the strong civil penalties and forfeiture mechanisms provided for in
the United States. At the time of this writing, England is considering introducing
civil penalties, and a draft Regulatory Enforcement and Sanctions Bill is the sub-
ject of consultation.35 Although the proposed legislation does not encompass il-
legal digging or destruction of monuments, it may be worth considering given the
successes of the U.S. approach. However, before placing such strong power in the
hands of the Crown Prosecution Service, consider that England and Wales, by using
a tailored cooperative approach, may in fact be doing a better job protecting its
heritage than the United States. Although the land areas are hardly comparable,
the United States relies on a strong criminal enforcement effort that is expensive
and would seem to require successful prosecutions to deter other looters. To this
point, such an effort has not taken place. The United Kingdom generally takes a
much different approach. According to the Department for Culture, Media and
Sport there are nearly 20,000 scheduled sites in England, which can cover a range
of sites from stone-age standing stones to World War II pillboxes. Under the
AMAAA a scheduled monument is a nationally important archaeological site or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

355

building and is protected. In England the Department for Culture, Media and Sport
keeps a register of protected sites. In the 1970s this power was devolved to Scot-
land and Wales and is now operated by the Scottish government and the Welsh
Assembly government, respectively.

England and Wales thus has a legal regime that allows unprofessional digging
and metal detecting so long as the finder has the permission of the landowner and
the area has not received special protection. Digging is prohibited in these spe-
cially designated areas. This certainly leads to the loss of some archaeological con-
text. However, some contextual information is preserved in some cases. This tradeoff
is perhaps justified when weighed against the remarkable benefits produced by
the voluntary project initiated to record chance finds and objects discovered by
detectorists, the PAS.

THE PORTABLE ANTIQUITIES SCHEME

If a newly discovered object falls within the scope of the Treasure Act, reporting
this find is mandatory, and it becomes property of the Crown. The reporting is
encouraged by rewarding finders, but criminal penalties are in place to promote
compliance and prohibit digging in specially designated areas. If an object does
not meet the treasure threshold, reporting is merely voluntary. The PAS is the
voluntary system created to record and document objects that are not encom-
passed by the Treasure Act and are unearthed legally. The PAS is a novel ap-
proach to undiscovered antiquities, which rests on a legal framework that essentially
allows amateur and unprofessional digging.36 This policy cuts against the over-
riding policy choices of most nations of origin and sharply contrasts with the
context-focused narrative found in most cultural heritage scholarship. Perhaps
surprisingly, by incorporating the public’s interest in ancient objects and a po-
tential reward, the PAS has created a massive community archaeology project,
which has produced an enormous database of contextual information. It stands
as an outstanding achievement demonstrating how cultural heritage policy can
work in conjunction with the economic, social, and contextual needs in a given
nation of origin. Other nations of origin would do well to consider a similar
comprehensive approach.

The PAS is a government-funded voluntary scheme to record archaeological ob-
jects found by members of the pubic, which has enabled large-scale research projects
and helped educate the public about archaeology and their local heritage. Since
2006 the scheme has been managed by the British Museum under the umbrella of
the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council. At the time of publication, this ar-
rangement is under review, and it seems likely that the PAS will be solely managed
by the British Museum. There are indications that the scheme is in danger of a
funding freeze at best, or even funding cuts. For 2008 to 2009, the annual budget
of the scheme will likely be £1.3 million.37 Although perhaps difficult to justify in

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

356

DEREK FINCHAM

many developing nations, this expenditure does not seem particularly onerous given
the tremendous benefits the scheme can produce, especially considering the enor-
mous sums many antiquities can fetch at auction.

In 2006 the PAS employed 37 Finds Liaison Officers (FLOs). These FLOs make
contact with finders, record finds, work with metal-detecting groups about sound
practices, and even identify finds that should have been reported as treasure. The
PAS has four main aims:

1. To advance knowledge of the history and archaeology of England and Wales

by systematically recording archaeological objects found by the public

2. To raise public awareness of the educational value of archaeological finds in

their context and facilitate research in them

3. To increase opportunities for active public involvement in archaeology and

strengthen links between metal detector users and archaeologists

4. To encourage all who find archaeological objects to make them available for

recording and promote best practice by finders

The PAS maintains a web site that instructs the public on what to do when they
discover a potential piece of treasure or other valuable object.38 They have also
conducted extensive community education programs.

There exists some confusion about the scheme, because commentators incor-
rectly refer to the scheme as shorthand for compensating finders of antiquities or
make other inaccurate statements.39 The PAS is a voluntary network, organized by
a national group of FLOs. As discussed earlier, under the Treasure Act finders have
an obligation to disclaim potential treasure. This then allows the Crown to ac-
quire the object. If this happens the finder is paid a reward determined by the
Secretary of State, as advised by the Treasure Valuation Committee and indepen-
dent panel of experts. The PAS and its FLOs do not compensate finders or pur-
chase objects. They speak with metal detecting groups about good practice, conduct
community outreach programs, and most importantly record finds. They are often
based in local museums or archaeology departments. In some cases museums ap-
proach finders and purchase these objects but not in every case; and the PAS should
never be confused with rewarding finders.

BENEFITS OF THE PAS

There is nothing like the PAS anywhere else in the world. The scheme has pro-
duced some impressive and unexpected benefits. As the following text reveals, it
has dramatically increased the reporting of objects always legally required, pro-
duced an important research resource, provided an important outreach for the
public about the importance of archaeology and heritage, led to a large and ever-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

357

increasing database with 320,000 objects, and created a massive and unprec-
edented community archaeology project. Perhaps the most tangible benefit is a
direct link with the public, which increases public appreciation for archaeology
and heritage—a laudable goal that will ideally bring cultural heritage policymak-
ing to the fore.

The scheme has not just increased the voluntary reporting of objects that fall
below the treasure trove threshold; it has also dramatically increased the reporting
of objects whose reporting has always been legally required (Figure 1).

Between 1988 and 1996, there was an average of a little more than 23 treasure
finds reported annually. With the Treasure Act and the PAS, numbers increased
dramatically. In 1998, the first full year of the program, there were 201 treasure
finds reported; and the numbers have increased steadily. In 2005, 595 treasure finds
were reported; and in 2006, 673 were reported.41 This is a dramatic increase from
the number of treasure cases reported before the Treasure Act. At least part of this
increase may be attributed to the new objective definition of treasure and the grad-
ual widening of the definition, which now includes base metals and certain pre-
historic objects.

Importantly, this dramatic increase may be closely related to the relationship
FLOs have established with finders as well as the increased public awareness of the
Treasure Act itself. When the Treasure Act first took effect, it relied on local mu-
seums and archaeological services, which is the standard approach taken by most
nations of origin. Through its regional FLOs, PAS can make contact with finders,
attend metal-detecting club meetings, and organize events where members of the
public are encouraged to bring finds for identification or classification. Conse-
quently, they are able to identify some finds that should have been considered
treasure. Roger Bland argues that “although the Treasure Act was not originally

FIGURE 1. Data taken from PAS Annual Report, 2006.40

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

358

DEREK FINCHAM

backed up by a national network of FLOs, it is now increasingly obvious that such
a network is necessary for its effective operation.”42 As Figure 1 makes clear, the
Treasure Case reporting has increased dramatically in conjunction with the estab-
lishment of the FLO network.

This indicates that a simple prohibition or state ownership declaration will do
little. A comprehensive approach is needed to build on the regulatory framework
and educate the public at large about compliance as well as erect a good system
that allows quick reporting of discoveries. This adds to the body of knowledge
and diminishes the market in unprovenanced objects. The end product is a better,
more responsible attitude among the general public. Although comprehensive pro-
tection and excavation of every site remains the goal of the cultural heritage com-
munity, given the time and expense of such professional digs, such a goal remains
far from realization in any nation of origin. Given the limited resources available
for archaeological research and study, the PAS works as a pragmatic and valuable
compromise.

One of the most positive effects of the scheme is its database, an impressive
accumulation of information. In 2007 there were 77,571 objects reported; in total
the ever-expanding database contains 320,000 objects and 160,000 images.43

One recent find, a unique copper bowl described as a trulla, was recently found
in Staffordshire in 2003.44 It contains the names of four of the forts on Hadrian’s
Wall. As Mark Fisher argued in a recent parliamentary debate, such Roman finds
are reshaping the historical picture of Roman Britain. Within the last three years,

FIGURE 2. Data taken from PAS Annual Report, 2006 and Parliamentary Debate on the
Portable Antiquities Scheme, Westminster Hall per Mark Fisher, March 5, 2008: Column
483WH.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

359

24 new Roman settlements have been discovered in the Wiltshire region alone.
This resource is useful for a tremendous range of individuals, from schoolchildren
to doctoral dissertations and major research initiatives.45

The PAS is a heritage policy that incorporates everyone, not just experts or ar-
chaeologists. This happens in two ways: Anyone who finds a relevant antiquity
can report and record it, but also anyone can access the database and use the data.
Figure 2 shows the volume of such data has increased steadily and corresponds
directly to the expansion of the FLO network and to the reporting of treasure
qualifying objects. Users of the PAS data may include a casual observer who wants
to know what kinds of objects are found in their region or could be used as part
of complex archaeological and historical research projects. Perhaps the greatest
success of the scheme, and the one that all those interested in cultural heritage can
fully support, is the education and outreach conducted by FLOs and others. This
has captured the interest of the public at large and has incorporated social and
economic groups that often do not normally attend museums.46 The FLOs have
been organizing finds days and community talks to metal detecting clubs, archae-
ological societies, and other groups since 2003. This attracts more visitors to local
museums and also instructs finders and detectors about good practice. In 2006
there were 776 outreach events conducted, and regular contact was maintained
with 167 metal detecting clubs.

In 2006 an overwhelming majority of objects reported to the PAS were discov-
ered by metal detectorists; and a substantial number of objects, more than 30%,
were discovered by chance because of field-walking, gardening, construction, ag-
ricultural work and the like.47 A limited number of objects were reported to the
PAS by archaeologists during the course of professional investigation.

FIGURE 3. Data taken from PAS Annual Report, 2006.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

360

DEREK FINCHAM

Several potential conclusions can be drawn from this information. Most trea-
sure and nontreasure finds reported to the PAS are discovered by metal detec-
torists. This raises the issue of whether the Treasure Act coupled with the PAS may
be causing more individuals to purchase metal detectors and seek treasure. Al-
though determining the precise number of detectors in the United Kingdom is
extremely difficult, there were approximately 6500 individuals registered in metal
detecting clubs in 2006.48 A 1995 survey estimated there were as many as 30,000
metal detectorists in the United Kingdom,49 which was a dramatic decrease from
the 1980s when there were perhaps five to ten times as many detectorists. Figure 3
shows the majority of objects are discovered with the aid of metal detectors, though
a substantial number are found by chance. Surprisingly, archaeologists have seem-
ingly not taken advantage of the PAS to record their work. In all likelihood there
has not been a tremendous upswing in metal detecting; rather, detectorists are
now motivated to bring their finds forward. It should be noted as well that this
method of discovery primarily unearths objects from the Iron Age and beyond.
Stone implements, pottery, textiles, and other objects that are not detected would
not be revealed by metal detecting.

The finds database is a tremendous resource for historical or archaeological re-
search as well as shaping a legal framework to the demands of the resource itself.
This data tells cultural policymakers what is taking place, who is discovering ob-
jects, whether they do so intentionally, and what they discover. With this infor-
mation policymakers in the United Kingdom are better able to tailor their legal
framework to the reality of the given archaeological resources in different regions
and are able to judge the effectiveness of the policies that are in place. If the status
quo is damaging too much context, policymakers can advocate a change based on
sound empirical evidence. Such information is invaluable and finally allows cul-
tural heritage scholars to move beyond conjecture.

The question of whether the limited state ownership of undiscovered antiqui-
ties, compensation of finders, and legalization of unprofessional digging can be
adapted to other nations remains in some doubt. It should be noted that in prin-
ciple the legal prohibitions on antiquities digging in England and Wales are far
more lenient than in nearly every other nation. In point of fact, many govern-
ments are either unable or unwilling to enforce them.50 The policy sacrifices ar-
chaeological context without question. If we compare Scotland, which has an
ownership interest in all undiscovered antiquities, with England and Wales, the
data seems to support the notion that declaring an ownership interest of only
limited classes of objects, soliciting the cooperation of the public at large, and
only prohibiting digging in limited areas has produced better results. Given the
successes of the PAS in England and Wales, it may be worth examining the rel-
ative worth of such a policy in other nations of origin. Scotland, which main-
tains a separate legal system and has certain control over local affairs, has not
opted for the PAS, but has instead a default legal framework similar to other
nations of origin.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

361

SCOTLAND’S APPROACH

Determining the title to found objects in England and Wales hinges on the com-
position of the found object, its location, and/or the circumstances under which it
was discovered. This approach differs markedly from Scots law, which has a far
more encompassing legal framework, but not necessarily a better cultural prop-
erty policy. Merely establishing a sovereign right to objects does not create a com-
prehensive cultural property policy. In Scotland the maxim quod nullius est, fit
domini Regis (that which belongs to nobody becomes the Sovereign’s) dictates that
all found items that are not owned or do not have a demonstrable heir become
the property of the sovereign.51 Stolen and lost property, known collectively as
bona vacantia, belongs to the Crown.52 This means that the definition of treasure
carries no legal significance, and it does not matter where an object was found.
A discovery in 1958 of 28 silver objects and a porpoise bone by a team of Ab-
erdeen University archaeologists reaffirmed the foundations of the quod nullius
rule in Scots Law. The resulting dispute, Lord Advocate v. University of Aberdeen
and Another saw the university unsuccessfully challenge the notion that the found
objects should fall to the Crown.53 As Professor Carey Miller states, “In the [rar-
efied] world of cultural property it can be taken to represent ascendancy for the
generally acknowledged greater good of public entitlement as against the English
Common Law’s popularist ‘finders keepers.’”54 St. Ninian’s Isle is a small body of
land a short distance from Shetland. In 1955 a University of Aberdeen team of
researchers began excavation work aimed at finding the ruins of a medieval church.
In July of 1958 the eighth-century Celtic hoard was discovered. The Lord Advo-
cate then brought an action seeking a declaration that the find belonged to the
Crown, but the university and the landowner contested the claim. The cases pre-
sented interesting legal questions for Scots property law, but do not merit a de-
tailed discussion for the purposes of this article. From a cultural property policy
perspective, the excavation, study, and display were a complete success. The site
was professionally excavated, the archaeological context was recorded, and the trea-
sure is now on public display in Scotland. Of more interest is the overarching pol-
icy framework created by this quod nullius.

In Scotland, the Queens & Lord Treasurer Remembrancer (Q&LTR) has tradi-
tionally been responsible for administering objects classified as bona vacantia and
by extension treasure trove. In 1994 the responsibility for administering the trea-
sure trove system in Scotland was transferred to the secretary of state for Scotland
and the Scottish office from HM Treasure, which had been given the responsibil-
ity since the Treaty of Union in 1707. Responsibility was then later devolved to the
Scottish Executive (now government) upon devolution in 1999.55 The Q&LTR de-
cides on the allocation of objects to museums and provides for the payment of
rewards to finders. Scotland’s wide definition of treasure trove allows the Crown
to obtain all important antiquities, not just limited classes of objects as is the case
in England and Wales.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

362

DEREK FINCHAM

Since the nineteenth century, Scotland has compensated finders of antiquities.
Henry Rhind of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland successfully petitioned the
Q&LTR to reward finders with the full intrinsic values of their reported finds as
early as 1859.56 It prevented the loss of objects to private collections or from being
melted down. This payment system continues today, except in the case of archae-
ological excavations or when a finder has not declared a find.

The Scottish government does not commit itself to offering rewards for all finds,
but it does in most cases by using market value as a guide. The system is not
supported by statutory criminal offences for the most part, but the common law
of Scotland might apply.57 The Scottish treasure trove system rewards finds and
puts objects in the care of Scottish museums and institutions. Metal detecting is
far less common in Scotland than in England and Wales. By putting found objects
in the hands of museums and cultural institutions in Scotland, the objects are
preserved and available for study. The system is not without its problems, how-
ever. In 2003 Andrew Normand, formerly the Q&LTR reviewed the treasure trove
system in Scotland for the Scottish Executive.

Normand recommended that the Code of Practice should be produced, analo-
gous to similar guidance given in England and Wales and Northern Ireland.58 He
also recommended there be a clear statutory reporting requirement to all finds,
whether it is archaeologists in the course of their work, metal detectorists, or oth-
ers. The review indicated that the reporting obligations and the applicability of
the Civic Government (Scotland) Act are both unclear. As a result there is uncer-
tainty among finders of objects.

The review also stressed a need for greater clarity regarding how and when to
report a find.59 The point cannot be underestimated. Several source nations have
extremely rigorous legal restrictions, but they are not enforced and the public may
not know how to comply. The experience of the voluntary PAS in the rest of the
United Kingdom strongly shows that a legal prohibition is not sufficient to pro-
tect undiscovered objects and sites. In fact, a more collaborative approach that
uses the public as amateur archaeologists has been much more effective than crim-
inal penalties. The dramatic surge in the number of finds, which was always man-
datory, shows how effective such a community education program can be.

Normand recommended streamlining the claiming and disclaiming procedure
when finds are reported. He recommended that the criteria should relate to the
significance of a find and the procedure should be clearly stated. Another major
portion of the review was devoted to the allocation of finds to localities. Scotland
maintains its strong regional character, and these areas are protective of their local
heritage and the antiquities found in surrounding areas. A great deal of resent-
ment can occur if, for example, a find from the northeast of Scotland is sent to the
National Museum in Edinburgh. Normand recommended the best possible solu-
tion to these kinds of dilemmas: joint ownership and loan arrangements when-
ever possible.60 Following the review several changes were made to the treasure
trove allocation process, but a thorough analysis of the allocation procedures falls

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

363

outside the scope of this work. At present the Crown office relies on recommen-
dations by the Scottish Archaeological Finds Allocation Panel (SAFAP) and is as-
sisted by the Treasure Trove Unit, which acts as its secretariat.

Scotland has the benefit of a far stronger position than the rest of the United
Kingdom, because all objects are subject to regulation. However, merely establish-
ing a sovereign right to objects does not create a comprehensive cultural property
policy. It is one reason the cultural heritage laws in many nations of origin appear
far more comprehensive than they really are. The mechanisms for policing sites,
reporting finds, and educating the public are perhaps even more important. As it
currently stands, Scotland still has a centralized reporting system and lacks the
comprehensive framework that has produced such great results in England and
Wales. Alan Saville notes that “regionally-based Treasure Trove staff . . . would un-
doubtedly lead to a major increase in the number of reported finds.”61 Finds are
discovered, however, there is no system in place to allow finders of objects to dis-
claim objects. Finders are rewarded, which dramatically decreases the incentive to
sell objects illicitly. It also may encourage members of the public to actively seek
out objects.

In Scotland finders of objects are rewarded the full estimated market value of
their finds. However, there is no similar program to the PAS, which allows volun-
tarily reporting finds that might be of only slight monetary value but could pro-
vide other data. Between 1998 and 2004, Scotland reported an average of a little
more than 300 finds. During the same period, an average of slightly more than
300 objects that qualify as treasure were recorded, but there was an average of
nearly 40,000 finds reported by the PAS in England and Wales during the same
period.62

CAN OR SHOULD OTHER NATIONS ADOPT A SIMILAR SCHEME?

The PAS coupled with the Treasure Act has created some impressive results. The
success of this policy may induce other nations of origin to adopt similar mea-
sures. The achievements of the PAS flow from an underlying assumption that merely
relying on law enforcement strategies and protection of sites will not produce the
desired results. The question at this point is how and to what extent a similar
approach could be implemented in other nations in Europe, Asia, Central and
South America, or the Middle East.

At least two aspects of the cultural policy in England and Wales can and should
be widely adopted: rewarding the finders of true chance finds and a community
outreach program that educates the public about good practice and the impor-
tance of heritage and context.

A cultural policy must be shaped to the needs of the archaeological resource,
the needs of the nation of origin, and other social and economic needs. Any re-
warding or information-gathering framework would fail if it rewarded those who

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

364

DEREK FINCHAM

destroy monumental Mayan structures in Central America or reward the looting
of tombs in Italy, for example. On one level is it better to reward finders of ob-
jects, which may in fact motivate individuals to seek out objects by metal detect-
ing or other means, or to instead implement a legal ban on such practices, which
will be difficult if not impossible to enforce? This question could easily devolve
into a stagnant polarized debate, which has too often plagued cultural heritage
policy. In fact, policies like the PAS are easy to change and adapt to a given ar-
chaeological resource. For example, rewards may be offered if detectorists use re-
sponsible methods of unearthing finds, or they may only be compensated for major
finds if they alert local authorities to determine if a professional excavation might
be required.

Most finds reported to the PAS and the objects encompassed by the Treasure
Act are discovered by the use of metal detectors. But such a cooperative policy
need not necessarily permit metal detecting or allow citizen excavation. It can work
in other circumstances. In Italy it might be used to record ceramic finds or sculp-
ture fragments discovered by farmers. Items that are seldom found by chance, such
as large frescoes from tombs, could be excluded from the program. Instead of re-
warding tomb robbers (or tombaroli, as they are often called in Italy), finders could
be compensated for alerting authorities to the location of a tomb, so long as they
have not disturbed its contents or archaeological context. If this reward scheme
pays locals more than they earn in selling the looted objects on to middlemen, it
could even preclude the illicit trade in these objects. In fact, a more cooperative
approach that is widely accessible and understood by the public may build inter-
est in archaeological and historical research and even build political momentum
for heritage policies in general.

If individuals are compensated for finding antiquities, they will look for and
find them. In many cases this damages the archaeological context. However, the
PAS has amassed a body of evidence that may even challenge what kind of his-
torical research is possible. Imagine a PAS on a massive scale that transcends mod-
ern national boundaries: It allows large-scale research of ancient cultures, which
seldom correspond to modern-day national borders, instead of basing it on the
policies of individual nations. Rather than in-depth excavation of limited sites,
national trends in ancient Britain can be examined.

Viewed in this light, the PAS may be a successful policy as well as an impressive
new resource that compels action on the part of other nations of origin. Heritage
advocates correctly point out the importance of our past and argue that it is a
limited resource that must be protected and preserved. This is often used as a
justification for preventing archaeological site looting.63 But it also mandates cre-
ating new policies that gather contextual information on a grand scale. In fact, the
PAS and policies like it are a badly needed mechanism to gather this contextual
information on a larger scale.64 Consider two examples. First, take into account a
Neolithic axe found in Northamptonshire bearing remarkable similarities to other
axes fond around the River Thames, which is quite some distance away.65 Did these

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

365

axes serve as gifts? Did they gain in value the further they moved from where they
were created? Such questions may affect how we view Neolithic societies, and a
resource which tracks and collects where these objects are found can help provide
answers. Also consider Celtic coins as another example on which the PAS has an
impressive body of information. Coins were an innovation imported from Europe
via the Roman Empire, but these coins arrived before the Romans. As Alun Salt
points out, “how much of this was adopted because of the [Roman] invasion and
how much would have happened anyway?” The national scope of the PAS allows
us to answer this kind of question, and a larger transnational PAS across all of
Europe for example could allow us to answer more of these kinds of questions
about ancient economies, trade, and movement.

The largest practical barrier to implementation of similar schemes surely is cost.
The PAS costs £1.3 million annually, and even its funding has been in jeopardy.
This is a sum many other nations of origin will be unwilling or unable devote to
heritage protection. There are models in place, however, that may allow nations of
origin to raise these funds. Although it is highly controversial, they may consider
selling or arranging for long-term leases of antiquities. These sales or loans could
be justified by showing how these funds produce practical heritage benefits. Sim-
ilarly, the great cultural institutions of North America and Europe like the Met,
the British Museum, or the Louvre could consider funding such programs, which
would increase their standing in nations of origin and allow them to fulfill their
educational missions in new ways.

CONCLUSION

The goal for cultural policymakers should be to maximize the preservation of con-
text, given the finite resources that can be devoted to the problem. The approach in
England and Wales offers a successful model. Cultural policymakers should ap-
proach any strategy that might incentivize digging with great caution. Either be-
cause of political choice or the lack of available funding, a well-funded cultural
heritage policy framework is exceptional. The current market for art and antiqui-
ties does not inject funds back into nations of origin. When illicit antiquities are
sold in market states, profits go to auction houses, dealers, and those who avoid the
law. The PAS and the Treasure Act in England and Wales offer a potential model to
reverse this trend in a way that encourages the participation of the relevant stake-
holders. Finders of important antiquities should be fairly compensated; and im-
portant finds should be shared equitably among local, national, and international
cultural institutions; the difficulty is in drawing the line between the innocent finder
of an object and the commercial looter. The Anglo-Welsh approach has led to a bet-
ter cultural policy, which leads to less looting of important archaeological sites, al-
lows for a tailored cultural policy, and has produced more data and contextual
information with which to conduct historical and archaeological research.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

366

DEREK FINCHAM

In evaluating the strengths and merits of this policy, a reasoned appraisal of
their usefulness is crucial.66 Heritage scholars persisting in polarizing their policy
discussions will leave no room for meaningful discourse. At the very least, the pol-
icy described here is worth further study and merits accuracy concerning what it
does and does not purport to do. Although it certainly cuts against the dominant
view, the policy described here has produced substantial benefits. A further pilot
program in other regions of the world, similar to the way the PAS was imple-
mented in its early years, seems like the best way to move forward; perhaps with
the cooperation and guidance of UNESCO, it could provide more insight into
whether the outstanding benefits produced in England and Wales may be enjoyed
by other nations.

ENDNOTES

1. This rich body of scholarship is not reviewed here, but for some examples see Coggins, “United
States Cultural Property Legislation”; Prott, “The International Movement”; Chippindale and Gill,
“From Malibu to Rome”; and Gerstenblith, “Controlling the International Market.” For different
views see Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism”; and Cuno, “Art Museums, Archaeology,
and Antiquities.”

2. Felch, “Raids Suggest a Deeper Network”; Drake, “Italy Awaits Biggest.”
3. Fincham, “Why Federal Criminal Penalties,” 601.
4. Renfrew, “Foreword,” xi.
5. Scotland and Northern Ireland maintain different frameworks. Scotland’s approach is dis-

cussed in detail in the following text.

6. As I have argued elsewhere, these criminal penalties will always have difficulty in eliminating
the illicit trade; they are effectively avoided because of the lack of transparency in the antiquities
trade (Fincham, “Why Federal Criminal Penalties”).

7. Ley No 28296: Ley General del Patrimonio Cultural de la Nación, Agosto de 2004, en vigencia

desde julio del 2004, Article 5.

8. Law No. 117, 1983; U.S. v. Schultz, 333 F.3d 393 (2d Cir. 2003); R. v. Tokeley-Parry [1999] 578.
9. Italian Law of June 1, 1939, no. 1089.
10. Chippindale and Gill, “From Malibu to Rome”; Povoledo, “Collector Returns Art.”
11. United States v. Pre-Columbian Artifacts, 845 F. Supp. 544 (N.D. Ill. 1993), in which a Guate-

malan Stelae was seized and returned to Guatemala under the McClain Doctrine.

12. Valdés, “Management and Conservation,” 95.
13. Hicks, Time Crime.
14. Cheek, “Protection of Archaeological Resources.”
15. General Accounting Office, Problems Protecting and Preserving.
16. Schiffman, “Riding for the Brand.”
17. This does not happen in every case of course. See Iran v. Berend, [2007] EWHC 132 (QB), in
which the High Court in London rejected application of a complicated conflict of laws principle
known as renvoi and refused to halt the sale in London of a limestone fragment from Persepolis
purchased by a French woman in 1974. For a note see Fincham, “Rejecting Renvoi.” In fact, absent
treaty obligations or other agreements, many nations do not enforce foreign export restrictions, but
many enforce ownership declarations. See Republic of Iran v. Barakat Galleries [2007] EWCA Civ
1374, a summary by the author is available at http://illicit-cultural-property.blogspot.com/2007/12/
iran-wins-barakat-appeal.html (published December 21, 2007).

18. Italian Law of June 1, 1939, no. 1089, art. 44.
19. de Bracton, De legibus, 338.
20. Hill, “Treasure Trove,” 240–41.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

367

21. [1980] 3 All E.R. 503.
22. Palmer, “Title to Antiquarian Finds.”
23. “Same find” here designates a collection or grouping of objects discovered in close proximity.
24. “Viking Treasure Hoard Uncovered,” BBC News.
25. Oxford Archaeology has undertaken an 18-month project titled Nighthawks and Nighthawk-
ing: Damage to Archaeological Sites in the United Kingdom and Crown Dependencies caused by illegal
searching and removal of antiquities. Results of the study should be available at the end of 2008.

26. Delafons, Politics and Preservation.
27. Sec. 61 (7) AMAAA 1979.
28. Sec. 28 AMAAA 1979.
29. Sec. 42 AMAAA 1979.
30. Part II AMAAA 1979.
31. Sec. 2, 3 AMAAA 1979
32. 16 U.S.C. 470aa–mm.
33. Sec. 42 AMAAA 1979.
34. Sec. 28 AMAAA 1979.
35. See Draft Regulatory Enforcement and Sanctions Bill, available at http://www.official-

documents.gov.uk/document/cm70/7083/7083.pdf (accessed February 15, 2008).

36. There does not appear to be any other scheme of similar size or scope. One similar project
is the Paleoindian Database of the Americas, which posts information on “Paleoindian tools
mostly fluted or unfluted projectile points, blades, and other tool types.” See http://pidba.utk.edu/
introduction.htm (accessed May 10, 2008).

37. Parliamentary Debates, House of Lords, March 13, 2008: Column 1574.
38. See http://www.finds.org.uk/ (accessed May 5, 2008).
39. Even respected heritage experts have made this mistake. Professor Patty Gerstenblith made
such an error in arguing that found objects of saleable quality are rare. She wrongly argued, “In the
UK, where the Portable Antiquities Scheme requires the reporting of finds, only 9 percent of the
finds reported in 2004–05 were found during construction, agricultural, and gardening activities
and are therefore true chance finds” (Gerstenblith, “Controlling the International Market,” 39). The
PAS is a voluntary scheme, not compulsory, and the universe of found objects Gerstenblith describes
seems far too slight, avoiding at the least hill walking, hiking, and the like. Of course, she is exactly
right: When individuals take metal detectors out into the countryside, they are hardly finding any-
thing by chance.

March 5, 2008: Column 483WH.

40. Data taken from Portable Antiquities Scheme, Annual Report 2006.
41. Portable Antiquities Scheme, Annual Report 2006, 143.
42. Bland, “Rescuing Our Neglected Heritage,” 263.
43. Parliamentary Debate on the Portable Antiquities Scheme, Westminster Hall per Mark Fisher,
44. See http://www.findsdatabase.org.uk/hms/pas_obj.php?typ (accessed May 10, 2008).
45. The nature and scope of these projects is too numerous to mention here, but they include the
Viking and Anglo-Saxon Landscape and Economy project, research into archaeological evidence for
state formation, as well as an evaluation of metal-detected data as a source of archaeological data at
Kings College London (see http://www.finds.org.uk/learning/progress_research.php/, accessed May
10, 2008).

46. Bland, “Rescuing Our Neglected Heritage,” 283.
47. Portable Antiquities Scheme, Annual Report 2006, 141.
48. Portable Antiquities Scheme, Annual Report 2006, 140.
49. Dobinson and Denison, Metal Detecting and Archaeology.
50. The problem persists even in Italy, where cultural heritage policy is a major political issue. A
reporter recently highlighted the problem by carrying away large boxes of ancient artifacts from
Trajan’s Forum in Rome in broad daylight. Archaeologists have criticized this removal of stature
fragments and amphorae shards (Moore, “Tourists ‘Stripping Ancient Rome Bare’”).

51. Lord Advocate v. Aberdeen University and Another 1963 S.C. 533 per Lord Patrick.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

368

DEREK FINCHAM

52. Cleghorn and Bryce v. Baird (1696) Mor. 13522.
53. Aberdeen University, 1963 S.C. 533.
54. Carey Miller, “TB Smith’s Property,” 192.
55. Scotland Act 1998 sec. 53 and Sch. 5 para. 3(1), (3).
56. Carey Miller and Sheridan, “Treasure Trove in Scots Law,” 398.
57. Section 67 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 imposes a duty on a finder of lost or
abandoned property to report the find or deliver the property to the police and creates a criminal
offense for failure to comply. However, there have been no criminal or civil cases involving the op-
eration of the treasure trove system in recent years.

58. Normand, Review of Treasure Trove, 48.
59. Normand, Review of Treasure Trove, 48–49.
60. Normand, Review of Treasure Trove, 50, 52.
61. Saville, “Treasure Trove in Scotland,” 796.
62. Bland, “Rescuing Our Neglected Heritage,” 292.
63. See Gerstenblith, “Reducing the Harm.”
64. As Alun Salt points out,

It’s this ability to be able to answer national questions that makes the scheme
important. Add to that the visionary idea of making this stuff as accessible as
possible and it becomes hugely successful. If it can be made available then this
kind of data should not be the exclusive domain of archaeologists who want to
answer their questions. It should be open for everybody to be able to ask what-
ever questions interest them. The pressure is then on archaeologists to show why
their research is as important as they say.

Salt, “The Portable Antiquities Scheme.”
65. Portable Antiquities Scheme. NARC-780084 (ALL FINDS: find 82215 of 192842). Available at
http://www.findsdatabase.org.uk/hms/pas_obj.php?type⫽finds&id⫽00141F788B801EF0/ (accessed
May 10, 2008).

66. See Bauer, “New Ways of Thinking,” for an excellent evaluation of the strengths and under-
lying weaknesses implicit in the underlying assumptions of cultural heritage stakeholders on all sides.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bauer, Alexander A. “New Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property: A Critical Appraisal of the
Antiquities Trade Debates.” Fordham International Law Journal 31 (2008): 690.

Bland, Roger. “Rescuing Our Neglected Heritage: The Evolution of the Government’s Policy on Por-
table Antiquities in England and Wales.” Cultural Trends 14 (2005): 257.

———. “The Treasure Act and Portable Antiquities Scheme: A Progress Report.” Journal of Art, An-
tiquity and Law 4.3 (1999).

Carey Miller, David L. “Treasure Trove in Scots Law.” In Summa Eloquentia: Essays in Honour of
Margaret Hewett, 75–89, 2002, South Africa: University of South Africa.

———. “T.B. Smith’s Property.” A Mixed Legal System in Transition. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer-
sity Press, 2005: 173–98.

Carey Miller, David, and Alison Sheridan. “Treasure Trove in Scots Law.” Art, Antiquity & Law 1
(1996): 393–406.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

A COORDINATED APPROACH TO CULTURAL HERITAGE

369

Cheek, Annetta L. “Protection of Archaeological Resources: History of the Archaeological Protection
Act.” In Protecting the Past, edited by George Smith and John E. Ehrenhard, 1991. http://
www.cr.nps.gov/seac/protecting/index.htm (accessed May 10, 2008).

Chippindale, Christopher, and David Gill. “From Malibu to Rome: Further Developments on the
Return of Antiquities.” International Journal of Cultural Property 14 (2007): 205–40.

Coggins, Clemency. “United States Cultural Property Legislation: Observations of a Combatant.”
International Journal of Cultural Property 7 (2005): 94.

Council of Europe. Metal Detectors and Archaeology. Report of the Committee on Culture and Edu-
cation (Doc. 4741). Strasbourg: Council of Europe, Parliamentary Assembly, 1981.

Cuno, James. “Art Museums, Archaeology, and Antiquities in an Age of Sectarian Violence and Na-
tionalist Politics.” In The Acquisition and Exhibition of Classical Antiquities, edited by Robin F. Rhodes.
Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 2008.

de Bracton, Henry. De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae, Vol. 2 (Samuel Thorne trans.). 1977, Cam-
bridge, Mass. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Delafons, John. Politics and Preservation: A Policy History of the Built Heritage, 1882–1996. London:
Spon Press, 1999.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport. The Treasure Act 1996 Code of Practice (2nd rev.). London:
DCMS, 2002.

Department of National Heritage. The Treasure Act 1996. Code of Practice (England and Wales). Lon-
don: Department of National Heritage, 1997.

Dobinson, Colin, and Simon Denison. Metal Detecting and Archaeology in England. York: English
Heritage; Council for British Archaeology, 1995. Available at http://www.britarch.ac.uk/detecting/
cont.html (accessed May 10, 2008).

Doyal, Stephanie. “Implementing the UNIDROIT Convention on Cultural Property into Domestic
Law: The Case of Italy.” Columbia Journal of Transnational Law 39 (2001): 657–77.

Drake, Cathryn. “Italy Awaits Biggest Ever Trial of Tomb Robbers.” Art Newspaper, January 28, 2008.
Available at http://www.theartnewspaper.com/article.asp?id⫽7375 (accessed May 10, 2008).

Felch, Jason. “Raids Suggest a Deeper Network of Looted Art.” L.A. Times, January 25, 2008. Avail-
able at http://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-me-museums25jan25,0,101198.story?page⫽1 (ac-
cessed May 10, 2008).

Fincham, Derek. “Why Federal Criminal Penalties for Dealing in Illicit Cultural Property are Inef-
fective and a Pragmatic Alternative.” Cardozo Art and Entertainment Law Journal 25 (2007): 597–645.

———. “Rejecting Renvoi for Movable Cultural Property: The Islamic Republic of Iran v. Denyse
Berend. International Journal of Cultural Property 14 (2007):111–20.

General Accounting Office. Problems Protecting and Preserving Federal Archaeology Resources. GAO/
RCED-88–3. Washington, DC: General Accounting Office, 1987.

Gerstenblith, Patty. “Controlling the International Market in Antiquities: Reducing the Harm, Pre-
serving the Past.” Chicago Journal of International Law 8 (2007): 169–95.
Hicks, Robert D. Time Crime: Protecting the Past for Future Generations.” FBI Publications, 1997. http://
www.fbi.gov/publications/leb/1997/july971.htm (accessed May 10, 2008).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X

370

DEREK FINCHAM

Hill, George. Treasure Trove in Law and Practice. Oxford: Clarendon, 1936.

Merryman, John Henry. “Cultural Property Internationalism.” International Journal of Cultural Prop-
erty 12 (2005): 11–39.
Moore, Malcolm. “Tourists ‘Stripping Ancient Rome Bare.’” The Telegraph, 2008. http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1583825/Tourists-%27stripping-ancient-Rome-bare%27.html (ac-
cessed March 3, 2008).

Normand, Andrew. Review of Treasure Trove Arrangements in Scotland. Edinburgh: Scottish Execu-
tive, 2003. Available at http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/47063/0023827.pdf (accessed May
10, 2008).

Palmer, Norman. “Treasure Trove and the Protection of Antiquities.” The Modern Law Review 44.2
(1981): 178–87.

———. “Title to Antiquarian Finds: Perpetuating the Impenetrable.” Journal of Art, Antiquity and
Law 1 (1996).

Portable Antiquities Scheme. Annual Report 2006. London: Department of Culture, Media and Sport,
2007.

Prott, Lyndel V. “The International Movement of Cultural Objects.” International Journal of Cultural
Property 12 (2005): 225.

Povoledo, Elisabetta. “Collector Returns Art Italy Says Was Looted.” New York Times, 2008. Available
at http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/18/arts/18collect.html?_r⫽2&oref⫽slogin&oref⫽slogin (ac-
cessed May 10, 2008).

Renfrew, Colin A., “Foreword.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archae-
ological Heritage, edited by Neil Brodie, Jennifer Doole, and Colin Renfrew, xi. Cambridge: Mc-
Donald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2001.

Salt, Alun. “The Portable Antiquities Scheme and the Indifference of Government.” Archaeoastron-
omy, 2008. http://archaeoastronomy.wordpress.com/2008/01/19/the-portable-antiquities-scheme-
and-the-indifference-of-government/ (accessed May 10, 2008).

Saville, Alan. “Treasure Trove in Scotland.” Antiquity 76 (2002): 796–802.
Schiffman, Lisa. “Riding for the Brand.” Archaeology, 2005. http://www.archaeology.org/online/
features/schalk/index.html (accessed May 10, 2008).

Valdés, Juan Antonio. “Management and Conservation of Guatemala’s Cultural Heritage: A Chal-
lenge to Keep History Alive.” Art and Cultural Heritage (2006): 94.
“Viking Treasure Hoard Uncovered,” BBC News, BBC, published July 19, 2007. Available at http://
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/north_yorkshire/6906107.stm (accessed May 10, 2008).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:53:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808020X


