International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

A Monument’s Work is Never Done: The Watson
Monument, Memory, and Forgetting in a Small
Canadian City

Russell Johnston & Michael Ripmeester

To cite this article: Russell Johnston & Michael Ripmeester (2007) A Monument’s Work is Never
Done: The Watson Monument, Memory, and Forgetting in a Small Canadian City, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 13:2, 117-135, DOI: 10.1080/13527250601118951
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250601118951

Published online: 15 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 271

Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 13, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 117–135

A Monument’s Work is Never Done: 
The Watson Monument, Memory, and 
Forgetting in a Small Canadian City
Russell Johnston & Michael Ripmeester

132000000March 2007
Associate Professor MichaelRipmeester
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_211829.sgm
10.1080/13527250601118951
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2007Taylor & Francis

mripmees@brocku.caPrivate Alexander Watson died a few days after being wounded during a decisive battle in
the Northwest Rebellions of Canada in 1885. A year later, a monument to his memory was
erected in front of city hall in his hometown of St. Catharines in the municipal region of
Niagara.  Our  interest  in  Watson’s  monument  is  in  understanding  the  role  of  material
culture  in  the  fostering  of  popular  memory.  On  one  hand,  the  production  side  of  this
equation has been well considered. The mnemonic and didactic potential of monuments is
used by elites in order to build a consensual understanding of the past and to legitimate
claims  to  authority  and  privilege.  On  the  other  hand,  the  consumption  side  of  public
memory  is  less  well  understood.  This  paper  seeks  to  identify  how  the  people  of  St.
Catharines have engaged the monument commemorating Watson’s service and his death.
We use archival research and surveys in order to understand the monument’s relationship
to residents of the city.

Keywords: Monuments; Public Memory; Landscapes of Memory

The  monument  stands  at  of  one  of  the  busiest  intersections  in  downtown  St.
Catharines (see Figure 1). Its unveiling was the local zenith of the fevered excitement
that gripped Ontario immediately following the defeat of Louis Riel’s Metis forces in
the Northwest Rebellions of 1885. It features a soldier: a soldier standing at order arms
(see  Figure  2).  The  name  WATSON  is  engraved  upon  its  pediment  in  large  block
letters. The death of Alexander Watson, a resident of St. Catharines and later Winnipeg,
and  a  volunteer  in  the  90th  Winnipeg  Rifles,  is  thus  commemorated.  However,  the
monument  has  very  little  to  say  about  Watson.  Nor  have  his  visage,  or  even  his

Russell  Johnston,  Department  of  Communication,  Popular  Culture  and  Film,  Brock  University;  Michael
Ripmeester, Department of Geography, Brock University. Correspondence to: mripmess@brocku.ca

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250601118951

118 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

0

50

100

metres

N

Street

Duke

Provincial
Provincial
Court House
Court House

Ly

m

a

n

Stre

et
St. Catherines
St. Catherines

Cathedral
Cathedral

KnoxKnox
Knox

Presbyterian
Presbyterian

Church
Church

W

ellington

Landmark
Landmark
Landmark
Building
Building

Street

Street

Church

* 

WATSON

MONUMENT

J

a

m

e

s

Str

e

et

City
City
Hall
Hall

OldOld
Old
Court
Court
House
House
House

NiagNiagara Regional
Niagara Regional

Police Headquarters
Police Headquarters
Headquarters

C

arlisle

Stre

et

Centennial
Centennial

Library
Library

G

a
r
d

e

n

P

a

rk

Federal
Federal
Building
Building

Market
MarkMarket
Square
Square

Street

Market

HelliwellLane

BellBell
Bell

Street

King

St.

Sum mer

Queen

St.

Figure 1 Downtown St. Catharines.

uniform, been set in stone. Our interest in the monument is in understanding the role
that material culture plays in the creation and maintenance of popular or collective
memory. The production side of such meaning has been the focus of much scholarly
writing. A substantial literature has explored the way in which statuary, commemora-
tion rituals, and historic sites bolster elite claims to particular versions of the past. We
are certainly interested in this process as it concerns the Watson monument. However,
we are also interested in the consumption side of landscapes of public memory. What,
if anything, does it mean to the people of the city of St. Catharines and the surrounding
Niagara region? Have the people of the region internalised Watson as a local hero and
as an icon that speaks to our collective past? Does the monument prompt thoughts of
the Northwest Rebellion? If not, what do inhabitants of the Niagara region make of it?

Figure 1 Downtown St. Catharines.
Figure 2 The Monument to Private Alexander Watson. The image of the monument is taken from the south-east. The building in the background is Knox Presbyterian Church.

Organising Concepts

Two  sets  of  concepts  inform  this  research.  The  first  derives  from  studies  related  to
popular or collective memory. Research has focused on the creation of archives and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

119

Figure 2 The Monument to Private Alexander Watson. The image of the monument is
taken from the south-east. The building in the background is Knox Presbyterian Church.

museums,1 curriculum development,2 historic sites,3 and monuments and memori-
als.4 Though scholars from disparate disciplinary homes contest the intellectual terrain
surrounding popular or public memory, there is some agreement that there is a supra-
individual understanding of the past.5 We take the view that the most successful of the
memory entrepreneurs will nurture those specific mnemonic traditions that best serve
to legitimate particular understandings of the past.6 Indeed, scholars argue that norms
of remembrance govern our acquisition of a past: we are instructed as to the things we
should  remember  as  well  as  those  things  that  we  should  forget.7  However,  we  also
believe that popular expression of the past works to mediate this effort at control.

Geographers and others also well understand that the landscape can contribute to
the reification of such narrative creation as it can in the case of other ideologically based
values.8 Put simply, and to paraphrase the words of W. J. T. Mitchell, the landscape
works.9 The recent literature is full of examples that demonstrate the ways in which
specific  versions  of  the  past  provide  both  the  temporal  and  spatial  coordinates  for
remembering in a material form. In so doing, they also provide ways in which to build
identity (consensus, belonging) and to provide motivation to participate in civic or
national arenas. Part of the power of these monuments is that they represent ideology,
quite literally set in stone, cast in bronze, or in some other time-defeating medium.
Young writes: ‘In suggesting themselves as indigenous, even geological outcrops in a

120 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

national landscape, monuments tend to naturalise the values, ideals, and laws of the
land itself.’10 Indeed, the emergence of national identities around monuments, rituals,
and commemorations has long captured the attention of scholars.11 In many cases,
such identity formation has been successful. As Gordon notes: ‘enthusiastic crowds at
monument unveilings and the repeated use of symbols and sites suggest the depth of
popular agreement with some aspects of the official public memory.’12

Time, however, can be the Achilles heel of material commemorations. It seems well
understood that the currency of any event will sit most dearly with the generation of
individuals who have experienced it.13 After that, the event and/or its commemoration
may have to fit new or altered expectations and meanings in order to remain meaning-
ful.14 For Osborne, ‘Put simply, they last too long! … They are frozen in space while
time moves on around them, their rigid materiality ensuring their estrangement from
the ever-changing values of the society in which they are located.’15 Nor can memory
entrepreneurs ever be certain that the monuments will stir a local population in the
manner they desire. As De Certeau contends, individuals will use the contexts granted
by the powerful to their own ends.16 Osborne, Knowles, and Gordon document the
highly  contested  nature  of  such  monuments  in  a  Canadian  context.17  Following
Anderson,  they  acknowledge  that  a  process  of  cultural  selection  takes  place  in  the
development of new commemorations but with Bodnar they agree that this process
involves  negotiations  between  two  competing  impulses:  official  concerns  for  social
unity and consensus on the one hand, and vernacular expressions of individual memo-
ries and immediate experience on the other.18 Such findings suggest that monuments
rarely inspired the deference their sponsors expected. Thus, we can assume that the
material word, like its textual cousin, can sometimes be an orphan.

Despite  these  observations,  we  believe  it  is  rash  to  dismiss  seemingly  forgotten
monuments out of hand. We suggest that we need to understand these monuments in
a slightly different way: a way that depends less on processes of remembering and more
on ways of seeing. That we can read the landscape as a text is hardly a new idea. Nor is
it surprising that landscapes support the values and assumptions of an elite determined
to maintain a status quo. Our reading of the landscape is structured around accepted
ideological arguments that do not have to be articulated in order to be heard, to be seen,
or  to  be  understood.  Boyer,  in  exploring  how  memory  is  situated  in  the  cities  of
Western Europe, refers to such landscapes as rhetorical topoi: landscapes that situate
arguments intended to instruct local consciousness.19 In addition, these landscapes can
become ideologically naturalised in that the values and assumptions that lay behind
their  material  form  and  symbolic  meanings  become  so  taken  for  granted  that  they
deflect  close  interrogation.  Nevertheless,  we  also  argue  that  some  of  the  statements
made by material culture are enthymemes: arguments in which a part of the argument
is suppressed (if it points to the fallacy of the statement) or left unarticulated (because
it is naturalised as fact).20

Cresswell argues that we are philosophers: we must read and interpret our environ-
ments in order to engage them.21 Though the language of material culture is certainly
ambiguous (in that it can be purposefully or inadvertently misread), we are from the
time we are children taught to read things in specific ways.22 Our readings, then, are

International Journal of Heritage Studies

121

often  a  function  of  mnemonic  socialisation:  we  receive  positive  reinforcement  for
appropriate  readings  and  reprimands  for  misreadings.23  Furthermore,  symbols  and
visual arguments can enter into a reflexive relationship with their viewers. Repeated
and  approved  readings  provide  viewers  with  visual  skills24  or  ways  of  seeing.25
However,  viewers’  knowledge  also  provides  a  context  for  producers  of  images  and
forms. Images and the arguments they contain can therefore become naturalised: the
preferred  reading  becomes  the  naturalised  symbol  or  dominant  code.  This  process
becomes seamless when the image and the argument are tied to a wider ideological
constellation.  The  intertextuality  of  particular  points  of  discourse  suggests  that
preferred readings are wound up in other contexts. It is germane that we think of the
ways in which certain cultural memories have multiple ‘fixed points’ by which they
become part of everyday existence. These might take the form of ‘cultural formations’
(such as texts, rites, monuments) or ‘institutional communication’ (recitation, prac-
tice, observance).26 Parts of the rhetoric of material culture, then, may lie deeply sedi-
mented in ideological meaning. For Stupples: 

That  which  is  approved  by  a  culturally  dominant  fiction  becomes  our  normative
fiction, that is a cultural screen given-in-advance, interposed somewhere between our
look  and  the  social  field  in  which  we  operate.  There  is  then  a  close  relationship
between the image given-to-be-seen and the dominant fiction.27

Scholars have described these approved readings of historic sites as ‘habit-memories’28
or  as  part  of  a  ‘mnemonic  tradition’.29  In  the  end,  rhetoric  becomes  vernacular,  or
popular, understanding: a message unspoken yet received. This is the key to under-
standing the continued viability of seemingly invisible monuments.

Method

To understand how the Watson monument works in the community we attempted
to  reconstruct  its  career  as  a  site  of  commemoration  from  the  time  of  its  unveiling
in  1886  to  the  present.  We  scoured  local  sources  (government  records,  local  and
distant  newspapers,  and  local  archives)  for  evidence  that  individuals  and  groups
have used the monument as such. We conducted face-to-face interviews at two loca-
tions: in the shadow of the statue in downtown St. Catharines and in a public park
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Port  Dalhousie.  In  connection  with  questions  concerning
these  issues,  we  gave  all  participants  a  nine-question  quiz  on  local  history;  we  used
this to measure the participants’ interest in, and knowledge of, local history beyond
Private  Watson.  We  purposefully  selected  these  two  locations  to  maximise  the
demographic  range  of  potential  survey  subjects.  The  statue  itself  is  located  on  city
hall property at the intersection of two major streets; the opposite corners are homes
to the municipal courthouse and federal government offices. We chose Port Dalhou-
sie  to  provide  a  control  group  to  assess  the  data  collected  at  the  statue  itself.  Port
Dalhousie  is  a  popular  neighbourhood  in  the  city  with  a  beach,  lake-front  park,
marina,  shops  and  restaurants;  it  serves  as  a  destination  for  locals  and  tourists.  We
conducted  all  interviews  between  10.00  a.m.  and  2.00  p.m.  using  a  rolling  week

122 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

technique.  Again,  we  determined  that  this  would  maximise  the  demographic  range
of potential participants.30

Background

The Northwest Rebellion of 1885 was one violent eruption in a long struggle over Metis
and  Native  land  claims  on  the  Canadian  Prairies.31  In  1870,  the  Canadian  federal
government began surveying the Red River Valley in anticipation of its settlement by
European immigrants. The local population, predominantly Metis, feared the survey-
ors would not recognise their existing land claims. Under leader Louis Riel they formed
a provisional government and halted the survey. Canadian troops ended the resistance,
and Riel was forced into exile, but the Metis won limited recognition of their claims and
a duly constituted, local government was established. Fifteen years later the same events
recurred  further  west.  Private  investors  cooperating  with  the  Canadian  government
were then building a railway linking British Columbia with Ontario. Between them lay
1,300  kilometres  of  Metis  and  Native  settlements  and  their  traditional  hunting
grounds. The government wanted to foster further European immigration by estab-
lishing farm communities along the railway. Despite its earlier experience, however, the
government had not guaranteed the Metis and Native groups their lands. In March
1885, the Metis took action. Led once again by Riel, they formed a provisional govern-
ment, made Batoche their capital, and confronted a force of Canadian police officers at
neighbouring  Duck  Lake.  To  outsiders  it  appeared  that  Riel’s  forces  controlled  the
district and had overthrown constituted authority. The Canadian government mobil-
ised some 8,000 militia men from Manitoba and eastern Canada to face the rebels. A
decisive battle at Batoche brought Riel’s surrender and effectively ended the rebellion.
Alexander  Watson  was  a  militia  volunteer  with  the  90th  Regiment  (Winnipeg
Rifles). At age 27, he was a carpenter working in Winnipeg’s construction trades. He
had been in the city roughly four years.32 Before that, he had spent most of his previous
years as a resident of St. Catharines. When the rebellion began in 1885, the 90th was
called immediately. Watson went to the front and saw action in minor skirmishes and
the Battle of Fish Creek. On 12 May, at the Battle of Batoche, he was wounded as part
of the advance line facing Riel’s forces. He died three days later, one of very few federal
soldiers lost in the battle.33

Watson had two funerals, the first in Winnipeg and the second in St. Catharines. Both
cities took great pride in the soldier’s sacrifice at Batoche. In Winnipeg, Watson’s body
and those of three comrades lay in state before a public service was held at a local church
on 23 May. After his comrades were buried, however, Watson’s body was shipped to
St. Catharines. The body lay in state at his parents’ home until the city and local militia
staged another public funeral on 29 May. A memorial service at the courthouse was
followed by a carefully orchestrated procession to the cemetery. Several businesses were
draped in black and flags flew at half-staff. Onlookers lined the streets.34

Within days of the second funeral, a committee formed in St Catharines to erect a
monument  to  the  fallen  soldier.  The  committee  made  appeals  to  local  citizens  and
businesses to raise the necessary funds. Their efforts were soon realised. Only the shape

International Journal of Heritage Studies

123

of the monument aroused some tension. Some felt the monument should feature the
likeness of Watson, but committee members decided otherwise: the monument would
take the shape of an anonymous Canadian volunteer.35 The original plan called for a
monument in the cemetery on the outskirts of the city. In August 1886, however, the
committee convinced a special meeting of the city council to place the monument in
the grounds of city hall.36 The unveiling ceremony was a grand event for the small city.
One reporter claimed that it was the largest crowd ever assembled in St Catharines,
‘fences, trees and every spot that could hold a sight-seer being occupied’.37 A photo-
graph of the event shows onlookers covering every inch of the roof of the city offices.38
Watson’s death and its commemoration were certainly significant to the people of
the region 120 years ago. Moreover, for about 30 years the memorial served as a focus
for  efforts  to  remember  fallen  soldiers.  Time,  however,  has  not  been  kind  to  the
monument. The erection of a temporary memorial to the dead of the First World War
on city hall lawn replaced the Watson memorial as a focus for memory in 1918; in 1927
the construction of a permanent cenotaph five blocks away exacerbated this separation.
In 1971, an inspection revealed that the monument had deteriorated severely. At this
point civic officials deemed it unsafe. It was saved not because of a sense of honour but
because a local architect saw the damaged monument as an opportunity to test the
capabilities of a relatively inexpensive two-part epoxy process for stabilising concrete.
Despite successful efforts to save the monument, it no longer seems to hold a place in
local memory. It features neither in a newly established History Corridor (2005)39 nor
in the latest versions of online walking tours.40 A reinterpretation of national history
has also left the monument contradictory. With the rehabilitation of Louis Riel and the
Metis, the monument celebrates the use of lethal force against a man now recognised
as one of Canada’s founders and against a people now viewed as correct in their effort
to have their claims to land recognised by the Canadian government. In light of this, a
journalist has referred to the monument as ‘a quaint anachronism’.41 Similarly, a guide
to local heritage landscapes suggests that some might find the monument’s message to
be ‘meaningless or embarrassing’.42

Findings and Discussion

With these contexts in mind, we set out to survey residents of the Niagara region on
their knowledge of local history, Watson, and commemoration. One hundred and sixty-
two individuals completed the survey. The gender split was exactly half. About 70% were
between 25 and 60 years of age and almost 80% were of Canadian and/or European back-
ground. Thirty-nine per cent were born in the Niagara region, while a further 33% were
born in southern Ontario. Eighty-nine per cent of those surveyed were currently living
in the Niagara region. Almost 60% visited the downtown area at least five times per week
and were there for work (29%) or for leisure (39%). Our occupational categories were
taken from the Canadian census: most individuals fell into one of three groups: social
science, education, government, and religion; business, finance, and administration; or
retired. Overall, the demographic profile of our participants is highly representative of
the wider population of St. Catharines as recorded in the 2001 census.

124 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

Given a Likert scale on which to rank their interest in history generally, over 70% of
participants stated a moderate to strong interest. Only 10% were ‘hostile’ to learning
history.  Most  participants  were  quite  clear  on  where  they  had  learned  their  local
history:  54%  identified  the  library  along  with  school  and  the  Internet  as  their  most
important sources of historical knowledge while another 16% identified the library as
their  most  frequently  consulted  source.  Over  80%  reported  reading  plaques  and
inscriptions on monuments. Participants’ stated interest in history, however, did not
translate  into  solid  knowledge  of  historical  facts  about  the  region.  Seventy-three
participants  scored  less  than  41/2  out  of  9  on  the  local  history  trivia  questions.  The
average number of correct responses was 3 out of 9.

Participants did not fare any better in identifying Watson than they did in identify-
ing other local historical knowledge. Only 6% of those surveyed were able to identify
the monument’s purpose. Eight of the ten who identified him were over 40 years of age.
Seven out of the ten were women. All were of Euro-Canadian background. Seven out
of ten were born in Niagara or in southern Ontario. All 10 now live in the region and
six  stated  that  they  were  in  the  downtown  core  every  day.  Therefore,  it  does  seem
possible that exposure to the monument leads to knowledge of it. However, so few
participants were able to identify the monument’s purpose that these numbers are not
significant.  It  is  somewhat  surprising  that  although  80%  of  surveyed  individuals
reported reading plaques when they saw them, 80% had never read the plaque located
on the monument.

It  seems  clear,  then,  that  the  Watson  monument  does  not  inspire  memories  of
Watson himself or the battle in which he was killed. For many, the monument was
simply there, a part of the urban fabric. People referred to it as ‘a piece of furniture’,
‘an  old  knick-knack’,  ‘familiar’,  or  ‘public  art’.  For  example,  when  asked  about  the
place of the monument in the city, one person responded: ‘It does add a little to the
community, but no more than would a pleasing piece of art or architecture. It’s nice,
well kept.’ Others recognised the monument as adding to the historic value of the city.
For this group, the historic content of the monument was not as important as was the
fact that the monument was old. This gave it intrinsic value. For example, a participant
told us: 

The monument is really important. It reminds us of an earlier time. It’s good to carry
on  traditions.  It  needs  to  stay  where  it  is.  People  would  miss  it.  It’s  a  beautiful
structure. People like to appreciate historic stuff. Residents are sad when historic stuff
goes. It’s well preserved.

Some, therefore, thought that residents would miss the monument, if, for some reason,
it was removed. Others suggested that no one would care if it was gone. One participant
summed this attitude up: ‘Too bad that people don’t notice it. It’s a beautiful monu-
ment, but if it disappeared no one would notice. I see the tourists take pictures of it and
I wonder: why do they take pictures of that?’

When informed of the monument’s intended purpose, many people simply did not
see the connection between Watson’s part in the rebellion and its relevance for a resi-
dent of St. Catharines. As one person suggested: 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

125

I’ve seen it hundreds of times, but never really looked at it. I thought it was a Boer War
monument. One guy died a hundred years ago in a battle that nobody knows about.
Even  if  it  was  an  internal  struggle,  it’s  not  local.  There  are  simply  too  many  other
significant local things to pay attention to something that has very little to do with
what happened here.

Similarly, another stated: ‘It’s just something that you pass all the time. It has very little
relation to our times. It’s not my history, maybe the Metis care.’ Ironically, one of the
few participants who made the connection between Watson, his part in the battle, and
the cause of the Metis captured this sentiment: 

He’s irrelevant. Why is he commemorated here? Maybe to show the attitude of Upper
Canadians. He’s not a local hero, it didn’t happen here. He fought against the Metis
and they were right. So that makes him sort of an antihero doesn’t it? In those days he
might have been a hero, but he’s not any longer. The monument is significant because
it shows the attitude from the past as opposed to the present. I’ve never bothered to
look at it and I’ve passed it a lot. It’s ironic that they have citizenship court here at City
Hall. He was sort of fighting against inclusivity wasn’t he?

Another made links between the monument and other tourist activities in the region:
‘it’s like if you live in the area you don’t ride the Maid of the Mist. It’s not significant
…’ While we were not astonished to find that many people did not know the details of
the monument, we were surprised that several participants felt some degree of shame
that  they  did  not  know  of  Watson  and  his  part  in  the  rebellion.  For  example,  one
participant stated: 

I  feel  bad  saying  that  he’s  nothing,  but  he’s  unknown.  I  can’t  believe  that  he’s
unknown. But it is important for the younger generation to know about people like
him.  The  monument  is  significant.  It’s  good  to  see  that  he  was  remembered.  His
importance lies in the history of the city. It’s great what they did for him. It’s just a
good thing—something for a local.

Even those who were less than convinced that Watson was a local hero were loath to
argue  that  Watson  and  his  commemoration  were  insignificant.  As  one  person
suggested, ‘He should be important, but I don’t know. I hate to say he wasn’t, but he
didn’t change the course of events in St. Catharines. The event didn’t happen here. It’s
sad, but most of us don’t know what it is for.’

Despite their ignorance of the details of the monument’s message, many believed the
monument itself is significant. Its location outside city hall was enough to convince
many participants of that. One participant explained: ‘It’s really important. It must be
given that it’s in front of city hall … and it’s big, with the flowers and the flags.’ In
addition, the simple fact that it was a commemoration spurred people to conclude that
it  was  significant.  For  example,  one  person  reasoned:  ‘The  monument  is  very
significant. After all, they put it up.’ One person, however, found the juxtaposition of
the Watson memorial and its placement at city hall a little disconcerting. He said: 

I’ve  read  the  plaque,  but  it’s  been  a  while.  It’s  kind  of  unexpected.  I  would  have
thought that it was someone more important. I wouldn’t associate with this guy in a
‘he came from my home town’ way. I’m big on monuments (speaking as an historian)
but this is a weird monument. That shouldn’t diminish its significance.

126 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

Moreover, many people were also able to read the codes that tie the monument to the
military. For one: 

It’s a World War One monument—I don’t know. He was important at the time, but
as  the  years  passed  …  Like  myself,  I’ve  never  taken  the  time  to  read  it.  I  took  for
granted that it was a World War I monument. He looks like a soldier … the way he’s
dressed and he holds a gun. I never really saw the need to investigate.

Another stated: ‘I knew it was regimental or something—perhaps an unknown soldier.
Most of us don’t know what this guy did. That’s the sad part of it.’ And finally, another
suggested: ‘We may just assume we know what it is for.’

Given these kinds of statements, we might argue that the monument is just another
piece  of  urban  clutter  or  bric-a-brac.  The  problem  may  be  that  monuments  locate
memories outside the dynamic of personal remembering and narrative and detached
from the exigencies of day-to-day living. As Young puts it: 

Under the illusion that our memorial edifices will always be there to remind us, we
take  leave  of  them  and  return  only  at  our  convenience.  To  the  extent  that  we
encourage our monuments to do our memory work for us, we become that much
more forgetful.43

Indeed,  the  peripheral  location  of  the  monument  in  the  collective  psyches  of  our
participants reflects its peripheral location in their lives. The monument was erected in
a walking city. Since then, the increased speed of urban life may have had an effect on
the ways in which people view cityscapes. Indeed, many scholars have suggested that
the pressures of urban movement have rendered the richness of the urban environment
inconsequential to pedestrians and to occupants of vehicles.44 Furthermore, the space
between  the  vehicle  and  destination  becomes  something  to  be  endured  rather  than
something to be enjoyed. Certainly, many of our participants reported such thinking.
People recognised that they walked by the Watson monument many times but never
paid any attention to it. As summed by one of our participants, that walk is often very
focused: ‘I never heard of him. Most people in downtown are doing business. They go
in, they want to get out. We need more parking if we are supposed to lollygag around.
It’s really frustrating.’ Another person voiced a strikingly similar opinion: ‘I passed by
it lots of times, but I never really noticed it before. People don’t really walk here. When
they do they are busy doing things and don’t really notice things like that.’ Indeed, the
perceived effort to know Watson was something noted by a number of participants.
One person said: ‘There’s not a lot of monuments around so it’s important. He was a
liberator of Canada or something. I used to work across the street and never noticed it.
It’s pretty nice once you notice it, but I wouldn’t go over and read it.’ Similarly, another
noted: ‘If it had a path, I might go up to it. But the flowers and the hedge and the ‘do
not walk on the grass’ look removes it from the passersby. It is a difficult monument,
can’t read it because of the flowers, it’s not inviting. It looks inaccessible.’

Nevertheless, it may be in its seeming invisibility and/or obscurity that we can see the
monument performing its function. As part of our theoretical argument, we suggested
that  the  power  of  some  discursive  formations  lay  in  their  intertextuality.  We  might
further contend that the details of the monument are less important than its ideological

International Journal of Heritage Studies

127

underpinnings. As we have already illustrated, the monument belongs to another time
and to another place. Obviously, the lived experience of the Northwest Rebellion and
the  small  part  played  in  it  by  a  local  man  has  long  since  passed.  Regardless,  both
Donohue45 and Butterfield46 contend that such remembrance is ultimately unimpor-
tant.  Donohue,  writing  about  the  generic  American  monument,  contends:  ‘[t]he
soldiers have lost their identity in becoming representatives of a collective and heroic
act that stands as a symbol of American patriotism. This monument defies the deaths
of these men and replaces it with idealism and patriotism.’47 Likewise, Butterfield prof-
fers ‘But monuments are a special vessel for memory … They seem to exclude the kind
of personal memories that most of us recall of the departed, and instead to register only
an extremely narrow spectrum of information about the object or our affection.’ He
concludes that ‘By means of this standardization, it often limits the commemoration of
the individual to a single aspect: how the dead personified a social ideal that is regarded
as a central and permanent value.’48

These kinds of arguments became readily apparent during our surveys. Participants
seemed  to  understand  that  the  war  memorial  had  a  deeper  meaning.  For  instance,
people were quick to recognise that the monument suggested that the death of a soldier
stood for something greater than the death of a civilian: sacrifice and bravery.49 One
person told us: ‘It’s really significant. It represents all soldiers who have given their all.
We need to remember them for their sacrifice. We need all monuments. They are very
important parts of who we are.’

Where the monument reminded some participants of the military sacrifice of others,
some also saw it as a model for citizenship. Much of the literature dealing with monu-
ments and collective memory suggests their construction should foster identification
with a national identity. Furthermore, as Ignatieff argues, such identification delivers a
sense of nationalism with a moral imperative: if one’s nation, one’s people, is threat-
ened then lethal violence is not only justified, but is a right.50 However, as scholarship
on citizenship suggests, rights cannot exist without obligations.51 In other words, in
addition  to  status  and  to  legal  standing,  citizenship  implies  a  moral  obligation  to
contribute to the functioning of the state. This seems to be particularly true of military
service. For Helman: 

Participation  in  war  and  military  service  was  identified  as  the  ultimate  token  of
political obligation as well as the highest contribution to the enhancement of collec-
tive goals. The institutions of war making, and especially the military, were instituted
as the prime arenas of political integration and as the signifiers of full and effective
membership in the political community.52

We believe that monuments, like that erected for Watson, can also call on members of
the nation to display the proper willingness to fulfil the duties of citizenship. Thus,
though Watson’s monument may not prompt recollection of the man or his deeds, it
seems to have occasioned recognition of a number of important characteristics associ-
ated with the citizen soldier: the citizen soldier is that individual most willing to meet
the ultimate obligation of citizenship.53 Volunteer service would also provide individ-
uals with the other principles: ‘freedom, equality, independence, community, mixing,
activity, and deliberation in groups’.54 In short, citizen soldiers were/are model citizens.

128 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

These messages were not lost on individuals participating in our survey. For exam-
ple, a number of people commented on the Canadian tradition of service that Watson
exemplifies. Canadians, participants said, were reliable soldiers. Another related that
Watson was like all the other ‘boys’ Canada sent to war. Several people related civic
virtues  like  honour,  dedication,  and  inspiration  when  asked  what  the  monument
meant to them. One said: ‘It’s important to one aspect of the community, especially for
people involved in conflicts elsewhere. It kind of foreshadows future conflicts and of
other things to come. It’s a reminder of the involvement of this community of a major
event in Canadian history.’ Likewise, for another: ‘He sets a good example of good citi-
zenship. I haven’t read the plaque, but I will some day. I may use it more now that I
know about it.’ Still another person noted that wars were inevitable and that we need
people to protect us from our oppressors.

It is important that the memories and the values associated with the citizen soldier
are not limited to monuments like that erected for Watson. Rather, they are tied into a
discourse  that  is  ratified  through  both  cultural  formation  and  institutional
communication. The remembrance of war heroes is, despite claims to the contrary by
Granatstein, an important part of Canadian cultural capital.55 Numerous government
and non-government organisations work hard to promote appropriate remembrance
practices.  Schools  at  all  levels  are  encouraged  to  include  a  Remembrance  Day
curriculum. In St. Catharines alone, commemorations are held at monuments in four
different city wards while local churches often include veterans in annual remembrance
liturgies. National and local veteran associations lobby to keep veterans in the public
eye.56  The  poppy  campaign,  a  visible  symbol  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  John  McCrae’s
poignant  battlefield  poem  (In  Flanders  Fields),  is  another  annual  ritual  of  remem-
brance.57 These local commemorations augment national and provincial government
strategies of remembrance based on annual acknowledgement of veteran service and the
provision of ephemera themed on remembrance (e.g. commemorative coins, stamps,
monuments, and highway names). Proof of the effectiveness of this ‘periodic fusion with
the past’ may be offered through the successful implication of military history in adver-
tising campaigns.58 A Canadian beer company advertisement, for instance, is designed
to play on widely accepted notions of what it means to be Canadian. It exploits visual
references to Canadian involvement in conflict: soldiers embarking for duty and return-
ing home as well as images of Canadian war graves in Vimy.59 These images were also
used in an advertisement for mobile (cell) phones (a Canadian youth visiting the beach
at Dieppe calls his grandfather to thank him).60 These companies are employing images
that they know will resonate with potential consumers.

Conclusions

Several  authors  have  argued  that  national  identity  must  be  rooted  in  some  form  of
popular memory. Popular memory of a shared past can elide social contradictions in
the present and thereby create an ideological precondition for peaceable communities.
Many  of  the  authors  cited  above  argue  that  commemorations  have  historically
performed these roles, even if their specific meanings are disputed. The monument to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

129

Private Watson exemplifies this. It certainly has had a chequered past. Initially, it was
the focus of much enthusiasm. However, its role as a focus of memory eroded as this
function was transferred to other, more pertinent, sites in the city and its surrounding
region. Our survey suggests that residents have forgotten the obvious statements that
the  monument  was  to  make.  Passing  time,  shifting  focus,  and  the  unwillingness  or
inability  of  both  teaching  and  receiving  generations  to  continue  to  commemorate
Watson and the Northwest Rebellion have left them almost completely irrelevant to
local  people.  The  supposed,  or  hidden,  argument,  however,  still  lurks  in  the
monument’s form and in popular imaginations. Participants of our survey continue to
articulate  that  a  soldier  represents  sacrifice,  honour,  dedication,  and  a  model  for
citizenry.  It  may  be,  then,  that  the  monument  continues  to  do  its  job  despite  its
apparent obscurity. It never needs to be critically examined because residents know or
believe they know for what it stands. It never needs to be ‘read’ because the details may,
ultimately,  be  unimportant.  A  momentary  flash  at  the  periphery  of  vision  may  be
enough  to  reify  yet  again  the  unspoken  rhetoric  of  the  Watson  monument:  fallen
soldiers are worthy of honour and represent a preferred model for citizenship.

We would like to conclude with a couple of thoughts for future research. First, we
have suggested that people were prompted to make associations between the Private
Watson memorial and the broader values of military sacrifice and good citizenship.
Nevertheless, it remains to be seen whether participants felt any motivation to partici-
pate in civic matters generally and military service in particular. Second, we feel that it
would be worthwhile to consider other invisible or obscure monuments in the same
way we have done here: that is, the necessary inclusion of local residents’ consump-
tion  of  material  commemoration.  For  instance,  could  we  look  at  monuments  to
otherwise forgotten explorers as somehow pointing to the legitimacy of the colonial
project? Or, could we view the heavy weighting of monuments to the lives and deeds
of men as justification for longstanding gender inequalities though both the individu-
als and their actions are inconsequential to those living in the present? The point is,
we  feel,  that  monuments  need  to  be  understood  at  the  interstices  of  complex
processes of truth making. Bills argues: ‘The regime of truth exists, for the most part,
below the surface of daily life, so much so that we are generally unaware of it.’61 Thus,
we  need  to  interrogate  beyond  the  surface  reading  of  monuments—their  particular
statements  concerning  historical  narratives.  This  deeper  reading  is  undoubtedly
integral to the building of identity and a guide to projects of exclusion. As we have
illustrated  here,  the  importance  of  the  intertextuality  of  the  form  and  symbol  give
monuments,  even  those  that  are  seemingly  invisible,  a  much  wider  consumer  base
than we might imagine.

Acknowledgements

This  project  was  funded  by  a  Social  Sciences  and  Humanities  Research  Council
Standard Research Grant held by the Popular Culture Niagara Research Group. The
authors  would  like  to  thank  Zorianna  Zurba,  Sarah  Bradley,  Laura  Visan,  and  Erin
Kaipainen for their research efforts, to the two anonymous reviewers for their many

130 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

useful comments, and to Loris Gasparotto for his cartographic wizardry. Drafts of this
paper were presented at the Annual Meetings of the American Association of Geogra-
phers (Chicago, 2006) and the Research Seminar Series of the Cultural Business Group,
Glasgow Caledonian University (Glasgow, 2006).

Notes

1 [1] Brown and Davis-Brown, ‘The Making of Memory’; Bills, ‘Public Memory, Commemoration,

and the Regime of Truth’.

2 [2] Ahonen, ‘Politics of Identity’.
3 [3] Gable and Handler, ‘Public History’; De Oliver, ‘Historical Preservation and Identity’.
4 [4] Gough,  ‘Sites  in  the  Imagination’;  Farmer,  ‘Oradour-sur-Glane’;  Young,  ‘The  Counter
Monument’;  Johnson,  ‘Cast  in  Stone’;  Osborne,  ‘Landscape,  Memory,  Monuments,  and
Commemoration’; idem, ‘Constructing Landscapes of Power’.

5 [5] Olick and Robbins, ‘Social Memory Studies’; Olick, ‘Collective Memories’; Crane, ‘Writing the
Individual Back into Collective Memory’; Confino, ‘Collective Memory and Cultural History’;
Assman, ‘Collective Memory and Cultural Identity’; Said, ‘Invention, Memory and Place’.
Jelin, ‘State Repression and the Labours of Memory’. Jelin uses the term memory entrepre-
neurs to delineate groups who attempt to rouse popular support in support of their particular
interpretation of the past.

6 [6]

7 [7] Zerubavel, Time Maps.
8 [8]

See Cosgrove and Daniels, The Iconography of Landscapes; Cosgrove, Social Formation and the
Symbolic Landscape; Duncan et al., A Companion to Cultural Geography.

9 [9] Mitchell, ‘Introduction’.
10[10] Young, ‘The Counter Monument’, 270.
11[11] Hobsbawm  and  Ranger,  The  Invention  of  Tradition;  Osborne,  ‘Constructing  Landscapes  of
Power’; idem, ‘Landscape, Memory, Monuments and Commemoration’; idem, ‘From Native
Pines  to  Diasporic  Geese’;  Shipley,  To  Mark  Our  Place;  McKay,  ‘Tartanism  Triumphant’;
idem,  ‘History  and  the  Tourist  Gaze’;  Boudreau,  ‘A  Rare  and  Unusual  Treat  of  Historical
Significance’; Nelles, The Art of Nation-building; Rudin, Founding Fathers; Reichl, ‘Flying the
Flag’; Vale, ‘Mediated Monuments and National Identity’; Baumel, ‘The Heroism of Hannah
Senesz’; Forest and Johnson, ‘Unraveling the Threads of History’; Said, ‘Invention, Memory
and Place’; West, ‘Selling Canada to Canadians’; Stupples, ‘Visual Culture, Synthetic Memory
and the Construction of National Identity’.

12[12] Gordon, Making Public Pasts, 172.
13[13] Hood,  ‘An  Unusable  Past’;  Korzh,  ‘Representation  of  Historical  Knowledge  in  Collective

Memory’; Zerubavel, Time Maps.

14[14] Macdonald, ‘Undesirable Heritage’; Purcell, ‘Commemoration, Public Art, and the Changing
Meaning of the Bunker Hill Monument’; Whelan, ‘The Construction and Deconstruction of a
Colonial Landscape’.

15[15] Osborne, ‘Corporeal Politics and the Body Politic’, 308.
16[16] De Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life. See also Burke, ‘In Sight, Out of View’.
17[17] Osborne,  ‘Constructing  Landscapes  of  Power’;  ‘Landscape,  Memory,  Monuments  and
Commemoration’;  idem  ‘From  Native  Pines  to  Diasporic  Geese’;  Knowles,  Inventing  the
Loyalists; Gordon, Making Public Pasts.

18[18] Cf. Anderson, Imagined Communities; Bodnar, Remaking America. See also Rosenzweig and

Thelen, The Presence of the Past.

19[19] Boyer,  The  City  of  Collective  Memory;  for  more  on  visual  arguments  see  Birdsell  and
Groarke,  ‘Towards  a  Theory  of  Visual  Argument’;  Blair,  ‘The  Possibility  and  Actuality  of
Visual Arguments’.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

131

20[20] Finnegan, ‘Recognizing Lincoln’; idem, ‘The Naturalistic Enthymeme and Visual Argument’;

Smith, ‘President Bush’s Enthymeme of Evil’.

21[21] Cresswell, In Place/Out of Place.
22[22] Turiel, The Development of Social Knowledge.
23[23] Zerubavel, Time Maps; Stupples, ‘Visual Culture, Synthetic Memory and the Construction of

National Identity’; Turiel, The Development of Social Knowledge.

24[24] Baxandall, Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy.
25[25] Berger, Ways of Seeing.
26[26] Assman, ‘Collective Memory and Cultural Identity’.
27[27]

Stupples,  ‘Visual  Culture,  Synthetic  Memory  and  the  Construction  of  National  Identity’,
136.

28[28] Connerton,  How  Societies  Remember.  See  also  Hobsbawm  and  Ranger,  The  Invention  of

Tradition.

29[29] Zerubavel, Time Maps.
30[30] We compiled the results of the surveys on a spreadsheet in which each participant’s responses
to each question were entered and coded. We transcribed and coded the subsequent inter-
views and stored them in a separate file.

31[31] For detail on the Northwest Rebellions see Beal and Macleod, Prairie Fire; Morton, A Military

History of Canada; idem, The Last War Drum.

32[32] Winnipeg Free Press, 1881–1885; Mulvaney, Canada’s Northwest Rebellion, 242.
33[33]

St.  Catharines  Journal,  quoted  in  Welland  Tribune,  1885,  1;  Morton,  The  Last  War  Drum,
chap. 4.

34[34] Winnipeg Free Press, 14 May 1885; ibid., 23 May 1885; Toronto Mail, 23 May 1885; Welland

35[35]

Tribune, 5 June 1885; Toronto Mail, 30 May 1885.
St. Catharines City Council, Minutes, 8 June 1885; Hamilton Spectator, 24 June 1885; ibid., 11
July 1885.

St. Catharines Standard, 18 September 2000, A4.

36[36] Thorold Post, 1886.
37[37] Thorold Post, 1886.
38[38]
39[39] City of St. Catharines, City of St. Catharines Heritage Corridor.
40[40] Tour St. Catharines, Old Town Walking Tour.
41[41]
42[42] Taylor and St. Catharines LACAC, Discovering St. Catharines’ Heritage, 15.
43[43] Young, ‘The Counter Monument’, 236.
44[44]

St. Catharines Standard, 22 May 1982, 9.

See Mumford, The Culture of Cities; Boyer, The City of Collective Memory; Adams, ‘Peripatetic
Imagery and Peripatetic Sense of Place’; Sheller and Urry, ‘The City and the Car’; Taylor, ‘The
Aesthetic Experience of Traffic in the Modern City’.

45[45] Donohue, ‘Dwelling with Monuments’.
46[46] Butterfield, ‘Monuments and Memories’.
47[47] Donohue, ‘Dwelling with Monuments’, 240.
48[48] Butterfield, ‘Monuments and Memories’, 30.
49[49]

See,  for  example,  Doss,  ‘Death,  Art,  and  Memory  in  the  Public  Sphere’;  Laqueur,  Names,
Bodies, and the Anxiety of Erasure’.
Ignatieff, Blood and Belonging.

50[50]
51[51] Rose, ‘Women’s Rights, Women’s Obligations’; Helman, ‘Negotiating Obligations, Creating

Rights’; Janoski, Citizenship and Society.

52[52] Helman, ‘Negotiating Obligations, Creating Rights’, 49.
53[53]

Strauss,  ‘Reflections  on  the  Citizen-soldier’;  Snyder,  ‘The  Citizen-soldier  Tradition  and
Gender Integration of the U.S. Military’.
54[54]
Strauss, ‘Reflections on the Citizen-soldier’, 72.
55[55] Cf. Granatstein, Who Killed Canadian History?
56[56] Morton and Wright, Winning the Second Battle.

132 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

57[57] For  more  on  the  Canadian  poppy  campaign  see:  http://www.legion.ca/asp/docs/rempoppy/

allabout_e.asp

Lieutenant Colonel John McCrae’s poem reads: 

In Flanders Fields

In Flanders Fields the poppies blow
Between the crosses, row on row,
That mark our place; and in the sky
The larks, still bravely singing, fly
Scarce heard amid the guns below.

We are the Dead. Short days ago
We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,
Loved, and were loved, and now we lie
In Flanders fields.

Take up our quarrel with the foe:
To you from failing hands we throw
The torch, be yours to hold it high.
If ye break faith with us who die
We shall not sleep, though poppies grow
In Flanders fields

For more on McCrae and his poem visit: Veterans Affairs Canada: http://www.vac-acc.gc.ca/
general/sub.cfm?source=history/firstwar/mccrae

58[58] Zerubavel, Time Maps.
59[59] Molson Breweries, ‘Free Wheeling’, 1995.
60[60] Bell Mobility, ‘On the Beach’, 1997.
61[61] Bills, ‘Public Memory, Commemoration, and the Regime of Truth’, 186.

References

Adams,  P.  ‘Peripatetic  Imagery  and  Peripatetic  Sense  of  Place’.  In  Textures  of  Place:  Exploring
Humanist  Geographies,  edited  by  P.  Adams,  S.  Hoelscher  and  K.  Till.  Minneapolis  and
London: University of Minnesota Press, 2001: 186–206.

Ahonen,  S.  ‘Politics  of  Identity  through  History  Curriculum:  Narratives  of  the  Past  for  Social

Exclusion—or Inclusion?’ Journal of Curriculum Studies 33, no. 2 (2001): 179–94.

Anderson, B. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London:

Verso, 1983.

Assman, J. ‘Collective Memory and Cultural Identity’. New German Critique 65 (1995): 125–33.
Baumel, J. T. ‘The Heroism of Hannah Senesz: An Exercise in Creating Collective National Memory

in the State of…’ Journal of Contemporary History  31, no. 3 (1996): 521–47.

Baxandall,  M.  Painting  and  Experience  in  Fifteenth  Century  Italy.  Oxford  and  New  York:  Oxford

University Press, 1972.

Beal, B. and R. Macleod. Prairie Fire: The Northwest Rebellion of 1885. Edmonton: Hurtig, 1984.
Berger, J. Ways of Seeing. London: British Broadcasting Corporation and Harmondsworth: Penguin,

1972.

Bills, S. ‘Public Memory, Commemoration, and the Regime of Truth’. Peace and Change 23, no. 2

(1998): 183–92.

Birdsell, D. and L. Groarke. ‘Toward a Theory of Visual Argument’. Argumentation and Advocacy 33,

no. 1 (1996): 1–10.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

133

Blair, A. ‘The Possibility and Actuality of Visual Arguments’. Argumentation and Advocacy 33, no. 1

(1996): 23–39.

Bodnar,  J.  Remaking  America:  Public  Memory,  Commemoration,  and  Patriotism  in  the  Twentieth

Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.

Boudreau,  M.  ‘A  Rare  and  Unusual  Treat  of  Historical  Significance:  The  1923  Hector  Celebra-
tion  and  the  Political  Economy  of  the  Past’.  Journal  of  Canadian  Studies  28,  no.  4  (1993):
28–48.

Boyer, M. C. The City of Collective Memory: Its Historical Imagery and Architectural Entertainments.

Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press, 1996.

Brown, R. and B. Davis-Brown. ‘The Making of Memory: The Politics of the Archives, Libraries and
Museums in the Construction of National Consciousness’. History of the Human Sciences 11,
no. 4 (1998): 17–32.

Burke, A. ‘In Sight, Out of View: A Tale of Three Monuments’. Antipode 38, no. 1 (2006): 41–58.
Butterfield, P. ‘Monuments and Memories: What History can Teach the Architects at Ground Zero’.

New Republic, 3 February 2003, 27–32.

City of St. Catharines. City of St. Catharines Heritage Corridor: City of St. Catharines Walking Tour

[n.d.], available from http://www.heritagecorridor.ca/walking.htm

Confino,  A.  ‘Collective  Memory  and  Cultural  History:  Problems  of  Method’.  American  Historical

Review 102, no. 5 (1997): 1386–403.

Connerton, P. How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Cosgrove,  D.  Social  Formation  and  Symbolic  Landscape.  Madison:  University  of  Wisconsin  Press,

1998.

Cosgrove, D. and S. Daniels, eds. The Iconography of Landscapes: Essays on the Symbolic Representation,

Design, and Use of Past Environments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Crane, S. ‘Writing the Individual Back into Collective Memory’. American History Review 102, no. 5

(1997): 1372–85.

Cresswell, T. In Place/Out of Place: Geography, Ideology, and Transgression. Minneapolis and London:

University of Minnesota Press, 1996.

De  Certeau,  M.  The  Practice  of  Everyday  Life.  Translated  by  S.  Rendell.  Berkeley:  University  of

California Press, 1984.

De Oliver, M. ‘Historical Preservation and Identity: The Alamo and the Production of a Consumer

Landscape’. Antipode 28, no. 1 (1996): 1–23.

Donohue, J. ‘Dwelling with Monuments’. Philosophy and Geography 5, no. 2 (2002): 235–42.
Doss, E. ‘Death, Art, and Memory in the Public Sphere: The Visual and Material Culture of Grief in

Contemporary America’. Mortality 7, no. 1 (2002): 63–82.

Duncan,  J.,  N.  Johnson  and  R.  Schein,  eds.  A  Companion  to  Cultural  Geography.  Malden,  MA:

Blackwell, 2004.

Farmer, S. B. ‘Oradour-sur-Glane: Memory in a Preserved Landscape’. French Historical Studies 19,

no. 1 (1995): 27–47.

Finnegan, C. ‘The Naturalistic Enthymeme and Visual Argument: Photographic Representation in

the “Skull Controversy”’. Argumentation and Advocacy 37 (2001): 133–39.

———. ‘Recognizing Lincoln: Image Vernaculars in Nineteenth Century Visual Culture’. Rhetoric

and Public Affairs 8, no. 1 (2005): 31–58.

Forest,  B.  and  J.  Johnson.  ‘Unraveling  the  Threads  of  History:  Soviet  Era  Monuments  and  Post
Soviet National Identity in Moscow’. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92, no.
3 (2002): 524–47.

Gable, E. and R. Handler. ‘Public History, Private Memory: Notes from the Ethnography of Colonial

Williamsburg, Virginia, USA’. Ethnos 65, no. 2 (2000): 237–52.

Gordon, A. Making Public Pasts: The Contested Terrain of Montreal’s Public Memories, 1891–1930.

Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2001.

Gough,  P.  ‘Sites  in  the  Imagination:  The  Beaumont  Hamel  Newfoundland  Memorial  on  the

Somme’. Cultural Geographies 11 (2004): 235–58.

134 R. Johnston & M. Ripmeester

Granatstein, J. L. Who Killed Canadian History? Toronto: HarperCollins, 1998.
Helman, S. ‘Negotiating Obligations, Creating Rights: Conscientious Objection and the Redefinition

of Citizenship in Israel’. Citizenship Studies 3, no. 1 (1999): 45–69.

Hobsbawm,  E.  and  T.  Ranger,  eds.  The  Invention  of  Tradition.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University

Press, 1983.

Hood, C. ‘An Unusable Past: Urban Elites, New York City’s Evacuation Day, and the Transforma-

tions of Memory Culture’. Journal of Social History 37, no. 4 (2004): 884–913.

Ignatieff, M. Blood and Belonging: Journeys in to the New Nationalism. New York: Farrar, Straus, and

Giroux, 1994.

Janoski, T. Citizenship and Society: A Framework of Rights and Obligations in Liberal, Traditional, and

Social Democratic Regimes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Jelin, E. State Repression and the Labours of Memory.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,

2003.

Johnson, N. ‘Cast in Stone: Monuments, Geography, and Nationalism’. Environment and Planning

D: Society and Space 13 (1995): 51–65.

Knowles, N. Inventing the Loyalists: The Ontario Tradition and the Creation of Useable Pasts. Toronto:

University of Toronto, 1997.

Korzh, N. N. ‘Representation of Historical Knowledge in Collective Memory’. Journal of Russian and

Eastern European Psychology 39, no. 3 (2002): 69–83.

Laqueur, T. ‘Names, Bodies, and the Anxiety of Erasure’. In The Social and the Political Body, edited

by T. Schatzki and W. Natter. London: Guilford Press, 1996: 123–41.

Macdonald,  S.  ‘Undesirable  Heritage:  Fascist  Material  Culture  and  Historical  Consciousness  in

Nuremberg’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 12, no. 1 (2006): 9–28.

McKay,  I.  ‘Tartanism  Triumphant:  The  Construction  of  Scottishness  in  Nova  Scotia,  1933–1954’.

Acadiensis 21, no. 2 (1992): 5–47.

———. ‘History and the Tourist Gaze: The Politics of Commemoration in Nova Scotia, 1935–1964’.

Acadiensis 22, no. 2 (1993): 102–38.

Mitchell,  W.  J.  T.  ‘Introduction’.  In  Landscape  and  Power,  edited  by  W.  J.  T.  Mitchell.  Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1994: 1–4.

Morton, D. The Last War Drum: The North West Campaign of 1885. Toronto: Hakkert, 1972.
———. A Military History of Canada. 4th ed. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1999.
Morton, D. and G. Wright. Winning the Second Battle: Canadian Veterans and the Return to Civilian

Life, 1915–1930. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1987.

Mulvaney, C. P. Canada’s Northwest Rebellion. Toronto: Hovey, 1885.
Mumford, L. The Culture of Cities. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1938.
Nelles, H. V. The Art of Nation-Building. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999.
Olick, J. ‘Collective Memories: The Two Cultures’. Sociology Theory 17, no. 3 (1999): 333–48.
Olick, J. and J. Robbins. ‘Social Memory Studies: From Collective Memory to Historical Sociology of

Mnemonic Practices’. Annual Review of Sociology 24 (1998): 105–40.

Osborne, B. ‘Constructing Landscapes of Power: The George Etienne Cartier Monument, Montreal’.

Journal of Historical Geography 24, no. 4 (1998): 431–58.

———.  ‘Landscape,  Memory,  Monuments,  and  Commemoration:  Putting  Identity  in  its  Place’.

Canadian Ethnic Studies 33, no. 3 (2001): 39–76.

———.  ‘Corporeal  Politics  and  the  Body  Politic:  The  Re-presentation  of  Louis  Riel  in  Canadian

Identity’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 8, no. 4 (2002): 303–22.

———.  ‘From  Native  Pines  to  Diasporic  Geese:  Placing  Culture,  Setting  Our  Sites,  Locating
Identity in  a  Transnational  Canada’.  Canadian  Journal  of  Communication  31  (2006):
147–75.

Purcell, S. ‘Commemoration, Public Art, and the Changing Meaning of the Bunker Hill Monument’.

The Public Historian 25, no. 2 (2003): 55–71.

Reichl, S. ‘Flying the Flag: The Intricate Semiotics of National Identity’. European Journal of English

Studies 8, no. 2 (2004): 205–17.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

135

Rose,  S.  ‘Women’s  Rights,  Women’s  Obligations:  Contradictions  of  Citizenship  in  World  War  II

Britain’. European Review of History 7, no. 2 (2000): 277–89.

Rosenzweig, R. and D. Thelen. The Presence of the Past: Popular Uses of History in American Life. New

York: Columbia University Press, 1998.

Rudin,  R.  Founding  Fathers:  The  Celebration  of  Champlain  and  Laval  in  the  Streets  of  Quebec,

1878–1908. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003.

Said, E. ‘Invention, Memory and Place’. Critical Inquiry 26 (2000): 175–92.
Sheller, M. and J. Urry. ‘The City and the Car’. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research

24, no. 4 (2000): 737–57.

Shipley, R. To Mark Our Place: A History of Canadian War Memorials. Toronto: NC Press, 1987.
Smith, C. ‘President Bush’s Enthymeme of Evil: The Amalgamation of 9/11, Iraq, and Moral Values’.

American Behavioral Scientist 49, no. 1 (2005): 32–47.

Snyder,  R.  C.  ‘The  Citizen-soldier  Tradition  and  Gender  Integration  of  the  U.S.  Military’.  Armed

Forces and Society 29, no. 2 (2003): 185–204.

Strauss, B. ‘Reflections on the Citizen-soldier’. Parameters 33, no. 2 (2003): 66–78.
Stupples, P. ‘Visual Culture, Synthetic Memory and the Construction of National Identity’. Third

Text 17, no. 2 (2003): 127–39.

Taylor, N. ‘The Aesthetic Experience of Traffic in the Modern City’. Urban Studies 40, no. 8 (2003):

1609–25.

Taylor,  R.  and  St.  Catharines  LACAC.  Discovering  St.  Catharines’  Heritage:  The  Old  Town.  St.

Catharines: St. Catharines LACAC, 1981.

Tour  St.  Catharines.  Old  Town  Walking  Tour  [2002].  Available  from  http://www.tourstca-

tharines.com/tours-oldtown.shtml

Turiel, E. The Development of Social Knowledge: Morality and Convention. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1993.

Vale,  L.  ‘Mediated  Monuments  and  National  Identity’.  Journal  of  Architecture  4,  no.  4  (1999):

391–408.

West, E. ‘Selling Canada to Canadians: Collective Memory, National Identity, and Popular Culture’.

Critical Studies in Media 19, no. 2 (2002): 212–31.

Whelan, Y. ‘The Construction and Deconstruction of a Colonial Landscape: Monuments to British
Monarchs in Dublin before and after Independence’. Journal of Historical Geography 28, no. 4
(2002): 508–33.

Young, J. ‘The Counter Monument: Memory against Itself in Germany Today’. Critical Inquiry 18,

no. 2 (1992): 267–96.

Zerubavel, E. Time Maps: Collective Memory and the Social Shape of the Past. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 2003.


