Guerilla art, social value and absent heritage fabric1
Jennifer Harris*

Built Environment, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_535212.sgm

(Received 15 August 2010; final version received 23 October 2010)

Dr JenniferHarris
jennifer.harris@curtin.edu.au
10.1080/13527258.2010.535212

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2011Taylor & Francis
1730000002011

There is extensive commentary on the role of unauthorised art, but little on the
coincidence of heritage value and guerilla art. This paper analyses the relationship
of the two in a 2007 statue which is a monument to a lost place for which there is
no surviving historic fabric. The statue functions not just as a place of memory,
but of guerilla art; a complex interplay has emerged between an official piece of
government  art  and  unsanctioned  community  performance.  Growing  heritage
emphasis on social value over the previous dominance of original fabric suggests
that  the  delight  with  which  the  statue  has  been  greeted  illuminates  evolving
heritage philosophy, monument language and the emergence of the importance of
the heritage community especially for its potential performance value at a site. The
dramatic  contribution  that  the  statue  has  made  to  the  city  has  an  impact  on  the
fields of landscaping, planning, history and heritage.

Most monuments exist unnoticed in cities (Huyssen 1995, p. 258, Gough 2006). They
are surrounded by cars, pedestrians and noise – they become almost invisible. Realist,
figural  monuments  usually  blend  into  the  landscape  and  very  rarely  stir  comment.
Exhausted, repetitious memorial language has produced static monuments which fail
ultimately to protect and enrich collective memory. Some monuments, however, tran-
scend invisibility and not only escape the indifference generated by everyday contact,
but become dramatic elements in daily life. In the water of the Swan River in Crawley,
Perth, Western Australia, about 15 metres from the shoreline and a never-ending line
of commuter traffic, there is a slightly larger than life realist statue of a 1940s woman
swimmer entitled Eliza. Intense public affection for Eliza, and community play with
it,  has  opened  up  questions  about  good  heritage  practice.  Public  uses  of  this  statue
suggest the potential for planners of monuments to imagine and encourage an interac-
tive audience which is the crucial element necessary to avoid the usual fate of monu-
ments:  invisibility.  Eliza  has  become  the  focus  for  surprisingly  vibrant  guerilla  art,
practices of which are commonly associated with negative rather than positive impacts
on heritage. Most importantly the statue has affirmed the importance of the somewhat
neglected social value as a key, everyday heritage value. Significantly, at this statue,
social value is demonstrated through performance producing a complex heritage text
which encompasses past and present and can even be seen to gesture to the future as
it suggests a new type of memorial language and a new conceptualisation of a heritage
audience.  The  well  known  concerns  of  Halbwachs  (1980),  Nora  (1989)  and  Boyer

*Email: jennifer.harris@curtin.edu.au



 215

(1996) about the split between official history and collective memory are challenged
at Eliza. This statue, erected by a government, has not only been used by its audience
to intensify the social value desired by official heritage practice, but that audience has
also convinced government officials – more or less – that community play with a statue
enriches community life. For these reasons this small statue deserves critical attention.
Eliza is well sited to attract passing community attention. The road and shoreline
in front of the statue follow the contours of one of the few high points in the Perth
metropolitan  area,  a  hill  called  Mount  Eliza  after  which  the  generic  swimmer  was
named.  Eliza  is  solidly  built,  neither  idealised  nor  erotically  thin  by  contemporary
standards. Her swimming costume is modest and her hair is tucked into a bathing cap;
she appears to be a realist depiction of a female swimmer who might have used the
baths. Upon installation, the monument almost immediately became a topic of daily
discussion because it became the focus of continual dressing and re-dressing pranks
of a type that can be understood in terms of guerilla art. The passing public/audience/
underground artists in cars, yachts, canoes, rowing shells, bikes and on foot, roller-
blade or bicycle have been presented with a playful, changing statue that marks the
passage of time by celebrating events, for example the Tour de France by wearing a
yellow jersey; or registers sinister threats, for example swine flu by wearing a surgical
mask (Figure 1). Sometimes the meaning of Eliza’s clothes is private, known only to
a select group. The statue is the work of sculptors, Tony Jones and Ben Jones and was
installed by the Perth City Council to commemorate the site of the former Crawley
Baths  which  were  once  the  biggest  in  the  southern  hemisphere.  It  was  politically

Figure 1. Eliza wears a surgical mask at the beginning of the H1N1 flu outbreak in Perth.
Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

216

 J. Harris

courageous of the council to erect Eliza because the statue reminds us of bureaucratic
support for the decades of relentless demolition of the city’s human scale as sky scrap-
ers took over from the late nineteenth and early twentieth century architecture in the
business district. The loss of pre-modernist Perth is mourned; Eliza alerts the audience
to lost fabric, a ruptured city and a landscape almost devoid of memory.

Public uses of Eliza reveal an odd combination: simultaneous resistance to heri-
tage  practices  associated  with  control  and  protection  of  a  place,  and  paradoxical,
unwitting,  support  of  social  value.  This  paper  explores  the  coincidence  of  heritage
value and guerilla art in the Eliza monument, asking: who is the community around
this statue?, what role does the community play in the meaning effects of this statue?,
how can we conceptualise such playful transgression?, what is the role of performance
at a heritage site?, what does collective memory mean here?

Figure 1. Eliza wears a surgical mask at the beginning of the H1N1 flu outbreak in Perth. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

Approaching Eliza
I am one of the commuters passing the statue each morning. My preparation for writ-
ing this paper included daily observation of the play around Eliza and consideration
of the meaning of the statue in the context of heritage regulation and heritage values.
Some  weeks  the  statue  is  stripped  of  new  clothes  almost  daily  while  sometimes  it
flutters  for  days.  The  statue  is  the  ‘canvas’  for  guerilla  art  action  which  has  joined
coincidentally  with  commemoration  to  give  back  to  Perth  a  version  of  the  social
value associated with the Crawley Baths. The Acting Arts and Cultural Development
Co-ordinator of the Perth City Council, Helen Hewitt, told me on 5 March 2009 that
the councillors of the City of Perth wished to commemorate the City of Perth Swim-
ming Club which was founded in 1923 and based at the Crawley Baths. The baths
were  upgraded  to  Olympic  size  in  1933  and  demolished  in  1964  before  heritage
legislation offered protection. There was no marker of the baths from 1964 to 2007
even  though  swimming  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  Western  Australian  leisure
activities. In this era of increased demand for an historicised landscape (Nora 1989,
Boyer  1996)  swimming  appears  politically  neutral  and,  therefore,  relatively  safe  to
commemorate, even though any new memory marker in a city which has had so great
a  loss  of  past  fabric  as  Perth  will  have  the  effect  of  foregrounding  the  generalised
loss of historic landscape.

Challenge to usual heritage controls is posed by the public activity at Eliza which
demands implicitly that a bureaucracy reconsider its rules. Perth City Council Chief
Executive Officer Frank Edwards said on 6 January 2010: ‘When Eliza’s dressed up
in more special stuff we don’t necessarily remove it immediately, it stays there for a
relatively short period of time … Basically a work of art like that should be appreci-
ated  for  what  it  is.  So  we  actually  prefer  it  to  be  in  its  natural  form’  (http://
www.ABC.net.au/news/stories/2010/01/06/2786662.htm?site=perth 
[Accessed  14
October  2010]).  Although  this  is  a  tentative  statement  of  approval,  it  nevertheless
marks an important step in acceptance of an active audience and suggests a positive
future for emerging memorial languages. Hewitt said that the council has an informal
arrangement  with  some  early  morning  rowers  to  keep  the  statue  free  of  adornment
because the Department of Transport licence to erect the statue in the water requires
that the statue be maintained ‘clean and free of vandalism’. The cleaning of Eliza thus
suggests that any interaction is regarded officially as negative and, like graffiti, to be
removed swiftly. In practice, the actions surrounding Eliza are regarded positively, as
indicated informally to me by Hewitt.



 217

In terms of heritage concepts, Eliza must be seen in the context of the on-going
issues associated with broader heritage practice and its over-emphasis on ICOMOS
Burra Charter2 aesthetic and historic values at the expense of the vitality of social
value. Strong social value began to emerge in Australia only in the 1990s. Until then,
if there was no surviving fabric it was very difficult to mark a significant place. The
dominance of historic and aesthetic values was often at the expense of complex inter-
pretation  and  many  sites  failed  to  make  links  to  contemporary  political  and  social
issues. The complexity of social value is set out by Johnston (1992, 1993): it identifies
a community because recognition of the social value of a place also recognises the
existence of a community. It can foster the continuity of traditions and can empower
local communities in the face of increasing bureaucratic control (Johnston 1993, p. 8).
Empowerment  is  also  a  broad  theme  for  commentators  on  public  art  (Finkelpearl
2000, Coutts and Jokela 2008) and it shows that, discursively, heritage and public art
have much in common. Since Eliza was erected in 2007, activity around the statue has
demonstrated that despite the absence of surviving heritage fabric, social value can be
preserved or, in this case, reactivated, by careful placement of heritage markers and
the enablement of community performance. Audience activity at Eliza reminds us of
the importance of everyday local identity, affection and accessibility to heritage fabric
– all key aspects of social value.

Another meaning context of this statue is the over-reliance on figurative represen-
tational  monuments,  ironically  of  the  very  type  from  which  Eliza  is  derived.  In  a
framework of heritage control and a history of monument invisibility, the only key to
understanding why this statue escapes both must reside in the audience’s high level
of  interaction.  Thus  I  extended  my  observation  to  other  sites  of  audience  activity,
specifically to graffiti and other examples of guerilla art, and also to monuments and
statues which have had strong and continuous interactive attention from their audi-
ences.  Like  graffiti,  guerilla  activity  involves  reclaiming  public  space.  As  London
guerilla artist Banksy says, speaking generally of his work, ‘I am doing this because I
personally feel I have a right to affect my urban environment and this image has as
much  right  to  be  here  as  that  perfume  commercial’  (Peiter  2009,  p.29).  Heritage
space,  monuments,  graffiti,  guerilla  art  and  public  art  have  blurred  in  the  practices
around Eliza. To understand the memory effects of Eliza one needs to consider all of
these.

The state of a community’s health is often read through the presence or absence
of graffiti, depending upon whether graffiti is discussed within the discourses of art
or  criminality  –  that  is,  positively  or  negatively.  There  is,  therefore,  contested
understanding  of  the  value  of  community  art  activity  in  public  space  and  it  is  not
simply  dependent  upon  whether  the  activity  is  sanctioned  or  unsanctioned  because
many  artists,  for  example  Banksy  and  the  Paris  based  Invader  (Peiter  2009),  travel
back  and  forth  between  illegal  street  activity  and  respected  high  culture  gallery
exhibitions (Fondation Cartier 2009). Similarly, the activities at Eliza move chaoti-
cally  between  prank,  polemic  and  the  private;  to  pin  down  a  singular  meaning
would  be  to  deny  the  wealth  of  community  expression.  To  dismiss  the  continuous
activity  around  this  statue  as  mere  pranks  is  to  state  implicitly  that  a  prank  has  no
meaning in a heritage context. That would mean nullifying three years of audience
participation. Heritage social value gives us the concepts with which to understand
the  activity;  social  value  moves  beyond  the  physical  fabric  of  a  site  to  the  people
who  use  it.  At  Eliza  social  value  takes  us  to  a  reactivation  of  collective  memory
of fun.

218

 J. Harris

Collective memory
Communities can re-remember lost places and times. At the Eliza site, many in the
passing-through-community  have  no  lived  memory  of  the  baths,  but  a  collective
memory at a later date has been activated. Eliza demonstrates the way that collective
memory can seem to negate complex memories. Wertsch (2002, p. 44), like Halbw-
achs (1980), Nora (1989) and Boyer (1996), separates history from memory and has
created  a  useful  table  describing  the  features  of  collective  memory  versus  the
attributes  of  history.  In  collective  memory  there  is  a  subjective  quality  and  the
memory has a ‘single committed perspective’; it is ‘impatient with ambiguity about
motives  and  the  interpretation  of  events’  and  focuses  on  the  ‘unchanging  group
essence’. In contrast, history attempts to be objective, critical, reflexive and ‘recog-
nizes ambiguity’. These headings sum up well the effects of collective memory in the
Eliza space. In reactivating the sense of fun associated with swimming, the guerilla
artists who dress the statue have erased any historic complexity – even the fact of the
demolition of the baths is not brought to mind, although the additional installation on
the shore, in 2009, of large reproductions of historic photographs of the baths began
to suggest the missing fabric. Original fabric is prized by western heritage practice,
yet its absence here goes unremarked. Complex and layered remembrance of specific
and  contested  events,  even  moments  of  great  sporting  achievement  are  submerged
beneath  playfulness.  Collective  memory  at Eliza,  therefore,  could  be  understood  as
historically impoverished because a complex past is obliterated.

Despite this grim analysis, Wertsch (2002, p. 44) also enables a positive reading.
He  argues  that  professional  history  practice  often  differentiates  the  past  from  the
present and thus creates a sense that the past is finished and has little contemporary
connection.  Collective  memory,  by  contrast,  he  says  has  the  effect  of  denying  the
‘pastness’ of historic events and places associated with them by bringing the past into
the present. Collective memory, therefore, is a force that connects past and present.
This is achieved partly by emphasis on the importance of a ‘group essence’ which is
reflected in past events which resonate in the present and help to define group identity.
The sheer fun around Eliza, therefore, connects vividly to the past and shows that rich
community experiences continue. This linkage leads to strong social value and has the
potential to awaken interest in a more complex past because of its currency in contem-
porary life. Collective memory, therefore, through this linkage of past and present, is
occupied with present uses of the past.

Boyer (1996, p. 11) describes the impulse of designers to ‘prescribe an order and
harmony’ which fails ‘to link these sites [i.e. disparate sites] together or relate them to
the layers of history and people that the city actually presents’ and insists that the real-
ity of cities is that they are alien to order. At Eliza there is a continuous eruption of
voices which gesture to the oppositional qualities of unexpected public performance
and hints at the role of meaning in the future city.

Guerilla art and graffiti
Guerilla art encompasses a variety of art events; it is difficult to define and not easily
differentiated  from  graffiti  from  which  it  emerged  (Peiter  2009,  p.  4).  Dew  (2007,
p. 29)  observes  that  graffiti  is  a  blurred  concept  itself,  like  post-graffiti  art  with  its
broader range of techniques (Ganz 2004, p.7). Guerilla art occupies the liminal zone
between  respectability  and  the  illegal  manifestations  of  graffiti,  both  of  which  are



 219

sometimes referred to as ‘street art’. As community play with Eliza has not damaged
the statue or altered it permanently, it seemed wise to conceptualise it for this paper
as guerilla art, but to draw also on graffiti for understanding. Graffiti often damages
the underlying ‘canvas’, for example a wall or a fence, especially when spray paint is
used, and is often reviled. There are now, of course, many examples of graffiti artists
being employed by local councils to enliven a city. Graffiti-style art is the result, but
it is no longer graffiti, the defining feature of which is that it is unsanctioned.

Both  types  of  art  re-claim  public  space  and  change  its  meanings.  Guerilla  art
contains a subversive element, but it is not as markedly anti-social and it is this empha-
sis which usually differentiates it from graffiti art. The 2009 Paris exhibition, Born in
the streets: graffiti (Fondation Cartier 2009), however, made clear through interviews
with graffiti artists that being anti-social is only one form of graffiti, some artists value
their aesthetic gift to the public, a gift noted also by Dew (2007, p.13). They also value
their art as an establishment of ‘a “street dialogue” in which the environment becomes
the subject of an infinite flow of coded messages and interferences’ (Dew 2007, p. 226,
Fondation Cartier 2009). A key phrase in the Paris exhibition explains further: ‘The
voice of the people is on the walls not out to destroy or make dirty’.

Guerilla artists take many approaches including creating an entirely new work of
art, this is most familiar from the work of Invader, the artist whose mosaics of aliens
first appeared in Paris in the 1990s (Blackshaw and Farrelly 2008). Now numbering
about 400 in Paris and hundreds more around the world, the little aliens are held in
great  affection  as  they  remake  public  space  and  comment  on  the  proliferation  of
computer  games  and  contemporary  image  saturation  (Figure  2).  Invader’s  work  is

Figure 2. An Invader mosaic in the Marais district of Paris. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

220

 J. Harris

subversive because it occupies public space. In the careful craftsmanship of the execu-
tion,  however,  there  is  no  aesthetic  subversion;  Invader  enhances  cities,  providing
delightful  moments  of  discovery.  Invader’s  art  has  now  been  authorised  by  some
cities, thus removing the unsanctioned element and making even more difficult the
task of definition – are the first, unsanctioned, alien mosaics to be considered guerilla
art, but later, sanctioned, ones not? For the 2002 Perth Artrage arts festival, Invader
was invited to install several mosaics; in this context the work could be understood to
occupy a legitimate high art realm because of the prestige of the festival, thus throw-
ing into doubt the earlier, apparent, subversion.

Figure 2. An Invader mosaic in the Marais district of Paris. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

In addition to new works, guerilla art takes an existing building or monument and
alters it, but in such a way that the original object is not damaged; Seattle offers an
instructive example. There is on-going guerilla art around Waiting for the Interurban
in  which  a  group  of  statues  of  people  waiting  for  a  bus  are  targeted  repeatedly  for
usually  comic  clothing  treatment  (Figure  3).  Former  Seattle  resident,  Joel  Gilman
recalled  in  discussion  on  30  September  2009  the  delight  of  watching  this  ever-
changing play with the statue. Eliza is an example of the second type of guerilla art
with its frequent comic treatment being very similar to the events surrounding Waiting
for the Interurban. Like the Seattle bus stop figures, the statue of the swimmer endures
as the most important aspect of the new work. As clothes are removed and replaced
the  swimmer  statue  re-emerges  and  is  hidden  again,  but  remains  unequivocally  the
visual core. It is obviously subversive to tamper with a statue, but this example clearly
highlights love of Perth rather than anti-social sentiment. In the apparently subversive

Figure 3. Robed statues in the Waiting for the Interurban group in Seattle, USA. Photograph
by Joel Gilman.



 221

acts around Eliza, a paradoxical strong affection for the statue and for the community
emerges as the most outstanding element.

Figure 3. Robed statues in the Waiting for the Interurban group in Seattle, USA. Photograph by Joel Gilman.

Heritage and guerilla art
In terms of good heritage practice, the Eliza monument has been successful in reacti-
vating memory of the history of the Crawley Baths, despite the total absence of surviv-
ing fabric. The community uses of the statue demonstrate how disconnection from a
site  can  be  overcome  by  re-connection;  a  lost  past  is  re-remembered.  The  re-
connection, however, has not been achieved simply by installing the monument, links
between past and present have come about through community play.

The coincidence of heritage practice and guerilla art in Eliza forces us to consider
a series of unexpected reversals of meaning. Heritage protection of a place is usually
achieved  through  control,  by  establishing  boundaries,  rules,  visitor  directions  and
management plans. At Eliza, heritage management of the original fabric of the baths
was never possible because their demolition occurred prior to heritage legislation and
yet, quite unexpectedly, social value is affirmed vividly. Australian heritage practice
is preoccupied with preservation of values as defined in the Australia ICOMOS Burra
Charter. Guerilla art, by contrast, occupies a liminal art zone and has limited social
appreciation – most enthusiastic in the case of, for example, Banksy whose works are
often torn from walls for resale for hundreds of pounds sterling (Peiter 2009, p. 28) or
regarded as ugly when ‘buffed’ (removed) by authorities. Similarly, the coincidence
of iconoclasm and celebration in, for example, the Invader mosaics suggests that the
community-affirming coincidence of heritage and guerilla art ought not to be possible
because these two cultural expressions seem antithetical. Activity surrounding Eliza,
however,  cannot  be  apprehended  unless  we  consider  the  possibility  that  these  two
unlikely elements are supporting each other in a complex interplay of official govern-
ment  art  together  with  playful,  unsanctioned  audience  performance,  a  positive
outcome not envisaged by Boyer (1996). The changing attitude to art and audiences
of the Perth City Council was noted earlier; effectively it has been forced by audience
action to question its own long held practices. Eliza is probably not the target of disen-
franchised people, as is often the case with graffiti (Dew 2007), the various types of
traffic around the statue come mostly from affluent suburbs, places where graffiti is
routinely abhorred as an ugly anti-social blight. Guerilla art around Eliza, therefore, is
not about anti-social behaviour. The opposite response is elicited because this guerilla
art is welcomed for brightening the monotony of a daily commuter drive. This guerilla
art is thus regarded as a rich bonus of everyday life; the secret artists are celebrated
rather than scorned. Not only is guerilla art not deplored at Eliza, but it can be seen to
support heritage ideals because, in the bold spirit of unsanctioned activity and its play
with a government-installed monument, there is reactivation of the social value of the
baths. The witty playfulness elicits smiles, community connection and social value in
a way that the statue alone could not. A desired heritage outcome, i.e. protection of
social value, and guerilla art have thus come together in performance at this statue in
remarkable mutual support. Performative elements at memorials create process sites.
I argued elsewhere (Harris 2010) in relation to Pinjarra, a colonial atrocity site, that
the cultural strength of the memorial was that it was a site of memory through perfor-
mance,  leading  to  a  place  that  needs  to  be  conceptualised  as  a  process  site.  Eliza,
erected as recently as late 2007, is still near the beginning of an emerging tradition of
audience guerilla art. As a process site it is evident that the site is evolving and that it

222

 J. Harris

Figure 4. Grey meanings of guerilla art – just as some guerilla art is sold for high prices thus
appearing  to  undercut  its  social  subversion,  so  sometimes  Eliza  has  been  used  to  advertise
business as she does in this advertisement for a radio station. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

has the potential to be a powerful city site of the embedded oppositionality desired by
Boyer (1996, p. 5).

Heritage has often had a static quality, the frozen look of preservation described
long ago by Walsh (1992) with a ‘don’t touch’ address to its audience. In the functioning
of Eliza, however, the audience has become central to its heritage meanings. We can
no longer imagine Eliza without its active audience; if the statue is undraped then we
are waiting for the next graffiti act – the statue is understood, therefore, as either draped
or about to be so. It is either a fresh new work of guerilla art or in the state of becoming
so. The statue is a dynamic performance place which reclaims the river space for public
comment and raises questions about the roles of transgression and community in heri-
tage practice. The remainder of this paper is devoted to considering these issues.

Figure 4. Grey meanings of guerilla art – just as some guerilla art is sold for high prices thus appearing to undercut its social subversion, so sometimes  Eliza has been used to advertise business as she does in this advertisement for a radio station. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

Transgression?
It is obvious that to climb onto a statue and robe it garishly is to transgress accepted
social mores of respect. In almost all cases respect is shown to a statue and what it
represents by maintaining a distance of a metre or two in order better to appreciate its
totality and to avoid damaging it. Climbing onto a statue is usually associated with
disrespect, in extreme cases it can signify the pending mob destruction of a statue after
the fall of a hated national leader. In rare historic cases, such as the thirteenth century
bronze of St Peter in the Vatican by Arnofo di Cambio, the public is invited, through



 223

tradition, to touch the feet (Michelin 1985, p. 77). In a reversal of acceptable mores,
extreme respect is thus shown by what is usually forbidden, that is, touching. The clar-
ity of the feet has long ago worn away, but this is a sign of centuries of devotion rather
than damage. This is a highly specific example in which touch is a form of spiritual
respect  which  links  millions  of  visitors  to  St  Peter’s  Basilica,  both  backwards  and
forwards in time. It is observation plus folk knowledge which transmits the correct
behaviour at this statue, and it is not limited to the statue in St Peter’s. In the Basilica
of Sacre-Coeur in Paris a smaller copy of this statue had had its feet worn away in the
same practice of veneration which could certainly not be described as transgressive.
Clearly  there  are  unwritten  rules  for  what  is  appropriate  for Eliza:  clothing  and
signs are the norm. Painting or scratching the statue has never occurred, either of these
would  result  in  vandalism  and  permanent  damage.  The  Eliza  audience  knows  that
vandalism is not acceptable, therefore, we can see that although the statue is subjected
to  transgressive  behaviour  there  are  limits  to  that  behaviour.  Audience  play  is  not
open-ended and does not permit highly individualistic damaging expressions. There is
a clear set of rules for play with Eliza, commericial advertising is stripped off quickly.
Julius  (2002)  argues  that  transgression  has  in-built  limits;  the  limits  are  part  of  the
definition of transgression. 

Transgressions are short-lived affairs; they do not so much seek to abolish the rule as
suspend it, and for a moment only … The transgressor reinscribes the border he violates.
Taboos are constraints that must be violated and preserved. Transgression asserts limits
…  The  taboo  is  ‘jolted’,  not  terminated.  Transgressions  suspend  taboos  without
suppressing  them  …  The  experience  of  transgression  is  one  that  mixes  dread  with
ecstasy. (Julius 2002, p. 23)

Julius’ argument is most useful in understanding interaction with heritage statuary, from
it we can see that the borders of acceptable behaviour thus are reinscribed in touching
the feet of the St Peter statue, highlighting that one is forbidden to touch in almost every
other case and that to do so here is to underscore that fact while elevating this statue
above others. Reversal of the rule, therefore, contains both transgression and the utmost
respect.  To  climb  onto  Eliza  and  change  the  statue’s  appearance  is  transgressive
behaviour in which the limits of transgressive activity are able to be read clearly.

The ‘dread’ that Julius argues is part of transgression lies in the fear associated
with constant acts of transformations of a statue, a fear associated with the on-going
transformations of urban space brought about by graffiti resulting in intensification of
city chaos. Eliza is undeniably a conservative, realist artwork and, therefore, by tradi-
tions associated with statues of this type and conventions of art appreciation, does not
invite public interaction. In historical appearance, Eliza thus is consistent with thou-
sands of figural statues around the world climbing upon which is not permitted, or
conceived as part of the art potential of the work. There is dread in linking Eliza to
other  figural  monuments  and  imagining  a  world  in  which  many  of  them  could  be
targeted  for  dressing,  leading  to  a  riotous  landscape.  There  is  delight,  however,
because it is thrilling to see bold, transgressive acts (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Eliza in a mankini. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

A passing-through-community
Although  Crawley  Baths’  swimmers  have  died,  aged  40  years,  or  now  swim  else-
where, Eliza functions to recognise a new community – in fact, to bring it into being.
The  statue  has  created  a  passing-through-community  of  people  who  would  not  be

224

 J. Harris

Figure 5. Eliza in a mankini. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

linked by other geographic or demographic elements. Paddlers, cyclists, walkers, roll-
erbladers, bus passengers and car drivers have become a mobile community linked by
the statue. For the moments of passing, and the moments of recall of the latest tricks,
a heterogeneous community exists. Falk and Dierking (2000) have demonstrated the
importance of memory in museum work where the recall of a moment in the museum
is one of the most powerful and lasting values of the visit. In remembering the latest
clothing  of  Eliza,  members  of  the  passing-through-community  are  linked  without
actually knowing the identity of each other. Sealed off alone in a passing car, one can
smile  at  the  statue  and,  recalling  it  later,  know  that  others  saw  what  you  saw  and
shared  your  amusement,  therefore,  you  were  not  actually  alone  in  the  car  because
shared experience and memory have linked you.

On-line  sites  reflect  enthusiastically  the  experience  of  passing  Eliza.  Facebook
hosts Eliza, the Swan River Statue Appreciation Group (http://facebook.com/pages/
Eliza-the-Swan-River-Appreciation-Group/136482793043779 [Accessed 12 October
2010]).  Publicartaroundtheworld  records  this  message,  revealing  the  energy  that
Eliza injects into dull commuter life: ‘She is the one thing that can make me smile, if
on  the  odd  occasion  I’m  having  a  bad  day’  (Publicartaroundtheworld.com/Eliza
[Retrieved 12 Oct 2010]). Photographers in Perth use Flickr in an attempt to record
every change of clothing. This is an example of non-professional people undertaking
the professional heritage task of photographing and recording all aspects of a changing
site as a gift to their community. Davis Curtis writes ‘How about keeping an eye out
for changes in outfit and mood and posting here’ to which pirate pj replies ‘this i [sic]
do believe is a thread forever (if not a whole website)’ (http://www.flickr.com/groups/



 225

perth_photo/disscuss/72157603622763465/?seaerch=statue  [Accessed  12  October
2010]). The breadth of community that Eliza brings into being is thus ever expanding.
Another writer on Flickr, Soporific menagerie, reflects the reality of the usual unac-
ceptable status of play with public statuary: ‘I love it – it’s quirky and great. I hope
the powers that be allow these “dress ups” to continue and don’t go all high and mighty
calling  it  “vandalism”  etc.’  The  earlier  quote  from  the  CEO  of  Perth  City  Council
demonstrates that the Council has been forced to abandon the vocabulary of vandalism
in relation to the statue thus causing it to examine its own approach to public art.

The  Oaxaca  Declaration  conceptualises  place  through  action:  ‘place  is  process’
(Johnston 1992, p. 12), just as guerilla art is understood as reacting to place and oppor-
tunity in an art process. In this sense, the activity around Eliza is what creates place
more surely than the statue itself; the on-going guerilla art robing of the statue defines
place. The concept of place through process is especially useful because it would be
challenging to try to set boundaries to this community; on-line communities show us
that  the  concept  of  community  is  no  longer  defined  easily.  Although  the  precise
historic memories of the Crawley Baths are shared by fewer and fewer people, the
feeling of the fun of the baths is powerfully reactivated by Eliza and thus reconnects
us to the memory of the baths. The statue, therefore, achieves continuity of tradition
despite the long period of visual erasure of the baths.

Johnston  (1993,  p.  8)  emphasises  that  external  recognition  of  a  community  is
necessary for social value because the community needs to be accountable. In the case
of  Eliza,  the  idea  that  those  moving  past  the  statue  constitute  a  passing-through-
community demonstrates the complexities faced by the heritage world as it establishes
itself necessarily through bureaucratic processes. How might accountability work with
a  passing-through-community?  It  is  very  complex  to  name  this  passing-through-
community of unfixed people, accountability is difficult to apply. In the unwritten rule
of ‘no vandalism’ and the implicit limits to transgression, there is, however, a sense
of accountability and community care and protection. The effect of Eliza is to coun-
teract the atomisation of contemporary city life by creating both an on-line and a pass-
ing-through-community.  Harvey  (1989)  argues  that  a  major  impulse  of  heritage
activity  is  to  respond  to  the  disconnection  of  contemporary  life.  At Eliza  we  see  a
powerful achievement of that aim, though, crucially, not through bureaucratic control,
but through interaction with a memory marker which ironically reminds us of loss.

Public art
Heritage practice could look to the art world for guidance in understanding the role of
the passing-through-community. In the later part of the twentieth century the role of
the  public  became  a  central  concern  in  sculpture.  Although  the  term  ‘public  art’  is
sometimes used to denote guerilla art, it is used in this paper to mean sanctioned art
in a public place. Twenty years ago, North (1990) described this established idea as a
defining and pervasive concern that could be found at both popular sites and high art
domains. 

The idea, that sculpture becomes public by taking the spatial experience of its audience
as a subject, is so seductive it has influenced everything from Serra’s fortresses to the
benign and cheery works featured in many shopping malls. (North 1990, p. 10)

In the space of Eliza the public has made the space its own as both artist and audience.
Although the statue appears to be a conventional, figural representation of a swimmer,

226

 J. Harris

the public use of the statue undermines its conservatism, effectively producing over it,
and  supplementing  it  with,  an  artwork  in  tune  with  this  era  of  the  primacy  of  the
audience. A conservative government statue, therefore, is re-made by guerilla art to
privilege the passing audience.

To demonstrate the power of a passing audience I include comments here on the
very famous example of unauthorised public use of a monument, the unofficial monu-
ment to Diana, Princess of Wales in Place de l’Alma, Paris, which has been adorned
with  flowers,  candles  and  photographs  since  her  fatal  1997  accident  in  the  tunnel
beneath despite repeated cleaning by city authorities (Figure 6). The gold flame statue,
a copy of the flame held by the Statue of Liberty was installed in 1987 to commemo-
rate  French–US  friendship  upon  the  centenary  of  the  newspaper  The  International
Herald Tribune. Such is the power of the post-1997 public interaction with this monu-
ment that it no longer seems to refer to the newspaper or international friendship; a
new signified of mourning has replaced the previous signified of diplomatic friend-
ship. On a visit on 9 July 2009 all of the Diana memorabilia had been cleaned off leav-
ing only heavy stains from melted candles and sticky residue from tape used to fasten
photographs and poems to the gold statue. The Diana connection, however, had not
been obliterated. About 10 people stood around discussing Diana and asking where
the tributes had gone, the tributes now functioning as powerful ghosts, their absences
highlighted by the outlines and dirt on the flame and its plinth. Nearby a young man
began to write in French in a felt marker pen on the edge of the bridge overlooking
the entrance to the traffic tunnel. 

Figure 6. The unofficial Diana monument in Place de l’Alma over the traffic tunnel in Paris
where she had her fatal 1997 car accident. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.



 227

Laurent Thiers demands that the authorities erect a satanic monument to light the tunnel
in prevision of the ritual murder of Lady Diana in 1997 on an old Merovingian sacrificial
site dedicated to the goddess Diana Artemis-Hecate. He asks the cleaners to refuse to
erase the poetry of the bridge and that the police arrest drug criminals rather than shit
men who are political dissidents…

On a visit on 15 February 2010 I found that memories of Diana are now shared with
memories of pop star Michael Jackson, their names appearing linked romantically in
several places on the parapet, even though Jackson had no popular links to Paris or
Diana. Evidently, it is impossible at the moment for Paris authorities to reclaim the
meaning of this monument, even after repeated thorough cleaning, the public/audience
insists on other, sometimes bizarre, meanings, evident in the above quote. Perhaps the
gold flame is now losing its exclusive Diana focus and is becoming a monument to
dead  celebrities.  The  power  of  the  artist  and  the  fixing  of  meaning  in  public  space
clearly gives way to the passing audience. ‘The gap between art and audience is closed
by bringing the audience into the art, by making spatial experience the very subject of
the art’ says North (1990, p.11). The unsanctioned public use of the unofficial Diana
monument  shows  the  power  of  the  audience.  Similarly,  war  memorials  now  also
embrace  the  audience;  the  Vietnam  Veterans  Memorial  in  Washington  DC  is  an
outstanding example of the primacy of the audience in creating meaning and claiming
space. People walk into memorial space bringing with them mementoes which are left
at the site (Edkins 2003). The mementoes, combined with the act of walking, create
the memorial as public space and emphasise that meanings emerge from the visitors.
Although  Australian  heritage  practice  now  emphasises  the  centrality  of  social
value to good heritage practice, it nevertheless has difficulty grappling with audience
roles. It is not that heritage cannot cope with interactive audiences – there are several
examples of invitations extended to audiences, for example, to move through the tree
installation in front of the Museum of Sydney. In Eliza, however, the role of the audi-
ence  must  be  interpreted  as  transgressive  because  there  is  no  allotted  space  for  the
audience as there is in the Washington DC and Sydney examples, indeed, siting Eliza
in the water should have guaranteed a water barrier to any audience activity.

Figure 6. The unofficial Diana monument in Place de l’Alma over the traffic tunnel in Paris where she had her fatal 1997 car accident. Photograph by Jennifer Harris.

The guerilla robing of the statue is, on one level of analysis, therefore, a despolia-
tion. It is only by reading the audience’s role with Eliza in terms of social value that
positive heritage meaning can be ascribed to it. Heritage practice prizes continuity of
use, but it is a considerable conceptual leap to move from that to valuing guerilla art
as a rich addition to heritage place. At Eliza, however, guerilla art illuminates social
value,  the  very  value  that  heritage  practice  is  currently  trying  so  hard  to  foster,  a
particularly difficult aim when people change house and job so frequently and attach-
ments to locality are tenuous.

Conclusion
Perth is a city that is unremarkable for its monuments; Eliza is very small in the scale
of  the  grandeur  of  the  estuary  site  that  it  occupies.  Examination  of  this  statue,
however, shows the great complexity of a small part of city life. Eliza not only func-
tions as a heritage marker of the demolished Crawley Baths, but has opened up the
strange mutual support of heritage value and guerilla art. The statue has also had the
effect of creating a community in a part of life which is most atomising, the tedious
daily commute. This paper does not propose that an open invitation to the public to
festoon heritage markers would enrich a city; on the contrary it would probably lead

228

 J. Harris

to  a  chaotic,  ugly  environment.  This  paper  shows,  however,  that  greater  audience
participation at heritage sites could be very valuable.

The porosity of heritage and memory is demonstrated at Eliza as past and present
flow through each other. A heritage marker to the lost Crawley Baths alerts us to the
many losses of historical Perth which were once understood as welcome progress, but
now are experienced painfully. Memory of these losses flows continuously into daily
play with the past at Eliza as past and present move through each other; there is a constant
dragging of past losses into contemporary concerns. Private jokes mix with comments
on health, community celebration and hallmark events. Play is not always about joking;
on some days of war commemoration Eliza reminds us of great sadness as she appears
in the iconic slouch hat of the Australian soldier. The frequently expressed hope that
heritage could make strong links to today (for example, see Boyer 1996; Gough 2006)
is achieved here. Many monuments unintentionally achieve invisibility because of the
fatal sealing off from the past that usual memorial language dictates. Their repetitious
norms condemn their messages to silence and a sealed off past. Wertsch’s (2002, p. 44)
insight that collective memory denies the ‘pastness’ of places is here made real because
of the actions of an unexpected audience. Heritage social value is activated because of
guerilla art – sometimes it is a private joke, sometimes it is a community comment that
lifts the meaning effects of Eliza into new monument language.

Notes on contributor
Jennifer Harris is the head of Cultural Heritage at Curtin University in Western Australia and
a member of the executive boards of ICOM Australia and ICOFOM, the international museol-
ogy committee of ICOM.

Notes
1. The  non-standard  spelling  of  ‘guerilla’  is  used  in  this  paper  because  it  is  the  preferred

spelling of those who are guerilla artists.

2. The Australian charter for good heritage practice which was developed from the principles

of the Venice Charter.

References
Australia ICOMOS, Australia ICOMOS Burra Charter, 1999.
Blackshaw, R. and Farrelly, L., 2008. Street art: in the artists’ own words. Mies: Rotovision.
Boyer,  C.M.,  1996,  The  city  of  collective  memory:  its  historical  imagery  and  architectural

entertainments. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Coutts, G. and Jokela, T., eds., 2008. Art community and environment: educational perspec-

tives. Bristol: Intellect Books.

Dew, C., 2007. Uncommissioned art: an A–Z of Australian graffiti. Melbourne: The Miegunyah

Edkins,  J.,  2003.  Trauma  and  the  memory  of  politics.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University

Press.

Press.

Falk, J. and Dierking, L., 2000. Learning from museums: visitor experiences and the making

of meaning. Walnut Creek: Altamira Press.

Finkelpearl, T., ed., 2000. Dialogues in public art. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fondation Cartier pour l’art contemporain, 2009. Born in the streets: graffiti, catalogue of the

exhibition (7 July to 29 November). Paris: Fondation Cartier.

Ganz, N., 2004. Graffiti world: street art from five continents. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Gough, P., 2006. Fault lines: four short observations on places of peace, trauma and contested

remembrance, Journal of visual art practice, 5 (1–2), 39–48.



 229

Halbwachs,  M.,  1980  (first  published  1950).  The  collective  memory,  trans.  F.J.  Ditter  and

V.Y. Ditter. New York: Harper Colophon Books.

Harris, J., 2010. Memorials and trauma: Pinjarra 1834. In: M. Broderick and A. Traverso, eds.

Trauma media art: new perspectives. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Harvey,  D.,  1989.  The  condition  of  post  modernity:  an  enquiry  into  the  origins  of  cultural

change. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Huyssen,  A.,  1995.  Twilight  memories:  marking  time  in  a  culture  of  amnesia,  New  York:

Johnston, C., 1992. What is social value? A discussion paper. Canberra: Australian Government

Johnston,  C.,  1993.  Social  values  –  overview  and  issues.  In:  S.  Blair,  ed.  People’s  places:
identifying  and  assessing  social  value  in  communities.  Canberra:  Australian  Heritage
Commission.

Julius,  A.,  2002.  Transgressions:  the  offences  of  art.  Chicago:  The  University  of  Chicago

Routledge.

Printing Service.

Press.

Michelin, 1985. Rome. Clermont-Ferrand: Michelin et Cie.
Nora, P., 1989. Between memory and history: les lieux de memoire. Representations, 26, 7–25.
North, M., 1990. The public as sculpture: from heavenly city to mass ornament. In: W. Mitchell,

ed. Art and the public sphere. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Peiter, S., 2009. Guerilla art. London: Laurence King Publishing.
Walsh, K., 1992. The representation of the past: museums and heritage in the post modern

world. London: Routledge.

Wertsch, J., 2002. Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


