Destruction, mitigation, and reconciliation of cultural heritage

Harold Kalmana,b

aarchitectural  Conservation  Programmes,  Hong  Kong  university,  Hong  Kong;  bCultural  resource  Management 
Program, university of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada

ABSTRACT
Attacks on built cultural heritage often occur during times of armed conflict. 
Many such acts are not collateral damage, but rather are deliberate and 
ideologically driven assaults intended to eradicate the adversary’s identity 
and collective memory. They represent ‘urbicide’ and ‘identicide’. The victims 
typically attempt to mitigate the loss, frequently by reconstructing the lost 
historic  place  and  thereby  restoring  tangible  evidence  of  their  identity. 
Reconstruction, however, is itself an ideological act and a destructive activity, 
since it erases memories of the violence and removes physical evidence. 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation has 
commemorated several cultural heritage sites that have been destroyed 
and subsequently reconstructed, by inscribing them on the World Heritage 
List. Although this ensures the perpetuation of their memory, it may distort 
the original purpose of the list as a celebration of ‘outstanding universal 
value’. Beyond commemoration, a desired outcome is reconciliation. True 
reconciliation requires the release of anger and pain, so that memories of 
the violence may be retained without a desire for retribution. This article 
looks at a selection of acts intended at destroying cultural heritage, including 
some that did not occur during war, and examines means and motives for 
achieving mitigation and reconciliation.

Destruction
At around 10:30 in the morning on 9 November 1993, after enduring a barrage of more than 60 
Croatian artillery shells, the 427-year-old Stari Most Bridge plunged into the icy waters of the Neretva 
river gorge. Located in the city of Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the bridge was yet another victim 
of the Bosnian War, the, 3½-year-long, ethnically-driven bloodbath that followed the breakup of the 
former Yugoslavia. The bridge was targeted for destruction by the Croatian Defence Council because it 
was perceived as symbolising the ‘ethnically mixed’ Mostar, which it wanted to ‘cleanse’ of ‘non-Croats’ 
(Block and Bellamy 1993; Coward 2009, 1–8; Jayaram 2013; ‘Siege of Mostar’).1

Many historians assert that Stari Most (the name means ‘Old Bridge’ and Mostar means ‘bridge-
keeper’) had little, if any, strategic military value. And strategically useful or not, the bridge had been 
impassible for some time because of previous damage from shelling and sniper fire. Its primary value 
lay rather in its extraordinary cultural heritage. Construction began in 1557 under orders from the 
Ottoman Sultan, Suleiman the Magnificent. Mostar was a frontier town and the Neretva River sepa-
rated civilisation from the barbarians. Spanning the river therefore extended the reach of the Ottoman 

CONTACT  Harold Kalman 

  hal@haroldkalman.ca

© 2017 Harold Kalman. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

  

  539

Empire. The limestone structure replaced a wobbly, wood suspension bridge, which reportedly struck 
fear into the hearts of all who ventured across it. The tall, masonry arch was anchored to the cliffs on 
either side of the gorge and supported a hump-backed roadway. Amazingly thin in the centre, the 
bridge was an engineering masterpiece that revealed the sophistication of its designers, master architect 
Mimar Sinan and his apprentice, Hayruddin (or Hairudin).

If the bridge had little or no contemporary strategic value, then why demolish it? It was target-
ted because its destruction was an attack on the cultural identity of Mostar’s non-Croats, who were 
principally Bosnian Muslims. András Riedlmayer of Harvard University calls the destruction ‘killing 
memory’. English political scientist Martin Coward, in his provocatively titled book, Urbicide, describes 
the event as ‘an exemplary instance of the emerging war on culture that was integral to the process of 
ethnic cleansing’. Coward asserts that ‘the deliberate destruction of the built environment – embodied 
in the destruction of Mostar’s Stari Most – was … a form of violence in its own right’, and not merely 
collateral damage. Croatian writer Slavenka Drakulic wrote an ‘elegy’ for the Stari Most, declaring 
that ‘because [the bridge] … was the product of both individual creativity and collective experience, 
it transcended our individual destiny .… The bridge is all of us’. Kemal Bubic of nearby Trebinje 
expressed his sense of having been personally violated when his 500-year-old mosque was burned to 
the ground as part of the broader Croat offensive: ‘It’s my foundation that burned. I was destroyed’ 
(Drakulic 1993, 15; Riedlmayer 1994; Coward 2009, 17, 19).

Mostar’s  Bosnians,  encouraged  by  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organisation (UNESCO) and the international community, determined to restore the tangible evi-
dence of their collective memory and identity. Only a decade after the attack, the bridge was rebuilt 
and the adjacent Old City of Mostar restored (Figure 1). In centuries past Mostar had been a model 
of multi-cultural tolerance, shared by Muslims, Christians and Jews. The reconstituted bridge and 
city were considered to be so important to global civilisation that they were named by UNESCO as a 
World Heritage Site, making the ensemble one of just more than 1000 cultural and natural properties 
that are celebrated for their ‘outstanding universal value’. The rationale for the designation of Mostar 
stated that ‘with the “renaissance” of the Old Bridge and its surroundings, the symbolic power and 
meaning of the City of Mostar … has been reinforced and strengthened’. While the centuries-old 
cultural significance of the historic place was fully acknowledged in the commemoration, it focussed 

Figure 1. the Stari Most, Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2006, following its reconstruction (Bruger:Ptr-jul, Wikipedia Commons).

540 

 

 H. KALMAN

particularly on the meaning of recent events. The official inscription cited the ‘reconstructed’ bridge 
and city as ‘a symbol of reconciliation, international co-operation and of the coexistence of diverse 
cultural, ethnic and religious communities’ (UNESCO List, n.d.(c)).

The resolve to rebuild Stari Most was as ideologically driven as the resolve to destroy it. Both 
acts were about culture and identity, not sticks and stones. Ironically, while the reconstruction of 
the destroyed historic bridge brought back an important part of Bosnian identity, it also eliminated 
physical evidence of the bombardment and erased memories of the Croatian aggression. If we are 
to learn from experience, the actions of both sides – the destruction and the rebuilding – should be 
remembered by posterity.

Stari Most by no means represented a new kind of violence. Attacks on historic places for social, 
political and religious – rather than military – reasons have occurred as long as there have been con-
flicting values. The earliest recorded case may be the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, described 
in the Book of Genesis, because their inhabitants were considered to be immoral.

This article looks at several morally – and immorally – motivated instances of the destruction of built 
cultural heritage during times of conflict. This is a concern that continues to resonate today, as attacks 
on cultural property seem to be on the increase. So too are conflicts in regions with high concentra-
tions of archaeological remains, most notably the Middle East. The text surveys a variety of physical 
and non-material approaches to mitigation and reconciliation. The most popular is reconstruction, 
as at Stari Most. An alternative method is preservation, a conservation treatment that stabilises the 
damage but leaves it unrepaired, and which is recommended by most international heritage doctrine. 
Other means of mitigation include punishing the perpetrators and returning the building to usable 
condition without removing evidence of the damage.

The literature addressing wartime assaults on cultural heritage is quite extensive. Some of the more 
important contributions are cited in the endnotes (e.g., Layton, Robert, Peter G. Stone and Julian 
Thomas, eds. 2001). Many have focussed on the acts of aggression, whereas this paper emphasises the 
mitigation: how the targets have been conserved and commemorated. It addresses only immoveable 
heritage – buildings and other structures – and not moveable artefacts. Many of the historic places 
that are considered were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, which commemorates places 
with ‘outstanding universal value’, after the attacks took place and the damage remediated. This will be 
shown to distort the purpose of the list and to violate best heritage practices by removing significant 
physical evidence. The ultimate objective of the mitigation has often been reconciliation, which risks 
denying the immense hurt and shattered memories caused by the violence. Society likes a happy ending.
The eradication of all signs of damage was the approach taken in the aftermath of a particularly 
significant atrocity against cultural property committed during the Second World War. The aggression 
was the destruction of the historic centre of Warsaw, Poland. Central Warsaw had been constructed 
incrementally over the years, beginning in the thirteenth century. The old market place, which formed 
its core, took on a distinctive character, surrounded by narrow stone and brick buildings, most of 
them four storeys high. The city centre suffered terribly during the German invasion in 1939. And 
after the Warsaw Uprising in 1944, what was still left standing was almost totally destroyed by the 
retreating German Army.

The old city occupied a large place in the hearts of Varsovians. Before the war, the faculty of Warsaw 
Technical University had documented much of its architectural heritage. As an act of moral resistance 
during the German occupation, faculty and students collected images of old Warsaw, supplemented 
their pre-war drawings, and developed schemes for rebuilding the old city. They hid the documents 
for safekeeping in a monastery outside the city. After the liberation of Warsaw by Allied forces, Polish 
authorities insisted on reconstructing the city core as an act of national pride. As respected scholar 
Stanislaw Ossowski declared, ‘If the Warsaw community is to be reborn … former Varsovians … have 
to be given back their old rebuilt Warsaw so that they can see in it the same city and not a different town 
on the same spot’. Over the course of two decades, old Warsaw was meticulously reconstructed, using 
the drawings, photos and historic paintings as evidence (Figure 2). The work required an enormous 
investment of time and funds. A special government agency was dedicated to teaching lost traditional 

  

  541

Figure 2. the old town Market Place, Warsaw, Poland, 2010, following its reconstruction (Barcex, Wikimedia Commons).

technical skills. Everything was done to connect the present with the past: old bricks were reused, 
decorative features were salvaged from the rubble (Tung 2001, 74–89).2

UNESCO inscribed the Historic Centre of Warsaw on the World Heritage List, praising its 26 hec-
tares as ‘an outstanding example of a near-total reconstruction of a span of history covering the 13th to 
the twentieth century’. The accompanying statement of significance noted that the attack targeted Polish 
nationhood and not only cultural treasures. It began: ‘Warsaw was deliberately annihilated in 1944 as 
a repression of the Polish resistance to the German occupation. The capital city was reduced to ruins 
with the intention of obliterating the centuries-old tradition of statehood’ (UNESCO Committee 2009).
The decision to inscribe the place did not come easily to the World Heritage Committee. World 
Heritage status requires, among other criteria, that a site retain ‘authenticity’ in its ‘original form and 
structure’ and also in ‘all subsequent modifications and additions’. ICOMOS, the International Council 
on Monuments and Sites, a UNESCO-affiliated non-government organisation (NGO) that develops 
heritage policy and advises on World Heritage designations, expressed its considerable discomfort with 
Warsaw’s meeting the test of authenticity. Nevertheless the World Heritage Committee recommended 
designation under the criterion of ‘events of considerable historical significance’. It added the proviso, 
however, that ‘there can be no question of inscribing in the future other cultural properties that have 
been reconstructed’ (Cameron 2009, 133; Cameron and Rössler 2013, 39–42).3 The Committee would 
not, however, follow its own resolution, as it subsequently included the Stari Most and the Bamiyan 
Buddhas (the latter are discussed below) on the World Heritage List.

The events in Mostar and Warsaw were acts of war. Canadian heritage administrator Rick Goodacre 
suggests that ‘the evolution of ballistics technology has been to a large extent the evolution of war 
against buildings’, and that buildings ‘seem to emerge as a form of currency that lies dormant in 
peacetime’.4 Acts of this kind were once seen as deplorable but permissible assaults. It used to be held 
that standards of morality are suspended during times of conflict. U.S. General Curtis LeMay, who 
commanded the devastating firebombing of Japan during the last months of the Second World War, 
famously said, ‘All war is immoral and if you let that bother you, you’re not a good soldier’ (American 
Experience, n.d.).

Society’s values have changed since LeMay’s day. Destructive acts of this kind now provoke calls for 
punishment, particularly when the perpetrators themselves meet with disapproval from mainstream 
society. An example of the new attitude is the case of Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, a Malian member 
of Ansar Dine, a Tuareg group associated with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (Figure 3). On 24 
March 2016, Al-Mahdi became the first person ever to be charged with the war crime of ‘destruction 

542 

 

 H. KALMAN

Figure 3. ahmad al-faqi al-Mahdi (International Criminal Court).

of historical and religious monuments’ by the International Criminal Court (ICC), a charge to which 
he pleaded guilty five months later. He directed attacks on nine mausolea and a mosque in Timbuktu, 
a city that has been inscribed on the World Heritage List.5 Fatou Bensouda, the ICC’s chief prose-
cutor, understood the deeper motives behind the act. She asserted that the attacks were intentional 
and had no military objectives. She stated that ‘what is at stake here is not just walls and stones’, but 
that the attack ‘falls into the category of crimes that destroy the roots of an entire people’. Judge Raul 
Cano Pangalangan sentenced al-Mahdi to nine years in prison, hoping that the sentence wold have 
a ‘deterrent effect on others tempted to carry out similar acts’ (Burke 2016; ICC 2016a, 2016b; York 
2016a, 2016b).

The idea that cultural destruction should be seen as a war crime continues to gain acceptance. In a 
particularly strong statement, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry described it as genocide. Kerry declared 
in March 2016 that ‘Daesh [also known as the Islamic State] is responsible for genocide against groups 
in areas under its control’, and that the genocide has come about, in part, because ‘Daesh has made 
a systematic effort to destroy the cultural heritage of ancient communities – destroying Armenian, 
Syrian Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches; blowing up monasteries and the tombs of prophets; 
desecrating cemeteries; and in Palmyra, even beheading the 83-year-old scholar who had spent a 
lifetime preserving antiquities there’ (Kerry 2016; Mohammed 2016).

Perhaps the most infamous act of cultural destruction in recent decades occurred in February and 
March 2001. Twenty-six-year-old Mirza Hussain, along with a 24 other Afghani prisoners being held 
by the Taliban, was ordered by his captors to drill holes in a pair of colossal stone statues of Buddha, 
fill the holes with explosives, and detonate them. The statues resisted destruction. It took 25 days of 
explosions, supplemented by bombardment by tanks and artillery shells, for the Taliban to declare the 
job done. The targets were the two Buddhas of Bamiyan, monumental images that had been carved 
out of the side of a sandstone cliff in the sixth century. The larger of the two was 55 m high, or the 
equivalent of a 12-storey building. Originally coated in stucco and brightly painted, the Buddhas were 
landmarks along the Silk Road in Afghanistan’s picturesque Bamiyan valley, surrounded by the moun-
tains of the Hindu Kush. A Buddhist pilgrim from China who travelled the Silk Road in 632 wrote that 
the Buddhas shone with gold and jewels (Montagne 2006; Behzad and Qarizadah 2015; ‘Buddhas’).6
The Taliban condemned the Bamiyan Buddhas as idols, which are strictly prohibited by Islam and 
therefore violations of the faith. Spiritual leader Mullah Mohammed Omar, likely acting on orders 
from Osama Bin Laden, was quoted by The Times as saying: ‘Muslims should be proud of smashing 
idols. It has given praise to Allah that we have destroyed them (“Buddhas”)’.7 No matter that the statues 
were created long ago by Buddhists and Buddha is not a god, or that the region’s Muslims treasured 

  

  543

them and didn’t consider them to be religious. The resilient Buddhas must have made a powerful and 
threatening impression on visitors, as this was not the first time that they had been attacked. They 
were assaulted by Ghengis Khan 800 years ago; struck by cannon in the seventeenth century by the 
Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb; fired at with cannon again a century later by the Persian king, Nader 
Afshar; and bombarded by artillery near the turn of the twentieth century by the emir, Abdur Rahman.
Mullah Omar had previously decreed, in 1999, that the Buddhas should be preserved. He offered 

a reason for changing his mind and directing his fighters to blow up the statues:

I did not want to destroy the Bamiyan Buddha. In fact, some foreigners came to me and said they would like to 
conduct the repair work of the Bamiyan Buddha that had been slightly damaged due to rains. This shocked me. I 
thought, these callous people have no regard for thousands of living human beings – the Afghans who are dying 
of hunger, but they are so concerned about non-living objects like the Buddha. This was extremely deplorable. 
That is why I ordered its destruction. Had they come for humanitarian work, I would have never ordered the 
Buddha’s destruction. (Harding 2001; Patton 2012)

Here he expressed the object of his anger not as idolatry or Buddhism, but rather as the Westerners 
who ignored the needs of his people.8

The niches have been designated a World Heritage Site. As with the Stari Most, the site of the 
Bamiyan Buddhas was inscribed on the list only after their destruction. Once again the act of demoli-
tion was central to their having been listed. Indeed, the official name of the site is ‘Cultural Landscape 
and Archaeological Remains of the Bamiyan Valley’ (Figure 4). The official inscription reads, in part: 
‘the site is … testimony to the tragic destruction by the Taliban of the two standing Buddha statues, 
which shook the world in March 2001’ (UNESCO List, n.d.(b)). Both the Afghan and the Bosnian 
sites commemorate acts of destruction at least as much as they do acts of creation. Both recognise 
the significance of obliterating cultural heritage. As with the Warsaw designation, the emphasis on 
loss – on the failure of protection – seems to distort the mission of the UNESCO’s World Heritage 
programme, which ‘seeks to encourage the identification, protection and preservation of cultural and 
natural heritage around the world considered to be of outstanding value to humanity’. UNESCO also 
maintains a list of World Heritage in Danger, including places under threat from armed conflict and 
war, in order ‘to encourage corrective action’. Neither list, however, was intended for cultural heritage 
whose protection has failed.

Figure 4. Cultural landscape and archaeological remains of the Bamiyan Valley World Heritage Site, afghanistan, showing the empty 
niches at the left and right of the escarpment (graciela gonzalez Brigas, uneSCo).

544 

 

 H. KALMAN

War crime, genocide, urbicide … these are strong words. So too are the words of Dr. Sarah Jane 
Meharg, a Canadian authority on post-conflict reconstruction, who calls acts such as these ‘identicide’ 
and ‘cultural cannibalism’. She writes:

The victims of identicide are not the bridge or the Buddhas, but the societies which subscribed to these mon-
uments of culture and spirit. They are left with a sense of placelessness devoid of particularity and familiarity. 
Not only are the perpetrators guilty of reducing grand architectural edifices to piles of rubble, they are ensuring 
that culture and identity have nowhere to reside, nowhere to be ritualized, and nowhere to be remembered. 
(Meharg 2001)

Mitigation
Stari Most, the Bamiyan Buddhas, the old city of Warsaw – one could add the Golden Temple at 
Amritsar, the World Trade Centre, the antiquities of Palmyra, the statue of Saddam Hussain in 
central Baghdad, and so many more – fell victim to deliberate attacks for being symbols of social, 
cultural and national identity. All triggered strong reactions, largely international and many of 
them highly emotional. The varied responses represent alternative methods of mitigation. They 
include retribution, physical intervention, prevention, documentation, commemoration and often 
reconciliation.

Some offenders have been convicted and imprisoned, intended both as retribution and to deter 
others by example. This option pursues the view that the destruction of cultural heritage should 
be considered a war crime, as was the case with the destruction of mosques in Timbuktu. After 
the Bosnian war, the UN’s International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, based in The 
Hague, prosecuted alleged perpetrators not only for crimes against humanity, but also for the crime 
of destroying historic places. Miodrag Jokić, a Serb who served as the last commander of the Yugoslav 
navy, was convicted and sentenced to seven years in prison for the ‘destruction or wilful damage done 
to … historic monuments’. Soldiers under his command ‘shelled the Old Town of Dubrovnik, listed 
as a UNESCO World Cultural Heritage Site’ (United Nations, n.d.(a), n.d.(b)). Former Macedonian 
police officer Johan Tarčulovski was sentenced to twelve years, in part for being criminally responsible 
for the ‘wanton destruction of cities, towns or villages … as violations of the laws or customs of war’ 
(Hague Justice Portal, n.d.).

With respect to alternative forms of physical intervention, the dialogue on what to do with the 
Bamiyan Buddhas has produced a fascinating and ongoing international debate. The choice is usually 
between reconstruction, which returns a historic place to its earlier state, and preservation, which 
retains the current appearance.9 Reconstruction is the default approach taken for post-conflict miti-
gation by the international community. It embraces both social and material remediation and often 
comprises the largest item in NGOs’ budgets. ICOMOS asserted that the Bamiyan statues should be 
reconstructed to their pre-destruction appearance. Reconstruction was supported as well by many 
local officials, including the provincial governor, Habiba Sarabi, in part because the restored Buddhas 
would bring back the tourists and boost the region’s meagre economy (Kakissis 2011).

In 2004 ICOMOS put a team of Afghan labourers to work collecting fragments of the Buddhas 
for eventual reconstruction. They also consolidated the niches with anchors and grout. Fragments 
scavenged from 400 tonnes of rubble were combined with new material. The initiative was directed by 
architect Georgios Toubekis of Aachen University. Work progressed on rebuilding the feet. Progress was 
slow, then came to a crashing halt in 2013. Opponents pointed out that the reconstruction of the feet 
and, by extension, of the entire statues, violated ICOMOS’s core policy document, The Venice Charter 
of 1964. The Charter, which was drafted by an international team of conservation specialists, remains 
the holy grail of the profession. Article 9 of The Venice Charter states that the aim of reconstruction 
‘is to preserve and reveal the aesthetic and historic value of the monument and is based on respect 
for original material’, and ‘any extra work which is indispensable [such as replacing missing parts] 
… must be distinct from the … composition and must bear a contemporary stamp’ (ICOMOS 1964; 
Article 9). Combining old with new material was seen as a violation of the Charter. If the document 

  

  545

were to be disregarded, the site could be removed from the World Heritage List. The puzzled Afghan 
authorities instructed the European specialists to stop their work (Bobin 2015).

Other voices have argued for preservation, or retaining the status quo, rather than for reconstruction. 
This group believes that the empty niches tell a more compelling story about the Taliban’s fanaticism 
than would the statues’ recreation. Franco-Afghan archaeologist Zamaryalai Tarzi, who led the French 
dig at the foot of the Bamiyan cliff, said: ‘The two niches should be left empty, like two pages in Afghan 
history, so that subsequent generations can see how ignorance once prevailed in our country’. Human 
rights activist Abdullah Hamadi, whose nearby community was massacred by the Taliban shortly before 
the attack on the statues, also supported leaving the niches empty, but for a different reason. He agreed 
with the Taliban’s argument that the money could better be spent on improving the lives of people. 
Hamadi told National Public Radio, ‘The Buddha was destroyed. If you made it, rebuilt it, that is not 
the history. The history is the broken Buddha’ (Kakissis 2011). Other reasons for not reconstructing 
the statues include the complexity and the cost of the project.10

No dispute would be complete without its proposed compromises. Some authorities have advocated 
the reconstruction of only one statue, the smaller one. Two who take this position are Governor Sarabi 
and German conservation specialist Michael Petzet, formerly president of ICOMOS and a professor 
at the Technical University of Munich. Another compromise position would simulate the Buddhas 
without rebuilding them. Indeed, this ‘temporary’ solution is being done at present, as a laser light 
show projects three-dimensional holograms into the niches (Montagne 2006; Bobin 2015). No final 
decision on the long-term conservation treatment for the Buddhas has yet been made.

Reconstruction, which was the choice at Stari Most and the old centre of Warsaw, may bring back 
the appearance of the historic place and restore collective memories of its associations, but it also 
destroys evidence of the destructive attack. Reconstruction also reduces the authenticity of the heritage 
resource by adding considerable new material (see also Khalef 2016). The Venice Charter describes 
reconstruction as ‘a highly specialised operation’. Preservation is often a preferred solution because it 
poignantly retains confirmation of the act and its meaning. The preservation approach was followed 
at St. Michael’s Cathedral at Coventry, England. German bombs had destroyed the nave but spared the 
tall tower, spire and some exterior walls. A competition was held in 1950 to identify an architect and 
scheme for rebuilding. The conditions required that the Gothic tower should be retained, but placed 
‘no restrictions … as to style or material’. It was generally assumed that a traditionally-designed or 
reconstructed new cathedral would incorporate these remnants. The commission went to architect Sir 
Basil Spence, who made the radical proposal to stabilise the ruins and construct an entirely modern 
cathedral adjacent to it. Despite some controversy during construction, the new Coventry Cathedral, 
dedicated in 1962, has met with widespread approval (Figure 5; Spence 1962).

Conservation treatments were combined at the Reichstag in Berlin, home of the Bundestag, the 
German parliament. The building, originally completed in 1894, had been heavily damaged in 1933 
by fire – allegedly set as a political statement – and again in 1945. Conservation work was undertaken 
in the 1990s so that the building could serve as the Bundestag of the reunified Germany. Under the 
guidance of English architect Sir Norman Foster, the exterior walls were preserved, including retaining 
wartime scars and Russian graffiti. Some heavily damaged portions were restored or reconstructed 
to their 1945 appearance. The interior, by contrast, was renovated. The central feature is a strikingly 
new legislative chamber. The original dome, which had been entirely lost, was replaced by an entirely 
new steel-and-glass cupola. Visitors can clearly ‘read’ the evolution of the building – its construction 
in the late nineteenth century, the war damage, and the new interventions of the chamber and dome. 
Foster’s firm describes the ensemble as a ‘living museum of German history’ (Foster + Partners, n.d.).11
Another form of mitigation focusses on what is called cultural property protection (CPP): pre-
venting the destruction of cultural heritage before it occurs. As part of preparations for the aerial 
bombardment of Japan late in the Second World War, the American forces consulted Chinese architect 
and historian Liang Sicheng, an expert on early Japanese architecture. Liang provided the U.S. mili-
tary with annotated maps showing Japan’s key cultural sites. The information went to the American 
Commission for the Protection and Salvage of Artistic and Historic Monuments in War Areas. It in 

546 

 

 H. KALMAN

Figure 5. Coventry Cathedral, england, with the ruins of the old cathedral at the left and the new cathedral at the right (World 
Monuments fund Britain/andy Marshall).

turn passed it on to officers in the field (the ‘monuments men’), who prepared official lists of historic 
places to be protected (Fairbank 1994, 137).12

Liang went so far as to recommend that the cities of Kyoto and Nara should be entirely spared from 

air raids. As he explained:

Architecture is the epitome of society and the symbol of the people. But it does not belong to one people, for it is 
the crystallization of the entire human race. Nara’s Tōshōdai-ji Temple [begun in the 8th century] is the world’s 
earliest wood-structure building. Once destroyed, it is irrecoverable. (‘Liang’ 2014)

The Americans followed Liang’s advice. Both Kyoto and Nara escaped the firebombing that incinerated 
portions of 63 Japanese cities and killed a half-million people, a reign of destruction that would cul-
minate in the nuclear bombardment of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The Tōshōdai-ji Temple was spared 
from war but damaged by fire in 1951. It was restored and stands today as a part of the Buddhist 
Monuments in the Horyu-ji Area World Heritage Site (UNESCO List, n.d.(a)).13

International agreements provide yet another way to protect cultural heritage from armed con-
flict. The Hague Convention of 1899 stipulated that ‘in sieges and bombardments all necessary steps 
should be taken to spare as far as possible edifices devoted to religion, art, science, and charity’. It also 
required that the besieged party should mark these places and notify the assailants. The rules were 
upheld in 1907 (Convention respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, 1907) and amplified 
in the Roerich Pact of 1935, which was inspired by and named after the efforts of Russian painter and 
philosopher Nicholas Roerich. The pact, which was ratified only by some American nations, stated 
that the protection of culture always takes precedence over any military necessity. However well 
intentioned, all these agreements have largely been unsuccessful.

The United Nations addressed the protection of cultural heritage in 1954, but again with only limited 
success. In that year UNESCO adopted the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property 
in the Event of Armed Conflict. The document has the strength of a treaty. Reacting to the enormous 
damage inflicted during the Second World War, the Hague Convention of 1954 seems to echo the 
words of Liang Sicheng: ‘Cultural property … is in increasing danger of destruction … [and] damage 
to cultural property belonging to any people whatsoever means damage to the cultural heritage of 
all mankind’. The convention calls for contracting parties to prepare inventories of cultural property, 

  

  547

both immoveable (buildings) and moveable (works of art), and calls for their ‘refraining from any 
use of the property and its immediate surroundings … for purposes which are likely to expose it to 
destruction or damage in the event of armed conflict (Preamble and Article 4.1)’.14

Properties that have been protected by the Hague Convention are marked with a blue shield. This 
symbol inspired the name of the International Committee of the Blue Shield (now simply the Blue 
Shield), which works to protect cultural heritage threated by both human-made and natural disasters. 
The Rome Statute of 1998, which established the ICC, is another treaty that contains provisions against 
the destruction of cultural property. It declares that ‘intentionally directing attacks against buildings 
dedicated to religion … [or] historic monuments’ in the absence of military objectives is a war crime. 
Well intended as the two agreements are, many have questioned their effectiveness. Canadian conser-
vation architect Herb Stovel, for one, wrote that the very presence of the Blue Shield marker ‘became 
less an inhibition to attack than an invitation to those anxious to destroy important cultural symbols 
of the group with whom they were in conflict’ (Stovel 1998, 86). Moreover, international agreements 
do not take into account destructive tendencies that roil not far below the surface. This black side of 
human nature was cast into sharp focus in William Golding’s acclaimed classic novel, Lord of the Flies, 
published in 1954 – the very year that the Hague Convention was proclaimed.

Education may help reduce threats to cultural property. UNESCO, as an example, has published 
pamphlets in many languages intended to raise public awareness of the value of cultural heritage. 
UNESCO’s World Heritage Education Programme engages young people by encouraging them to 
participate in heritage conservation and to respond to the continuing threats to historic places. Its 
World Heritage in Young Hands Educational Resource Kit for secondary school teachers exists in 37 
national languages.15 Educating children can have long-term positive effects. As German-Canadian 
heritage consultant Christin Döinghaus has observed, ‘educational programmes reaching out to young 
people can help to create an understanding and appreciation of cultural diversity among the deci-
sion-makers of tomorrow’.16 Nevertheless, while increasing awareness can contribute to preventing 
vandalism and accidental destruction by ignorant people, it is highly unlikely to deter ideologues 
who destroy in order to commit identicide. Educational programmes may be more effective when 
directed at building capacity among government officials and law-enforcement agencies. Numerous 
conferences and educational programmes have been devoted to this cause. Newcastle University, for 
example, has established a UNESCO Chair in CPP and Peace. The first chairholder, Professor Peter 
Stone, expressed his objective as working ‘with governments, the armed forces, the heritage sector and 
the public to foster a better understanding of the value of cultural property’ and meeting ‘an almost 
unprecedented urgency to mitigate the destruction of cultural property (Newcastle University 2015)’.17
Documentation provides another tool in the effort to protect cultural heritage. Drawings, photo-
graphs, and descriptions provide a record of historic places and artefacts that can help in their recon-
struction if the places are destroyed. As was seen above, record drawings permitted reconstructing the 
old town of Warsaw. The Institute for Digital Archaeology, a joint venture among Harvard University, 
the University of Oxford, and Dubai’s Museum of the Future, is one organisation that promotes the 
development of digital imaging and 3D printing techniques (The Institute for Digital Archaeology, 
n.d.). New technologies even enable a permanent record to be made after a property has been lost. 
The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH Zürich) created a highly accurate scale model of the 
Bamiyan Buddhas following their destruction. Experts used photogrammetric analysis of prior images, 
specialised software, and a machine tool that took the digital data and milled the model from polyu-
rethane. The three-dimensional reconstruction clearly shows the damage that the Buddhas incurred 
over the past millennium (Grün, Remondino, and Zhang 2004).

Recording can also be used to monitor current threats to cultural heritage. The American Association 
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) has adopted high-resolution commercial satellite imagery for 
this purpose. The AAAS analysed military action and encampments that threatened potential world 
heritage sites in Syria, gathering information in the hope that it can help stop aggression and to aid 
restoration when the fighting ends (AAAS 2014). Syrian antiquities have been particularly hard hit 
by civil war, attacks by the Islamic State, and subsequent looting. In addition to the satellite remote 

548 

 

 H. KALMAN

sensing, a level of protection has been provided by an international emergency Heritage Task Force 
that trained Syrians to sandbag cultural collections and keep damaged buildings from collapsing. 
While the destruction is more often than not the result of deliberate aggression, it also comes about as 
unintended collateral damage and from other risks (Stone 2016). ‘Intentional damage is not something 
we can actually prove with our analysis’, says Susan Wolfinbarger, director of the AAAS initiative, in 
an interview with BBC News. She adds, however, that when the satellite imagery is analysed together 
with other information from news outlets, social media, and eyewitness accounts, certain patterns 
may emerge that indicate that attacks on cultural heritage sites were deliberate (O’Brien 2014).

Fire is sometimes fought with fire. Military forces may participate in reacting to aggression that has 
been detected by means of monitoring, becoming a component of a preventive conservation strategy. 
Military involvement was the subject of a pilot course on CPP undertaken in 2011 by NATO, the 
Austrian Ministry of Defence, and the Military Cultural Resources Working Group. In the invitation 
to the course, NATO stated that ‘practical activities in the field’ are required to protect sites and pre-
vent looting (Kila 2013a, 2013b). An important legal issue is whether the international community 
has the right to intervene in preventing threats against cultural property within a sovereign state.18

When the dust has settled, reconstruction may be called for. ‘Post-trauma reconstruction’ is a popu-
lar new theme. It formed the subject of a colloquium held in March 2016 by ICOMOS. A multi-national 
study currently underway, led by Cambridge University archaeologist Marie Louise Stig Sørensen, 
recognises that historic places are frequently ‘deliberately targeted as a means of inflicting pain and 
societal trauma’, and that ‘a community’s shared sense of belonging is often rooted in its heritage sites 
and landscapes’. In a programme called Cultural Heritage and the Reconstruction of Identities after 
Conflict (CRIC), Dr. Sørensen and her colleagues looked at post-conflict reconstruction at sites in 
five countries that were damaged during civil war, ethnic violence, and world war, including Bosnia 
and Germany (ICOMOS 2016; ‘Cultural heritage’, n.d.).19

Interpretation is yet another form of mitigation. This is the practice of telling the stories associated 
with a cultural heritage site in order to explain its many meanings. Interpretation may take many 
forms, including non-personal devices, such as signs, panels and multimedia presentations; personal 
methods, such as guided tours and dramatisations; and conventional print media. Two examples are 
the laser light show at the Bamiyan Buddhas and Warsaw’s Old Town’s Heritage Interpretation Centre. 
The latter presents information on the war damage to the Old Town and the reconstruction, as well 
being the starting point for the Route of the Old Town Cultural Basements, a walking tour through 
historical subterranean spaces (‘Warsaw’s Interpretation Centre’, n.d.).

Reconciliation
Immediately after the destruction of Coventry Cathedral, Provost Richard Howard made a com-
mitment to forgiveness and reconciliation with those responsible. He participated in establishing 
the International Centre for Reconciliation in Coventry, which was ‘committed to reconciliation in 
various situations of violent conflict, some related to religious dispute and others fuelled by different 
factors’. Its work continues to comprise a part of the Coventry Cathedral Reconciliation Ministry 
(‘International Centre’, n.d.).

Reconciliation was also the main incentive behind the reconstruction of the Frauenkirche, the 
Church of Our Lady, in Dresden, Germany. In February 1945, as the war in Europe was winding 
down, the British and American air forces dropped nearly 4000 tonnes of firebombs on Dresden, 
creating a vicious firestorm that devastated the city centre and killed around 25,000 people. Many 
questioned whether military strategy justified the destruction; most agreed that it did not. They argued 
that Dresden was more of a cultural than a military centre, and that the bombing was an immoral act 
intended to destroy buildings and kill civilians – in many ways a German counterpart to Coventry 
(e.g. Selwood 2015).

The Frauenkirche lay in ruins for nearly a half-century. In 1990 advocates determined that it should be 
reconstructed, including the exuberantly decorated Rococo interior. A massive international fundraising 

  

  549

Figure 6. the frauenkirche, dresden, germany, 2010, following its reconstruction (netopyr, Wikimedia Commons).

effort yielded €180 million from dozens of countries. The reconstruction was intended above all as an act 
of reconciliation, intended to take the place of retribution (Figure 6). Surviving fragments of the original 
building are embedded in the new work and can be distinguished by their darker colour, so that visitors 
clearly understand that the structure combines old and new materials. At the reconsecration service in 
October 2005, Bishop Jochen Bohl stated, ‘A deep wound that has bled for so long can be healed. From 
hate and evil a community of reconciliation can grow, which makes peace possible’. A poignant reminder 
of the international nature of the reconciliation is the new, golden ‘Cross of Peace’ atop the dome. It was 
crafted by English goldsmith Alan Smith, whose father, Frank Smith, had participated in the firebombing 
as a RAF pilot (‘Dresden Cross’ 1998; ‘Landmark’ 2005; Stiftung, n.d.).

A blogger who admires both the Warsaw and Dresden reconstructions wrote: 
You could argue that rebuilding the past is nostalgic nonsense, that it falsifies and contradicts history and pretends 
that significant events from the past did not happen or that it is done only to fool tourists and children. You could 
make those arguments but who we are is tied up in many things, including the built environment. (Hollier 2011)

‘Who we are’ is, of course, our social, cultural and national identity. Even if reconstruction leaves 
conservation purists uncomfortable, it makes total sense when undoing an attempt to eradicate that 
identity.20

550 

 

 H. KALMAN

Loss of identity and reconciliation are at the heart of a current issue that troubles Canada deeply. 
These are the dominant themes of the attempt to mitigate the cultural damage inflicted on several 
generations of Indigenous people by the former Indian Residential Schools. The federal government 
and numerous church denominations collaborated in the nation-wide system of boarding schools, 
which, over the course of a century, forcibly took some 150,000 children from their families and sought 
to assimilate them into the European-Canadian, Christian culture. In 2008 the government issued 
a formal apology and set up the Indian Residential Schools Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
(‘TRC’). The TRC strove to reconcile the parties by means of public events and ‘truth sharing’, the 
taking of statements from more than 6000 ‘survivors’. It issued its final report in December 2015. The 
report defined reconciliation as ‘coming to terms with events of the past in a manner that overcomes 
conflict and establishes a respectful and healthy relationship among people going forward’. It concluded 
that, with respect to the Residential Schools, the government had committed ‘cultural genocide’ (TRC, 
n.d., 2015)’.

The Residential Schools’ built cultural heritage consisted of the schools themselves. The harms 
prompted varied responses towards the school buildings. Many First Nations demolished them as 
despised symbols of acculturation. Others, however, chose to retain them as a gesture of reconciliation, 
and to assert that Indigenous people had gained a measure of power over the establishment that had 
tried to destroy their culture.

A group that took one position and then the other was the 'Namgis First Nation in Alert Bay, 
British Columbia. Many members of the band had been educated at St. Michael’s Indian Residential 
School, a dominant landmark that was built on the reserve in 1929 and closed in 1975. The 'Namgis 
Band initially celebrated the school as a symbol of reconciliation by using it as a community facility, 
which it called 'Namgis House. Over time, however, sentiments of reconciliation were succeeded by 
anger. The Band resolved to destroy the despised symbol of government authority. A ceremony held 
on 18 February 2015, marked the start of demolition (Figure 7). The Vancouver Sun reported that 
hundreds of ‘survivors and their supporters’ attended, partaking in prayers, songs and speeches that 
‘honoured residential school survivors and those who have died’, and throwing stones at the building 
‘to release anger or pain’.

The release of anger and pain is a necessary precondition for reconciliation, permitting victims to 
come to terms with past events. In some ways this may be more important than retaining the physical 
symbol of oppression, as long as the former oppression is not forgotten. It could be said that it does 

Figure 7. demolition and reconciliation ceremony at St. Michael’s residential School, alert Bay, British Columbia, Canada, 18 february ,  
2015. Source: lehmann, The Globe and Mail, (2015).

  

  551

not matter whether the lost cultural heritage is reconstructed, left in ruins, or removed, arguing that 
reconciliation is achieved by a state of mind more than by a physical object.

In support of this point of view, leading-edge conservation theory reduces the importance of retain-
ing historic places. It emphasises instead the creative use of the places and the interpretation of their 
many stories. Some heritage professionals have taken this concept a considerable distance. Laurajane 
Smith of the Australian National University has written that the celebration of heritage is more impor-
tant than the object. ‘Places are not inherently valuable’, she writes. What makes them meaningful 
‘are the present-day cultural processes that are undertaken at and around them, and of which they 
become a part’. New York teacher and heritage practitioner Ned Kaufman says that preservation ‘is 
a social practice … [whose] ultimate goal is not fixing or saving old things but rather creating places 
where people can live well and connect to meaningful narratives about history, culture and identity’ 
(Smith 2006, 3, 4; Kaufman 2009, 1)’.

If our concern is with material cultural heritage – Stari Most as a stone bridge, the old town of 
Warsaw as a collection of buildings, and the Bamiyan Buddhas as huge sculptures carved out of the 
mountainside – then these arguments fall flat. If, however, we recognise that cultural heritage represents 
much more than tangible objects, the positions taken by Smith and Kaufman assume greater relevance. 
Cultural heritage also embraces memories, personal and collective identity, stories and associations, 
social customs and political views. Indeed, all these properties are incorporated in UNESCO’s defini-
tion of intangible cultural heritage, which it lists and seeks to protect.21

So perhaps we may conclude that the destruction of cultural heritage in times of conflict – an 
occurrence that seems to be on the increase as the militancy of disaffected groups escalates – should 
be understood not only as the object of a war crime or a loss to be mitigated, but also as an event to 
be commemorated, even celebrated, in the pursuit of reconciliation.22 Mitigation may be physical, 
whether by reconstructing a structure to its formerly intact form, preserving its ruins, or building 
anew; or it may be intangible, by restoring the collective memories and identities that have been lost.
UNESCO strove to assure that destructive acts would be remembered when it inscribed Stari Most, 
the old city of Warsaw, and the Bamiyan Buddhas on the World Heritage List. In doing so, however, 
UNESCO modified the original intentions of the List by highlighting cultural heritage that had been 
damaged or destroyed. The officials at Conventry achieved a similar outcome by building a new cathe-
dral adjacent to the stabilised ruins of the old one and interpreting the two structures side by side. It 
stands to reason that the objectives of the World Heritage programme should be expanded to include 
this interpretive dimension. All these kinds of interventions to historic places symbolise the life cycle 
of creation, destruction and rebirth. Commemoration, interpretation and physical intervention all 
contribute to restoring the identities and memories of their communities, enabling people to once 
again recognise who they are.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 

6. 

 The author acknowledges the generous suggestions provided by Christin Döinghaus, Rick Goodacre, Sarah 
Jane Meharg and Martin Segger.
 A similarly ambitious reconstruction was undertaken in 1919–1934 in Arras, France, following the destruction 
of its two central squares in 1914–1915. The Chartre des sinistrés (Victims’ Charter), enacted by the French 
government on 17 April 1919, required that war damage to ancient monuments should be rebuilt to their 
previous condition (‘Rebuilding Arras’, n.d.; Gomes 2010, 8).
 It has been argued that ‘universality’ is a Eurocentric concept that is incompatible with the essential diversity 
of human culture (Cleere 2001).
 Rick Goodacre, correspondence with the author, 17 May 2016.
 Timbuktu was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1988 and was added to the List of World Heritage in 
Danger two years later. Fourteen destroyed mausolea at Timbuktu were reconstructed by UNESCO in 2014 
and formally handed back to Mali in February 2016 (Agence France-Presse 2016).
 The  actual  demolition  of  the  Buddhas  was  preceded  a  lengthy  lead-up  period,  during  which  the  Taliban 
announced their intentions and attracted the attention of the international community.

552 

 

 H. KALMAN

7. 

8. 
9. 

 The Wikipedia article, ‘Buddhas of Bamiyan’, reports testimony by Afghans declaring that Obama Bin Laden 
originally ordered the destruction, citing ‘Laden ordered Bamyan Buddha destruction’ 2006 and a documentary 
film by Christian Frei, The Giant Buddhas, 2006.
 The story is fully told and illustrated in Petzet 2009 and Emmerling and Petzet 2016.
 ICOMOS  and  some  national  heritage  agencies  define  the  different  conservation  treatments,  including 
‘preservation’,  ‘restoration’  and  ‘reconstruction’.  Following  are  the  definitions  from  Australia  ICOMOS’s 
respected Burra Charter: ‘Preservation means maintaining the fabric of a place in its existing state and retarding 
deterioration’; ‘Restoration means returning the existing fabric of a place to a known earlier state by removing 
accretions or by reassembling existing components without the introduction of new material’; ‘Reconstruction 
means returning a place to a known earlier state and is distinguished from restoration by the introduction of 
new material into the fabric’ (Australia ICOMOS 2013 Articles 1.6-1-8).

10.   A parallel debate occurred after the destruction of New York’s World Trade Centre on 11 September 2001. Some 
voices argued passionately that the site should remain a hole in the ground, with the damaged lower levels 
clearly visible. The eventual solution was new construction that realised the economic potential of the real estate.
11.   Combining conservation treatments in this manner, while retaining the cultural significance of the historic 
place, represents good preservation practice. The ‘combination of more than one’ treatment is supported by the 
Burra Charter (Australia ICOMOS 2013 Article 14).

12.   The extensive records of the Commission (known as ‘the Roberts Commission’) are in the U.S. National Archives; 
the  finding  aid  is  at  http://www.archives.gov/research/holocaust/finding-aid/civilian/rg-239.html,  accessed 
24 March, 2016. A current initiative to protect cultural heritage targeted by terrorists is ‘Protecting Cultural 
Heritage – An Imperative for Humanity’, launched by the governments of Italy and Jordan, with participation 
from UNESCO, INTERPOL and UNODC (UN News Centre 2015).

13.   A  statue  of  Liang  Sicheng  was  erected  in  Nara  in  2009  to  commemorate  his  role  in  protecting  the  city;  
http://www.nara-np.co.jp/20090910110532.html,  accessed  August  4,  2016.  Jiefei  Zhang  kindly  located  this 
reference.

14.   The Hague Convention was signed in 1954 and entered into force in 1956. The U.S. ratified it only in 2009. It 
had been ratified by 127 states as of March 2016. See also International Committee 2016. A working group of 
experts has been engaged since 1992 on amending the Hague Convention; see Šulc 2001.

15.   See  http://whc.unesco.org/en/wheducation/  and  http://whc.unesco.org/en/educationkit/,  both  accessed 

7 December, 2017.

16.   Christin Döinghaus, correspondence with the author, 20 May 2016.
17.   Peter Stone has published extensively on the protection of cultural property in times of conflict. His anthologies 

include Stone (2011) and Stone and Bajjaly (2008). For this journal he has written Stone (2012).

18.   Louise  Arbour,  the  former  UN  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights,  has  argued  that  the  international 
community has a ‘responsibility to protect’ when a state is unable or unwilling to protect individuals against 
gross human rights violations, which may be extended to a duty to protect cultural heritage. English political 
scientist Philip Cunliffe refutes this, maintaining that it threatens to repress popular sovereignty and makes the 
exercise of power less responsible (Arbour 2008, 448; Cunliffe 2011, 51).

19.   The  CRIC  project  was  active  from  2008  to  2011;  http://www.cric.arch.cam.ac.uk/home.html,  accessed 

7 December, 2017.

20.   Themes that overlap with some in this article are treated within the context of reconciliation in Segger 1998.
21.   The  UNESCO  Convention  for  the  Safeguarding  of  the  Intangible  Cultural  Heritage  (2003)  maintains  two 
inventories: the ‘List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding’ and the ‘Representative 
List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity’.

22.   The author uses ‘celebration’ in the sense of remembering and honouring, as in the manner that Jews ‘celebrate’ 
Tisha B’av, a fast day that commemorates the destruction of two holy temples; and Christians ‘celebrate’ Good 
Friday, the day their Lord was crucified.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Harold Kalman is a heritage planner and architectural historian living in Victoria, BC, Canada. He recently withdrew 
from an active international consultancy in heritage conservation after 35 years in practice, and now divides his work 
time between writing and teaching. Kalman teaches heritage conservation at the Universities of Hong Kong and Victoria. 
He is the author of many books and articles for both professional and general readers, including Heritage Planning: 
Principles and Process (Routledge, 2014) and A History of Canadian Architecture (2 vols., Oxford, 1994). Kalman was 
the founding president of the Canadian Association of Heritage Professionals and is the British Columbia member of 

  

  553

the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada. He received the B.C. Heritage Award in 2006, the Gabrielle Léger 
Medal for Lifetime Achievement in Heritage Conservation in 2009, and Lifetime Achievement Awards from the City of 
Vancouver (2013) and the Canadian Association of Heritage Professionals (2015). He is a member of the Order of Canada.

References
AAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science) 2014. “Ancient History, Modern Destruction: Assessing 
the Current Status of Syria’s World Heritage Sites Using High-resolution Satellite Imagery.” http://www.aaas.org/page/
ancient-history-modern-destruction-assessing-current-status-syria-s-world-heritage-sites-using.

Agence France-Presse. 2016. “Timbuktu Recovers Its Mausoleums, Risen from Ruins of Islamist Destruction.” South 
China  Morning  Post,  February  5.  http://www.scmp.com/news/world/article/1909791/timbuktu-recovers-its-
mausoleums-risen-ruins-islamist-destruction.

American Experience. n.d. “People & Events: General Curtis E. LeMay (1906–1990).” Public Broadcasting Service. 

Accessed July 21, 2016. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/bomb/peopleevents/pandeAMEX61.html

Arbour, Louise. 2008. “The Responsibility to Protect as a Duty of Care in International Law and Practice.” Review of 

International Studies 34 (3): 445–448.

Melbourne: Australia ICOMOS.

Australia  ICOMOS.  2013.  The  Burra  Charter:  The  Australia  ICOMOS  Charter  for  Places  of  Cultural  Significance. 

Behzad, Nasir, and Daud Qarizadah. 2015. “The Man Who Helped Blow up the Bamiyan Buddhas.” BBC News, March 

12. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-31813681.

Block, Robert, and Christopher Bellamy. 1993. “Croats Destroy Mostar’s Historic Bridge.” The Independent (London), 

November 9. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/croats-destroy-mostars-historic-bridge-1503338.html.

Bobin, Frédéric. 2015. “Disputes Damage Hopes of Rebuilding Afghanistan’s Bamiyan Buddhas.” The Guardian, January 

10. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rebuild-bamiyan-buddhas-taliban-afghanistan.

“Buddhas of Bamiyan.” 2006. Wikipedia. Accessed May 6, 2015. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhas_of_Bamiyan
Burke, Jason. 2016. “ICC Ruling for Timbuktu Destruction ‘should be deterrent for others.” The Guardian, September 
27. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/27/timbuktu-shrines-icc-sentences-islamic-militant-nine-years-
destruction-ahmad-al-faqi-al-mahdi.

Cameron, Christina. 2009. “The Evolution of the Concept of Outstanding Universal Value.” In Conserving the Authentic: 
Essays in Honour of Jukka Jokilehto, edited by Nicholas Stanley-Price and Joseph King, 127–136. Rome: ICCROM.
Cameron,  Christina,  and  Mechtild  Rössler.  2013.  Many  Voices,  One  Vision:  The  Early  Years  of  the  World  Heritage 

Convention. Farnham: Ashgate.

Canada’s Residential Schools: Reconciliation. The Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 

2015. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=890

Cleere, Henry. 2001. “The Uneasy Bedfellows: Universality and Cultural Heritage.” In Destruction and Conservation, 

edited by Layton, Robert, Peter Stone and Julian Thomas, 22–29.

Convention with Respect to the Laws and Customs of War on Land (“The Hague Convention of 1889”). 1899. http://avalon.

law.yale.edu/19th_century/hague02.asp.

law.yale.edu/20th_century/hague04.asp.

Convention with Respect to the Laws and Customs of War on Land (“The Hague Convention of 1907”). 1907. http://avalon.

Coward, Martin. 2009. Urbicide: The Politics of Urban Destruction. London: Routledge.
“Cultural Heritage after Conflict.” n.d. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/cultural-heritage-

Cunliffe, Philip. 2011. “A Dangerous Duty: Power, Paternalism and the Global ‘Duty of Care’.” In Critical Perspectives 
on the Responsibility to Protect: Interrogating Theory and Practice, edited by P. Cunliffe, 51–70. London: Routledge.

Drakulic, Slavenka. 1993. “Falling down: A Mostar Bridge Elegy.” The New Republic, December 13: 14–15.
“Dresden Cross presented at Windsor.” 1998. BBC News, December 1. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/225369.stm.
Emmerling, Erwin, and Michael Petzet, eds. 2016. The Giant Buddhas of Bamiyan II: Safeguarding the Remains 2010–2015. 

Berlin: ICOMOS and Hendrik Bäßler Verlag.

Fairbank, Wilma. 1994. Liang and Lin: Partners in Exploring China’s Architectural Past. Philadelphia: University of 

after-conflict

Pennsylvania Press.

parliament/.

“Foster + Partners.” n.d. Accessed August 3, 2016. http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/reichstag-new-german-

Gomes, Leonard. 2010. German Reparations, 1919–1932: A Historical Survey. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Grün,  Armin,  Fabio  Remondino,  and  Li  Zhang.  2004.  “Photogrammetric  Reconstruction  of  the  Great  Buddha  of 

Bamiyan, Afghanistan.” The Photogrammetric Record 19 (107): 177–199.

Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. 1954. http://portal.unesco.org/

en/ev.php-URL_ID=13637&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html.

The Hague Justice Portal. n.d. “Tarculovski, Johan.” Accessed May 22, 2016. http://www.haguejusticeportal.net/index.

php?id=6045.

554 

 

 H. KALMAN

Harding, Luke. 2001. “How the Buddha Got His Wounds.” The Guardian, March 3. https://www.theguardian.com/

books/2001/mar/03/books.guardianreview2.

Hollier, Steve. 2011. “Turning Back the Hands of Time: Historical Reconstructions.” https://stevehollier.wordpress.

com/2011/01/26/turning-back-the-hands-of-time-historical-reconstructions/.

ICC (International Criminal Court) 2016a. “ICC Pre-trial Chamber I Confirms the Charge against Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi 
and Commits Him to Trial.” Press Release, March 24. https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=pr1204&ln=en.
ICC (International Criminal Court) 2016b. “The Prosecutor V. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi.” Case Information Sheet. 

https://www.icc-cpi.int/mali/al-mahdi/Documents/AlMahdiEng.pdf.

ICOMOS. 1964. International Charter for the Conservation and Restoration of Monuments and Sites (“The Venice Charter”). 

Paris: ICOMOS.

ICOMOS. 2016. “Post-trauma Reconstruction – ICOMOS Colloquium, 4 March 2016.” Accessed July 22, 2016. http://

www.icomos.org/en/what-we-do/focus/5751-post-trauma-reconstruction-icomos-colloquium-4-march-2016

“The Institute for Digital Archaeology.” n.d. Accessed July 15, 2016. http://digitalarchaeology.org.uk/
“International Centre for Reconciliation.” n.d. Accessed August 3, 2016. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_

Centre_for_Reconciliation

at-risk-acts-of-human-aggression.

Jayaram, Divya. 2013. “Heritage at Risk: Acts of Human Aggression.” August 23. http://www.cyark.org/news/heritage-

Kakissis, Joanna. 2011. “Bit by Bit, Afghanistan Rebuilds Buddhist Statutes.” National Public Radio. July 27. http://www.

npr.org/2011/07/27/137304363/bit-by-bit-afghanistan-rebuilds-buddhist-statues.

Kaufman, Ned. 2009. Place, Race, and Story: Essays on the Past and Future of Historic Preservation. New York: Routledge.
Kerry, John. 2016. “Remarks on Daesh and Genocide.” U.S. Department of State, Press Release, March 17. http://www.

state.gov/secretary/remarks/2016/03/254782.htm.

Khalef, Roha W. 2016. “A Viewpoint on the Reconstruction of Destroyed UNESCO Cultural World Heritage Sites.” 

 23 (3): 261–274.

Kila, Joris D. 2013a. “Inactive, Reactive, or Pro-active?: Cultural Property Crimes in the Context of Contemporary Armed 

Conflicts.” Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies 1 (4): 319–342.

Kila, Joris D. 2013b. “Military Involvement in Cultural Property Protection as Part of Preventive Conservation.” In 
Cultural Heritage in the Crosshairs: Protecting Cultural Property during Conflict, edited by Joris D. Kila and James A. 
Zeidler, 9–50. Leiden: Brill.

“Laden Ordered Bamyan Buddha Destruction.” 2006. The Times of India, March 28.
“Landmark Dresden Church Completes Rise from the Ashes.” 2005. Deutsche Welle, October 29. http://www.dw.com/

en/landmark-dresden-church-completes-rise-from-the-ashes/a-1758986.

Layton, Robert, Peter G. Stone, and Julian Thomas, eds. 2001. Destruction and Conservation of Cultural Property. 

London: Routledge.

Lehmann, John. 2015. “St. Michael’s Residential School Demolition Ceremony.” Photo essay. The Globe and Mail, February 
18. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/in-photos-st-michaels-residential-school-demolition-ceremony/
article23067843/.

“Liang Sicheng.” 2014. Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liang_Sicheng.
Meharg, Sarah Jane. 2001. “Identicide and Cultural Cannibalism: Warfare’s Appetite for Symbolic Place.” Peace Research 

Journal 33 (3): 89–98. http://www.mostarbridge.org/starimost/10_contr/meharg/meharg01.htm.

Mohammed, Arshad. 2016. “Islamic State Committed Genocide against Christians, Shi’ites: U.S.” Reuters, March 17. 

http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-usa-genocide-idUSKCN0WJ1OL.

Montagne, Renee. 2006. “Preserving Memory of Afghanistan’s Giant Buddhas.” National Public Radio, December 13. 

http://www.npr.org/2006/12/13/6616167/preserving-memory-of-afghanistans-giant-buddhas.

Newcastle University Press Office. 2015. “Newcastle University to Establish UNESCO Chair for Cultural Protection.” 

http://www.ncl.ac.uk/press/news/2015/10/peterstoneunescochair/.

O’Brien, Jane. 2014. “The International Team Trying to save Syrian Antiquities.” BBC News, July 21. http://www.bbc.

com/news/magazine-28380674.

Patton, Eric. 2012. “Mullah Mohammed Omar on Why He Ordered Bamiyan Buddha Statues Destroyed.” Blog posted 
July  12.  https://colonyofcommodus.wordpress.com/2012/07/12/mullah-mohammed-omar-on-why-he-ordered-
bamiyan-buddha-statues-destroyed/.

Petzet, Michael, ed. 2009. The Giant Buddhas of Bamiyan: Safeguarding the Remains. Monuments and Sites Series, 190. 

Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 1998. https://www.icc-cpi.int/nr/rdonlyres/ea9aeff7-5752-4f84-be94-

Berlin: ICOMOS and Hendrik Bäßler Verlag.

0a655eb30e16/0/rome_statute_english.pdf.

Riedlmayer, András. 1994. “Killing Memory: The Targeting of Bosnia’s Cultural Heritage.” Testimony presented to the 
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, April 4. https://www.ischool.utexas.edu/~archweek/2002/
killingmemory.doc.

Segger, Martin. 1998. “Introduction to ‘toward a Museology of Reconciliation’.” Paper delivered at the Inter-University 

Centre, Dubrovnik, Croatia. http://center.uvic.ca/tmr/segger.html.

  

  555

Selwood, Dominic. 2015. “Dresden Was a Civilian Town with No Military Significance. Why Did We Burn Its People?” 
The Telegraph, February 13. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/history/world-war-two/11410633/Dresden-was-a-civilian-
town-with-no-military-significance.-Why-did-we-burn-its-people.html.

Smith, Laurajane. 2006. Uses of Heritage. Abingdon: Routledge.
Spence, Basil. 1962. Phoenix at Coventry: The Building of a Cathedral. London: Geoffrey Bles.
Stiftung Frauenkirche Dresden. n.d. “Frauenkirche Dresden.” Accessed July 14, 2016. http://www.frauenkirche-dresden.

Stone, Peter G., ed. 2011. Cultural Heritage, Ethics, and the Military. Woodbridge: Boydell Press.
Stone, Peter G. 2012. “Human Rights and Cultural Property Protection in Times of Conflict.” International Journal of 

Stone, Peter G. 2016. “The Challenge of Protecting Heritage in times of Armed Conflict.” Museum International 67 

Stone, Peter G., and Joanne Farchakh Bajjaly, eds. 2008. The Destruction of Cultural Heritage in Iraq. Woodbridge: 

de/en/reconstruction/

Heritage Studies 18 (3): 271–284.

(1–4): 40–54.

Boydell Press.

Stovel, Herb. 1998. Risk Preparedness: A Management Manual for World Cultural Heritage. Rome: ICCROM.
Šulc, Branka. 2001. “The Protection of Croatia’s Cultural Heritage during War 1991–95.” In Destruction and Conservation, 

edited by  Layton, Robert, Peter Stone and Julian Thomas, 157–167.

Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015. Honouring the Truth, Reconciling for the Future: Summary of 
the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/
File/2015/Honouring_the_Truth_Reconciling_for_the_Future_July_23_2015.pdf.

Tung, Anthony M. 2001. Preserving the World’s Great Cities: The Destruction and Renewal of the Historic Metropolis. 

New York: Clarkson Potter.

“Rebuilding Arras: Old and New Ideas.” n.d. Accessed August 4, 2016. http://www.remembrancetrails-northernfrance.

com/history/reconstruction/rebuilding-arras-old-and-new-ideas.html#c1288

“Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada” [TRC]. n.d. Accessed July 20, 2016. http://www.trc.ca/websites/

trcinstitution/index.php?p=3

UNESCO. n.d.(b). “World Heritage.” Accessed July 15, 2016. http://whc.unesco.org/en/about/
UNESCO World Heritage Committee. 2009. “Draft Decision WHC-09/33.COM/8E.” 33rd session, Seville. http://whc.

unesco.org/archive/2009/whc09-33com-8Ee.pdf.

UNESCO World Heritage List. n.d.(a). “Buddhist Monuments in the Horyu-Ji Area.” Accessed March 25, 2016. http://

whc.unesco.org/en/list/660

UNESCO  World  Heritage  List.  n.d.(b).  “Cultural  Landscape  and  Archaeological  Remains  of  the  Bamiyan  Valley.” 

UNESCO World Heritage List. n.d.(c). “Old Bridge Area of the Old City of Mostar.” UNESCO World Heritage List. 

Accessed July 12, 2016. http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/208

Accessed May 6, 2016. http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/946

United Nations, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. n.d.(a). “Jokić, Miodrag (IT-01-42/1).” 

Accessed May 12, 2016. http://www.icty.org/case/miodrag_jokic/4

United Nations, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. n.d.(b). “Miodrag Jokić.” Accessed May 12, 

2016. http://www.icty.org/en/content/miodrag-joki%C4%87

United Nations, News Centre. 2015. “‘At UN, Global Initiative Launched Boost Protection of Cultural Heritage Targeted by 
Terrorists and Traffickers.” September 27. http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=51994#.V5KGoTXIBVo.
 “Warsaw’s Old Town’s Heritage Interpretation Center (Centrum Interpretacji Zabytku).” n.d. Accessed July 21, 2016. 
http://www.warsawtour.pl/en/tourist-attractions/warsaw-s-old-town-s-heritage-interpretation-center-centrum-
interpretacji-zabytku

York, Geoffrey. 2016a. “ICC Trial on Destruction of Timbuktu Shrines Debates Meaning of Islam.” The Globe and Mail 
(Toronto), March 1. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/icc-trial-on-destruction-of-timbuktu-shrines-
debates-meaning-of-islam/article28989152/.

York, Geoffrey. 2016b. “Islamic Radical Pleads Guilty in Historic War-Crimes Case of Cultural Destruction.” The Globe 
and  Mail,  August  22.  http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/islamic-extremist-pleads-guilty-to-historic-
timbuktu-rampage/article31484866/.


