International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

From a colonial reinvention to postcolonial
heritage and a global commodity: performing
and re-enacting Angkor Wat and the Royal Khmer
Ballet

Michael S. Falser

To cite this article: Michael S. Falser (2014) From a colonial reinvention to postcolonial heritage
and a global commodity: performing and re-enacting Angkor Wat and the Royal Khmer Ballet,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20:7-8, 702-723, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2013.794746
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2013.794746

Published online: 24 May 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 790

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2014
Vol. 20, Nos. 7–8, 702–723, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2013.794746

From a colonial reinvention to postcolonial heritage and a global
commodity: performing and re-enacting Angkor Wat and the
Royal Khmer Ballet

Michael S. Falser*

Cluster of Excellence ‘Asia and Europe in a Global Context’, Karl Jaspers Centre of
Advanced Transcultural Studies, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
(Received 4 December 2012; ﬁnal version received 2 April 2013)

It is a commonplace that cultural heritage is not only a highly contested concept of
modern times, full of nationalistic undertones, cultural stereotypes and essentialist
topoi such as past grandeur and enduring cultural purity. Cultural heritage has also
become the easiest and most proﬁtable prey for today’s global tourism industry. These
observations apply with particularly dramatic consequences to young emerging,
postcolonial nation states with a rich repertoire of built (tangible) and performed
(intangible) culture – especially if elements of this repertoire are branded ‘UNESCO
World Heritage’ without considering their contested formation histories. Few other ico-
nic heritage sites are more instructive in showcasing these observations than the tem-
ple site of Angkor, by charting the transcultural trajectories of Cambodia’s heritage
construction through the processes of French colonial reinvention, postcolonial/nation-
alist essentialisation, and global commodiﬁcation. This paper focuses on the ‘Royal
Khmer Ballet’ as cultural performance and heritage re-enactment in combination with
the twelfth-century temple of Angkor Wat as architectural stage. References to similar
‘heritagisation’ processes in the (post)colonial Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) will
help to anchor this transcultural enquiry.

Keywords: re-enactment; performance; Angkor; Royal Khmer Ballet; architecture;
cultural heritage

The spectacle starts […] music […] One of the back doors opens; one small,
the hall: an
adorable and almost chimerical creature rushes into the middle of
Apsara of the temple of Angkor! Impossible to make a more perfect
illusion of
it; she has the same features because she is of the same pure race, she has the
same enigmatic smile […] the small Apsara from the old ages, slipped away from
the holy bas-reliefs [of Angkor Wat, MF] […] these poses are the ancient
tradi-
tion of this country, as the stone ﬁgures which inhabit the ruins […] May France,
the protector of
the kings of
Phnom Penh is a sacred legacy, an archaic marvel which should never be
destroyed!1

this country, understand that

this royal ballet of

Pierre Loti: Un pèlerin d’Angkor (1912, 204–213)

*Email: falser@asia-europe.uni-heidelberg.de
This article was originally published with errors. This version has been corrected. Please see
Erratum (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2013.815495)

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

703

Introduction: history, heritage, performance and re-enactment

1.
‘History is not about [a passive] past as such, but rather about our [active] ways of
creating meaning from the scattered, and profoundly meaningless debris we ﬁnd
around us’ (Kellner 1997, 136–137). If heritage can be deﬁned as ‘history processed
through mythology, ideology, nationalism, local pride, romantic ideas or just plain
marketing, into a commodity’ (Schouten 1995, 21), and ‘the use of the past for
contemporary purposes’ (Tivers 2002, 188), then both history and heritage are made
by concrete agency. Our inquiry asks about this agency behind contested heritage
constructions in general, and focuses on cultural performances in particular. ‘To
study performance is not to focus on completed forms, but to become aware of
performance as itself a contested space, where meanings and desires are generated,
occluded, and of course multiply interpreted’ (Diamond 1989, 69). We include ‘not
only supposedly ‘pure’ performances or idealised versions of traditional genres but
also tourist shows, hybrids, and genres in the midst of [these] profound disturbances
and/or transformations’ (Schechner and Appel 1990, 2), which particularly character-
ise the modern history of country we are examining: Cambodia. Furthermore, we will
analyse a speciﬁc type called heritage performance which is characterised by a site-
speciﬁc ‘unity of kinaesthetic imagination and the afﬁrmation of cultural memory’
(Carlson 2000, 247) and which materialises and spatializes in so-called historical
re-enactments. With the goal of exactly restoring ancient history or ‘socially relevant
events’ or both with the latest multi-media (Arns 2007), historical re-enactment aims
to make it possible to experience ‘living history’ directly. They employ supposedly
‘authentic’ actors with historical apparatus, and often take place, as in our case, on
original cultural heritage sites (Agnew 2004, 2007; Cook 2004). By blurring the
boundaries between fact and ﬁction, heritage performances in the form of historical
re-enactments contribute today to an ever-growing global heritage tourist industry.
Since the 1980s, they have become parasitic and even instrumental in the global
heritage politics under UN’s Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO)’s leadership. This combination helps to ‘fossilise and commodify heri-
tage’ (Brosius and Polit 2011, 6). This trend is, as we shall see in our combined case
study on Cambodia’s temple of Angkor Wat (as a tangible heritage) and ‘Royal
Khmer Ballet’ (as an intangible heritage), especially menacing to young emerging
nation-states with a rich built and performed heritage, which is today both ‘salvaged’
by the global heritage community, locally exploited by proﬁt-oriented national(ist)
elites, and instrumentalised to overwrite memories of recent postcolonial traumata.

Chronologically, we will

traverse three decisive moments of culturo-political
transformation in Cambodia’s modern history: French colonialism (1863–1953/4),
Cambodia’s independence as a period of extensive cultural nationalism (1954–1970)
and Cambodia’s globalised rebirth process after 1990 as Asia’s youngest nation state.
Cambodia’s heritage landmarks, the temple of Angkor Wat and the Royal Khmer
Ballet, as transcultural hybrids, with their colonially reinvented, postcolonially
appropriated and globally commodiﬁed elements, will be contextualised along six
parameters:
the source material used to reconstitute cultural performances and
re-enactments; the media used to develop them; the events of representation and their
audiences; the speciﬁc sites and spatial components; the temporalities employed;
and, most importantly, the concrete agency behind these scenarios, ranging from
individual cultural brokers, national decision-makers, and elites and institutions, to
the global heritage community and cultural heritage industry.

704

M.S. Falser

2. The French colonial reinvention of the danseuses cambodgiennes
2.1. From Louis Delaporte 1880 to the National Colonial Exhibition of 1906 in
Marseille
Louis Delaporte – French captain, draughtsman and participant of the French
Mekong Expedition of 1866–1868 – presented the twelfth-century sandstone temple
of Angkor Wat in his 1880 book entitled Voyage au Cambodge: L’architecture
Khmer. Two aspects of his drawings were remarkable: ﬁrstly, although the call for
the reclamation and restoration of the decayed ninth-to-thirteenth-century temples of
the Angkor region (until 1907 on Siamese territory!) was an essential part of the
French colonial rhetoric in Indochina at this time, Delaporte depicted Angkor Wat
in a picture-perfect condition (Delaporte 1880, 206–207) (Figure 1). Secondly, his
drawing did not correspond to the French narrative of Angkor as the abandoned site
of a vanished civilisation; on the contrary, he placed a row of four dancing and
bare-breasted women with stylised skirts, necklaces and crown-like headgear on the
temple’s central causeway as a perfect stage. He named them ‘tévadas’ or ‘celestial
nymphs’, as they were ‘sculptured on the walls of Angkor-Vaht’ to represent the
‘living female beauties themselves’ (Delaporte 1880, 344–346). Delaporte’s ideal
reconstitution of the temple as a stage setting and background for a re-imagined
historical dance performance remained a powerful pictorial combination for the
decades to come. During his second mission to Indochina (1873–1874), Delaporte
collected original sculptures and made moulds of selected bas-reliefs of
the
Angkorian temples and shipped them back to France. His collection was ﬁnally
opened in the mid-1880s as the musée Indo-chinois in the Parisian Trocadero
just opposite Viollet-le-Duc’s musée de Sculpture comparée containing
palace,
plaster casts of mainly Gothic French architectural sculpture. At
the

this point,

Figure 1. Angkor-Vaht (Vue restituée), as depicted in Louis Delaporte’s 1880 publication
Voyage au Cambodge (Delaporte 1880, 206–207).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

705

celestial maidens of Angkor Wat had been ‘translated’ through the medium of
plaster casts to France, but were, for the moment, only depicted on these thin
replicated facade elements, which were, in the following decades, reassembled to
create fantastic temple pavilions in Universal and Colonial Exhibitions in Paris and
Marseille (Falser 2011).

it was right next

to the palais d’Angkor that

The 1889 Universal Exhibition in Paris staged the ﬁrst free-standing Angkor
pavilion in its French colonial section, but Khmer dance performances were not
yet carried out. In these early European exhibitions, ‘imaginative representations
of the exotic ‘East’ gave little heed to cultural speciﬁcities’ (Cohen 2010, 4), as
long as a random combination of architectural stereotypes and ‘traditional’ dance
elements could form a compelling amalgam for the Occidental voyeuristic gaze.
Thus,
the kampong Javanais (a
‘traditional’ Javanese village) was installed to stage cultural performances from
colonial Southeast Asia. A remake from the 1883 Colonial Exhibition at Amster-
dam, the scenario was executed as a private enterprise by Dutch planters from
Java to promote their products. Additionally, the sacred danseuses Javanaises, in
reality ‘prostitute dancers from the princely courts of Java’ (Chazal 2002, 114),
presented a hybrid cultural performance imitating ‘traditional’ court dance ele-
ments together with a gamelan orchestra provided by the plantation owners. Vis-
iting along with other prominent guests, such as the sculptor Auguste Rodin and
the painter Paul Gauguin not only satisﬁed his
the composer Claude Debussy,
Oriental sexual fantasies with a member of the show, but also reportedly con-
fused Javanese art with the Khmer art of
the neighbouring pavilion (Chazal
2002, 131; Cohen 2010, 17; compare Bloembergen 2006, 106–163). Ironically,
the French press itself celebrated the Javanese dancers’ ‘splendid costumes as
almost identical reproductions from the bas-reliefs of the Khmer ruins’ (Lombard
1992, 122). How the architectural and performative elements from an imagined
colonial Far East became exchangeable and even combinable in European specta-
cles was shown by the indoor
the Tour-du-Monde during the
1900 Universal Exhibition in Paris, where the painted architectural panorama of
Angkor Wat was enhanced (re-enacted) with living Javanese dance performers
(Décordet-Ahiha 2004, 39) (Figure 2).

installation of

With ‘authentic’ actors from the colonies in front of their reconstituted village
huts or temples, these performative displays (a) facilitated the European voyeuristic
gaze on the exotic ‘Other’ with its pre-modern and static tradition, or better timeless
‘ethnographic present’ (Fabian 2002, 80), and (b) exhibited the primitive, underde-
veloped status of the colonies to self-justify the exhibiting imperial nation’s suppos-
edly altruistic project of ‘cultural uplifting’ around the planet (Blanchard 2011). In
the case of Angkor, the 1906 National Colonial Exhibition at Marseille marked a
decisive turning point. Two years previously,
the Francophile Sisowath had
followed the former Cambodian King Norodom on the throne in Phnom Penh and
was strongly backed by the French colonial authorities. In 1906, he was invited to
France with the highest diplomatic honours, but with no real political power.
Encouraging the French population’s curiosity about exotic French colonial
Indochina, the king was also made the ofﬁcial head of an ‘authentic’ royal ballet
troupe for the Marseille Exhibition. In reality, this ballet group was the creation of
the French representative in Phom Penh, George Bois, and composed of mostly
private dancers and only a few ‘real’ court dancers (Cravath 2007, 125, referring to
Bois 1913). The ‘Royal Ballet troupe’ enjoyed great success and was invited to

706

M.S. Falser

Figure 2.
Inside the Tour-du-Monde panorama of the 1900 Universal Exhibition in Paris.
The French explication reads (in English translation): ‘Le Tour du Monde – La pagode
d’Angkor et les danseuses Javanaises. Land of dreams that the poets and musicians sang
about... The fabulous ruins of Angkor, of unknown profoundness, hide under their collapsed
stones inestimable treasures. And in front of these vestiges of the Khmer empire,
the
Javanese female dancers, very modern, the sisters perhaps or the daughters of these which
already had such a success in 1889.’ (Baschet 1900: plate 166; photographer Neurdein frères
et Maurice Baschet).

their eternal

[the Khmer]

traditions, of

Paris to perform during Sisowath’s visit to the French president. Its reputation as an
‘icon of
the
immutability of the Cambodian culture’ (Vilain 2006, 29) was only established at
this very moment with Rodin executing about 150 drawings and paintings of the
graceful gestures of the Khmer ballet. As cited by Bois in 1913, Rodin, in 1906,
formulated what would become – from the time of French colonial politics to UNE-
SCO’s intangible heritage listings today (see below) – an essentialist cultural stereo-
type of the Khmer Ballet,
like the Orientalists Loti and Groslier in 1913 (see
quotations):

religious rites and of

There are stones which are so ancient
that one cannot describe them with the
terms of historic epochs. And looking at these stones, one thinks about thousands
of years […] These Cambodian female dancers gave us all that real antiquity can
contain: their own antiquity which equals ours. In three days we experienced three
is impossible to see human nature in a higher state of perfec-
thousand years. It
tion. (Auguste Rodin about
the danseuses Cambodgiennes in 1906, cited in Bois
1913, 275).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

707

Figure 3. Left (a): cover page of Le Petit Journal of 24 June 1906, entitled À l’Exposition
Coloniale de Marseille. La ‘Danse des Nymphes dans la forêt’, exécutée par les danseuses
du roi Sisowath. Right (b): illustration of Dieuleﬁls’ 1909 trilingual publication Indo-China
picturesque and monumental. Ruins of Angkor with a water colour by Lorant-Heilbronn
entitled Fete given at Angkor-Vat by H.M. Sisowath King of Cambodge (Dieuleﬁls 1909:
plate 2).

This version of the ‘Royal Khmer dance’ already contained many of the charac-
it was performed for a speciﬁc occasion
teristics of a ‘cultural performance’:
with a structured programme and it used actors to satisfy the gaze of a deﬁned
audience (Diamond 2005, 390; Fischer-Lichte 2003, 11–37). Press releases like
the one in the Petit Journal de Marseille from 24 June 1906 (Figure 3(a))
described the Khmer ballet performances in Paris and Marseille as ‘animated
bas-reliefs of the temples of Angkor’ (cited in Vilain 2006, 25, compare Beau
1906, 177), accompanied by illuminated fountains and electrical colour projec-
travel of this topos of Angkor’s built and
tions. At
performed antiquity was in full swing. The Marseille performances combined the
scenario with the royal ballet dancers in ‘traditional costumes’ performing origi-
nal gestures to authentic music, with the Khmer King as the ballet’s patron and
guarantor of an unbroken tradition stretching back to Khmer antiquity, Angkor
Wat
the public and representa-
tives of the ruling French authorities were very quickly re-translated back to the
original spot (Figure 3(b)).

temple architecture as a stage and background;

the transcultural

this time,

708

M.S. Falser

2.2. George Groslier and the rebirth of the Khmer dance from the bas-reliefs of
Angkor Wat

They are in agony, the Khmer dancers! […] They’re dying! The charming traditions
and poetry of yesteryear are dying! Our steamships and automobiles generate a smoke
in which champa ﬂowers wither. Soon, mysterious actresses, we will no longer see
you gather the ancient poems and lost beauties ﬂoating thick in the air of festival
nights. […] What will artists and poets do tomorrow in this chosen land? They will
be told that, only yesterday, there still remained one hundred twenty Vestals in whom
the entire past and all its rituals were preserved; that these Vestals were sometimes
seen emerging from their mystery and dancing slowly in splendid costumes with
graceful harmony, under streaming lights […] but that now [all this] is gone! (George
Groslier: Danseuses cambodgiennes anciennes et modernes (1913, 120, translated in
Davis 2010, 107)

the temples of Angkor became part of

In 1907,
the French protectorate of
Cambodia and the primary cultural concern of the French mission civilisatrice in
Indochina. The earlier romanticised imaginings of Angkor were now replaced
with scientiﬁc research in situ. More importantly, the new political ‘owners’ of
Angkor wished to reconnect the whole contemporary canon of Cambodian cul-
ture to ancient Angkor. This procedure, intended to recreate the present within a
pure Angkorian past tradition without foreign inﬂuences, was a delicate task. In
reality, Angkor had been captured by the Siamese in the ﬁfteenth century, and
royal court dance – like some of the Cambodian kings themselves – only sur-
vived until the nineteenth century at the Siamese court in Bangkok, the cultural
inﬂuences of which were still considerable around 1900. Now, the entire system
of art education in Cambodia was systematically grouped around the French
rescuing the traditional Cambodian art scene from – a typically
intention of
topos – ‘degeneration’. The central ﬁgure was George Groslier (1887–
colonial
the ﬁrst French citizen born in Cambodia, a Parisian École des Beaux-
1945),
Arts graduate, and gifted artist and writer. Between the establishment of
the
École royale des arts décoratifs in 1907 and its reformulation as École des arts
cambodgiens in Phnom Penh (with Groslier as its ﬁrst director), he had also
studied the decorative reliefs of Angkor. Observing a contemporary crisis of reli-
gious beliefs,
traditional morals, and performing arts (citation above), his 1913
book Danseuses cambodgiennes anciennes et modernes was the ﬁrst modern in-
depth study about the royal court dancers. In his sketches, Groslier let the ballet
dancers emerge – or be reborn in their purest reincarnation – from the celestial
maidens on the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat (Figure 4). However, from an icono-
graphical standpoint, the latter had never been conceived as earthly dancers per
se, but as celestial guardian ﬁgures for the entertainment of a dead king after
apotheosis, serving to mediate between him and the heavenly skies. Concluding
his study, Groslier re-imagined a ‘spectacle grandiose’ of an ancient procession
at Angkor Wat – altogether a virtual re-enactment of the past
including back
translated elements of contemporary dance performance. This hybrid reconstruc-
tion would serve as a perfect script for the son-et-lumière shows performed at
the Exhibitions in France, the spectacles at Angkor Wat during Cambodia’s inde-
pendence, and, ﬁnally, for the mythic re-enactments for a cultural heritage indus-
try on site after 1990:

International Journal of Heritage Studies

709

Figure 4. A series of sketches on the revived bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat by George
Groslier in his 1913 publication Danseuses Cambodgiennes anciennes et modernes (Groslier
1913: 135, 128, 161, 133).

the dying sun,

lies clearly before me! […] mysterious harmonies,
Now the extraordinary ritual
dripping down the stones like the drops of some sonorous rain, fade before a
procession that has suddenly appeared. Sixteen devadasi advance. The crowd is
like green rice bending in the wind. […] What a spectacle! The huge,
prostrate,
pale sky of Cambodia,
the
the prostrate crowd. […] Royal elephants, each enclosed in its golden car-
King,
apace. Then, atop the sculpted mountain, before the shadow of
the sanctuary
resplendent
where all powers dwell suspended,
[…]
like stars in the night! Yes,
Absolute Beauty stands complete before me. […] Of this absolute Beauty she is
the sole pure expression […] Alone, she returns from the past
to offer us her
ﬂower, while all else about her crumbles.
in Davis
2010, 154–159)

the sixteen symbolic devadasi,

(Groslier 1913, 172–173,

the extraordinary ritual.

I see it quite well,

the sacred academy,

the nine towers,

Groslier even translated the arm gestures of the actual dance back into the ancient
stone surface of the Angkor temples (compare UNESCO’s video on the listed
‘Royal Ballet of Cambodia’ later in this paper):

Today’s […] giant poses resemble those of the characters set in the sandstone of Ang-
kor. There is a direct line of descent, and absolute relationship between the parts and
the whole. In fact, the line of descent is so direct that if lokhon [dance] in the modern
aesthetic were suddenly to turn to stone, we could precisely superimpose their gestures
carved in the past. (Groslier 1913, in Davis 2010, 153)

Groslier established a small photo studio in the musée Albert Sarraut (today the
National Museum) in Phnom Penh to study the dance gestures through frag-
mented photographic series. Years later, Sappho Marchal,
the daughter of the
General Angkor Conservator Henri Marchal, published a detailed study on the
costumes and hairstyles of the ‘1700 devatas’ of the Angkor Wat temple (Mar-
chal 1927, 2). Both Groslier’s and Marchal’s publications would serve as a per-
fect catalogue and pattern book to re-Khmerise and purify the Royal Ballet à la
angkorienne (Figure 5). However, when King Sisowath died in 1927, private
dance troupes were already performing in front of the Angkorian temples for the
fast growing tourist industry.

710

M.S. Falser

Figure 5. A study on the costumes of the Cambodian dancers in Sappho Marchal’s 1927
publication Costumes et parures khmèrs d’après les Devatâ d’Angkor-Vat (Marchal 1927:
plate XL).

2.3. Reconstitutions of Angkor Wat and the Royal Ballet in Marseille 1922,
Paris 1931 and on the ‘real’ spot
In 1908, the position of a Conservator General was established to supervise the
installation of the so-called Archaeological Park of Angkor (Falser 2013) under the
colonial tutelage of the newly founded École française d’Extrême-Orient. Along
with Groslier’s studies of Cambodia’s applied and performing arts, the architectural
and stylistic knowledge of the Angkor temples was increasing exponentially, and
the ephemeral Angkor Wat pavilions for the Colonial Exhibitions in Marseille 1922
and Paris 1931 resembled more and more their ‘original’ source (Falser 2011). Now
stereotyped as ‘direct descendants of the Apsaras on the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat’
(Artaud 1923, 207), the dancers’ magic night performances now took place in front

International Journal of Heritage Studies

711

Figure 6. L’apothéose lumineuse du temple d’Angkor le soir, as depicted in the special
issue of L’Illustration in 1931 on the Exposition Coloniale Internationale de Paris 1931
(L’Illustration 22 August 1931, special issue: Exposition Coloniale Internationale de Paris
1931, n.p.).

of the giant Angkor Wat replica and they were, after their performance at the Paris
Opera, praised again for their ‘authenticity, purity and timelessness’ (de Miomandre
1923, 213). Nine years later, the Parisian Colonial Exhibition of 1931 topped all
earlier undertakings of exotic representations in scale, variety, and performance. The
‘illuminated apotheosis of Angkor [Wat]’ (de Beauplan 1931) reached the 1:1-scale
of its Cambodian source and the theatrical effect of its central causeway was
enlarged into a cruciform square for cultural performances (Figure 6).

In the meantime, the French authorities in Phnom Penh had tried in vain to keep
complete control over the ‘real’ Royal Ballet in order to save it from ‘decadence’ and
‘agony’ (Groslier 1918). The great success of dance performances in Marseille in
1906 and 1922 had proved their political signiﬁcance, tensions concerning their
proper use broke out and an ofﬁcial invitation for the 1931 Paris Exhibition was
turned down by the new Cambodian king, Monivong. The French then chose Say
Sangvann, the wife of a member of the royal family who had already organised
performances for the Résident Superieur in Phnom Penh, for a dance troupe. As a sub-
stitute of the real dance group, the one in Paris in 1931 was a private enterprise
equipped with costumes and masks from Groslier’s art school and subsidised by
the French authorities (Cambodian Information Agency 1963, 19, Edwards 2007,
171–173). With this essential
the border between ‘authentic’ cultural
performance and commercialised folklore was irreversibly crossed, even though the
show was still sold as ‘original’ Khmer and ‘of the greatest purity even from the
viewpoint of Siamese connoisseurs’ (Thiounn 1930, 31, 58). As a staged heritage

shift,

712

M.S. Falser

commodity, the Cambodian ballet in front of the Angkor Wat pavilion was now inter-
changeable with the Balinese troupe in front of the Dutch Indies pavilion or the ‘fetish
dancers’ from French Africa in front of faked adobe architecture (Cadilhac 1931).

These conﬁgurations in the French métropole had,

transcultural
viewpoint, considerable consequences for the real site back in Cambodia:
the
aesthetics of folkloric dance spectacles in torch-lit or electric ﬂoodlight atmosphere
in front of mysterious temple skylines in France were re-imported back to the real
site (Cravath 2007, 143). Say Sangvann’s private troupe had gained ‘the monopoly
to perform the dance for tourists at Angkor Vat’ (Sasagawa 2005, 429) and her
dancers now posed in gestures and costumes even more perfect than the depictions
on the ancient bas-reliefs behind them.

from our

3. A new identity rooted in antiquity: re-enacting Angkor and the invention
of the Apsara dance during Cambodian independence
The ﬁght for the monopoly over the ‘authentic’ Khmer ballet continued into the early
1940s. Princess Kossamak, the mother of the young Norodom Sihanouk, who had
become king in 1941, played a crucial role. She took advantage of (a) the detailed
studies on the Khmer ballet by Groslier and Marchal, who had re-established its direct
and ‘puriﬁed’ link to the imagined origins of the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat; and (b)
the rising international popularity of Cambodia’s glorious built and performed past in
the mass spectacles in France. Feeding the movement of an ‘anti-colonial cultural
nationalism’, she initiated a major reconﬁguration of the royal dance performance,
ironically based on French colonial ideas. She changed the choreography to form a
group-precision dance, added entertaining effects and shortened the previous day-long
private royal dance ritual into a two-hour programme. Outwardly, the result was
meant to underline the new cultural self-conﬁdence of the Khmer nation on the
occasion of international state visits, and inwardly to symbolically demonstrate the
authority of the new king who was rooted in a continued Angkorian antiquity back to
his direct ancient royal ancestors (Cravath 2007, 153–167). With this shift, the status
of the Khmer dance changed again, now from its folkloristic effect at French exhibi-
tions to a deeper political meaning back in Cambodia. With its (ostensibly) apolitical
appearance beyond a speciﬁc time, space and direction, the royal dance with its ritual
components was in fact the perfect performative medium with which to minimalise
tensions or bridge the liminal spaces that opened up in Cambodia’s violent ‘transition
from a colonial to a postcolonial state ﬁguration’ (after Bachmann-Medick 2009,
113–130, compare Turner 1982, 28–94). After Cambodia’s independence in 1953,
Kossamak succeeded in ‘re-Khmerising’ and politicising the royal dance with a new
central element: she invented the so-called Apsara Dance or roban Apsara which
perfectly served the new Khmer national ideology. In the best fulﬁlment of Groslier’s
1913 study, the whole choreography itself staged ﬁve apsaras which materialised out
of the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat, only to perform a dance of salutation before
disappearing again into the stone surface (Heywood 2008, 76). In order to densify the
ideological dimension of a supposedly pure continuity from the ancestors of Angkor
up to the current ruling political power, Kossamak made the Apsara dance the
showpiece for Buppha Devi, the prima ballerina of the Royal Ballet and daughter of
King Sihanouk (Figure 7). During Cambodian independence, the ‘Apsara dance’ with
Buppha Devi of the newly named Royal Corps de Ballet became the entertaining
centre piece of all diplomatic visits to Cambodia, and during Sihanouk’s own interna-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

713

Figure 7. Left (a): a photograph in Cambodge Aujourd’hui 1962 of Bopha Devi as Apsara
dancer in front of the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat, entitled ‘Women in Angkorian history -
Past and present: a 12th century bas-relief and Princess Bopha Devi’
(Cambodge
Aujourd’hui, July-August 1962, 46). Right (b): a dance performance of the revived Royal
Khmer Ballet with a painted architectural background as depicted in Thiounn’s 1956
reprinted publication Danses cambodgiennes of 1930 (Thiounn 1930, reprint in 1956, n.p.).

tional state visits abroad. In the medium of cultural performance, cultural nationalism
was poured into Sihanouk’s strategy of ‘cultural diplomacy’, most importantly with
his visit to France in 1964, where the dance was performed (one more time after
1922) in the Paris Opera (Cambodian Information Agency 1963). Now, the peaceful
‘Khmerness’ full of unbroken tradition and cultural purity could be staged all around
the world using a movable stage set quoting Angkorian architecture. In this context,
Khmer and Javanese dance performances met each other once again after their career
during Dutch and French colonialism in Southeast Asia: Indonesia’s ﬁrst president
Sukarno fused Javanese and Balinese dance elements into one coherent performance
as a cultural instrument of the ‘peaceful’ internationalisation of his country during the
ﬁrst decades of Cold War politics (Cohen 2010, 214–219). He himself visited Cambo-
dia in 1962 and reportedly fell in love with Sihanouk’s daughter during her dance
with the Royal Khmer Ballet.

The French invention of an ephemeral Angkor pavilion also came back to
the New Emerging Forces were
modern Cambodia when the second Games of
organised in Phnom Penh’s new Olympic Stadium in 1966 and portable ‘Bayon
towers’ formed a part of the opening ceremony. As an additional component to the
political parcours by Phnom Penh’s new and highly symbolic city planning (includ-
ing the Angkor-styled Independence Memorial), important diplomatic state visits to
non-aligned Cambodia were now combined with dance performances at the real site
of Angkor Wat with ﬁreworks above the illuminated temple – just like those above
the temple’s replica in Paris about 30 years earlier.

When General Charles de Gaulle, President of the French Fifth Republic, was
brought to Angkor Wat for a son-et-lumière show, the Khmer Ballet was turned
from a cultural performance into historical
re-enactment. A unique blend of
‘collapsing temporalities’ and the recreation of a ‘historical continuity, exploited for
ideological ends’ (Agnew 2007, 309) took place on 1 September 1966: the king of
a postcolonial nation let the pre-colonial, ‘authentic past’ of his direct ancestors at

714

M.S. Falser

Figure 8. A double page on the visit of Charles de Gaulle to Cambodia in 1966 with a
son-et-lumière show at Angkor Wat, as depicted in Norodom Sihanouk’s publication Photo-
Souvenirs du Cambodge in volume 7 (Le prestige au plan international du Cambodge)
(Sangkum Reastr Niyum 1969, 167–168).

the original, ‘credible setting’ (an important feature of re-enactments, Gapps 2009,
403) be theatrically re-enacted in front of the head of the former colonial power
(Figure 8). In a ‘reconstitution historique grandiose’ (Sangkum 1969, 167, compare
Groslier 1913), 900 laymen and 600 monks in historical and religious costumes par-
ticipated in the re-enactment of a historic royal coronation ceremony and procession
of an Angkorian king in which the actual children of the real King Sihanouk,
Prince Naradipo and Princess Botum Popha, staged the historic royal couple in
order to ‘narrow the mimetic gap’ (Agnew 2004, 332) between fact and ﬁction; the
gigantic illumination of Angkor Wat had been designed by Sihanouk’s gifted state
architect Vann Molyvann.2 Even though, in 1969, he would explicitly correct his
own father’s invention of the ‘dancing maidens emerging from the bas-reliefs of
Angkor Wat’3, the acting General Angkor Conservator, Bernard-Philippe Groslier
(the son of George Groslier!), wrote the text The voices of one night in Angkor for
this retro-travel into Angkor’s re-staged past (Groslier 1966). As the ‘most beautiful
and perfect temple of Asia’ and the ‘summit of the ﬁrst thousand years of glory’,
Groslier aligned Angkor Wat with the Egyptian pyramids, Rome, and Byzantium.
He announced the dancers as a ‘thousand stone ﬁgures which dreamlike came to
life that early night as shadows out of our time, [as] celestial dancers that descended
to earth’ and, ﬁnally, the king himself as divine reincarnation. Bringing his audience
back to present times, Groslier described the ‘procession that vanished in the dark
like a sign of the dying time’ and was followed by Buddhist ‘holy monks’. His text
concluded – highly relevant for the political aspect of re-enactments in the form of
‘pageantry’ – with a direct and ‘afﬁrmative address’ to the French president and the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

715

Cambodian king (Lamb 2008, 243): he spoke of the actual afﬁnities of both nations
to each other as regards the temple of Angkor Wat as an ‘object of joint, caring
interest’. Here, King Sihanouk used this staging of the Khmer emergence myth to
subliminally communicate a new political self-conﬁdence to his former colonial
master (Sangkum 1969; Sihanouk 1981, 319–320).

Ironically, this event was repeated two years later for a political guest at the
other end of the ideological spectrum. When Josip Broz Tito, President of the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, visited his non-aligned brother country, a
reduced de Gaulle version was performed on 19 January 1968. Grolier’s text from
1966 was modiﬁed to have socialist undertones. Now, the Romans did not conquer
the Gauls, but ‘Trajan and Hadrian brought the pax romana to the Dacians’, and
both the Cambodian and the Yugoslav nations were now ‘united in a common
history of battles’ against imperial politics (Sihanouk 1968, 16, 20). However, this
was just a minor detail in a much larger political programme in the name of reborn
Khmer antiquity. King Sihanouk was a brilliant politician in staging himself as the
‘quasi re-incarnation’ of the glorious King Jayavarman VII (Garry 1964), and he
re-enacted himself in processions à la angkorienne and circulated his enormous
production of song, poem, and ﬁlm productions, including Apsara (1965) or The
little Prince (1967), where his own son played himself in reference to the ancient
king Jayavarman.

4. The globalised rebirth of Cambodia and the commodiﬁcation of Angkor
and the Apsara dance
In 1970, Cambodia descended into civil war when Sihanouk’s former minister of
defence, Lon Nol, came to power. Although backed by the United States, he was
himself overthrown by the Maoist terror regime of the Khmer Rouge, which ruled
between 1975 and 1979 and committed a horrifying auto-genocide in order to re-
install a pre-industrial, rural state, meant to be (we remember George Groslier) ‘puri-
ﬁed’ of Western inﬂuences. The Khmer Rouge refashioned a female dance group
with the typical revolutionary dresses, and Angkor was still present in the propaganda
material (Gosh 1998, 1–53; Shapiro-Phim 2002). On the Western side of the Thai-
Cambodian border, the refugee camp Khao I Dang became the second largest city in
Thailand, housing some 130,000 Cambodians. In 1980, the ﬁrst Khmer dance perfor-
mances were carried out there by dancers who later emigrated to the USA to form a
new traditional dance troupe. Here, Khmer and Javanese dance troupes, the ﬁrst
formed by refugees and exiles and the second sponsored by the Indonesian Suharto
government, might have met for a third time in their modern history.

The Cambodian scene changed dramatically with the end of the Cold War
around 1989, and when ﬁnal national peace was within reach after the Paris Agree-
ment of 1991. The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
supervised free elections in 1993 to re-install a constitutional monarchy. What had
been de-contextualised, fragmented, reassembled and altogether re-invented during
French colonial times, and then essentialised during cultural nationalism and diplo-
macy in Cambodia’s Sihanouk-led era of independence, was now, with a total of
twenty years without any creative development, incorporated into the new identity
construction of the reborn Cambodian nation state: the representational modes of
the Angkorian temple site and the Apsara Dance were back on the spot. They were,
quasi overnight, ‘re-colonised’ by a globalised heritage machinery, now including

716

M.S. Falser

it

newly-found national agencies of heritage protection led by returning Khmer elites,
and by government-encouraged mass tourism.

Following the partly justiﬁable, however neo-colonial narrative of the ‘imminent
danger of the total loss of Cambodia’s tangible and intangible culture’ – but this
impact of international expertise,
time with an unforeseen speed and the direct
ﬁnancial support and ad hoc-infrastructure (some call
‘NGOisation’) – the
UNESCO stepped onto the stage. From 1989, with a series of international work-
shops and conferences, agreements and declarations, and with the regional (old and
new) political key players, France and Japan, together with many other countries,
from the USA to Germany, Italy to China and Indonesia, UNESCO helped to place
the Angkor Archaeological Park in 1992 on the World Heritage List (of Danger).
With a draught management plan for the protected zone which correlated roughly
with the borders of the French colonial Parc archéologique d’Angkor of 1925/1930,
‘adequate protective legislation, a national protection agency, permanent boundaries
and buffer zones and a international coordination’ were, at this point, still a desider-
atum (UNESCO 1992); these were only established with the national protection
agency APSARA years later (Ang et al. 1996). Under the slogan ‘Save Angkor’, the
newly founded Bulletin of UNESCO’s Phnom Penh representation reported on
‘national and international steps to protect the ancient city of the Khmer kings, an
authentic symbol for the Cambodian people, from the corrosive ﬁngers of time, the
incursions of nature and the destruction by man’ (UNESCO Cambodia 1992, 2).

A decade later, after the Angkor temples, the Royal Ballet of Cambodia (unlike
the Angkor temples, Cambodia’s performing arts had indeed suffered near-extinc-
tion during and after the Khmer Rouge), too, had become another target of the
global (neo-colonial) ‘salvage paradigm, reﬂecting the desire to rescue something
‘authentic’ [and pure] out of destructive historical changes’ (Clifford 1989, 73).
UNESCO‘s 2002 publication Rehabilitation of Cambodian performing arts spoke
the ‘revival of previously lost forms of performing arts’ and judged the
about
Roban dance (invented by Kossamak) to be deeply rooted in antiquity, since
‘Angkor’s temple walls [were] literally saturated with dancing images, notably the
heavenly nymphs of Apsaras’ (UNESCO 2002, 2, 3). An Inventory of intangible
cultural heritage of Cambodia based its research on Cambodia’s performing arts on
the new global heritage norms and standards (Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts
2004). After UNESCO’s ‘Safeguarding project’ from 2005 to 2008, the Royal Ballet
of Cambodia was inscribed in 2008 on UNESCO’s List of the Intangible Cultural
Heritage of Humanity based on its Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible
Cultural Heritage of 2003 (UNESCO Convention 2003). To this day, UNESCO’s
homepage for the Intangible Heritage List reconnects the Royal Ballet of Cambodia
‘with the Khmer court for over one thousand years’. UNESCO’s online video on
this inscribed property is – like George Groslier’s sketches (Figure 4) – a neo-colo-
nial invention of tradition in the best Hobsbawmian sense: as a kind of virtual
re-enactment for the global internet user, a ‘real’ apsara rises from a ﬁlmed bas-
relief of Angkor Wat, and starts to dance in front of the screen of the spectator
while a male voice-over explains the unbroken and unchanged link from antiquity
to the present (UNESCO 2008) (Figure 9).

Despite sincere intentions of sustainable protection, Cambodia’s tangible heritage
(the temples of Angkor) suffers from touristic over-exploitation (Hauser-Schäublin
2011; Winter 2007). Its intangible heritage (the performing arts, including the Royal
Khmer Ballet) is frozen in time by folkorisation. The combination of faked apsaras

International Journal of Heritage Studies

717

Figure 9. Screen shot of UNESCO’s homepage of the List of
Heritage of Humanity, featuring The Royal Ballet of Cambodia (UNESCO 2008).

the Intangible Cultural

re-enacting in front of Angkor Wat has become a fossilised and static, but lucrative
stereotype of Khmer culture, whereas the ‘real’ ballet’s conditions of training and
instruction were and are consequently constricted (Burridge and Frumberg 2010;
Diamond 2005; Shapiro-Phim and Thompson 2001; Turnbull 2006). Strongly sup-
ported by the ex-colonial (French and Japanese) and global protection community,
the ruling Khmer elites in their cultural ministries under president Sun Sen (an old
Khmer Rouge member), and the national protection agency of Angkor APSARA,
the heritage package of Angkor as a historic temple site, a place of cultural perfor-
mances and re-enactment of Angkor’s past, and of cultural mass tourism as the
most proﬁtable national
income, has become a great source of income for the
Cambodian post-conﬂict nation (Winter 2007). Random examples underline these
global, national and local alliances: Les nuits d’Angkor Vat (also the title of the
Sihanouk-de Gaulle re-enactment in 1966) staged as ‘illumination events’ in situ in
December 2002, were organised by the French Cultural Centre with the support of
Cambodia’s Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, and presented Khmer and French
dance performances (Figure 10(a)). The Angkor Wat Show ‘took place’ in 2008/
2009. According to its webpage, the re-enacted French discoverer of Angkor, Henri
Mouhot, was ‘on his dreamlike journey through Khmer legends’ and followed by
an apsara from the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat. The show was organised by Siem
Reap’s Bayon CM Organised Co Ltd, a joint venture with Bayon TV and ‘put
together with the cooperation of the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of
Culture and Fine Arts […] All historic and cultural details of the show, the script
and choreography were developed and supervised by Proeung Chhieng, vice rector
and dean of the Faculty of Choreographic Arts, at Phnom Penh’s Royal University
of Fine Arts’ (Angkor Wat Show 2008) (Figure 10(b)). The ASEAN Congress of
2009 chose the same iconography for their publication (Figure 10(c)) and the

718

M.S. Falser

Figure 10 (a–c). Collected ﬂyers on Angkor Wat shows and publications between 2002
and 2009 (Personal Archive Michael Falser).

Cambodian Pavilion at the Shanghai Universal Exhibition 2010 presented ‘dancing
Apsaras’ in front of Angkorian temples – just as Louis Delaporte had imagined it
almost 150 years earlier and UNESCO propagates it on its homepage today.

5. Three conclusions, or: the last meeting of the Javanese and Khmer dancers
Firstly, our case study has demonstrated that cultural heritage is not a god-given
fact or natural property of modern nation states and on World Heritage lists, but a
contested construction, full of constantly reloaded ideological conﬂicts and shifting
cultural interests in changing political regimes. Understanding cultural heritage in
its manifold manifestations thus implies the dissection of the concrete, ever-chang-
ing – individual, institutional, collective – agency behind it. Something called the
‘Royal Khmer Ballet’
is not a static cultural entity directly from Angkorian
antiquity, but a dynamic modern hybrid of different interpretations, re-inventions,
and reactivations, and therefore a constant de- and re-evaluation of ancient pasts for
is an ongoing ‘performance of
contemporary purposes. Cultural heritage itself
meaning making‘ (Smith and Akagawa 2009, 4): the Khmer dancers in Delaporte’s
drawing of 1880 were not the ones at the Marseille Colonial Exhibition of 1906;
the Khmer ballet surviving at the Bangkok or Phnom Penh royal courts until the
the one reinvented in George Groslier’s purifying
nineteenth century was not
sketches from Angkor Wat’s bas-reliefs in 1913; and Sihanouk’s post-colonial diplo-
matic Royal Corps de Ballet dancing in the son-et-lumière show at Angkor Wat or
the Paris Opera in the 1960s was not what is performed today in Phnom Penh’s
Royal Palace, featured for bus-loads of international tourists in Siem Reap’s luxury
hotels near Angkor, or, ﬁnally, propagated on UNESCO’s exclusive World Heritage
these bits and pieces participate in this speciﬁc
List homepage. However, all
complex heritage construction called ‘Royal Khmer Ballet’.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

719

Secondly, as our case study was able to show, an adequate reading of today’s
complex – synchronically locally, regionally, nationally and globally entangled –
cultural heritage constructions necessitates a new methodological approach. The
so-called ‘Area Studies’, such as Asian or Southeast Asian, or in our case Khmer
Studies, have themselves contributed largely to the hermetic and essentialist concep-
tualisation of cultural products within supposedly well-deﬁned political and
geographical borders, national centres and cultural peripheries. On the contrary, we
have tried to sketch the transcultural trajectories which the so-called ‘Khmer Ballet’
has travelled with changing cultural brokers (e.g. George Groslier or Norodom
Sihanouk), regimes (French colonialism, Cambodia’s independence and globalisa-
tion), and institutions (e.g. Groslier’s colonial art school, UNESCO), and in different
cultural and political spaces between Europe and Asia, in our case between France
and Cambodia, or Paris-Marseille and Angkor-Phnom Penh. The transcultural
concept of cultural heritage works against nationalist narratives and stereotypes, and
deconstructs – within the emerging discipline of Global Art History – essentialist
terms such as ‘the pure, original, traditional, and authentic’ in heritage constructions
(Falser and Juneja 2013).

Thirdly, our case study has pinpointed the enormous risks and dangers in
UNESCO’s new cultural branding strategy called ‘intangible heritage’, which still
borrows much from its original concept of 1989, to ‘safeguard traditional culture
and folklore’. After 1989, when the Cold War blocks collapsed, new emerging
nation states such as Cambodia re-established their new identity construction by
re-imagining ancient cultural glory and imperial power, by reviving post-colonial
nationalism, but also by overwriting recent collective traumata of violent decoloni-
sation (Chau-Pech Ollier and Winter 2006, 1–19). With its elitist listing strategy,
UNESCO had, instead of ‘supporting the continuity of knowledge and skill’ and
‘the conditions’ per se for a creative further development of the Khmer Ballet, only
given the ‘national government a tool to proclaim the richness of their cultural heri-
tage’ and give, as our case has shown, ‘the endangered or outmoded a second life
as an exhibition of itself’ (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 2004, 56, 61). At this moment, the
Javanese and Khmer dancers meet for a fourth and maybe last time: just as the
‘staged authenticity’ (MacCannell 1973) of a Khmer Ballet à la Angkorienne frozen
in time helps to block the necessary artistic-performative expression of the recent
post-colonial trauma of the Khmer Rouge genocide, the folkloric ‘Javanese dance
troupes’ as government-sponsored ‘cultural missions’ around the globe help to
‘erase’ the memory of post-colonial massacres in Indonesia (1965–1966). Or, as an
international ‘Javanese dance performer’ of the 1990s put it, and as a Khmer Ballet
dance might equally say:

I was reminded and forced to admit that my body functioned as an eraser, and at the
same time provided a reconﬁguration of a ‘nationalized body’ to enter the global
discursive space. This (re)formation of (new) identity, although presented through the
presence of the marked body on the global stage, is always sown as a celebration of
‘diversity’. Everyone’s ‘National Dress’, and my dance as well seem to commemorate
the presence of ‘differences’ while in actuality this celebration has already passed
through many layers of violence in the process of its replication […] Javanese court
dance dominates cultural mission presentations [meaning] the ‘Javanese replica’ […]
The replica dances a cultural form categorized as ‘third world’, but a third world with
‘high, royal arts’ or sacred, ancient origins that remains valuable to the people with
whom it originated (Larasati 2006, 167, quoted in Cohen 2010, 224)

720

M.S. Falser

Notes
1. This and all following English translations from French sources are by the author of this

paper.

3.

2. The author would like to thank Vann Molyvann and his wife Trudy for this information

provided during an interview in Phnom Penh, in March 2010.
‘The monuments themselves give only us only a little precious information on the
dance. Not that the female ﬁgures are rare on the Angkorian temples, but it does not
make sense to see in them only dancers. As protective deities, praying and following the
almighty and mysterious god who lives in the cella, they are here to surround him, to
serve him and to adore him, forever perpetuated in stone. At Angkor Wat, the god-serv-
ing enchantresses are multiplied ad inﬁnitum, however they do everything but dance
[italics MF]. On the bas-reliefs we can only ﬁnd at most two or three dancing poses’
(Groslier 1969, 91).

the Austrian UNESCO-Commission, he worked at

Notes on contributor
Michael Falser studied architecture and art history in Vienna and Paris. He wrote his
PhD-thesis on ‘The Political History of Historic Preservation in Germany’ at the Berlin
University of Technology. After practical experience as preservation architect in the USA
and as consultant at
the Institute of
Building Research and Conservation at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich
and at the Art History Department at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität in Munich. Since
2009, he is research fellow at
the Chair of Global Art History within the Cluster of
Excellence ‘Asia and Europe in a Global Context’ at the University of Heidelberg. His
research focuses on ‘heritage’ as a transcultural concept with the case study of Angkor Wat
in Cambodia
(http://www.asia-europe.uni-heidelberg.de/en/people/person/persdetail/falser.
html). Since November 2012 he is Research Fellow of the Gerda-Henkel-Foundation and
associated to the Centre Allemand d’Histoire de l’Art at Paris.

References
Agnew, V. 2004. “What is Re-enactment?” Criticism 46 (3): 327–339.
Agnew, V. 2007. “History’s Affective Turn: Historical Re-enactment and its Work in the

Present.” Rethinking History 11 (3): 299–312.

Ang, C., E. Prenowitz, and A. Thompson, eds. 1996. Angkor. A Manual

for the Past,

Present and Future. Phnom Penh: APSARA, UNESCO.

Angkor Wat Show. 2008. “The Legend of Angkor Wat – When History Comes to Life.”

Accessed June 15 2010. http://www.angkorwatshow.com/.

Arns, I. 2007. “Strategies of Re-enactment in Contemporary (Media) Art and Performance.”
In History Will Repeat Itself, edited by I. Arns and G. Horn, 37–63. Frankfurt/Main:
Revolver.

Artaud, A. 1923. Exposition National Coloniale de Marseille, Rapport Général. Marseille:

Imprimerie du Semaphore.

Bachmann-Medick, D. 2009. Cultural Turns. Neuorientierungen in den Kulturwissenschaf-

ten. 3rd ed. Reinbeck bei Hamburg: Rowohlt. (Performative turn: 104–143).

Baschet, R., ed. 1900. Le Panorama, 1900. Exposition Universelle. Paris: Baschet (photogra-

pher Neurdein frères et Maurice Baschet).

Beau, M. 1906. L’Indo-Chine à l’Exposition Coloniale de Marseille [Indochina at the Colo-

nial Exhibition of Marseille]. Marseille: Imprimerie Marseillaise.

Blanchard, P., G. Boëtsch, and N. J. Snoep, eds. 2011. Exhibitions. L’Invention du Sauvage

[Exhibitions. The Invention of the Savage]. Paris: Actes Sud.

Bloembergen, M. 2006. Colonial Spectacles. The Netherlands and the Dutch East Indies at

the World Exhibitions, 1880–1931. Singapore: NUS Press.

Bois, G. 1913. Les danseuses cambodgiennes en France [The Cambodian Dancers]. Hanoi,

Haiphong: Imprimerie d’Extrême-Orient.

Brosius, C., and K. Polit, eds. 2011. Ritual, Heritage and Identity. The Politics of Culture

and Performance in a Globalised World. London: Routledge.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

721

Burridge, S., and F. Frumberg, eds. 2010. Beyond the Apsara. Celebrating Dance in Cambo-

Cadilhac, P.-E. 1931. “L’heure du ballet [The Hour of the Ballet].” L’Illustration, no.4616,

dia. London: Routledge.

89th year, 22 August 1931, n.p.

Cambodian Information Agency. 1963. Royal Cambodian Ballet. Phnom Penh: Government

Carlson, M. 2000. “Performing the Past: Living History and Cultural Memory.” Paragrana

Press.

9 (2): 237–248.

Chau-Pech Ollier, L., and T. Winter, eds. 2006. Expressions of Cambodia. The Politics of

Tradition, Identity, and Change. London: Routledge.

Chazal, J.-P. 2002. “‘Grand Succès pour les Exotiques’. Retour sur les spectacles javanais de
l’Exposition Universelle de Paris en 1889 [Great Success for the Exotic. Revisiting the
Javanese Spectacles of the Paris World Fair of 1889].” Archipel 63: 109–152.

Clifford, J. 1989. “The Others: Beyond the ‘Salvage’ Paradigm.” Third Text 6: 73–77.
Cohen, M. 2010. Performing Otherness. Java and Bali on International Stages, 1905–1952.

Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.

Cook, A. 2004. “The Use and Abuse of Historical Re-enactment.” Criticism 46 (3):

487–496.

Holmes Beach: DatASIA.

89th year, 22 August 1931, n.p.

Cravath, P. 2007. Earth in Flower. The Divine Mystery of the Cambodian Dance Drama.

De Beauplan, R. “La nuit merveilleuse [The Marvellous Night].” L’Illustration, no.4616,

de Miomandre, F. 1923. “Rêveries sur les Danseuses Cambdgiennes [Fantasies About the

Cambodian Dancers].” La danse 38: 213–214.

Décordet-Ahiha, A. 2004. Les danses exotiques en France [The Exotic Dances in France].

Pantin: Centre national de la danse.

Delaporte, L. 1880. Voyage au Cambodge. L’architecture Khmer [Travel

to Cambodia.

Khmer Architecture]. Paris: Delgrave.

Diamond, E. 1989. “Performance and Cultural Politics.” In The Routledge Reader in Politics

and Performance, edited by L. Goodman and D. de Gay, 57–63. London: Routledge.

Diamond, C. 2005. “Emptying the Sea by the Bucketful. A Difﬁcult Phase in Cambodian
Theatre or the Creation of a Culture of Independence.” In Ethnicity and Identity. Global
Performance, edited by R. Chaturvedi and B. Singleton, 389–396. New Delhi: Rawat.

Dieuleﬁls, P. 1909. Indo-China. Picturesque and Monumental. Ruins of Angkor (Cambodge).

Hanoi: Dieuleﬁls.

Columbia UP.

Edwards, P. 2007. Cambodge. The Cultivation of a Nation, 1860–1945. Honolulu: HUP.
Fabian, J. 2002. Time and the Other. How Anthropolgy Makes its Object. New York, NY:

Falser, M. 2011. “Krishna and the Plaster Cast. Translating the Cambodian Temple of Ang-
kor Wat in the French Colonial Period.” Transcultural Studies, 2: 6–50. Accessed March
15 2013. http://archiv.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/ojs/index.php/transcultural/article/view/9083.

Falser, M. 2013. “From Colonial Map to Visitor’s Parcours – Tourist Guides and the Spatio-
temporal Making of the Archaeological Park of Angkor.” In ‘Archaeologizing’ Heritage.
Between Local Social Practice and Global Virtual Reality, edited by M. Falser and
M. Juneja, 79–103. Berlin: Springer.

Falser, M., and M. Juneja, eds. 2013. Kulturerbe und Denkmalpﬂege transkulturell. Gren-
zgänge zwischen Theorie und Praxis [Cultural Heritage and Architectural Preservation in
a Transcultural Perspective. Enquiries between Theory and Practice]. Bielefeld: Tran-
script.

Fischer-Lichte, E., et al., eds. 2003. Performativität und Ereignis [Performativity and Event].

Tübingen, Basel: Francke.

Gapps, S. 2009. “Mobile Monuments: A View of Historical Re-enactment and Authenticity

from Inside the Costume Cupboard of History.” Rethinking History 13 (3): 395–409.

Garry, R. 1964. La renaissance du Cambodge de Jayavarman VII roi d’Angkor à Norodom
Sihanouk Varman [The Renaissance of Cambodia of Jayavarman VII, King of Angkor to
Norodom Sihanouk Varman]. Phnom Penh: Department de l’Information.

Gosh, A. 1998. Dancing in Cambodia, At Large in Burma. Delhi: Ravi Dayal.

722

M.S. Falser

Groslier, G. 2010. Danseuses cambodgiennes anciennes et modernes. Paris: Challamel, 1913.
Translated: Cambodian dancers – ancient and modern, edited by K. Davis, 6–158.
Holmes Beach: DatASIA.

Groslier, G. 1918. “L’agonie de l’art cambodgien [Agony of Cambodian Art].” Revue Indo-

chinoise: 547–560.

Groslier, B. P. 1969. “La musique et la danse sous les rois d’Angkor [The Music and the
Dance of the Kings of Angkor].” In Mélanges sur l’archéologie du Cambodge (1949–
1986), Bernard-Philippe Groslier [Miscellanies on Archaeology of Cambodia (1949-
1986), Bernard-Philippe Groslier], edited by J. Dumarcay, 89–93. Paris: EFEO.

Groslier, B. P. 1966. “Les voix d’une nuit d’Angkor. Texte de spectacle ‘son et lumière’ off-
ert au Général de Gaulle, sur le parvis d’Angkor Vat, par le Royaume du Cambodge, le
1er septembre 1966 [The Voices of a Night at Angkor. The Text for the Sound and Light
Show for General Charles de Gaulle in front of Angkor Wat].” In Mélanges sur l’arch-
éologie du Cambodge (1949–1986), Bernard-Philippe Groslier [Miscellanies on Archae-
ology of Cambodia (1949–1986), Bernard-Philippe Groslier], edited by J. Dumarcay,
79–84. Paris: EFEO.

Hauser-Schäublin, Brigitte, ed. 2011. World Heritage Angkor and Beyond. Circumstances
and Implications of UNESCO Listings in Cambodia. Göttingen Studies in Cultural Prop-
erty, vol. 2. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Heywood, D. 2008. Cambodian Dance. Celebration of the Gods. Bangkok: River Book

Press.

Kellner, H. 1997. “Language and Historical Representation.” In The Postmodern History

Reader, edited by K. Jenkins, 127–138. London: Routledge.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett. 2004. “Intangible Heritage as Metacultural Production.” Museum

Lamb, J. 2008. “Historical Re-enactment, Extremity, and Passion.” The Eighteenth Century

International 56 (1–2): 52–64.

49 (3): 239–250.

Larasati, R. D. 2006. “Dancing on the Mass Grave: Cultural Reconstruction Post Indonesia

Massacres.” PhD diss., UC, Riveside. (unpublished).

Lombard, D. 1992. “Le Kampong javanais à l’Exposition Universelle de Paris en1889 [The

Javenese Kampong at the Paris World Fair of 1889].” Archipel 43: 115–130.

Loti, P. 1912. Pelerin d’Angkor [A Pilgrim of Angkor]. Paris: Grevin.
MacCannell, D. 1973. “Staged Authenticity: Arrangements of Social Space in Tourist Set-

tings.” American Journal of Sociology 79 (3): 589–603.

Marchal, S. 1927. Costumes et parures khmèrs d’après les Devatâ d’Angkor-Vat [Khmer

Costumes and Attires After the Devatas of Angkor Wat]. Paris: G. van Oest.

Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, UNESCO Phnom Penh, eds. 2004. Inventory of Intangi-

ble Cultural Heritage of Cambodia. Phnom Penh: JSRC Printing House.

Sangkum Reastr Niyum. 1969. Photo-Souvenirs du Cambodge. Sangkum Reastr Niyum
1955–1969 (Vol. 7: Le prestige au plan international du Cambodge) [Photo-Souvenirs of
Cambodia. Sangkum Reastr Niyum 1955–1969 (The International Prestige of Cambo-
dia)]. Phnom Penh: Sangkum Reastr Niyum (to the visit of Charles de Gaulle, see 128–
9, 136–7, 156–7, 160–7, 174–8).

Sasagawa, H. 2005. “Post/Colonial Discourse on the Cambodian Court Dance.” Tonan Ajia

Kenkyu (Southeast Asian Studies) 42 (4): 418–441.

Schechner, R., and W. Appel, eds. 1990. By Means of Performance. Intercultural Studies of

Theatre and Ritual. Cambridge: CUP.

Schouten, F. 1995. “Heritage as Historical Reality.” In Heritage, Tourism and Society, edited

by D. T. Herbert, 21–31. London: Mansell.

Shapiro-Phim, T. 2002. “Dance, Music, and the Nature of Terror in Democratic Kampu-
chea.” In The Anthropology of Genocide, edited by A. L. Hinton, 179–193. Berkeley:
UCP Press.

Shapiro-Phim, T., and A. Thompson. 2001. Dance in Cambodia. Kuala Lumpur: OUP.
Sihanouk, N. 1968. The Glory of Angkor – Son et Lumière. After the idea of Samdec
Norodom Sihanouk, Chef d’Etat. In honor of His Excellency Mr. Josip Boroz Tito, Presi-
dent of
the Socialist Federal Republic of Yogoslavia [in Serbo-Croatian, National
Archives, Phnom Penh, Cambodia].

Sihanouk, N. 1981. Souvenirs doux et amers [Sweet and Bitter Memories]. Paris: Hachette.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

723

Smith, L., and N. Akagawa, eds. 2009. Intangible Heritage. London: Routledge.
Thiounn, S. C. 1930. Danses cambodgiennes [Cambodian Dancers]. Hanoi: Imprimerie

Tivers, J. 2002. “Performing Heritage: The Use of Live ‘Actors’ in Heritage Presentations.”

d’Extrême-Orient.

Leisure Studies 21 (3–4): 187–200.

Turnbull, R. 2006. “A Burned-out Theatre: The State of Cambodia’s Performing Arts.” In
Expressions of Cambodia. The Politics of Tradition, Identity, and Change, edited by L.
Chau-Pech Ollier and T. Winter, 133–149. London: Routledge.

Turner, V. 1982. From Ritual to Theatre. The Human Seriousness of Play. New York, NY:

Performing Arts Journal Publications.

UNESCO. 1992. Angkor, UNESCO World Heritage Accessed on March 15 2013. http://whc.

unesco.org/en/list/668/.

Publications.

UNESCO. 2002. Rehabilitation of Cambodian Performing Arts. Phnom Penh: UNESCO

UNESCO. 2003. “Convention of the safeguarding of intangible cultural heritage.” Accessed

March 15, 2013. http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00022#art2.

UNESCO. 2008. “UNESCO List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity: The
Royal Ballet of Cambodia.” Accessed March 15, 2013. http://www.unesco.org/culture/
ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00011&RL=00060.

UNESCO Cambodia. 1992–4. Save Angkor. News Bulletin 1–4. Phnom Penh: UNESCO.
Vilain, J. 2006. Rodin et les danseuses cambodgiennes. Sa dernière passion [Rodin and the

Cambodian Dancers. His last Passion]. Paris: Editions du musée Rodin.

Winter, T. 2007. Post-conﬂict Heritage, Postcolonial Tourism. Culture, Politics and Develop-

ment at Angkor. London: Routledge.


