35

3  Op. dt.

4  Op.  cit.

5  Jean-Marie  Tjibaou, La
Presence  Kanak. Paris,
Odile Jacob  publish.
1996.

make  sense,
reconstruct.

In  this  kind  of  world,  museums  have  to  translate,  not  to

'The near  and the  far'3
Ecomuseums, for instance, are based on the study of what is nearby and belongs
to  the community—but  with  the aim of allowing  the community  to perceive
what  is  far  away,  for  one  should  not  get  closed  into  one's  identity.  In
confronting  other  communities  and their  memories,  the museum  becomes the
social place it should  always be, where  here and there, now and then,  can be
compared  and elucidated.  The museum  object  itself  belongs to both  a  faraway
time and space, and it is quite near to us, making us conscious of the enormous
distance  separating us from it. In the gap lie questions, imaginings and dreams.
What  is the role of museology in the midst of current  globalisation? Let us
say  it  involves  not only  a  duty  of memory,  but rather  a  memory  at  work,
implying  both  remembrance  and  forgetting,  for  it  is  a  duty  of  truth,  of
awakening  an  acute  consciousness:  consciousness  of our temporality,  of our
territoriality,  of  diversity  and  consciousness  of  our  universal  community  of
humanity.  Museums  exist to bring  human  testimony  on dignity  and ingenuity
to the community to which each individual belongs.

The era of  'disparition'

Loss of  landmarks
Museologists  are  used  to  dividing  time  into  periods,  civilisations,  histories,
attempting  to  deal  with  the  genesis  of  changes.  However  globalised,  time
belongs to the world, not just the territory or the period, it is instantaneous and
ubiquitous.  Speed is the most  important  factor  because it  gives  power.  Virilio
instantaneous
says 
instruments:  Concorde, 
telephones.
'Inhabiting  time'',  according  to the beautiful  words  of the Kanak  Jean-Marie
Tjibaou,  'is an art we have lost.'5

'speed  is  the  milieu'.4  Homo  economicus possesses 

tele-meetings,  mobile 

the  Internet, 

This  new perception  of time  imposes  a new perception  of space.  Space is
the  information  and  the  decision  can  be
somehow  denied  because 
instantaneously  everywhere.  At the opening  exhibition  of the Bibliotheque de
France was an unforgettable  manuscript of the De Imago Mundi which belonged
to Christopher Columbus (kept in Seville). On this document, annotated with his
own hand, were words to the effect  that the earth is not so big.

Paradoxically, those who have a strong consciousness of the true dimension
of time and space are today people without roots—exiles, emigrants, people who
have  lost  their  territory  and  perhaps  everything  else.  Those  who  have
experienced this loss give a new meaning to time, often  in the form of waiting.
Further  weakening  our sense  of the solid  world  around  us, nowadays we
welcome  virtuality—the 
reality  of  the  well-off  via  the  Internet,  numerics,
holography. In fact  the virtual has prevailed  over the real; physical presence is
no longer necessary thanks to the new technologies for distant  communication.
We  recognise  that  in  these  ways  'absent'  people  can become  'present'. An
example could be those  endangered  communities  enabled to express themselves
through  the Internet  to let the world know of their  issues, such as the Chiapas
Indians. But could this immaterial, ghostly, disembodied presence sooner or later

36

Mathilde  Bellaig

6  Marcel Evrard, 1983,

unpublished.

become  the  cause  of  a  perversion  of  human  relations?  Do  we  risk  further 
unreality  with  the  disappearance  of real  people ?

It  is  said  that  we  live  in  the  'civilisation  of  images'  and  it  is  true;  images
often  replace  objects  and  museums  can  make  use  of  these  images  themselves.
And  this  can  be  a  positive  element;  as  a  document,  the  image  is  often  a
representation  of  reality.  But  an  image  can  also  be  an  artwork  inspired  by  and
inspiring  creation  (as  for  example  photographs  by  Cartier-Bresson,  Doisneau,
Sudek,  Kertesz  and  others).  So  it  happens  that  to  look  at  an  image  comes  to
. require  similar  skills as in  looking  at  an  object—the  same  capacity  in  thoroughly
reading  the  meaning,  in  appreciating  the  aesthetics,  in  feeling  the  personality  of
the  author.  Here  we  talk  no  more  of  'disparition'  but,  on  the  contrary,  of  an
added  presence.

Mass  media  value  both  the  virtual  and  the  image.  The  substance  of
communication  disappears,  but  we  have  never  talked  about  communication  so
much.  This  illusion  of  the  human  sciences  has  become 
institutionalised,
professionalised.  Have  we  lost  our  direct,  spontaneous,  instinctive  means  of
communication?  The instruments  of the  media  are:-

quantitative  therefore  coming  from  power.  TV presenters,  mediators,
journalists  simplify  to be understood,  in  fact,  they do not  say  anything
anymore. They say words without  any weight, empty words. In  this way  all
the information  system  does  away  with  the subtlety  of one  to  another
relationships. Wanting  to talk  to everybody  at  the  same time, they  do not
talk to anybody.  Our world just  wants  to know  what  is happening,  it  makes
up files, more  and  more sophisticated,  dealt  with  by computers  able to  store
more and more  data. In  this way  reality  is lost  and  so is quality.6

These  modifications  and  losses  occur  also  in  the  field  of  material  life.  Since  the
Second  World  War  and  the  acceleration  of  industry,  we  see  the  universal
standardisation  of  everyday  objects.  Material  goods  are  homogenised.  It  should
have  been  for  people's  material  benefit,  but  instead  it  often  leads  directly  to  the
loss  of material  culture  and  cultural  identity.

So if  our  familiar  markers  disappear,  periodised  time,  diverse landscape,  real
communication,  unique  objects,  made  redundant  by  new  technologies,  reduced
to  standardised  production  or  simply  destroyed  in  space  and  time,  where  should
territory,  near-by
we 
relationships,  memory, 
is  the  sign  of
globalised  cultural  mutation.

'disparition'  of  temporality, 

their  good  use—such 

identity?  The 

'disparition' 

look  for 

Does the word 'community' have a meaning today?
Much  more  serious  is  the  fact  that  often  war  is  preceded  by  the  destruction  of
the  real  witnesses  of  a  nation,  of an  ethnic  group. The  most  tragic  issue  of  wars
between  neighbouring  populations is the  destruction  or  attempted  destruction, of
ethnic  or  religious  communities  (in  Bosnia  or  Kosovo, in  Rwanda  or  among  the
Kurds).  In  France  the  rise  of  the  extreme  right-wing  with  its  hostility  towards
immigrants,  the  problem  of suburban  ghettos, plus unemployment,  accentuate  a
new  refusal  to  recognise  or  negotiate  with  heterogeneity.  It  acts  as  a  denial  of
all non-French  culture  within  the  borders.

Abroad  we  have  seen  the  greedy massacres  of small  groups  previously  living

Globalisation  and  Memory 

37

7  Edgar  Morin  in  les
Nowelles  de Survival
International,
printemps  1997,  p. 11.

8  C.A.  Celius, ICOFOM

Study  Series  27,
'Museology  and
Memory',  pp.182-189,
ICOFOM Paris,  1998.

9  he Monde, 24  April

1998.

in  balance  with  their  environment,  with  their  lifestyle  and  with  their  local
resources,  e.g.  Amazonian  Yanomamis,  Native  Americans  on  reservations,
Australian  Aboriginals. As Edgar  Morin  puts  it,

'small civilisations  are being destroyed  and we do not  know how  to preserve
them... We cannot  lock them  away in  a zoo to protect them  and if we open
them  in trying to integrate them  we risk their disintegration... We felt we were
right because we thought  our  arguments  were logical but  also totally  abstract
because we thought  all truth  relied on  science. We ignored for instance that  a
profound  knowledge had been  acquired  in every country's populations'.7

These  are  not  only  people  we  are  decimating,  territories  we  are  destroying,

but  ancient  and  precious  wisdoms  are  also  disappearing  for  ever.

So  how  can  'community'  be  defined  today,  if  not  as  more  defensive,  more
introverted  and  more  exclusive  than  before?  Perhaps  there  may  be  a  possibility
to  give  the  word  a  more  positive  me'aning,  widening  it  to  the  people  of  our
common  planet.

themselves  and  maintain 

Identity  and memory
Nonetheless,  it seems  that  the  more  mass  culture  threatens  to  take  over  life,  and
to  integrate  communities  into  itself,  the  more  people  need  the  feeling  of  being
specially  different,  of  belonging  somewhere  particular.  In  big  cities  foreign
communities  reconstitute 
living  traditions,  rites,
mother  tongue,  diet,  recreating  some  local  way  of  life  within  the  body  of  the
predominant  society.  This  active  attitude  comes  from  collective  memory.  But
how  can  collective memory  form  if the  immigrants  have  gathered  in  the  foreign
land  in  successive  waves?  It  is  pieced  together  out  of  the  sum  of  individual
memories  whose  roots  are  the  same  through  the  diversity  of  objects  life  has
released,  of  places  and  life  experiences,  of  interpretation  through  common
knowledge  and  belief: that  is  how  a  collective  memory  is  built.  But  other  cases
are  similar,  such  as youth,  special  interest  groups  and  so  on.

We  should  also  talk  about  those 

'without  memory'",  heirs  of  the  un-
commemorated,  of  the  people  formerly  considered  shameful,  unworthy.  In
France  in  1998  was 
celebrated  the  150th  anniversary  of  the  abolition  of
slavery.  Some  critics  pointed  out  that  the  commemoration  was  distorted  by  an
emphasis  on  the  righteousness  of  the  abolition  law  rather  than  on  the  awful
circumstances  surrounding  the  slave  trade  and  the  resistance  that  had  given
rise  to  their  freedom.  Never  before  had  slavery—a  crime  against  humanity—
been  officially  recognised.  For  instance,  it  had  been  kept  silent  in  our  museums
until  the  1990s.8  In  another  misunderstanding,  we  sometimes  believe  that  the
memory  of  slaves'  descendants  comes  from  far-away  original  Africa.  But  as
Patrick  Chamoiseau,  a  Martiniquais  poet  and  a  slave  descendant  himself,  says
(and  feels),  the  starting  point  of  the  Creole  identity,

'is not  original Africa,.but  the hold  of a  ship, the place  of collapse. Going
down the  hold, we  did not  go into  another  world but  into  another  life  where
gods and  certainties  had  to be reinvented,  everything  had to be  redone.'9

He  calls  this  memory  change  'genesical  death,  both  symbolic  and  concrete'.

38

Mathilde  Bellaig

10 Primo  Levi, Si c'est un
homme, Paris: Julliard,
1987,  1994,  and  Us
naufrages  et les rescapes
—  Quarante ans apres
Auschwit2, Paris:
Gallimard,  1989,  and
Le devoir de  memoire
—  Entretien avec Anna
Bravo et Federico
Cereja,  Editions  Mille
et  une  nuits,  1995.

11 Jochen  Gerz, la  ques-

tion secrete  - le
monument vivant de
Biron, Actes  Sud,
1996.

12 Christian  Boltanski  is

a  contemporary
French  artist  whose
essential  theme  is
memory.  The
reference  is to  his
1998  exhibition  in
Paris,  Musee  d'art
moderne  de la  Ville de
Paris.

13 Marcel  Evrard,  1983.

unpublished.

14ICOFOM  Study  Series

27,  'Museology  and
Memory', p.l78. ICO-
FOM Paris,  1998.

It is as though  another  memory was born  out  of the ruins  of a preceding one.
We  can  see  the  same  reaction  in  Primo  Levi's  interviews  and  books  after  his
return  from  Auschwitz.10

So when  we think  that  through  a  commemoration,  a memorial,  an  official
duty of memory, we honour with dignity the heirs of the past, it is true that we
recognise  a  historical  event  and  that  it  stirs  the  public  conscience,  but  this
happens anonymously. The faces of the actors blend and names disappear." That
is  why  some  artists'  works  seem  exemplary  in  their  will  to  reject  official
anonymity. Examples are the  work  of Jochen  Gerz in  the  small Perigord village
of Biron,11 where he inscribes on the memorial to the dead of the Great War the
inhabitants' individual statements; and the obsessive work of Christian Boltanski
concerning  the  children  of an  old Belgian mine.12 In  an  exhibition  he lines up
their  humble  photographs  and  their  names  from  top  to  bottom  of  weakly  lit
underground walls. When we see them we cannot  avoid being moved, feeling a
certain tenderness for those who, in their tragedy, bear a name.

'Finding the signs  of a world  rematerialisation'
Paul  Virilio's  phrase  could  be  the  motto  of museums  of the  third  millennium.
Resisting  dispersion,  dilution,  upset  identities,  disguised  or  denied  memories, in
short,  'disparition',  what  can  museums  do  with  their  humble  means?  The
answer  must  be  to  find  the  signs  or  markers  of  the  culture  and  give  them  a
sensitive form so that their sense can be perceived. Virilio suggests the following
•means to achieve this end, which he calls 'rematerialisation'.  Is not that  exactly
the museum's duty?

'Be present  here and now'
Totally  opposed  to  the  'disparition'  caused  by  aspects  of  globalisation,  the
advantage  of the  ecomuseum  is that  it  takes into  account  a territory  within its
limits, its population with its material culture, 'the signs of history, visible things
which  are  so much  a part  of  the physical  and mental landscape  that  they  are
inseparable. The main  thing is to throw  light  on them; a revealing light which
will enable us to see what  habits  and routine hide.'13 Turning  attention to the
here  and  now,  and  educating  the  gaze  upon  the  object,  even  in  its  everyday
banality,  upon  traces in  a landscape, in  a city. This gaze upon  space, upon  the
organisation  of the  environment,  upon  the  links  between  people  in  society,  all
become, in the museum, the meaning of a place in an organic whole and not in
an  homogeneous  anonymity,  of  its  ecological  and  social  context.  It  is  inter-
disciplinary,  with  earth  and  human  sciences  connected  such  that  artworks,
objects, archives, monuments, places are signs put forward  by the museum.

Every  community's  museum  is  based  on  two  sorts  of  history:  a  past
perceived  by people, comprising  memories  of high  points  in  experience,  relying
on sensitive aids such as sites of life, objects, habits  and traditions; on the other
hand  historical  research  which  corrects,  sheds  light  on  the  sense  of what  has
been  experienced; it is not  a matter  of reconstruction  but  of translation.  This is
not  always  easy  and  we  should  recognise  that  throwing  light  on  history  may
sometimes  hurt  the  emotional  sides  of  memory.  The  attempt  by  Le  Creusot's
local councillors  to rub  out  most traces  of the  old Schneider  factory,  a place of
work and also of enslavement—but  also a memorial to social struggles, has been
previously  studied.14 It is the obsession with  a past that  does not pass away.

Globalisation  and  Memory

39

15 Le Monde, 28  January

1994.

16  International

Symposium,  'Memoire
collective  ouvriere',
Ecomuseum  of Le
Creusot,  1977.

'The near and  the far'
The  ecomuseum  approach  is based  on  the  community's  'near',  but  it  can  also
make  understood  'the  far',  the  strange,  the  other.  This  approach  is  effective
because  it  does not  close  down  into  a fixed identity  (what  Alfred  Grosser calls
'abusive  identities'15  whose  presence  stirs  up  nationalism,  racism,  etc)  but  on
the  contrary,  opens up  all  means  of  comparison  with  similar  situations. At Le
Creusot,  for  instance,  through  training  activities  based  on  trade  unionists'
involvement 
including
communities  from  other  French  industrial  areas  (the  North,  Lorraine,  the
Lyonnais) and also at the international level.16

in  research,  a  study  network  was  established 

Thus  the  museum  becomes  the  archetype  of socinl  places  for  meetings,  for

Figure 1. Le Creusot, 1981.  The Creusot-Loire (formerly  Schneider) steel works and iron
foundry  whose history  was studied in  the Ecomuseum as being the  most  important part  of the
inhabitants'  memory.

Figure 2.  Le Creusot, 1995.  The factory  has been demolished. Only  three industrial halls
remain; in  the front  part  two  have been turned into  the  university  technology library. At  the
rear, the old hall for  cranes and railway engine assembly (1848)  has been maintained as an
historical monument  thanks  to the intervention of  the Ecomuseum near the Ministry  of
Culture. Since  1990  this  large space remains vacant. Most  local traces of memory have
been  erased.

40

Mathilde Bellaig

17 le  Monde,  28 January

1994.

18 ICOFOM Study Series

10, 'Museology and
Identity', ICOFOM,
Buenos Aires, 1986.

comparing  experiences, for common elucidation  resulting in exhibitions. Is such
remembering together a maker of collective memory? Or is it just a movement of
companionship  which  risks  withdrawal  and  introversion?  'Freeing  without
dropping  out,  that  is  keeping  a  critical  distance  towards  any  group  even
privileged  ones,  but  without  eliminating  different  integrations  without  which
man  is  asocial  and  useless  to  others',  this  is  the  teaching  recommended  by
Alfred  Grosser.17

There  exists  a  considerable  distance  between  the  object  observed  in  the
museum  and the one who observes it, sometimes because the museum presents
a  community's  vision  not  shared  by the  visitor.  This  is  noted  in  the  paper by
Poka Laenui  (of Hawaii)  about  the Bishop Museum exhibition  'The Hawaiians',
in  which  the  history  of  Hawaii  began  with  the  'discovery'  of  the  islands  by
Captain Cook. Laenui answers to this with some humour: 'Cook did not discover
us. We knew, long before he was conceived, who and where we were'.18 Or this
huge  distance  between  the one who remembers  and  what  is to be remembered
may  exist  because  the  objects  come  from  the  past  or  the  geographically  far
distant.

The  museum  has  therefore,  and  not  without  risk,  this  strange  and  double
power, to bring us closer to a time or a space sometimes forgotten,  or unknown,
but  also to  make  us  realise  the  distance  separating  us,  now, from them,  there
and then. This distance generates questioning, imagination, dreaming and opens
consciousness.

'From memory  to timelessness'
The  object  perceived  in  that  way  emerges  from  time  and  space. It  was  the  sign
of  a  former  or  distant  reality,  and  all  of  a  sudden  it  becomes  the  symbol  of  a
universal  truth.  It  may  no  longer  be  any  memory's  token.

in 

We  must  therefore  be  careful  in  treating  each  object;  it  is  not  a  matter  of
accumulating  collections  but  of  giving  the  greatest  attention  to  the  role  of
objects  as  signs  so  as  to  avoid  sometimes  shocking  misinterpretations.  An
example  a  contrario  occurred  recently 
the  new  Egyptian  Antiquities
Department  of the  Louvre Museum: the  curator  placed  amongst  other  objects,  in
a  window  display,  the  mummified  body  of  a  man  lying  down,  naked;  a  week
after  the  opening  the  staff  casually  threw  a  loincloth  on  him.  Had  they
recognised  humanity  in  that  'object'?  But  clothing  was  not  the  solution  to  the
problem,  which  was  more  about  the  trivial  treatment  of  that  'object',  the
mockery  of  death,  the  indifference  to  what  the  museum  is  supposed  to  evoke,
namely  Egyptian  rites  of  embalming  and  burying  which,  in  their  mystery,
respected  and  finally  hid  to  human  eyes  the  flesh  of  the  one  who  has  passed
away.  The  man  lying  in  our  gaze  amongst  varied  objects  (which  did  not  even
belong to  his tomb)  does not  give us  any  information  about  his  life, his  time,  his
death.  He  has  no  identity,  no  memory.  And  more  outrageously  still,  because  of
the  presentation's  obscenity,  he  is  of no  importance.

Today  the  contribution  of  exact  sciences  to the  knowledge  of objects  and  art
pieces  is  a  relatively  new  dimension  which  will  certainly  be  developed  in  the
museums  in  the  future.  Materials  science  as  applied  in  the  Research  Laboratory
of  the  Musees  de  France,  penetrating  to  the  heart  of  matter,  identifies  it,  reveals
its origin,  the  objects'  exchange  networks  from  one  society  to  another;  the  same
sciences  throw  light  on  artists'  techniques,  their  pentimenti,  their  creation

Globalisation  and  Memory

41

19 Virilio, op. cit.

20 Paul  Ricoeur, Legons

au College de
philosophic Paris,
1996.

21 M. Evrard,  1983,

unpublished.

22  Le Monde, 1998. E.
Glissant  is a  Creole
philosopher  and  poet.

gestures.  This  adds  a  wider  dimension  of  space  and  time  to  the  memory  opened
by  the  museum  and  that  the  'so  far,  so  near'  we  are  facing  is  a  new  side of  the
suggested  dream.

That  is why  the  museum  has  a  strange  alchemy  where  the  object,  testimony
of a  precise moment  and  place, takes  on  a  timeless, universal  dimension  through
which  we  have  access  to  the  world.  As  Virilio  writes,  'measuring  the  world  is
our  freedom.  Knowing  that  the  world  around  us  is  enormous,  realising  it,  even
if  we  do  not  practise  that  world,  is  an  element  of  the  freedom  and  greatness  of
man'.19

Conclusion
The  museum  must  help  the  community  undertake  not  so  much  a  duty  of
memory  as  a  work  of  memory,  which  also  means  a  work  of forgetting  because
the  work  of  memory  is  a  'duty  of  truth'.20  The  function  of  the  museum  is
awakening  consciousness  in  several  dimensions:
• 

consciousness  of  time:  knowing  what  links  us  to  our  origins,  to  our
temporality  (duration). 
'Looking  at  the  past  is  not  a  backward-looking
attitude,  it  is  to  acknowledge  its  nourishing  sense,  the  base  of  our  memory.
Being  unconscious  of time  makes  us  unable  to  imagine  the  future'.21
consciousness 
and
acknowledgment  of  differences  gives  its  true  dimensions  to  the  world  and
humanity.  It opens  the  dialogue. In  the  globalising  world,  communities  find  it
more  and  more difficult  to survive,  as expressed by the statement  attributed  to
the  Indian  chief  Seattle  to  the  president  of the  United  States  in  1894:

homogenisation 

diversity: 

refusal 

the 

of 

of 

• 

This fate  is mysterious  for us, because we cannot  understand  why  all the
buffaloes  are  massacred,  wild horses domesticated,  the  forest's  secret places
full  of the  smell of so many  men,  and  the view  of the  beautiful  hills soiled by
the  talking  wires. Where  are the  deep thickets? They  are  gone. Where is the
eagle? Gone. It is the  end  of life  and the beginning  of survival.

• 

consciousness  of  the  never-ending  community  of  humanity:  the  survival
problem  exists  on  humanity's  scale.

'Our  histories  are from now  on  total and  largely  common,  and  our
responsibilities, because  of this, diffused...  It is we who  must  think  of the
poetics of this  globalisation. I mean  poetics where it  concerns  the  inside of
things  and  not  their  shape. As long  as man  has not  accepted  a  new
conception  of his identity,  slavery,  genocides  will stay  without  answer.
Cultures, people of the  world must  be intimately  persuaded  that  they  can
have  exchanges  with  their neighbour  and,  through  the  imagination  and  the
sensitivity  they  propose, change  the neighbours  without  disintegrating.
Without  risking  dilution  ... We have  a job: contribute  to  this  stirring of the
world's imagination  and  sensitivity  which will allow us  to really work
together.'22

So  that  the  'end  of  life  and  the  beginning  of  survival'  does  not  appear  like  a
museum  caricature,  our job as museologists  is to show  to humanity  that it  owns
its  identity,  its  memory,  its  survival  capacities.  For,  if  museums  deal  with

42

Mathilde  Bellaig

memory, they do it to bear testimony to human  progress and failures,  to throw
light  on  them,  to prove  people  can  survive  in  spite  of everything,  that  we  are
able  to  invent,  create.  In  one  word,  the  museum  is  concerned  with  human
dignity, whichever  community we belong to.

Acknowledgement
My  warmest  thanks  to  Michel  Menu,  from  the  Research  Laboratory  of  the
Musees  de  France  (Louvre),  for  his  kind  help,  and  also  to  Pamela  Scalbert-
Menanteau  who  translated  this  text from the  French version  in ICOFOM Study
Series  29,'  Museology  and  Globalisation',  ICOFOM  19th  Meeting,  Melbourne
1998.  Thanks  also  to  Linda  Young  who  helped  me  to  make  this  text
publishable.

Globalisation  and Memory 

43


