International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Expanding Horizons: environmental and cultural
values within natural boundaries

Judith Powell

To cite this article: Judith Powell (2000) Expanding Horizons: environmental and cultural
values within natural boundaries, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 6:1, 49-65, DOI:
10.1080/135272500363733
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/135272500363733

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 184

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2000, pp. 49± 65

Expanding Horizons: environmental and
cultural values within natural
boundaries1
Judith Powell

Abstract
Indigenous communities have much to teach heritage professionals about the identification
and management of cultural heritage values. A holistic approach to cultural heritage has
long  been  promoted  by  indigenous  communities;  recent  discussions  in  the  professional
heritage world about social and aesthetic value and debates about cultural landscapes all
have precursors in indigenous concepts of cultural heritage.

Since  1992 some  states  in Australia have been engaged  in regional assessments  of the
environmental,  heritage, social and economic values of forests. These assessments  aim at
providing expert advice upon which decisions about the future  use of these forests  will be
made.  The  inclusion  of  cultural  heritage  assessments  as  part  of  the  overall  resource
assessment  is  notable.  Regional  resource  studies  such  as  the  Regional  Forest Agreement
process (incorporating assessments of natural, cultural, social and economic values) provide
an opportunity to adopt a more holistic approach to cultural heritage management. In this
as  in  other  matters,  indigenous  communities  appear  to  be  leading  the  way,  with  the
development of catchment resource management models and co-management strategies. As
part  of  the  Regional  Forest  Agreement  process  in  Southeast  Queensland  (SEQ),  two
projects  have  identified  principles  and  protocols  concerning  the  management  of  cultural
heritage values in the forests.

Key words: Australia; Cultural Heritage; Forests; Indigenous Heritage; Commu-
nity Heritage; Catchment Studies

Natural and Cultural Values in Protected Area Management
Many years before I had any involvement in heritage issues, I spent a week walking
the 129 km White  Peak Way  within the  Peak  National  Park in the  UK. The park,

1 I would like to thank friends and colleagues within the Department of Environment and Heritage
whose ideas and discussions have assisted in the writing of this paper. In particular, I want to thank
Shane Coghill  and David Cameron (Forest Assessment Unit), Jeff Bedford (Ecologically Sustainable
Forest Management Unit), Penny Cook, Mike Rowland and Stewart Armstrong (Cultural Heritage
Branch). Thanks also to Jane Lennon, heritage consultant. The input of all these people was
invaluable. Any deficiencies I claim as my own.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; 1470-3610 online/00/010049-17   2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd

declared in 1951, was the first area of Britain to be designated a National Park, and
the White Peak Way traverses some of its most beautiful parts. It also, much to my
astonishment, passes working farms and towns and settlements. Indeed, the walk is
so planned to allow walkers to spend each night in a Youth Hostel and the published
guide to the walk includes a pub tour! This all came as a shock to someone raised
in  Australia,  for  whom  the  concept  of  a  National  Park  involved  `natural’   and
`untouched’   landscapes  with  natural  features  and  examples  of  vegetation  being
interpreted for those traversing park tracks. By contrast, the symbolic feature of the
White Peak was the patchwork of styles in farm fences, the `chequerboard of light-
grey  drystone  walls’ .2 Although  nature  is  celebrated  in  the  Peak  National  Park,
people have a place there; they live and work within the park and no one in the UK
is  surprised  by  this.  The  landscape  of  the  Peak  District  is  a  cultural  one,  and
continues to be so.

Australia has  one of  the  oldest National  Park  systems in  the  world;  the  Royal
National Park near Sydney was  declared in 1879  as  a place of recreation and for
nature conservation, and was modelled more on the British urban park system than
the American Yellowstone model.3 In 1880  in Queensland, a similar reservation of
land  occurred at  Mt  Coot-tha  close to  the  capital  city,  Brisbane.  In  all  parts  of
Australia, the forests were first considered for reservation, either because they were
considered suitable areas for health and recreation, or because concerns were felt at
their impending disappearance. Today, although only 5% of Australia’s land is still
forested, forests and woodlands account for  25% of the country’s National Parks
and conservation reserves.4

Southeast Queensland’s Forests5
For thousands of years, the forests and woodlands of Southeast Queensland have
been the home of indigenous peoples, who lived in and with them. Subtle landscape
changes are clearly demonstrable over time and include, in particular, those relating
to the use of fire. Two distinctive vegetation types are patterned in the landscape,

2 R. Haslam, The White Peak Way: an 80 mile circular walk in the Peak National Park, Cumbria:
Cicerone Press, p. 8.

3 K.J. Frawley, ` ª Cultural landscapesº  and National Parks: philosophical  and planning issues’,
Australian Parks and Recreation, Vol. 25, No. 3, 1989, pp.  16± 23. The use of the term `national’ is
noteworthy. At the time when the Royal National Park was established, there was no nation of
Australia. After Federation of the separate colonies in 1901, State governments assumed responsibility
for National Parks as they were progressively declared, and the fact that such parks were called
`national’  suggests that the values inherent in these parks were seen to be more than simply of local,
regional or even State significance.

4 A.R.M. Young, Environmental  change in Australia since  1788, Melbourne: Oxford University Press,
1996, p. 84.

5 For a fuller discussion, see J. Powell, People and trees: a thematic history of South East Queensland  with
particular reference to forested areas, 1823± 1997, Queensland Government & Commonwealth  of
Australia, 1998.

50

Judith Powell

Figure 1. Clearing the forest for settlement [DPI Forest Library G1].

both  as  a  result  of  fire  management.  Hardwood  (mostly  eucalypt)  forests  are
interspersed with softwood (native pine) and rainforest `scrubs’ . Regular burning by
indigenous people encouraged the former and reduced the extent of the latter. In
the process, more open forests were created with grassy ground-cover attractive to
kangaroos and other game.

In particular areas, the forests and trees were the focus of religious activity. In the
Bunya  Mountains  and  Blackall  Range  to  the  north  and  north-west  of  modern
Brisbane, triennial festivals attracted Aboriginal groups from throughout the south-
east. The  massive  bunya  pine  trees  (Araucaria  bidwilli)  belonged  individually  to
Aboriginal groups, and only members of that group could climb the trees to harvest
the pine cones that  were an  important source of  food and feasting  at  the time of
these festivals.

When the surveyor John Oxley entered the Brisbane River in 1823  investigating
potential sites for a new convict settlement, he commented favourably on the stands of
hoop pine (Araucaria cunninghamii) lining the banks of the river. Timber, whether for
building or export, was one of the earliest commodities exploited in the new settlement
of Moreton Bay, and the search for timber supplies influenced early exploration and
expansion from the settlement. Cedar cutters had already opened up areas along the
coast between Sydney and Brisbane; Andrew Petrie reported on the stands of bunya
pine  (Araucaria  bidwilli)  found  on  his  exploratory  trips  with  Aborigines north  of
Brisbane to Fraser Island and the Mary River. All along the coastal strip, timber was
rafted and floated eastwards down rivers to the Pacific for shipment south to milling
centres in Brisbane and Sydney; the decentralised nature of Queensland’s settlement
patterns reflects in part this pattern of early timber transportation.

Expanding Horizons

51

Forests  and  timber  have  had  a  profound  effect  on  the  development  of
Queensland, influencing  settlement  patterns,  transport  networks,  building  styles
and  aesthetic sensibilities. At  the  same  time  Queenslanders, like  settlers in  other
areas  of Australia, had a  profound antipathy  to  the  forests,  often  seeing  them  as
`wastelands’ . Settlers followed timber getters, attracted by what they assumed (often
incorrectly)  were  rich  soils  beneath  these  stands  of  timber.  Clearing  and  ring-
barking6 were  government-sponsored  policies  aimed  at  taming  the  forests  and
making the land useable for introduced forms of pastoralism and agriculture, and
this decimation soon far exceeded the extent of forest destruction associated with
the  extraction  of  timber. The  wastage  of  timber  was  particularly  extreme  when
distance  from  rivers  and  coasts  made  the  movement  of  logs  to  milling  centres
uneconomical.

Two conflicting strands in government policy are clear in Queensland. On the one
hand,  regulations  on  timber  cutting  began  as  early  as  1839,  prohibitions on  the
cutting of bunya pine were declared in 1842, and timber land began to be reserved
in the 1880s. A conference on forest conservancy was called in 1873 and reported
to Parliament in 1875. On the other hand, the government actively pursued a policy
of  expanded  land  settlement  and  settlers  on  resumed  land  were  required  to
undertake  improvement  such  as  clearing. The  creation,  in  1900,  of  a  Forestry
Branch  within  the  Department  of  Public  Lands  underlines this  conflict,  that  is,
those  charged  with  preserving  and  managing  the  forests  were  working  within  a
Department whose primary aim was the expansion of agriculture and settlement,
often at the expense of those same forests.

In 1906,  the State Forests and National Parks Act created a situation unique in
Australia,  whereby  productive  forests  (State  forests  and  timber  reserves)  were
administered by the same organisation that administered National Parks. By 1930,
when  the  National  Parks  Association  was  founded  by  Romeo  Lahey  and  other
conservationists and  bushwalkers, over  330,000  acres  of  National  Park  had  been
declared in the State. The early parks movement in Australia and Queensland was
influenced by issues of public health, recreation and enjoyment and was often eager
to improve on nature in much the way  that  the acclimatisation societies aimed to
improve  the  quality  and  variety  of  Australia’s  fauna  and  flora  through  the
importation of exotic species. By the late 1950s and 1960s, however, the concept of
biodiversity was becoming more widely understood, and it was now recognised that
an important function of National Parks should be to `reserve permanently typical
examples of all the main environments, including the less scenic’ .7

What  role did people play  in National Parks and State forests? The principle of
`multiple-use’ , espoused since the  1930s,  allowed for a  range of  activities  besides

6 Ring-barking  is the chopping  away of the bark and cambium layers around the circumference of a
tree so as to cause death. Also called `girdling’ .

7 Department of Forestry, Annual  Report of the Department of Forestry for the year 1963± 64, 1964,
p. 15.

52

Judith Powell

timber harvesting within State forests, including grazing, bee-keeping, recreational
pursuits such as horse-riding, and other activities. Although there may  have  been
little  recognition,  or  conservation,  of  cultural  heritage,  people  were  a  common
part  of  the  landscape. National  Parks,  on the  other hand, were seen to be places
for  `retreat’ ,  where  `the  greatest  charm  . . .  lay  in  their  primitiveness  . . .  any
development  of  the  Parks  should  be  based  on  the  principle  that  they  must  be
preserved as far as possible in that simplicity and unspoilt beauty that make them
unique’.8

It is now widely recognised, of course, that  this `unspoilt’  quality  so desired in
National  Parks  was  never `untouched’ . The work of  Pyne9 and others has  clearly
shown  the  extent  to  which the  landscape of Australia was  shaped  by  humans, in
particular by  the  fire  management regimes developed as  part  of  Aboriginal  land
management. Fire exclusion, however, was  the foresters’   creed, and not until the
1960s  did prescribed burning regimes come to  be  widely practised. It  has  taken
time  for  a  recognition  that  the  country  has  been  managed  in  some  form  or
another for thousands of  years, and that  therefore `passive  management of  fauna
and  flora  results  in  a  decline  in  the  conservation  values  of  parks  and
reserves’.10

After their separation from the Department of Public Lands in 1957, State forests
and National Parks were the responsibility of the Queensland Forest Service until
1975 when the Queensland National Parks and Wildlife Service was established. For
the first time since 1906 National Parks and State forests were managed by separate
authorities.  In  the  mid-1990s  the  Forest  Service  underwent  a  series  of  changes
leading  to  a  situation  whereby  the  Department  of  Primary  Industries  became
responsible  for  the  commercial  aspects  of  forestry  (plantations  and  native
hardwood), and the Department of Natural Resources became responsible for the
non-commercial aspects of State forests. Three government departments are now,
therefore, responsible for the management of public forests.

The  bureaucratic  separation  of  aspects  of  forest  management  in  many  ways
reflects concerns that a conflict of interest might exist if the managers of productive
forests were also responsible for the management of National Parks. It also reflects
a desire to separate economic values of forests from the conservation or recreational
values. If the conservation and production values of forests were seen as divergent,
with the potential for conflict, it is interesting to consider where the cultural values
of forests might fit.

8 `Some notes on the early history of National Parks in Queensland’, 1969, Forestry File 1A:NR,
1/33.

9 S. Pyne, `Frontiers of fire’ , in T. Griffiths & L. Robin (eds) Ecology  and empire. Environmental  history
of settler societies, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, pp.  19± 34.

1 0 W.-G. Baker & Mutitjulu community, `The role of Aboriginal ecological knowledge in ecosystem
management’ , in J. Birckhead et al. (eds) Aboriginal involvement  in parks and protected  areas, Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Report Series, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies
Press, 1996 (first published 1992), pp.  65± 73.

Expanding Horizons

53

Figure 2. Railway sleeper cutter,  Cooyar,  1930s [DPI Forest Library 197H].

Cultural Landscapes
By the 1960s, a conflict between natural and cultural values had resulted from `the
dominance of ecological criteria in the assessment of environmental values, and the
broadening of  our historical perception of  landscape from isolated sites to  whole
cultural patterns’ .1 1 Deep ecology and `wilderness’  movements stressed the natural
over  the  cultural  and  were,  in  one  sense, `misanthropic’ .12 The  idea  of  `cultural
landscape’  protection, however, threatened to become the vehicle by which special
interest groups could seek  to  promote exploitative  and  destructive land  manage-
ment practices.1 3

Although the  idea of  cultural landscapes is  not  new14 and derives from a  long
tradition  of  historical  geography,  the  idea  that  cultural  landscapes  should  be

1 1 T. Griffiths, `History and natural history: conservation movements in conflict’ , in J. Richard & P.
Spearritt (eds) Packaging the past? Public histories, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1998,
pp.  16± 32.

1 2 Ibid., p. 18.

1 3 Frawley, op. cit., note 3; J. Russell, `Challenging  history: an environmental perspective’, Public
History Review, Vol. 2, 1993, pp.  35± 53.

1 4 See, for example, A. Ross, `Landscape as heritage’, Tempus, Vol. 5, 1996, pp.  9± 17; K. Taylor & C.
Tallents, `Cultural landscape protection in Australia: the Wingecarribee Shire Study’ , International
Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1996, pp.  133± 144; J. Lennon, Case study  of the cultural
landscapes of the Central Victorian goldfields, Australia: state of the environment technical paper series
(natural and cultural heritage), Central Queensland University Publishing  Unit, Commonwealth  of
Australia, 1997.

54

Judith Powell

considered  as  part  of  cultural  heritage  management  is  a  relatively  recent
phenomenon. Just as taxonomy and taxidermy gave way to dioramas and finally the
idea of community museums, and the study of individual species gave way  to the
investigation of complex ecosystems, site-specific heritage concerns have given way
to the current recognition of the broader `landscape’  within which heritage values
reside. Characteristically, disciplines undergo such expansions of definition as levels
of  complexity  and  inter-connections with  related  disciplines are  uncovered,  and
cultural heritage management is no different.

The World Heritage  Committee adopted the  concept of `cultural landscape’  in
1992, and the Asia-Pacific Regional Workshop on Associative Cultural Landscapes
`recognised that the consideration of properties of outstanding universal value needs
to be contextual (recognising a place in its broader intellectual and physical context)
rather  than  specific  (as  in  the  limited  approach  to  viewing  heritage  solely  as
monuments or  wilderness)’ .1 5 Uluru Kata-Tjuta  National  Park  in  the  Northern
Territory is  now  included on  the World  Heritage  List  for  its  associative  cultural
values, in addition to its prior listing for natural values. The cultural landscape work
undertaken in the Wingecarribee Shire located between Sydney and Canberra is a
model  for  the  identification,  assessment  and  management  of  historic  cultural
landscapes.16

The argument over cultural landscapes is by  no means at  an end, however. As
recently  as  1988,  the  Australian  National  Parks  Council  carried  a  resolution  to
`increase  the  awareness  of,  and  provide  a  united  opposition  to,  the  continuing
campaign by  organisations promoting cultural heritage  issues to  incorporate into
National  Parks  activities  incompatible with  the  conservation  of  natural  values’ .17
Given  that  many  past  settler  activities  within  the  landscape  were  exploitative  or
destructive (e.g. pastoral activity on marginal lands), maintenance of such practices
in  the  name of  preserving cultural landscapes is  seen by  many  commentators as
questionable.18

National Forest Policy Statement (NFPS), Ecologically Sustainable
Forest Management (ESFM) and the Montreal Process
Forests are the subject of intense debate. In Australia, three-quarters of the forest
estate is on public land, so any controversy over the use of the forests has powerful
political dimensions.

In 1992, Australia endorsed a series of principles and objectives articulated at the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio

1 5 UNESCO, The Asia-Pacific regional workshop on associative cultural landscapes, a report by
Australia ICOMOS to the World Heritage Committee, 27± 29 April 1995,
www.unesco.org/whc/archive/cullan95.html

1 6 Taylor & Tallents, op.  cit., note 14.

1 7 Cited in Griffiths, op. cit., note 11, p. 30.

1 8 Frawley, op. cit., note 3.

Expanding Horizons

55

de Janeiro. Agreements at  this  conference related to  biodiversity,  climate change,
deforestation  and  forest  management,  and  the  succeeding  Montreal  Agreement
established criteria and indicators against which forest practices could be measured
in order to determine the extent to which forests were managed in a sustainable way.
The Commonwealth, States and Territories jointly signed the National Forest Policy
Statement in 1992 and since then a series of Regional Forest Agreements (RFAs)
have been initiated in Tasmania, Western Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland.19

In 1998, a framework of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management
covering  National  Parks,  State  forests,  Crown  leasehold  and  freehold  land  in
Australia, at regional level, was developed and agreed by the states participating in
the RFA process.20 Three sets of  indicators (the first immediately reportable, the
other two requiring further research and development) will be used to report on the
implementation of a  national approach to  sustainable forest management. Of  the
thirty-seven  indicators,  twenty  relate  broadly  to  issues  of  biodiversity,  water
catchment or ecosystem health. Six indicators relate to timber production and forest
products, seven  to  socio-economic values  and  three  to  cultural values.  Although
10% may not appear a representative number, the recognition of cultural values in
overall  resource  management  and  planning  is  a  key  component  of  the  process;
indeed the Commonwealth is keen to stress that indigenous issues, in particular, are
paramount. The current Native Title debate is recognised as relevant to this process
and  there  is  a  recognition  that  `native  title  issues  need  to  be  addressed  in
implementing management strategies’ .21

As  part  of  the  RFA  process, Comprehensive Regional Assessments (CRAs)  of
environment, heritage and socio-economic issues22 (theoretically across all tenures)
are  meant  to  provide  the  framework  for  political  decisions  concerning  the
development  of  conservation  reserves  and  the  use  of  forests.  Criticisms  of  the
process certainly abound. According to the eminent forest historian, John Dargavel,
time  constraints  have  severely  limited  the  assessment  process,  indigenous rights
have  generally been ignored, and community consultation has  been poor. Private
land  has  been  largely  ignored  in  the  process  and  the  Montreal  indicators  on
sustainability  will  be  difficult  to  apply  to  freehold  tenure.  Finally,  while  the
assessment process has been a visible one, the decision-making process, he argues,
is `opaque’   and  prone  to  criticisms that  decisions are  the  result  not  of  scientific
assessment but of political `trade offs’ .23

1 9 Department of Natural Resources, 1998.

2 0 Commonwealth  of Australia, A framework of regional (sub-national) level criteria and indicators  of
sustainable forest management in Australia, Canberra: Pirie Printers, 1998, p. xii.

2 1 Ibid.

2 2 In Southeast Queensland, environment projects include studies of forest vertebrates, flora, genetic
diversity, forest ecosystems, old growth forests and geoheritage.

2 3 J. Dargavel, `Replanning the forests’ , Australian Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 5, pp. 28± 29.

56

Judith Powell

None  the  less,  the  RFAs  constitute  `the  largest  environmental  planning  and
management  endeavour  in  Australia’ .24 In  environmental  terms,  the  fact  that
cultural heritage has been incorporated in the identification and assessment phase
is significant. Whereas historical data can be used to illustrate disturbance history
and other forest processes,2 5 the full range of inter-disciplinary projects has not yet
been fully realised. However, for the first time in Queensland, natural and cultural
values are being identified in a regional survey as part of the same process.

Comprehensive Regional AssessmentÐ
The  cultural  heritage  component of  the  Comprehensive Regional Assessment of
Southeast Queensland comprised a series of reports, targeted field work, commu-
nity  workshops  and  consultation, and  the  development  of  a  set  of  management
guidelines and protocols to cover Indigenous and non-Indigenous cultural heritage
values.

cultural heritage

Indigenous Cultural  Heritage
d Data Audit of known places of cultural heritage value in SEQ.
d Management Guidelines.

Non-Indigenous  Cultural  Heritage
d Three  background  contextual  studiesÐ Overview  Thematic  History,  Travel

Routes, Forest Towns and Settlements, Sawmills and Tramways.

d Three studies to identify places of potential National Estate (NE) significanceÐ

Places of Historic Value, of Social Value, or of Aesthetic Value.

d Management Guidelines.

The  non-Indigenous  projects  were  undertaken  by  staff  in  the  Department  of
Environment  and  Heritage,  and  external  consultants.26 Field  work  in  SEQ
identified  over  800  historic  cultural  heritage  sites,  of  which  seventy-six  were
considered  of  potential  National  Estate  significance.  Community  workshops
identified 455  places  of  social  value,  of  which  twenty-five  were  of  potential  NE
significance. A study of places of aesthetic value considered 163 places, of which 47
were considered of potential National Estate significance.

The Indigenous projects were managed by the three Native Title Representative
Bodies  responsible  for  areas  within  SEQ,  namely  FAIRA  (Foundation  for

2 4 J. Dargavel, `Politics, policy and process in the forests’ , Australian Journal of Environmental
Management, Vol. 5, pp.  25± 30.

2 5 J. Lennon, `History, cultural heritage and the Regional Forest Assessment process’ , Australian
Journal of Environmental  Management, Vol. 5,  1998, pp.  38± 46.

2 6 Forest Assessment Unit, Department of Environment, National estate: place documentation.  Aesthetic,
historic and social values, A report for the Joint Commonwealth  and Queensland RFA Steering
Committee, 1998.; Powell, op.  cit., note 5; J. Kerr, Forest industry  heritage places study:  sawmills and
tramways, South East Queensland, A report for the Queensland Department of Environment, 1998.

Expanding Horizons

57

Aboriginal and Islander Research Action),  Gurang Land Council, and Goolburri
Land Council.27

Indigenous groups were not prepared to identify places for a variety of reasons,
most  notably  because  of  concerns  about  confidentiality.  Many  of  the  sites  of
significance in SEQ are sacred and secret places and knowledge of them is retained
by  traditional  communities. What  limited  archaeological  survey  work  has  been
undertaken in the region has not always been done with appropriate authorisation
from  traditional  owners  and  has  usually  been  undertaken  as  part  of  the  EIS
(Environmental Impact  Study)  development process. Although  communities are
keen for cultural surveys to  be undertaken, they  want  to  ensure that  appropriate
protocols are applied.

Management Guidelines (Non-Indigenous and Indigenous)
The  guidelines  for  the  management  of  non-Indigenous  cultural  heritage  were
developed by an independent consultant.2 8 A workshop of land managers from the
three government departments responsible for forest management provided input.
The conclusions of the process highlighted a number of issues, namely:

the  need  for  further  studies  to  identify  cultural  heritage  places  and  make
landscape assessments;
the need for a co-ordinated approach to heritage management; and
the  need for improved training of  field staff,  both in identification, assessment
and management of cultural heritage places.

Guidelines  for  the  development  of  protocols  and  principles  concerning  the
management of  Indigenous cultural heritage  interests were  also  developed by  an
independent consultant.29 A  total  of  thirty-four  formal and  informal community
workshops were held with indigenous communities throughout the bio-geographic
region  and  management  protocols  and  principles  were  developed.  Many  of  the
issues raised by Indigenous communities parallel those raised in the Social Values
(non-Indigenous)  community  workshops.  Some  of  the  views  expressed  by  both

2 7 The RFA has only addressed issues in SEQ, and many Aboriginal communities in other parts of
the State have different ethnographic histories as a result of varying levels of acculturation. The
history of forced relocation and settlement on reserves has meant that many traditional owners of
areas within SEQ no longer live there; similarly, many Aboriginal  people have moved to SEQ from
other parts of the State.

2 8 J. Lennon & Associates, Protecting  cultural  heritage  values and  places in South East Queensland  forests,
A report for the Joint Commonwealth  and Queensland RFA Steering Committee, 1998; J. Lennon &
M. Townley, National estate: aesthetic  values, A report for the Joint Commonwealth  and Queensland
RFA Steering Committee, 1998.

2 9 K. Sullivan & Associates, RFA cultural heritage project, Guiding  principles for forest management for
FAIRA, Gurang and Goolburri Land Councils, A report for the Joint Commonwealth  and Queensland
RFA Steering Committee, 1998.

58

Judith Powell

d
d
d
communities  correspond  to  developments  at  the  theoretical  level  concerning
cultural landscapes, social value and other broad cultural heritage issues.

Specific principles outlined by Indigenous communities include:

recognising the holistic and evolving nature of Aboriginal cultural heritage and
Indigenous cultural landscapes;
preserving Native Title rights;
acknowledging Aboriginal associations with forested land, whether that associa-
tion is traditional or historic;
guaranteeing access to places of cultural importance;
ongoing  direct  involvement  in  planning  and  management  of  forests  across  all
tenures;
allowing  traditional stories, knowledge and  management practices to  influence
how the land and forest resources are cared for because `clean water, fauna and
flora, medicine plants and other resources are cultural resources’ ;
expanding plantation forestry in preference to logging native forests, especially if
this can be done on cleared or degraded lands where cultural heritage will not be
damaged;

d managing cultural heritage places `as part of the whole forest landscape, and the

spiritual, social and economic environment in which they exist’ ;
conducting  cultural  surveys,  under  the  supervision and  control  of  traditional
owners;
identifying  and  protecting  cultural  heritage  of  the  forests;  surveys  should  be
conducted as part of long-term land use decision making;
no  activity  undertaking until  a  cultural  clearance  (i.e.  approval  by  traditional
owners) has been given for that development;
involving appropriate people from an area in negotiation and management;
forests are important in educating children and others about Aboriginal cultural
heritage; and
employing Aboriginal people as part of this process.

It is easy to highlight differences in the approaches taken by Indigenous and non-
Indigenous communities to  cultural heritage  issues. Indigenous communities are
concerned with  confidentiality and ownership issues regarding traditional knowl-
edge, and with how to identify traditional owners and the `right’  people with whom
to negotiate. Non-Indigenous communities are, in general, keen to identify sites and
places and are less concerned with the release of such information.

Far more useful, however, is to recognise areas of similarity. There are many of
these, reflecting perhaps the concerns of the broader community as regards heritage
conservation:

d The  need  for  a  broad  definition  of  cultural  heritage.  At  the  non-Indigenous
community workshops, people identified `heritage’  in its broadest sense (it was
`lifestyle’ ,  `leaving  some  of  yesterday  for  tomorrow’ ,  `past  and  present’ ,

Expanding Horizons

59

d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
`education’ ). Similarly, Indigenous people stressed the `holistic’  nature of cultural
heritage (it is about `land’ , `stories and oral history’ , `teaching children’ , as well
as sites).

d Ownership issues.  Heritage  is  seen to  belong  to  people; it  is  not  separate  nor
static. Indigenous communities see heritage as living; non-Indigenous commu-
nities  also  see  cultural  heritage  as  an  ongoing  process  (`keeping  alive  the  old
skills’.30 Cultural heritage  places often are  best preserved through useÐ
as  the
non-Indigenous guidelines  plead,  `Don’t  turn  it  into  a  museum.  . .  if  it’s  a
building  use  it,  get  some  one  to  occupy  it  and  care  for  it’ .31 Ownership  and
context are connected.

d Recognition of  both  expert  and  community knowledge.  Expert  and  specialist
knowledge is welcome, but not when it is imposed from outside or is out of touch
with community perceptions. This is not to suggest that  expert opinion cannot
influence  communitiesÐ
indeed  this  happens  commonly.  But  the  relationship
needs to be a negotiated partnership.

d Co-ordination. Communities seldom take into account artificial or governmental
boundaries, even when they fully understand them! There is broad community
support  for  better  co-ordination  between  government  departments  and
communities.

d The need for community involvement in management and planning at all levels

is commonly stressed.

Figure 3. Wooden Queensland house, Wiss House, Kalbar, Boonah Shire. [Environmental Protection

Agency].

3 0 Forest Assessment Unit, op. cit., note 26b, p. 183.

3 1 Lennon & Associates, op. cit., note 28, p.  42.

60

Judith Powell

Other Regional Models of Cultural Heritage Management
One of the aspects of the RFA process in Queensland that appears to provide the
most  useful  prospect  for  future  planning  and  management  of  land  is  the  inter-
disciplinary  nature  of  the  environment  assessment  (including  both  natural  and
cultural  values)  and  the  regional  approach  involving  a  range  of  government
departments. In both these instances, however, there is much to be learned from
Indigenous communities. Two recent examples in Southeast Queensland show how
Indigenous  communities  can  provide  excellent  lessons  in  the  co-ordination  of
natural and cultural heritage management.

Indigenous communities make  no  distinction between  types  of  land  tenure or
the  government department responsible for  decision making.  Nor  does the  flora
or  fauna.  Forests  rely  on  water;  land  and  sea  are  indivisible.  It  makes  no
difference whether geographic or responsibility demarcations between government
instrumentalities or  agencies  exist  or  notÐ
Indigenous communities see  these  as
irrelevant. The  boundaries  that  Indigenous  communities  do  recognise  are  geo-
graphic and natural; many of these have determined traditional land ownership or
use.

Quandamooka
The area known as Quandamooka includes Moreton Bay, the islands of the Bay and
everything within it. Aboriginal people of Quandamooka have lived and managed
the  sea  and  land  resources there  since  the  beginning  of  time. To  the  people  of
Quandamooka, cultural heritage is `the sustainable use of the resources of the land
and  waters  that  make  up  Quandamooka  . . .  An  impact  on  one  element  of
Quandamooka adversely affects other components of the system . . . Given that the
management of food resources is a significant element of Quandamooka heritage,
cultural heritage management therefore requires conservation of the catchments of
that  resource’ .32 In  1998,  the  Quandamooka  Land  Council  established  the
Quandamooka  Land  and  Sea  Management  Agency.  The  key  objectives  of  this
agency are:

d maintenance of a clean and healthy environment;

recognition  as  Indigenous  custodians  of  Quandamooka  in  a  modern  world;
and

d maintenance of a unique lifestyle.33

The agency takes what it calls a `bottom up’  approach to resource management, and
promotes  the  concept  of  collaborative  management  of  all  resources  within  an

3 2 A.  Ross & Quandamooka Aboriginal Land Council, `Aboriginal approaches to cultural heritage
management: a Quandamooka  case study’ , Tempus, Vol. 6, 1996, pp.  107± 112.

3 3 Quandamooka  Land and  Sea Management Agency (QLSMA), Brisbane River and Moreton Bay
wastewater  management study. Indigenous consultation program, a response, 1998.

Expanding Horizons

61

d
integrated catchment area. The guiding principles upon which the agency operates
are almost exactly the same as those enunciated by Indigenous communities during
the RFA process, namely:

d Native Title;

connectedness;
self-determination;
evolving process;
future generations;
participation;
common ground;
unity of purpose;
negotiation;
expertise;
social and economic development;
living culture; and
respect for others.

Currently, members of the Quandamooka community are involved in environmen-
tal  monitoring programmes with  the  Brisbane River  Management Group. These
include water-quality monitoring and assessing how water quality affects sea-grass
levels  and  therefore  dugong  numbers. Community members are  involved  in  the
identification of endangered fresh and sea water marine creatures.

Fitzroy Basin
At the other end of Southeast Queensland, similar moves are underway to develop
organisations that can monitor the heritage of the Fitzroy River catchment.

Over  the  last  few  years,  the  Queensland  Mining  Council,  the  Australian
Heritage  Commission  and  the  Department  of  Environment  and  Heritage  have
jointly  sponsored the  involvement  of  Aboriginal  groups  within  the  Bowen  Basin
area  in  the  identification  and  protection  of  cultural  heritage  sites.34 The  Bowen
Basin  is  rich in  mineral products and  numerous development projects  are  either
underway  or  planned.  Previous  archaeological  work  in  the  area,  undertaken  as
part of Environmental Impact Assessments, had solicited little or no involvement
from Aboriginal communities. Since  the  advent  of  Native Title,  there  is  `a  legal
basis, founded in both common and statutory law, for involving Aborigines above
and  beyond  other  interest  groups  (e.g.  conservation  groups)  in  the  planning
process’.35

3 4 S. L’ Oste-Brown, L. Godwin & C.  Porter, Towards an Indigenous  social and cultural  landscape in the
Bowen  Basin. Bowen  Basin Aboriginal cultural  heritage project, Cultural Heritage Monograph Series, Vol.
2, Brisbane: Queensland Department of Environment, 1998.

3 5 Ibid., p. 400.

62

Judith Powell

d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
In 1997 an Aboriginal Steering Committee was established to undertake a range
of tasks relating to cultural heritage work, and in the course of this work it became
clear that `there was a real need for a strong body of elders to continue the regional
dialogue with other resource users about resource management problems’ .36 The
Fitzroy Basin Elders Committee has been the result. Their concern is `to make sure
that the land, the rivers and all of the natural and cultural resources of the Fitzroy
Basin  are  managed  properly  for  all  future  generations’ .37 The  priorities  of  the
Aboriginal  communities  within  the  Fitzroy  Basin  are  no  different  from  those
articulated by the people of Quandamooka, or by the communities involved in the
RFA process. They include:

involvement in key regional planning activities;
protection of cultural heritage;
keeping the waters and the environment healthy;
responding better to new developments;
resolving Native Title conflicts; and
improving social and economic conditions for the community.

Conclusion
The  RFA  processes  underway  throughout  Australia  are  a  response  to  political
controversy at the international, national and regional level. Despite the difficulties

Figure 4. Field Naturalists’  Club,  McPherson range,  1918. [Environmental  Protection Agency].

3 6 Gummoowongara, Gummoo Wongara newsletter  One Waater (one  people), November 1998.

3 7 Ibid.

Expanding Horizons

63

d
d
d
d
d
d
Figure 5. Community Workshop, B undaberg, 1997. [Environmental Protection Agency].

of  reaching agreed solutions to the  problems of forest use, some of  the  processes
undertaken along the way may provide positive models for future land and resource
management.

Indigenous communities in Australia have  a  holistic  view  of  their environment
and  do  not  separate  cultural, environmental, social or economic issues. In  many
different  places  and  through  a  number  of  different  processes,  Indigenous
communities are articulating this view and attempting to work across what they see
as  artificial  boundaries. The  adoption  of  a  `catchment’   or  `natural  boundary’
approach to resource management is one that the broader professional community
could usefully adopt. A regional resource approach that  recognises and welcomes
community input is the one most likely to succeed. Whether State forest or National
Park,  management  that  includes  local  people  will  safeguard  the  broad  cultural
heritage  values  within  those  boundaries. Conflict will  never  be  entirely removed
from the management of protected areas, and differing views will always exist on the
balance  between  cultural and  natural  values  whether  they  be  on  the  question of
Indigenous  hunting  in  National  Parks;38 the  presence  of  historically  significant
pastoral  activity;39 or the  presence of exotic  vegetation  associated with  important
past  activities.  But  without  community  involvement,  any  such  conflict  will  be
exacerbated.

3 8 A.  Ross, `Traditional hunting in National Parks and the cultural heritage paradigm’ , Ngulaig, Vol.
11, 1994, pp.  1± 19.

3 9 Frawley, op. cit., note 3; Griffiths, op. cit., note 11.

64

Judith Powell

Cultural heritage is, itself, a cultural construct and as such it should come as no
surprise that changing concepts of our heritage parallel changes in other aspects of
society  and  culture. Multiculturalism, reconciliation and  Native Title  are  just  as
likely to influence our understanding of cultural heritage as concepts of ecology and
biodiversity will influence our understanding of natural values. Cultural and natural
heritage  practitioners  are  learning  to  expand  their  horizons  and  are  developing
broader concepts of the interface between nature and culture. Indigenous and many
non-Indigenous communities already know this.

Expanding Horizons

65


