Making heritage at the Cannes Film Festival

José Antonio González Zarandona

alfred deakin Institute for globalisation and Citizenship, Melbourne, australia

ABSTRACT
This paper is a discussion of how and why film should be considered heritage, 
by analysing the role of the Cannes Film Festival (CFF) in turning films into 
a form of heritage, through a number of different initiatives focused on the 
preservation and promotion of films as heritage. In doing so, the present 
article charts the evolution of the CFF against the background of cultural 
diplomacy  and  heritage.  Studying  the  CFF  from  a  heritage  perspective 
will  contribute  to  theoretical  debates  that  situate  film  festivals  as  places 
where memories and identities are contested and negotiated. The paper 
will show that these heritage-making initiatives are a result of the ability 
of the CFF to respond to changes taking place in an age of international 
contact, to accommodate new trends, new films and emerging national film 
industries. Within this context, this paper also addresses a gap in film festival 
scholarship by engaging in heritage theory to further expand cultural and 
heritage insights.

Introduction
Analysing film festivals to discuss heritage discourses is not a recurrent practice among heritage schol-
ars. For this reason, in this paper I analyse the Cannes Film Festival (CFF), to expand the discourse 
of heritage by recognising film as heritage, and the diplomacy dimension this might entail, to argue 
that the CFF is a space where films are turned into a form of heritage. I argue that the CFF’s efforts in 
heritage (film) conservation has not only contributed to elevating film as heritage to a position where 
it is capable of accommodating more complex and experimental forms of cinema, but in doing so, it 
has allowed the CFF to fulfil its aspirations of playing a significant role in the international film festi-
val circuit, film exhibition and conservation. This provides the opportunity to open up a new line of 
investigation and reference a new range of possible theoretical influences in Heritage Studies. While 
I argue – sometimes quite forcefully – that the CFF is a real social model, which creates forms of 
heritage on a globally distributed population, it must be stated that this is my own theoretical model 
and not CFF’s. The CFF does not use the term, nor does it explicitly state that it intends to use the 
festival as a vehicle of heritage in its quest ‘to draw attention to and raise the profile of films with the 
aim of contributing towards the development of cinema, boosting the film industry worldwide and 
celebrating cinema at an international level’ (Festival de Cannes 2016).

A historical analysis of the film festival shows that in the period from 1946 to 1972, the CFF was 
characterised as a space where countries would show their national heritage through films, mediated 

CONTACT  José antonio gonzález Zarandona 

 antonio.g@deakin.edu.au

© 2016 José antonio gonzález Zarandona. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

782 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

by a cultural diplomacy that framed these heritages. A change in the selection of films admitted to the 
festival in 1972, and the new trends emerging in film aesthetics, as a result of experimentation and a 
new generation of filmmakers, contributed to the creation of special sidebars and sections devoted 
to screen a different type of films. Underneath this desire for difference and expansion lay a drive to 
consider film as heritage, but it was not until 1998 when the CFF changed gears and fully embraced 
different initiatives such as the Cinéfondation, Cannes Classics, the World Cinema Project, the Atelier and 
the Village International that have been steering the CFF since then, into new directions to consolidate 
film as heritage in the international arena. Within this context, CFF acts as a heritage promoter in the 
form of an archive that conserves and screens films (through Cannes Classics mainly), but also as a 
catalyst, supporting young filmmakers to find the finance to produce their first long-feature film, as 
well as facilitating and creating cooperation and film preservation initiatives.

In regard to the structure of this paper, I first establish a discourse of film as/and heritage, as well 
as the role film festivals fulfil in relation to the film industry and as cultural events. I then review the 
concept of cultural diplomacy, after which I provide a brief history of the CFF. Following this, I engage 
in an analysis to show how diplomacy and heritage discourses are strategies that the CFF has used for 
different purposes. In the ensuing discussion I engage with recent scholarship in regard to the history 
of Cannes, to claim that the focus in heritage initiatives should be considered, in order to satisfactorily 
explain the heritage-making efforts that the festival undertakes, thus framing the discussion of how 
and why film should be considered heritage. As a result, this paper will provide an important potential 
route towards a deeper understanding of the wider heritage conjuncture.

Film as/and heritage
Echoing Frick (2008), discourses of (intangible and tangible) heritage rarely include film in their argu-
ments. Certainly, film is mentioned as a tool to re-create the past (Lowenthal 1985, 231, 367) and in 
the debates on authenticity that this use elicits on audiences (Frick 2008; Sargent 1998; Terry-Chandler 
2000). But the role it plays in heritage discourses is minimal. For example, in a recent heritage reader 
(Meskell 2015), neither film nor cinema are even mentioned once. Some scholars (Byrne 2013; Morgan 
2001; Winter 2002) have used a particular film, or film genre, to speak about broader heritage issues, 
but they do not develop a discourse of film as heritage. Only a few papers (Frick 2008; Sargent 1998; 
Terry-Chandler 2000) analyse film with the purpose of advancing the discourse of film as heritage. 
This is not surprising, since heritage discourses often focus on the heritage value of other things that 
more typically define heritage (Lipe 1984; Riegl 1982 [1903]): archaeological sites (Carman 2002); 
landscapes (Howard 2011; Taylor and Lennon 2012) traditions (Karp and Lavine 1991; Kirshenblatt-
Gimblett 1995); practices, processes and management (Ashworth 1999; Cleere 1989; Hewison 1987); 
negotiations and tensions (Ashworth and Graham 2005; Bonfil Batalla 1997; García Canclini 1997; 
Tunbridge and Ashworth 1996), as well as legislations and different critical methodological approaches 
(Byrne 2003; Harrison 2012; Lilley 2000; Smith 2006).

Films, as other works of art, mirror our world. Either depicting reality or fiction, film captures 
our imagination more than any other form of heritage. As Lowenthal (1998, 149) states, films are 
‘postmodern equivalents of oral narratives. Like epic sagas (…) cinema persuades by emotional force 
and immediacy, implanting truths more through the heart than the mind’. This is mot evident in the 
universal language of films that individuals easily recognised, regardless of their economic, social and 
cultural background. Films rely on exhibition value, and their importance resides ‘in being perceived, 
to attract attention and solicit emotional and cognitive responses from the spectators’ (de Valck 2007, 
125–126), enabling viewers to engage with cultures ‘in profound, contradictory, but always meaningful 
dialogues’ (Făgărășan 2014, np). And nowadays, with the quick and easy access people have to film 
through the Internet, DVDs and Blue Rays, more than ever it is one of the most accessible forms of 
heritage. In this context, film shares with heritage the capacity to transport the viewer back to the past 
by means of a time capsule, whilst the authenticity of what is being looked at can also be questioned, 
thus making an illusion of the past in the present (Terry-Chandler 2000). Similarly to cultural processes 

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  783

of heritage (Smith 2006), film is understood, interpreted and evaluated in the present, even if it speaks 
about the past. This is particularly the case for films that scholars have termed ‘heritage films’, ‘costume 
dramas’ and ‘history films’, where history is used ‘to provide picturesque detail’ and offer ‘some authen-
tic re-creation of the past in return’ (Terry-Chandler 2000, 68). However, this ability to recreate the 
past is not without its critics, because film, like heritage, is perceived differently by each culture, thus 
sparking controversies surrounding the politics of representation, ethnicities, religions and cultures 
(Frick 2008, 320). In this regard, film, like heritage, can result problematic when it controls, through 
representation, the heritage of the Other, and appropriates particular heritages (stories, identities, 
ethnicities) that result in a misrepresentation of these identities, and perpetuates stereotypes. Thus, 
films that speak about particular heritages would be widely exhibited, whilst other films may suffer 
censorship and have a limited distribution because of their contested nature.

Film as heritage is traditionally nurtured by discourses of heritage addressing objects with val-
ues (aesthetic, historical and social) and meanings that are subjectively negotiated and endowed by 
particular groups. In this context, film embodies other heritage traits: it is a vessel of meanings and 
values that audiences and critics endlessly interpret, archives manage and festivals curate. As such, 
film reflects our identity as a society that is characterised by the production and conservation of aes-
thetic objects. In this context, it is rather surprising that film has rarely received the same attention 
from heritage scholars, although there are studies that address other art forms and/as heritage (see 
for example Howard 1998).

Furthermore, using Terry-Chandler’s (2000, 70) understanding of heritage, film also evokes ‘an 
imagined past as viewed through the present’, and this ‘past is presented for consumption by contem-
porary society and is consciously or unconsciously shaped by its concerns and debates.’ For this reason, 
film is not an object that is finished once the viewer sees it, because films can be continuously watched 
ad infitinum, thus constantly transforming its meanings and values. Because of this plasticity (both 
film and heritage are malleable), film and heritage have the ‘potential to define a group ethos’, trigger-
ing emotions, experiences and memories, thus creating a bond of identity, ‘solidarity and fomenting 
relationships’ (Kersel and Luke 2015, 71). In fact, some films create such a strong bond of identity 
though the memories they trigger that they are transformed into classics or heritage films – films that 
have marked whole generations, transmitting a message that endures for many decades in the minds 
of viewers. Rebel Without a Cause (1955) by Nicholas Ray; If … (1969) by Lindsay Anderson; The Last 
Tango in Paris (1972) by Bernardo Bertolucci; Pulp Fiction (1994) by Quentin Tarantino; and Amores 
Perros (2000) by Alejandro González Iñárritu are a few films which are now widely regarded as classics.
There is another important facet of film that resonates with the idea of heritage, that of the film 
festival. As Smith (2006) claims, discourses of heritage intercede in the negotiation of social relation-
ships, group identity, historical narratives and collective and individual memories. Similarly, it is in 
film festivals where narratives of films are negotiated and contested by a corpus of experts (critics and 
jury members), and the legitimacy of particular historical or cultural narratives are either rejected or 
embraced, regardless if they are awarded a prize or not. This practice promotes an authorised discourse 
of heritage (Smith 2006), and a top-down perspective on film – although festivals like to promote 
themselves as spaces where dialogue occurs. This is possible because film festivals are not exempt from 
showing a history of film in the same way that heritage is curated by institutions in charge of managing 
it. Certainly it is in the market where films are selected, sold, promoted, exhibited and shown, making 
the film industry meaningful. However, the festival remains influential in adding value to films in the 
same manner as a museum creates, through the process of heritage, a particular value for a certain 
object (Bennett 1995; Witcomb 2003). Moreover, in the case of the CFF, there is more than just an 
exchange of artworks between members of the jury and the audience, because the CFF is a space of 
both cooperation and collaboration, as I shall demonstrate below.

Finally, some heritage films, as many heritage sites and intangible heritage, are threatened and 
at risk of disappearing, and as such, they are ‘worthy of being valued, preserved, catalogued, exhib-
ited, restored’ and ‘admired’ (Kersel and Luke 2015, 71). Again the link between heritage and film is 
important to consider here, because films triggers our memory in the same manner as other forms of 

784 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

heritage. Hence, the CFF has created film archives and supported heritage initiatives to preserve our 
memories and shape film history. But this memorialisation has come to a critical stance in societies 
where individuals are constantly trying to remember while at the same time being anxious about for-
getting. According to Harrison (2013, 581), this ‘has led to a persistent and pervasive “heritagisation” 
of society in which the traces and memories of many different pasts pile up, constantly surfacing and 
intervening in our present’. It is in such context that heritage and film converge, and the CFF plays a 
key role in facilitating this convergence.1

The role of film festivals
The study of film festivals is a relatively new field of scholarship in Cultural and Screen Studies that 
has yet to convey ‘consensus on theoretical underpinnings’ or available methodologies by which they 
may be approached (de Valck 2016; Iordanova 2013, 11). As a result, analysing film festivals through 
the discourse of film as heritage is useful to understand the broader cultural politics that shape them, 
and the ways in which these change under global forms of competition and cooperation.

Film festivals satisfy three major roles in contemporary international film culture: they promote 
art, stardom and business. As film critic Turan states (2002, 9), film festivals are ‘picture windows onto 
a wider, more diverse world and cinema’s place in it’, and they help us ‘understand the international 
political community’s most vexing dilemmas’. Thus, they fulfil three overlapping roles: the political, 
the commercial and the cultural (Iordanova 2013), but it is not always clear where one role ends and 
the other finishes, because the connections are hybrid (de Valck 2007, 29) and the roles are mutually 
dependent. For example, if the authorities in charge of organising a festival are conservative or liberals 
it does not play a significant part, as long as the film festival has a positive impact on the local economy 
and the cultural life of the population by raising the international profile of the city, and developing 
the audiences’ taste for avant-garde and independent cinema (Cousins 2013, 168). However, generally 
speaking, film festivals contribute to ‘the appreciation of film as art’ (Peranson 2013, 191) by showing 
films to an audience that would not be usually picked up by commercial distributors, thus raising 
awareness about social issues. This has been the case with films such as The 10 Conditions of Love 
(dir. Jeff Daniel, 2009), about the fight of the Uyghur people in China, or This is not a Film (dir. Jafar 
Pahani, 2011), which overcame censorship from the Iranian government. These two films premiered 
at the Melbourne International Film Festival and the CFF, respectively.

Needless to say, the commercial/economic role transforms the festival into an instrument of cap-
ital, because with ‘every prize it confers, a festival also confirms its own importance, which in turn 
increases the symbolic value of the prize’ (Elsaesser 2005, 97). Indeed, festivals fulfil a cultural role 
by adding value to the films presented in them, and this value is generated by the coveted prizes the 
festival bestow, thus reinforcing the value of the festival as a distinctive place for awarding selected 
films (de Valck 2016; Elsaesser 2005, 85). All these values cannot be achieved without considering the 
role media plays in promoting certain films over others (de Valck 2007, 125–126), and the attraction 
of the city as a distinctive place, where glamour, art and business-opportunities meet.

Some cities host film festivals because they were once a destination for aristocrats and the city 
authorities want to regain the lost charm. This is certainly the case for Cannes or Venice, for example. 
But for Berlin, Pusan or Toronto it is because these cities hold a key geopolitical venue that a film 
festival was created. Other cities seek to change their industrial façade and become a cultural city, like 
Oberhausen or Rotterdam (Elsaesser 2005, 84–85), thus pursuing the cultural capital festivals generate. 
In any case, after they are born and become part of the global ‘festival circuit’ network, film festivals 
evolve and they cannot be ‘understood as a cohesive network, but rather as a new cultural industry 
administered through the institutional model of the non-profit organisation and an economy of public 
and private subsidy’ (Rhyne 2013, 148).

Like the concept of heritage, the film festival is a European invention (de Valck 2007; Elsaesser 2005, 
71), a result ‘of the post-Second World War era in which culture was seen as a means of encouraging 
friendly relations between states that had formerly been adversaries’ (Corless and Darke 2007, 145). 

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  785

This exercise of cultural diplomacy rests on the notion that festivals are spaces where competition 
occurs that suspends the ‘prosaic considerations of cultural politics and national prestige’, whilst ‘at 
the same time (…) makes them possible’ (Elsaesser 2005, 99). Film festivals provided an excuse to 
reinvent friendship through the notion of culture, as the post-war European political leaders saw in 
cinema a powerful medium to exert some influence on international audiences. It is not surprising 
therefore that only in 1946, four festivals were launched to polish the politically devastated relations in 
Europe between winners and losers: Cannes (France), Locarno (Switzerland), Edinburgh (Scotland) 
and Karlovy-Vary (Czech Republic). The film festival was born thanks to the vision of some who saw 
in an annual gathering of people – the simplest definition of a festival – a new opportunity to develop 
more enduring friendships. The political role is therefore fulfilled when governments need to justify 
the money they are spending in creating international relations through the prizes they bestow in 
their festivals.

Whether a geopolitical battlefield or an occasion to generate business opportunities, film festivals 
are an excuse to gather people who are interested in film, regardless if they belong to the industry 
(actors, directors, cinematographers) or the cultural bodies that feed the industry (critics, historians, 
research institutes, civil organisations and museums). This is possible because film festivals reinforce 
the identity of cultural groups by showing films that aim to educate the society in which they are shown 
‘with explicit interest in engaging identity questions and representational issues’ (de Valck 2016), and 
in which ‘issues of identity politics can be thrashed out’ and ‘audiences can hone their sensibilities’ 
(Rich 2013, 161). For example, festivals such as Jewish and queer film festivals raise the public profile of 
groups in the many cities that host these festivals.2 Their outgrowth in the last decades is also evidence 
that minority groups are using film festivals as means to achieve social empowerment (Richards 2013).
In sum, film festivals have ‘one foot planted in the model of avant-garde artisanship, while the other 
strides forwards on the beat of markets demands within the culture economy’ (de Valck in Corless and 
Darke 2007, 229). They are spaces where new cultural shapes and social nuances are discovered and 
defended, in and outside the screen, and where memories contribute to consolidate an identity larger 
than a particular faith or ethnicity, through images and film aesthetics. From this derives a strong 
reason to consider film as heritage, because film festivals, like any other heritage institution (muse-
ums, galleries), mediate the politics of representation, ethnicities, religions and cultures. Therefore, 
analysing how film festivals mediate these representations in regard to heritage is the starting point 
to ponder how films should be framed as heritage.

Cultural diplomacy and film festivals
Film festivals are not strange to the concept of promoting culture through the exertion of diplo-
matic channels. A growing literature on the subject of film festivals as vehicles of cultural diplomacy 
(Archibald and Miller 2011; de Valck 2007; Fehrenbach 1995; Gallinari 2007; Iordanova 2006; Latil 
2005), highlights the geopolitical role of film festivals in promoting national interests and the inclusion 
of local audiences. However, cultural diplomacy falls short of the efforts and range of the CFF. This is 
because there is more than a simple interaction between countries in the same space, as the festival 
has gradually moved towards forms of heritage where opportunities for cooperation, preservation 
and restoration are created and promoted (see below). Hence my approach to the CFF as a vessel 
of heritage-making, in addition to an exercise of peaceful action in order to obtain power through 
culture (Nye 1990).

Cultural diplomacy emphasises the place of culture in the exchange between nations that promotes 
and develops cultural relations – creating a positive and favourable image of a nation (Akagawa 2014; 
Kersel and Luke 2015; Lane 2013). For the purposes of this paper, cultural diplomacy is defined as the 
promotion of national culture ‘and interactive international cultural exchange’ between governmental 
and nongovernmental actors (Gienow-Hecht and Donfried 2010; 10). This means that in case of the 
CFF, countries invited to attend the festival promote their own ideological and cultural agendas through 
films; heritage-making, on the other hand, emphasises the role of heritage initiatives, in the form of 

786 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

Table 1. list of awards given at the Cff (2009-2016).

Year
2016
2016
2016
2015
2015
2014
2013
2012
2012
2011
2010
2009

Film

Ma’ rosa
Forushande
Bacalaureat
Nie Yinniang
Chronic
Winter Sleep
Heli
Post Tenebras Lux
Dupa Dealuri
Hearat Shulayim
Uncle Boonmee …
Kinatay

director
Brillante Mendoza
asghar farhadi
Cristian Mungiu
Hou Hsiao-Hsien
Michel franco
nuri Bilge Ceylan
amat escalante
Carlos reygadas
Cristian Mungiu
Joseph Cedar
apichatpong Weerasethakul
Brillante Mendoza

Country of origin

Philippines
Iran
romania
South Korea
Mexico
turkey
Mexico
Mexico
romania
Israel
thailand
Philippines

Award
Best actress
Best Screenplay
Best director
Best director
Best Screenplay
golden Palm
Best director
Best director
Best Screenplay
Best Screenplay
golden Palm
Best director

cooperation and development, to accommodate the arrival of new actors in the international film 
arena – strategies related to preservation and conservation. For example, a quick glance at the Official 
Selection in Cannes for the last eight years not only reveals greater diversity in the films selected for 
competition, but it also shows recognition of new film industries taking up major awards (see Table 1) – 
something that would have been unthinkable in the cinematic landscape a few decades ago. This also 
suggests recognition of a shared heritage of humankind that, not only permeates the discourse of 
film as heritage, but the relationship between film aesthetics and international cooperation as well.

Cultural diplomacy and heritage are frameworks from which we can interpret the strategies that 
the CFF assumes and develops to expand the cultural power it possesses, by framing film as/and 
heritage in different manners.

A brief history of the CFF
Most scholars agree that the main reason to launch the CFF was to counteract Mussolini’s propaganda 
that the Venice Film Festival (founded in 1932) promoted, when in 1937 it decided not to award 
its main prize to the French film The Grand Illusion (dir. Jean Renoir), thus fracturing the aesthetic 
commitment of the festival (Rich 2013, 159). Given that film was born in France (in 1895), it is dif-
ficult to accept that the main reason to organise a festival to act as a cultural and political alternative 
to the Venice Film Festival was grounded on an aesthetic discussion. Certainly, film aesthetics were 
responsible for the birth of the European film festival, but as de Valck has shown (2007), a festival like 
Cannes had more geopolitical motivations behind its foundation than anything else: it was also ‘an 
attempt to establish an “international” cinematic forum which could combat the discourses of fascism 
and the international tensions it engendered’ (Mazdon 2007, 16). Therefore, the political aspect should 
not be overlooked because it underlines the desire of the festival to appropriate an art form as part of 
the national patrimony. After all, the festival was funded and organised under the aegis of the French 
State for the benefit of the French State (Gallinari 2007).

Originally planned to have its first edition in 1939, the start of the Second World War prolonged 
it and it was not until 1946 that the first CFF took place (as the Festival International du Film, Cannes 
1946). Audiences in the recently European liberated countries were hungry to see new ways of life 
that could help them forget the horrors of the war, and a film festival would certainly contribute to 
erase those memories (Corless and Darke 2007, 13), by creating new ones.

Nowadays, the CFF is clearly a competition, but in its early days, it was rather a forum. The French 
government consider it a success to have previous enemies all gathered under the same roof in Cannes 
(Jungen 2014, 31). However, remaining neutral was difficult. The impotence and frustration of being 
polite to everybody without hurting sensibilities was reflected in the first edition, where 44 films were 
selected from 14 countries,3 and 21 awards were bestowed as a result of the nationalities of the jury, 
which included representatives from each country that had submitted films. The next edition, held 

Table 2. awards bestowed by the jury in 1953.

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  787

Award
grand Prix
tribute

Prix International du film le 
Mieux raconte Par l’Image

Prix International du film 

d’explorateur

Prix International du film 

légendaire

Prix International du film de la 

Bonne Humeur

Prix International du film 

Prix International du film 

d’aventures

dramatique

Film

director

Country of origin

Le Salaire de la Peur
Duende y misterio del 

Henri-georges Clouzot
edgar neville

flamenco

La Red

Magia Verde

emilio fernández

gian gaspare napolitano

Valkoinen Peura

erik Blomberg

Bienvenido Mister Marshall

luis garcía Berlanga

O Cangaceiro

lima Barreto

Come Back Little Sheba

daniel Mann

france
Spain

Mexico

Italy

finland

Spain

Brazil

uSa

Table 3 list of countries awarded the golden Palm (1955-1963).

Year
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961

1962
1963

Film

Marty
Le Monde du Silence
Friendly Persuasion
Letjat Zuravli
Orfeu Negro
La Dolce Vita
Viridiana
Une Aussi Longue Absence
O Pagador de Promesas
Il Gattopardo

director

Country of origin

delbert Mann
Jacques-Yves Cousteau; louis Malle
William Wyler
Mikhail Kalatozov
Marcel Camus
federico fellini
luis Buñuel
Henri Colpi
anselmo duarte
luchino Visconti

uSa
france
uSa
uSSr
france
Italy
Mexico
france
Brazil
Italy

in 1947, only included members of the French Academy (mostly writers) in the jury, a tradition that 
remained unchanged until 1953, when the festival invited the US actor Edward G. Robinson and 
the Italian actress, Titina de Filippo, to be part of the jury. Still, the festival became known for being 
diplomatic: that same year awarded nine prizes. The titles of the awards not only reflect diversity in 
the different film genres that participated in the festival, but also the nationalities and heritages in the 
chosen films (see Table 2).

Two years later, the Golden Palm was bestowed for the first time. The following countries were 

awarded the coveted prize (see Table 3).4

It is evident that a balance was consciously sought between domestic films, European films, films 
produced by the two worldwide potencies, and from developing countries, to continue the neutrality 
that was achieved during the first editions. Although it is quite evident that there was not a predispo-
sition towards European films, the range of countries and their influence in winning coveted prizes 
provides material for speculation, because it is rather difficult to prove that the Golden Palm was 
subject to forms of governance driven by the festival.

Likewise, the benefits of winning the coveted Golden Palm are not really clear; no study has yet 
been seriously devoted to finding this out. However, Derek Malcolm writing for The Guardian in 1998 
affirmed that if an obscure film wins the award, it will be automatically bought all over the world ‘and for 
a much higher price than it would otherwise have (been) obtained’. The prize certainly draws attention 
to unknown directors and films, but this is not the case for directors whose work is already known, 
or that work in Hollywood. As Elsaeeser claims (2005, 87), ‘No poster of an independent film can do 
without the logo of one of the world’s prime festivals’, and particularly Cannes. In terms of numbers, in 
2015 alone, 32,465 film professionals (film directors, distributors and producers) from 134 countries 
attended the CFF and the film market that occurs at the same time as the festival.5 Thus, winning the 

788 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

Golden Palm refers to issues of branding. A film selected for Cannes is never the same film after it is 
shown in the festival, as it becomes part of Cannes and its filmic heritage. Harrison claims (2013, 582) 
that there ‘seems to be a general perception that once objects, places and/or practices are gazetted, 
and hence transformed into a privileged class of “thing” which we call “heritage”, they will very rarely 
revert or transform into something else’. Once something is considered heritage, it may be conserved 
and protected. The same is true for the CFF with its strict instructions on how to promote the festival’s 
logo on awarded films. As stated on its website, the CFF is concerned about its corporate identity, and 
it implements rigorous guidelines that need to be followed by those who choose to use their logo. 
Indeed, this nation-branding tool (Anholt 2007) confirms France’s image and identity in a positive 
way as a country that uses arts to exert some kind of influence in the international arena (Lane 2013).

Cultural diplomacy by the beach
Since its first edition, Cannes became an important platform to showcase world cinema (mainly that 
produced in Western countries), and a space where national heritages are (re)presented on screen. In 
the first editions, national governments were responsible for selecting and submitting their films to the 
festival. In fact, awards were not handed out to the film director, but to the national delegate (Jungen 
2014, 32–33), the real representative of the film in Cannes. Moreover, films were regarded as heritage 
‘produced under a particular national umbrella’, not the work of a single auteur (Ostrowska 2016). As 
a result and as part of the glamour and the festive ambience of the festival, national delegations would 
then use elements from their own heritage repertoire, such as throwing exuberant parties – with unlim-
ited caviar and vodka in the case of the Soviet Union (Chapron 2011) – to impress and seduce festival’s 
patrons and the jury. The latter, composed of members from the film industry, chose the winner from 
the selected films. To this day, the general delegate of the festival, as well as the president of the jury 
(usually a superstar) chooses the members of the jury. For the first editions, both the president and the 
members of the jury were often selected from a francophone heritage, but gradually, professionals of 
the industry from other countries were also invited to be part of the jury. Nowadays, a multicultural 
and transnational group of filmmakers, actors, actresses, musicians, directors of photography, critics 
and writers decide upon the fate of the winners and losers.6

There is no doubt that the role of nation-states in promoting national representations of identity 
and political agendas, through film, was evident at Cannes. The process was simple: countries would 
nominate films to represent them, chosen from a pool of filmmakers and producers. The amount of 
films attending the CFF was, allegedly, proportional to the overall number of films that each country 
produced, according to the capacity of their film industries (Gallinari 2007). This method of selection 
produced a competition between cultural industries that highly promoted their national identities, 
using an art form to achieve universal recognition for their heritage. The CFF devoted itself to be a 
cultural battlefield where a cultural diplomacy was in place, and national delegations – such as the 
former USSR – would withdraw their selections as a form of protest if other films were clearly favoured 
by the jury (Chapron 2011). Certainly, the CFF gradually became a contact zone for the international 
film festival circuit, where competition was the key force in the power relationship that cultural are-
nas usually create. But this was not always the case. According to Mazdon (2006, 25), the CFF in its 
beginning was more of a space where tourism and glamour would mingle, rather than a space where 
film was appreciated as an art form. Thus, the film festival took strength, arguably in 1972 following 
the proposal by Maurice Bessy, General Delegate of the festival (1971–1977), when governments lost 
the possibility to choose their own films.

According to Jacob (2011, 145), the festival’s General Delegate (1978–2007), the reason for this 
change in the festival’s governance lay in the concern that invited countries would submit ‘dry, unin-
ventive films that followed the rules and were always made by establishment directors’ – films which 
nonetheless contributed to raising the profile of the countries’ national identities and followed a certain 
set of rules and aesthetic criteria. In other words, after 1972, films, not nations, were represented in 
Cannes (Jacob in Museum of Modern Art 1992, 12). Since 1972, the General Delegate of the festival, 

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  789

with the help of its many programmers, selects the films. For many years, this process of selection was 
kept secret but in recent years the names of the people responsible for selecting the films has come to 
light, shedding some invaluable information (Wong 2011, 22).

Generally speaking, cultural diplomacy strategies can be detected from 1946 until 1972. As we have 
seen, countries had the choice of opting for a particular film and denying the ticket to Cannes to other 
films. That is, particular heritages (in the form of narratives, stories or representations) were controlled 
by the nations to attend the festival and represent them. Many films in the Soviet Union, for example, 
had to be cleared by the cultural authorities before they were eligible to attend. Films that did not 
comply with the aesthetic rules of social realism were ignored, as was the case with the films of Andrei 
Tarkovsky (1932–1986), the most famous dissident Russian filmmaker.7 This is understandable, since 
films ‘belonged more to the nation than to the citizens who made it’ (Jungen 2014, 33). In another 
case of political censorship disguised as aesthetic discrimination, the Mexican authorities in charge 
of selecting the films that would compete in Cannes always favoured the same directors during the 
1940s and 1950s: Emilio Fernández (1904–1986), Roberto Gavaldón (1909–1986) and Luis Buñuel 
(1900–1983). This is not the place to discuss the work of these directors in detail, however, suffice is 
to state that their work selected for Cannes is a clear example of the role nation-states play in shaping 
national representations and a common identity, based on traditional rituals and myths, through 
film. Thus, Mexican directors who were critical of Mexico’s political system or did not subscribe to 
a particular representation of Mexican heritage in their films – showing the modernity and progress 
of the nation, or the bucolic landscapes as the backdrop for love stories – were not allowed to attend 
the festival.

And this is also the case with French films. According to Gimello-Mesplomb and Latil (2003), in 
regard to the selection of French films for the Official Selection in Cannes, there is indeed a cultural 
policy at work that favours certain films over others. This mainly obeys to economic reasons, although 
aesthetic factors are also in play. According to Făgărășan (2014), it is the struggle and tension between 
the French cinema of art and quality versus Hollywood and the global film industry that articulates the 
French cinematic identity, thus French films are selected on the basis of their high culture pedigree.
This period of cultural diplomacy based its strength on an interaction of national heritage and 
identity that responded to economic, aesthetic and political reasons. As I have shown, in this period 
Cannes’ success as a festival relied on the fact that national/international identities/heritages were 
represented through film aesthetics mediated by the festival. The cultural diplomacy enforced during 
this period falls under the definition of cultural diplomacy as enacted during the Cold War between 
countries in an asymmetrical relation of power. Films were used to stabilise this asymmetrical balance 
as they acted as diplomats, contributing to shape national identities, thanks to the international expo-
sure, in order to promote favourable images of a nation’s heritage. As Jungen deftly asserts (2014, 32):

The national label established a specific horizon of expectation, which spectators could conjure on the basis of 
their personal experiences. In the same way that American films produced the expectation of stars, high pro-
duction values and a happy ending, Soviet films were identified with documentary images, historical narratives 
and political messages (…).

When governments lost the possibility to choose their own films, this policy was celebrated because 
this meant that previously neglected avant-garde and independent filmmakers would have the same 
opportunity to represent not only their countries, but also a unique and different film aesthetic. 
Alternative sidebars began to flourish: the International Critic’s Week (1962), the Director’s Fortnight 
(1969) and A Certain Regard (1978). Except for the Director’s Fortnight, these sidebars also bestow 
awards, which recognise the cinema produced around the world that prove difficult for the average 
viewer. From these sidebars, some of the most famous film directors have been promoted to interna-
tional stardom, such as Jim Jarmusch or Lars Von Trier, to name two of the most recent examples.8 
As with the concept of heritage, this shift in the canon aimed to ‘recognise a multitude of different 
“heritages” as a consequence of the acknowledgement of the post-colonial politics of representation 
and difference’ (Harrison 2013, 580), and the socio-political and cultural changes that swept the world 
during the 1960s. As a result, for the first time in the festival’s history, developing countries were able to 

790 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

tell their stories from their own point of view, showing diversity in previously unseen film aesthetics. 
By including and creating these sidebars, the CFF allowed a negotiation of values and meanings to 
take place. Thus, non-elite, non-Western stories that challenged or did not conform to universalizing 
heritage narratives were encouraged and promoted, and defined as the special memories of minority 
stories. As a result, film was thus incorporated into a new age of internationalism, defined by a compe-
tition amongst film directors (auteurs), and converging in a space of international contact, supported 
and mediated by the French government.

Heritage films and heritagisation
Arguably, the first effects of heritage initiatives at the CFF were the result of the policy that allowed 
individual filmmakers to submit their work for consideration, thus subverting the governance of an 
institution, to recognise new actors in the cinematic landscape. However, it was not until 1998 that 
there was a clear tendency to encourage heritage film conservation through cooperation and support, 
when the CFF shifted from a vehicle of cultural diplomacy to a festival that facilitates the production 
of new films, and the preservation of classic films.

Since the turn of the millennium, the CFF has enforced a number of strategies that aim to preserve, 
conserve and promote heritage films, namely Cannes Classics. According to the festival organisers, 
Cannes Classics exhibits ‘Important heritage films, which used to be screened as thematic retrospec-
tives (…) a selection that presents restored copies, tributes to filmmaking and documentaries about 
cinema’ (Festival de Cannes 2016). ‘Heritage film’ is a category difficult to define, just as experimental 
or independent film. However, any film that it is part of the Classics programme would be consid-
ered a heritage film, regardless of its nationality or age. Cannes Classics, according to the festival, is 
an initiative to protect and conserve the international filmic heritage. Working in collaboration with 
agencies, film distributors, film societies and even other film festivals (such as the Cinema Ritrovato 
in Bologna), Cannes Classics is an exercise of heritage conservation because it provides the means 
to support the protection and preservation of a specific type of heritage from oblivion. As the same 
festival acknowledges, its (self-imposed) mission is ‘to delight audiences of today with the memory 
of cinema’.9 Thus, Cannes Classics functions as an archive that is continuously recycling memories. 
Within the context of an archive, both heritage and films are given a second life through preservation, 
conservation and exhibition. In the case of CFF, the festival recycles films that were shown in Cannes 
in previous editions, as part of the Official Selection or in the Out of Competition section, by inviting 
the stars that performed in the films, and by means of a special screening – what de Valck calls the 
‘self-referencing’ stage in film festivals (in Ostrowska 2016).

But preservation is only part of the story. International cooperation is also a key player in these 
heritage-driven strategies. Countries like France, Germany, Austria, Spain, Belgium and England 
support the production of films in Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, Guinea-Bissou, Tunisia, Turkey and 
Thailand. This has been possible through the agency of the Village International established in 2000, 
where many countries and agencies10 promote their national heritage, selling ‘their cinematic goods 
(…) to attract filmmakers to their locations through scenery and facilities as well as the many tax breaks’ 
(Wong 2011, 26). Selling exotic locations and offering attractive deals to shoot films not only frames a 
country’s national heritage as a symbol, but it also weighs an essential part in reaching a commercial 
arrangement, in the cultural exchange between film-production companies and two or more coun-
tries. By facilitating this commercial transaction, CFF encourages the commoditization of heritage.
One must not also forget the role that the Cinéfondation also plays in the festival. With the sponsor-
ship provided by L’Oreal, Warner Brothers and Nestlé France, a selection of films made in film schools 
around the world are selected to take part in this prestigious and competitive programme (an Official 
Selection of the Festival de Cannes nonetheless), where young filmmakers present their work at Cannes, 
assisted by the festival. Furthermore, in 2005, the Cinéfondation began another programme, L’Atelier, 
which promotes ‘the creation of new works’ (Festival de Cannes 2016). Whilst the Cinéfondation 
selects medium to full-length features, at the Atelier, projects are selected from around the world, 

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  791

and ‘their directors [are invited] to the Festival de Cannes in order to put them in contact with film 
professionals’ (Festival de Cannes 2016). This occurs in the Village International. According to the 
festival, the Atelier programme enables young filmmakers ‘to gain access to international financing 
and speed up the production process’ (Festival de Cannes 2016).

Is the CFF therefore a space where heritage-making occurs? I argue it is, because the CFF has 
created a network of cultural processes that together consolidate the power of heritage as a collective 
process of meaning-making, by conserving and curating films that talk about our past and the history 
of cinema. It is a space where the prestige of French cinematic, based on a historical appropriation 
of cinema as national heritage (Mazdon 2007), is not only strengthened but disseminated as well, 
and where international exchange is promoted and export of cultural goods facilitated. Moreover, 
the CFF’s exercises of control and support quite often entail conservation aid, whereby one country 
exports or provides assistance to another in order to co-produce, preserve or distribute films. As an 
international festival, the CFF comes to be made and remade through the films shown during the 
festival, made in a local or national context, and financed or co-produced through networks of capital 
and institutionalised practices of heritage facilitated during or at the festival, such as those described 
above. The presence of these films in the global arena that is Cannes ‘repositions them as thoroughly 
hybrid or transnational artefacts’ (Mazdon 2007, 18), and brings into focus multi-directional cul-
tural flows and exchange, thus characterising these strategies as examples of heritage control (Village 
International) and heritage commemoration (Cannes Classic). As an example, one only needs to look at 
the 2010 Golden Palm winner, Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, directed by Thai director 
Apichatpong Weerasethakul, produced by the United Kingdom, Thailand, France, Germany and Spain, 
and rewarded by an international jury in France headed by American director Tim Burton. Thailand, 
United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Malaysia produced his 2015 film Cemetery of Splendour, in 
competition in Cannes.

Another initiative taken by the CFF worth mentioning is the World Cinema Support (also known 
as World Cinema Aid Fund), which seeks to raise the profile of the French film industry as a key sup-
porter for other film industries. This cooperation initiative is one of the two most important activities 
lobbied by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that seeks to ‘promote the heritage works of French 
cinema and the non-commercial distribution of recently created works’ (France Diplomatie 2016). Not 
surprisingly, the fund was announced in Cannes in 2011. Jointly created by the Ministry for Culture 
and Communication and the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, the fund is managed by the 
Centre National du Cinéma et de l’Image Animée (CNC) and the Institut Français, the French Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs operator in charge of looking after French interests overseas. In the 2014 edition 
alone, 11 films supported by this fund premiered at the CFF. Likewise, the initiative Les Cinémas du 
Monde, supported by the Institut Français, sponsors a number of programmes that seek to promote 
artists, ideas and artworks that contribute to present an innovative and dynamic image of creation in 
France (Les Cinemas du Monde 2016). Many of these programmes, such as the L’Aide aux Cinémas 
du Monde (in partnership with the CNC), the Cinémathèque Afrique, and La Fabrique les Cinémas 
du Monde, contribute to the dialogue of cultures and develop professional communities within the 
global film industry. The latter is a professional programme conceived by the CFF and its market, to 
help young filmmakers from South countries – not clearly defined – to enter the international market. 
Under the umbrella of this programme, since 2009 the festival brings filmmakers to Cannes so they 
can present their long-features in the film market (in Cannes since 1959), and they are assisted in the 
elaboration of a programme to finance their projects. This kind of initiatives certainly speaks about the 
CFF’s compromise to introduce and nurture new international actors within the cinematic landscape.
In a hypothetical scenario, a young filmmaker is invited to Cannes for the first time as a member 
of the Cinéfondation or the Atelier. S/he finds financial support to finish his/her first feature film 
and subsequently s/he is invited to be part of a sidebar such as Un Certain Regard or The Director’s 
Fortnight. If s/he is awarded the Golden Camera (an initiative established in 1978 by Gilles Jacob to 
recognise first features competing in the festival), his/her second feature will be invited to be part of 
the Official Selection a few years later. The trajectory is quite predictable: this director eventually wins 

792 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

the Golden Palm and in three or four decades, the film that won his/her recognition is screened in 
Cannes, for a second time, at Cannes Classics, where his/her film is now considered to be part of the 
World Cinema Project.

This latter initiative is also supported by the CFF, through Cannes Classics. Established in 2007 by 
film director Martin Scorsese, as part of his Film Foundation, the project is dedicated to the preservation 
and restoration of neglected films around the world (Project). According to the blurb written on the 
back of the Blue-Ray box-set containing six restored films from Senegal, Mexico, India, Bangladesh, 
Turkey, Morocco and South Korea, these restored and preserved films come from environments ‘gen-
erally ill equipped to preserve their own cinema history’. This is a euphemism to say that these films 
come from developing countries that depict ‘a culture not often seen by outsiders on-screen’ (Martin 
Scorsese’s World Cinema Project, Criterion Collection).

Why and how should film be considered heritage?
Certainly one part of the answer lies in the change of policy that the festival enforced when countries 
were not allowed to send their own selections. As a result, in the last few years, the festival has recog-
nised particular films that depict social issues in their country of origin that would not pass censorship 
a few decades ago (for example, Heli (2013), a film directed by Amat Escalante on the effects of the drug 
war in Mexico). On the other hand, the analysed initiatives have their origins in the switch that saw 
35 mm prints being substituted with digital copies – a technological shift that symbolises the current 
anxiety that permeates the Digital Era, where digital is the new buzzword and digital preservation 
is questioned in regard to its capacity to preserve heritage on a sustainable basis (Pietrobruno 2014; 
van Heur 2010). This precedent taken by the CFF is now even carried out by the European Union, 
urging its member states to take part in the protection of film heritage as part of the Digital Agenda 
for the Europe 2020 Initiative.

And the European Union is not alone in preserving the memory of the past for the future. In 2000, 
UNESCO created the Memory of the World Programme to conserve and preserve the memory of films, 
amongst other material heritage documents. This programme is an archive where countries deposit 
their most precious objects, historically speaking. To counteract the destruction of many libraries 
and archives around the world, this programme seeks to preserve and fight the loss of memories and 
heritage, by enabling the preservation of the ‘world’s documentary heritage’, supporting universal 
access to this heritage, and increasing awareness of the existence of this heritage (UNESCO 2016a).
As a response to this heritage initiative, some countries have submitted films and audio visual 
material to its register.11 But the guidelines under which these films were chosen are not really clear, 
adding to the problem that Harrison (2013) identifies in regard to the lack of sustainable management 
of heritage in the twenty-first century. Moreover, the problem with a programme like Memory of the 
World is that it perpetuates the belief that by adding an audio visual document to a register, one con-
tributes to its understanding and awareness. However, how many films from the Memory of the World 
have been actually publicly exhibited? Granted, some films have been commercially exhibited when 
they were first released (Metropolis, The Wizard of Oz), and some have even been shown in Cannes (Los 
olvidados and the films by the Lumière brothers – considered to be the cornerstone of the cinematic 
form). Nonetheless, this is another case of conservation in the form of an archive, only accessible to 
those who undertake research about them. The films selected to be part of this archive are certainly 
part of our memories, but people do not engage with them and as a result, they remain inaccessible. 
To further reinforce the role this programme is playing in the conservation and preservation of audio 
visual material, amongst other material culture, UNESCO approved in 2005 the commemoration 
of a World Day for Audiovisual Heritage, in order ‘to raise general awareness of the need for urgent 
measures to be taken and to acknowledge the importance of audio visual documents as an integral 
part of national identity’ (UNESCO 2016b). On the surface, these heritage initiatives are processes 
that ‘may appear to be an empty gesture, endowed perhaps with potent symbolism but a passive and 
impotent political performance nonetheless’ (Di Giovine 2009, 33).

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  793

Ostrowska has explored the history of the CFF by looking at four different types of film that 
allegedly the CFF has created throughout its existence. These are ‘humanist film’, the ‘critics’ film’, the 
‘auteur film’ and the ‘Cannes film’ (Ostrowska 2016). In revising the history of Cannes through these 
labels, one aspect of the festival is overlooked, and that is the heritagisation of film and the festival 
that Cannes has pushed forward. According to Ostrowska’s analysis, none of the types of films she 
analyses may be considered in the approach I am suggesting. Indeed, the humanist film does share a 
few notions of the cultural diplomacy that I am analysing here, as part of the heritage strategies that 
the festival encouraged. But framing the 1960s and 1970s through the critics’ and auteur film labels is 
problematic because it focuses on film aesthetics, leaving out the cultural, political and social factors 
that were also instrumental in shaping the festival by accepting new heritage identities. Henceforth, 
considering film as heritage is a better option because it considers not only the aesthetic aspects of 
film, but it also takes into account the cultural processes that influence the way in which films are 
received and perceived by wider audiences. Moreover, film as heritage involves remembering, forget-
ting, communicating, and asserting identity. These aspects are rarely considered in film scholarship 
except from an ontological perspective. If film festivals should be studied because they ‘may change 
our perception of the world’(de Valck 2016), framing them through a heritage lens provides a different 
platform to study them.

This presents some issues worth discussing. If we consider film as heritage, particularly in the case 
of the CFF, does it mean that the latter can bolster claim to authority through film? Certainly it does 
control heritage up to a point. However, the fact that the winners are decided by a culturally diverse 
jury formed by members of the same industry and that the festival encourages emerging film indus-
tries, as well as young filmmakers to attend the festival, speaks about the festival’s compromise to be 
open to contestation. Film festivals are synchronic and diachronic by nature (Harbord 2016), thus 
films from the past can be revived in the present. Likewise, new films are nurtured and supported by 
their exposure in the festival. However, we must understand this dual nature within a heritage process 
– common in other heritage environments – since films become heritage when they are re-launched, 
and they become heritage after they are screened at the festival. How? By acknowledging the potential 
of film as a memory tool that seeks to celebrate the past whilst acknowledging the present.

Likewise, heritage-making is not only limited to the heritage space and experts who create heritage, 
but it is also present in the initiatives taken by the CFF to counteract the decrease in cinema attendance, 
particularly in the European market (MPAA 2016, 5). As an art form that in the future will likely be 
enjoyed in private spaces, homes mainly, as opposed to public spaces, such as cinemas theatres, film 
festivals are constantly changing in order to respond and react to major changes in the way we view 
films and we value culture, art and heritage. Public debate and exposure of films in spaces such as 
film festivals will remain paramount to the reception of films in the future. Therefore, film needs to be 
recognised as heritage, not because it is part of our past, and must be celebrated as such, but because 
film, as I have demonstrated above, shares with heritage many forms of expression, interpretation 
and manifestation to make the case that film is part of a universal heritage. Thus, studying and ana-
lysing film festivals is perhaps the first step to show how this art forms part of our critical vocabulary 
embedded in heritage discourses.

Likewise, as an art form that enjoys popular acceptance and sustains an industry, film should be 
recognised as heritage because it shapes our ideas about culture, and is evidence of our capacity to 
create symbols that communicate ideas and myths about our past in the most persistent visual form 
in the present. If the digital future represents a threat for many filmmakers, then considering film as 
heritage provides a useful toolkit through which debates about the future of cinema can be generated.
Whether these heritage-making practices are endeavour to make sense of the global landscape of 
film, or if they are directed at expanding Cannes’ global influence cannot be said for sure. Regardless 
of the true reasons behind these practices, this situation reflects a desire to be at the forefront of the 
use of culture and art to promote national interests, whilst also demonstrating that France in terms 
of art and culture is still highly regarded in the international arena (Lane 2013). It also reflects the 

794 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

current changes in heritage policy and the new ontologies of heritage (Harrison 2015) that permeate 
global conservation dialogues.

Conclusion
CFF is arguably the most active film festival in the world in terms of heritage film strategies. The study 
of film festivals remain an under-researched topic that heritage scholars may want to focus on more 
in the future in order to unravel the links between heritage, memory and identity. As this paper has 
shown, film was used as a tool in the CFF to reinforce national identities as part of their heritage, and 
promote competition and collaboration of national identities through cultural diplomacy. Heritage is 
made at the CFF on different levels. On one hand, it is made through the promotion of heritage films 
that previously were screened at Cannes in the past, whilst acknowledging their influence in the pres-
ent. On the other hand, Cannes creates heritage by supporting the creation of films that would likely 
be screened at Cannes at some stage or another, in a series of cultural processes that seek to privilege 
and elevate the art of film to a heritage status – that is, film is an art form, an industry, that engulfs 
audiences around the world, but it is also part of the symbolic heritage of mankind. In demonstrating 
so, the theoretical nexus between film and heritage has been established.

I have argued that in the first decades of its existence the festival acted as a mediator of national 
identities, and by selecting and showing films that were previously chosen by national film industries, 
it became the cultural battlefield where national heritages were promoted on the silver screen – a 
symbolic battlefield that was made possible by the exchange of cultural products. As a result, the CFF 
became a space where countries could (re)present their national identities and heritage through films, 
mediated by the diplomacy that Cannes facilitated. I have also argued that the CFF makes heritage 
in the form of an archive that conserves and preserves films, building capacity on the existing links 
between film and heritage. In addition, at the start of the new millennium different initiatives such 
as Cannes Classics, the World Cinema Project, the Village International and the Cinéfondation have 
been steering the CFF into new directions to consolidate film as an important part of our heritage, 
constructing and maintaining strategies of cooperation and collaboration in the international heritage 
arena. The memory of film is thus perpetuated through the duty of care that France endows to film 
as part of its national heritage.

If film as heritage is indeed a new field of enquiry in Heritage Studies, it remains to be seen if the 
model exercised by the CFF will continue as such or if new paths of heritage making will develop, to 
help us remap the field of heritage. In the meantime, it is now time for heritage scholars to focus on 
the relationship between film and heritage, to look for more ways to analyse and interpret film festivals 
as loci where heritage is promoted, preserved, projected and conserved.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

 Another example is the International Federation of Film Producers Associations (FIAPF), the Paris-based 
organisation in charge of bestowing festivals a strict ranking system between A (top rated) and B (second rated), 
according to the guidelines elaborated by the organisation. Cannes is A-rated.
 For example, the Jewish Film Festival, which has ‘branches’ in New York, Melbourne, London, St. Louis, Calgary, 
Miami, Chicago, Las Vegas, Seattle and many cities in Europe.
 Italy, United States of America, Sweden, Denmark, United Kingdom, Portugal, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, 
Egypt, Romania, France, Mexico, Czechoslovakia and India.
 The Golden Palm remained the golden prize of the festival until 1963, when it was discontinued. It was restored 
in 1974 and has been bestowed uninterruptedly since then.
 See http://www.festival-cannes.fr/assets/File/WEB%202,015/PDF/En-chiffres-Accredites-2015-VA.pdf.
 The first non-French president of the jury ever to embrace the honour was Japanese writer Tetsuro Furukaki, 
in 1962.
 Most films that Tarkovski presented at Cannes were not sponsored by the Soviet authorities, and he struggled 
for many years to see his films premiered at Cannes, where they were always a favourite of the juries. In Cannes, 
four of his films won six awards altogether.

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  795

8. 

9. 

 Typically, unknown and first-time directors would win an award in one of these sidebars and then be catapulted 
to international stardom. For their second film, they would be invited to become part of the Official Selection. 
According to the Festival de Cannes (2016), the Official Selection ‘serves to highlight the diversity of cinematic 
creation through its different sections the two most important of which are the Competition and Un Certain 
Regard’. Films that are representative of ‘auteur cinema with a wide audience appeal’ are presented in Competition, 
and Un Certain Regard focuses on works that have an original aim and aesthetic. The Official Selection also 
includes Out of Competition films, Special Screenings and Midnight Screenings, Cannes Classics and the 
Cinéfondation selection targeting film schools.
 Although the CFF has six official languages – French, Spanish, English, Arabic, Chinese, Portuguese, Japanese 
and Russian – a same message does not always convey the same information. For example, according to the 
Spanish translation Cannes Classic’s mission is to ‘preserve the link that audiences of today have with cinema’s 
memory’. ‘Preserve’ and ‘delight’ do not convey the same meaning. Translation by the author.

10.   As of 2014 the following countries and agencies possess a pavilion in the Village: Algeria; Argentina; Azerbaijan; 
Belarus;  Bosnia-Herzegovina;  Bulgaria;  Cameroon;  Canada;  Colombia;  Croatia;  Cyprus;  Czech  Republic; 
Dominican Republic; Egypt; Estonia; France; Georgia; Germany; Greece; Hong-Kong; Hungary; India; Ireland; 
Italy; Kenya; Luxembourg; Macedonia; Montenegro; Morocco; Netherlands; Qatar; Quebec; Russia; Serbia; 
Slovakia; Slovenia; South Africa; South Korea; Switzerland; Thailand; Tunisia; Turkey; Ukraine; United Arab 
Emirates;  United  Kingdom;  United  States;  European  Union;  Cinemas  Du  Monde;  Agence  Du  Patrimoine 
Immatériel De L’état; Austrian Film Commission And Funds; Cnc – Centre National Du Cinéma Et De L’image 
Animée;  Cst;  Denmark  –  Copenhagen  Capacity;  Ecuador;  Film  Commission  Norway;  Film  Development 
Council Of The Philippines; Film France Commission Nationale; Kosovo; L’atelier Du Festival; Latvia; Lebanon; 
Lithuania; Panama Film Commission; Pavillon Next; Producers Club; Puerto Rico Film Commission; Région 
Provence-Alpes-Côte D’azur; Rendez-Vous Des Exploitants; Romania; Société Des Auteurs Et Compositeurs 
Dramatiques; Sweden Film Commission; Unifrance Film International; Ville De Marseille – Mission Cinéma.
11.   Neighbours (Norman McLaren 1952) (Canada 2009); UNRWA Photo and Film Archives of Palestinian Refugees; 
The Story of the Kelly Gang (Charles Tait 1906) (Australia 2007); The Wizard of Oz (Victor Fleming 1939) (USA 
2007); The Battle of the Somme (UK 2005); Metropolis (Fritz Lang 1927) – Sicherungsstück Nr. 1: Negative of 
the restored and reconstructed version 2001 (Germany 2001); John Marshall Ju/’hoan Bushman Film and Video 
Collection, 1950–2000 (USA 2009); Audiovisual documents of the International antinuclear movement ‘Nevada-
Semipalatinsk’ (USA 2009); Leo Tolstoy’s personal library and manuscripts, photo and film collection. (Russia 
2011); Newsreels and photographs of Istituto Nazionale L.U.C.E. (Italy 2013); Los olvidados (Luis Buñuel 1950) 
(Mexico 2003); Lumière films (Lumière Brothers) (France 2005); Ingmar Bergman Archives (Sweden 2007); 
Collection of note manuscripts and film music of composer Aram Khachaturian (Armenia 2013); Desmet 
Collection. Group of films, company documents, posters and film stills from the 1910s (Netherlands 2011); 
The Max Stahl collection of audio visual documents on the Birth of the Nation: Turning Points (Timor Leste 
2013) and the Thor Heyerdahl Archives (Norway 2011).

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Tim Winter for his comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The author acknowledges 
the insightful comments and suggestions of the anonymous reviewers and the guidance of the editor of this journal. 
Any errors or misinterpretations are entirely the responsibility of the author.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Antonio González is an Associate Research Fellow at the Alfred Deakin Institute for Citizenship and Globalisation 
(Deakin University, Australia), analysing the destruction of heritage in Iraq and Syria. Previously, he was tutor at 
The University of Melbourne, where he was awarded his PhD. Antonio has also been Visiting Research Scholar at the 
Ironbridge International Institute for Cultural Heritage at the University of Birmingham (UK). Dr González is the author 
of journal articles published in the Cambridge Archaeological Journal, The International Journal of the Humanities, and 
book chapters published by Palgrave Macmillan and the Germanisches Nationalmuseum (Nuremberg, Germany). He 
is also the author of a book on the history of experimental cinema (Editorial Académica Española, 2012) and the guest 
editor of ISTOR (Mexico), for a special issue on the Histories of Prehistory (2015).

796 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

References
Akagawa, Natsuko. 2014. Heritage Conservation in Japan’s Cultural Diplomacy: Heritage, National Identity and National 

Interest. New York: Routledge.

Anholt, Simon. 2007. Competitive Identity. Houndsmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Archibald, David, and Mitchell Miller. 2011. “From Rennes to Toronto: Anatomy of a Boycott.” Screen 52 (2): 274–279.
Ashworth, Gregory. 1999. “Heritage, Identity and Interpreting a European Sense of Place.” In Contemporary Issues in 

Heritage and Environment Interpretation, edited by D. Ballantyne and R. Uzzell, 112–132. Chichester: Wiley.

Ashworth, Gregory, and B. Graham. 2005. Senses of Place, Senses of Time. Fanrham: Ashgate.
Bennett, Tony. 1995. The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics. London: Routledge.
Bonfil Batalla, Guillermo. 1997. “Nuestro patrimonio cultural: un laberinto de significados.” [Our cultural heritage: a 
labyrinth of meanings.] In El patrimonio nacional de México, edited by Enrique Florescano, 57–86. México: Consejo 
Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes / Fondo de Cultura Económica.

Byrne, Denis. 2003. “Nervous Landscapes: Race and Space in Australia.” Journal of Social Archaeology 3 (2): 169–193.
Byrne, Denis. 2013. “Love & Loss in the 1960s.”  19 (6): 596–609.
Carman, John. 2002. Archaeology and Heritage: An Introduction. London: Continuum Press.
Chapron, Joel. 2011. “Cannes and Russia: A Love-Hate Relationship.” Accessed 2 February 2016. http://www.festival-

cannes.fr/en/article/57957.html.

Cleere, Henry, ed. 1989. Archaeological Heritage Management in the Modern World. London: Routledge.
Corless, K., and C. Darke. 2007. Inside the World’S Premier Film Festival. London: Faber & Faber.
Cousins, Mark. 2013. “Widescreen on Film Festivals (2006)/Film Festival Form: A Manifesto.” In The Film Festival 

Reader, edited by Dina Iordanova, 167–172. St Andrews: St Andrews Film Studies.

Di Giovine, Michael. 2009. The Heritage-Scape: UNESCO, World Heritage, and Tourism. Lanham, MD: Lexington.
Elsaesser, Thomas. 2005. European Cinema. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Făgărășan, Silvia. 2014. “The Tradition of European Film Festivals and Cultural Diplomacy.” http://www.culturaldiplomacy.
org/academy/content/pdf/participant-papers/2014-01-acdSilvia_Fagarasan__The_Tradition_of_European_Film_
Festivals_and_Cultural_Diplomacy.pdf.

Fehrenbach, Heidi. 1995. Cinema in Democratizing Germany: Reconstructing National Identity after Hitler. Chapel Hill: 

University of North Carolina Press.

Festival de Cannes. 2016. “Festival de Cannes.” http://www.festival-cannes.com/en/about/aboutFestivalHistory.html.
France Diplomatie. 2016. “The Fields of Action for Cultural Diplomacy.” http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-

foreign-policy-1/cultural-diplomacy/the-fields-of-action-for-cultural/article/cinema.

Frick, Caroline. 2008. “Beyond Hollywood: Enhancing Heritage with the ‘Orphan’ Film.” International Journal of Heritage 

Studies 14 (4): 319–331.

Gallinari, Pauline. 2007. “L’URSS au festival de Cannes 1946-1958: un enjeu des relations franco-soviétiques à l’heure de 
la « guerre froide ».” [The USSR at the Cannes film festival 1946-1958: a stake in the French-Soviet relations during 
the Cold War] 1895: Revue de l’Association Française de Recherche sur l’Histoire du Cinéma 51: 23–43.

García Canclini, Néstor. 1997. “El patrimonio cultural de México y la construcción imaginaria de lo nacional.” [The 
Mexican cultural heritage and the imaginary construction of the national.] In El patrimonio nacional de México, edited 
by Enrique Florescano, 57–86. México: Consejo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes/Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Gienow-Hecht, Jessica, and Mark Donfried. 2010. “The Model of Cultural Diplomacy: Power, Distance, and the Promise 
of Civil Society.” In Searching for a Cultural Diplomacy, edited by Jessica C. E. Gienow-Hecht and Mark C. Donfried, 
13–29. New York: Berghahn Books.

Gimello-Mesplomb, Frédéric, and Loredana Latil. 2003. “Une politique du cinéma: la sélection française pour Cannes.” 

[A politic of cinema: the French selection for Cannes.] Protée 31 (2): 17–28.

Harbord, Jane. 2016. “Contingency, Time, and Event. An Archaeological Approach to the Film Festival.” In Film Festivals: 
History, Theory, Method, Practice, edited by Marijke de Valck, Brendan Kredell, and Skadi Loist, 69–82. New York: 
Routledge.

Harrison, Rodney. 2012. Heritage: Critical Approaches. Abingdon: Routledge.
Harrison,  Rodney.  2013.  “Forgetting  to  Remember,  Remembering  to  Forget:  Late  Modern  Heritage  Practices, 
Sustainability and the ‘Crisis’ of Accumulation of the past.”  19 (6): 579–595.
Harrison, Rodney. 2015. “Beyond ‘Natural’ and ‘Cultural’ Heritage: Toward an Ontological Politics of Heritage in the 

van Heur, Bas. 2010. “From Analogue to Digital and Back Again: Institutional Dynamics of Heritage Innovation.” 

Age of Anthropocene.” Heritage & Society 8 (1): 24–42.

 16 (6): 405–416.

Hewison, Robert. 1987. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London: Metheun.
Howard, Peter. 1998. “Editorial: Heritage and Art.”  4 (2): 61–63.
Howard, Peter. 2011. An Introduction to Landscape. Farnham: Ashgate.
Iordanova, Dina. 2006. “Showdown of the Festivals: Clashing Entrepreneurships and Post-Communist Management 

of Culture.” Film International 4 (5): 25–37.

InTernATIonAl JournAl oF  HerITAGe STudIeS 

  797

Iordanova, Dina. 2013. The Film Festival Reader. St Andrews: St Andrews Film Studies.
Jacob, Gilles. 2011. Citizen Cannes. The Man Behind the Cannes Film Festival. London: Phaidon.
Jungen, Christine. 2014. Hollywood in Canne$. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Karp, Ivan, and Steven Lavine, eds. 1991. Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of Museum Display. Washington, 

DC: The Smithsonian Institution Press in association with the American Association of Museums.

Kersel, Morag, and Christina Luke. 2015. “Civil Societies? Heritage Diplomacy and Neo-imperialism.” In Global Heritage: 

A Reader, edited by Lynn Meskell, 70–93. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. 1995. “Theorizing Heritage.” Ethnomusicology 39 (3): 367–380.
Lane, Philippe. 2013. French Scientific and Cultural Diplomacy. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Latil, Loredana. 2005. Le festival de Cannes sur la scène internationale. Paris: Nouve Monde editions.
Les Cinemas du Monde. 2016. “Les Cinemas de Monde.” https://www.lescinemasdumonde.com/fr.
Lilley, Ian, ed. 2000. Native Title and the Transformation of Archaeology in the Postcolonial World. Sydney: Oceania 

Publications, University of Sydney.

Lipe, William. 1984. “Value and Meaning in Cultural Resources.” In Approaches to the Archaeological Heritage, edited 

by H. Cleere, 1–11. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lowenthal, David. 1985. The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lowenthal, David. 1998. The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mazdon, Lucy. 2006. “The Cannes Film Festival as Transnational Space.” Postscript: Essays in Film and the Humanities 

25 (2): 19–30.

(1): 9–20.

Mazdon, Lucy. 2007. “Transnational ‘French’ Cinema: The Cannes Film Festival.” Modern & Contemporary France 15 

Meskell, Lynn, ed. 2015. Global Heritage: A Reader. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Morgan, Sally J. 2001. “Heritage Noire: Truth, History, and Colonial Anxiety in the Blair Witch Project.” International 

Journal of Heritage Studies 7 (2): 137–148.

MPAA. 2016. “2015 Theatrical Statistics Summary. Motion Picture Association of America.”
Museum of Modern Art. 1992. Cannes 45 Years : Festival International Du Film. New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Nye, Joseph. 1990. “Soft Power.” Foreign Policy 80: 153–171.
Ostrowska, Dorota. 2016. “Making Film History at the Cannes Film Festival.” In Film Festivals. History, Theory, Method, 

Practice, edited by Marijke de Valck, Brendan Kredell, and Skadi Loist. New York: Routledge.

Peranson, Mark. 2013. “First You Get the Power, Then You Get the Money: Wo Models of Film Festivals.” In The Film 

Festival Reader, edited by Dina Iordanova, 191–204. St Andrews: St Andrews Film Studies.

Pietrobruno, Sheenagh. 2014. “Between Narratives and Lists: Performing Digital Intangible Heritage through Global 

Media.”  20 (7–8): 742–759.

Rhyne, Ragan. 2013. “Film Festivals Circuits and Stakeholders.” In The Film Festival Reader, edited by Dina Iordanova, 

Rich, Ruby. 2013. “Why Do Film Festivals Matter?” In The Film Festival Reader, edited by Dina Iordanova, 157–166. St 

135–150. St Andrews: St Andrews Film Studies.

Andrews: St Andrews Film Studies.

Richards, Stuart. 2013. “Popcorn & Politics: The Queer Film Festival’s Relationship with Homonormativity and Social 

Empowerment.” PhD, School of Culture and Communication, The University of Melbourne.

Riegl, Alois. 1982 [1903]. “The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Character and Its Origin.” Oppositions 25: 21–51.
Sargent, Amy. 1998. “The Darcy Effect: Regional Tourism and Costume Drama.” International Journal of Heritage 

Studies 4 (3–4): 177–186.

Smith, Laurajane. 2006. Uses of Heritage. New York: Routledge.
Taylor, Ken, and Jane Lennon, eds. 2012. Managing Cultural Landscapes. London: Routledge.
Terry-Chandler, Fiona. 2000. “Vanished Circumstance: Titanic, Heritage, and Film.” International Journal of Heritage 

Tunbridge,  J.,  and  G.  Ashworth.  1996.  Dissonant  Heritage:  The  Management  of  the  past  as  a  Resource  in  Conflict. 

Turan, Kenneth. 2002. Sundance to Sarajevo. Film Festivals and the World they Made. Berkeley: University of California 

Studies 6 (1): 67–76.

Chichester: Wiley.

Press.

UNESCO. 2016a. “Memory of the World.” Accessed 12 June. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-

information/memory-of-the-world/about-the-programme/objectives/

UNESCO.  2016b.  “World  Day  for  Audiovisual  Heritage.”  Accessed  12  June.  http://www.unesco.org/new/en/

communication-and-information/access-to-knowledge/archives/world-day-for-audiovisual-heritage/

de  Valck,  Marijke.  2007.  Film  Festivals:  From  European  Geopolitics  to  Global  Cinephilia.  Amsterdam:  Amsterdam 

University Press.

de Valck, Marijke. 2016. “Introduction. What is a Film Festival? How to Study Festivals and Why You Should.” In Film 
Festivals. History, Theory, Method, Practice, edited by Marijke de Valck, Brendan Kredell, and Skadi Loist, 1–12. New 
York: Routledge.

798 

 

J. A. GonZáleZ ZArAndonA

Winter, Tim. 2002. “Angkor Meets Tomb Raider: Setting the Scene.”  8 (4): 

Witcomb, Andrea. 2003. Re-imagining the Museum. London: Routledge.
Wong, Cindy. 2011. Film Festivals: Culture, People, and Power on the Global Screen. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 

323–336.

Press.

World Cinema Project. “World Cinema Project.” Accessed 23 March 2016. http://www.film-foundation.org/world-cinema


