Islamism and Iran’s Islamic Period Museum
Ali Mozaffari*

Centre for Muslim States and Societies (CMSS), Faculty of Arts, Humanities and Social
Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia; Australia Asia Paciﬁc Institute
(AAPI), Faculty of Humanities, Curtin University, Perth, Australia
(Received 25 October 2011; ﬁnal version received 19 December 2011)

The Islamic Period Museum of Iran was established, almost 16 years after the
Islamic Revolution, as an addition to the previous National Museum building –
the Iran Bastan, or Ancient Iran Museum – in 1996. By examining the compo-
nents of state Islamism, the space of the museum and key exhibits, this paper
reveals the analogous relationship between the museum and state ideology. That
relationship suggests that the museum embodies fundamental ambiguities and
inconsistencies inherent in Iranian state Islamism. Those ambiguities and incon-
sistencies are only concealed, in the museum as in the ideology, by employing
traditionalist rhetoric with regard to religion and identity.

This paper examines the relationship between the state ideology of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and its representation in the Islamic Period Museum (IPM) The
IPM is part of the National Museum of Iran and was established in 1996 through
the refurbishment of the former Ethnographic Museum.1 The architectural style of
the building belongs to Europe’s monumental period in the 1930s, the interior, how-
ever, was refurbished and transformed to suit a curatorial narrative speciﬁcally
developed for exhibiting artefacts of the Islamic period of Iran (672 CE to present).
Ostensibly, the IPM represents the nation’s Islamic identity through the arrange-
ment of artefacts, the curatorial narrative. However, its ofﬁcial rendition of that
identity, this paper demonstrates, reproduces the internal tensions of Iranian state
Islamism. Behind the appearance of a coherent place, the museum conceals incon-
sistencies and ambiguities inherent in Islamism as well as its mode of mass inculca-
tion, being the invocation of the familiar sense of everyday religious experience.
This paper begins with an examination of the state ideology and its components.
This is important for understanding the subtle and complex relationship between
that
ideology and aspects of the spatial design and curatorial narrative of the
museum that can address and engage the cultural experiences of museum goers. It
will then introduce the IPM; and focus on the most pertinent elements of the curato-
rial narrative, an exhibition of Koranic manuscripts at the heart of the museum in
particular. Through this examination,
the
museum authenticates Islamism and emphasises the primacy of Islamic identity in

the paper demonstrates not only that

*Email: a.mozaffari@curtin.edu.au

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

260

A. Mozaffari

Iran, but that it does so by invoking traditional ritual and religious practices familiar
to Muslims. Incidentally, it is the traditional veneer of these invocations that conceal
the ideological intent of the museum.

Islamism deﬁnition and its roots
Islamism is not a monolithic ideology. Nevertheless, in Iran and as a general con-
cept, it encompasses different ideological tendencies based on interpretations of reli-
gion that dominated the 1979 Revolution of Iran, and has since become the state
ideology of the Islamic Republic.

The origins of Islamism may be traced back to local reactions to global develop-
ments in the late-nineteenth century; reactions to events such as colonial rivalries in
the region, dominance of Iranian economy by foreign powers, speciﬁcally Russia and
territorial excisions throughout the century. Such events had ultimately resulted in Iran
– then known as Persia – existing in a state of dependency.2 Responses to this trau-
matic era transformed the old Empire of Persia into a modern nation-state, a process
that was driven from the top and by the ruling and intellectual elite.3 A noteworthy
section of those intellectuals were Islamic modernists – those asserting the compatibil-
ity between an ‘authentic’ Islam and modernity. They attempted to reconcile their Isla-
mic identity with European Enlightenment, a move that could have resulted in a
version of Islamic nationalism.4 However, their ideals were not realised as a secular
nationalism dominated the political discourse and, by early twentieth century, a
nationalist state – the Pahlavi monarchy (1925–1979) – with a Westernising and secu-
larising agenda was in power. For a while, in the 1930s, the state suppressed public
expressions of religious rituals and creeds. This, however, did not stop the private
religious and ritual practices espoused by the majority Muslim-Shiite population.5

Towards the later part of the century, the Westernising trends of the state caused
growing unease among some Western educated elite and the more conservative sec-
tors of society. Those trends, they thought, would result in the loss of authentic Ira-
nian identity. Islamism was one of the responses fashioned to the state ideology of
nationalism. It drew on tenets of Shiism and was deceptively familiar to the public
in its appropriation of religious mythology, jargon and rituals. Drawing on such
emotional and cultural connections proponents of Islamism enlisted mass support
for Revolution and the leadership of the clergy. Reacting to the ideology and cul-
tural policies of previous establishments, the Islamic Republic promoted an ofﬁcial
Islamic identity as the authentic identity of Iranians. The IPM of Iran reproduces
and represents in its curatorial narrative and spatial arrangement, that Islamist state.
The Iranian version of Islamism may be deﬁned as comprising the following
three tendencies: Pan-Islamism (also known as Islamic unity), Islamic Authenticity
and Traditionalism. The ﬁrst two are responses to the Enlightenment as a result of
East–West encounters, and invoke interpretations of Shiite (Islamic) identity and
practices (Burke 1998). Traditionalism, on the other hand, was expressed through a
resurgence of the mystical outlook exempliﬁed in Suﬁsm, which is an umbrella
term for the ascetic movements within Islam.

Pan-Islamism
Pan-Islamism is a modern invention that followed the formation of nation-states,
when identiﬁcation with, and loyalties to, the nation were beginning to transcend



261

denominational limits (Enayat 2005, p. 41). It was a consequence of local encoun-
ters with Western Imperial conquests, modernism and the application of the Enlight-
enment ideal of a universal reason. Pan-Islamist thought is characterised by the
incorporation of Western thought into Islamic outlook, thus a certain measure of
Islamic revivalism to suit modern conditions, and political militancy against foreign
domination (Keddie 1994, pp. 485–486). Pan-Islamists attempt to transcend or even
mend confessional divides and consider Muslims as a united nation based in Islamic
lands, a territory where Western encroachments have taken place (Keddie 1972,
pp. 63–64, 130–131).

formulations were,

This political persuasion was an attempt to secure an identity and respond to the
challenge levelled at the people’s outlook by the Enlightenment and its world of
nation-states. While its initial
in nineteenth century Iran,
addressed to the elite (Enayat 2005, pp. 93–95), in the post-World War II period
and particularly from the 1960s, a popularised notion of active and militant Pan-
Islamism came to the fore. This group saw the current condition of the Iranian soci-
ety and its politics as inauthentic. Similar to their brethren elsewhere, twentieth cen-
tury Iranian Pan-Islamists drew upon and radicalised anti-imperialist and revivalist
tendencies of the previous century. They sought to cultivate a transnational reaction
borne partly as a result of popular disillusionment with Westernised governments of
countries with a Muslim population. Its proponents, the militant clergy, some lay
preachers and Islamic scholars and their followers from among the more socially
conservative classes such as the bazaaris (traditional merchants), rejected the Wes-
tern domination of Islamic societies and sought a complete puriﬁcation of those
societies from Western political, ideological and cultural inﬂuence. Pan-Islamists
envisaged that this could be achieved through a return to and reinterpretation of the
basic tenets of religion. In the museum, this tendency would ﬁgure in the form of
the central exhibit and the way Islamic territories are deﬁned and emphasises over
and above national(ist) territories.

Islamic Authenticity
Anti-imperialism, Islamic revivalism and a critical response to Western Enlighten-
ment, which initially ﬁgured in Islamic unity, were also incorporated in another
intellectual discourse focused on authenticity. This will be identiﬁed, after Lee
(1997), as Islamic Authenticity, a movement that became prominent in the Islamic
countries in the 1970s (Lee 1997, p. 1) and was a major contributing element to the
Islamic Revolution and its Islamist ideology.

Islamic Authenticity is fundamentally romantic and characteristically revolution-
ary. It stems from Western romantic debates on authenticity and is characterised by
a critique, or even revolt against both tradition and modernity. Its proponents seek
to construct what they consider to be the authentic Islamic tradition (Lee 1997, p.
16). This reconstructed tradition is different
to dominant social customs, which
Authentics see as impediments to human freedom. Islamic Authenticity is another
response to the identity crisis in Islamic countries caused by the Enlightenment and
its Humanist ideals.

In the Iranian context, this response was fashioned by reinterpreting local Shiite
traditions and rituals in light of Modern Western civilisation.6 It came through a reac-
tion to Pahlavi cultural, social and government policies that aimed at Westernised
progress, which the Authentics thought would result in the loss of Iranian identity

262

A. Mozaffari

and consequently, subjugation to the West. They sought the deﬁnition of authentic
Iranian identity, ﬁrstly in the country’s cultural, meaning religious, traditions and then
in developing a scientiﬁc and rational understanding of the Western civilisation.
Although this tendency is less pronounced than the other two in the space of the
museum, it is detectable in the emphasis on the Islamic identity that dominates the
interior and its relationship to the broader revolutionary discourses of the state.

Traditionalism
Islamic unity and Islamic Authenticity are attempts to repel Imperialism and furnish
a response to the crisis it caused in the East. Traditionalism, on the other hand, is
an attempt to redress the disillusionment with modernity and Western rationality felt
by twentieth century intellectuals – initially in the West, but later globally – since
the Renaissance (Sedgwick 2004, p. 264). The founder of twentieth century Tradi-
tionalism, René Guenon, endeavoured to ‘restore to the West an appropriate tradi-
tional civilization’, a ‘divine order’, which emphasises
the immutability of
traditions and their sacred aspects (Sedgwick 2004). This, essentially modern move-
ment, is in the East merged with Suﬁsm, which is a mystical movement within
Islam that seeks to ﬁnd divine love and knowledge through direct personal experi-
ence of God. Traditionalism is, in spirit, removed from Islamic Authenticity. Rather,
its emphasis on the unity of all being under the aegis of religion, and an ideal ori-
gin located in a romanticised golden past, brings it closer to Pan-Islamism.

In the Iranian society with its powerful, often living, Suﬁ traditions and religious
belief, Traditionalism appeared as the continuation of the existing customs and pen-
etrated ‘signiﬁcant areas of Iranian life’ and politics. Traditionalism is, in spirit,
removed from any kind of Islamic reformism and Islamic Authenticity. Rather, its
emphasis on the unity of all being under the aegis of religion, and an ideal origin
located in a romanticised golden past, is indicative of revivalist tendencies within it.
From a Traditionalist perspective, Iranians have preserved their Persian essence
within the Islamic civilisation. Since Tradition is essentially singular, hence the cap-
italisation, Islam is characterised as the authentic reassertion of timeless truths, also
present in the decayed pre-Islamic Iranian traditions. Therefore, for Traditionalists,
the Iranian conversion to Islam, which followed the Islamic conquest, would have
been an expected and voluntary event. From this perspective, the contemporary Ira-
nian, or Persian, views his or her life as completely and willingly immersed in reli-
gion and its laws (Nasr 1975, pp. 101–121).

Traditionalism’s categorical rejection of Western civilisation and modernity is
also apparent in its rejection of aspects of modernity such as secularism, national-
ism and Westernisation – policies espoused by the pre-Revolutionary State of the
Pahlavis (Nasr 1975, p. 105).

In the museum, as in many instances of the state’s public discourse, Traditional-
ism is the concealing veneer, the gel that covers inherent contradictions within the
ideology deferring contentious matters to tradition. This tendency would inﬂuence
the formation and experience of the main exhibition level within the museum.

Islamism
Iranian Islamism was born from the conﬂuence of the above three tendencies that
are not fully congruent. As a syncretic ideology, it has remained ambiguous and is



263

riddled with internal contradictions.7 For example, Islamic Authenticity’s critique of
tradition is antithetical to the latter’s gloriﬁcation by Traditionalists, while they both
posit differently constructed origins for traditions. Nevertheless, the ideology galva-
nized much of the revolutionary activities, mass support and the direction of events
that followed the Revolution. What these three strands have in common is ﬁrstly a
rejection of the West, Westernisation and modernity on Western terms as symboli-
sed by the deposed monarchy; and secondly, they draw their impetus from familiar
traditions, much of which are dominated by the ethos of Shiism.

The core question of Islamism has been over the relevance of native traditions
to the contemporary conditions of Iran.8 Attempts to formulate a response to that
question have informed the deﬁnition of heritage and heritage policies, and their
practical outcomes have become manifest in the curatorial narrative of the IPM,
where objects are narrated ‘in accordance with Islamic art and philosophy’ (Roohfar
1997, p. 55).

The curatorial narrative of the museum closely reﬂects the above conditions of
Islamism: each one of the three constituents of the ideology is present, without
dominating the narrative. This peculiar condition in the curatorial narrative results
in a general ambiguity in its meaning and ultimately the connotations of the
museum while concurrently assisting the authentication of state ideology.

With this background in mind, it is possible to detect and unravel ideological

cues embedded in the curatorial narrative and architecture of the IPM.

The Museum and its curatorial narrative
The building
The museum is distributed over three levels. The entrance is through a raised
ground level above which there are two other levels dedicated to permanent exhibi-
tion halls: the second level containing the museum shop and thematic exhibitions
and the third level consisting of chronologically arranged exhibitions where histori-
cal periods are determined following the succession of dynasties that ruled over Iran
after Islam. Spatially, the museum forms a concentric interior consisting of a pri-
mary central space surrounded by four secondary wings, one of which constitutes
the entrance and stair hall. It is useful to focus on examples of exhibits on the sec-
ond level and interpret them as the discussion proceeds.

Exhibitions begin at this level. The galleries are entered through a large glazed
wall beyond which there is a steel mesh providing a gridded view of the main hall
of the museum. Framed and gridded views are not uncommon in traditional Iranian
and Islamic architecture, however, such a metal trellis is only found in religious
shrines. Speciﬁcally, the scale of the steel mesh invokes the lattice work in the mau-
soleum of Sheikh Saﬁ ad-Din Ardebili, the founder and central ﬁgure of the Safavid
dynasty, and by implication, for the advent of Shiism in Iran. The visitor may won-
der if this is a hint towards the sanctity of the museum exhibits.

Furthermore, the association with religious shrines, hinting at once to the other
world through death and a sense of the sacred, has potent religious connotations,
which bring together different components of Islamist ideology. In the traditional
religious belief, death is the moment of union with God, a potentially signiﬁcant
puriﬁer. This is manifest in the idea of martyrdom, exempliﬁed in the martyrdom of
the third Shiite saint, Imam Hossein. Both martyrdom and Hossein as its symbol
have been potent political instruments of the Islamist ideology as is exempliﬁed in

264

A. Mozaffari

numerous wall paintings across Iranian towns. To Islamic Authentics, death is the
ultimate expression of individual authenticity and a gateway to a superior knowl-
edge, knowledge of the self. This kind of knowledge is imbued with a sense of the
sacred. There is an overlap with Traditionalism in which self-knowledge, gained by
chosen people, is the gateway to a superior knowledge, which Traditionalists iden-
tify as Sacred Knowledge.

Further to providing a visual clue, the grid also directs visitor movement to a
framed orientational map of the ‘Islamic territories.’ This map, which is entirely in
Persian, suggests the geographical extent of the Islamic Empire (Figure 1). The
most prominent feature of this map is the iconic building of the Ka‘ba in Mecca
(Saudi Arabia) presented in its black cloth cover over yellow the desert colour of
the Islamic lands. Ka‘ba, the House of God, is a sacred Muslim monument with a
cosmological signiﬁcance as well as daily relevance, since Muslims offer their daily
prayers facing Ka‘ba. While in this exhibit, three-dimensional natural features are
represented, and some countries such as Iran, Arabia and Spain are nominated, there
is little emphasis on contemporary geo-political divisions among countries. The
map depicts a pre-nationalist world and rather than overtly connoting contemporary
nation-states, it is Mecca-centric emphasising Islam as the common cultural denomi-
nator of the depicted territories. There are a few place-names on the map, some of
which designate the origins of exhibits in Iran, and some, such as Mosul in Iraq,
are places that have been in cultural exchange with Iran (previously known as Per-
sia) throughout centuries.

The implicit transnationalism on this map may be interpreted as a commentary
on the idea of a nation-state: it subsumes Iran under a notional Islamic territory
without clearly denoting the relationship between the two, Iran and that world. The
map in the IPM is in three colours that constitute a representational hierarchy: a
realistic representation in black for Ka‘ba invoking medieval miniature paintings,
a blue to represent water and an abstract desert yellow for all lands. Perhaps, the
map is intended to suggest to the viewer that there is but one concrete and higher

Figure 1. Orientational map or map of the Islamic world in the IPM.



265

Reality or Truth (symbolised through Ka‘ba) and the rest are only ‘abstractions’
from it. In this process, the notion of a homeland within a distinctive geopolitical
entity is treated likewise, as an abstraction. Instead, the map denotes a spiritual
homeland – the Islamic territory – the heart of which is Ka‘ba (in Mecca). Centring
the Ka‘ba, the map immediately posits Islam as the ultimate source of authenticity
and celebrates a Theo-centric unity that subsumes all other differences and divi-
sions, including national divisions and this would seem out of place in a national
museum. Through visual devices,
this orientational map celebrates the unity of
God, the fundamental doctrine of the Islamic faith, and also, the unity of all being
with God, which is a Traditionalist idea. It also invokes the modern, pan-Islamic
ideal of an essential unity of the Islamic territories and peoples. As an orientational
map, this exhibit can prepare the visitor for the experience of any level of the above
connotations (transnationalism, the Islamic territories as a spiritual homeland, the
centrality of religion in identity), which, as elaborated later, exacerbates the percep-
tual confusion in the museum.

The Koran exhibition
Past the orientational map and a number of smaller exhibits, the visitor steps into
the double-height central hall of the IPM, where the Koranic Manuscripts Exhibi-
tion is located (Figure 2). The space is covered with a decorative plaster dome that
creates an acoustic effect, similar to traditional mosques. The exhibition is slightly
elevated from the surroundings and is facing Mecca, the universal direction of all
mosques. Its general characteristics invoke the idea of early Arabic mosques, which
is reinforced with the presence of a prayer niche and rug within the space. The

Figure 2. The Koran Exhibition with the metal trellis in the background.

266

A. Mozaffari

Koran exhibition constructs its own architectural order in the interior, emphasising
its independence from and authority over the rest of the IPM. The planning of the
space is such that the visitor is required to submit to the autonomy and power of
this exhibition by circumambulating and entering it facing the prayer niche. The
museum space is, therefore, analogous to other Muslim ritual sites, and above all,
the Ka‘ba in Mecca which is distinguished by formal simplicity and circumambula-
tory movement during the rituals.

The collection of Korans at the centre is particularly signiﬁcant for two reasons.
Firstly, the Koran is seen by Muslims as the Prophet’s only Miracle, which is why
the Arabic alphabet constitutes a ‘coherent, consistent and reasonably pan-Islamic’
visual symbol (Grabar 2006, p. 185) and its script is seen by some, including the
curator, as a ‘divine sign’ (Roohfar 1999, p. 27). The Book contains knowledge of
the Divine. The Koran exhibition is thus sacralised.9 This sacralised exhibition
establishes a unidirectional validation from the centre towards the periphery, from
God to all else. This is reinforced by subtler visual cues that make up the atmo-
sphere of the IPM, such as the dominant whiteness of the exhibition, which sug-
gests purity. Secondly, although the Koranic manuscripts in the exhibition range
from the ninth to the twentieth century, historical and artistic evolution is secondary
to the ultimate spatial unity of the arrangement. This imposed unity subsumes their
distinct individual differences in artistic and stylistic expressions of the manuscripts
positing them as different manifestations of the same truth. The explicit attempt for
a timeless and sacred aura distinguishes this exhibition from the rest of the IPM,
while invoking a most familiar religious place, the mosque.

This exhibition may, on one hand, be interpreted as a Traditionalist symbol, an
interpretation that one is tempted to extend to the rest of this level in the museum,
and accords with parts of the state ideology. On the other hand, it may be a repre-
sentation of Pan-Islamism, an interpretation that is consistent with the orientational
map of the museum, the title of the museum – Islamic Period – and part of the state
ideological rhetoric.

Given that the IPM’s curatorial narrative primarily targets Muslims from within
the Islamic Republic (Roohfar 1999, p. 26), the Koran Exhibition has further polit-
ico-historical connotations pertaining to the Islamist ideology. Firstly, to a local visi-
tor, it is likely to invoke the role of mosques as multifarious revolutionary centres
during and after the 1979 Revolution. There is mutual dependence and reinforce-
ment between the institution of the mosque and community leadership in Islamic
tradition. Secondly, by invoking early Islamic mosques, this exhibition suggests par-
allels between the events of the Revolution and those of the nascent and idealised
Islamic community, positing the Islamic Republic as the reincarnation of the Islamic
community and its leader as the heir to Prophet Mohammad. This recalls the Con-
stitution of the Islamic Republic where it declares the objective of the Revolution
to be a return to ‘authentic intellectual standpoints and world-view of Islam’ and
the establishment of ‘ideal society’ based upon ‘Islamic norms,’ under the leader-
ship of a jurist (Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran).

The former curator of the museum has suggested the presence of an holy atmo-
sphere in the museum (Roohfar 1999, p. 26), which recalls the Traditionalist assertion
that traditional art ‘has a sacramental function’ (Nasr 1989, p. 253). From this per-
spective, the Korans, and indeed the rest of the museum, would convey the essence
of humanity and are concerned with the attainment of Sacred Knowledge (Nasr 1989,
p. 259) – the epiphany of God. The curatorial narrative imposes an internal hierarchy



267

among the exhibits, the centre of which is the Koran exhibition – indicating the
supremacy of Sacred Knowledge – surrounded by other types of ‘scientiﬁc, historical
and literary manuscripts10’, repositories of knowledge of a second order, according to
a Traditionalist outlook. Such a concentric hierarchisation results in the classiﬁcation
of more mundane objects of daily life according to museological conventions in the
peripheral galleries of the third level. The strong focus on the Koran Exhibition,
which dominates the totality of the curatorial narrative, does invoke Traditionalism,
but to fully accord with a Traditionalist view, a view that does not subscribe to mod-
ern historicality, historical progress and chronology would be the least of the curato-
rial narrative’s concerns. However, the presence of chronologically arranged exhibits
that seem to historicise objects and impose a notion of historical progress in the
museum results in an ambiguous, albeit religious, impression in this regard.

It is also possible to detect the presence of, Islamic unity and Islamic Authentic-
ity, which acknowledge and respond to historical processes within the museum. The
Koran Exhibition resembles a prototypical seventh century AD mosque, as a central,
politico-religious, civic and exclusively Muslim urban space (Grabar 2006, pp. 109–
110). This universal prototype is pre-denominational, suggesting an authentic, origi-
nal Islam, no longer existing in the contemporary world. It suggests a return to ori-
gins and thus concurs with the orientational map, which subsumes different peoples
and territories into an Islamic territory. It would appear that the thematic galleries on
the second and third ﬂoors accord with this interpretation: they trace historical devel-
opment of art objects, without placing an overt emphasis on Shiism. To this extent,
the IPM’s curatorial narrative transcends denominational, confessional and territorial
divides in favour of a unitary notion of Islam and an Islamic nation.

Yet again, for the museum to be a true representation of Islamic unity, and for
the orientational map to make any sense, exhibits must come from, or be related to,
the extent of that imagined Islamic territory as depicted on that map and this does
not happen in the museum. Instead, ﬁrstly, the information provided at the entry to
each gallery suggests the inﬂuence of Persian art upon the Islamic arts of other
lands, thus designating and separating this as a distinct sub-community, and sec-
ondly, the curatorial narrative utilises an Iran-centred periodization of history, appro-
priate for a national museum, by positioning Iran and its rulers in the context of
larger events in other parts the Islamic Empire and in Muslims in general.

The museum’s message thus remains ambiguous as a result of competing means
of authentication with reference to Islam and the geo-political, national entity of
Iran. Similarly, it could be argued that the curatorial narrative only partially reﬂects
ideas of Islamic Authenticity as the exhibits are not necessarily limited to Shiite
material culture. Instead, the museum seems to be underpinned by a vague sense of
nationalism.

It appears that the conﬁguration of the Koran Exhibition is the main source of
the IPM’s problematic ambiguity. Islamism as revolutionary ideology relied, above
anything else, on ritual manifestations inherited from the Shiite traditions of Iran, a
quality implied in the IPM. The ambivalence experienced towards the museum
space, an ambivalence centred on reutilisation and the inculcation of a sense of the
sacred, recalls state politics where Islamist ideologues invoked Shiite rituals and
legends and co-opted a traditional aesthetic and combining it with other expedient
modes of expression, as required. Thus, the ideology that was itself ambiguous
nevertheless
as
it
appropriated the memory of cultural practices. The museum mimes this quality.

appeared deceptively familiar,

and authentic

traditional

268

A. Mozaffari

Conclusion
The central message of the curatorial narrative in the IPM emphasises the primacy
of Islamic identity over all else. The curatorial narrative establishes a strong link
between exhibits and the refurbished interior of the museum. Exhibits are at once
art objects and yet in some instances, such as the Korans, they are sacred entities
pertinent to daily lives of Muslim visitors. The exhibits thus invoke multiple refer-
ences and this is ampliﬁed by the conﬁguration of the interior space. That conﬁgu-
ration has two attributes. Firstly, a central focus, which has made the position of
the Koran Exhibition all the more prominent and therefore meaningful. Secondly,
a speciﬁc movement pattern that resembles the circumambulatory patterns of Mus-
lim rituals.

in constructing this religious message,

The space, therefore, lends itself to speciﬁc religious interpretations on the part
of the initiated – the local Muslim population. In it, they can imagine their familiar
traditional religious practices such as daily prayers and the type of movement occur-
ring in religious commemorative and pilgrimage rites, be it in a mosque, a saint’s
tomb or other ritual sites. However,
the
museum assists and reinforces the political message of state Islamism. As it was
shown in this paper, the museum makes ‘subliminal’ references to aspects of Islam-
ism. The emphasis of the museum seems to be not so much on detailed historical
and scientiﬁc aspects of exhibits, but on making emotional connections and general
impressions through the totality of space and the experience of movement through
it. This ampliﬁcation of cultural practices and emotive and bodily habits results in a
transient emotional experience that conceals ambivalences and even contradictions
in the curatorial narrative and, by extension, the state ideology. In this space, invo-
cations of religious traditions act as a veneer that conceals the otherwise incompati-
ble messages of the museum and its driving ideology of Islamism. The museum
thus reproduces aspects of Islamism through its spatial and exhibitory relations.
Authenticating that ideology, it also authenticates the state-sanctioned version of
collective identity the core of which is an Islamic identity that is meant to subsume
all other manifestations of identity.

The IPM has been closed to the public for minor refurbishment since late 2008.
It remains to be seen what will come out of this prolonged refurbishment and
whether the curatorial narrative incurs any transformation.

Acknowledgements
The production of this paper was made possible in part through a Publication Grant awarded
by Curtin University’s Faculty of Humanities. I would also like to thank the anonymous
referees and the editor for their comments and acknowledge Associate Professor Nigel
Westbrook from the Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Visual Arts, and Professor
Michael Pinches from the School of Cultural and Social Studies, Faculty of Humanities of
the University of Western Australia for their constructive comments on the original research
project, my doctoral dissertation at that university, from which this paper is drawn.

Notes on contributor
Ali Mozaffari is a research associate at the Centre for Muslim States and Societies at the
the Australia Asia Paciﬁc
University of Western Australia. He is also an associate at
Institute at Curtin University. His interests include place and identity, heritage and museum
studies, cultural and architectural anthropology, cultural politics, Islamism and Iran.



269

Notes
1. An ethnographic museum in this building never actually eventuated despite the fact that
the building was designed and conceived, after a long process, to host ethnographic col-
lections.

2. For the origins of Islamism, see among others, Enayat (2005) and Keddie (1994) and for

a thorough discussion of the ‘state of dependency’ in Iran see Foran (1993).

3. I have discussed this in further detail in my doctoral research, Mozaffari (2010).
4. For

the relationship between the Enlightenment

thinking and Islamism, see Burke

(1998).

5. Shiism is a denomination of Islam and the majority and ofﬁcial religion of Iran.
6. This strand of thought was championed by Ali Shari‘ati. For a summary of his thoughts

refer to Rahnema (1994, pp. 208–250).

7. Such contradictions arguably originate from the ambiguities embedded in the Islamist

ideology. For further reading refer to Burns (1996).

8. This classiﬁcation is a means for analysing the IPM. In reality, there are even more frac-
tures, ideological divisions, and factionalism within the ideology of the Islamic Republic
than articulated in this chapter.

9. Scripture (the Koran) was the Prophet’s only Miracle and is regarded as sacred by all

believers.

10. From the brochure of IPM published in English.

References
Burke, E., 1998. Orientalism and world history: representing middle eastern nationalism and

Islamism in the twentieth century. Theory and Society, 27, 489–507.

Burns, G., 1996. Ideology, culture, and ambiguity: the revolutionary process in Iran. Theory

and Society, 25, 349–388.

Enayat, H., 2005. Modern Islamic political thought: the response of the Shii and Sunni Mus-

lims to the twentieth century. London: I. B. Tauris.

Foran, J., 1993. Fragile resistance: social transformation in Iran from 1500 to the revolu-

Grabar, O., 2006. Islamic art and beyond: constructing the study of Islamic art. Aldershot:

Keddie, N.R., 1972. Sayyid Jamal ad-Din ‘al-Afghani’: a political biography. Berkeley, CA:

tion. Oxford: Westview Press.

Ashgate/Variorum.

University of California Press.

Keddie, N.R., 1994. The revolt of Islam, 1700 to 1993: comparative considerations and

relations to imperialism. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 36, 463–487.

Lee, R.D., 1997. Overcoming tradition and modernity: the search for Islamic Authenticity.

CO: Westview Press.

Mozaffari, A., 2010. Inscribing a homeland: Iranian identity and the pre-Islamic and

Islamic collective imaginations of place. Thesis (PhD). University of Western Australia.

N.A. 1979, 1992. The constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran [Online]. Available from:

http://mellat.majlis.ir/CONSTITUTION/ENGLISH.HTM [Accessed 5 June 2005].
Nasr, S.H., 1975. Islam and the Plight of the modern man. London: Longman Group.
Nasr, S.H., 1989. Knowledge and the sacred. New York, NY: State University of New York
Rāhnemā, A., 1994. Ali Shari‘ati: Teacher, preacher, rebel. In: A. Rāhnemā, ed. Pioneers of

Press.

Islamic revival. London: Zed Books, 208–250.

Roohfar, Z., 1997. The Islamic Period collection. Mooze‘ha [Museums, Persian Journal].

Tehran.

Roohfar, Z., 1999. Fourteen centuries of Islamic culture: the Iranian Islamic Period Museum.

Museum International (UNESCO, Paris), 51, 26–31.

Sedgwick, M., 2004. Against the modern world: traditionalism and the secret intellectual

history of the twentieth century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


