children  to  participate  in  critical  learning.  light,8  using  a  survey  of  1,197
visitors to four Welsh sites, argued that  the educational  effectiveness  of heritage
interpretation  was  poorly  understood.  Images  of  historicised  place  are
experienced by specific social subjects in particular ways.9 Although the ways in
which  adult  visitors  activate  that  knowledge  are  beginning  to  be  addressed,10
the  ways  in  which  heritage  visiting  resonates  through  the  everyday  lives  of
school-age  children  and  affects  the  formation  and  reproduction  of  spatialised
identities, remain  a significant  lacuna in heritage studies.

In  this paper,  we examine  ways in  which  the history  curriculum  developed
for  schools in Wales has  incorporated  themes designed  to promote  a  particular
interpretation  of Welsh  heritage  and  imbue both  a  sense  of identity  and  of an
overtly  Celticised  Welsh  past.  Within  the  National  Curriculum,  these  elements
translate  into  the  Key Stages  and  Attainment  Targets prescribed for  all subject
areas.  Given  the  significance  of  children  as  visitors  to  heritage  sites,
presentations  are  often  geared  directly  towards  the  needs  of  the  curriculum.
These  relationships  between  the  curriculum  and  heritage  places  are  discussed
with  particular  reference  to  Castell Henllys Iron  Age Hillfort  in Pembrokeshire.
Here,  an  attempt  is made  to  encourage  children  to  engage  critically  with  the
consumption  of  heritage.  Role-playing  at  the  site  is  subjective  but,  allied  with
teacher  guidance  and  pupil  evaluation,  offers  new  ways  of learning  about  the.
past.

Our focus is upon the  intersection  of state  education,  the  'heritage  industry'
and  the  grounding  of  identity  in  an  ancient  landscape:  "the  Welsh—together
with  the  Scots,  the  Irish,  the  Cornish,  and  the  Manx—are  the  original  Celtic
inhabitants of Britain. They are the real British in the same sense the American
Indians  are  the  real  Americans'.11  Although  so-called  Celtic  culture,  rooted  in
the  British  Iron  Age, has  been  extensively  critiqued  by  archaeologists  over  the
past  ten  years,  images  of  the  Celts  continue  to  circulate  through  the  various
heritage  media. The ways  in  which  this  notion  of Celt has  been  invested  with
meaning  are more fully  discussed by Piccini.12 The power  of a Celtic identity is
bound  up in  an  anthropological  practice  that  writes  'the  Other',  in  contingent
perceptions  of  time,13  and  in  the  production  and  consumption  of  material
culture.14  This  discussion  is  not  survey-based,  but  in  order  to  examine  the
specific contexts in which children engage with 'Celti-centric' heritage media, we
report observations of and conversations with  a visiting school group from west
Wales at the  Castell Henllys site and incorporate relevant  comments from other
visitors. Central  to  our  approach  is the  belief  that  it  is  through  the  process of
discourse  with  visitors  that  the  issues  revolving  around  the  relationships
between  history  and identity emerge. Learning to think  'with'  heritage involves
addressing  themes  of  identity,  memory  and  the  myths  of  nation,  all  of  which
have been debated  in recent  heritage  literature.15 Heritage representations  may
be understood as a form of carnival that is invoked in the coding of state, whilst
nationalism  is  built  on  a  congruence  of  culture  and  politics16  into  which
heritage media play.

This discussion begins with  a description  of the development of the National
Curriculum  and  its  interpretation  in  Wales  and  then  examines  the  ways  in
which the  history curriculum  in Wales addresses issues of identity. The section

Heritage, Tourism  and
Society, London:
Mansell,  1995,
pp.146-169.

5. D.T. Herbert,  'Does

interpretation  help?'
in  D. T. Herbert,  R. C.
Prentice  & C. J.
Thomas  (eds) Heritage
Sites: Strategies for
Marketing and
Development,
Aldershot:  Avebury,
1989,  pp.191-230.

6. R.C. Prentice,  1995,

op cit. (note  4).

7. M.M. Prentice  & R.C.

Prentice,  "The
heritage  market of
historic sites  as
educational
resources',  in  Herbert,
Prentice  & Thomas
(eds)  op.cit.  (note  5),
pp.143-190.

8. D. light.  'Heritage  as
informal  education',
in D.T. Herbert  (ed)
op.  cit  (note  4)
pp.117-145.

9. J.D. Goss,  'Placing  the

market  and
marketing  place:
tourist  advertising  of
the  Hawaiian
Islands', Environment
and Planning D Society
and Space, Vol.11,
no.6,  1993, pp.663-
688.

10.  G. Fyfe & M. Ross,

'Decoding  the  visitor's
gaze:  rethinking
museum  visiting',  in
S. MacDonald  & G.
Fyfe  (eds) Theorising
museums:  representing
identity and diversity
in a changing  world,
Oxford:  Blackwell,
1996,  pp.127-150.

11.  B.B. Khleif,

Learning  to Think...heritage,  identity  and  state  education  in  Wales

155

Language,  Ethnicity
and Education  in
Wales, The Hague:
Mouton, 1980.

12. A. Piccini,  'Celtic

Constructs:
Archaeology,  Media
and  Identities of
Heritage',  University
of  Sheffield,
Unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, 1999.

13. J. Fabian,  Time and

the Other: how anthro-
pology makes its object.
New  York:  Columbia
University  Press,
1983.

14. D. Miller, Material

culture and mass con-
sumption,  Oxford:
Blackwell, 1987.

15. P. Gruffudd,  'Heritage

as national  identity:
histories and
prospects of the
national  pasts', in
Herbert  (ed) op.cit.
(note 4) pp.49-67.

16. M. Evans,  'Languages
of racism  within con-
temporary  Europe', in
B. Jenkins & S. Sofos
(eds) Nation and
Identity in
Contemporary  Europe,
London: Routledge,
1996,  pp.33-53.

17. R. Dearing, The

National  Curriculum
and its Assessment
Final Report, London:
School  Curriculum
and  Assessment
Authority, 1993.

18.  Department of
Education and
Science, History  in the
National Curriculum
(England), DES:
HMSO, 1991.

19.  Education  Reform

on  'Remembering identity'  examines some of the recent  debate in the literature
of  archaeology,  history  and cultural  studies,  and the case  study  of the Castell
Henllys  Iron  Age Hillfort  allows  some  insight  into  the learning  experiences of
children  at a heritage  site. Our central proposition is not so much  that  what is
structured  as a Celtic past is central  to the curriculum  in Wales, but that  it is
through the active use of the Celtic that  children in Wales are taught to 'think
with the past'. The problematic meanings of 'Celtic' and its links to 'identity' are
therefore of central importance.

Curricular  development
The National Curriculum for England and for Wales (Cwricwlwm  Cenedlaethol)
was a product of the Education  Reform  Act of 1988 and led to the publication
in  1991 of a  set of National  Curriculum  documents  by the Department  for
Education  and  Science  in  England  and  the  Welsh  Office  in  Wales.  These
documents  were  produced  after  wide  consultation,  but  by  1994,  'teething
problems'  had  emerged,  specifically,  the  overwhelming  burden  placed  on
primary  school  teachers  to  understand  and  implement  lengthy  curricular
stipulations.17  Following  reviews,  new Orders  across  all  subject  areas  were
introduced  in  1995,  though  the  1991  and  1995  documents  remained
fundamentally  similar.

The  National  Curriculum  for  Wales  comprised  Welsh  (English  in  English
language  schools),  mathematics  and science  as core  subjects  and seven  other
foundation  subjects:  Welsh  (in English  language  schools),  history,  geography,
technology,  and  a  modern  foreign 
language,  music,  art  and  physical
education.18  The curricula  were  divided  into  Key Stages  (KS 1 to  4)  taking
pupils through to their General Certificate  of Secondary Education  examinations
at  sixteen. All pupils were required to study both  history  and geography to the
age  of  fourteen.  The  Education  Act  specified  Attainment  Targets,  or  the
'knowledge, skills and understanding which pupils of different  abilities and levels
of maturity are expected to have by the end of each key stage.'19

History  was  the  only  national  curriculum  subject  to  have  a  separate

committee to advise the Secretary of State for Wales, and History in the National
Curriculum  (Wales)/Hanes  yn  y  Cwricwlwm  Cenedlaethol (Cymru)  set  out key
stages,  attainment 
targets,  and  levels  of  attainment.  Knowledge  and
understanding  of  a  distinctively  Welsh  history  was  made  an  explicit  goal
through  teaching pupils:
•  Chronology as a framework  for learning about past events and developments
•  The  variety  of  human  experience  in  the  past  including  the  economic,

political, social and cultural dimensions of history

•  The social,  cultural,  ethnic  and religious  diversity  of societies  and of the

experiences of men, women and children in these societies

•  Past  events  and  developments  in  Welsh,  British,  European  and  World
history, their inter-relationships and their value as avenues for exploring and
understanding the past

•  Awareness that the past can be viewed at differing  levels: local, national and
international;  chronologically  and thematically;  over  long  and short  time
spans

156

R. Pyrs Gruffudd,  David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

Act, 1988, Section 4
Order History,
London: HMSO,
1991, p.5.

20. Welsh Office/Y

Swyddfa Gymreig,
History in the National
Curriculum
(Wales)/Hanes yn  y
Cwricwlwm
Cenedlaethol  (Cymru),
Cardiff: Welsh  Office,
1991.

There  is  a  specific  sense  of  the  role  of  the  past  within  the  present  that  finds  a
place  at each key stage of the curriculum. Pupils are expected  to  'appreciate  the
links  between  the  history  of Wales  and  the  geography,  languages  and  cultures
of  Wales'.20  Wherever  possible,  Wales's  past,  is  seen  as  distinct  from  that  of
Britain  as  a  whole.  Welsh  themes  are  also  brought  in  to  more  general  topics
such  as  'War  and  society',  'The  world  of work',  'Frontiers'  and  'Migration  and
emigration'.

The  three  attainment  targets  in  the  Welsh  curriculum  are:  knowledge  and
understanding  of  history;  interpretations  of  history;  and  the  use  of  historical
sources.  They  use  material  culture  and  archaeological  approaches  to  create
concrete,  specific  histories  linking  the  object  world  to  personal  memory.  At  an
early  stage,  pupils  are  taught  to  put  together  a  series  of  personal  and  family
photographs  and  belongings  in  chronological  order  based  on  the  idea  that  the
reality of things (as opposed to text) is somehow  a truer picture of what went  on
in  the  past.  Later,  pupils  are  introduced  to  concepts  that  include  the  idea  that
lack  of evidence  about  the  past  may  lead  to  varying  depictions in  books of past
life. They also study the ways in which museum-based material culture can help
us  to  understand  how  past  peoples  went  about  their  everyday  lives,  seemingly
dominated  by pragmatic  acts of survival.

For Key Stage 2  (KS2), pupils are first introduced  to specific time periods  and

Invaders  and settlers: end  of Roman  rule  to  Viking invasions
life  in Tudor  and  Stuart  times
life  in Wales and Britain  in Victorian  times

cultures  and  are  taught  eight  out  of fifteen study  units, that  include:
•  Early peoples: Prehistoric, Celtic and  Roman  Britain
• 
• 
• 
•  Houses  and  households
•  Writing  and  reading
•  Food  and  farming
•  Crafts  in  past  societies
The first three units on  this list are  compulsory.

'Houses  and  households'  provides  opportunities  to  use  archaeology,  museums
and  heritage  centres; domestic  space becomes  a  template  for  understanding  the
past.  'Food  and  farming'  inscribes  human  activity  onto  wider  perceptions  of
landscape;  'Crafts  in past  societies'  are  those  of the  Iron  Age, the  medieval  and
early  modern  periods. The  aesthetics  of craft  making  also  'spatialise'  the past  in
rural  terms  with  traditional  crafts  serving  to  express  the  values  of  the  gwerin.
Loosely  translated  as  'men,  people, democracy'  and  the  idea  of folk  culture,  the
gwerin  has been  a  central motif in Welsh  language  culture.

The  'Celtic' topic in  the  'Early  peoples'  study  unit  identifies  Iron  Age themes
such  as  tribes,  hill  forts  and  chieftains;  farming  and  daily  life;  Celtic  religion,
druids,  myths  and  legends.  The  'Invaders  and  settlers'  unit  includes  study  of
'The  coming  of  Christianity',  both  Celtic  and  Roman,  reflecting  the  historical
importance  Christianity  has  enjoyed  in  the  construction  of  a  Welsh  nation.
These  themes  also  form  the  core  of  the  educational  programme  at  Castell
Henllys Iron  Age Hill  fort.

Learning  to  Think...heritage,  identity  and  state  education  in  Wales

157

21.-N. Tate,  'National

identity  and  the
school  curriculum',
Welsh Historian,
Spring  1996, pp.7-9.

22.  P. E. Willis,  Learning

to  labour,
Famborough:  Saxon
House,  1977.

23.  Curriculum  Council

for  Wales,  The Whole
Curriculum 5-16  in
Wales, Cardiff: CCW,
1991.

24.  Ibid, p..2.

Educational  identities
The  debate  about  the  role  of  schools  and  curricula  in  fostering  children's
identities  has  recently  intensified  and  the  most  provocative  question  has  been
whether  pupils should  be  'taught'  British, or even English, identities. The Chief
Executive  of the  Schools  Curriculum  and  Assessment  Authority  (SCAA), joined
the  fray  with  an  article  titled  'National  identity  and  the  school  curriculum'  in
which  he  argued  that  ethical  relativism  and  postmodernism  have  eroded
'traditional  assumptions  about identities and values'.21 While it is clear that  the
'constructedness'  of cultural  traditions  does not  negate  the meanings we invest
in  them,  Tate's  argument  that  we  should  not  be  afraid  of  holding  up  'our'
identity as superior to others illuminates its highly problematic nature. Although
pupils  are  not  social  dupes  and  engage  creatively  with  state  curricula,22  the
potential  dangers  of  constructing  a  particular  sense  of  identity  from  archaeo-
historic narratives  are clear.

In  Wales,  there  has  been  no  hesitation  in  speaking  about  and  teaching  a
Welsh  identity.  The  Curriculum  Council  for  Wales's  Curriculum  Cymreig
includes  a  topic  titled  'Belonging:  what  it  means  to  be  Welsh'  designed  'to
enable  pupils  to  think  critically  about  the  nature  and  significance  of
nationality'.23  Questions for pupils include:
Does nationality  depend on where you are born?
Do you take your nationality from your parents?
What if your parents have different  nationalities?
Is a Welsh speaker more Welsh? (Than a non-Welsh speaker)
Can we change our nationality?

In Wales, nationality  and identity  are conflated  and this may marginalise those
pupils in  Wales who  may not  be Welsh  from  birth  but  who  see themselves  as
Welsh.  Officially,  Welsh  educators  and  policy  makers  seek  to  define  Wales  in
inclusive  terms  through  reference  to  shared  histories  of  oppression.  The
Curriculum Cymreig aims to link  all subject  areas to questions  of Welshness in
what is still a controversial  approach to education in Wales.

Curriculum  Cymreig  is  the  Curriculum  Council  for  Wales's  (CCW),  now
renamed  as  the  Curriculum  and  Assessment  Authority  for  Wales,  attempt  to
ensure  that  the  curriculum  in  Wales  properly  reflects  the  distinctiveness  of
Wales whilst acknowledging that it is not a culturally uniform  country.  In The
Whole Curriculum  5-16  in Wales (CCW, 1991) it was stated  that:

The Welshness of the curriculum will manifest itself differently  in each school.
However, all subjects should be taught in such a way that the content is
meaningful  and relevant to the pupil's own experience within his/her
community.24

Place  and  heritage,  belonging,  language  and  literature,  the  creative  and
expressive arts and religious beliefs  and practices comprise the  specific  elements
that  make  up  a  Curriculum  Cymreig.  Set  within  a  framework  of  aims  and
objectives, pupils are expected to begin to understand  themes such as:

158

R. Pyrs Grufflidd,  David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

•  The  geographical  environment  of Wales, thereby  gaining  an  understanding

of the relationship between the environment  and the people

•  The  history  of  Wales  and  of  Wales's  relationships  with  other  parts  of  the
United  Kingdom,  together  with  an  appreciation  of  past  and  present  links
with Europe and the wider world

•  The contribution,  past  and  present,  which  people fromm  Wales have made

to the development of their own and other nations'  cultures

•  Celebrate  the  fact  that  the  cultures,  languages  and  traditions  of Wales  are

distinctive, whilst respecting the values of other cultures

•  Providing  all  children  in  Wales  with  access  to  the  Welsh  language  and
opportunities to refine  their  ability to use it as a medium  of communication
either  as a first or second language

•  Learning  about the heritage of fable  and legend -  a part  of Welsh experience
and  of  the  traditional  Welsh  love  for  the  spoken  word  as  exemplified  by
many poets, story-tellers, orators, preachers  and some politicians
Introducing pupils to the range and variety of Welsh literature in both Welsh
and English, and stimulating an  awareness of Wales's rich literary tradition
•  The distinctive  nature  of Welsh  music, both  traditional  and  contemporary,

• 

vocal and  instrumental

•  The  Celtic  artistic  and  craft  tradition,  and  the  manifestation  of  artistic  and
including  knowledge  of

craft  skills 
contemporary Welsh artists, sculptors  and craft  workers

in  Wales  over 

the  centuries, 

•  Technology, as seen in many aspects of the built environment in Wales, past

and present

•  The Christian  tradition  in  both  church  and  chapel,  and  its influence  on  all

aspects of Welsh life

The  Curriculum  Cymreig  enables  teachers  to  include  specifically  Welsh  themes
in  all  subjects.  Celtic  design  can  provide  themes  for  art  lessons;  the  Celtic
tradition  is  discussed  in  Religious  Education  even  though  the  idea  of  a
specifically  Celtic church  is contested.  Cross-curricular  work  in  primary  school
can involve studying various types of Celtic 'stones' or monuments as a  unifying
topic  for  history,  geography,  Welsh,  art  and  religious  education.  These would
include  cromlechs,  Stonehenge  (with  its  controversial  links  with  the  Preseli
hills), Carnac, hill forts and stone burials, Celtic crosses, Ogham writing, Gorsedd
stones  and  Welsh  stone  houses.  Extra-curricular  activities  such  as  visits  to
museums  and  open-air  sites  are recommended.  To foster  critical  approaches  to
the  past,  the  stated  aims of the  Council's  approach  to history  teaching  include
those of helping pupils to:
•  Come to  their  own  conclusions  about  the  validity  of  the  various  historical

interpretations they will encounter

•  Use procedures which help to promote historical  objectivity
•  Respect historical interpretations other than  their own
•  Understand better the ways in which the attitudes and values of contemporary
society are shaped by the ways in which the past has been, and is, presented

•  Become more tolerant of the views of others
•  Become more effective  citizens in a democratic society

Learning to Think...heritage, identity and state education in Wales 

159

25.  R. W. Bushnell, A

Culture of Teaching:
early modern
humanism in theory
and practice, Ithaca
and  London:  Cornell
University  Press,
1996.

26.  M. E. David, The

State, the Family and
Education, London:
Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1980.

27. R. Samuel,  Theatres of

Memory.  Volume 1:
Past and present in
contemporary culture,
London: Verso, 1994.

28.  M. Ferro, The Use and

Abuse of History,
London:  Routledge
and  Kegan  Paul,
1981.

29.  A. D. Smith, The
Ethnic Origins of
Nations, Oxford:  Basil
Blackwell, 1986.

30. B. Anderson,

Imagined  Communities,
London: Verso, 1983.

31.  T. Eagleton,

'Nationalism:  irony
and  commitment' in
T. Eagleton (ed)
Nationalism,
Colonialism  and
literature,
Minneapolis:
University  Press,
1990,  pp.23-39.

32. A. D. Smith, The

suppression  of nation-
alism?', International
Journal of Comparative
Sociology, Vol.31,
nos.1-2,  1990.  pp.l-
31.

33. J. Whetter,  A Celtic

Tomorrow, St Austell:
MK Publications,
1973.

The aim of linking a sense of Welsh identity with wider curricular goals belongs
to  the  humanist  concept  that  education  is  inherently  good25  and  to  the
politically  rightist  view  that  traditional  approaches  to education  are central to
the  preservation  of 'our cultural  heritage'.26  Since  the  1970s,  the number of
museums  and heritage  centres  has increased  rapidly  and this,  together  with
more child-centred  approaches to teaching, has created  a climate in which the
use of material culture has become 'increasingly central to teaching practice'.27
As Ferro argued,'  ... our image of other peoples, or of ourselves for that matter,
reflects the history we are taught as children.'28

Remembering  identity

There can be no identity without memory (albeit selective), no collective purpose
without myth, and identity and purpose or destiny are necessary elements of the
very concept of a nation.29

As Anderson has commented in the context of 'imagining communities', nations
and  nationalism  have  to  be  understood  not  by  aligning  them  with  'self-
consciously held political ideologies' but, rather, with large cultural systems and
their productions.30 We argue that heritage as cultural production is not merely
symptomatic  of  nationalism,  it  is  central  to  any  understanding  of  British
national  identities.  Archaeo-historic  media  narratives  reproduce  images  of a
unified  Britain  through  the  aggressive  flattening  out of contingent  Iron Age
material remains and the assertion that at root, Britain as a whole was a Celtic
nation  with  little  difference  among  the many  peoples  of the islands. Yet those
who seek to assert a Celtic specificity  for Ireland, Wales, Scotland and Cornwall
subvert  this  very  British  heritage  in  their  claims  for  distinct  nationhood
grounded  in  prehistoric  Celtic  identities.  Eagleton's  observation  that  'all
oppositional  politics...  move  under  the  sign  of  irony,  knowing  themselves
ineluctably parasitic on their  antagonists' has clear resonance in this respect.31
Although these issues are sometimes dismissed as the 'merely museological and
touristic',32  they  are central  forms  by which  the habits  of identity  are made
concrete and nationalism is made visible.

Appeals  to identity  are used  to make  discourses  on the theme  of nation  a
natural  and  ongoing  process.  Identity  in  this  sense  is  understood  as  a
particularly fluid way of conceptualising 'self  by bringing together geographical
imaginations, blood, and roots:

To be proud of one's community, one's nation is no bad thing. It is not much
different  from being proud of one's family. ... Among all people there is this
desire to discover one's roots, to have a place, a geographical area which one
can call home.33

Whetter  used  these  words to justify  a distinct,  political  sense of Cornishness
but visitors to spaces of Celtic heritage in Wales often  echoed similar sentiments.
One visitor described  Welshness as having  gone through  a period of being very
weak but was now 'coming back very strong, especially with the youth'. Visitors

160

R. Pyrs Gruffudd,  David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

34.  E. Hobsbawm  & T.

Ranger  (eds) The
Invention of Tradition.
Cambridge:  University
Press,  1983.

35.  K.  Lunn,

'Reconsidering
"Britishness":  the
construction  and  sig-
nificance  of  national
identity  in  twentieth-
century  Britain',  in
Jenkins & Sofos  (eds)
op. cit.  (note  16)
pp.8 3-100.

36. M. BiUig, Banal

nationalism, London:
Sage,  1995.

37.  A. D. Smith,  'Ethnic

myths  and  ethnic
revivals', European
Journal of Sociology,
Vol.25,  1984,
pp.283-305.

38.  B. Anderson,  op  cit.
(note  30)  pp.178-85.

39.  A.D. Smith.  1984,  op

cit.  (note  36).

40.  P.  Connerton,  How
Societies  Remember,
Cambridge:  University
Press,  1989.

41.  Ibid. p.95.

42.  Ibid, p.  17

often spoke of 'roots' suggesting a linear and physical connection with an actual
past.  The  language  of  'roots'  raises  the  issue  of  a  Celtic  ethnicity,  itself  an
arguable and contested term. Consumers of Celti-centric heritage media continue
to speak in  a language  of identity that  circulates  around  'roots'  and  'ethnicity';
in  everyday  life, people continue  to see identity  as a  'function  of being'  that in
Wales  means  a  specifically  ethnic  link  to  the  Iron  Age.  The  assertion  that
identity  is fixed somewhere  in  the  past,  implying  a  closure  that  resists  critical
discussion, is problematic.

Yet  cultural  traditions  and  identities  are  not  wholly  'invented'.34  Indeed,
focusing  on  historical  inaccuracies  in  narratives  of  identity  rooted  in  the  past
merely  reinforces  notions  that  some identities  are  more  authentic  than  others.
As Lunn argued, 'we need to recognise ... that national identity has always been
a  constructed  identity  and  ... moves beyond  a  simplistic  evocation  of historical
identity  to  acknowledge  the  constancy  of  active  formation  and  reformation'.35
What  is  interesting  is  that  in  the  face  of  the  'always  present'  of  cultural
identities  36  we  continue  to  see identity  as something fixed, handed  down  and
treasured,  much  like heritage  itself. Both  heritage  and  identity  are  given  form
through  the  physical  remains  of the  past  in  which  'we  locate  "ourselves"  and
dignify  "our  communities"  by  references  to  an  ancient  pedigree  and  time-
honoured  environment'.37  The  borders  between  communities  are  effectively
reasserted  through  museum  spaces  which  give  form  to  the  kinds  of  archaeo-
historically based nationalist  narratives,38 increasingly  used in school curricula.
Pupils within the nationally sanctioned curricula are taught  specifically  to think
in terms of historicised identity mapped onto past physical landscapes. As Smith
reminded  us,  state  formations  such  as  education  are  all  about  creating  loyal
citizen bodies conscious of their stake in the territorial  realm.39

Appeals to memory play an important role in both heritage places and myths
of nation  through  their  encapsulation  in  the  material  world  and  are  'sustained
by  (more  or  less)  ritual  performances'.40 
Particularly  interesting  is  the
formation  of habit  as knowledge  and  'a  remembering  in  the  hands  and  in  the
body'.41  We  argue  that  the  performance  of  habit  is  central  to  the  linking  of
heritage spaces, school education and the spatial grounding of identity in Wales.
What we will see as a focus  on technology  and  the domestic spaces of the past
in  both  curricula  and  heritage  narratives,  invites  school  children  to  engage
physically in the performance  of contingent images of Welshness. As Connerton
argued:

If we are to play a believable role before an audience of relative strangers we
must produce or at least imply a history of ourselves: an informal account
which indicates something of our origins and which justifies or perhaps excuses
our present status and actions in relation to that audience.42

We  would  argue,  from  information  gathered  during  interview  work  with
visitors  to  Celtic  heritage  sites  in  Wales,  that  although  the  English,  to  some
extent, experience a crisis of identity, they do not always recognise that  sense of
crisis in what they define as Celtic. As one male adult visitor commented: "They
know that they are Celts but they have their own ideas of Celts that may not be

Learning to Think...heritage, identity  and  state  education  in  Wales

161

connected with this kind of (place)'. Another adult female visitor was anxious to
declare the shared heritage of the British: 'It made you feel proud  that  we lived
on  this  island,  whether  you're  Scottish,  Welsh,  whatever,  that  we  had  a
heritage,  a  past  that  a  lot  of  people  in  America  don't  have'.  Some  of  this
difference  may  arise  from  educational  practice.  Children  in  Welsh  schools  are
encouraged  to  think  in  terms  of  their  historical  identity.  Heritage  media  are
actively used to reassert and reproduce the borders between communities and to
give  form  to  archaeo-historically  based  narratives.  The  act  of  consuming
heritage media viewed as a form  of 'carnival', includes the communal  gathering
and  performing  of  specific  gestures  and  identities,  whether  that  involves  the
watching  of  television  documentaries,  the  visiting  of  heritage  centres,  or
.participation  in  school-based  history.  We  are  faced  with  a  complex  of  Celti-
centric  heritage  media  that  are  seen  by  those who  consume  it  to  represent,  if
not  the whole truth,  then  certainly  an  authentic representation  of the  value of
the past in the present.

Siting the past
The  ways  can  now  be  examined  in  which  auricular  agenda  and  issues  of
identity  formation  come  together  in  children's  active  engagements  with  the
spaces of Celti-centric heritage media. Castell Henllys Iron Age Hillfort  is a large,
self-contained  heritage site with a singular heritage theme, built on  and  around
the remains of an inland promontory fort. Managed by Pembrokeshire National
Park,  Castell Henllys incorporates  the  reconstructed  Late Iron Age site,  and  an
on-going  excavation  (headed  by  Harold  Mytum  of  York)  of  the  subsequent
Romano-British  settlement  just  to  the  north-west.  There  is  a  heritage  trail
illustrated  by 
the  Dyfed
Archaeological Trust in  the late  1980s; areas for  'representative' Iron Age wild
boar  and  Soay sheep;  a  shop  and  offices;  and  an  architectural  award-winning
education  centre for school groups.

interpretive  panels  designed  and  written  by 

Interpretive  panels  with  their  images  of male  druids,  warriors  and  farmers,
and female weavers and cooks illustrate this story of the past and literally  frame
(but  not  dictate)  visitors'  movements. As fixed snapshots  of  the  Iron  Age,  the
panels  direct  movement  along  marked  paths  and  present  ways  of  seeing  and
reading  specific  places,  which  are  based  on  conventional,  highly  gendered
accounts  of  Iron  Age  life.  These  static  images  are  elaborated  as  visitors
encounter  the working excavation,  reconstructed  animal pens and roundhouse.
The  excavation,  metaphorically  and  literally,  grounds  the  academic  knowledge
presented  on  the  heritage  trail  by  providing  an  intimate  connection  with  the
past  in  the  shape  and  texture  of layers  of soil, scattered  stones  and  bones  and
apparently  random  patches  of  dark  earth.  The  roundhouses,  based  on  the
experimental work of Peter Reynolds at Butser Farm, Hampshire, take the story
above ground with  their interiors filled with modern interpretations  of Iron Age
material  culture.  These  interpretations  are  based  on finds from  the  whole  of
Britain neither  specific  to one place nor time nor to any period of occupancy  at
the  Castell  Henllys  site.  The  spatial  arrangement  represents  much  of  the
information  contained  in  the  interpretive  panels,  thus  making  concrete  and
three-dimensional  a particular,  linearly narrative  textual past.

162 

R. Pyrs Grufiudd, David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

43.  M. Dillon,'  The

archaism  of Irish  tra-
dition'. Proceedings  of
the British Academy,
Vol.33, 1947,
pp.245-264.

A typical  day  for  primary  school pupils  (KS  1 and  2)  consists  of being told
Celtic stories, which  link  the  hill fort  and  the Preseli hills  to  the  wider body of
Celtic mythology.43 These are used to 'read off  Iron Age social relations from an
early medieval ecclesiastical practice and merely perpetuate  stereotypes  that  the
Celtic  fringes  are fixed in  the  mists  of  time.  At  Castell  Henllys,  the  children
practise basket-making, wattle and daubing and engage in 'warrior training'. As
a  volunteer basket-maker  at the site told us, the children  'pretend they're living
in  the  Iron  Age'  and  this  'brings it  alive to them'.  This was  of course  only his
view. In  reality,  the  learning  process  must  involve the  careful  contributions of
teachers, background material, pupil interaction,  and role-playing.

The  specifically  educational  content  of  the  day  begins  with  a  talk  at  the
education  centre  that  introduces  the  site  to  the  children.  They  are  greeted  by
role playing  volunteers  who  initiate  children  into  the  past  by telling  them  the
story of Culwch and Olwen and then  guide them  out into the site and  'into the
past'  along a spiralling path. The first engagement  of the children with heritage
is  in  the  literal  grounding  of  their  footsteps  along  this  path.  They  enter  the
reconstructed hill fort site, sit around the fire in the main roundhouse and listen
to  'real live Celts' tell them  about life in the past. This telling, like the  National
Curriculum version, is dominated by a focus on technology.

The roundhouse  narrative  reproduces  the  stereotypically  aggrandising  Celtic
identity  by  associating  it  with  the  familiar  everyday  domestic  space  of  the
roundhouse.  The  site  volunteer  that  role-plays  as  Culwch  introduces  the
children to Celtic Iron Age life:

Now then, here we are in your new home. This is where you're going to be
living while you're here. What do you think? It's good isn't it? It's a lot better
than the houses you live in, I expect, because we are great builders.... We'll get
in some nice straw or hay to make beds for you and then we'll get you some
nice things to sleep on. But as you can see, it's not bad as it is. We've got the
fire, and the smoke's rising up as we saw from outside...there's no hole in the
roof for the smoke. It just finds its way out of the roof through the thatching
and as it goes it helps to preserve the thatch and, as we also say, from the
outside.... And because the roof is so thick it keeps us warm in the winter and
cool in the summer.

Culwch  refers  to  the  construction  of  the  building,  describing  the  way  in
which  the  roof  is  thatched  and  mentioning  such  key  elements  as  posts, pegs,
walls  and ring beams  (the circular frames which  tie together  all the  wall posts
in  to  a  structurally  stable  unit).  Culwch's  words  serve  to  convey  succinctly  a
wide  array  of  knowledge.  The  past  is  made  familiar  to  children  through
comparison  between  past  and  present  and  reference  to  everyday  domestic
features  such as beds and heating. However,  those beds are made of straw  and
the  heating  consists  of  a  central  hearth  fire.  The  space  may  thus  serve  as  a
physical  metaphor  for  both  the  familiar  and  the  strange.  Beyond  that,  the
domestic  space  becomes  defined  first  and  foremost  as  a  functional  space. This
corresponds with the technological focus in the curriculum as a whole and early
history  teaching  specifically  where  the  domestic  space  becomes  a  template  for

Learning  to  Think...heritage,  identity  and  state  education  in  Wales

163

44.  K. McCone,  Pagan
Past  and  Christian
Present  in Early  Irish
Literature,  Maynooth:
An  Sagart,  1990.

understanding  the  past.  Contingent  modern  perceptions  of  comfort  are  also
mobilised in order to initiate the children  into the space.

A  discursive  relationship  between  the  physicality  of  past  and  present  is
stressed  throughout  the  introductory  lesson  about  Iron  Age life.  Culwch's  first
question  to  the  pupils  is whether  anyone  knows  how  to  build  a  wall. A child
answers,  'Yes, we get cement'. To reinforce  the fact that the children  are meant
to  feel  as  though  they  are  living  in  the  past,  Culwch  replies  'Who?  Is  that  a
person in your village?'. There follows  a discussion among Culwch and a few of
the  children  which  rests  on  the  relative  modernity  of cement,  bricks  and  slate
(which  the  children  list  as  essential  components  of  the  Welsh  home)  versus
'proper'  building  which  consists  of  wattle  and  daub.  Wattle  then  provides  an
introduction  to  the  practice  of  weaving  which  Culwch  describes  as  'very
important'  in Celtic life. Yet the domestic remains a strictly functional  space for
Culwch:

Now I don't know if you noticed when you came in that the roofs go almost all
the way down to the ground. Did you notice? The reason for that is to keep the
walls dry and stop the wind blowing, but the main reason is to keep the walls
dry. That's how we build the houses.

Celtic culture comes into the educational narrative after pupils have practised
weaving with branches and daubing a wattle wall.44 Culwch brings the children
back into the roundhouse to tell them of Celtic feasting, drinking, adventure and
magic. These tales are intended to spark the imaginations of the children, but in
fact they help to set up interesting oppositions between ritual and functional;  the
everyday  and  the  out-of-the-ordinary;  and  the  object  and  the  text. This fact  of
the oppositions encourages the children's critical evaluations; they can recognise
that  there is more than  one version of the past and that it can be interpreted in
different  ways. Further, they are learning about the past in ways that differ  from
the  story  telling  of  the  classroom;  it  is  a  form  of  engagement  with  a
representation  of history that  adds a dimension to their experiences.

There are no obvious connections made between  the technological  emphasis
of the early part of the day and the romantic picture of Celtic culture portrayed
later in the afternoon.  The wider landscape around the roundhouse enclosure is
mythologised  as  a  mystic  landscape  of  Welsh  Celts  battling  with  unseen
neighbours  for  resources  and  prestige.  As  this  exercise  links  in  with  a  Welsh
curriculum  geared to teaching  spatialised,  distinctly Welsh history,  it is notable
that  both  heritage  discourses—the  functional  and  romantic—are  two  sides of
the  same  coin  of  academic  practice  in  the  past,  largely  centred  in  the  English
experience.

However,  the Curriculum  Council for  Wales facilitates  critical  approaches  to
history  and  it  was useful  to  explore how  the  children  themselves  responded  to
this knowledge. We spoke with a group of pupils from the school being observed
and they  answered  a few questions. The children  told us that  Castell Henllys is
'about  what  the  Celts  used  to  do  and  what  they  used  to  build'  (BOY1)  and
expressed their knowledge of Celtic culture in chronological terms:
RESEARCHER:  And who were the Celts?

164

R. Pyrs Gruffudd,  David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

People who  used  to  live  2000  years  ago.
BC
BC

B0Y2: 
B0Y1: 
BOY2: 
RESEARCHER:  Have  they  got  anything  to  do  with  you?
B0Y1: 
BOY2: 

They're  our  big  ancestors  and  they  formed  our  buildings.
And  your  family....

Later  in  our  conversation  we  asked:
RESEARCHER: 

B0Y1: 

But  do  you  think  about  living  in  Wales  because  the  Welsh
used  to  be Celts?
It  makes  me 
think  of  my  great-grandfather's  great-
grandfather  and  what  used  to  happen,  like  adventure  in
thosetimes.

RESEARCHER:  And  I  suppose  that's  really  exciting?
BOY2: 

And  maybe  it's  the  same  only  2000  years  ago—that  my
great-grandfather's  great-grandfather  was  sitting  here  having
a  Celtic  lunch.

These  children  had  already  mastered  the  chronological  sequencing  of  KS1
which  involves  personalising  time  through  reference  to  (gender  specific)  family
lineage.  It  is  also  clear  that  that  lineage  is  also  expressed  in  terms  of  ethnic
kinship  with  the  past.  As  in  Culwch's  lesson,  that  past  is  a  heroic  (male)  one
layered  onto  a  functional  narrative  of space.

However,  the  children  themselves  are not  unaware  of the  potential  conflict  in

the  opposition  between  adventure  and  the  everyday:
RESEARCHER:  What  else  can  you  tell  me?
BOY1: 

The  Celts  used  to  be  great  warriors  and  they  used  to  have
different  gods,  like  the  tree  gods,  the  sky  gods,  and  the  river
gods.

RESEARCHER:  How  do you  know  they  were  great  warriors?
BOY1: 
Because  there  are  remains  of  the  swords,  shields  and  spears.
RESEARCHER:  How  do  you  know  that  makes  them  warriors?  Because  if  you
think  about  it,  there  are  lots  of  weapons  today  and  not
everyone's  a  warrior.
Well  some  of them  were  fanners  and  some  were  warriors  just
like  we  are. They  had  different  jobs  and  stuff  like  that.
They  could've  done  the  same  job.
Lots of people used  to know  about  the  Celts and  their kids told
their  kids  who  told  their  kids  and  now  we  know.

RESEARCHER: 
B0Y2: 

BOY1: 

Clearly  our  questions  were  understood  as  cues  with  the  children  answering
in  terms  indicating  their  familiarity  with  curricular  archaeo-historic  narratives
which  associate  a  distinct  Wales  with  Iron  Age  Celts. Divisions  of  labour,  work
differentiated  in  terms  of  separate  jobs  are  also  naturalised  through  curricular
emphasis  on  discrete  uncontextualised  social  roles.  These  roles  become  mapped
as  separate  landscapes  with  the  everyday  of  'Food  and  farming'  overlaid  with
the  ritual  spaces  of  battle  and  adventure.  Again,  as  with  the  conceptualising  of

Learning to Think...heritage,  identity  and  state  education  in  Wales

165

time as patriarchal  lineage, these spaces are read as male domains. When  that
version of the past is questioned, the children know how to appeal to the logical
progression of linear time expressed in traditional historical narratives.

Interestingly, the girls we spoke with told us that  what they liked best about
the  site was seeing 'the insides of the houses'. The boys, however,  envision the
uses of the past in terms of understanding.
How electricity is made.
B0Y1: 
B0Y2: 
You  can  find  out  that  there  were  no  batteries  and no
computers a long time ago.

By KS2 children are well aware of their own places in gendered spaces of the
present (and of the early association of 'black technologies' with boys and 'white
technologies' with girls) and use that knowledge to make sense of and spatialise
the  past.  Educators  foster  critical  approaches  to archaeo-historic  interpretation
but  use  narratives  of  the  past  to  reproduce  contemporary  identities,  that
encompass such diverse issues as gender and cultural politics.

Conclusions
What  emerges  from  this  work  is the overarching  sense  of children  learning
appropriate  modes  of thinking  through  engagements  with  concrete  archaeo-
historic  representations.  These  in turn  reproduce  clearly  formed  identities  that
are mapped onto specific spaces. Pupils are provided with a vocabulary to speak
the past. They learn to envision human  activity in terms of achievement with a
technological focus, structured  around given periods of past time. Underlying the
theme of historical development, however, is a focus on identity tied to the belief
that to understand who we are now, we have to understand who we once were.
There  are  serious  issues  surrounding  the use of  heritage  media  to  portray
narratives  of Celtic  culture  as unproblematic.  Children  and other  visitors who
engage with the spaces of heritage are clearly influenced  by these narratives. It
is the Celtic Iron Age as represented in heritage media that continues to be used
as  a  talisman  of  being  and it  therefore  needs  sensitive  deconstruction. The
children  interviewed  revealed  a keen  interest in the issues identified  by and for
them.  Some  observed  that  the interviewers  had become parts of their  heritage
experience, others that  they had been made aware of interesting  questions  that
they  had hot previously  considered.  Children  reacted  very  positively  to the
opportunity  to  engage  actively  with  questions  of why they  were  at  specific
heritage sites and what  they were being asked to consume.

Memory, structured chronologically, and its meaningful  constitution  through
the use of 'things'  shapes children's  experiences of the environment  and fosters
their  identities in the context of nationhood.  Gendered  identity is defined  along
with  contingent  gender  roles  and  gendered  spaces  naturalised  through  the
measurement  of time. Heritage  sites and museums  reproduce  this  emphasis on
linear  and often  causal  change. Although  the national  curriculum  for history
has  attempted, by for example,  'mixing and matching'  periods of time, to move
away  from  a strict  chronological  approach,  the focus  on technological  change
preserves the progression from the simple to the complex.

Although  the  linking  of  chronology,  materiality  and  gender  within  the

166 

R. Pyrs Gruffudd,  David T. Herbert and Angela Piccini

educational  curriculum in Wales is problematic, the resolutely material focus of
archaeo-historical  educational  narratives  seems to provide  a  useful  connection
with the 'thingness' of life. While it may be romantic nonsense to speak of life in
the  past  as simpler  and better,  study  of past  technologies  can connect  pupils
with objects, and with the making of meaning  through the use of objects, even
if  that  meaning  is  encapsulated  in  terms  of better  or  worse.  Certainly  the
complexity of past human relationships is masked, but what is clearly exposed is
our  own relationship  with  the physical  world  in the present  and our distance
from the means of material production.

Of course,  the whole  purpose  of representing  the past  to  children  in these
ways is to make it easily understandable, and examinable because it is 'good' to
know history. The past is often  presented to children in terms of adventure and
romance  in order  to catch  their  interest.  But perhaps the difficult  question we
need to ask is whether there is any point in teaching and learning history if past
lives  have  to be translated  into  the language  of the life-worlds  of late  20th-
century  children?  The harnessing  of archaeo-historic  narratives  to  a  specific
curricular  goal  of communicating  a  sense  of a  distinctly  Welsh  past,  with its
cultural  characteristics,  may in  fact  have  the effect  of reproducing  the very
modes of thinking  and social relations  that  educators in Wales have  sought to
challenge.

Acknowledgement
This  research  was funded  by the Board  of Celtic  Studies  of the University of
Wales. During the period of funding  support, Angela Piccini was appointed as a
Senior Research Assistant to the project.

Learning to Tbink...heritage, identity and state education in Wales 

167


