 

Prison Heritage, Public History and
Archaeology at Fannie Bay Gaol,
Northern Australia
Mickey Dewar and Clayton Fredericksen

Abstract
Prisons play an important role in the Australian psyche. As places in which the lawless
element of society is incarcerated they possess a resonance that harks back to the stereotyped
and  mythologised  convict  foundations  of  the Australian  nation.  Many  former  places  of
confinement have been transformed into publicly accessible heritage sites and museums, but
visitor numbers often do not reflect the widespread public interest in confinement. It is not
at all clear how to engage the public with the individual histories of these places. This paper
examines this issue by reference to the public display of Fannie Bay Gaol prison museum
in Darwin. Changing themes and foci in the display of this site are discussed. The role of
the  historian  and  archaeologist  is  examined  in  the  context  of  the  public  presentation  of
narratives of the Gaol’s past.

Key  Words:  Australia;  Prison  Heritage;  Gaol  Museums;  Public  History  and
Archaeology; Visitor Numbers; Darwin

The  origin  of  the  European  settlement  of  Australia  as  a  dumping  ground  for
convicts has been used as a metaphor for the Australian national character as free
thinking, egalitarian and lawless. The heritage sites from that era, particularly the
places  of  enforced  incarceration  such  as  Port  Arthur  in Tasmania,  Kingston  on
Norfolk Island, Hyde Park Barracks in Sydney, and Fremantle Prison in Western
Australia,  have  achieved  iconic  status  in  Australian  popular  culture.  However,
convict sites are not the only places of incarceration that have become incorporated
into Australian public heritage. Gaols, penitentiaries, and asylums and hospitals for
the insane have assumed historical and cultural significance as well.1 Often this is at
the regional or local level. In a climate where small towns and regions are striving
to develop economic bases through heritage tourism, frequently the town gaol, still
standing but now obsolescent, represents the most longstanding heritage site in the
area. There is both an economic and an historical imperative to use such sites to tell

1. This is reflected, for example, in papers published in Historic Environment, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1999,
and by J.S. Kerr, Out of sight, out of mind. Australia’s places of confinement, 1788–1988, Sydney: S.H.
Ervin Gallery and National Trust of Australia, 1988.

the history of a region’s past. Interpretive problems, however, can be associated with
the development of former gaols into prison museums. Prisons are constructed as
places to segregate offenders from mainstream society, through the use of perimeter
walls,  internal  fences,  cellblocks,  and  other  physical  media. The  prison  and  its
inhabitants, both inmates and warders, are physically insulated from the outside,
forming  a  society  within  a  society.  In  a  museum  context  this  creates  a  visually
impressive fabric that frequently overwhelms both interpretation of the nuances of
prison life, and public dialogue about that life.2

How, then, are heritage practitioners to provide an inclusive history of a prison
and its residents, a history that engenders public interest and discussion beyond that
connected with the material fabric of remaining structures? This can be answered
only by refocusing interpretation to the intimate details of the lives of the prison
population,  and  bringing  to  light  the  various  narratives  contained  therein.  Here,
history and archaeology have complementary roles to play. Historians construct a
framework  of  the  social  life  of  prison  occupants  by  reference  to  official  admin-
istrative  records,  the  diaries  of  warders,  the  recollections  of  former  inmates,  and
sometimes from secreted prisoner diaries and notes. The role of the archaeologist is
to flesh out this framework by retrieving and examining lost, discarded or hidden
artefacts  and  material  culture,  and  recording  the  remains  of  long-demolished
structures. Sometimes, archaeology will supplement the historical record, providing
additional information on diet, clothing, health, and other elements of prison life.
At  other  times  it  may  provide  vistas  on  previously  unrecorded  facets  of  prison
existence, as the archaeologist Eleanor Casella achieved when she discovered trade
in  objects  for  sexual  favours  in  a  19th-century Tasmanian  female  factory  (prison
workshop).3 Information of this kind encourages museum visitors to engage with
the narratives of prison life, to put people back, figuratively, into the buildings that
constitute  the  prison  museum  and  examine  their  existence  in  the  context  of
contemporary society.4

One  example  of  a  prison  museum  where  an  attempt  is  being  made  to  use
archaeology  in  combination  with  history  to  uncover  the  narratives  of  prison
existence  is  Fannie  Bay  Gaol  in  Darwin,  capital  of  the  Northern  Territory  of
Australia. In the past, Fannie Bay Gaol has been used to display material extraneous
to the history of the prison. Recent attempts to redevelop the prison more strictly in
accordance with the current philosophy of heritage management have resulted in a

2. For a discussion of this topic refer to J. Garton-Smith ‘The prison wall: interpretation problems for
prison museums’, Open Museums Journal, Vol. 2, 2001,  < http://www.amol.org.au/omj/volume2 > .

3. E.C. Casella, ‘ “Doing trade”: a sexual economy of nineteenth-century Australian female convict
prisons’, World Archaeology, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2000, pp. 209–221.

4. The importance of ensuring public engagement and involvement with heritage places is discussed
for other types of Australian heritage sites by G. Grimwade & B. Carter, ‘Managing small heritage
sites with interpretation and community involvement’, 46

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

sharp decline in visitor numbers. This paper looks at the Fannie Bay Gaol, its history
and  interpretation,  and  explores  how  archaeology  might  be  used  in  conjunction
with  historical  studies  to  make  the  site  more  relevant  and  perhaps  intellectually
stimulating to the visiting public.

History
Her  Majesty’s  Gaol  and  Labour  Prison  or,  as  known  colloquially,  ‘Fannie  Bay
Gaol’, is located on the seaward edge of the prestigious suburb of Fannie Bay, about
4 km from the centre of Darwin (see figure 1). Once isolated, the site is now closely
surrounded by suburbia. The Gaol is managed by the Museum and Art Gallery of
the  Northern Territory  (MAGNT)  as  part  of  a  suite  of  six  heritage  properties
managed in the region. Admission to the site is free of charge.

Fannie Bay Gaol functioned as the main centre for incarceration in the Northern
Territory for most of the ninety-six years the prison operated. Established in 1883,
it was in continuous operation, excluding the military occupation of the site during
the  Second  World  War,  until  1979.5 Most  commonly  those  imprisoned  were
individuals  from  groups  marginal  to  the  frontier  society.  In  the  19th  century,
Chinese  prisoners  predominated,  but  by  the  early  20th  century  Aboriginal
prisoners,  particularly  those  serving  life  sentences,  were  in  the  majority.  The
Depression years saw a number of casual European labourers move to the Territory
seeking work, who frequently ended up imprisoned for offences relating to alcohol
or violence. In the post-war period, prisoners were identified as Aboriginal and non-
Aboriginal  alike,  although  by  the  mid–1960s  a  picture  of  disproportionate
Aboriginal  representation  amongst  prisoners  began  to  emerge.  This  pattern
continues in Northern Territory prisons and correctional centres today.6

From the earliest period of operation, few funds were expended on the site by the
administration. Apart from government reluctance to spend money on prisons, this
was  also  because  the  Gaol  was  considered  only  a  temporary  or  short-term
proposition. This  attitude  affected  the  architecture  and  design  of  the  buildings.
Although  there  are  two  buildings  in  stone,  Maximum  Security  (1883)  and  the
Infirmary  building  (1887),  and  one  in  concrete,  the  Female  Section  (1928)  (see
figure  2),  the  remainder  of  the  buildings  on  the  site  are  corrugated  iron
prefabricated structures (see figures 3 and 4). In December 1974 a violent cyclone,
Tracy,  destroyed  much  of  the  city  of  Darwin,  and  with  it  many  of  the  Gaol
structures, including the perimeter fence. In a climate of the rebirth of the city, the
decrepit corrugated iron prison, located in the centre of one of the prime residential

5. M. Dewar, Inside-out: a social history of Fannie Bay Gaol, Darwin: Northern Territory University
Press, 1999, provides a more detailed history of the years of the Gaol’s operations.

6. This is an identified area of action for the Northern Territory Department of Correctional Services,
which includes as a key strategy in the reduction of re-offending, involvement with Aboriginal
communities in the ‘development, implementation and evaluation of offender rehabilitation programs
and services’, NT Correctional Services, Future Directions 2000–2001.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

47

Figure 1. Location of the Gaol in the Darwin suburb of Fannie Bay [scale 1:42,500].

48

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Figure 2. Plan of Fannie Bay Gaol showing the present layout (solid outline) and the locations of
former  19th-  and  early  20th-century  structures  (dashed  outline).  Numbered  buildings  are  those

referred to in the paper. Archaeological excavation areas are shaded.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

49

Figure 3. Present-day view of corrugated iron buildings from inside the main entrance of the Gaol.
The  Infirmary  is  visible  in  the  background,  right.  [Museum  and  Art  Gallery  of  the  Northern

Territory.]

Figure 4. View of the interior of a corrugated iron cellblock, Fannie Bay Gaol. [Museum and Art

Gallery of the Northern Territory.]

50

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

seaside  suburbs,  had  no  place  and  the  Gaol  was  officially  closed  in  September
1979.

Public Presentation: immediately post-closure 1979—National
Trust
Although it had been recognised for some time that the Gaol could not co-exist for
long in such proximity to urban development, it was difficult to know what to do
with the site. In the 1970 s, while there was respect for those buildings that were of
stone  that  dated  back  to  the  19th  century,  the  more  modern  ‘tin  sheds’  of
corrugated iron were generally considered of less importance. Shortly before the last
prisoners left, the Northern Territory government announced that it would use the
site  for  a  new  and  unspecified  purpose.  Advice  was  sought  from  the  public  for
suggestions as to the future of the site. A persistent suggestion was that the buildings
be used to house the Territory museum.7 The museum had previously been located
at  the  old Town  Hall,  which  was  destroyed  during  Cyclone Tracy. There  were
alternative plans, however, for the construction of a special purpose-built museum,
which ultimately proceeded nearby.

In May 1980 the National Trust of Australia (Northern Territory) was appointed
to develop and manage the place as an historic site. The Trust engaged prison expert
and heritage consultant James Semple Kerr to carry out a survey and formulate a
management plan for the site. Although severely limited by time constraints, Kerr
outlined a plan of management that he produced in draft form and then finalised in
1981.8The main thrust of the report was that the general conservation policy for the
site should aim to retain the Gaol’s structures and spaces as they were during the
period  of  the  Gaol’s  operation.  Kerr  proposed  that  fixtures  be  retained  and  any
missing contents be replaced to create a Gaol precinct that reflected the state of the
Gaol immediately prior to its closure.9

The National Trust opened the Gaol to the public and charged a small admission
fee for entry. The Gaol proved a popular visitor site and from the revenue generated
by the admission fees the Trust was able to pay the wages of an on-site caretaker.

MAGNT, 1982–1993
For reasons unclear, the Trust operated the Gaol site only for a short while. In 1982
the  Northern Territory  government  proposed  that  the  Fannie  Bay  Gaol  site  be
managed by the Board of MAGNT instead of the National Trust. When the Board

7. B. James, ‘Gaol closure is end of an era’, The Star, 17 May 1979.

8. J.S. Kerr, Notes of conversation, Fannie Bay Gaol, 6 July 1995.

9. J.S. Kerr, Fannie Bay Gaol Precinct Conservation Management Plan, National Trust of Australia
(NT), Darwin, November 1981. See also P. Forrest, Fannie Bay Gaol after 1979: interim report on some
future use alternatives for the former gaol site, National Trust of Australia (NT) for Department of
Community Development of the Northern Territory Government, 14 December 1979, whose report
also suggests this approach.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

51

opened the Gaol on 13 September 1983, the site developed in a different way from
that proposed by the Trust. The Gaol site was virtually split in two along the division
marking one of the old yards. One section of the Gaol was left as a Gaol museum.
The temporary structures, used by the prison after Cyclone Tracy, were removed,
some  original  Gaol  signage  was  returned  to  storage  as  part  of  the  permanent
museum  collection  and  interpretive  signage  installed.  Graffiti  and  any  other
identifying evidence of prisoner occupation were removed from the cells on the basis
that former inmates’ identities should be protected.10

The  other  section  of  the  Gaol  became  a  transport  display,  including  a
reconstruction of a ‘railway station’ with the installation of a steam locomotive and
carriage; the old ‘Stores’ building was air-conditioned and became a gallery space
for an exhibition commemorating the destruction of Darwin by Cyclone Tracy in
1974. Flowering vines were planted along the yard fences. A palaeontological fossil-
preparation  workshop  was  installed  and  the  hut  previously  used  as  a  prison
workshop became a storage place for lawnmowers and other gardening tools used by
museum staff.

The Museums and Art Galleries Board undertook these changes on the grounds
that the Trust’s plan for the site was too narrow and lacked appeal for visitors. These
initiatives were supported by a number of educational and promotional materials
produced  by  the  Museum  and  the  Department  of  Education.11 A  survey
undertaken in 1990 by academics Glenn Ross and David Carment of the Northern
Territory University supported the Board’s prediction that the additional installa-
tions  (reconstructed  railway  station  and  Cyclone Tracy  Gallery)  were  a  primary
attraction  to  visitors.12 There  is  evidence  that  inclusion  of  this  material  was
misleading to the visitor, however. The Cyclone Tracy Gallery, which included a re-
creation of a wrecked living room in a domestic dwelling, led some visitors to believe
that it was part of the Gaol preserved intact from the cyclone. Similarly, visitors
(and  staff)  sometimes  asked  during  tours  of  the  site  when  the  Gaol  had  been  a
railway station.

MAGNT, 1993–2001
A change in the Museum and Art Gallery management at the end of 1993 and a
climate of increased awareness towards heritage properties brought a reversal of the
earlier museum policies for the site. In 1994 the Cyclone Tracy Gallery, transport
display, old signage, locomotive and carriage, fossil-preparation workshop and other
items extraneous to the Gaol site were removed as part of a longer-term plan to
develop  the  site  in  accordance  with  current  heritage  principles.  Some  minimal

10. R. Knox, Telephone conversation with Mickey Dewar, 12 June 1996.

11. These are summarised by W. Tyler, ‘Penology at the frontier: Fannie Bay Gaol 1883–1979’, paper
delivered to the Australian Historical Association Conference, Darwin, 2 July 1991, p. 6.

12. G.F. Ross & D. Carment, The Fannie Bay Gaol Museum: a comprehensive evaluation of tourist
responses, Cairns: James Cook University of North Queensland, June 1990.

52

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Figure 5. Cover of brochure distributed to visitors to Fannie Bay Gaol. [Museum and Art Gallery

of the Northern Territory.]

interpretive  signage  was  installed.  To  support  the  signage,  a  comprehensive
brochure was developed which outlined the history of the Gaol and included a brief
guided walk (see figure 5). Some of these changes did not meet with the approval
of the visiting public. The response of many suggests that removal of the popular but
historically irrelevant Cyclone Tracy Gallery and steam locomotive was particularly
unpopular.

There  was  recognition  that  it  was  important  that  the  site  be  managed  with
integrity, in such a way as to preserve the site for future generations. Some of the
previous decisions made in the administration of the Gaol site—for example, the
permanent removal of the prison graffiti—resulted in a loss of valuable information.
Beginning  in  1995,  heritage  consultants  were  engaged  to  undertake  a  detailed
historical survey and baseline study of the site.13 The resulting report is a useful
reference  not  only  for  assisting  in  managing  the  site,  which  is  protected  under
Northern  Territory  legislation,  but  also  as  a  reference  tool  for  students  and

13. Troppo Architects, Fannie Bay Gaol: a structural history and data base, Produced for the Museum
and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory, December 1996, 2 vols.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

53

historians. Research projects involving students of architecture, archaeology, history
and tourism are frequently carried out on the Gaol, utilising the information held by
MAGNT  on  the  site.  Alongside  the  baseline  study  there  is  also  a  management
programme in place for immediate and long-term protection of the Gaol site.

Partly  to  raise  public  awareness  of  the  social  heritage  of  the  Gaol,  in  1998  an
Aboriginal  Prisoner  Art  Exhibition  was  run  as  a  pilot  programme. The  Darwin
Prison Education Officer initially conceived of the project as part of an accredited
programme  taught  to  students  who  were  also  inmates.  The  aim  was  to  assist
Aboriginal  inmates  in  the  arts  industry,  including  marketing  and  exhibition  of
works.  This  project  has  operated  annually  with  the  development  of  a  touring
component, with works going on display elsewhere in the Northern Territory, and
the development of a complementary Web site.14

Visitor Numbers and Public Perspectives
The  annual  visitor  attendance  figures  at  Fannie  Bay  Gaol  provide  interesting
comparison with prison heritage sites elsewhere in Australia. The first attendance
figures for the Gaol immediately after the Board took over in 1984–1985 show an
annual visitation of 60,482.15 By the following year, this had risen to 65,021.16 Over
the next few years the figures show a steady increase. By 1988–1989 the figures had
risen  to  80,060.17 In  1990–1991  the  attendance  figures  peaked  at  92,600.18
Following that year, attendance figures stabilised at around 75,000 visitors per year.
Port  Arthur,  by  far  the  most  significant  heritage  prison  site  in  Australia  and  in
operation  as  a  tourist  destination  since  1877,19 regularly  attracts  in  excess  of
200,000  visitors  per  year.20 A  survey  taken  in  199821 of  prison  sites  in Australia
notes that visitor numbers at three prisons were greater than 80,000 per annum:

14. See, for example, the ‘Ending Offending Program’,  < www.ourmessage.org > , which, although
not identified as culturally specific, clearly has a large Indigenous input.

15. Museums and Art Galleries Board annual report, 1984–85, Appendix II.

16. Museums and Art Galleries Board annual report, 1985–86, Appendix II.

17. Museums and Art Galleries Board annual report, 1986–87, Attendance Figures, gives 58,105;
Museums and Art Galleries Board annual report, 1988–89, Attendance Figures.

18. Museums and Art Galleries Board annual report, 1990–91, Attendance Figures.

19. D. Young, Making crime pay. The evolution of convict tourism in Tasmania, Hobart: Tasmanian
Historical Research Association, 1996.

20. Visitor Centre, Port Arthur Heritage Site, gave the attendance figures for 1999–2000 as 189,650,
with a further 43,799 attending the ‘Ghost Tours’, but it is estimated that a third of the tour
attendees are also day visitors, bringing the figures to about 204,250. These figures are 6% down on
the previous year, with annual day attendance figures normally well in excess of 200,000. Pers.
comm., 9 January 2001.

21. Summary, Anne Brake, then Curator Fremantle Prison, ‘A survey of managers of prisoner
heritage sites in Australia’, unpublished but presented, Prison Museums and Heritage Sites,
Inaugural meeting and presentation of papers, Saturday 10 October 1998, Melbourne.

54

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Fremantle  Prison,  Old  Melbourne  Gaol  and  Old  Dubbo  Gaol.  There  is  a
considerable  gap  between  the  visitation  figures  for  these  three  sites  and  the  next
down in order of magnitude, the Justice and Police Museum in New South Wales,
which reported visitation figures of between 25,000 and 35,000 per annum.22 The
next site, in decreasing order, recorded nearly 18,000 visitors, but the remainder
recorded attendances of fewer than 11,000 per annum.23 It is probably significant
that  the  most  visited  institution  after  Port Arthur,  Fremantle  Prison,  has  both  a
convict  and  public  prison  history. The  Old  Melbourne  Gaol  as  the  place  of  the
execution of Ned Kelly, whose death mask remains there as part of the permanent
collection, is quite iconic in Australian history.24 Australian prison visitor statistics
appear comparable with prison sites in North America and the UK.25

Visitor  numbers  for  Fannie  Bay  Gaol  in  the  early  1990s  compared  favourably
with those from other Australian prison museums. But following the removal of the
Cyclone Tracy Gallery and reconstructed railway station there was a sharp drop in
visitor  attendance,  followed  by  a  steady  decline.  In  1995–1996,  43,792  people
visited the site; the previous year there had been 47,646 visitors.26 By 1999–2000
there were 27,899 visitors to the site, with the figures dropping by about three or
four thousand each year.27 Although still declining, visitor numbers are presently
comparatively stable.28 Although no direct complaints were formally recorded by
MAGNT, the comments in the Visitors’ Book note dissatisfaction.29 The observa-
tions  made  by  Ross  &  Carment  in  1990  were  confirmed.  Removal  of  the  items

22. As did the National Trust of South Australia Burra Branch, but this also included entry into other
sites as well as prison heritage.

23. A. Brake, op. cit. (note 21).

24. No similar explanation can be provided for the relatively high visitor numbers for Old Dubbo
Gaol. Dubbo is an inland town in New South Wales and, although situated on a highway, would
probably not be considered a major tourist destination in its own right. The attendance figures may
be influenced by the proximity of the Western Plains Zoo, also located in the region. This ‘cageless’
zoo was one of the first of its kind in Australia and is justly famous. Visitors to the Old Dubbo Gaol
may well be taking advantage of a stayover in Dubbo after visiting the zoo.

25. Anne Brake collected some statistics from overseas in her survey. The Galleries of Justice in the
UK, for example, attracted about 60,000 visitors per year including general public and school visits.
Regional prison museums in the USA generally recorded visitation rates of between about 8,000 and
25,0000. Folsom Prison Museum, for example, quite typically registers about 9,000 visitors per year
(http://www.stevenmenke.com/FolsomPrisonMuseum.htm).

26. Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory annual report, 1995–96, p. 43.

27. Department of Arts and Museums 1999/2000 annual report, p. 45.

28. The Gaol received 27,344 visitors in 2000–2001 and 27,164 visitors in 2001–2002. In contrast,
overall visitation rates at all sites controlled by MAGNT increased slightly from 2000–2001 to
2001–2002. Unpublished report, Museums and Art Galleries of the Northern Territory Yearly
Attendance Figures from 1981 to 2002.

29. Comment, 11/7/95, Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 25/5/95–4/2/97, is typical: 11.7.95
‘Disappointed Cyclone Tracey [sic] display removed’, P. Smeeth, NSW.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

55

extraneous to the development of the Gaol as a heritage site with the emphasis upon
its penal history, while in accordance with current heritage philosophy nationally
and internationally, resulted in a severe drop in visitor numbers.

Public Responses to the Gaol’s Fabric
In  some  ways,  comments  written  in  Visitors’  Books  are  revealing  despite  the
repetition of comments, language and sentiment (even apart from the ubiquitous
‘good’  and ‘interesting’  that  abound  on  every  page).  Some  comments  indicate  a
strong  response  to  the  site  in  its  own  right.  One  of  the  most  frequent  responses
arises from a category of visitor who views the ‘primitive’ conditions at Fannie Bay
Gaol  as  a  lesson  that  modern  prison  administrators  could  learn  from. This  is  a
common  response  from  Australian  (but  not  necessarily  local)  visitors.  A  typical
sample of comments from this type of response would be:

16/2/97 All prisons should be as hot & horrible as this maybe the less people [sic]
would commit crimes.

21/2/97 Sad but true. Prisons around the world should be more like this one. Then
there might be less crimes, & murders.

29/3/97 Prisoners today have it easy TV etc. Some prisoners today need to be put to
the Gallows. Good exhibition and well preserved.30

Others are almost directly in opposition to this view and think of the inmates who
served time at Fannie Bay Gaol with sympathy. ‘Glad it’s not me’, ‘I broke out’, ‘My
first and last time in Gaol’ are frequent comments. These visitors see the starkness
of the conditions at the Gaol as a reminder of what we should not return to. This is
particularly  true  for  visitors  who  identify  their  address  as  overseas  (especially
Germany, Italy or France, less so from the UK or USA) rather than Australian or
Territorian:

15/2/97 Would hate to stay here . . .

16/5/97 In some ways I glad [sic] to live now and not back in those days . . . [Another
visitor has written underneath] Us too . . .

13/7/97 Is it mawkish voyeurism? We all ask ourselves but I suppose we learn
something.31

30. Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 29/11/96–7/8/97; these are only selected quotes but they are
reproduced consistently; the following examples listed were from overseas’ visitors, for example:
16/11/00; 8/11/00; etc. Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 25/02/00–13/06/01.

31. Comment, Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 29/11/96–7/8/97; these are only selected quotes but
they are reproduced consistently, and not only by overseas’ visitors, for example: 31/12/00; 4/01/01;
21/01/01; etc. Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 25/02/00–13/06/01.

56

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Apart  from  visitor  comments  about  the  staff  on  duty  (and  there  are  enough  to
suggest  that  this  is  a  real  factor  in  the  visitor  experience  of  the  site),  a  common
response from local visitors, who give their address as Darwin, is dissatisfaction with
the  changes  that  have  taken  place.  For  some,  the  interpretive  material  is  not
adequate and requests for more information and signage are frequent:

29/3/97 The  removal  of  the  Cyclone Tracey  [sic]  room,  train  &  other  things  taken
from  this  Gaol  site  has  only  made  the  Gaol  less  appealing  &  has  taken  something  of
interest. As  a  travel  agent  sending  people  to  Darwin  I  always  made  it  a  point  telling
people  to  visit  Fanny  Bay  [sic]  Gaol.  Now  there  is  less  point  as  too  much  has  been
taken  away.

14/7/97 Not very impressed . . .32

There  are  sufficient  comments  to  indicate  that  the  programme  to  increase
interpretive signage on the site would be appreciated by many visitors.

Public Focus on the Executions
In  the  public  eye  the  main  event  with  which  the  Gaol  is  often  associated  is  the
execution  by  hanging  of  two  convicted  murderers  in  1952. The  hangings  took
place  in  the  1887  Infirmary,  which  was  adapted  for  the  purpose  by  the  addition
of a gallows and trapdoor. This episode has caught the public imagination to such
an  extent  that  visitors  often  erroneously  refer  to  the  Infirmary  as  the ‘execution
block’. This misrepresentation was reinforced by the attachment to the gallows of
a rope with hangman’s noose, a feature that was removed because many members
of the public insisted on posing for photo shots with their head through the noose
while balancing on the edge of the gallows pit! One example of how the hangings
have permeated the public psyche is a 2001 publicity brochure advertising a tour
of  the  Gaol  in  aid  of  Northern Territory  Law Week  celebrations. The  brochure
carries  an  image  of  a  hanging  man  in  silhouette  on  the  prison’s  main  gate  (see
figure  6).

In  the  UK,  a  number  of  museums  deal  with  the  sensitive  issue  of  capital
punishment. The Galleries of Justice, for example, has a fully operational gallows
based on 1883 Home Office specifications, but the exhibition is designed so that it
can be bypassed if the visitor does not wish to see this. HM Prison Service Museum
has a gallows in store but not on display and takes pains to vet applications to view
these items to ensure that it is for bona fide research.33 Australian prison sites are less

32. Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 29/11/96–7/8/97; these are less frequent as memory of previous
interpretations declines and increased interpretive material is included, although many visitors would
prefer even more text, for example, 10/01/00, or guides or interpreters to mediate the experience,
15/11/00. Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol 25/02/00–13/06/01.

33. J. Griffiths, ‘Crimes and misdemeanours’, Museums Journal, July 1999, p. 33.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

57

Figure 6. Brochure produced by the Law Society of the Northern Territory for Law Week 2001. [Law

Society of the Northern Territory.]

sensitive in their approach.34 This prison space is most frequently the site of interest
for the visitor, as they attempt to grapple with the ultimate questions of crime and
punishment. Diane Gardiner of the Old Melbourne Gaol has noted:

Many people are fascinated by crime, murder and death—however, delving into the
more explicit details of a crime can be quite confronting for a museum visitor. How to
interpret these awful crimes to an incredibly diverse audience is most challenging.35

At Fannie Bay Gaol the gallows are retained in situ but at present with only minimal
interpretive text. In the case of the 1952 executions at the Gaol, the aim is to let the
primary documents, as much as possible, narrate the events described. In 2001 a
community  MAGNT  exhibition,  in  conjunction  with  the  Police  Museum  and
Historical Society, was installed. This specifically examined the role played by the
police in this event as well as the trial and executions. Both organisations attempted
to  set  out  the  climate  of  the  period  that  led  to  the  crime  and  the  events  that
followed.

34. Most prisons that have staged executions usually note this as part of the promotional information
on the site, often in some detail. See, for example, Brochure, Adelaide Gaol ‘A total of 49 people
were executed at the Gaol . . .’; National Trust of Tasmania, the Penitentiary Chapel and Criminal
Courts, ‘guided tours of this fascinating complex which includes . . . execution yard’; The Old
Roebourne Gaol—a history, Llyrus Weightman, ‘Executions at the Roebourne Gaol’, p. 11 etc. The
Old Dubbo Gaol at one stage had a T-shirt showing a prisoner leaping over a wall away from a
gallows.

35. D. Gardiner, ‘Show & tell: Old Melbourne Gaol’, 2, Unsavoury Histories,
< http://amol.org.au/craft/omjournal/volume2/gardiner.asp > .

58

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Despite attempts to elevate the importance of the historical and social fabric of
the  Gaol  and  its  former  inhabitants,  it  is  clear  that  many  visitors  remain  either
focused on the chronologically ‘frozen’ architecture of the prison, or transfixed by
a singular, tragic historical event of the recent past. To go beyond these time-limited
perspectives requires greater understanding of the meaning behind retaining Fannie
Bay  Gaol  as  a  museum,  as  a  place  of  public  commentary  and  dialogue  with  the
past.

The Case for Archaeology
One pathway for engaging visitors with the social contexts and meanings of Fannie
Bay Gaol is through facilitating connection with the everyday things and activities
of  former  inmates. This  focus  on  prison  lives  instils  a  sense  of  time  and  change,
contrasting the atmosphere of synchrony, abandonment and monumental ruin that
is  characteristic  of  many  prison  heritage  sites.36 Archaeology,  with  its  popular
association with ‘discovering the past’, is an ideal vehicle for initiating this kind of
engagement.  At  Hyde  Park  Barracks  in  Sydney,  for  example,  is  a  display  of  a
fascinating array of material recovered by archaeologists from rats’ nests under the
floorboards of the building. The managers of Hyde Park Barracks have promoted
these everyday things in presenting the lives of the inmates of the Barracks, so that
the rat is identified as the original artefact collector and the rodent logo is employed
as a mascot for the Barracks.37 Such fragments of the past easily capture the public
imagination and lend an authenticity to prison narratives that might otherwise be
missing.

Hyde Park Barracks and a few other notable exceptions aside, public displays of
archaeology are uncommon at Australian heritage sites. Even in Britain, where the
Jorvik  Viking  Centre  remains  one  of  the  outstanding  examples  of  the  use  of
archaeological interpretation in a museum context,38 industry comment suggests
that both museums and archaeologists are failing to capitalise on public interest in
media reconstructions of the past:

Archaeologists agree, reluctantly, that . . . [television] programmes can be useful in
encouraging public interest. But have the programmes created a public interest in
excavation that archaeologists and museums are currently failing to cater for?39

36. J. Garton-Smith, op. cit. (note 2) p. 7,  < http://www.amol.org.au/omj/volume2 > .

37. Paid attendance at Hyde Park Barracks in 1999–2000 was 61,545, with a further complementary
attendance figure of 7,964. In addition, a further 17,424 visited the grounds and the shop.
Information provided by the manager, Hyde Park Barracks, pers. comm., 9 January 2001.

38. P.V. Addyman, ‘Reconstruction as interpretation: the example of the Jorvik Viking Centre, York’,
in P. Gathercole & D. Lowenthal (eds), The politics of the past, London: Routledge, 1994, pp.
257–264.

39. S. Heal, ‘The dig idea’, Museums Journal, July 2001, p. 34.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

59

Nevertheless,  in  the  UK,  historians,  curators  and  site  managers  are  increasingly
employing  archaeology  to  engender  public  engagement  with  heritage  places.
Evidence  indicates  that  when  museums  do  provide  archaeology  programmes  or
visitor displays they are extremely popular.40 This could even be extended beyond
traditional display to something more interactive or reconstructive. Evaluation of a
recent  exhibition  at  the  Museum  of  London,  which  involved  archaeology,
reconstruction and visitor interaction noted:

The  museum  believes  that  the  approach  adopted  was  more  successful  at  achieving
. . .  [its]  aims  than  a  more  traditional  type  of  exhibition  would  have  been. Although
there  is  a  responsibility  to  present  archaeological  evidence  as  we  find  it,  the  museum
should  not  be  afraid  of  using  its  expertise  to  make  interpretations  of  the  past  based
upon  it.41

There is a case for incorporating archaeology in amplifying the visitor experience
of  Fannie  Bay  Gaol.  Written  records  of  the  early  history  of  the  Gaol  are
incomplete  and  inconsistent.  In  part  this  is  because  of  the  depredations  on
paper archives of Darwin’s tropical climate, including cyclonic activity, which has
on  a  number  of  occasions  severely  damaged  the  city.  Heavy  bombing  during
the  Second  World  War  also  damaged  parts  of  Darwin,  although  the  ensuing
military  occupation  by Australian  personnel  probably  did  more  harm  to  archival
records  than  Japanese  aerial  bombardment.  Another  contributing  factor  in  the
loss  of  records  was  the  fact  that  the  region  had,  up  until  1978,  been  admin-
istered  from  a  distance.  Before  1911,  the  Northern  Territory  was  run  from
Adelaide in South Australia, 3,300 km away. After 1911, the region was declared
a  Commonwealth  Territory  and  administered  from  the  National  Capital  in
Canberra. As a consequence, records became lost or misplaced in the transfer of
information  to  Adelaide  or  Canberra.  Archaeology  therefore  has,  in  addition  to
motivating public engagement, the research purpose of adding to the story of the
Gaol.

Excavations
Archaeological excavations were carried out in Fannie Bay Gaol over one- to two-
week seasons in 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001. A number of structures dating from
the first years of the Gaol’s history were targeted. These included the sites of one of
two  underground  water-storage  tanks  and  the  Guards’  Barracks,  constructed  in

40. P. Liddle, ‘Going walk about’, Museums Journal, July 2001, p. 35; but perhaps it depends on what
is shown. See also an interesting theory on this by anthropologist Nick Saunders from London’s
University College (M. McDonald, ‘Pieces of light’, New Scientist, 28 October 2000, pp. 42–45),
who, using examples of trench art collected from battlefields, argues that visitors are attracted to
displays that are bright or shiny.

41. H. Swain, ‘High street Londinium’, Museum Practice, Iss. 17, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2001, p. 20.

60

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Figure 7. Brochure distributed to Gaol visitors during the period of archaeological excavation, 2001.

[Clayton Fredericksen.]

1884 and 1883, respectively.42 Although early plans of the Gaol compound are few,
those that do survive provide information on the location of a number of now buried
or  demolished  prison  structures. These  plans,  in  conjunction  with  photographs,
were used to identify areas where subsurface remains were likely to be found. An
information  leaflet  was  provided  for  visitors  to  the  excavation  (see  figure  7).
Temporary signage was erected around the trenches to provide information on the
archaeological  project,  and 
inviting  the  public  to  ask  questions  of  the
archaeologists.

Clearly,  the  archaeological  activities  at  Fannie  Bay  Gaol  were  beneficial  to  the
visitor  experience. There  is  some  indication  that  they  assisted  with  maintaining
visitor  numbers.  A  comparison  with  numbers  at  the  end  of  1998  shows  that
during the period of the excavation visitor numbers were actually down from the
previous  year’s  (1,842  in  1997;  1,815  in  1998).  But  when  compared  with  other
sample  weeks  chosen  from  July  and  August  from  the  previous  year,  the  visitor
numbers were not down by as much as would be expected. This suggests that the

42. C. Fredericksen, ‘Unearthing Fannie Bay Gaol: archives and the archaeology of water
management in Darwin’s first purpose-built prison’, The Beagle, Records of the Museums and Art
Galleries of the Northern Territory, Vol. 15, 1999, p. 131.

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

61

Figure 8. Information panels mounted inside the Gaol perimeter fence. [Clayton Fredericksen.]

excavations were successful in attracting additional visitors to the site, though not
enough  to  halt  the  declining  visitor  rate,  only  to  slow  it.  The  Visitors’  Book
comments  also  indicated  interest.  Most  visitors  reported  that  their  visit  was
worthwhile; in addition, some comments noted the excavation specifically such as
‘Archaeological site is great’ or ‘Very interesting. Keep the digging going’, ‘Loved
the  excavation’.43 In  addition,  the  excavation  attracted  considerable  media
interest.  The  local  newspaper,  the  Northern  Territory  News,  Northern  Territory
University and national radio have also done interviews each year associated with
the  excavation  season.

The  archaeological  excavations  have  furnished  information  for  permanent
on-site  signage.  Photographs  of  the  archaeologists  at  work  and  the  remains
uncovered  by  them  have  been  incorporated  into  aluminium  display  panels  that
recount  the  history  of  the  Gaol  and  the  endeavours  of  investigators  (see  figure
8).  MAGNT  senior  conservation  staff  are  working  with  researchers  at  Northern
Territory  University  on  a  programme  of  artefact  conservation.  When  funding
becomes  available,  display  cases  housing  artefacts  recovered  by  the  excavations
will be erected inside the Gaol. Information panels relating the function and role
of individual artefacts in prison life, as well as an interpretation of their recovery
from  various  archaeological  contexts,  will  accompany  these.

43. Comments, 2/7/98 and 3/7/98, Visitors’ Book, Fannie Bay Gaol.

62

Mickey Dewar & Clayton Fredericksen

Summing Up
Although there is evidence that visitors to the Fannie Bay Gaol site respond to the
powerful sense of atmosphere at the Gaol, the declining visitor numbers suggest that
this alone cannot guarantee the viability of the museum. While visitors responded
enthusiastically to attractions that were extraneous to the site, such as the Cyclone
Tracy  Gallery  or  the  reconstructed  railway  station,  there  is  evidence  that  on-site
archaeological  excavations  and  the  material  uncovered  by  those  excavations  also
have  the  capacity  to  interest  visitors.  The  site  is  of  importance  not  only  to
contemporary understanding of the region but also as one of the few historical sites
that demonstrates continuous site occupancy. Furthermore, with the Gaol site itself
as  the  intersection  between  frontier  and  coloniser,  it  represents  a  locus  of  cross-
cultural history where the marginalised becomes the protagonist. Moreover, as the
comments in the Visitors’ Books illustrate so clearly, it raises relevant issues about
society’s contemporary dealings with crime, law and order.

Archaeology and history possess a natural partnership in the public interpretation
of  Fannie  Bay  Gaol.  While  the  records  illustrate  the  institutional  history,  the
archaeological evidence reveals the social. In the official records, ‘the testimony of
the  inmates  remains  largely  silent’.44 The  finds  from  the  site  thus  far,  including
coins, pearl-shell buttons, an earring, a Communist Party medallion, and material
from a Second World War military dump, are the detritus left behind by the people
who  lived,  worked  or  were  incarcerated  there.  The  starkness  of  the  cells  and
structures  has  meaning  only  when  visitors  can  understand  the  people  who  lived
there. Gaols lack the romantic appeal of a convict past, yet they are relevant, and the
heritage sites as museums can speak to individuals. Activities such as archaeology
and public history create a focus on a place while at the same time revealing more
of  the  past.  More  to  the  point,  they  tell  the  history  of  the  marginalised  and  the
disadvantaged,  whose  story  is  often  conveniently  forgotten  in  the  search  for  an
heroic tradition.

Decisions need to be made to preserve and protect, to research and to present,
without  compromising  or  misleading.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  this  can  be
achieved  at  Fannie  Bay  Gaol.  In  a  climate  in  which  increasingly  museums  and
heritage  sites  are  called  upon  to  demonstrate  relevance  and  popularity  through
increased visitation, the response of the general public to the removal of the material
extraneous to the site is worrying. Not only is the incorporation of archaeology and
the construction of narratives from archaeological material desirable, in the face of
recent low visitor numbers to Fannie Bay Gaol it might well be a lifeline.

44. C. Fredericksen, op. cit. (note 42).

Fannie Bay Gaol, Northern Australia

63


