International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

It’s hard to be down when you’re up: interpreting
cultural heritage through alternative media

Daniel Michon & Ahmed El Antably

To cite this article: Daniel Michon & Ahmed El Antably (2013) It’s hard to be down when you’re up:
interpreting cultural heritage through alternative media, International Journal of Heritage Studies,
19:1, 16-40, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2011.633539
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.633539

Published online: 24 Jan 2012.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 649

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2013
Vol. 19, No. 1, 16–40, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.633539

It’s hard to be down when you’re up: interpreting cultural
heritage through alternative media
Daniel Michona* and Ahmed El Antablyb

aDepartment of Religious Studies, Claremont McKenna College, 850 Columbia Avenue,
Claremont, CA 91711, USA; bDepartment of Architecture, University of California, 470
Wurster Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
(Received 5 August 2011; ﬁnal version received 13 October 2011)

Heritage places are characteristically imbued with a multiplicity of meanings
contingent on the speciﬁcities of the society, time and space in which such
places are perceived. The interpretation of places also depends on the
affordances of the representational medium through which these places are per-
ceived and the ways in which such a medium is socially deployed and inter-
preted. Using the ancient settlement of Sirkap, located in modern-day Pakistan,
as a case study, the present article demonstrates that a change in the representa-
tional medium entails a change in the interpretation of archaeological records.
Most conventional historical accounts of Sirkap use two-dimensional site maps
and city plans as the primary media to represent the urban fabric of the ancient
settlement. These media lend themselves to interpreting the Block D Apsidal
Temple complex as the dominant socio-religious structure in the afﬂuent north-
ern parts of the settlement. When the authors developed an interactive three-
dimensional reconstruction of Sirkap using gaming technology – a medium that
allows users, through their avatars, to explore the settlement from the standpoint
of a pedestrian – it was immediately obvious that the aforementioned Block D
Apsidal Temple complex did not demand such an interpretation. Instead, the
in the afﬂuent northern parts of the settlement,
authors argue that, at
the northern gate, its adjacent fortiﬁcations, and the Block A stupa court were
the dominant structures. Such an interpretation leads the authors to question the
canonical understanding of the role of the state and its military apparatus in the
socio-religious life of Sirkap.

least

Keywords: multi-user virtual environments; new media; tangible heritage; intan-
gible heritage; place-making; Sirkap

‘[A] model is judged not by the proofs advanced in support of it, but by the results it
produces in interpretation’ (de Certeau 1984, p. 137).

Introduction
Multi-user virtual environments (MUVEs) are a new medium for researching the
genesis and evolution of sites of cultural signiﬁcance. MUVEs are able to model
both the tangible and intangible heritage of a site, allowing the user to obtain a
more dynamic understanding of the culture. The present article documents the early

*Corresponding author. Email: dmichon@cmc.edu

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

17

stages of a cultural heritage project – ‘Virtual Sirkap’ – which captures and commu-
nicates the interplay of context (geography), content (architecture and artefacts), and
temporal activity (rituals and everyday life) in a MUVE leading to a unique digital
archive of the tangible and intangible heritage of the ancient South Asian city of
Sirkap. Sirkap is but one element of the vast archaeological complex at Taxila, a
complex which was the ancient capital of western Punjab and is now a UNESCO
World Heritage site located in Pakistan (Figure 1).

In the ﬁrst section, ‘Thinking through media’, we introduce the powerful role
that the media we employ play in how we think and, consequently, the effect they
have in shaping our interpretations. We argue here that new media such as MUVEs
can have a profound impact on the presentation and interpretation of cultural heri-
tage sites. In the next section titled ‘Representing place’, we explicitly argue that
we are not creating an ‘authentic and accurate’ model of the cultural heritage of Sir-
kap. Rather, through our interpretation of the archaeological data, we are necessarily
creating one instance of the ancient city – an instance that will bear, if we have
been careful in our interpretation, some traces of the intents and purposes of some
of its original creators. However, the meanings of the city will also be determined
very much by present concerns – both those of the modellers, the Virtual Sirkap
project team, and the users, the visitors to the site who engage the place. Once we
have made our theoretical orientations clear the ﬁnal section of the article begins
with a brief introduction to the ancient South Asian city of Sirkap, and quickly
moves on to the crux of the argument. First, we highlight some of the standard
interpretations of Sirkap based on the two-dimensional representations available.

Figure 1. The location of Sirkap in the South Asian subcontinent.

18

D. Michon and A. El Antably

We then leave the two-dimensional world behind and enter the three-dimensional
virtual environment. We encourage readers to download the model for themselves
so they can explore the city as we have created it;1 however, for a journal article
such as this, we narrate the experience of walking the city for the readers. In doing
so, we seek to demonstrate how a three-dimensional experience produces new
insights into the cultural heritage of an ancient city.

Thinking through media
Most of the time, we, as scholars, do not pay close attention to the formative effect
of our chosen mode of representation on our arguments. Text is the dominant mode
of representation for communicating scholarly ideas and many have erroneously
assumed its neutrality. However, for quite some time now, linguists, media theorists,
and literary critics have argued against the neutrality of text. For example, in lin-
guistics, it is well understood that our own native language is instrumental in the
ways in which we think about and represent ideas (Wittgenstein 1968, Heidegger
1971, Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Media theorists have detailed how text has its
limitations, which typically emerge when a textual narrative is appropriated into a
different medium. An example of this dissonance – an example that comes very
close to the cultural heritage project discussed in the following pages – is when a
novel is appropriated for the stage. A novel, according to Abbott (2002, p. 121), is
full of gaps in its prose narrative and ‘[t]here is no way that a narrator can avoid
calling on listeners or readers to help bridge one gap after another’. On stage, how-
the novel’s characters are alive and actions unfold in actual time and, as
ever,
Abbott continues, ‘[w]hat happens is that many of these narrational gaps disappear.
This is what happens on stage. The difference in effect is great’. Even the choice of
tools for recording our ideas has a formative effect. Friedrich Kittler (1999) argues
that not only do people operate upon media, but media also operate upon people.
Perhaps the most famous statement of this effect comes from Friedrich Nietzsche
(cited in Kittler 1999, p. 200) when he used his typewriter, rather than his pen, to
proclaim, in an appropriately terse statement: ‘Our writing tools are also working
on our thoughts’. Thus, transitions across time and space, from oral discourse to
writing, from hand-copying manuscripts to the printing press, from pen to type-
writer, to name a few, have all been transformative moments in the way we think
about, and interpret, the world.

Thus, just as Kittler details how new media technologies such as the gramo-
phone, ﬁlm, and typewriter shattered the hegemony of the printed word in the
in the twenty-ﬁrst century, computer-generated three-
late nineteenth century,
dimensional virtual environments have the potential
to create similar seismic
shifts (Gill 2009). That is, if history is any guide, we can expect that these new
media will challenge and change the way we think and argue much like those
key transformative moments in the past. For example, a two-dimensional visual-
isation, whether a traditional map or a new geographic information system (GIS)
computer visualisation, certainly encourages different
thinking about space, but
too, has limitations.2 In the interpretation of the spatial meaning of ancient
it,
cities,
the scholar who engages with an archaeological site map, whether on
paper or in GIS, has a privileged point of view – that of the ‘celestial eye’
which, to appropriate the words of Michel de Certeau (1984, p. 92): ‘. . .makes
the complexity of the city readable, and immobilizes its opaque mobility in a

International Journal of Heritage Studies

19

Inhabitants may,

transparent text’. Thus, for the scholar, like de Certeau’s ‘voyeur’ viewing Man-
hattan from the 110th ﬂoor of the World Trade Center,
the archaeological site
map allows the whole city to be apprehended in one glance. That
is, on the
two-dimensional page,
spatial everyday practices vanish, and the logic of
the map that reveals itself is one that no inhabitant would encounter. While the
map-reader experiences the urban fabric from above without limits, the inhabit-
ants’ experience of a city is constrained by walls, closed doors, and limited
sight-lines. The map-reader is subject
to none of these restrictions, but rather
she has a totalising view of the space devoid of its inhabitants. Further, it is not
just the physical and visual affordances that de Certeau outlines, but he is inter-
ested in how the inhabitants’ experience also goes beyond the limits of these
physical determinants.
themselves from
taking a path that is generally considered accessible. However, while in this pro-
ject we are interested in representing the experience of inhabiting the place from
the standpoint of a human being, we do not want to take our appropriation of
de Certeau’s insights too far, and thus we must be clear that trying to recover
the everyday practices of the inhabitants of an ancient city is very, very difﬁcult.
However, we ﬁnd that de Certeau is quite helpful when he points to the inad-
vertent wisdom of a 1970s poster describing the wonder of visiting the World
Trade Center, which reads: ‘It’s hard to be down when you’re up’ (Figure 2).
In the ‘Virtual Sirkap’ project, we read this poster idiosyncratically, as does de
to ‘be down’;
Certeau, and we also read it as a challenge. Thus, we attempt
that is, we attempt to represent the vantage point of the walker ‘down’ in the
city, rather than the voyeur ‘up’ above it. The walkers in a city, as de Certeau
argues, experience an urban fabric in a particular way, and this is the experience
we seek, however compromised it might be by the interventions of technology
and time.

for example, prevent

Representing place: erasure and formative effects
In our view, place is a social, historical, and spatial phenomenon. By that we mean
that the meaning of a singular, physical space changes according to the speciﬁcities
of the society, the time, and the physical attributes in which that space is inter-
preted.3 As such, place is not ﬁxed in any of these three dimensions. For example,
a given classroom at an American university, as a place, may contain particular
meanings for an American student, but have very different meanings for a Chinese
student who just came to the USA for study. The same classroom has a third mean-
ing for an American student who used to study in the same physical location – the
same space – 20 years ago. And if one changes the physical settings of the class-
room – the spatial matrix – the meaning changes for all three students. Thus, place
is heterogeneous; it affords a multiplicity of mixed and sometimes contradicting
meanings that are juxtaposed with each other and yet do not negate each other. A
given classroom may be experienced simultaneously as a place of ecstasy by one
student and as a place of agony by his classmate. Ecstasy and agony co-exist within
the class space despite their opposing meanings, and thus the presence of one
meaning does not necessary entail the absence of the other. The meaning of a class-
room may also change in the mind of one student over time. It can be a place of
ecstasy at the start of the academic semester, and then a place of agony at its end.
The meaning of the classroom can also change in the mind of this given student

20

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Figure 2. 1970s American poster advertising the observation deck of the World Trade
Center.
Note: Size, 46  30 inches.

depending on the presence of one teacher or the other. In this way, the ‘meaning’
of a space – that is, place – is presentist and contingent on the experience of the
individual; it is not ﬁxed in some permanent past (Lefebvre 1991, Casey 2002).
This kind of place is very, very difﬁcult to recover in the ancient city of Sirkap, but
it might not be impossible. If we can discern individual or social meanings which
are encoded in the physical matrix of the city, we may be able to re-present at least
one meaning. With this said, we would like to highlight two important concerns
about representing place: (1) the act of representation tends to signify one interpre-
tation of the place and to erase others; and (2) the act of representation tends to
have a formative effect on the signiﬁed place.

Erasure
The heterogeneity of place is affected by the activities not just of individuals, but
of large social groups as well. Dominant groups typically try to impose one mean-
ing of a given place, obviously theirs, on other groups. Thus, the place becomes an
object of the dialectics of domination and appropriation. It
is most often these

International Journal of Heritage Studies

21

dominant meanings that are encoded in the architecture and writings that exist as
artefacts in the present for archaeologists and historians to study. An example of
the pitfalls in these interpretive processes that comes very close to our project is
historic Colonial Williamsburg. Colonial Williamsburg is a preservation of the eigh-
teenth-century historic district of the town of Williamsburg, Virginia. But the site is
more than just the space; that is, it contains more than just the physical buildings
and natural environment, the tangible heritage. Colonial Williamsburg also employs
actors to play the roles of eighteenth-century inhabitants of the town. These actors
recreate the intangible heritage of the site, and attempt to make space into place. In
the early 1970s, this historical ‘recreation’ of the intangible heritage at Colonial
Williamsburg was criticised as elitist as it ignored the harsh reality of the life of
black Americans in the colony (Gable et al. 1992). In response to these critiques,
the curators of Colonial Williamsburg attempted to ‘democratise’ the story. They
sought to incorporate African-American history into the site. However, much of
this was, as the curators put it, ‘conjectural’; that is, the history and material culture
of such a marginalised group did not survive in a form that is readily accessible to
us in the present. Thus, another critique arose after the interleaving of ‘conjectural’
black history into the site. The effect of juxtaposing the dominant history of the
white colonists with a ‘conjectural’ black history created an interesting, and disturb-
ing, paradox: the museum, by including a black history that is ‘conjectural’ implied
that mainstream, dominant history is ‘actual’. In other words, the inclusion of a
previously excluded group worked to ensure the legitimacy of the mainstream,
dominant history by making it seem more real and truthful than the history of other
groups (Gable et al. 1992). Here, at Colonial Williamsburg, we see the difﬁculty in
representing past history without erasing, or at least diminishing the importance of,
much of it.

We address this issue of erasure, or better for our project, the (im)possibility of
retrieval, of certain experiences by our choice of user avatars. In Virtual Sirkap, the
user takes on a pedestrian view in both the literal and ﬁgurative sense: the user’s
avatar is literally represented as ‘on-foot’, but the avatar is also quite ‘pedestrian’,
that is, commonplace and ordinary. Thus, we represent an experience of the city
from the point of view of the commoner. However, the urban form of the city may
not have been purposely designed to engage with the commoner, but rather, the
urban form may reﬂect the desire to engage other classes of inhabitants such as a
monk or a prince, and as such, perhaps the commoner’s perspective is not of pri-
mary importance. We employ Michel de Certeau here to address these concerns. De
Certeau argues that all places exist in a dialectical relationship between a represen-
tation of place imposed by a dominant structure and an appropriation of the same
place by subverted structures. To quote de Certeau (1984, p. xix):

I call a ‘strategy’ the calculus of force-relationships which becomes possible when a
subject of will and power (a proprietor, an enterprise, a city, a scientiﬁc institution)
can be isolated from an ‘environment’. A strategy assumes a place that can be circum-
scribed as proper (propre) and thus serve as the basis for generating relations with an
exterior distinct from it (competitors, adversaries, ‘clientèles’, ‘targets’, or ‘objects’ of
research). I call a ‘tactic’, on the other hand, a calculus which cannot count on a
‘proper’ (a spatial or institutional localisation), nor thus on a borderline distinguishing
the other as a visible totality. The place of a tactic belongs to the other. A tactic insin-
uates itself into the other’s place, fragmentarily, without taking it over in its entirety,
without being able to keep a distance.

22

D. Michon and A. El Antably

For our model, what is important here is that places are in themselves representa-
tional devices used by dominant structures of power – in our representation, perhaps
the religious elite (the monk) or the state/military apparatus (the prince) – to impose
a certain meaning on their dwellers – our pedestrian avatar. Dwellers, on the other
hand, usually appropriate their own, different, meanings in their everyday use of
these places. As contemporary scholars, we have no access to these meanings in the
past. What we can do is to reconstruct the formal space and allow for a pedestrian
(on-foot) experience. We could have created the look of the avatar to match a cer-
tain class, but this would have done very little to change the ways in which users
perceive the place. We could make conjectures based on historical studies of these
classes, but this approach goes beyond the limits of our current study. Thus, what
we do in the present article is compare the presentist interpretation derived from our
three-dimensional representation with the equally presentist interpretations derived
from more traditional media of representation such as two-dimensional maps, photo-
graphs, and site plans. We signal the presentist nature of the model by having the
user choose an avatar that reﬂects our contemporary culture.

Formative effects
In Virtual Sirkap, then, we are well aware that what we ‘recreate’ privileges the
dominant groups’ history. Although we understand place as inter-subjective and het-
erogeneous – and we accept that it has a multiplicity of meanings depending on the
speciﬁcity of the individual, the society, and the time in which it is interpreted –
most of the past meanings are now lost to us. Further, however, it is not just that
only certain meanings survive the ravages of time, but the very act of representation
ﬁxes the meaning of place according to its producer’s time and worldview. Such a
producer can be an individual (e.g., a painter) or a group of individuals (e.g., the
dominant media or, in this case, the Virtual Sirkap team). Edward Casey (2002)
calls this process ‘re-emplacement’. According to Casey, the act of representing a
place, for example in a painting or a map, is an act of a re-emplacement of this
place. It is a subjective act in which one tries to reinstate the meaning of a place in
a representational medium. Re-emplacement also implies a displacement. The rein-
stated meaning of place is reinterpreted in a different place by a different society at
a different time. This act has a formative effect on the meaning of the place. Jeff
Malpas (2008, p. 206) sums up the problem well:

. . .no attempt to recreate a place elsewhere can ever be successful as a recreation of
‘that’ place, since the identity of the place is itself tied to its speciﬁcity and singular-
ity, and the very attempt at ‘recreation’ marks off the ‘recreated’ place from the origi-
nal – similarly no such ‘recreation’ can ever do justice to the original sense of place
at issue.

Further, the medium of representation itself is inherently selective in its signiﬁca-
tion, and much depends on its technical affordances. For example, a photograph
does not afford sound, whereas ﬁlm does. The medium is also socially constructed
and the way in which it is perceived has an impact on the meaning it conveys. For
example, a photograph typically suggests an actual event while a painting suggests
artistic expression. Therefore, a re-emplacement of place through representation can
entail a change of meaning depending on the medium of representation, the time,
and the society in which the representation is deployed.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

23

Similarly, the medium of representation that we employed in our project is not
neutral. Its technical affordances and the ways in which it is socially constructed and
deployed have a formative effect on the ways in which Virtual Sirkap is perceived.
Our project employs a computer-generated virtual environment based on gaming
technology. It represents place in three-dimensional perspectival constructions where
users are represented as anthropomorphic, usually gendered, three-dimensional com-
puter models called ‘avatars’. Through avatars, users can explore the environment
and interact with other users and non-playing characters. The environment allows for
a liberal visual, auditory, and kinetic experience of space in actual time.4 This sets
this medium apart from cinematography, which affords only a restricted experience
in a staged time and space. It also sets it apart from maps for it puts back into the
representation the possibility of individually and socially inhabiting the place. On
the other hand, other than sight, hearing, and kinesthesis, our medium does not
afford the other senses. The sense of smell, for example, which is a key sense in
market places, is absent from our reconstruction of Sirkap’s Main Street.

Cartographic media and interpretation: representations of Sirkap circa 100 CE

The position of Sirkap within the archaeological complex of Taxila
Located in northern Pakistan about 22 km to the west of Islamabad and about 25
km to the northwest of Rawalpindi, the archaeological complex at Taxila was at
one time at the intersection of three great trade routes connecting India, Central
Asia, and Western Asia. Its early urban form was developed in the late sixth cen-
tury BCE, and it ﬂourished from the third century BCE to the seventh century CE.
Its decline can be linked to changes in the trade routes and a subsequent population
decrease (Dani 1986). The site is a vast complex of monasteries, temples, and three
separate cities, which taken as a whole covers almost 45 km2. It was ‘discovered’
by Alexander Cunningham in the late nineteenth century as he travelled throughout
India following the pilgrimage routes of the Chinese monks Fa Xian, who also trav-
elled through the Indian subcontinent in the ﬁfth century CE, and Xuan Zang, who
did the same in the seventh century CE (Singh 2004).

While Cunningham did not engage in full excavations at Taxila, he did carry
out some preliminary digs in and around the area.5 However, it was the twentieth-
century British archaeologist Sir John Marshall who did the most extensive work
there from 1913 to 1934. His ﬁnds were steadily published in his yearly Annual
Reports, and in 1951, Marshall re-published his data in a three-volume ﬁnal report
now known simply as Taxila. Marshall (1951) wrote in his introduction: ‘in such an
excavation there comes a time when the entire body of data has to be re-examined
and coordinated, and a comprehensive account of the whole put at the service of
archaeologists and historians’. Although there have been various small archaeologi-
cal digs in the area since the publication of Taxila in 1951, Marshall’s work is by
far the most comprehensive archaeological record of the site to date.6

In Taxila Marshall identiﬁed – in addition to the myriad of temples, stupas, and
monasteries – three separate cities. The earliest, and smallest, was located on Bhir
Mound and was founded some time after the fourth century BCE. In the late Maur-
yan period and during Indo-Greek rule – that is, the early second century BCE –
much of the population moved from Bhir Mound to Sirkap. Sirkap ﬂourished from

24

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Table 1. Chronology of habitation at Sirkap.

Virtual Sirkap
terminology

Rulers

Dates

Settlement

Phase

Transitional

Phase

Mauryans, Indo-Greek, Indo-Scythian, Indo-
Parthian and other kings
Upper boundary of Settlement Phase is marked by coins of the Kushana
king Kujula Kadphises, circa 78 CE
Great Kushana kings: Vima Takto, Vima
Kadphises, Kanishka I and Huvishka

circa 200 BCE to mid-
to late ﬁrst century CE

circa mid- to late ﬁrst
century CE to circa
200 CE
circa 200 CE to ﬁfth
century CE

High Kushana

Phase

Begins with reign of Vasudeva I and includes
later Kushana and Kushana-Sassanian rulers

Notes: CE, Common Era; BCE, before the Common Era.

the late second/early ﬁrst century BCE to the middle of the second century CE
under the rule of three successive groups: the Indo-Scythians, Indo-Parthians, and
Kushanas. With the arrival of the Kushanas in the late ﬁrst century CE, the city’s
population began to move to Sirsukh which, unfortunately, has yet to be adequately
excavated. This period, from the late ﬁrst century CE to the middle of the second
century CE we have called the ‘Transitional Phase’, and it is from this period that
much of the ruins of the city belong (see Table 1). The long-term goal of the Vir-
tual Sirkap project is to build a comprehensive model in both space and time: we
hope not only to model the urban and extra-urban landscape, but also to present
these landscapes through time; that is, to offer snapshots of the whole complex at
Taxila at different historical moments. However, we have only just begun, and at
this point, we have only modelled a small portion of the middle city of Sirkap,
from the northern fortiﬁcations to Block D, as it might have stood around 100 CE.

Scholars as voyeurs: experiencing the city while ‘being up’
The primary site plan of the city of Sirkap, Plate 10 entitled ‘Plan of Sirkap show-
ing the second (parthian) stratum’, is found in volume three of Marshall’s Taxila. It
is the site plan used by almost all subsequent studies of the cultural heritage of the
city (Figure 3). Of course, while it is the primary focus of our study in the present
article, this two-dimensional site plan is not the only medium through which a scho-
lar can interpret Sirkap. Photographs – including those taken by Marshall and his
excavation team at the time of excavation, those taken by subsequent excavation
teams and visitors to the site after Marshall, and aerial images (both the traditional
methods of using an airplane and now the much easier method of using Google
Earth) – and actually walking through the extant ruins are two other ways of appre-
hending the site. Virtual Sirkap and photographs are similar in that while both are
displayed in two-dimensional platforms, they solicit our life-long experience with
three-dimensional objects to reconstruct in our mind the third dimension. Virtual
Sirkap differs from photographs, however, as it affords kinesthesis – the ability to
perceive the environment by experiencing movement through it – whereas photo-
graphs are more like site plans in that they are static. Virtual Sirkap differs from
walking the extant ruins in two ways: ﬁrst, the ruins at Sirkap do not preserve the
third dimension in any helpful way. That is, what is left of the city is just the foot-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

25

Figure 3. Marshall’s Plate 10 as found in Taxila (Marshall 1951).
Note: Image reproduced with permission from Cambridge University Press.

26

D. Michon and A. El Antably

print, and the visitor’s sight-lines are not impeded. Second, the norms of heritage
site management work to order the experience for the visitor. As Sudharshan
Seneviratne (2008, p. 190) argues:

. . .the site management decorum applied at living World Heritage sites becomes an
impediment to the free ﬂow of intangible heritage. Neatly demarcated pathways force-
fully guiding the movement of pilgrims and visitors, restrictions imposed on certain
types of rituals and expressions. . . and the restriction of entry after visiting hours
(when such sites are aesthetically most appealing) tend to dilute the ‘living’ heritage
at heritage sites. . . [they become] docile and devoid of ‘life’.

Thus, the media of photographs and the act visiting the extant ruins run up against
many of the same issues that adhere to two-dimensional site plans. Again, however,
our focus here is the most common way of representing Sirkap, two-dimensional
site plans and maps.

Now, when we look at Marshall’s Plate 10, the two-dimensional site plan of
Sirkap, from above – as we must when viewing it in two dimensions – three fea-
tures of the plan visually demand our attention: the Block D Apsidal Temple com-
plex, the northern fortiﬁcation wall, and Main Street. The ‘modern’ afﬁnity for
order and simplicity within constructed space draws our eye away from the chaos
of the intricate urban fabric of much of the city and towards the large swathes of
solid white and black space – the white space created by the outer courtyard of the
Block D Apsidal Temple complex and the black space created by the heavy foot-
print of the fortiﬁcation wall.7 Further, the ‘modern’ desire for symmetry, most
readily apparent in our familiarity with the grid layout of a city, impels us to focus
on the geometric work that Main Street performs.

Of these three features, perhaps the most visually captivating is the Block D
Apsidal Temple complex. As Ahmed Dani (1986, p. 100), perhaps the foremost
expert on Sirkap after Marshall, wrote: ‘[t]he temple [in Block D] is the most
imposing building in the whole site of Sirkap’. We argue that this assessment is not
primarily derived from its size, but more so from the simplicity of the architectural
features as depicted on the two-dimensional page. It certainly is large, the whole
complex occupies much of Block D and spills into Block C to the north. The rect-
angular outer wall is approximately 69.4 m in length and 45 m in width, while the
temple itself measures 39.9  15.5 m. However, it is not primarily the size of
the structure that draws our eyes to it, as equally large structures can be found in
the site plan but do not hold our attention in the same way. For example, the Palace
complex in Block K is much larger, measuring approximately 106 m in length by
97 m in width. However, the Palace complex is divided into a number of rooms
and courts, all of which we can see in our totalising vision from above, and these
divisions lessen its visual impact, making it seem smaller than the Block D Apsidal
Temple complex. The Block D Apsidal Temple complex, on the other hand, has
lots of white space both surrounding and within it, giving it a sense of mass. So, in
the midst of the chaos of black lines that characterises most of Plate 10, our eyes
move to this white space, and the Block D Apsidal Temple complex becomes the
visual focus of the city.

This focusing phenomenon is even stronger in the many reprints of Marshall’s
Plate 10. The original Plate 10 was published in Taxila as a large, 25-inch-wide fold-
out. However, very few publications allow for such a large fold-out, and so it is

International Journal of Heritage Studies

27

Figure 4. Marshall’s Plate 10 – a reproduction from the fortiﬁcations through Block F.
Note: Image reproduced with permission from Cambridge University Press.

rarely reproduced in full. Rather, the map is divided into parts for ease of publication.
A reproduction strategy that keeps the image most fully intact is to shrink it a bit and
then rotate it 90° clockwise so that the north–south orientation is vertical allowing for
the most coverage. Even in this maximal procedure, only 11 inches of the original

28

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Figure 5. Reproduction of Marshall’s Plate 10 by the Pakistan Department of Archaeology
and Museums outside the site itself.
Note: Photo reproduced with permission from Usman Waqas (http://pbase.com/waqas).

plate can be depicted on one page – that is, from the fortiﬁcations to Block F
(Figure 4). More often than not, however, only a very small portion of the city is rep-
resented – from the fortiﬁcations to Block D or E. The result of these reductions is
twofold: (1) the larger structures that might compete for our visual attention with the
Block D Apsidal Temple complex are not depicted; and (2) often the Block D Apsi-
dal Temple complex is centred on the page.8 When Marshall’s Plate 10 is reduced in
size enough to ﬁt entirely on one page, the focusing effect of the empty white space
of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex is heightened even more.9

Marshall’s Plate 10, while the most ubiquitous, is not the only representation of
the Sirkap available. Perhaps the most striking full reproduction of Plate 10 was
created by the Pakistan Department of Archaeology and is not in a publication at
all. Rather, a full reproduction of Marshall’s Plate 10 stands at the entrance of the
ruins of Sirkap. The site plan is drawn with white lines on a blue background
(Figure 5). In this representation, the Pakistan Department of Archaeology chose to
draw the white lines of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex in bold, which further
distinguishes it from the rest of the city. Yet another important representation of
Sirkap is found in A. Ghosh and Sir Mortimer Wheeler’s 1947–48 excavation
report.10 In this plan, the Block D Apsidal Temple complex’s white space jumps
out even more. As beﬁts the visual prominence of this structure as represented in
the two-dimensional site maps, this complex receives the most attention in discus-
sions of urban form and religion at Sirkap.

The other two features that visually demand our attention in two-dimensional
site plans of Sirkap are Main Street, which bisects the city, and the fortiﬁcations,
which surround it.11 To reiterate what we said previously, the acculturated ‘modern’
desire for symmetry and order brings our attention to Main Street (particularly in
the full reproduction of the city site plan as in Figure 3), and the ‘modern’ empha-
sis on simplicity brings our attention to the solid, thick black lines of the fortiﬁca-
tion’s footprint (Figure 3). These two features, like the Block D Apsidal Temple
complex, have received much attention from scholars who often have noted the odd
relationship between them: the northern gate does not open out directly onto Main
Street as one would expect, but rather is offset to the east quite a bit. This odd ori-
entation is explained by Marshall (1951, p. 115) as a product of both defensive and
sanitary concerns:

[The offset orientation] would check any sudden rush of assailants and prevent them
sweeping through the gateway and up the Main Street. . . [and] during the rainy season

International Journal of Heritage Studies

29

the ﬂood-water pouring down Main Street would extend its force to some extent
against the city wall. . . before entering the capacious underground drain which passes
from south to north beneath the gateway.12

Both of these explanations are well-founded, but perhaps not exhaustive, as we
shall explore in the next section. That is, this understanding, or better ‘experience’,
of the relationship between the fortiﬁcations and Main Street, just as the ‘experi-
ence’ of the centrality of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex, is very much the
product of the visual medium employed: the two-dimensional site map.

Walking the city: experiencing Sirkap in three-dimensions
As the title to this section suggests, and as we have noted previously, the goal of
the Virtual Sirkap project was to create a way in which we, in the present, can
‘walk the city’ rather than apprehend it from above. While there is still much work
to be done – we were only able to model a very small portion of Sirkap – our
three-dimensional virtual environment affords us that possibility. At the beginning
of the project, we expected the interactive nature of the model to be the primary
generator for fresh ideas. That is, we were very interested in tracking how users
experienced the city when it was populated by non-player characters engaging in
actions as simple as walking down the street, selling goods in the market, or offer-
ing devotion at a shrine. And while we were able to put non-player characters into
the model, we did so only at a very basic level. Unfortunately, there are only two
types of non-player characters, one male and one female prototype, and we have
yet to model the appropriate physical forms and dress for them. Further, and more
importantly, there is very little interactivity with them: visitors can only watch them
perform their preset tasks and cannot engage with them. The incomplete nature of
the model as we envisioned it, however, has turned into a great boon. One of the
great surprises in the Virtual Sirkap project was how different the experience of the
city was even without the interactive portion completely ﬁnished. That is, the urban
layout, when experienced from the ground up as an inhabitant of a three-dimen-
sional world might have encountered it, provided alternative interpretations of the
religio-political form of the city. When walking the city in three dimensions, rather
than apprehending it in a totalising vision via the two-dimensional site plan, the
visual dominance of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex recedes signiﬁcantly.
One might assume, as we did, that the size of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex
would render it visible from quite a distance;13 however, this is not the case. For
example, when standing in the centre of Main Street between Block 1 and Block
A, the Block D Apsidal Temple complex is barely visible (Figure 6a). In fact, one
would already have to know it is there to realise that the small circles just above
the far south-eastern buildings were the crests of the pillars located in the courtyard
of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex. That is, from this vantage point, it is
impossible to know that these circles are actually Buddhist chakra wheels mounted
on tall pillars. Further, the visitor’s interest is drawn to the activity, the movement,
on Main Street and not to the constructed form, thus rendering the pillars even
more insigniﬁcant. As the visitor moves down Main Street,
the chakra wheels
mounted on the pillars do become more prominent (Figure 6b); however, the roof
to the Block D Apsidal Temple does not come into view until she reaches the
southern portion of Block C (Figure 6c). It is only when standing directly in front

30

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Figure 6. Screen shots of an avatar ‘walking the city’ in the Virtual Sirkap project: (a)
avatar standing between Block 1 and Block A looking north; (b) avatar standing at Block B
looking north; (c) avatar standing at the southern end of Block C looking north; (d) avatar
standing at Block D looking at the Apsidal Temple complex.

of the Block D Apsidal Temple complex that the temple roof and a portion of the
temple itself, rather than just the pillars, are visible (Figure 6d).

The preceding description of the view of a person walking southward on Main
Street is merely a translation of a possible course of action that can be taken in the
model. It is much like a city tour in that the choices are pre-determined for the
reader. However, unlike an actual tour, a textual description does not take place in
real time. This is an important aspect of walking a city – it takes time to move from
one spot to the next. The city cannot be apprehended all at once, but only in small
segments. In the Virtual Sirkap model, for a visitor to change their location in the
city they must walk to the next point. If they want to revisit a site, they must walk
back. They are located in time and space, and their decisions must
take these
parameters into account. On the other hand, the location of the traditional scholar

International Journal of Heritage Studies

31

Figure 6. (continued).

engaging a two-dimensional site plan is, paradoxically, both nowhere and every-
where at the same time. The scholar views the city from above, from an undeﬁned
point in space, which no inhabitant of the city could attain. However, from that
indeterminate place, that ‘God’s eye view’, the scholar, or as de Certeau calls her,
the ‘voyeur-god’, is also, at the same time, everywhere. However, in Virtual Sirkap,
walking, for example, in a straight line – with no stopping to look at other build-
ings, with no stopping to look at the markets – from Block 1 to Block D (about
150 m) takes almost two minutes. This lessens the impact of any particular build-
ing, and in particular the Block D Apsidal Temple complex, as much of the time it
is not within the visitor’s immediate experience.

Now that the Block D Apsidal Temple complex is not assumed to be the domi-
nant structure in the city, other structures begin to come into focus and demand our
attention. For example, for any visitor entering the city through the northern gate
(which we must note is only one of a number of ways to move within the city) the

32

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Figure 7. Screen shots of an avatar entering the city through the northern gateway in the
Virtual Sirkap project.

visually dominant structure is not the Block D Apsidal Temple complex, but the
Block A stupa court. Not only is the top of the stupa in Block A visible from the
moment the visitor enters the city,14 but they are further drawn towards this struc-
ture as the entrance to this stupa court opens out to Second Street and not out to
Main Street as expected. The intentionality of this north-facing orientation is further
conﬁrmed by the fact that the stupa itself faces north towards Second Street and the
northern gate. The visitor, upon entering the city then, naturally walks straight from
the northern gate to a sort of walkway leading to the entrance of the stupa court
(Figures 6a–c).15 Thus, in addition to the previous arguments of sanitation and
defence, we can add a third argument for the function of the odd orientation of the
northern gate and Main Street: the three-dimensional experience informs us that
the Block A stupa court held a privileged place in the religio-political geography of
the city.16 New arrivals would most likely make initial offerings here, and the struc-
ture would showcase the power of the rulers.17 This is not to discount Marshall’s
arguments; structures can have multiple purposes, and it is quite possible that the
‘odd’ orientation of the northern gate served to facilitate waste management, bolster
a defensive posture, and afford an initial contact point for visitors to the city.

Thus, our three-dimensional model offers hints of the importance of the socio-
religious ideologies embedded within the urban form of Sirkap. However,
the
instantiation of political ideology in Sirkap’s urban form ﬁnds its most profound
visual imprint in the ever-present fortiﬁcation walls. The fortiﬁcations do not just
dominate the landscape when a visitor approaches the city from outside the walls

International Journal of Heritage Studies

33

(Figure 7), but they dominate the interior of the city as well. It is not just that they
are visible from many parts of our model, but it is that they are visually imposing
from almost every vantage point. No matter where the visitor walks in the city, the
fortiﬁcations loom in the background. Here,
the state apparatus, represented by
defensive walls and the soldiers placed within them, is decidedly present. In the
Block A stupa court, the fortiﬁcations tower over the interior, and the visitor could
not but be aware of the presence of the military above her (Figure 8a) – compare
this with the photograph taken by Marshall from the same vantage point where
the fortiﬁcation walls and northern gate dominate
there is no indication that

Illustration of the presence of fortiﬁcations throughout the city: (a) screen shots

Figure 8.
of avatar in the Block A stupa court facing northwest in the Virtual Sirkap project; (b)
photograph from Marshall’s Taxila, Plate 23a, showing Block A stupa court looking
northwest (photo reproduced with permission from Cambridge University Press; (c) screen
shot of avatar at southern end of Block A facing north; (d) screen shot of avatar at southern
end of Block D facing north; (e) screen shot of avatar in a small courtyard at the eastern
end of Block B; (f) screen shot showing avatar in alley in Block A.

34

D. Michon and A. El Antably

Figure 8. (continued).

the fortiﬁcations are the
(Figure 8b); on Main Street, whenever facing north,
backdrop (Figure 8c); moving 150 m southward down Main Street, all the way to
the Block D Apsidal Temple complex, the guard towers are a visible and distinct
presence (Figure 8d); and in the various alleys and interior courtyards, the fortiﬁca-
tions are present (Figure 8e and f). This ‘experience’ of the ubiquity of the fortiﬁca-
tions is only possible in a three-dimensional environment.

Conclusion
Through the use of a three-dimensional MUVE, we have explored a multiplicity of
meanings embedded within a small portion of the urban fabric of the ancient settle-
ment of Sirkap. We contrasted these meanings with those derived from the more
traditional medium of the two-dimensional site plan and concluded that traditional
interpretations often overvalue the socio-religious impact of the Block D Apsidal

International Journal of Heritage Studies

35

Figure 8. (continued).

Temple complex,
leaving the powerful visual statements made by the Block A
Stupa Court, the northern gate, and the fortiﬁcations under-interpreted. However,
we need to be very clear here: this does not mean that the Block D Apsidal Temple
complex was not an important socio-religious site, in fact, at certain times, for
certain inhabitants, and in certain ‘walkings’ of the city it surely was the dominant
structure. However, it is also important to recognise that in some ‘walkings’ of the
city, for example the one outlined previously where the visitor enters from the
northern gates and walks southward down Main Street, the Block D Apsidal Tem-
ple complex recedes from view, and other structures emerge. Further, the meanings
we have identiﬁed can only be provisional, as we need to model so much more of
the site. How would having a complete model of the excavated portion of Sirkap,
not just the northern blocks, affect the experience of the city? How would entering
from one of the other two gates affect the experience? And even beyond the urban

36

D. Michon and A. El Antably

fabric, how would modelling the extra-urban monasteries, stupas, and temples affect
the experience of the walled city? For example, surely the massive Dharmarajika
Stupa complex, located less than 1.5 km to the southeast of the eastern gate at
Sirkap, had a powerful effect on the city itself.

Lastly, how will improving the visual believability and interactional capabilities
of the non-player characters populating the city change the experience? Through-
out the present article, we have stressed the presentist nature of the Virtual Sirkap
experience, and increasing the verisimilitude and perceptual realism of the experi-
ence will only add to the complexity of this problem. As the creators of the vir-
tual city, we are constantly reminded that we are not representing actual events.
However, we hope that, ultimately, the city will be visited by many people who
are interested in the cultural heritage of ancient India. Since we are employing
gaming technology, these users will most likely interact with the environment in
ways similar to the ways they interact with video games in general:
they will
explore it playfully and uncritically. The more visually believable the environment
becomes, the more users will understand it as objective history. That is, just as,
because of the ways photographs are socially constructed, photorealism, or percep-
tual realism, suggests actual events (Tagg 1993), so too will our model suggest
actual history. In fact, Kevin Schut (2007, p. 229) argues that ‘the creation of a
tangible historical space is in some sense a much more convincing case of histori-
cal objectivity than any picture might be’. If this is true, it is incumbent upon us
as the creators of Virtual Sirkap to ﬁnd ways in which to encourage the users to
engage the game critically.

All of these issues can be explored as the Virtual Sirkap model continues to
grow, and their theoretical value can be enhanced through other models of heritage
sites. However, what is clear is this: the interpretation of heritage places depends on
the affordances of the representational medium through which these places are per-
ceived and the ways in which such a medium is socially deployed and interpreted.
This means that the models we create are profoundly presentist – that is, they
reﬂect many of our concerns in the present, rather than giving us objective knowl-
edge about the past. However, with careful modelling, perhaps we can capture some
of the meanings embedded by some of its past inhabitants and ﬁnd ways to convey
these meanings to visitors to the city.

Acknowledgements
The construction of Virtual Sirkap was funded through the National Endowment for the
Humanities Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant Programme. We would like to extend our
sincerest thanks to the NEH for their support. We would also like to thank Cambridge
University Press for allowing us to use a number of plates from volume three of Marshall
(1951). This project was born out of a collaboration between Daniel Michon and Yehuda
Kalay. Finally, we would like to recognize the rest of the modelling team, as without their
efforts this project would not have been successful. Thank you Pinar Aybar, Ginette Wessel,
Seungwan Hong, and Paul Kim for all your work.

Notes
1. The model is available for download at www.virtualsirkap.com.
2. While it is true that GIS does have three-dimensional capabilities, they still rely very
much on two-dimensional epistemologies. For example, the most popular three-dimen-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

37

sional use of GIS is in viewshed analysis. However, viewshed analysis does not allow a
user to walk through the landscape and experience the site.

3. This view is not new, but rather is in accordance with much of the recent theorising
on spatiality. One potential confusion is in the inversion of the meanings of de Cer-
teau’s terms ‘place’ and ‘space’. That is, de Certeau, in line with continental scholars
on space, thinks of space (éspace) in an Aristotelian sense:
the space of all places
(lieux). Here, space is full of meanings ascribed to it by the social groups that inha-
bit it. Most Anglo-American scholars, on the other hand, think of space in a Platonic
sense: a physical container devoid of meaning. Thus, for these latter scholars, place
is space imbued with meaning typically understood at the individual level. So, to be
clear, we ascribe the meanings the term ‘place’ that de Certeau has assigned to space
(éspace). In addition, obviously, our use of ‘space’ is akin to de Certeau’s ‘place’
(lieux).

4. ‘Kinesthesis’ is perception through movement, and since the user has an awareness of
the avatar’s moving body’s position in relationship to an object of perception, it is a
form of kinesthesis. However, like in all kinesthetic activities, the extent of the user’s
ability to explore the environment liberally is limited by certain factors. In a virtual envi-
ronment, the constraints depend on the programming code that controls and regulates
movement. For example, in our project, the code does not allow avatars to ﬂy or users
to explore the environment using a ﬂying camera. This is a restricted experience when
compared with an environment like Second Life (www.secondlife.com), which allows its
users both these abilities.

5. The archaeological data from Taxila published by Alexander Cunningham can be found
scattered throughout his annual reports to the Archaeological Survey of India. See, in
particular volumes I (1871), II (1872), V (1875), and XIV (1882), all now reprinted by
the Archaeological Survey of India.

6. Other excavations and surveys of note include Ghosh (1947–48), Sharif (1969), and
Khan (1983). A very good summary of many of these excavations can be found in Dani
(1986). Most recently, there has been an ongoing excavation of parts of Taxila by a
Korean team, but they have yet to put forth a full publication.

7. These ‘modern’ ideas of what makes for a well-designed, beautiful city are deeply
rooted in the aesthetic assumptions derived from the western classical tradition. In fact,
in the World Heritage Committee’s ofﬁcial justiﬁcation for the inclusion of Taxila on the
World Heritage List, it is Taxila’s link to urban development further to the west that is
highlighted. In the ﬁnal decision document (International Council on Monuments and
Sites [ICOMOS] 1980), the World Heritage Committee brieﬂy notes the presence of ‘a
number of Buddhist monasteries of various periods and. . . Moslem mosques and mad-
rassahs of the medieval period’ (ICOMOS 1980, p. 1) contained within the vast complex
that is Taxila, but it quickly moves on to describe Taxila’s ‘universally meaningful’ set-
tlement sites. According to the World Heritage Committee, the ﬁrst settlement site, Bhir
Mound, owes its urban design to the ‘Achaemenians’. The second site, Sirkap, derives
its importance from its similarity to ‘the Hellenistic grid system and show[s] the strong
western classical inﬂuence on local culture’ (ICOMOS 1980, p. 1). In addition, the third
site, Sirsukh, ‘attests to the early inﬂuence of Central Asian architectural forms on those
of the sub-continent’ (ICOMOS 1980, p. 2). Thus, the ‘universally meaningful’ heritage
of Taxila is all connected to civilisations to the west of the subcontinent. Further, this
judgement concerning the value of Taxila using almost exclusively ‘Western’ criteria is
not limited to assessments of its urban form. After recognising Taxila as a unique exem-
plar of western urban development – and by omission not recognising Taxila for its
South Asian urban heritage – the World Heritage Committee turns to Criterion 6 in
which a World Heritage Site is ‘directly or tangibly associated with events or with ideas
of beliefs of outstanding universal signiﬁcance’ (UNESCO 1980, p. 5). The event of
‘outstanding universal signiﬁcance’ associated with Taxila has nothing to do with Indian
history – and Taxila is associated with many events of great signiﬁcance to Indian
history – but rather it is Bhir Mound’s purported association with the ‘triumphant entry
of Alexander the Great into Taxila’ (ICOMOS 1980, p. 2) that qualiﬁes it for inclusion.
8. Two examples of this kind of reproduction are in Behrendt (2004, Fig. 10) and Dani

(1986, ﬁg. 26).

38

D. Michon and A. El Antably

9. See Marshall (1936), a volume that was published long before his integrative excavation

report in 1951, and another full reproduction of Plate 10 in Mairs (2005, Fig. 2).

10. This plate is reproduced in a number of important publications, including, Dani (1986,

pl. 2) and Allchin (1995, ﬁg. 12.5).

11. While Dani (1986, pp. 140–141) concludes that ‘the general view of the Saka-Parthian
city, as drawn by Marshall, can hardly be improved’, he also suggests that ‘main street
(sic) dominates the entire city plan’ (Dani 1986, p. 92).

12. All later studies of Sirkap agree with this analysis, for example, see Chakrabarti (1995,

p. 179) and Dani (1986, p. 92).

13. We constructed the height of the outer enclosure wall to rise 5 m from the ground
level of Main Street; the heights of the other buildings are about 3 m. A signiﬁcant
difference between Marshall’s discussion of the temple complex and our model per-
tains to the two ‘stupa bases’ outside the main temple. Domenico Faccenna has
made a very convincing argument that these types of bases were for pillars, not stu-
pas, and we have chosen to follow Faccenna (2007). The pillars we constructed are
also 5 m high, but the whole Block D Apsidal Temple complex was constructed on
a raised, 2 m-high platform, so the pillars, in effect, rise 7 m above the street level.
Cresting the pillars is a circular disk, the Buddhist chakra wheel. Further, we were
quite conservative in our construction of
the structures fronting Main Street. For
example, while Marshall suggests that many of them supported a second storey, we
only constructed single-storey buildings as we saw no signiﬁcant evidence for two
storeys. However, if we followed Marshall and did build another storey on some of
these buildings, this would further obstruct the view of the Apsidal Temples complex
in Block D. Of course, many decisions were made in how to reconstruct
the city,
and a complete discussion of such decisions can be found at
the project website,
www.virtualsirkap.com.

14. The Block A stupa court complex contained a central stupa which sat on a square plinth,
three smaller, votive stupas, and a few small rooms. According to Marshall’s excavation
report, the houses in Block 1 belong to very late stratum II only, that is, the very end of
the Settlement Phase and into the Transitional Phase. Without these poorly built houses,
the entry to the city would lead the visitor directly to the Block A stupa complex.

15. On Marshall’s (1951) site plan, we can trace a direct line from there is a direct line from
the entrance to the city (square 2–68’) to some rubble (square 15–68’) that indicates
some kind of walkway leading to the entrance of the stupa court from Second Street
(square 15–65’).

16. We have yet to model the diachronic changes in the urban fabric of the city. This is

something we would like to do in the future.

17. Support for the conclusion that this stupa shrine was a locus of royal patronage comes
from its similarity to two other stupas in urban Sirkap, those in Block F and Block G –
two stupas which, as I argue elsewhere (Michon 2007), received direct royal patronage
and served as tools to express the power of the rulers. We, obviously, have not yet mod-
elled these stupas.

Notes on contributors
Daniel Michon received his Ph.D. in Religious Studies from University of California, Santa
Barbara and has been teaching at Claremont McKenna College since 2007. His research
focuses on the intersection of religion and material culture in ancient India.

Ahmed El Antably is a Ph.D. Candidate in Design Theories and Methods with a Designated
Emphasis in New Media, Department of Architecture, University of California, Berkeley. He
is currently ﬁnishing his dissertation on the ways in which place is perceived in online
multiuser virtual environments.

References
Abbott, H.P., 2002. The Cambridge introduction to narrative. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge

University Press.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

39

University Press.

Government Central Press.

Government Central Press.

Press.

Press.

Allchin, F.R., 1995. The Mauryan state and empire. In: F.R. Allchin, ed. The archaeology of
the emergence of cities and states. Cambridge, UK:

early historic South Asia:
Cambridge University Press, 187–221.

Behrendt, K., 2004. The Buddhist architecture of Gandhara. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Casey, E., 2002. Representing place.
landscape, painting, and maps. Minneapolis, MN:

University of Minnesota Press.

de Certeau, M., 1984. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Chakrabarti, D.K., 1995. The archaeology of ancient Indian cities. New Delhi, India: Oxford

Cunningham, A., 1871. Four reports made during the years 1862-63-64-65. Vol. I. Simla:

Cunningham, A., 1872. Four reports made during the years 1862-63-64-65. Vol. II. Simla:

Cunningham, A., 1875. Report for the year 1872-73. Vol. V. Simla: Government Central

Cunningham, A., 1882. A tour in the Punjab 1878-79. Vol. XIV. Simla: Government Central

Dani, A.H., 1986. The historic city of Taxila. Tokyo, Japan: Unesco.
Faccenna, D., 2007. Columns at Dharmarajika (Taxila). East and West, 57, 127–173.
Gable, E., Handler, R., and Lawson, A., 1992. On the uses of relativism: fact, conjecture,
and black and white histories at Colonial Williamsburg. American Ethnologist, 19 (4),
791–805.

Ghosh, A., 1947–48. Taxila (Sirkap). Ancient India, 4, 41–84.
Gill, A., 2009. Digitizing the past: charting new courses in the modeling of virtual land-

scapes. Visual Resources: An International Journal of Documentation, 25 (4), 313–332.

Heidegger, M., 1971. Building, dwelling, thinking. In: A. Hofstadter, ed. and trans. Poetry,

language, thought. New York: Harper & Row, 145–161.

International Council on Monuments and Sites, 1980. Advisory board evaluation of Taxila,
Pakistan [online]. Paris, ICOMOS. Available from: http://whc.unesco.org/archive/advi-
sory_body_evaluation/139.pdf [Accessed 23 September 2011].

Khan, G.M., 1983. Hathial excavations. Journal of Central Asia (Islamabad), 6 (2), 35–44.
Kittler, F.A., 1999. Gramophone, ﬁlm, typewriter. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M., 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of

Chicago Press.

Blackwell.

Lefebvre, H., 1991. The production of space. D. Nicholson-Smith,

trans. Malden, MA:

Mairs, R., 2005. The ‘Greek grid-plan’ at Sirkap (Taxila) and the question of Greek inﬂu-
ence in the North West. In: M. Willis, ed. Migration, trade and peoples: European asso-
ciation of South Asian archaeologists, proceedings of the eighteenth congress. London:
The British Academy, 135–147.

Malpas, J., 2008. New media, cultural heritage and the sense of place. mapping the concep-

tual ground. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14 (3), 197–209.

Marshall, J.H., 1936. A guide to Taxila. Delhi, India: Manager of Publications.
Marshall, J.H., 1951. Taxila: an illustrated account of archaeological excavations carried
out at Taxila under the orders of the Government of India between the years 1913 and
1934. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Michon, D., 2007. Material matters: archaeology, numismatics, and religion in early historic

Punjab. Thesis (PhD). University of California, Santa Barbara.

Schut, K., 2007. Strategic simulations and our past. Games and Culture, 2 (3), 213–235.
Seneviratne, S., 2008. Situating world heritage sites in a multicultural society: the ideology
of presentation at the sacred city of Anuradhapurna, Sri Lanka. In: M. Liebmann and U.
Rizvi, eds. Archaeology and the postcolonial critique. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press,
177–195.

Sharif, M., 1969. Excavation at Bhir Mound, Taxila. Pakistan Archaeology, 6, 6–99.
Singh, U., 2004. The discovery of ancient India: early archaeologists and the beginnings of

Tagg, J., 1993. The burden of representation: essays on photographies and histories. Minne-

archaeology. Delhi, India: Permanent Black.

apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

40

D. Michon and A. El Antably

UNESCO, 1980. Operational guidelines for the implementation of the World Heritage Con-
vention [online]. Available from: http://whc.unesco.org/archive/opguide80.pdf [Accessed
23 September 2011].

Wittgenstein, L., 1968. Philosophical

investigations. G. Anscombe,

trans. New York:

Macmillan.


