Consequences of Designating the Recent
Past: Korreweg-district, Groningen, The
Netherlands
Marie-Jeannette Kuipers

Abstract
In The Netherlands the national government is busy designating residential districts from
the recent period 1910± 1940. To gain deeper insight into the consequences of designating the
recent past, a case study of a residential district from the period 1910± 1940 in the city of
Groningen in  the  north of The Netherlands  will  be discussed. The Korreweg-district was
designated  as  an  urban  conservation  area  in  2000. The  reactions  of  the  residents  with
regard to the designation of their residential area as an urban conservation area, and in
some  cases their dwelling  house as national monument, will be described. One important
question with regard to this is: do they acknowledge the recent historicity of their residential
district built in 1910± 1940 and, if so, are they prepared to pay the costs of maintenance
and undergo the restrictions of living in an urban conservation area and in some cases a
national monument?

Key Words: The  Netherlands;  Recent  Past;  Urban  Conservation  Area;  National
Monument; Residents; Historicity; `Problems of Success’

Conservation in The Netherlands
Consequences  of Designation
The legal consequence of designating residential areas as urban conservation areas1
(UCAs) actually means that the town council is forced to develop and determine a
spatial  vision  of  the  future  for  the  area  in  the  shape  of  a  development  plan.2
However, the designation does not prescribe what the vision of the future  should
look  like. The  vision  can  vary  from  being  reconstructive  or  conservative  to  being

1. According to the Monuments Law of 1988, urban and rural conservation areas are groups of real
estate which are of general importance because of their beauty, their mutual spatial or structural
cohesion or their scientific or cultural-historical value, and in which one or more monuments can be
found.

2. As mentioned in article 36 of the Monuments Law of 1988.

dynamic.3 In a development plan the municipality lays down what may or may not
happen  in  the  area,  to  which  the  plan  refers. Where  a  development  plan  already
exists, it has to be adapted in a way that the urban conservation area is protected
from  harm. This  means  that  the  development  plan  describes  which  monumental
aspects  of  the  area  may  or  may  not  be  changed.4 It  is  prohibited  to  demolish
buildings in a conservation area, entirely or partly, without or in contravention of,
written permission of mayor and aldermen.5

For  the  owner  of  premises  that  are  not  a  national  listed  monument  but  are
situated in a UCA, the designation has practical consequences. If owners want to
alter the premises they must get the necessary permission from the municipality. To
obtain this they must comply with both the usual building-technical demands and
the  demands  based  on  the  development  plan  in  force  for  the  area.6 In  this  latter
case, the building plans will be checked for the possible degradation of the UCA. So
this means that the premises are seen as a larger whole and, as a consequence, do
not enjoy any individual protection. Permission is necessary for the demolition of
premises in a UCA.

It is also possible that someone owns a national listed monument within a UCA.
In this case the designation of the area will not make a difference. When the owners
concerned  want  to  make  changes  to  their  premises  they  must  obtain  permission
according to the Monuments Law of 1988. Most of the time a year elapses between
the first information to an owner about the intention of conservation and the final
decision  of  designation.  An  owner  has  several  opportunities   to  react  or  raise
objections to the intention of conservation, first to the municipality and second to
the central government.

Criteria for  Designation
The  area’s  history  and  the  presence  of  spatial  qualities  (at  the  moment  of
designation) should  play  a  role during the  realisation  of the vision  of the future.7
This conservation, in the form of UCAs, means the following in practice:8

The protection aims at the distinction of the characteristic structure and the spatial
quality of the area, which is closely related to the historic development, as being of
great importance in the further developments within that area.

3. N.J.M. Nelissen, Monumentenzorg  in de praktijk, Nijmegen: Prof. dr. N.J.M. Nelissen, Nationaal
Contact monumenten, Nationaal Restauratiefonds, Rijksdienst voor de Monumentenzorg, 1999, p.
1.3.1.

4. R. Berends, Monumentenwijzer, Zeist: Rijksdienst voor de Monumentenzorg, 1995, p. 29.

5. Ibid., p. 29.

6. Ibid., p. 30.

7. Nelissen, op. cit. (note 3), p. 1.3.2.

8. Berends, op. cit. (note 4), p. 28.

54

Maire-Jeannette Kuipers

In this way a certain town district can, on the basis of its buildings and spatial layout,
evoke  memories  of  the  functions  that  the  area  had  for  centuries.9 Also,  the
appearance of such an area can be characteristic.

Until  the  mid-1980s,  younger  architecture  (from  the  period  1850± 1940)
was  scarcely  listed. This  was  because  a  strong  emphasis  had  always  been  placed
on  the  fifty-year  limit  for  becoming  a  national  listed  monument.1 0 Since  the
mid-1980s  interest  in  this  younger  architecture  has  increased.  Increasingly,
the  lack  of  knowledge  about,  and  information  concerning,   architecture  and
urban  design  was  recognised,  as  also  was  the  lag  in  the  protection  and
maintenance  of  the  architecture. This  became  clear  in  the  Dutch  Conservation
Report  of  1984,11 in  which  the  initiative  was  taken  to  start  reducing  the  lag  that
had  developed.

Projects for the Stocktaking and Selection of Monuments
In  1986  the  central  government  took  the  initiative  to  start  a  national  inventory.
Therefore,  a  project  for  the  stocktaking  of  monuments  (MIP)  was  set  up  and
started. The  national  inventory  took  place  per  province  and  per  area  in  it. The
provincial governments and the four big municipal governments were responsible
for the co-ordination and execution of the task. The whole project had to be finished
within five years. In 1999 the MIP was almost totally completed and the intended
national coverage was  obtained. The  result  is that  special  values were  ascribed  to
165,000 objects and 650 areas.1 2

The MIP was followed by the MSP in which a selection and description is made
of  the  objects,  complexes  and  areas  from  the  period 1850 ± 1940  which  had  been
inventoried in the MIP. Its aim is the preservation of valuable heritage with respect
to  architectural  history,  cultural  history  and  city  planning  on  the  basis  of  the
Monuments Law of 1988. The MSP started officially on 6 June 1994. The MSP is
followed by the Monuments Registration Procedure (MRP), which has to result in
definite designation.

`Problems of Success’ ?
The  Netherlands  is  very  much  a  `country  of  monuments’  because  of  its  many
monuments compared with the relatively small size of the country.13 It accounts for
44,000  national  monuments  and  approximately  25,000  municipal  and  provincial

9. Ibid.

10. Nelissen, op. cit. (note 3).

11. Ministerie van Welzijn, Volksgezondheid en Cultuur, Nota over de monumentenzor g, Den Haag,
1984.

12. M.J.S. Bogie, N.J.M. Nelissen, J. Smits & J. Voorzee, Herbestemming van grote  monumenten:  een
uitdaging!, Nijmegen: Stichting Pandenbank Noord-Brabant and Prof. dr. N.J.M. Nelissen, 1999.

13. Bogie et al., 1999, op. cit. (note 12), p. 25.

Designating the Recent Past

55

monuments.1 4 However, these are only the monuments dating from before 1850.
The  MSP  will  lead  to  the  addition  of  another  12,000  so-called  younger  national
monuments.

At this moment more than 300 urban and rural conservation areas are officially
designated in The Netherlands. In the near future, about 165 urban and rural areas
from the period 1850± 1940 will be added to the existing list.15 After the MSP a new
task for conservation will be the heritage of the reconstruction   period, that is the
period of occupation during the Second World War, and the years of reconstruction
after the war.16

The success in conservation has created many problems:17

It is hard to find economically viable uses for preserved premises. The expanding list of
monuments and the designation of extensive conservation areas has included a higher
percentage of small residential properties while the group in the population prepared to
live in, and finance historic houses has not expanded proportionately.

Also,  the  commercial  and  governmental  functions  that  prefer  to  be  located  in
historic  premises  or  areas  are  too  small  to  fill  up  the  increasing  supply  of  such
locations.18 The consequences of preserving more and more in time and in space
could eventually lead to a `conservation time-bomb’ .19 The degree of risk depends
on  the  extent  to  which  the  preserved  buildings  and  areas  contribute  to  the
contemporary  space requirements of the city. If they do not, or not enough, it can
result  in:20 (1)  under-occupation,  or  even  vacancy  of  much  floor  area,  (2)
restrictions  on  urban  change  and  redevelopment,  (3)  loss  of  forgone  alternative
opportunities,  and (4) (ultimately) the fossilisation of large parts of the city in what
are little more than open-air museums of historic architecture. Lichfield21 adds to
these:  (5)  a  growing  financial  burden  on  present  and  future  governments  for
maintenance.

14. Ibid., p. 9.

15. Nelissen, op. cit. (note 3), p. 1.3.1.

16. Ibid. (note 3), p. 1.5.4.

17. G.J. Ashworth, `National policies towards heritage: The Netherlands’ , in G.J. Ashworth & P.
Howard (eds) European heritage planning  and  management, Exeter: Intellect, 1999, pp. 147± 151 (p.
150).

18. Ibid. (note 17).

19. W.C. Baer, `When old buildings ripen for historic preservation: a predictive approach to
planning’ , Journal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 61, No. 1, 1995, pp. 82± 94.

20. G.J. Ashworth, `Living in the past: the residential function in the conserved built environment’
(research proposal), Groningen: University of Groningen, Faculty of Spatial Sciences, Department of
Planning, 1999.

21. N. Lichfield, `Achieving the benefits of conservation’ , Built Environment, Vol. 23, No. 2, 1997, pp.
103± 110.

56

Maire-Jeannette Kuipers

Figure 1. Map of the city of Groningen, and the location of the UCA Groningen city centre and UCA

Korreweg-district.  [Source: M.J. Kuipers,  2001.]

Case Study: the Korreweg-district, Groningen
The UCA of the Korreweg-district (see figure 1) is designated on the basis of several
different values.22 Remarkable in the case of the UCA of the Korreweg-district  is
that  its  historical-spatial   quality,  which  led  to  its  designation,  did  not  lie  in  its
architectural characteristics, but in its architectural design and spatial structure.23
The number of national monuments in the UCA of the Korreweg-district is 247.24

22. These are: (1) it is a complete example of an extensive district of the town from the 1920s and
1930s with a well-preserved clear architectural design, a spacious design and an architecturally
coherent and varied built-up area, in which the different phases of development are clearly
recognisable. (2) It possesses spatial quality, which is supported by the spacious profiles of the main
streets, squares and ponds with varied green, and the spatial organisation of the street-pattern. (3) It
is of general importance, because of its meaning for the development in thinking in terms of urban
design, the quality of the spatial concept, the scale and the architectural elaboration (Gemeente
Groningen: Afdeling Bouwtoezicht en Monumenten, Toelichting bij het besluit tot aanwijzing van het
beschermde stadsgezicht Korrewegwijk, Zeist: RDMZ & Multicopy, 1998, p. 11).

23. Interview with ir. J.O.D.  Kloosterman, Senior Consultant, Urban Design for Eastern and
Northern Regions of The Netherlands: Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission, on 1
December 2000, Groningen: University of Groningen, Faculty of Spatial Sciences, Department of
Planning, 2000.

24. Gemeente Groningen: Afdeling Bouwtoezicht en Monumenten, `List of National and Municipal
Monuments in the Whole Municipality of Groningen: as from 1 January 1995’, Groningen:
Gemeente Groningen (contact: Rita Overbeek),  2001.

Designating the Recent Past

57

Figure 2. Why did you choose to live in the Korreweg-district? [Source: M.J. Kuipers, `Evaluatie van
Korrewegwijk  EnquÃetes’ ,  Groningen:  Rijksuniversiteit  Groningen,  Faculteit  der  Ruimtelijke

Wetenschappen, 2000.]

Most of them have a residential function and all of them were built in the period
1910± 1940,  as  were  the  total  of  3,27325 residential  houses  in  the  UCA  of  the
Korreweg-district.

In  general,  the  UCA  is  characterised  by  relatively  large  percentages  of  single-
person households (43%),26 residents in the age category of 18± 25 (34%),27 rented
houses (59%, of which 34% is social housing)28 and `upper and lower stacked’ houses
(65%).29 The mean disposable income, both per resident and per household, in the
whole Korreweg-district  is the lowest in the municipality of Groningen.30

So, on the one hand, the historicity of the UCA of the Korreweg-district is quite
recent, because it is from the recent past (1910 ± 1940), and is therefore still within
living memory of many of the people alive today. As a consequence, it is very likely
that they do not find the UCA of the Korreweg-district  very historic or interesting.
On the other hand, its mono-functionality, peripheral location with respect to the
city centre, high percentage of lower incomes and rented houses will probably not
encourage the residents to be financially supportive of its historicity. On the basis of
both these assumptions, it can be stated that the actual reaction of the residents to
the designation of their residential environment as a UCA, and their opinion of its
historicity, will be very interesting. Therefore, a number of relevant outcomes from

25. Gemeente  Groningen:  Dienst  Informatie en Administratie-a, Gronometer  2.50: `Zelfstandige Woningen,
1999’, Groningen: Gemeente Groningen (contact: Age Stinissen), 2001.

26. Gemeente  Groningen:  Dienst  Informatie en Administratie-b, Gronometer 2.50: `Bevolking,  2000’ ,
Groningen: Gemeente Groningen (contact: Age Stinissen), 2001.

27. Ibid.

28. Gemeente  Groningen:  Dienst  Informatie en Administratie-a, op. cit. (note 25).

29. Gemeente  Groningen:  Dienst  Informatie en Administratie-c, Gronometer  2.50: `Zelfstandige  woningen,
2000’, Groningen: Gemeente Groningen (contact: Age Stinissen), 2001.

30. Gemeente  Groningen:  Dienst  Informatie en Administratie, Statistisch  Jaarboek 2000, Groningen:
Stadsdrukkerij Groningen, 2000, p. 76.

58

Maire-Jeannette Kuipers

Figure 3. Why did you choose to live in this residential house? [Source: M.J. Kuipers, `Evaluatie van
Korrewegwijk  EnquÃetes’ ,  Groningen:  Rijksuniversiteit  Groningen,  Faculteit  der  Ruimtelijke

Wetenschappen, 2000.]

a survey31 among 130 respondents who live in the Korreweg-district  UCA will be
described.

Figure  2  shows  that  `historic  appearance’   and  `architectural  quality’   are  not
important factors among the residents of the Korreweg-district  UCA in their choice
of residential area, and that `convenient location with regard to the inner city’  and
`atmosphere and liveliness’  are important factors. In the choice of house `relatively
low rent’  and `low buying price’ and `right size of residential house’ are important
factors. `Historic  appearance’   and `style  of  architecture’   are  not  important  in  the
choice  of  house (see  figure  3).  On  the  question  of  whether  they  find  their  house
historic,  one  half  of  the  respondents  said  `yes’   and  the  other  half  said  `no’ . The
factors that, according to the respondents, determine if a residential house is seen
as historic can be divided into three general groups: `style of architecture’ ; `date of
building’; `architectural  design  of  the  street  or  the  district  in  which  the  house  is
located’.

According  to  the  respondents,  it  also  depends  on  the  following  subjective
characteristics,  which are probably related to the factors named above: `character’
and `what it tells us’; `appearance and beauty’ ; `atmosphere’ ; `cosiness’ ; `complex-
ity’ ;  `if  it  is  detailed  or  not’;  `no  newly  built  houses’;  `not-modern’ ;  `typicality,
uniqueness and specificity’ . A residential house is considered as not being historic
when it is: `not old, special, beautiful or unique’; `too new, square, ugly, common,
or  normal’;  `one  in  a  million’,  and  when  it  has  `no  historical  inside’;  `too  many
modern  elements’;  undergone  a  too  innovative  renovation’ ;  `no  small  towers  or
beautiful  fa‡ades’.  Most  respondents  (71%)  were  of  the  opinion  that  their
residential district was historic and 29% did not find it historic. Their reasons were
generally based on the same factors as named by the respondents with respect to the
historicity of their residential house.

Only  27%  of  the  respondents  did  not  know  if  they  were  living  in  a  national
monument or not. However, among the respondents who said they knew, there were

31. M.J. Kuipers, `Evaluatie van Korrewegwijk Enqu Ãetes’, Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit Groningen,
Faculteit der Ruimtelijke Wetenschappen,  2000.

Designating the Recent Past

59

some who claimed to live in a monument, when they did not, and there were some
who claimed not to live in a monument or that they did not know, when they did
actually live in a monument. So it seems that the respondents were  not very well
informed by the local government about the designation of some residential houses
as national monuments.

Two-thirds  of  the  residents  were  not  informed  about  the  designation  of  the
Korreweg-district  as a UCA. This again confirms the presumption that something is
wrong with the provision of information by the local government to the direct users of
the UCA, that is the residents. A larger proportion of respondents are positive about
the designation of their residential district as a UCA. They gave as arguments: `reason
for large-scale renovation’ ; `good for the image of the district’; `better maintenance of
residential houses and public space in between’; `it will look better’ .

Many respondents (42%) said they reacted positively when their residential house
was designated as a national monument, because they: (1) like it, find it interesting
and special, (2) are of the opinion that their house, street, residential environment
will gain more status, quality,  value, history and  atmosphere  as a consequence of
designation,  or  (3)  find  conservation  and  protection  (of  style  of  building  or
architecture) an important cause, and also like the grants for maintenance that go
along with designation. But 39% stayed neutral in this matter. The relatively small
proportion (19%) who claimed to react negatively to the designation put forward
the  following  arguments:  (1)  `nothing  would  be  allowed:  no  reconstructions  or
adaptations’ , (2) `no  voice  in the whole designation,  renovation  and  conservation
process, or not being informed well enough’, (3) `it would be too expensive’ .

The following fragment gives an idea of the recent reaction of the residents of the
national  monuments  along  the  Bernoulli-square  in  the  UCA  of  the  Korreweg-
district (designated in the second half of the 1990s), to the renovation plans that the
local government has:3 2

[The site hut . . . ] should make the residents more enthusiastic for participation in the
Project Bernoulli-plus. In accordance with this project the residential houses along the
Bernouilli-square  will be restored in the old style . . . Because a price is put on the
plans, not all owner-occupiers are equally pleased with the project.

The group of 130 respondents consisted, for the most part, of `eighteen to twenty-
five-years-olds’ , `single persons’, `lower incomes’ and `scholars and students’. This
seems  to  match  the  general  figures  of  the  UCA  of  the  Korreweg-district,   as
described at the beginning of this section.

Approximately  one-third  of  all  the  respondents  said  that  they  wanted  to  move
within two years. Almost one-third gave as a reason `graduation and getting a job’ .
Only one respondent said that he had to move because of the renovation. However,

32. Groninger Internet Courant, `Monumentale bouwkeet moet bewoners enthousiast maken voor
woningrenovatie’, at 13 March 2001, k www.gic.nll .

60

Maire-Jeannette Kuipers

Figure 4. Banner on a residential house of the housing association Volkshuisvesting on Borneo-square,
number  9  (A,  B,  C  or  D),  with  the  following  text  on  it: `Renovation  for  the  recent  residents!!!!
[Source:  M.J.  Kuipers,  Groningen:  Rijksuniversiteit  Groningen,  Faculteit  der  Ruimtelijke Weten-

schappen, 2001.]

from the text on the banners (see figure 4) that a number of residents of the UCA
hung  on  their  residential  houses,  it  seems  that  there  are  more  residents  who  are
afraid they will have to move as a consequence of renovation.33 Another third said
that  they  wanted  to  move  because  they  were  searching  for  more  space,  more
comfort, or for a location in, or nearer to, the inner city.

33. The housing association Stichting Volkshuisvesting has 781 residential houses (that is 24% of the
total housing stock) in the UCA of the Korreweg-district. At the end of the year 2000 it started
large-scale renovation and maintenance of its residential houses located in the UCA of the
Korreweg-district. Although the designation as a UCA was not the prime motive in starting the
renovation project, the way in which the renovation and maintenance plans are worked out are
certainly influenced by the designation. Designation means restriction on change on the outside of
the houses, and a prohibition on demolition of the houses. As a consequence, the housing association
chose a high-level and large-scale renovation (not step by step but all in one go, and to the highest
standards), which meant large investments. To make these more affordable the housing association
has to sell a certain number of its houses within the UCA. Therefore, some `upper and lower stacked’
houses have to be joined vertically, without affecting the outside of the house, to create saleable
family houses with a garden. The housing association will have to increase the rents of the other
houses. As a result, a considerable number of recent residents will have to move out. [Contact: Mw.
J. Reindersma, Groningen: Department of Rent, Housing Association Volkshuisvesting, 2000.]

Designating the Recent Past

61

Conclusion
On  the  basis  of  the  case  study  it  can  be  assumed  tentatively  that  there  are  not
enough residents who are able or prepared to pay the costs of maintenance of the
historicity  of  the  UCA  and  in  some  cases  national  monuments  of  the  Korreweg-
district. This means that the cost of renovation and maintenance will remain with
the national government instead of its direct users, the residents.

Most of the respondents found their residential environment historic, and were
positive about its designation as a UCA. Some of them gave as a reason for this that
as  a consequence  of the  designation the quality  of  their  residential  district  would
improve. However, the historicity of the Korreweg-district  would not be the primary
motive  for  the  respondents  to  live  in  it.  It  is  remarkable  that  almost  none  of  the
respondents  was  informed  about  the  designation  of  their  residential  district  as  a
UCA, and that there was uncertainty  among many respondents about whether they
did or did not live in a national monument.

From the case study one can also conclude that the majority of respondents have
a lifestyle that can be reduced roughly to the same denominator of `young almost
urban professional’ . This group consists of scholars and students who have almost
completed their education, and are already searching or will search for a job in the
near future. They are very willing to move within two years, because they will look
for employment in the larger cities in the west of  The Netherlands or, when they
stay in Groningen, will search for larger living accommodation, preferably central
and accessible in the inner city.

With  respect  to  the  historicity  of  their  recent  residential  location,  they  are  as
students  or  scholars  very  focused  on  function. The  reason  for  this  is  that,  as  a
consequence of their lifestyle, they  are looking  for cheap and temporary  housing,
not too far from the inner city `where it all happens’. With regard to this it can be
said  that  for  them,  as  a  consequence  of  their  lifestyle,  the  historicity  is  an
unexpected bonus, but no primary motive in their residential choice.

From  the  case  study  it  seems  that  most  of  the  residents  of  the  UCA  of  the
Korreweg-district  built in the recent past (1910± 1940) are content with the choice
of  the  national  government  to  preserve  its  historicity  by  designation,  and  they
acknowledge its historicity. However, they do not see it as a primary factor in their
residential  choice  and  see  the  costs  of  renovation  and  maintenance  as  not  their
responsibility.  It  remains  largely  unclear  for  whom  the  recent  past  is  conserved,
because no resident is really asking for it in the case of the Korreweg-district.  Then
why is the national government conserving this recent past, when no user, in this
case  the  resident,  regards  himself  responsible  for  it?  The  main  risk  lies  in  the
uncertainty  concerning how long the national government will be able to bear the
costs  of  renovation  and  long-term  maintenance  of  the  recent  past  it  chooses  to
conserve, if its direct users, in this case the residents, stay unsupportive.

62

Maire-Jeannette Kuipers


