International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

The Protection of the Site: Discursive Formation
and Self-identification in Contemporary Society

Koji Mizoguchi

To cite this article: Koji Mizoguchi (2000) The Protection of the Site: Discursive Formation and
Self-identification in Contemporary Society, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 6:4, 323-330,
DOI: 10.1080/13527250020017753
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250020017753

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 87

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 323± 330

The Protection of the Site: Discursive
Formation and Self-identification  in
Contemporary Society
Koji Mizoguchi

Abstract
The paper argues that rescue archaeological activities in Japan create a discursive  space
where  the  future  protection  and  management  of  the  site  is  debated,  notably  between
academic  archaeologists,  developers  (the  financial/administrative  force)  and  the  media.
This  discursive  space  is  more  and  more  dominated  by  the  media  agenda,  to  which  the
academic force largely conforms. This is connected with the nature of the stability of the lives
of the rescue excavation officers themselves, in contradistinction to that of the general public.

Key Words: Japan; Media; Rescue archaeology; Self identity; Site preservation

The purpose of this tentative piece is to understand the discovery of the site and the
subsequent process towards its protection in the form of scheduling, as a process of
discursive formation  in  contemporary society.  It  will  be  argued  that  the  process
functions as a site of self-identification, in the reproduction of which the structuring
principles of contemporary society ±  which are described to be the late/high/post-
modern ±  are drawn upon. Amongst those structuring principles, the principle of
the spatio-temporal organisation of social life shall be particularly focused upon. It
will  be  contended  that  the  opening-up  of  a  new  discursive  space  about  the
implications of the discovery and protection of the site by theorising the mechanism
of the discursive formation is needed if we are to imagine a better way to preserve
and  represent the  site.  Examples  are  taken  solely  from  Japan,  but  hopefully  the
picture  I  shall  draw  and  discussion  I  shall  put  forward  will  have  wider
implications.1

1. The understanding of the nature and the character of contemporary society and the technology of
self-identification in contemporary society in the paper heavily draws on ideas of the late German
sociologist Niklass Luhmann.  For the essence of his thinking  see N. Luhmann,  Social systems,
Stanford: Stanford University Press Luhmann, 1994.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/00/040323-08   2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250020017753

The Discovery of the Site as a Problematisation of Issues in
Contemporary Society
In Japan, as elsewhere in the world, a vast majority of archaeological excavations are
conducted under rescue circumstances. In that sense, excavation is conceived to be
a problematisation in contemporary society of socio-economic issues; negotiations
over issues, such as who contributes how much to the cost, how much time can be
spared for it and so on, take place as routine, and the mutual understanding of a
professional kind between developers and `rescuers’  is often developed. However,
what I would like to focus on in the following is what is behind the socio-economic
issues problematised and discussed in the negotiations. What I would like to analyse
is a set of `binary codes’  which seems to me to be structuring the way the discussion
goes by tacitly differentiating what is desirable from what is not for carrying on the
discourse of the excavation and, particularly, protection/preservation of the site and
reaching a desirable agreement.

The binary codes, obviously, are constituted by a matrix of factors which can be
classified into different levels of different scales, and the elements which ultimately
determine the  way  in which the factors are interconnected are economic. Having
said that,  it should be  hurriedly added that  the  economic factors are inextricably
coupled with socio-cultural factors. Socio-cultural factors significantly influence the
classification of what is `economic’  and what is `uneconomic’ , and it is this socio-
culturally  influenced  classificatory  framework  that  constitutes  a  significant  axis
along which the binary codes are laid. By `economic’  in this case I mean to make
money well spent; this includes the decision to spend money for a long-term `profit’
for the institution(s) concerned by  knowing that  the  expenditure would not yield
any short-term return. The recognition/definition of long-term profit, in this case, is
interconnected to socio-cultural factors, and the economic system of contemporary
society  has  had  a  profound  impact  upon  the  way  in  which  the  identity  of  the
individual is constituted. It is the  issue of  the  self-identification of  those who are
involved in the excavation and protection of the site and the discursive space which
is created by them that I would like to examine.

Self-identification and Discursive Formation
The spatio-temporal path/movement of the individual in the scales of social life, i.e.
the  everyday,  medium (monthly,  yearly,  etc.),  and  the  lifetime scales,  is  spectac-
ularly different from one another in contemporary society. It means that to expect
to know who one meets at a station/locale in one’s spatio-temporal path and what
those whom one meets there are, is difficult. This implies a range of implications for
the  consideration  of  the  nature  and  the  character  of  contemporary  society,
characterised with terms such as late/high/post-modernity, but what is particularly
important here  is  the  fact  that  the  sharing  of  biographical knowledge between  the
individuals who momentarily share a station in the spatio-temporal path/movement
cannot  normally be expected. This means that  those  who meet one another at  a
station do not know how each of them have come to be what s/he is/appears or how
s/he behaves.

324

Koji Mizoguchi

This  high/late/post-modern  experience  of  the  spatio-temporal  organisation  of
social life leads to the following consequences. First, one has to monitor the situation
and re-identify what one is in each of the stations which one moves through in the
aforementioned scales in order to initiate communications with others with whom
one shares a station. Second, this situation makes one feel it possible/easy to become
someone else. In fact, to become someone else by changing one’s life course, which
was  unimaginable/difficult  in  pre-modern societies/early-modern  society,  is  now
possible. Third,  meanwhile,  through  the  experience  of  chronically  re-identifying
oneself, the regular change/re-invention of what one is, becomes the aim/meaning of
one’s  life  itself.  The  economic  system  of  contemporary  society  constitutes  the
condition in  which  the  unique spatio-temporal  organisation  of  social  life  and  its
consequences are  embedded while  at  the  same  time  it  fully  utilises  them  and  is
carrying on making profits.

Bearing in mind this broad picture of life in contemporary society, if we shift our
focus to the everyday life of those who are involved in the excavation and protection
of the site in Japan, there are some striking contrasts. The average everyday life of
rescue excavation officers in Japan is full of fixity and biographic experience which
life in contemporary society commonly lacks. A majority of the rescue excavation
officers  in  Japan  are  attached  to  the  education boards of  the  local  governments.
They  are public office workers. Their social status  is, in public conception, fairly
high,  and  their  expected/expectable  life  course  in  terms  of  career  advancement
highly stable. The main contents of their work, excavating sites, in most cases prior
to their destruction, and sorting out related paperwork, is highly systematised and
routinised. The methodology of, and techniques and equipment used in, excava-
tions are highly standardised, and training courses for the rescue officers are run by
a governmental agency, Nara National Cultural Properties Research Institute (cf.
http://www.nabunken.go.jp).  Site  workers  ±   a  majority  of  whom  are  either
housewives or retired individuals ±  are employed upon a temporary basis, but many
of them work continuously for a particular education board or a particular officer
for a long time, and personal bonds are often developed between them. In all, once
settled  down,  both  the  everyday  life  and  the  life  course  of  Japanese  local
government-attached  excavation  officers  are  stable  and  predictable  ones,  partic-
ularly in terms of the spatio-temporal organisation of their movements and the range
of individuals they meet and share the knowledge of their biographies.

The stability, fixity and predictability of life in the profession often attracts media
attention. The  everyday  life  and  the  biography  of  the  officer  in  charge  of  a  site
yielding a `media-worthy’  artefact or feature or two are often depicted with a sense
of  curiosity,  sympathy,  admiration  and  tacit  ridicule  to  his/her  often  lifetime
commitment to local archaeology and his/her `pre-modern’  lifestyle, i.e. the lifestyle
which is totally different from the one with the aforementioned characteristics. And,
the media interest obviously derives from the fact that it is the traces of the life of
`our ancestors’ , the epitome of the stability, fixity and predictability we believe or are
made  to  believe  the  ancestors  had  in  abundance  and  we  have  lost,  that  they
excavate.  Naturally,  the tone of the narrative that  the  media try to set is one that

Self-identification in Contemporary Society

325

emphasises  the  lost  stability,  fixity  and  predictability  that  can  only  be  revisited
through the mediation of the archaeologist who lives a stable, fixed and predictable
life.

Meanwhile, the subjective topography in which the rescue archaeologists live is
constituted of contradictions. As illustrated above, the spatio-temporal path of the
aforementioned scales which Japanese rescue archaeologists move through is more or
less  a  fixed,  stable  and  predictable  one.  However,  the  spatio-temporal  path  that
average Japanese people move through is not so fixed and stable, and getting less and
less so as the prolonged economic recession has led to the introduction of `flexible’
employment styles.  Consequently, the  three `consequences’   of  the  high/late/post-
modern experience of  the  spatio-temporal  organisation of  social  life  summarised
above are getting enhanced and accelerated. A reaction by the mass of the population
is  the  widespread  adoption  of  the  technology  of  self-identification  unique  in
contemporary society: chronically re-inventing/re-identifying one’s identity. In the
circumstance in which one cannot anticipate whom one meets and how one should
behave at each station in the spatio-temporal path of one’s everyday, medium-term
and long-term movement, what one can do is to monitor the situation and decide how
to act at each station in the path. Through the experience of chronically re-inventing/
re-identifying who one is, the chronic re-invention/re-identification of the self itself
becomes the  aim of  one’s life. The shortening of  fashion cycles, the  explosion of
Internet culture, etc., can be explained as attempts by the masses of chronically re-
inventing/re-identifying themselves. This trend, I  would argue, comes down upon
those  who  live  fixed,  stable  and  predictable  lives,  such  as  Japanese  rescue
archaeologists, in the form of social/virtual peer pressure. They are pressurised to be
`someone else’  by breaking their `routine’ , because they are made to believe by the
media that everyone else does it. Serious ethno-methodological researches need to be
conducted to  verify  this  thesis  based upon limited personal communication with
colleagues working as rescue excavators, but the explosion of the publication of local
archaeological journals emphasising their interests in fiendishly minute detail and
informal characters of the articles they feature, and of activities in cyberspace, seems
to reflect the situation well; those media offer a discursive space in which individuals
can competitively express their often very minute differences from one another in their
opinions by ignoring pre-existing disciplinary codes.

The  encounter  with  a  site  which  yields  a  number  of  `important’   findings  is
certainly an occasion in which the routine is broken; the excavation will be covered
by the media and the excavation officer(s) and concerned academic/non-academic
archaeologists will start considering the possibility of preserving the site by making
it scheduled by the Ministry of Cultural Affairs. It is this kind of situation in which
a distinct discursive space emerges and starts reproducing itself as if it is a systemic
autonomous  entity  in  which  all  of  the  aforementioned  factors  concerning  the
characteristics  of  contemporary  society  and  the  technology  of  self-identification
unique to it come. Those factors influence the way the discursive space moves in a
way  which  is  difficult  to  engineer  or  control.  It  is  this  discursive  space  of  the
preservation of the site and the nature and character of it to which we now turn.

326

Koji Mizoguchi

The Discursive Space of the Preservation of the Site:
characteristics and problems
As mentioned above, this discursive space of the preservation of the site reproduces
itself as a series of discussions and negotiations, and the issues raised range from: a)
how important the site is; through b) who contributes how much to the cost of re-
purchasing the land from the developer(s); to c) what benefit to the local economy
can be extracted from the preservation.

All these issues are obviously interconnected as at  the same time each of them
constitutes a sub-discursive space in which a set of `binary codes’  structures the way
the discussion goes by tacitly differentiating what is desirable from what is not for
carrying on the discourse towards a desirable agreement. However, it is issue a) that
determines the `tone’  of the way in which the entire discursive space works, i.e. the
importance of the  site  determines the level to which both parties supporting and
opposing the preservation feel comfortable to compromise. In that regard, I wish to
focus on the set of binary codes that structures the discourse/discursive space of the
importance of a site.

Three `forces’   of  discursive formation  come  in  and  draw  up  the  set  of  binary
codes:  the  academic,  the  media  and  the  administrative/financial  forces.  The
discursive formation by the developer(s) and the local government concerned often
overlap with one another significantly; in Japan, many large-scale developments are
initiated by local governments in collaboration with private sectors, and `important’
discoveries are often made in excavations prior to such developments. Among them,
the media force of discursive formation plays a determinant role, and that seems to
create  some  serious  problems,  to  which  I  shall  return.  Let  me  illustrate  the
operation of the media force of discursive formation and interpret the source of its
significance in the reproduction of  the  discursive space of  the preservation of  the
site.

As far as commonsensical thinking goes, the academic force would be expected to
play the decisive role in the discussion of the importance of a site. However, as far
as the general, realistic observation goes, it is the media force that sets the principal
axis along which the binary codes are laid. Let me interpret why that is the case.
Let  us  go  back  to  the  nature  and  the  characteristic  of  the  spatio-temporal
organisation of social life in contemporary society. The lack of fixity,  stability  and
predictability  sets  the  background against  which,  it  has  been argued,  the  unique
technology of the self-identification of contemporary society, described by late/high/
post-modernity, is created: the chronic re-invention/re-identification of the self. At
the same time, the  stress caused by chronically re-inventing/re-identifying oneself
necessitates the creation of the virtual reality narrative of a life full of fixity, stability
and predictability. In many cases it takes the form of nostalgia to the past in general.
Both  of  those  somewhat `systemic’   reactions by  the  self  to  the  experience of  the
spatio-temporal organisation of contemporary society are conducted and fulfilled by
the media force.

Exposure to the media is an occasion for the individual to become `someone else’
other than  the `routinised’   self. The media itself constitutes a  discursive space  in

Self-identification in Contemporary Society

327

which the chronic creation of differences is the norm of conducts. Meanwhile, the
media sell themselves by regularly featuring items evoking the image of long-gone
fixity, stability and predictability and the sense of nostalgia, and their coverage of the
discovery  of  a  new `important’   site,  whose  importance is  based  upon  the  media
saying the site is important. Why is that the case and why is it not the academic force
of discursive formation which determines the importance of the site? I would argue
it  is  the  ontological  desire of  the  rescue excavators  to  become  someone else,  as
illustrated above, that plays a significant role in their creating and telling narratives
that  exactly  conform what  the  media  want  to  hear  from  them. These  narratives
are:

x) the narrative of the oldest;
y) the emergence of a tradition which had survived over an incredible number of
years  before  being  destroyed  during  the  post-Second World  War  economic
development of modern Japan;

z) the emergence of the early agrarian state to which the ancestry of the imperial

line is thought to be traced back.

It  is  often  rumoured  in  Japanese  archaeologists’   conversation  that  some  `white
lies’   were  told  by  the  excavation  officer  to  the  media  in  order  to  create  the
`atmosphere’  in which the financial/administrative force can be persuaded to back
down.  It  is  true  that  the  recognition  and  valuation  by  the  media  force  of  the
importance of a site gives an incentive to the administrative/financial force for the
consideration  of  the  preservation  of  the  site  and  the  payment  of  the  necessary
cost, because the administrative/financial force knows that  at  times the halting  of
the  project  and  preserving  the  site  benefit  them  financially  in  the  long  run;  the
administrative/financial  forces,  as  well  as  the  academic  force  of  the  discursive
formation,  recognise  that  the  media  force  plays  a  very  significant  role  in
constituting the sense of reality in contemporary society. At the same time the way
in  which  the  media  force  operates  itself  is  constituted by  the  sense  of  reality  in
contemporary society,  and  a  preserved and `reconstructed’   site,  as  a  number of
examples show,  can bring as much money and economic benefit to the  region as
the  development project  does. However,  the  academic  force,  at  least,  can  try  to
influence the way  the  media force of the discursive formation of the preservation
of  the  site  operates  in  order  to  avoid  telling  `white  lies’ .  Nevertheless,  the
endeavour  of  illustrating  problematic  implications  of  the  aforementioned  narra-
tives x), y), and z), and of telling the media what they (rescue archaeologists and/
or  academics)  think  significant,  appears  rarely  to  take  place.  It  even  appears  at
times  the  case  that  it  is  the  media  force  that  determines the  way  the  academic
force operates in the  discursive formation of  the  preservation of  a  particular site.
The consequences to which the domination of the media force lead are sometimes
bizarre,  with  damaging  implications  concerning  the  position  of  the  discursive
space of the past, in which archaeology is supposed to play a dominant role, in the
general  discursive space of  contemporary society.

328

Koji Mizoguchi

We  Japanese  archaeologists  have  witnessed  lately  a  number  of  cases  where
comments  ±   highly  problematic  and  contradicting  the  knowledge  achieved  by
scholarship but conforming to what the media force wants to hear ±  are fed to the
media by  the  excavators and university academics concerned, and the comments
are  subsequently  criticised  by  the  media  as  being  either  exaggeration  or  mis-
representation  of  the  information.  And  most  of  the  cases  of  exaggeration  or
misrepresentation are made towards the direction of over-conforming to what  the
media force wants to  hear or is  supposed by  the  academic force to want  to hear,
i.e. the  aforementioned narratives  x), y),  and  z). Therefore, a  set  of  binary  codes
is in  operation in  the  reproduction of  the  discursive space  of  the  preservation  of
the  site,  in  which  the  discovery  of  something  to  do  with:  x)  the  `oldest’ ; y)  the
emergence  of  a  tradition  that  had  survived  over  an  incredible  number  of  years
before being destroyed during the post-Second World War development of modern
Japan;  and  z)  the  emergence of  the  early  agrarian state  to  which  the  ancestry of
the imperial line is thought to be traced back, are all regarded to be good for the
continuation  of  dialogue  for  the  preservation  of  the  site,  and  in  which  other
implications  of  the  findings,  regardless  of  their  characters  (i.e.  factual,  inter-
pretative,  falsifying the  established thesis, and so on)  are regarded `irrelevant’   for
the continuation of dialogue for the preservation of the site and, hence, regarded
as  the  subjects  of  academic  indulgence by  all  three  forces  of  the  discursive
formation concerned.

The  over-enthusiasm of  the  academic force  in  conforming to  the  above  set  of
binary codes can only be understood to derive from the ontological desire of those
who  constitute  the  academic  force,  i.e.  rescue  archaeologists  and/or  academics.
This  thesis  can be supported by  the  following fact;  most of  the  voices criticising
the aforementioned situation are  heard at  meetings of  private  study and research
groups  for  a  limited,  like-minded  audience  or  are  seen  in  the  `chat  room’   of
individual  Web  pages.  Those  media  exactly  conform  to  the  attributes  of  the
technology of  the  self-identification of  contemporary society; those media offer a
space  in  which  individuals  can  competitively  express  their  often  very  minute
differences from one another in their opinions by ignoring pre-existing disciplinary
codes,  whereby  to  acquire  the  virtual  sense  of  chronically  re-inventing/re-
identifying  themselves.  Regardless  of  whether  one  is  for  or  against  the  way  in
which  the  discursive  space  of  the  preservation  of  the  site  is  reproduced,
archaeologists  ±   as  do  the  general  public  ±   adopt  the  technology  of  self-
identification in  contemporary society.

Conclusion
If the technology of our being ourselves, i.e. the technology of self-identification, in
contemporary society itself causes problems such as those I have illustrated, the first
step of solving them would be to grasp the background of the emergence and the
reproduction of the technology, the way the technology is employed in each context
of our everyday life, and the consequences the employment of the technology brings
about. This paper has been such an attempt.

Self-identification in Contemporary Society

329

As  illustrated, the  reproduction of  the  structure of  the  discursive space  of  the
preservation of the site is dominated by the media force of discursive formation. The
way  the  academic force  of  discursive formation ±   which  is  supposed to  critically
counter the media force’s domination ±  reproduces itself is so fragmented that it is
unable critically to assess the state it is in. The way the academic force reproduces
itself is fragmented in terms of its spatio-temporal structure; the space for internal
debate has been shifted from established journals with wider circulation to privately
published  journals  for  a  limited,  like-minded  audience  or  to  the  chat  rooms  of
individual Web pages. As argued, I think they are archaeologists’  systemic responses
to  the  enhancement of  the  character  and  nature of  contemporary society  that  is
described as late/high/post-modernity. One cannot blame the trend itself, because
the trend is, as argued above, a systemic reaction to the ever-enhanced nature and
the character of high/late/post-modernity: what  I find problematic is  we  Japanese
archaeologists  appear  to  have  lost  the  integrated  discursive  space  in  which  the
modes  of  our  individual  discursive  formations  can  be  critically  compared  and
mutually assessed. This, I would argue, constitutes the main cause of our not even
being bothered with the social implications of our uncritically co-operating in the
reproduction of the narrative of x) the `oldest’ , y) the emergence of a tradition that
had survived over an incredible number of years before being destroyed and during
the post-Second World War development of modern Japan, and z) the emergence of
the early agrarian state  to which the ancestry of the imperial line is thought to be
traced back.

This is not the place for a critical examination of the social implications of those
narratives, for which another paper has to be written. Rather, I wish to conclude this
short piece by contending that  if we  Japanese  archaeologists are to reconstitute a
self-critical  attitude  we  shall  have  to  re-invent  an  integrated  discursive space  in
which the modes of our individual discursive formations can be critically compared
and mutually assessed.

330

Koji Mizoguchi


