International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Transcendent myths, mundane objects: setting
the material scene in rock, soul, and country
museums

Charles Fairchild

To cite this article: Charles Fairchild (2018) Transcendent myths, mundane objects: setting the
material scene in rock, soul, and country museums, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 24:5,
477-490, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2017.1390487
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2017.1390487

Published online: 12 Oct 2017.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 141

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2018
Vol. 24, no. 5, 477–490
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2017.1390487

Transcendent myths, mundane objects: setting the material scene 
in rock, soul, and country museums

Charles Fairchild

Sydney Conservatorium of Music, university of Sydney, australia

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 31 March 2017 
accepted 13 September 2017

KEYWORDS
Popular music; cultural 
intermediaries; museums; 
music and myth

ABSTRACT
The many varied myths of origins, aesthetic transcendence, and greatness 
that surround popular music continue to proliferate in a variety of forms. 
One  comparatively  recent  type  of  institution  producing  such  forms  of 
mythology is the popular music museum. This article uses the familiar idea 
of the ‘experience economy’’ to examine how three popular music museums 
produce experiences through objects that, while they are deliberately cast 
as mundane and everyday, work to support widely-shared narratives of the 
musical traditions of which they are a part. I argue that they do so in the 
service of larger myths of popular music. In each case I examine, I show 
that the myths on display are specific to the music that forms that content 
of the exhibitions. I argue that the specific kinds of spectator experiences 
these museums seek to produce are designed to enhance the value of these 
museums and their collections through claims made on specific types of 
musical patrimony made material through carefully contextualized objects 
of display. As such, traditionalist myths of musical greatness and aesthetic 
transcendence  are  well-served  by  the  forms  of  exhibition  and  display 
produced by these institutions.

Introduction
Popular music is strewn with galvanising myths that have long been comfortably settled in the multiple 
broader discourses that surround it (Biron 2011; Blanning 2008; Court 2015; Fairchild 2013; Gendron 
2002; Kelly and McDonnell 1999). One comparatively recent development of interest here has been 
the growth and expansion of popular music museums. The legitimacy, importance, and status of these 
institutions is distinctly tied to their presentation of the material cultures of popular music. Between 
2011 and 2016, I visited fifteen popular music museums for the purposes of analysis and interpretation. 
Thirteen were in the U.S., two were in the U.K., reflecting the more general expansion of the sector 
in the U.S.1 Some were new, such as The Birthplace of Country Music Museum in Bristol, Virginia 
that opened in 2014. Some were much older, such as Graceland which opened in 1982. Despite some 
often significant differences, all of the places I’ve studied for this project, from the palatial Experience 
Music Project in Seattle to the intimate Carter Family Fold in Hiltons, Virginia, have a few important 
elements in common that form the core of the analysis that follows. They all use an array of mundane, 
everyday objects within larger, encompassing multimedia displays to uphold a range of musically-spe-
cific myths, such as those surrounding a musical tradition’s character and origins, as well as those 
attributing various forms of transcendent artistry and greatness to prominent musicians.

CONTACT  Charles fairchild 

  charles.fairchild@sydney.edu.au

© 2017 Charles fairchild. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

478 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

There has been a significant and welcome burst of scholarly activity in recent years in the 
study of popular music heritage and the analysis of how objects are used in museums. (Baker, 
Istvandity, and Nowak 2016; Brandellero and Janssen 2014; Cohen et al. 2015; Leonard 2014; 
Mortensen and Madsen 2015) However, one key theme has been underplayed in most accounts. 
Popular  music  museums  rely  very  strongly  on  persistent,  long-circulating,  and  fairly  specific 
myths about popular music in order to assert the authenticity and meaningfulness of the often 
very mundane objects on display.2 They do this in order to enhance the perceived value of the 
spectator’s experience, and by extension, the perceived value and legitimacy of the collections and 
the institutions themselves. In what follows, I will examine how three very different museums use 
objects in very similar ways to present foundational, musically-specific myths about particular 
traditions of popular music. I will examine how the Experience Music Project (EMP) in Seattle 
uses an array of objects to demonstrate a very specific interpretation of the popular foundations 
of punk. Then, I will examine how the Stax Museum of American Soul Music in Memphis uses 
objects to evoke the special if not sacred qualities attributed to Stax Records’ Studio A. Finally, 
I will show how the Carter Family Fold in Hiltons, Virginia uses a range of objects to present a 
widely-accepted version of the origins of contemporary American country music in the southern 
Appalachian region of southwest Virginia.

The point of this article is not to present and then ‘correct’ the presentation of these myths, nor 
is it to critique the processes through which these myths and the belief systems that support them 
become embedded in popular discourses. Instead, the goal here is to examine how these kinds of 
myths take on material form and to suggest something of why they assume the specific forms they 
do. I will rely on a few key ideas drawn from the application of the study of materiality in museum 
studies to do this. Specifically, I want to examine what Dudley calls ‘the embeddedness of material 
objects in human social life and the meanings and values objects thereby acquire’ (Dudley 2010, 
2). To put it simply, the objects examined here are embedded in social life through their ability to 
animate and act as material representations of myths specific to the musical traditions on display. 
As Leonard has shown museums such as these often seek to ‘present, and effectively transform, 
a very ordinary object by interpreting it as part of an extraordinary story’ (Leonard 2014, 360). 
Yet they also do so by playing on the perceptions of an object’s authenticity as ‘a genuine object 
from the fabric of daily life’ (Leonard 2014, 363). Therefore, the pursuit of this analysis will entail 
a deliberate drawing together of the displayed object, be it a smashed guitar, dented suitcase, or 
well-used  diary,  and  the  musically-specific  myths  through  which  these  acts  of  display  become 
meaningful in specific ways.

It is important to understand something of the larger research context from which this article has 
emerged as it has shaped my assumptions, arguments, and methods. As demonstrated by numerous 
researchers, complex issues have emerged around the documentation and institutionalisation of the 
heritage of popular music in recent years. Several scholars have identified a generational shift in the 
ways in which the experience of popular music’s many pasts are being shaped, packaged, and expe-
rienced through tourism and museums (Bennett 2009; Leaver and Schmidt 2010; Roberts 2014). As 
Bennett has argued, this shift was, at least in part, a consequence of a larger recognition of the ways in 
which ‘popular culture ceases to be regarded as something set apart from culture per se’, but instead 
acts ‘as an integral part of culture, its production and reproduction over time. At the same time, the 
new significance attached to popular culture, and music in particular, has given rise to new under-
standings of its “cultural” value’ (Bennett 2009, 477). The larger project that has produced this article 
has been focused on the nature of that sense of value as it is produced through a broad collection 
of related institutions. As we will see shortly, familiar, genre-specific myths are important vehicles 
through which this value is expressed.

I have approached the museums I have been studying through the prism of this larger historical 
shift, a shift that has been definitively marked by the emergence of the ‘new museum.’ The descriptor 
‘new museum’ is one that encompasses a paradigm shift in the kinds of dynamic relationships between 
forms of museum exhibitionary content and methods used to engage audiences through that content 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  479

(see Fairchild 2017). As such, as I went through the different institutions I examined for this pro-
ject, I documented exhibits primarily as opportunities for a kind of communicative connection with 
audiences through strategically-constructed multimedia environments. These environments include 
the full array of tools used in contemporary museum displays: objects, music, sounds, video, curated 
playlists, audio guides, informative panels, interactive kiosks, etc. My methods for organising my own 
perceptions of this complex range of media was to look for connecting threads both within individual 
museums and across several different ones. My resulting claim here is that, at least in the three cases 
examined here, the objects on display become meaningful through the connecting threads of familiar 
musical myths.

As such, these objects are there to be viewed as part of a larger instructional assemblage. They 
become meaningful not as objects whose material presence is important in its own right, but as 
museum artefacts whose meaning is meant to be expressed through their careful placement and 
contextualization within larger encompassing narrative. This is not to say all objects in all muse-
ums can or should act this way. There is a substantial literature arguing for a far more nuanced 
understanding of the role objects can or might play in various exhibtionary contexts (Bjerregaard 
2015; Chua and Elliott 2013; Keane 2005). However, in specifically focusing on the use of objects 
for the broader communicative purpose of these particular exhibits, I argue that this purpose is 
defined by exhibitionary narratives which are dependent for their coherence and clarity as complex, 
multimedia, multisensory museum exhibits on the broader myths I am talking about. Therefore, 
when I call them artefacts, I mean that they act as tangible and material markers of the larger 
sets of values and narrative sense these myths express. More specifically, I argue that these three 
museums render these familiar myths of popular music materially through remarkably similar 
arrays of objects making them meaningful through notably similar kinds of historical narratives. 
The range of objects each museum displays includes musical instruments, recording equipment, 
demo tapes and other personal recordings, as well as a large range of personal effects and family 
heirlooms such as photos, letters, household items, and clothing. Intriguingly, all three museums 
use these objects in very similar ways despite the manifest and significant differences between 
them in terms of the contents of their exhibitions, the overall scope of their displays, and their 
character as museums.

Musical myth and the experience economy
The concept of ‘the experience’ has been one of the more prominent and distinguishing characteristics 
of recent exhibitionary practice in museums (Hall 2006; Klingmann 2007; Marstine 2006; Message 
2006). Given this, my first task here will be to use the widely-circulated idea of the ‘experience econ-
omy’ to frame my interpretation of the material manifestations of musical myths in the museums 
under examination here (Pine and Gilmore 1998). This concept is particularly relevant because in 
each exhibit I examine, the museums producing them clearly work from within a previously-existing 
framework of ideas and assumptions that their audiences are already presumed to hold, in this case 
the well-known musical myths that form the expressive core of each institution’s displays. Objects are 
used to shore up the authenticity of the contents of the exhibits through the spectator’s experience 
them, thus enhancing the legitimacy of the museums themselves. The myths at the centre of each 
museum’s displays are an expression of this form of authentication. This is accomplished through a 
very particular model of experience that is typical of the 

“new” museum (see Marstine 2006; Message 2006). Specifically, the focus on the unique and compelling nature 
of the experience is meant to make these places stand out from within the competing ruck and maw of compet-
ing institutions such as the shopping mall, theme park, or proliferating urban ‘brandscapes. (Klingmann 2007)

As Martin Hall has argued, with their gradual inclusion in these brandscapes, museums have often had 
to become less concerned with conserving and displaying their objects than they are with ‘enclaving’ 

480 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

and ‘diverting’ them into collections meant to enhance the value of the institution through the value 
of the visitor’s experience of them (Hall 2006, 93).

Pine and Gilmore argue that the ‘experience economy’ is based on what they called the ‘progression 
of economic value’ from a economy of things to an economy of ideas (Pine and Gilmore 1998, 97, 
98). They argue that new social and economic conditions were threatening ‘to render irrelevant those 
who relegate themselves to the diminishing world of goods and services’ (Pine and Gilmore 1998, 
105). They describe a world increasingly dominated by comparatively intangible forms of economic 
exchange within which they posit the centrality of an active consumer who routinely enacts various 
forms of resistance to a world they perceived to have become dominated by empty spectacles and 
inauthentic forms of exchange that alienate and isolate. The notion of an experience economy was 
a crafted as a way of exploiting the inherent sociability of shopping and consumption in order to 
imagine more grounded and meaningful relationships between producers and consumers as a means 
to engage consumers ‘on an emotional, physical, intellectual, or even spiritual level’ (Pine and Gilmore 
1998, 99). There is a broad consensus that the kinds of experiences these theorists analyse are part of 
a ‘sophisticated game’ produced by ‘quintessential semioticians’ in which ‘the spectator’ is treated as 
an ‘intelligent participant’ in the collaborative production of meaning (Hall 2006, 72).

It is important to note, however, that I am not analysing these museums or their displays by assum-
ing that these places are some kind of neutral ground for the playing out of such an innocent ‘game.’ 
Instead, I rely on a familiar, but still very useful model of analysis that links the myths these places 
reflect to their larger shaping ideologies. As Meisel argues, myth is ‘a belief in the unitary interpretive 
regimes that ideology fixes in the porousness of given signifying fields. Mythologies are the interpre-
tive residue of canonical practices’ (Meisel 1999, 131). An able summary of the foundations for the 
line of thinking that links this particular definition of myth to its musical iterations is set out very 
effectively in Higgins (2004) in which the author notes that one of the more influential analytical 
gestures in analysing myth comes from the work of Roland Barthes (1957, 1977). Barthes argued that 
the primary function of myth is as a communicative rhetoric which operates to make ‘highly complex 
and historically determined processes seem “natural”’ (Higgins 2004, 445). As Higgins notes, myths 
are made to seem ‘acceptable, commonsensical, and ultimately complacent,’ merely becoming part of 
a backdrop of assumptions that ‘tend to go unchallenged, thereby eliminating competing discourses’ 
(Higgins 2004, 446). She notes, through Terry Eagleton, that myth and ideology are often difficult to 
pry apart. Eagleton writes:

A dominant power may legitimate itself by promoting beliefs and values congenial to it; naturalizing and univer-
salizing such beliefs so as to render them self-evident and apparently inevitable; denigrating ideas which might 
challenge it; excluding rival forms of thought, perhaps by some unspoken but systematic logic; and obscuring 
social reality in ways convenient to itself. (Quoted in Higgins 2004, 446)

Importantly, this analytical formulation has been robustly challenged by a more expansive model 
of communication in which the contestation or negotiation of meaning is posited as the locus of 
meaning production (Brooker and Jermyn 2003; Cobley 1994; Turner 1997). This challenge, growing 
from the long tradition encapsulated by the catch-all term ‘active audience thesis,’ has been widely 
taken up in museums studies. Instead of presenting a communicative model in which meaning in 
the ‘old’ museum was said to be imposed on an exploited and manipulated public, meaning in the 
‘new’ museum is instead constructed mutually and collaboratively (Hall 2006; Henning 2006; Message 
2006). The ‘experience economy’ is closely allied to this model of meaning making. However, while 
the shift to an analytical emphasis on audience agency has often been perceived as a major paradigm 
shift, I have argued elsewhere that producer and audience agency are by definition, intimately linked 
and mutually constituting (Fairchild 2014). Therefore the notion that meaning is made collaboratively 
should not imply that the larger more pervasive power relations the define the relationships between 
institutions and individuals are somehow set aside to make their respective forms of agency coequal.
Importantly, given that the exhibits I examine here are clearly formed from within the already-ex-
isting understandings of the musical traditions in question, I strongly suggest that they are particularly 
effective a promulgating, not challenging, the foundational myths of those musical traditions whose 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  481

material remnants they display. This is what most effectively explains why these three very dissimilar 
museums nevertheless use very similar arrays of objects in very similar ways. In short, this form of 
display is not an ideologically neutral act. Instead, it is through these displays that the spectator’s agency 
is not simply collaboratively engaged, but also actively incorporated into the broader exhibitionary 
designs of the institution. Each institution examined below does this by using its collection of objects 
to create a necessary sense of uniqueness that underlies the sought after ‘experience,’ doing so through 
the display of objects that have some direct bearing on the tradition of musical practice being exhibited. 
As Wehner and Sear argue, in many museum exhibits, as the ‘particularity had been leached from the 
objects, so too had been much of their power to excite and inspire curiosity’ (Wehner and Sear 2010, 
145). They argue that when curators infuse an object with some sense of its own life history and biogra-
phy, they allow the spectator to see ‘the social context is which the object has “lived,”’ more completely. 
Further, this helps them understand ‘the values associated with an object and the meanings attached 
to it by people,’ and experience ‘the enactment or performance of an object’s meaning, including those 
moments in an object’s life when the meanings and social relationships it embodies are performed, 
elaborated, witnessed, etc’ (Wehner and Sear 2010, 146). In the three cases examined below, these 
performances centre around the previously-existing myths that already animate the primary meanings 
of the musical traditions whose histories they seek to display. What follows are three examples of this.

The material experience of musical myth 1: the populism of punk
When the Experience Music Project (EMP) opened in Seattle in 2000, it did so through a flurry of 
carefully-cultivated publicity that had one overriding, albeit implicit, theme: this is not the Rock 
and Roll Hall of Fame. The purpose was to make the EMP feel like a popular institution, unlike the 
‘establishment’ Hall of Fame. The museum’s co-founder, Microsoft’s co-founder Bruce Allen, made 
this clear in a lengthy New York Times article written by celebrity music commentator, Neil Strauss. 
Strauss described how Allen ‘sent a small contingent’ to examine Rock and Roll Hall of Fame upon its 
opening and asked them to complete a thorough critique of it. Their main conclusion, according to 
Strauss, was that, in contrast to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, the EMP was to be built for the people; 
it was built for the rock fan, by ‘a rock fan’ (Strauss 2000; E1). In Strauss’ account, we learn that the 
EMP talked about itself through its numerous billboards in Seattle as the kind of ‘museum for those 
who sing in the shower or drum on their car steering wheels’ (Strauss 2000; E1). Further, the exhibits 
were accompanied by a computerised karaoke stage and high-tech musical instruments on which ‘in 
just a few technology-aided minutes’ anyone can learn how to play the guitar, it is an institution that 
‘overwhelmingly favours independent music’ (Strauss 2000; E1). The EMPs focus was not to be focused 
on those hoary old myths and legends of the rock age. Instead, ‘Husker Du and the Replacements get 
three times the amount of space given to the entirety of the blues’ (Strauss 2000; E1). These central 
themes were mirrored exactly in the EMPs own catalogue of their collections, Crossroads, as well as 
in their visitor’s guides (EMP 2000a, 2000b).

It is not surprising, then, that these themes also define one of the EMPs primary music exhibits, 
‘Nirvana: Taking Punk to the Masses,’ which was on display from 2011 to 2016. This is due in part to 
the ways in which punk in general and grunge in particular have been construed as popular eruption 
of resistance against those perceived as corporate musical overlords from the 1980s (see Lyons 2004; 
Moore 2010; Strong 2011). Fittingly, a varied collection of objects is used in this exhibit to evoke what 
is presented as punk’s necessary populism to nudge spectators towards a collective experience defined 
by what is continually suggested to be an already-existing social formation to which they are meant 
to feel an inherent and intimate connection. These displays routinely play on the idea that all visitors 
are already part of a larger punk demos made coherent by ‘the music,’ not the museum. The EMPs 
Curatorial Director had already suggested as much over a decade earlier in the institution’s inaugural 
catalogue, although in a somewhat elliptical and emotionally charged manner. He argued that the EMPs 
collection had been assembled in the way it was because the objects ‘are all of value in preserving the 
puzzle of our cultural heritage and because we’re pretty sure they contain some magic’ (McMurray 

482 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

2011, 8). This magic, he continued, was inhered in the fact that ‘the value of these common everyday 
things, this stuff of material culture … has the capacity to explode the divisions of time, musical genre 
and geography’ (McMurray 2011, 8). In other words, it is the objects on display that link us indelibly 
to one another and to the music. Across each of the three examples I am analysing, we can see how 
the objects presented in museum displays are brought to bear on the two tasks that grow from these 
claims: establishing a direct connection between the spectator with the mythic origins of the music 
and placing them within a larger encompassing subject position within a preferred narrative about 
that music.

The preferred narrative of ‘Nirvana: Taking Punk to the Masses’ is set out fairly straightforwardly 
in the publicity blurb on the inside cover of the exhibition catalogue. The exhibit was said to explore 
‘the emergence of punk rock in the mid-1970s and its evolution throughout the ‘80s, culminating in 
late 1991 with the release of Nirvana’s Nevermind’ (McMurray 2011). The EMPs Senior Curator, Jacob 
McMurray, expands this capsule narrative in his introduction to the volume and in the exhibit itself. 
Punk developed in the U.S., he argues, ‘driven solely by fellow travellers whose primary impetus was 
music rather than cash’ (McMurray 2011, vii). This theme continues on a panel near the start of the 
exhibition which claims:

For most of the 1980s, the underground music scene was largely left to its own devices, allowing for an unfettered 
flow of creativity despite the lack of resources afforded by the major labels. During this time, scores of under-
ground bands toured the country in cramped vans, spreading the gospel of punk.

The catalogue continues this story, noting that some bands ‘broadened their sound while maintaining 
punk roots,’ and that those roots burrowed their way with all seeming inevitability into ‘mainstream 
consciousness’ (McMurray 2011, ix). As music once thought to be commercially unviable gradually 
notched up greater and greater sales figures, ‘the majors began seeing dollar signs’ (McMurray 2011, x). 
Eventually, ‘Nirvana brought a punk message wrapped in a pop package’ to that mainstream, thereby 
‘changing popular music forever by instantly turning upside down the methods and assumptions of 
the major label record industry’ (McMurray 2011, x). However, it was not just their music that made 
this band different. Nirvana were also regular people who 

wore regular clothes, gave props to other underground bands, and stuck up for the freaks, geeks and outcasts 
everywhere. Instead of creating a barrier between the fans and themselves, they indicated by their affect and 
actions that they were ultimately one of us. (McMurray 2011, x)
If we take this to be the dominant story of punk reproduced in miniature, then we can more eas-
ily understand and interpret the mass of sounds, images, objects, and ideas this exhibit presents to 
spectators. Interestingly, given that the focus of this exhibit, Nirvana, simultaneously represent both 
preferred populist narrative of the exhibit as well as the most successful example of the corporatiza-
tion of punk, the exhibitors had to tread very carefully when establishing their story of a mythic punk 
demos. It seems clear that exhibition designers took great care to craft an experience of punk that 
could, in both intellect and affect, give this myth material form. The exhibition consists of multiple 
parallel narratives running across interconnected aural, visual, textual, and material displays that 
run more or less simultaneously throughout the exhibition. To anchor these displays, the curators 
presented extensive collections of objects, the collective impact of which is twofold, to link the past to 
the present and to authenticate it for visitors through some sense of the material reality once inhabited 
by the exhibition’s subjects.

We are guided through the narrative that defines this exhibit through text, imagery, and objects all 
placed in close, strategic proximity to one another. The exhibition designers displayed these in a series 
of small multimedia assemblages of thematically-linked materials that act as visual and physical anchor 
points in the exhibition space and its story. The first is placed at the entrance of the exhibit where 
the visitor is confronted with a massive introductory image that sets a definitive tone for the exhibit 
as a whole. This overwhelming image is a close up detail of a series of hands holding up a guitarist 
whose ripped jeans form the dominant texture of the image, that of stretched flesh and frayed denim. 
Underneath are two quotes. The first is from Krist Novoselic, the bassist for Nirvana. He says simply, 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  483

‘Music is an art form that thrives on reinvention.’ Just beneath this, in a much smaller font, is another 
more telling quote, this one from photographer Charles Peterson, the author of this and most of the 
other iconic images presented in this exhibition. Peterson says the following: 

It’s when the band and audience are melded into one that the true nature of what they are trying to accomplish–
the cathartic release of pent up angst and rebellion–reached its chaotic fruition. I feel fortunate to have been 
there to capture that.

The musician is, of course, the late Kurt Cobain, captured as he surfed his adoring crowd. We are 
welcomed into this exhibit through a visual manifestation of the very populism that is literally holding 
the great artist aloft.

The next anchor point is just inside the formal entrance to the exhibit in the first gallery. It consists 
of a guitar, a bass, and a drum set, each in their own vitrine, all of which were played by members of 
Nirvana during their career. The guitar is a Fender Mustang played by Cobain for several years in the 
late 1980s until he smashed it at the end of a show in 1990. An extensive biography of the instrument 
is provided explaining the modifications and the ultimate disposition of its shattered pieces. Nearby, 
is a similarly-sized photo of Novoselic, with an accompanying quote: ‘When Nirvana hit it big, it was 
overwhelming because we were part of the counterculture. Nirvana didn’t go the mainstream–the 
mainstream came to Nirvana.’ A similar image of drummer Dave Grohl is accompanied with a text 
attesting to his love of both the Beatles and Bad Brains.

In the panels of text placed throughout the exhibition, noted luminaries are repeatedly given the 
space to guide our thinking on what we are seeing. For example, music critic Everett True, alleged to 
have coined the term ‘grunge,’ tells that all of this magic and frenzy was simply the work of ‘four guys 
from rural Washington’ who, True claims, would simply be ‘working in a lumberyard or fixing cars’ if 
they weren’t making music. Of the early Nirvana gigs he witnessed, photographer Charles Peterson, 
said, ‘there were no rock stars in the room, just fans and bands revelling in each other’s embrace.’ The 
well-respected musician Ian MacKaye of Minor Threat and Fugazi, tells us in one panel what punk was:

Kids for the first time were writing their own songs, forming their own bands, putting on their own shows, 
putting out their own records and magazines. It was underground, without state, government or corporate 
sponsorship. It was true rock ‘n’ roll.

These claims are placed strategically and emotively over images that act as visual synecdoche for the 
constellation of punk values upon which the moral economy of this exhibition turns. For example, 
a larger than life image of a Converse All Star resting on a dashboard of a travelling car is meant to 
recall for us the hours of necessary travel that their geography uniquely demanded of musicians form 
the Pacific Northwest. We are also shown the visual frenzy of a mosh pit on one wall while a fan and 
a musician confronting each other face to face mid-song on another. These images form part of the 
core of the expressive dynamic the EMP engages in between the exaltation of the singular transcendent 
artist and band and the wider polity that supported him. One final panel assessing this artist’s legacy 
provides the spectator with this food for thought:

Regardless, the health of independent music throughout the United States and the Pacific Northwest has been 
indelibly changed: music now matters, not just to the hipsters in the know, but to everybody. It has become part 
of our communal fabric, and music has continues to flourish. The underground has become mainstream, and 
the mainstream will never be the same.

The key themes that run throughout this exhibit are plain: exceptional circumstances, exceptional 
artistry, and the ‘magic’ that brought both together in a momentous way. However, if one were forced 
to rely only on the images and text to tell this story, spectators would only be offered a mostly attention 
grabbing volume of ideas and moments of the sort that are easily found elsewhere in the many books 
and documentary films that continue to appear about this band and their scene. While this exhibit 
could be mostly a familiar chronicle made into a series of rooms, it is the EMPs collections of objects 
that give the images and text a life and experiential cohesion they would not otherwise have.

Set amongst the hagiographic superlatives describing ‘the immortal music that they made,’ a music 
which subverted ‘the calcified world of contemporary corporate rock,’ there is set a series of objects, 

484 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

often small, often poignant, that take us out of the world of retrospective comment, analysis, and 
assessment, and ever so slightly closer to the world that produced this ‘revolutionary’ music. The 
objects are diverse. They include musical instruments of definitive vintage and history, a collection 
that includes, e.g. the battered red suitcase Cobain used as a makeshift drum on his earliest four-track 
recording. The exhibit also includes the guitar on which ‘Smells Like Teen Spirit’ was first played in 
public. Next to the vitrine in which it sits is nearly life-sized image of Cobain playing that very guitar. 
The collection includes ancillary musical objects such as demo tapes, tape recorders, setlists, backstage 
passes, and even the original record contract between Nirvana and Sub Pop Records. There are a great 
many personal items present as well, such as family photos, band tour photos, and letters to fans. The 
photos are particularly affecting as they are presented, not simply as images, but as objects and personal 
mementos. There are several candid shots of Cobain with his young daughter, the emotional affect 
of which belies their small, blurry stature. Importantly, there are many iconic items of clothing, such 
the greyish, green cardigan Cobain wore on Nirvana’s MTVs ‘Unplugged’ special. Most often, these 
objects were placed next to an authenticating image of the item in use. For example, the neatly-typed 
set list for the ‘Unplugged’ special sits under the iconic image of Cobain performing on the show in 
that very cardigan. Similarly, Cobain’s Sears-brand bass sits just a few inches away from two family 
pictures of a very young and serious-looking Cobain with headphones using that guitar to record one 
of his early cassettes.

These objects have a varied effect, sometimes immediate and striking, sometimes gradual and cumu-
lative. But their effects are an integral part of the encounter the EMP has staged for us, an encounter 
to which these objects are clearly meant to provide some kind of cognitive spark and emotional scin-
tillation. However, these objects cannot express the central myths of the exhibit directly. Instead, they 
can only offer tangible hints and material corroboration for the claims of a wider popular demos the 
foundations of which this exhibit has attempted to demonstrate. They act as confirmation of a wider 
polity of punk, so to speak, a polity that is produced most vividly through the resonant meanings of 
the unique objects put before us. We can see the traces of the musical activities that clearly mark so 
many of the objects that the objects themselves almost take on some residue of the agency that has 
been exerted upon them. Given this, these objects are still weighted with the potential meanings of the 
future they were integral in creating, the future we are experiencing. In this sense, an early Nirvana 
demo tape or Krist Novoselic’s lime green collared shirt, worn in a picture just next to the shirt itself, 
possess a kind of material proof of the inevitability of the exhibit’s narrative. It is the past which they 
are now used to construct that takes on the subtle, but definitive charge of the future their owners were 
eventually going to experience. The spark of curiosity or recognition these objects produce springs 
from the fact that, despite the fact that most are genuinely mundane and would appear generic in any 
other circumstance, they are not presented anonymous objects. Instead, these are objects that possess 
a distinct and explicit sense of their own life history, often taking on the shape of the biographical 
narrative that surrounds them in the exhibit (see Wehner and Sear 2010). We can see the same sort 
of spark as it is produced in the Stax Museum in Memphis.

The material experience of musical myth 2: the sacred space of Stax
As you enter the Stax Museum of American Soul, you are confronted with a remarkable set of images 
that take up the entire back wall of the lobby. Each is an image of the building you are now standing 
set in three distinct panels. The first shows the original building when it was the Capitol Theatre. It is 
lit up at night to invite the neighbourhood in to see the latest feature. The second shows the building 
when Stax was in its heyday. The third shows the building in the process of disintegration. The Stax 
Museum now stands on the original site of Stax Records. Set in a former movie theatre, the original 
building was torn down in 1989 with nothing more than a state historical marker to mark its passing. 
After a good deal of organising and community work, the museum was opened in 2003 in a new pur-
pose-built facility including a privately-owned and operated charter school. Throughout the museum, 
the story of the record label and the museum commemorating it fuse thematically, the central themes 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  485

being that of rebirth and revivification, themes central to the African American musical experience 
generally. They constitute an interesting iteration of a ‘discourse of expectation,’ as one historian of 
African American community life described such ways of interpreting the world (Hahn 2003). Given 
that these kinds of world-making discourses are prevalent in the broader understandings of soul music, 
it should not be too surprising, then, that these themes are central to the experience of this museum 
(see Bowman 1997; Guralnick 2002).

At the start of the main exhibit, the theme of the rebirth of a sacred space is presented in a dra-
matic way. The first object on display is the entire frame, including most of the roof and the walls, 
of the Hoopers Chapel AME Church, built in 1906 near the town of Duncan, Mississippi, about 100 
miles south of Memphis. In the gallery that surrounds the building are a series of panels showing the 
structure in its original location with panels that explain how it was built and the meaning and value 
it had for the local community. The rough textures of wood and peeling paint dominate the visual field 
both inside and outside of the structure. Inside, there are the original pews, the pulpit with a framed 
print of the Last Supper, the original wood-fired stove, and a television that plays a loop of one of the 
services from this church. One panel is particularly evocative:

The pews, collection table, and altar were hand-made by the church members. They saved to buy a fancy pulpit 
and also bought an old piano that was never tuned. For warmth, a cast iron pot-bellied heater burned wood. In 
summer, church windows were raised and fans, donated by regional funeral homes, stirred the sweltering air.

Importantly, the other panels provide extensive explanations of the place of gospel in the story of 
rhythm and blues and soul music in general, and Stax Records in particular. Gospel is one of the 
foundation stones of both this exhibit and the musical tradition it chronicles. The combination of the 
rigorously reconstructed church and the extremely detailed and evocative texts and imagery gives 
this building its own biography, a story that is intricately woven into the history of Stax Records. The 
social context that, in part, produced soul music, is presented to spectators as a living tradition, its 
values and meanings evoked as much from the text as the peeling paint and warped roof beams, to 
some extent allowing the museum to ‘perform’ the origins and meanings of this music through this 
building (see Wehner and Sear 2010).

At the other end of the main exhibit, we find another space that performs the meanings of Stax 
Records. It takes the form of the other bookend of main exhibit, a reconstruction of Studio A. The 
studio was set in the main theatre of the original building. As a plaque helpfully explains, this space 
has long been thought to be ‘integral to the raw sound that became the signature of Stax Records.’ 
The space museum visitors enter, we are told, is a ‘near-exact recreation of Studio A. It was designed 
and built according to blueprints, photographs, and the memories of Stax musicians, engineers, and 
administrators, whose lives were changed forever in that room.’ Visitors are guided through a very 
carefully-rendered experience of this place. As spectators enter the studio area, they first pass the 
Tape Library:

This corridor is the brain stem of Stax, connected directly to Studio A, Stax's heart. Stored in this outer room 
were the master tapes, the company's blood. Music is vibrations, and here those lucky, masterful, wonderful, 
beautiful vibes were kept safe.

Across the corridor from the tape library is the original Altec Power Head speaker, sitting heavily at 
about six feet high, three feet wide, and four feet deep. It was once used in the movie theatre as the 
main sound source and was used at Stax for playback. Next to it is a mock-up of the original lounge 
area strewn with old magazines, newspapers, and soft drink bottles, all firmly fixed in place to evoke 
the years of activity that passed here. As we move through, we hear and see the recollections of Stax 
musicians, engineers, and producers musing about the uniqueness of the space. These reminiscences sit 
comfortably with a recreated control booth dominated by a mixing desk which is the same model as the 
one Stax used in its heyday. On a television above the lounge area is a video loop of various musicians 
and producers, such as Steve Cropper, Tom Dowd, and Sam Moore, describing the moments when 
the iconic songs such as ‘Hold On’ and ‘Green Onions’ were made. Each explains the different ways 
they used the existing structure to their advantage. They describe the unusual spaces and materials 

486 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

they used as archaic, their methods as haphazard and experimental, and their products as unique and 
special. While these stories have been told many times before, hearing them in this reconstituted studio 
charges the space with meanings unavailable elsewhere. One plaque captures the tone of the display:

An observer of a Stax session might say it worked as a lucky quirk of nature. The playback speaker has been built 
for movie projection and was outdated, as was most of the other equipment. The artists, producers, and engineers 
had no formal training. But the repeated success of what happened here belied any suggestion of happenstance. 
Music was made here, and so was magic.

Just before the entrance to the studio, a wall panel reinforces its status. It explains that with ‘little extra 
funds at hand,’ the label owners, their business partners and family members ‘renovated the space 
themselves, building an acoustic tile wall to divide the spacious theatre into two distinct rooms.’ They 
‘turned the former theatre stage into a control room’ and put in large burlap sound baffles to reduce 
the echo in the room.’ Importantly, the label owners did not level the sloping floor of the old movie 
house ‘which added to the concert hall feel and sound of the studio.’ When you enter the sacred space 
of the studio you see five instruments from the Stax house band’ Booker T. and the MGs, set out 
around the room (which now has a level floor). They are all tucked snugly in their own vitrines. As 
we move through the capacious studio, we hear outtakes from various Stax recordings while a mon-
tage of moving and still images loop endlessly above and around us. We are asked to recall, or realise, 
it all happened just about ‘here,’ sort of. When you look closely at the instruments, you can see the 
occasional telltale signs of wear and tear on some of them. The polish on Wayne Jackson’s trumpet is 
slightly worn and there are still hints of dust and rust inside Booker T. Jones’ Hammond M-3 organ. 
Despite the crisp new heads on Al Jackson Jr’s drum kit, these instruments collectively add a sense of 
lived experience to the nostalgic vibrancy of the studio.

The material experience of musical myth 3: the mythic origins of America’s music
The final example of interest here is the Carter Family Fold in Hiltons, Virginia. This location is home 
to the A.P. Carter Grocery, the relocated Carter Family cabin, officially entitled ‘A.P. Carter’s Boyhood 
Home,’ and a working music venue called the Carter Family Fold. The grocery store is now the Carter 
Family Museum, a small building housing a substantial collection of family memorabilia. The cabin 
was moved from its original location in a pasture about ten miles away and has been renovated signif-
icantly to allow it to act as a museum in its own right. The cabin is populated with family heirlooms 
as well as a great many more generic items that, while not directly part of the Carter family’s history, 
are meant to recall the kinds of lives A.P., Maybelle, and Sara Carter led in this corner of southwest 
Virginia, about thirty miles north of Bristol. The Fold is now part of the Crooked Road, a tourist road 
similar in shape and intent to the Mississippi Blues Heritage Trail. Both are broad conceptual frame-
works that draw together geographically and historically disparate sites into a common framework 
of musical tradition.

The purpose of the Carter Family Museum and cabin is to commemorate those the informative 
plaque refers to as the ‘First Family of Country Music.’ It is strongly informed by the version of 
country music history that places the Carters at the centre of what is commonly referred to as the 
‘big bang’ of country music (see Malone and Neal 2010; Wolfe 1996). Here,’ a plaque outside the 
cabin tells us, ‘Alvin Pleasant Carter’s genius absorbed and reshaped folk songs, vintage parlour 
ballads, sacred pieces and Tin Pan Alley pop tunes into over 300 songs, new compositions that 
defined an era.’ This is, in miniature, one of the central myths of American country music. On a 
plaque near the cabin, bluegrass musician Marty Stuart summarises what these places are meant 
to evoke:

Few places speak to me like A.P. Carter’s Cabin. Many of America’s songs and stories come from within these walls. 
While the cabin was still standing in the middle of a pasture, I loved going there just to feel the wind blow through 
the rooms. It was the same wind that carried A.P.’s and the Carter Family’s songs out to the rest of the world.

On another plaque, Stuart comments, ‘If you look at country music as if it were a musical bible, I’d say 
he would be in the Genesis. Where God says, “In the beginning, God created A.P. Carter.”’

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  487

The objects housed in the cabin and the store are used to uphold this narrative very much in the 
ways we have seen already. In these two buildings, the early history of American country music and 
the Carter Family’s place in it become difficult to distinguish from one another given how the latter 
inhabits the former so seamlessly in these exhibits. Only the two downstairs rooms in the cabin are 
open to the public. One is the kitchen, the other the main family room. Each is filled with objects either 
donated by the Carter family or made to act as representative examples of possessions they would 
have owned. The kitchen contains a small, white stove with a stove-top coffee pot and soup pot. It is 
festooned with seed bags from the Southern Seeds Cooperative. Next to this are shelves with various 
Mason jars with food stored in them as well as dinner settings and a water pitcher. The main room 
is spare in its furnishings and is set up around a large round rug, an old wooden rocking chair, once 
a favourite of Johnny Cash, and a large number of family photos that are spread around the room. 
There are stockings over the fireplace, a wood pile next to it, and several display cases of personal 
items taken from the family. The three or four oil lamps set around the place suggest that the cabin is 
clearly meant to reflect the Carter’s austere living conditions as faithfully as possible.

Next door, all of the space in the large front room of the grocery store is given over to a formal 
museum display tracking the Carter Family’s musical career narrated through panels of text and 
imagery. These are very detailed and effective at noting crucial points in the development of their 
repertoire, performance style, and influential catalogue of recordings. However, despite this, the panels 
are simply overwhelmed by the large number of personal items that surround them taking up almost 
all of the space on the floor and each wall. For example, one wall is completely covered in large dis-
play cases presenting outfits A.P., Maybelle, and Sara Carter wore on stage at different points in their 
careers. Each has an associated photograph nearby showing the clothes in use. There are several musical 
instruments in the display, including a full-sized upright piano, once a status symbol of those aspiring 
to middle-class comfort, an old autoharp sitting in for Maybelle’s which we are told is in Nashville, a 
guitar once played by Sara, and one of A.P.’s mandolins. The numerous glass cases contain a wide range 
of personal items, such as many pieces of Maybelle’s china setting, again a symbol of middle-class 
aspiration, and a good many books on folklore and folk music as well as pieces of sheet music published 
by A.P. during his lifetime. The room is striking for the warm, intimate sense of a family museum. It 
is also notable for the precise and exacting narrative of the Carter Family’s musical career which is 
laid out in a significant amount of detail in conjunction with the heirlooms that surround it. It is in 
this way that the story of the Carter Family as musicians and folklorists merges seamlessly with their 
history as a family from southwestern Virginia. Their seeming unremarkableness, as evidenced by 
A.P.’s Grocery cash box and rusted metal sign reading simply ‘A.P. Carter Gro.,’ rubs up against their 
oft-cited extraordinariness as professional musicians captured in the panels of text and imagery.

The displays at the Carter Family Fold capture the arrival of modernity in the American South and 
the simultaneous defence of a valued tradition that we are told was brought into the modern world 
more or less intact. In this way, there is a telling contrast between the cabin and the Grocery. While 
both tell of a vanished world they do so is significantly different ways. The cabin is starkly austere yet 
exudes an undeniable intimacy. We are told how the eight children slept tightly packed together until 
the family could afford to build a second floor. The grocery, however, bespeaks of a style and elegance 
necessarily absent from the cabin. We see subtly hand-coloured china plates and a set of handmade 
formal dresses and suits the Carters used for performing in so many far flung places. In one sense 
the cabin tells us where this music came from and grocery store tells where modernity took it. Both 
are necessary to uphold the narrative that places the Carter Family at the originating moment of the 
history of the musical tradition they are said to have brought into the modern world.

Conclusion
Across the three examples examined here, we find many obvious differences. The musical traditions 
on which each of the exhibits focuses are from different regions and time periods. The social contexts 
that produced the music each institution exhibits are clearly distinct from one another as well. Further, 

488 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

each of these three museums is a different type of institution. The EMP is a big, expensive, and explicitly 
forward-looking place, fashioning its identity by playing off its proximity to Seattle’s once-futuristic 
space needle and boasting to visitors about its prodigiously networked and interactive infrastructure 
(Experience Music Project 2000a, 2000b). By contrast, The Stax Museum emphasises its historical 
connections to its community, placing itself in the African American residential neighbourhood of 
Memphis where the original once stood. It offers not only educational programmes, but a private 
school as well. The Carter Family Fold is as small and intimate as the cabin and store themselves must 
have been. It is a very modest family museum.

I was quite deliberate in choosing examples with these kinds of differences precisely because they 
amply highlight the important characteristics these exhibits share. The main characteristic these muse-
ums share is a reliance on wider, more encompassing myths of the origins and character of each musical 
tradition as a primary element of narrative coherence. We can see in each case how a few dominant 
communicative threads are woven throughout each exhibit. These threads tend to focus each exhibit’s 
story by linking together the broad range of materials present and moulding them into a coherent 
story. This act of linking these diverse materials in this way is meant to guide audience interpretations 
by emphasising a dominant theme. We are asked to read the populism of punk, e.g. into a series of 
generic images of mosh pits and road trips. Another characteristic each shares is how each museum 
deployed these dominant myths not only throughout their exhibitions, but also in their locations 
and infrastructure. For example, while the Carter Family Cabin has been moved from its original 
location and populated with the simulacrum of a Appalachian farm house, we are still guided to feel 
the presence of the people who made music there once. Similarly, we are carefully led into Studio A 
at Stax only after a lengthy narrative of redemption and rebirth has sanctified the reconstituted space 
in which the music was made.

These themes create an all-encompassing story that transforms what are fairly mundane objects into 
museum artefacts. It is this transformation that expresses and upholds the central and foundational 
myths of the forms of music whose historical traces they are exhibiting. They do so in a way that is 
meant to shape the spectator’s experience in a manner that is musically-specific, directly engaging 
the historically-specific traditions of thought that have shaped the musical practices on display. This 
establishes a direct connection between the spectator and the mythic origins of the music. It places the 
audience in a very particular subject position within a preferred narrative about that music. However, 
it is important to reiterate that, however poignant they might be, these artefacts cannot encapsulate 
the central myths of each exhibit by themselves. They can only offer immediate material legitimation 
for the claims the rest of the exhibit makes around them. It is in this way the each artefact acts as one 
small piece of material proof of the truth and legitimacy of the exhibit’s narrative. We continually see 
throughout all three of these exhibits how the unremarkable appearance of a sweater, a trumpet, or a 
set of dishes highlights and focuses visitor attention on the residual extraordinariness of the musicians 
memorialised in the panels of text and imagery that surround them.

Each of the museums examined here attempts to create a novel experience of familiar narratives of 
well-known musical myths in very particular ways. Instead of sapping the objects they display of their 
‘power to excite and inspire curiosity’ (Wehner and Sear 2010, 145), these museums seek to infuse them 
with various forms of particularity. They construct a life history or ‘object biography’ for the musical 
instruments or articles of clothing they display by linking them to some special moment from the 
past that is meant to still be with us. These objects must be imbued with some sense of a larger history 
and biography to enable the spectator to see ‘the social context in which the object has “lived,”’ more 
clearly understand ‘the meanings attached to it by people’ and indirectly experience ‘the enactment 
or performance of an object’s meaning’ (Wehner and Sear 2010, 145). These museums create what 
we might think of as a referred sense of agency with which they infuse their collections to link these 
objects to galvanising historical moments when an otherwise mundane thing comes to embody and 
stand in for momentous social and cultural changes either sought or reflected through the traditions 
of musical practice each displays. It is this sense of material and biographical specificity that forms 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  489

the core of emotional and intellectual charge these exhibits attribute to their collections, but in point 
of fact, carefully conjure up from their own storehouses of cultivated objects.

Notes
1. 

2. 

 While this issue lies outside the scope of this article, I should note I found no significant stylistic exhibitionary 
differences between the museums I studied in the U.S. and those in the U.K. with regard to the use of familiar 
myths of different musical traditions.
 An important exception is King (2006) which links various myths of the blues to the ways in which these are 
reproduced for primarily white audiences in blues tourism.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Charles Fairchild is an associate professor of Popular Music at the University of Sydney and the author of Danger Mouse’s 
The Grey Album (Bloomsbury, 2014), Music, Radio and the Public Sphere (Palgrave, 2012) and Pop Idols and Pirates 
(Ashgate, 2008). His work focuses on how intermediaries within different kinds of institutions shape the ways people 
consume and make meaning from music.

References
Baker, Sarah, Lauren Istvandity, and Raphael Nowak. 2016. “The Sound of Music Heritage: Curating Popular Music in 

Music Museums and Exhibitions.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 22 (1): 70–81.

Barthes, Roland. 1957. Mythologies. New York: Hill and Wang.
Barthes, Roland. 1977. Image – Music – Text. New York: The Noonday Press.
Bennett, Andy. 2009. “‘‘Heritage Rock’’: Rock Music: Representation and Heritage Discourse.” Poetics 37 (5–6): 474–489.
Biron, Dean. 2011. “Towards a Popular Music Criticism of Replenishment.” Popular Music and Society 34 (5): 661–682.
Bjerregaard, Peter. 2015. “Dissolving Objects: Museums, Atmosphere and the Creation of Presence.” Emotion, Space 

Blanning, Tim. 2008. The Triumph of Music: The Rise of Composers, Musicians, and Their Art. Cambridge, MA: Belknap 

and Society 15: 74–81.

Press of Harvard University Press.

Bowman, Rob. 1997. Soulsville, U.S.A.: The Story of Stax Records. New York: Schirmer. 
Brandellero, Amanda, and Susanne Janssen. 2014. “Popular Music as Cultural Heritage: Scoping Out the Field of Practice.” 

International Journal of Heritage Studies 20 (3): 224–240.

Brooker, Will, and Deborah Jermyn. 2003. The Audience Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.
Chua, Liana, and Mark Elliott, eds. 2013. Distributed Objects: Meaning and Mattering After Alfred Gell. New York: 

Cobley, Paul. 1994. “Throwing Out the Baby: Populism and Active Audience Theory.” Media, Culture and Society 16 

Cohen, Sarah, Robert Knifton, Marion Leonard, and Les Roberts, eds. 2015. Sites of Popular Music Heritage: Memories, 

Court, Benjamin. 2015. “The Christ-like Antichrists: Messianism in Sex Pistols Historiography.” Popular Music and 

Histories, Places. New York: Routledge.

Society 38 (4): 416–431.

Dudley, Sandra. 2010. “Museum Materialities: Objects, Sense and Feeling.” In Museum Materialities: Objects, Engagements, 

Interpretations, edited by Sandra Dudley, 1–17. London: Routledge.

Experience Music Project. 2000a. Crossroads: The Experience Music Project collection. Seattle, WA: Experience Music 

Experience Music Project. 2000b. The Experience. Seattle, WA: Experience Music Project.
Fairchild, Charles. 2013. “Revealing What We Can Never Know: The Problem of the Past in Gus Van Sant’s Last Days.” 

Popular Music and Society 36 (4): 523–539.

Fairchild, Charles. 2017. “Understanding the Exhibitionary Characteristics of Popular Music Museums.” Museum and 

Gendron, Bernard. 2002. Between Montmartre and the Mudd Club: Popular music and the Avant-Garde. Chicago, IL: 

Society 15 (1): 87–99.

University of Chicago Press.

Berghahn.

(4): 677–687.

Project.

490 

 

 C. FAIRCHILD

Guralnick, Peter. 2002. Sweet Soul Music: Rhythm and Blues and the Southern Dream of Freedom. Edinburgh: Mojo Books.
Hahn, Steven. 2003. A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great 

Migration. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Hall, Martin. 2006. “The Reappearance of the Authentic.” In Museums Frictions: Public Cultures/Transformations, edited 
by Ivan Karp, Corinne A. Kratz, Lynn Szwaja, and Tomas Ybarra-Frausto, 70–101. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.

Henning, Michelle. 2006. Museums, Media and Cultural Theory. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Higgins, Paula. 2004. “The Apotheosis of Josquin des Prez and Other Mythologies of Musical Genius.” Journal of the 

American Musicological Society 57 (3): 443–510.

Kelly, Kelly, and Evelyn McDonnell. 1999. Stars Don’t Stand Still in the Sky: Music and Myth. London: Routledge.
King, Stephen. 2006. “Memory, Mythmaking, and Museums: Constructive Authenticity and the Primitive Blues Subject.” 

Southern Communication Journal 71 (3): 235–250.

Klingmann, Anna. 2007. Brandscapes: Architecture in the Experience Economy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Leaver, David, and Ruth Schmidt. 2010. “Together Through Life an Exploration of Popular Music Heritage and the 

Quest for Re-enchantment.” Creative Industries Journal 3 (2): 107–124.

Leonard,  Marion.  2014.  “Staging  the  Beatles:  Ephemerality,  Materiality  and  the  Production  of  Authenticity  in  the 

Museum.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 20 (4): 357–375.

Lyons, James. 2004. Selling Seattle: Representing Contemporary Urban America. New York: Wallflower Press.
Fairchild, Charles. 2014. “Popular Music.” In The Cultural Intermediaries Reader, edited by Jennifer Maguire and Julian 

Matthews, 125–133. London: Sage.

Malone, Bill, and Jocelyn Neal. 2010. Country Music, U.S.A. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Marstine, Janet, ed. 2006. New Museum Theory and Practice: An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
McMurray, Jacob. 2011. Taking Punk to the Masses: From Nowhere to Nevermind. Seattle, WA: Fantagraphics Books.
Meisel, Perry. 1999. The Cowboy and the Dandy: Crossing Over from Romanticism to Rock and Roll. New York: Oxford 

University Press.

Keane, Webb. 2005. “Signs Are Not the Garb of Meaning: On the Social Analysis of Material Things.” In Materiality, 

edited by Daniel Miller, 182–205. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Message, Kylie. 2006. New Museums and the Making of Culture. Oxford: Berg.
Moore, Ryan. 2010. Sells Like Teen Spirit: Music, youth Culture, and Social Crisis. New York: New York University Press.
Mortensen, Christian, and Jacob Madsen. 2015. “The Sound of Yesteryear on Display: A Rethinking of Nostalgia as a 

Strategy for Exhibiting Pop/rock Heritage.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 21 (3): 250–263.

Pine, B. Joseph, and James Gilmore. 1998. “Welcome to the Experience Economy.” Harvard Business Review, July–August. 

Accessed July 1, 2016. https://hbr.org/1998/07/welcome-to-the-experience-economy.

Roberts, Les. 2014. “Talkin Bout My Generation: Popular Music and the Culture of Heritage.” International Journal of 

Heritage Studies 20 (3): 262–280.

Strauss, Neil. 2000. “Making a Museum Out of Music, Part 2.” New York Times, E1+, June 26.
Strong, Catherine. 2011. Grunge: Music and Memory. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Turner,  Graeme.  1997.  “The  Active  Audience:  Reception  Traditions.”  In  The  Media  in  Australia:  Industries,  Texts, 

Audiences, edited by Stuart Cunningham and Graeme Turner, 381–393. St. Leonards, NSW: Allen and Unwin.

Wehner, Kirsten, and Martha Sear. 2010. “Engaging the Material World: Object Knowledge and “Australian Journeys”.” 
In Museum Materialities: Objects, Engagements, Interpretations, edited by Sandra H. Dudley, 143–161. London: 
Routledge.

Wolfe, Charles. 1996. “The Legend That Peer Built: Reappraising the Bristol Sessions.” In The Country Reader: 25 Years 

of the Journal of Country Music, edited by Paul Kingsbury, 3–19. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.


