Cultural diversity, cultural heritage and human rights: towards
heritage management as human rights-based cultural practice

William Logan*

School of History, Heritage and Society, Deakin University, 121 Burwood Highway,
Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia
(Received 23 October 2011; ﬁnal version received 24 October 2011)

it

The present article investigates
the linkages between conserving cultural
heritage, maintaining cultural diversity and enforcing human rights. While there
seems to be a growing awareness of these linkages in international heritage and
human rights circles, they remain poorly understood by many heritage practitio-
ners who see their conservation work merely as a technical matter. The article
argues that
is essential for practitioners engaged in heritage conservation
projects to understand the broader economic, political and social context of their
work. However, heritage scholars and teachers, too, need to recognise that there
can be many motives behind ofﬁcial heritage interventions, that such action is
sometimes taken primarily to achieve political goals, and that it can undermine
rather than strengthen community identity, cultural diversity and human rights.
Such a reorientation is an extension of the paradigm shift in which heritage is
understood as cultural practice. In this more critical heritage studies discipline
human rights are brought to the foreground as the most signiﬁcant part of the
international heritage of humanity.

the fundamental

Introduction
The present article traces the growing awareness of
linkage
between conserving cultural heritage, maintaining cultural diversity and enforcing
human rights. It argues that such awareness supports a re-conception of heritage
conservation as a form of cultural practice in which human rights-based approaches
can be well accommodated. The present article is based on my contribution to the
introductory chapter of the book Cultural Diversity, Heritage and Human Rights
(Langﬁeld et al. 2010), which I edited with Professors Michele Langﬁeld and
Máiréad Nic Craith. It is also informed by the work being done at the Ofﬁce of the
United Nations High Commission for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Geneva by Ms
Farida Shaheed, a Pakistani sociologist who was appointed as an independent expert
in August 2009 to investigate cultural rights over a three-year period. In 2011, she
chose to focus on access to, and enjoyment of, cultural heritage as a cultural right.
This was seen to be of particular concern because: ‘ensuring access to cultural
heritage is a precondition for fostering dialogue and understanding across cultures

*Email: william.logan@deakin.edu.au

232

W. Logan

and civilizations and therefore, for creating an environment which enables the pro-
motion and protection of human rights for all’ (OHCHR 2010).

A consultative meeting in February 2011 brought together a small group of law-
yers, academics and practitioners working at the human rights and cultural heritage
interface. The meeting was useful in raising ideas that may well come to shape heri-
tage theory and practice in coming years – in particular concerning the adoption of
a human rights-based approach to management in the heritage ﬁeld as has been
occurring throughout the United Nations system. The meeting ended with general
agreement that we need now to move on to clarify what this means to people on
including ofﬁcial decision-makers, heritage
the ground – to the stakeholders,
professionals and the community to which the heritage belongs. By fortunate coin-
cidence the workshop of Norway International Council on Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS), the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights and the Norwegian Helsinki
Committee had been held in Oslo in March 2011 and aimed to address this critical
issue, at least insofar as the management of World Heritage sites is concerned.

Ms Shaheed’s report (UN Human Rights Council [UNHRC] 2011a) was pre-
sented to the UNHRC in Geneva on 21 March 2011 and launched publicly at the
end of May. On 1 June 2011, she convened a working meeting of representatives
of UNESCO and its advisory bodies – ICOMOS, the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the International Centre for the Study of the
Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM) – the under the World
Heritage Convention (UNESCO 1972) (UNHRC 2011b). Here, as in the consulta-
tive meeting, the discussion focused on a series of key questions: What tools are
necessary to promote a human rights-based approach to cultural heritage matters,
such as instruments, guidelines and monitoring? What are the priorities for action?
What kind of cooperation among stakeholders could be envisaged? How can the
decision-makers and professionals working in cultural heritage be better convinced
to adopt a human rights foundation for their work?

At the centre of these considerations are the three concepts of cultural diversity,
cultural heritage and human rights. These concepts have been researched widely for
more than half a century since the Untied Nations and UNESCO were formed
(1945 and 1946, respectively) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR) was adopted in 1948. In the scholarly world, however, the concepts have
tended to be studied separately, with the various disciplines focusing more on one
concept than the others. This has been a limited approach given that the concepts
developed alongside each other and are inextricably linked. Recognition of the link-
age between the concepts will inﬂuence the way in which the purpose of heritage
conservation is seen and heritage protection work is carried out.

The academic world seems to have lagged behind the international committees
and secretariats of the global heritage bodies where the linkage appears to be well
understood. For example, in 2008, ICOMOS ranked human rights issues associated
with heritage (both natural and cultural) as one of seven ‘new and complex global
pressures’ impacting negatively on conservation outcomes (ICOMOS 2008, p. 5).
Meanwhile, the IUCN has already commenced framing a rights-based approach to
the management of Natural World Heritage sites (IUCN 2011).

The linkage remains poorly understood by heritage conservation professionals in
many countries, however, even where heritage conservation has been well
established. The present article argues that heritage identiﬁcation, inscription, man-
agement and monitoring form a cultural practice set in a broad economic, political



233

and social context. With such a reconceptualisation, heritage professionals can better
see that ofﬁcial heritage interventions have many motives, are used to achieve polit-
ical aims, and, at their worst, may undermine rather than strengthen community
identity, cultural diversity and human rights. The March 2011 Oslo workshop was
another step towards bringing the message home to heritage practitioners operating
at the world, national and local levels. The present article suggests that human
rights can and should be brought to the centre of conservation activity, both as a
theme in heritage identiﬁcation and as a set of policy principles underlying
conservation processes.

Setting agendas
In the mid-twentieth century, during the last stage of World War II, a series of
meetings held in the Bretton Woods in the USA led to the establishment of the
United Nations Organization (UN) and the ‘specialised agencies’ associated with
but independent of it, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), Food and
Agricultural Organization (FAO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
International Labour Organization (ILO), as well as the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the World Bank and, in the heritage ﬁeld, United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). One of the UN’s chief ambitions
was to anchor a new world order on the concept of human rights. It sought, too, to
encourage co-operation between nation-states in solving international economic,
social, cultural and humanitarian problems as a means of securing and maintaining
peace. In this, however, development of the cultural aspects proved to be relatively
slow on the whole. Although the UN does not play a direct role in cultural heritage
conservation, some of its activities have, nevertheless, gradually come to have an
effect on heritage, especially through the promotion of cultural diversity and human
rights.

The concept and discourse of human rights has been described as a unique
product of modernity, with so-called ‘ﬁrst generation’ human rights – civil and
political rights – emerging in the Age of Enlightenment in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries in response to the growing military and coercive power of the
new nation-states (Chen 2006, p. 487). After World War II and the Holocaust, an
awareness of problems needing to be solved led to new attempts to create universal
standards, especially the UN’s 1948 UDHR. It should be noted that a conscious
decision was made to focus on individual rather than group or community rights.
Article 22 of the UDHR makes this clear when it insists that: ‘Everyone. . . is enti-
tled to the realization, through national efforts and international co-operation. . ., of
the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free
development of his personality’. The tension between collective and individual
rights bedevils theory and practice – a point returned to later.

What is referred to as ‘second generation’ human rights – that is, social and
economic rights – did not emerge strongly until later, in the 1960s, in response to
the new forms of social and economic inequality produced by capitalism and indus-
trialisation (Chen 2006, p. 506) and in the context of the Cold War and decolonisa-
tion (Yusuf 2005). The principles captured in the UDHR were transferred into two
UN instruments adopted in 1966 – the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESC). It was soon recognised that cultural rights must be carried by

234

W. Logan

rights-holders to have any meaning in practice and that this applied more to groups
than individuals (Stener Ekern, personal communication, 14 July 2011). The context
of decolonisation had the particular impact of making ‘the people’ rather than
minorities the relevant group for carrying rights, with the emphasis on the people
who live within the state’s boundaries rather than those who share the culture.

These two covenants are increasingly recognised to have relevance for the
management of cultural heritage. While not speciﬁcally mentioning cultural heri-
tage, Article 15 of the latter instrument afﬁrms that states party to the covenant
‘recognize the right of everyone. . . to take part in cultural life’. In the same year,
1966, UNESCO’s General Conference went further, adopting a Declaration on the
Principles of International Cultural Cooperation that asserted more clearly the link
between human rights, human dignity and culture: ‘Each culture has a dignity and
value which must be respected and preserved’, ‘every people has the right and duty
to develop its culture’ and ‘In their rich variety and diversity, . . . all cultures form
part of the common heritage belonging to all mankind’.

It was in the optimistic, modernist spirit that UNESCO and the other global
organisations speciﬁcally focused on cultural heritage – the International Council on
Museums (ICOM), the ICCROM and ICOMOS – were established (Logan 2002).
UNESCO’s founding constitution makes clear the organisation’s ambitions and
clearly connects the trilogy of concepts which the present article is exploring.
Adopted in London in November 1945, it starts with the key sentence: ‘That since
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed’. These words have remained even though the constitu-
tion has been amended many times. While reﬂecting the World War II context, they
hold an ongoing socio-psychological truth: that when meeting peoples with cultures
that are strange to us, we react too easily with hostility, rather than seeking to
understand, accommodate, negotiate and compromise. Cultural diversity is, there-
fore, often the cause of conﬂict – or at least the excuse for it. International norma-
tive statements insist, however,
to maintain their
diversity, their own or their group’s identity, their cultural heritage. This is a process
essentially of intercultural dialogue and understanding, a process that the UNESCO
constitution from 1946 onwards has seen as being fundamental if greater tolerance
and, ultimately, peace are to be achieved.

that humans have the right

UNESCO’s Culture Sector remains relatively small

in terms of budget and
personnel. Even so, its remit has grown over 60 years and especially since the
World Conference on Cultural Policies held in Mexico City in 1982, when the
notion of ‘culture’ was broadened from a narrow, high art deﬁnition to a more
anthropological one taking in the ‘whole complex of distinctive spiritual, material,
intellectual and emotional features that characterize a society and social group’
(UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies 1982). It was this shift that ulti-
mately made possible the expansion of UNESCO’s heritage activities from the tan-
gible – heritage places under the World Heritage Convention (UNESCO 1972) and
artefacts through its work relating to collections management, libraries, archives and
museums – to the intangible cultural heritage – practices, representations, expres-
sions, knowledge, skills, such as language, oral history, song, dance, music, as well
as intellectual property – under the Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible
Cultural Heritage (UNESCO 2003).

During the 1990s the cultural diversity theme, and especially the protection of
diversity, emerged as a major focus of UNESCO activities, in large part because of



235

fears that globalisation was threatening the survival of the world’s cultural diversity
(Logan 2007a, p. 36). The UN’s ‘Decade for Cultural Development’ (1988–1997),
which had cultural diversity as a key theme, ended with the World Commission on
Culture and Development presenting its ﬁnal report under the title Our Creative
Diversity (UN 1995). In October 2000, UNESCO’s Executive Board invited the
Director-General to prepare a declaration aimed at ‘promoting cultural diversity in
the context of globalization’. The result was the Universal Declaration on Cultural
Diversity (UNESCO 2000), adopted by UNESCO’s General Conference in 2001.
UNESCO’s website refers to it as the founding act of a new ethic for
the
twenty-ﬁrst century, providing the international community, for the ﬁrst time, with a
‘wide-ranging standard-setting instrument to underpin its conviction that respect for
cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue is one of the surest guarantees of
development and peace’. This was followed by the Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development
in September 2002, which adopted a declaration that
recognises cultural diversity as a collective force that must be promoted to ensure
sustainable development.

By 2000, the UNESCO Director-General, Koichiro Matsuura, had put in place a
scheme called ‘Proclamation of Master Pieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage
of Humanity’, which was to be the advance guard of the Convention for the Safe-
guarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (UNESCO 2003). The intention was to
recognise and manage embodied cultural heritage in societies where perhaps the
built heritage was less signiﬁcant. The push to protect intangible as well as tangible
heritage can be seen, therefore, as a further step in recognising cultural diversity,
and the Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (UNESCO
2003) and the International Convention on the Protection of the Diversity of Cul-
tural Contents and Artistic Expressions (UNESCO 2005) seek to engage states in
binding legal instruments representing a commitment to cultural diversity.

At the same time as human rights notions were being incorporated into the heri-
tage discourse, instruments and practice, the reverse was also happening: human
rights experts started to become aware of cultural heritage and to incorporate it into
their work. From the 1960s, cultural heritage was subsumed within cultural rights,
as in, for instance, the argument that the maintenance of one’s culture was a funda-
mental ‘cultural right’. Today the position taken in the ICCPR of 1966 is now well
accepted in international human rights discourse and the programmes of global
organisations; that is:

In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist persons belong-
ing to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with other members
of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess their own religion, or to use their
own language. (ICCPR 1966, Article 27)

It was this agenda set by the ICCPR that UNESCO sought to extend with its own
normative statements, notably the 2001 Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity
(UNESCO 2000), which declares in Article 5 that:

Cultural rights are an integral part of human rights, which are universal, indivisible
and interdependent. The ﬂourishing of creative diversity requires the full implementa-
tion of cultural rights... All persons have therefore the right to express themselves and
to create and disseminate their work in the language of their choice, and particularly
in their mother tongue; all persons are entitled to quality education and training that

236

W. Logan

fully respect their cultural identity; and all persons have the right to participate in the
cultural life of their choice and conduct their own cultural practices, subject to respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Gaps and inconsistencies
Different types of cultural heritage raise different human rights issues. Managing
intangible heritage has the most direct and difﬁcult human rights implications
because we are dealing with embodied and living heritage. It is ethically impossible
to ‘own’ people in the way that we can own, buy and sell, destroy, rebuild or pre-
serve the tangible heritage of places and artifacts (Logan 2007a, p. 37). Looking at
tangible heritage and UNESCO’s ﬂagship programme, World Heritage, we can talk
about human rights both as a theme that can be used to justify listing and as a set
of principles underlying the processes and practices employed at the various stages
of World Heritage nomination, inscription, management and monitoring.

On the ﬁrst front, it is surprising that human rights feature so little as a key uni-
versal value and reason for the inscription of historic sites. Robben Island is there,
certainly, inscribed for its link with Nelson Mandela and the ﬁght against apartheid.
But where are sites reminding the world of the democratic and/or independence
struggles of racial and ethnic groups elsewhere? Gorée in Senegal is inscribed for
its link to the New World slave trade that ended in the nineteenth century, but what
about sites to commemorate the end of colonialism? Auschwitz-Birkenau and Hiro-
shima’s Genbaku Dome are symbols of technological warfare and provide moral
lessons to us all, but what about other genocides and massacres?

In the Geneva Consultative Group meeting referred to previously it was necessary
to explain the broadening of the conception of cultural heritage that has occurred over
the last 30 years – from those things inherited from previous generations that give us
a sense of dignity, worth and identity as a community, to things about which we are
not proud but which remind us of errors made in the past and from which we can
learn so that such errors are never repeated. Heritage results from a selection process;
heritage values are attributed, not inherent. The Geneva group asked: How do some
inherited things become regarded as ‘signiﬁcant’? What is the process? Who does the
valuing? Usually governments are responsible for the recognition of signiﬁcant heri-
tage in lists and registers, but they are not always the leaders in creating signiﬁcance.
My recent work on war-related sites in Asia – Dien Bien Phu and Long Tan in Viet-
nam, the Thai–Burma Railway and Gapyong in Korea – shows that it was the men
and women involved in the events themselves who ﬁrst articulated the signiﬁcance of
the sites and started the process of memorialisation, with governments later being
drawn into the process (Logan and Nguyen 2012).

the ofﬁcial

Nevertheless, governments are responsible for

lists and they
generally deﬁne the ofﬁcial heritage to reﬂect what the dominant socio-political
jurisdiction think is signiﬁcant. At a local
group or groups in a particular
(sub-national) level, however, communities also have their own sense of what is
signiﬁcant. Unofﬁcial or community deﬁnitions are articulated by community lead-
ers. But community dynamics are often problematic. The question sometimes arises
as to whether the community leaders are representative of the community in a
democratic sense. There is always potential for conﬂict between the views of the
community leaders and individual members of the community. Do individuals have
the right to reject the group heritage? In all cases, ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial, deﬁnition
is linked to power structures in society.



237

The political character of heritage decision-making is seen increasingly in the
World Heritage system. In a recent paper (Logan forthcoming) on this topic I dis-
cuss how a range of problems confronting inscribed sites around the world has led
to criticism of UNESCO and the World Heritage system. In fact, I argue, much of
that criticism is misdirected. The operation of the global system is dependent on the
goodwill and collaboration of the State Parties to the World Heritage Convention.
But many, if not all, State Parties seek to use World Heritage to suit their own
national needs and in so doing act against the universalist principles underlying
UNESCO’s mission and the World Heritage system.

Much of UNESCO’s difﬁculty lies in its nature as an inter-governmental organi-
sation, made up of State Parties for which national self-interest normally takes the
upper hand. Returning for a moment to the small number of sites on the World Her-
itage List related thematically to human rights, the difﬁculty lies primarily with the
State Parties. Difﬁcult sites are unlikely to be listed if this causes embarrassment or
offence to the State Party. Olwen Beazley (2010) reveals the intense international
politics that were played out behind the nomination and inscription of the Genbaku
Dome and attempts by the USA to derail the process. The cultural landscape of
Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam, is another revealing site (see Logan and Nguyen 2012).
Here, according to noted historian Stanley Karnow (quoted in Simpson 1994, p. xi),
one of the greatest battles in history took place in 1954. Not only were the French
troops re-routed, but European colonialism in Asia effectively came to an end. How
would France react to a Vietnamese nomination of the site? By recognising the
human rights dimensions of colonisation, which is of course easier to do in hind-
sight, the tension around nominating a place like Dien Bien Phu for inscription
would be defused and heritage intervention turned into a vehicle for further recon-
ciliation.

National and sub-national heritages in conﬂict
Clearly, the implementation of conservation programmes based on the interlocking
concepts of cultural diversity, heritage and human rights is far from simple or easy.
Part of the problem lies in the contradictions and inconsistencies in the way the
concepts themselves are conceived and used or misused. So far, the present article
has been focused on agenda-setting at the global level, referring to the tensions at
play between global institutions and nation-states. Let us now turn to the tensions
that exist within states between national and sub-national, or ‘local’, values. Here
we see conﬂicts arising all round the world when an ofﬁcial version of heritage is
promoted by national governments, commonly as part of a ‘nation-building strat-
egy’ to achieve political stability and social cohesion, but through the exclusion of
minority group views. Thus, while cultural heritage can be a unifying force, empha-
sising a nation’s shared identity, often non-democratic governments, especially in
multi-ethnic states, force groups to adopt
leading to the
destruction of minority cultural identity. Insistence on unity around a single heritage
can also be used to encourage community involvement in wars, even ethnic cleans-
ing and genocide.

the dominant culture,

Taking an Asian example, Janette Philp (2010) outlines the politicisation of
Myanmar’s cultural heritage under the military rule of the State Peace and Develop-
ment Council (SPDC). In order to assimilate the country’s diverse ethnic and
religious cultures into a single national
the SPDC junta has promoted

identity,

238

W. Logan

cultural values that are historically connected with the monarchy and Buddhism,
thereby legitimising its own political authority. The cultural heritage of other ethnic
and religious minority groups such as the Karen and Shan is ignored. Building
human rights into heritage policy would require acknowledgment of the multi-
cultural nature of Myanmar’s population and deﬁnition of the national heritage in
more inclusive ways. This would help defuse inter-ethnic conﬂict as well as bring
Myanmar back into line with the universalistic principles underlying the UDHR.
Myanmar (then Burma), it should be remembered, was one of the countries support-
ing the UDHR’s adoption at the UN in 1948.

There are some inspiring examples of states making efforts to ensure the repre-
sentation of ethnic and racial minorities in the national story. One such is the
‘Embedding Shared Heritage’ project in London, outlined by Clara Arokiasamy
(2012), a project that seeks to ensure the heritage of London’s African and Asian
immigrant groups is acknowledged. However, despite such efforts, it is clear that
the imposition of a mainstream heritage by national governments onto ethnic minor-
ities is common across the world. Also problematic, and recognised as a fundamen-
tal violation of human rights, are situations involving Indigenous minorities since
the Indigenes are seen to have been displaced from their lands and their cultures
undermined by the new settlers arriving – or ‘invading’ – from other parts of the
world. While this might particularly apply to states in the New World, there are
examples in Norway, as discussed by Gro Ween (2012), or Brittany in France and
Wales in the UK, where indigenous European communities – the Sami, Bretons and
Welsh – have been swamped and struggle to assert their cultural distinctiveness
against the dominant majority. Taiwan and Indonesia are cases where Asian settlers
now dominate over indigenous populations.

In relation to World Heritage places, UNESCO has moved strongly in recent
years to engage the local, and especially indigenous, communities in both heritage
identiﬁcation and management. The notion of ‘World Heritage’ is based on the idea
of ‘outstanding universal value’ (OUV) but the OUV so deﬁned may not always
coincide with local ideas about what is signiﬁcant heritage. UNESCO used the
‘Linking Universal and Local Values’ conference held in Amsterdam in 2003 (pub-
lished in 2004 as World Heritage Papers No. 13 [UNESCO 2004]) to promote the
view that heritage protection does not depend alone on top-down interventions by
governments or the expert actions of heritage industry professionals, but must
involve local communities.

Dealing with indigenous heritage claims, however, presents many challenges.
For most indigenous communities, culture and heritage are intimately associated
with their lands (Gilbert 2010). The notion of cultural heritage of course covers tra-
ditional indigenous practices such as language, art, music, dance and song, as well
as claims to ancestral human remains; however, for indigenous peoples, the preser-
vation of heritage is also deeply embedded in, and requires the protection of, tradi-
tional territory and its sacred sites. This puts indigenous groups into conﬂict with
national governments on both political and economic fronts. Note that Australian
and other indigenous groups insist that they are referred to not simply as ‘communi-
ties’, but as ‘peoples’, with peoples’ rights to self-determination. While the settler
populations in Australia, Canada and elsewhere may encourage minorities to co-
exist, they do not support the self-determination aspiration of some indigenous peo-
ples (Havemann 1999) or even the more conciliatory agenda of shared sovereignty
and collective rights advocated by others. Australia ICOMOS runs a delicate line,



239

therefore, with its 2001 Statement on Indigenous Cultural Heritage, which, among
other principles, asserts that: ‘The Indigenous cultural heritage signiﬁcance of places
can only be determined by the Indigenous communities themselves’ (Australia ICO-
MOS 2001). The Burra Charter (1999) also upholds the social and spiritual values
of places and, although the term ‘human rights’ is not used, it is implicit in the Bur-
ra Charter, for it deals speciﬁcally with living culture as embodied in actual people,
not simply the physical remains of societies belonging to the past (Silverman and
Ruggles 2007, p. 7).

Conﬂict between rights
Human rights are often evoked when claims in favour of cultural diversity and heri-
tage (particularly intangible) are at stake. Paradoxically, however, some attempts to
protect cultural heritage represent threats to other human rights. Often groups claim
a cultural practice as a human right, even though others may claim that the practice
plainly contravenes human rights instruments and laws. Some forms of heritage
contravene the individual’s right to take an independent line and to choose his or
her own lifestyle. That
fraught with major contradictions and
inconsistencies was observed by the Academy of European Law (2005) when it
pointed out that:

the area is

Cultural rights are torn between two different but linked meanings: ﬁrst, as a sub-cate-
gory of human rights, cultural rights are endowed with universal character, which is a
major characteristic and postulate of human rights as a whole; second, cultural rights
are clearly related to cultural diversity and cultural diversity is an obvious challenge to
the very idea of universal human rights.

Another major issue is that some of the cultural rights and values still practised by
particular religious or ethnic groups contravene individual human rights or those of
the less powerful groups in society, such as women and children, stateless persons
and the poor. Cultural practices such as child sacriﬁce, genital mutilation, arranged
marriages and gender-based requirements to cover the head and body in particular
ways are cases in point. Some of these have been abandoned, or nearly so, but
others are still alive, even growing.

Those who framed the 2003 Intangible Convention sought to minimise such

contradictions with the statement that:

For the purposes of this Convention, consideration will be given solely to such intan-
gible cultural heritage as is compatible with existing human rights instruments, as well
as with the requirements of mutual respect among communities, groups and individu-
als, and of sustainable development. (UNESCO 2003, Article 2)

For many, however, the concern remains. Moghadam and Bagheritari (2007, p. 11)
argue, for instance, that the cultural rights of women are not at all ensured by the
Convention for Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage. Their fundamental point
is that ‘“culture” is not a valid justiﬁcation for gender inequality’ and it follows that
cultural forms representing and perpetuating gender inequality should not be safe-
guarded. Farida Shaheed (UNHRC 2011a) argues that
there are some forms of
cultural heritage that should be recorded and relegated to history rather than being
protected as part of living heritage. But how would we select those forms of heri-

240

W. Logan

tage to be discouraged or abandoned? What criteria would be used? Clearly this is
yet another mineﬁeld at the heritage/human rights interface.

I have explored this issue of rights in conﬂict elsewhere (Logan 2010), using
the example of the Tay Nguyen hill tribes whose gong-playing skills were inscribed
ﬁrst as one of UNESCO’s ‘Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of
Humanity’ and subsequently on the Representative List under the 2003 convention.
The Tay Nguyen territory in Vietnam’s central uplands saw an outbreak of political
and social turbulence in the early 2000s resulting from a mix of state-initiated popu-
lation in-migration, land tenure and land use changes and the intervention of Chris-
tian sects and diasporic political groups based in the USA. In this case the
community’s right to protect traditional culture, including traditional religious prac-
tices, conﬂicted with the right of individuals to enjoy new religious experiences –
or to abandon religion altogether. Indeed, the Tay Nguyen gong case raises a series
of rights-related questions critical to both cultural heritage theory and practice. How
are the cultural rights of ethnic minority groups best protected? How do we deal
with situations where local communities prefer to achieve higher standards of living
by rejecting tradition and modernising their cultures? Is the commodiﬁcation of
their cultures through cultural tourism a problem that requires a policy response?
How do we deal in practice with situations where cultural heritage is used by pow-
erful actors, both domestic and external, to obtain political goals that are essentially
unrelated to heritage conservation? How do we respond as professionals to
instances where various claims to cultural practices based on human rights are in
conﬂict with each other? Should a hierarchy of human rights be clearly established,
with the right to life at the top? Where would the cultural rights and the right to
access and enjoy cultural heritage come within such a hierarchy?

Eman Assi (2012) refers to the Palestinian city of Hebron in the Occupied West
in the long-running and intractable Arab–Israeli conﬂict. What
Bank, a hotspot
makes it particularly difﬁcult is that both sides claim the same fundamental rights –
to freedom of speech, association, assembly, religion and movement. Yet, when
these freedoms are applied by two oppositional groups in the same contested terri-
tory and when the sides fail to respect the equality of each other’s rights claims, a
recipe for disaster is created. Assi shows how, under such circumstances,
local
Palestinian organisations struggle to protect their cultural heritage as a way of pro-
tecting their national identity; Israeli groups do the same Assi (2012).

In unstable parts of the world, where ﬁghting occurs over a protracted period,
the destruction of cultural heritage is often both deliberate and devastating. As
Silverman and Ruggles (2007, pp. 5–6) note: ‘It is precisely because cultural heri-
tage is a signiﬁcant aspect of identity that it is the arena where conﬂict occurs’. The
repair and rebuilding of physical heritage, as well as the recovery of less tangible
heritage such as community beliefs and traditions, is sometimes difﬁcult to achieve.
There is, however, a growing acceptance among practitioners that cultural heritage
policies in post-conﬂict zones cannot proceed in isolation but must be incorporated
within the broader objectives of redevelopment and recovery, including the accom-
modation of cultural diversity and human rights.

A new paradigm: heritage conservation as human rights-based cultural practice
It is now 60 years since the UDHR was adopted by the UN as a key instrument in
its programme to reduce conﬂicts between peoples of different cultures. Despite



241

this, human rights issues feature little in the literature of the interdisciplinary ﬁeld
of cultural heritage studies (Logan 2008, p. 441). Conferences, workshops and their
associated reports and proceedings sometimes see the need to protect minority
cultures as part of a more inclusive, even democratic approach to heritage conserva-
tion. Several books and chapters now ﬁnd solutions in the notions of multicultural-
ism and cosmopolitanism (Bennett 2006, Ashworth et al. 2007, Harrison 2010). A
few anthropological works have speciﬁcally focused on human rights (Cowan et al.
2001, Goodale 2006, 2009), but elsewhere in the heritage discourse the link with
cultural rights or human rights is not directly made, even when the maintenance of
cultural diversity is discussed and advocated.

Heritage professionals in the past have commonly seen cultural heritage protec-
tion as either a technical or a management matter – a matter of applying the best or
latest scientiﬁc solution or the appropriate management strategy to preserve or
restore an artefact, monument or site (Logan 2008, p. 439). This was never true;
heritage protection has always been about resource management and resource allo-
cation and, therefore, always had a powerful political dimension. With the focus
shifting towards intangible forms of heritage – ‘living heritage embodied in people’
– efforts to protect heritage are more likely to run up against what many people
consider to be infringements of human rights. However, the paradigm has shifted so
that cultural heritage in both its formation and protection is now best seen as cul-
tural practice and, like other forms of cultural practice, only understandable in the
broad context of economic, social and political factors. Heritage is constructed,
beneﬁtting some people but often affecting others negatively. It is used in nation-
building and state-formation as well as for revenue-generation and job creation
through tourism. In the processes of heritage identiﬁcation, inscription, management
and monitoring we need to recognise the inequities that often arise and the feeling
people can have that they are the victims of heritage projects. We need to ensure
that human rights infringements are not being swept under the carpet. Only in these
ways will human rights obligations be met and the credibility of World Heritage,
national and local heritage lists be maintained.

the World Heritage level,

The key issue, which was central to both Shaheed’s work and the Oslo work-
is how to convince decision-makers and professionals to adopt a human
shop,
the difﬁculties confronting
rights-based approach. At
reform within UNESCO and the World Heritage Committee as inter-governmental
organisations have already been noted. Raising human rights is like waving a red
ﬂag at a bull for many UNESCO Member States and State Parties to the World
Heritage Convention. It is perhaps not surprising that, even though the human rights
concept lay at the heart of the 2003 ‘Linking Universal and Local Values’ confer-
ence, the words ‘human rights’ are used only four times in the entire World Heri-
tage Papers No. 13 (UNESCO 2004), which is effectively the conference
proceedings. Perhaps it might be possible to tweak the operational guidelines for
the implementation of the World Heritage Convention in minor ways without the
State Parties objecting. Certainly, the guidelines should remind the State Parties that
human rights should be respected at all stages in the World Heritage Committee’s
processes. However, strong advocates are needed within UNESCO, the advisory
bodies and elsewhere to remind State Parties, and perhaps especially those on the
World Heritage Committee itself, that as signatories of the UDHR, the 1966 cove-
nants and other normative instruments, they are required to uphold human rights in
all their conservation activities.

242

W. Logan

Harvey (2001), Smith (2006), Byrne (2008) and others, myself included (Logan
2007a,b), have argued for some time that heritage should be seen as cultural
practice rather than as a merely technical matter. In the present article I argue that
the cultural practice approach should be extended by taking on human rights as a
core, if not the core, consideration and looking both to identify signiﬁcant human
rights-related sites and to apply a human rights-based approach to the conservation
processes of identiﬁcation,
inscription, management and monitoring, be they at
world, national or local levels. As heritage professionals – practitioners, policy-mak-
ers, researchers and educators – we need to learn how to work within this new par-
adigm,
to deal with the disjuncture between conservation and human rights
principles, to adopt a human rights foundation for our heritage work, and to engage
more fully with the public whose cultural heritage we are seeking to conserve. As
heritage teachers, we need to reconsider what new knowledge and skills are needed
by practitioners in their education if they are to adopt a human rights approach to
their work. As scholars, we need to explore further the politics and politicisation of
heritage as part of a process of challenging conventional perceptions of heritage
and creating a more critical heritage studies discipline. We can take up Farida
Shaheed’s ‘heritage as a cultural right’ approach (rights to heritage); but we can go
further to identify ways to bring human rights principles into heritage identiﬁcation,
management and monitoring (rights in heritage). Some of us might even consider
human rights as heritage, perhaps the most signiﬁcant element in the international
heritage of humanity.

Notes on contributor
William Logan is Alfred Deakin Professor and UNESCO Chair in Heritage and Urbanism at
Deakin University in Melbourne, where he was director of the Cultural Heritage Centre for
Asia and the Paciﬁc (CHCAP) from 2001 to 2009. He was President of Australia ICOMOS
in 1999–2002 and is currently a member of the Heritage Council of Victoria and a fellow of
the Academy of Social Sciences in Australia.

References
Academy of European Law, 2005. Cultural rights as human rights [online]. Available from:

http://www.iue.it/AEL/Projects/Cultural Rights.shtml [Accessed 13 December 2005].

Arokiasamy, C., 2012. Embedding shared heritage: the cultural heritage rights of London’s
African and Asian diaspora communities. , 18 (3),
339–345.

Ashworth, G.J., Graham, B., and Tunbridge, J.E., 2007. Pluralising pasts: heritage, identity

and place in multicultural societies. London: Pluto Press.

Assi, E., 2012. World Heritage sites, human rights and cultural heritage in Palestine. Interna-

tional Journal of Heritage Studies, 18 (3), 316–323.

Australia ICOMOS, 2001. Statement on Indigenous cultural heritage [online]. Available
http://australia.icomos.org/wp-content/uploads/Australia-ICOMOS-Statement-on-

from:
Indigenous-Cultural-Heritage.pdf [Accessed 12 October 2009].

Beazley, O., 2010. Politics, power and representation:

(Genbaku Dome) as World Heritage.
and globalization. London: Routledge, 45–65.

the Hiroshima peace memorial
In: S. Labadi and C. Long, eds. Heritage

Bennett, T., 2006. Culture and differences: the challenges of multiculturalism. In: S. Boda
and M.R. Cifarelli, eds. When culture makes the difference: heritage, arts and media in
multicultural society. Rome: Meltemi Editore, 21–37.

Byrne, D., 2008. Heritage as social action. In: G. Fairclough, et al., eds. The heritage reader.

London: Routledge, 149–173.



243

Chen, A.H.Y., 2006. Conclusion: comparative reﬂections on human rights in Asia. In:
R. Peerenboom, C.J. Petersen, and A.H.Y. Chen, eds. Human rights in Asia: a
comparative legal study of twelve Asian jurisdictions, France and the USA. London:
Routledge, 487–516.

Cowan, J.K., Dembour, M.-B., and Wilson, R.A., 2001. Culture and rights: anthropological

perspectives. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Gilbert, J., 2010. Custodians of the land: indigenous peoples, human rights and cultural
integrity. In: M. Langﬁeld, W. Logan, and M. Nic Craith, eds. Cultural diversity, heri-
tage and human rights: intersections in theory and practice. Routledge: London, 31–44.
Goodale, M., 2006. Towards a critical anthropology of human rights. Current Anthropology,

Goodale, M., 2009. Surrendering to utopia: an anthropology of human rights. Stanford, CA:

47 (3), 485–511.

Stanford University Press.

Harrison, R., 2010. Multicultural and minority heritage. In: T. Benton, ed. Understanding

heritage and memory. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 164–201.

Harvey, D., 2001. Heritage pasts and heritage presents: temporality, meaning and the scope

of heritage studies. , 7 (4), 319–338.

Havemann, P., ed., 1999. Indigenous peoples’ rights in Australia, Canada and New Zealand.

Auckland, New Zealand: Oxford University Press.

International Council on Monuments and Sites, 2008. Submission by ICOMOS [to the]
Reﬂection Workshop on the Future of the World Heritage Convention, 17 October 2008
http://www.icomos.no/cms/icontent/ﬁler/verdensary/WHC%
Paris. Available
20reﬂection%20workshop.pdf [Accessed 6 December 2011].

from:

International Union for the Conservation of Nature, 2011. Conservation and human rights
http://www.iucn.org/about/union/commissions/ceesp/topics/

from:

[online]. Available
rights.cfm [Accessed 12 June 2011].

Langﬁeld, M., Logan, W.S., and Nic Craith, M., eds., 2010. Cultural diversity, heritage and

human rights: intersections in theory and practice. London: Routledge.

Logan, W.S., 2002. Globalizing heritage: World Heritage as a manifestation of modernism,
and challenges from the periphery. In: D. Jones, ed. Twentieth century heritage: our
recent cultural legacy. Proceedings of the Australia ICOMOS National Conference 2001,
23–27 May 2001 Alice Springs. Adelaide, Australia: University of Adelaide & Australia
ICOMOS, 51–57.

Logan, W.S., 2007a. Closing Pandora’s Box: human rights conundrums in cultural heritage
protection. In: H. Silverman and D.F. Ruggles, eds. Cultural heritage and human rights.
New York: Springer, 33–52.

Logan, W.S., 2007b. Heritage education at universities. In: M.-T. Albert and S. Gauer-Lietz,
eds. Heritage education: capacity building in heritage management. Frankfurt am Main:
IKO – Verlag für Interkulturelle Kommunikation, 64–69.

Logan, W.S., 2008. Cultural diversity, heritage and human rights. In: B. Graham and
research companion to heritage and identity.

P. Howard,
eds. The Ashgate
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 439–454.

Logan, W.S., 2010. Protecting the Tay Nguyen gongs: conﬂicting rights in Vietnam’s
In: M. Langﬁeld, W.S. Logan, and M. Nic Craith, eds. Cultural
central plateau.
diversity, heritage and human rights: intersections in theory and practice. London:
Routledge, 189–207.

Logan, W.S., Forthcoming. States, governance and the politics of culture: World Heritage in
Asia. In: P. Daly and T. Winter, eds. The Routledge handbook of heritage in Asia.
London, Routledge, 113–128.

Logan, W.S. and Nguyen Thanh Binh, 2012. Victory and defeat at Dien Bien Phu: memory
and memorialization in Vietnam and France. In: M. Gegner and B. Ziino, eds. The heri-
tage of war. London: Routledge, 41–63.

Moghadam, V. and Bagheritari, M., 2007. Cultures, conventions, and the human rights of
women: examining the Convention for Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage, and
the Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Museum International, 59 (4), 9–18.

244

W. Logan

Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights, 2010. Independent expert
in the ﬁeld of cultural rights. Questionnaire on access to cultural heritage [online].
Available from: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/CulturalRights/Pages/IECulturalRightsIn-
dex.aspx [Accessed 21 November 2011].

Philp, J., 2010. The political appropriation of Burma’s cultural heritage and its implications
for human rights. In: M. Langﬁeld, W. Logan, and M. Nic Craith, eds. Cultural diversity,
heritage and human rights: Intersections in theory and practice. London: Routledge,
83–100.

Silverman, H. and Ruggles, D.F., 2007. Cultural heritage and human rights. In: H. Silverman

and D.F. Ruggles, eds. Cultural heritage and human rights. New York: Springer, 3–22.

Simpson, H. R., 1994. Dien Bien Phu: the epic battle America forgot. Washington, DC:

Brassey’s.

zerland: UN.

Smith, L., 2006. Use of heritage. London: Routledge.
United Nations, 1966. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Geneva, Swit-

United Nations Human Rights Council, 2011a. Report of

ﬁeld of cultural rights, Farida Shaheed (A/HRC/17/38)
indigenouspeoplesissues.com/attachments/article/10227/A-HRC-17-38.doc
December 2011].

the independent expert

in the
[online]. Available from:
[Accessed 6

United Nations Human Rights Council, 2011b. Meeting with independent expert in the ﬁeld

of cultural rights, June 1, 2011. Geneva, Switzerland: UNHR.

United Nations Organization, 1995. Our creative diversity. Report of the World Commission

on Culture & Development. Paris, France: EGOPRIM.

UNESCO, 1972. Convention concerning the protection of the world cultural and natural

heritage. Paris, France: UNESCO.

UNESCO, 2000. Universal declaration on cultural diversity. Paris, France: UNESCO.
UNESCO, 2003. Convention for the safeguarding of the intangible cultural heritage. Paris,

UNESCO, 2004. Linking universal and local values. World Heritage Papers, No. 13. Paris,

France: UNESCO.

France: World Heritage Centre.

UNESCO, 2005. International convention on the protection of

the diversity of cultural

contents and artistic expressions. Paris, France: UNESCO.

UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies, 1982. Mexico declaration on cultural poli-

cies. Mexico City, Mexico: UNESCO.

Ween, G., 2012. World heritage and indigenous rights: Norwegian examples. International

Journal of Heritage Studies, 18 (3), 257–270.

Yusuf, A.A., 2005. Towards a convention on cultural diversity: background and evolution. In:
Third Forum on Human Development, 17–19 January 2005 Paris [online]. Available from:
http://hdr.undp.org/docs/events/global_forum/2005/papers/Abdulqawi_Yusuf_talking.pdf
[Accessed 6 December 2011].


