International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Heritage Noire: truth, history, and colonial anxiety
in The Blair Witch Project

Sally J. Morgan

To cite this article: Sally J. Morgan (2001) Heritage￿Noire: truth, history, and colonial anxiety in
The￿Blair￿Witch￿Project , International Journal of Heritage Studies, 7:2, 137-148
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250120060178

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 279

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2,  2001,  pp. 137± 148

Heritage Noire: truth, history, and
colonial anxiety in The Blair Witch
Project
Sally J. Morgan

Abstract
When  watching the  film The Blair Witch Project we  seem  to be witnessing  through its
clumsy, apparently uncrafted footage the unmediated documentation of `reality’  as it occurs.
This article argues that the  carefully  crafted  deceit  of The Blair Witch  Project may  be
understood as part of a subversive `public history’  project that uses modern history’s own
scientific motifs and methodologies against itself and challenges its basic tenets.  If positive
myths of the past are structured into what we tend to call heritage, i.e. shared narratives
affirming a positive sense of self and region or nation, then this paper argues that The Blair
Witch Project takes the same notion and subverts it, giving its chosen audience a dark and
unsettling sense  of its own history.

Key  Words:  Heritage;  Public  History;  Blair  Witch;  Historiography;  Historical
Methodologies; Film Studies

Prelude: the fact of a fact
I once worked with a newly qualified archaeologist who knew what a fact was. He
informed us all about it, loudly, one night when we were drinking beer under the
ascending stars and waiting for the rain to come in off the Irish Sea.

What  he  found  when  he  `dug’ ,  he  said,  were  `facts’ ,  and  when  you  put  facts
the  kind  `Joe  Public’

together  you  got  stories,  simple,  common-sense  storiesÐ
wanted.

I heard a  deep sigh  next  to me, and my  friend Eleanor, who has  never been a
woman to take a hostage when a well-aimed bullet through the head would suffice,
stirred in her fold-away deck chair, put her small bottle of Alsace beer on the grass
beside her, and leaned towards him

`And what’ , she said with slow clarity, `is a ª factº ? What, in God’s name, is ª common
senseº , and who, exactly is ª Joe Publicº ?’

Perhaps this  was a rather cruel thing  to do to  a  drunkenly passionate man in the
throes of his first professional dig. He looked as though he’d been slapped in the

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/01/020137-12   2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250120060178

mouth and after a pause that conveyed both bewilderment and betrayal he gathered
himself into action:

`I don’t give a toss about all of that’ , he said, so emphatically that everyone turned to
look and then turned away  again quickly, `People are people, a story’s a story, a fact’s a
fact. Our stories as archaeologists should be understandable, based on the factsÐ
scientific factsÐ

the ones we find in the ground!’

the

`Facts  in the  ground’ .  I liked the  thought  of  it,  but  I didn’t  believe it.  More like
enigmas in the ground, half-spoken sentences and incomplete pictures. For some
reason, beer in hand and light fading, I felt the need to alert him to the impossibility
of a simple story. I began as though I was being helpful,

Okay, so we find a collection of large stones in a particular configuration like we did
today, that’s a reality. So we know they exist and we know that we found them. But
anything else we say about them as to their significance is interpretation, based on
typology and probability. To make those stones into a story we have to interpret them.
Interpretation is an act of the imagination. We make cultural choices in the way we
define the `facts’  and then in the way that we put them together.

He swayed  momentarily in a haze of indignant, drunken confusion, `Fuck off  for
fucksake! I hate fucking theory, what do you need fucking theory for? You just dig
and then tell it like it isÐ

you tell the truth.’

scientificallyÐ

Whether we’re archaeologists or historians, telling the truth sounds as though it
should be as simple as just `not lying’ . `Showing the facts’  seems as straightforward
as pointing at the view out of the window. But of course this isn’t the case. Notions
of `truth’  and `narrative’  are at  the  heart of  historiography; von Ranke, the 19th-
century `father of modern history’  defined historical truth as the presentation of the
`facts as they actually happened’ , and insisted that to do so was the historian’s duty.
His position arose from his shocked discovery that the historical novels of Sir Walter
Scott were not true. He was horrified to realise that Scott’s depictions of the past
were  wilful  distortions,  crafted  to  suit  the  author’s  own  ends.  From  that  time
onward  the  problem  of  `facts’   has  been  at  the  centre  of  historical  enquiry  and
exposition. Not least, in historical endeavour, has been the quest for pure, scientific
facts that somehow stand free of the pollution of imagination.

However, the difficulty of defining a fact can, of course, never be underestimated.
My drunkenly optimistic archaeologist was wrong. Facts do not lie in the ground
waiting to be found and recognised. To find an object in the earth, or a text in an
archive, is not to find a fact. As Wittgenstein contends, a thing is not a fact.1 In terms
of historical enquiry, a thing remains, stubbornly, a thing, whereas an historical, or

1. L. Wittgenstein, `Tractatus logico-philosophicus’ , in Anthony  Kenny (ed.) The Wittgenstein  reader,
Oxford: Blackwell, 1994, p. 3.

138

Sally J. Morgan

archaeological, fact is a decision about the significance of a thing or things. Facts are
described through propositions, but propositions are not, in themselves, facts.2 In
short, an historical fact is elusive and worrying. An historical fact can’t be proved,
like a scientific fact, through a repeatable experiment; it can only be agreed, like the
legal guilt or innocence of the accused by a jury in a courtroom. History, like guilt,
only  appears  to  be  the  untainted  sum  of  the  evidence;  history,  like  a  fact,  is  a
proposition that we agree to agree to.

This  article  has  at  its  heart  issues about `facts’ , `stories’   and `Joe  Public’ . The
crucial starting points being which `facts’ ,  which stories, and which `public’ .  Can
you, as  an  archaeologist or historian, just `dig  and tell  it  like it  is’ ? Will scientific
method save you? Is truth the same thing as  reality? Where we  used to believe in
stories,  we  now  believe  in  methodologies. We  hold  that  as  long  as  a  method  is
rational then the story it produces will be true. As Ranke insisted, it is the evidence
that  builds your story. Your evidence, your facts, in speaking for themselves, will,
according  to  Ranke’s  proposition,  innocently  tell  the  story.  However,  I  would
contend that our faith in methodology leaves us just as vulnerable to delusion as our
old belief in narrative unless we understand how method and narrative are linked
and, indeed, how method is, in itself, narrative.

Introduction
On Halloween in 1999 a film called The Blair Witch Project opened in the UK. It had
caused a great stir in America during the preceding year and had reached Britain
billed as `the scariest movie ever made’ . The film was an unlikely blockbuster, a low-
budget production made by a very small company called Haxan films. It had been
a  success at  the `art-house’   Sundance Film Festival  and, as  a  result of  this  small
exposure, enthusiasts had spread the word about it on the Web. So, in America, its
box  office  success  had  come  about  not  by  studio  hype  but  by  the  turn-of-the-
century’s version of word-of-mouth, the Internet.

The basic conceit of The Blair Witch Project is that it is `true’ . We are told through
a  written,  on-screen preface  that  in  1994  three  student film-makers  disappeared
whilst making a documentary in the Maryland Woods of  the USA and that  three
years later their footage was found and pieced together by Haxan Films. From that
point onward we seem to be witnessing, through this edited, apparently uncrafted
footage,  the  unmediated documentation of  reality  as  it  occurs. The  truth  of  the
situation is, however, that this is a carefully constructed conceit.

At the time of writing, The Blair Witch Project has had four phases, the film, a Web
site, a book and a DVD recording. I intend to argue that these four elements (and
there may yet be more) may all be understood as part of a subversive `public history’
projectÐ
a  heritage  noire that  uses  modern  history’s  own  scientific  motifs  and
methodologies against  itself and challenges its  basic  tenets. When  examining The

2. Ibid., p. 12.

Heritage Noire

139

Blair Witch Project in this paper I will pay special attention to three areas of interest.
First is its subversive relationship to `history’ , through its references to oral, local
and national histories, its construction or `collection’  of evidence and its knowing
allusions to historical and archaeological methodologies. Second is its form, which
plays with our expectations of truth in relation to certain cinematic conventions and
to ways of constructing narrative. Third is the particularity of the project’s audience,
or  the  `Joe  Public’   it  wishes  to  address. The  film-makers  have  understood, and
played  on, the particular fears and anxieties arising from shared histories, myths,
and cultural relationships peculiar to the descendants of the European colonists of
North America.

The  Blair Witch  Project uses  and  manipulates  public  history  continually  and
cleverly throughout. By `public history’  I mean, in this context, the sense of history
(as first described by Raphael Samuel)3 that a community develops, not through a
conscious,  adult  study  of  academic  history,  but  through  exposure  to  films,
television, primary-school history  lessons, popular literature and  folklore. In  this
sort of public history, fact is mixed with myth and communal identities are affirmed
through an agreed set of stories. This manifests as a kind of residual knowledge; a
bit  like  common  sense,  it  is  composed  of  informal  information  that  powerfully
shapes our ideas of the past and the cultural assumptions arising from them. For
instance, just  as  every  Briton from  a  particular background and  of  a  certain age
would know who Robin Hood was and what his identity meant, without, perhaps,
being  sure  why  or  how  they  know  this,  likewise  every  American  of  a  certain
background would know about the Wild West and what that meant culturally. The
makers  of The  Blair Witch  Project make  knowing  and  careful  use  of  this  residual
knowledge  and  subvert  it  into  heritage  noire.  Instead  of  comforting  the  public
through a celebration of shared myths of the past, the project produces unease, like
a  dark-mirror image,  a  doppelg Èanger.  It  redirects the  historical imagination to  less
comfortable ends.

An Historical Enquiry
The  Blair Witch  Project presents  itself  as  an  historical  enquiry  that  attempts  to
disaggregate myth from fact. In the film we accompany the students in their quest
for the truth about the legendary Blair Witch. One of the students, the `director’ ,
Heather Donahue, has, it appears, already done some work in the archives and has
come  up  with  information from  a  series  of  sources.  In  the  third  episode of  the
project, the book or dossier, there appears a facsimile of Heather’s `proposal for a
student film thesis’ . She sets the scene by `reminding’  us of the legend of the Blair
Witch,  and  telling  us  that,  since  the  late  1700s,  there  have  been  a  number  of
disturbing incidents involving the disappearance of children from the Burkittsville
area, all of which have been attributed to the Blair Witch. She goes on to say that her

3. See R. Samuel, Theatres of memory, London: Verso, 1994, p.  15.

140

Sally J. Morgan

documentary will, `separate  the  known  facts  from  the  legend  that  has  grown  up
around them’ .4

What  we gradually deduce from Heather’s evidence is that  just after the War of
Independence  (thereby  firmly  placing  it  as  an  American story),  in  1785,  in  a
Maryland town called Blair, a woman called Elly Kedward was accused of taking
children’s blood in order to perform magic. As a result the townspeople cast her out
into  the  woods  to  perish.  Not  long  afterwards  the  town’s  children  began  to
disappear and eventually the town itself was abandoned, to be replaced in 1823 by
the new town of Burkittsville. After this time there were regular sinister occurrences
in that area, usually involving disappearances and/or the violent death of children.
We are also given fragments of evidence that imply that the whole area, known as the
Black Hills Forest, was  taboo  Indian land, and so was  tainted in  some way  even
before the incidence of the witch.

In her documentary Heather recounts stories of the Blair Witch and the events
linked to her, citing documents such as The Blair Witch Cult (an apparently archaic
publication,  which  she  reads  from  on  screen),  and  press  clippings  from  old
newspapers. She  also interviews local  people  in the  manner of  an  oral  historian.
Some  of  the  interviewees talk  of  the  witch  and  the  related `incidents’   as  legend;
others speak of them as fact. She herself makes no judgements or pronouncements;
most  of  her  comments  are  posed  as  questions,  either  to  her  interviewees,  her
colleagues, or herself via the camera. The film presents itself as a piece of public/oral
history, a foray into one of the interesting by-ways of Maryland local heritage.

The Web site extends this further. As a sequel to the film it seems to be set up as
a  real site about  something that  has  really happened. It  promises to  tell us more
about the disappearance of the students and to show us the facts. The site displays
evidence in  the  form  of  digital  pictures  and  recorded interviews  with  witnesses,
police and  local historians and  archaeologists. It  also  has  a  section given  over to
evidence about  the  Blair Witch. As  we  scroll across  the  screen we  find  readable
fragments from old documents. These include a picture of a tattered leather book
(described as  the  only  surviving  copy  of The  Blair Witch  Cult);  an  18th-century
woodcut  depicting  the  banishment  of  the  original  witch,  Elly  Kedward,  and
reproductions of 19th-century photographs of search parties and the like. Alongside
the pictures we  find interviews with experts and with  Bill Barnes, who is, we  are
told, the Director of the Burkittsville Historical Society.

The third phase of the project, the book, extends the evidence, including a 17th-
century  portrait,  a  snippet  from  an  old-journal  entry  and  even  a  19th-century
folksong. Through all three stages of the project we are given a sense of a mass of
evidence  going  back  through  time.  Like  real  evidence it  is  fragmentary,  contra-
dictory and doesn’t resolve into narrative certainty. But this is not real evidence. It
is  a  careful  construction  that  seeks  to  be  convincing  history  by  mimicking  the
material  that  history  is  constructed  from.  Much  of  the  material  is  banal,  even

4. D.A. Stern, The Blair Witch Project, London: Boxtree (Macmillan), 1999, p.  73.

Heritage Noire

141

tedious, some of it is dramatic, but mostly it is cumulative. Its sheer quantity and
complexity begins to convince us that we might begin to believe in the unbelievable.
It uses scientific historical methodologies to convince us that what we are witnessing
actually happened, is historically true.

Truth and Form
Certain forms seem truer to us than others. As Hayden White has proposed, form
itself is a kind of content.5 The casual photograph, the shopping list, or the home
movie, all give the appearance of unmediated reality. The less crafted the material,
the  more  likely  we  are  to  believe  in  it  as  evidenceÐ
as  something `factual’ . The
makers of The Blair Witch Project have exploited this propensity of ours to great effect
in all three of their documents (film, Web site, book). The film is apparently shot on
two hand-held cameras, one a video and the other a 16 mm black-and-white cine
camera. The form is that of the home movie, interspersed with clumsily convincing
documentary.  The  Web  site  utilises  what  are  declared  to  be  `genuine’   radio
interviews, family albums, old books and newspaper cuttings. The book is presented
as a facsimile of `actual documents’ , it is subtitled `A Dossier’  and it has not been
authored, but rather, we are told, `compiled’  by D.A. Stern.

None of these documents has an explicit narrative, or, when they appear to have,
then we are never given the whole of the story. No explanatory voice is present. No
author assigns meaning. Rather, evidence is presented and we are, apparently, asked
to come to our own conclusions, to play the detective or historian and to let the `facts
speak for themselves’ . At their simplest, and at face value, these documents (as I shall
continue  to  call  them)  are  collections  of  evidence. At  their  most  complex  they
function  like  the  `chronicles’   that White  would  say  `do  not  conclude but  simply
terminate’ .6 The `chronicle’ , he says, `Lacks [. . .] that summing up of the ª meaningº
of  a  chain  of  events  [. . .]  that  we  normally expect  from  a  well-made story. The
chronicle typically promises closure but does not provide it.’ 7 As a form, the chronicle
presents us with an apparently disconnected set of occurrences in which we may find
no imposed pattern, or meaning, owing to the lack of a clear authorial map.

A  dispassionate,  `removed’   relationship  to  evidence  has  been  a  common
aspiration  for  historians  and  archaeologists  through  most  of  the  20th  century.
Indeed,  from  the  time  of  Von  Ranke  until  very  recently,  most  historians  and
archaeologists, to a greater or lesser extent, shared the belief that `methodologically
controlled  research  makes  objective  knowledge  possible’ ,8 and  believed  in  their

5. H. White, The content  of the form: narrative, discourse  and historical representation, Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1987, p.  xi.

6. Ibid., p. 16.

7. Ibid., p. 16.

8. G.G. Iggers, Historiography in the twentieth  century, Hanover, USA: Wesleyan University Press,
1997, p. 3.

142

Sally J. Morgan

disciplines as `rigorous science[s]’ .9 Some mid-20th-century schools, such as  the
Processualists of British Archaeology, or the  French Annales school put scientific
analysis at the heart of their approachÐ
almost to the point of ideology. White has
suggested  that,  along  with  this  scientific  orientation,  most  notably  amongst  the
French  Annales  school,  went  a  rejection  of  narrative  `as  a  non-scientific,  even
ideological representational strategy’ .10 John Tosh sees this scientific turn as having
produced  a  general  climate  where  narrative  has  been  generally  discredited, `the
multiple nature of causation in history demands that the narrative be suspended’ .11
Narrative, it  would seem, has become suspect because of its close relationship to
literary  fiction,  because  of  its  association  with  interpretation,  and  with  the
potentially polluting influence of personality, and because of the way that it tidies an
untidy reality.

Leon J. Goldstein, in his essay `The sociological historiography of Charles Tilley’ ,
denies that history is, as Hayden White and others have proposed, a discourse. On
the contrary, it is, he says:

A way of knowing, which is the only way it makes sense to speak of historical truth and
falsity,  historical objectivity, factuality and reference. The manner in which a historian
presents his conclusions cannot be essential to the nature of the discipline.1 2

He proposes, then, that  form does not  affect  meaning; that  content does indeed
stand free of its mode of expression. What I would contend, however, is that, at the
very least, form influences our predisposition towards the content. The Blair Witch
Project knowingly  exploits  this  to  its  own  ends.  In  all  the  project’s  three  phases
conventional narrative and authorship are studiously avoided or denied. The form,
that  of  the compiled dossier of  evidence, the  visual archive/digital  data  base,  and
home movie/documentary, is  one of distanced enquiry  rather than narrative. It  is
processual  rather  than  declamatory.  It  asks  us  to  believe  in  its  impartiality  and
disinterested rationality. The form, then, conveys meaning as much as the content.
It appeals to our belief in scientific methodology, to our distrust of the `mediated
reality’   of  narrative,  to  our  instinct  that  `seeing  is  believing’ .  It  appears  to  be
balanced, with many sides of the story presented and no single viewpoint or voice
representing  the  `true’ . The  content  of  Blair Witch is  not  very  special,  not  very
frightening, nor very believable, but its form, its apparent methodological approach,
is convincing. The form unsettles us and produces ambivalence. The form and the
content become inseparable.

9. Ibid., p.  25.

10. White, 1987, p. 31.

11. J. Tosh, The pursuit of history,  2nd edn, Harlow: Longman,  1991, p. 119.

12. In Henry Kozicki (ed.) Developments  in modern historiography,  London: Macmillan, 1993, p.  83.

Heritage Noire

143

A Particular Public
When the film opened in the UK it arrived promising to scare audiences more than
any film had ever done before. The first time I  saw  it, on Halloween at  the  Ritzy
Cinema in Brixton, South London, I was intrigued rather than frightened and the
restlessness in the audience seemed more like boredom than terror. This was  not
what I expected and so I decided to go and see it again in Bristol, and this time to
spend more time listening to the audience during and after the showing. Of course,
this isn’t exactly  an experiment under controlled conditions, but the responses of
the two audiences were similar enough to suggest a pattern. The audiences that I sat
with  didn’t  respond  as  American  audiences  apparently  had. They  were  politely
interested but unmoved. When I came out of the Bristol showing I overheard two
young men behind me:

Were you scared?

No, not really. It was like watching some people getting lost in a park.

If you were being supercilious, you might say that this was because British audiences
are more sophisticated and less easily fooled than their American counterparts, but
possibly you would be wrong.

The  reasons  for  the  different  responses  between  the  two  audiences,  I  would
contend, are very deep, and are historically and culturally based. The elements that
make up the film, especially in relationship to reality, landscape and ideas of good
and  evil,  are  particularly American. They  are  perhaps  not  just  American, but  of
Americans with a  particular ancestry and historical sense of themselves. In other
writings I  have  referred to the descendants of the early white  settlers of America,
Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada  and  South  Africa  as  being  post-colonial  in
outlook.1 3 In retrospect I think I was wrong. Post-colonial, as an epithet, would be
more appropriately applied to those ex-colonies in India and Africa where there was
no  significant  European settlement. The  descendants of  the  white  settlers of  the
major ex-British dominions, mentioned above,  may  not be politically linked with
Britain  anymore,  but  they  remain,  culturally  and  temperamentally,  European
colonists. They  perceive  their  history  in  European  terms,  and  they  see  a  clear
cultural difference between themselves and the native people of whichever continent
they have  colonised. They are undoubtedly post-imperial but, as yet,  they are not
post-colonial  societies.  I  don’t  know  if  they  ever  can  be,  for,  unlike  India,  the
colonisers have never left, and are not likely to.

The public of this film are (actually and metaphorically) the descendants of the
first European colonists of North America. This film plays on a shared public sense
of history which underpins what I will call `colonial anxiety’ , i.e. a relationship to a

13. See S.J.  Morgan, `The ghost in the luggage: Wallace and Braveheart: post-colonial pioneer
identities’ , European Journal of Cultural Studies, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1999, pp. 375± 392.

144

Sally J. Morgan

landscape that remains alien and threatening, irredeemably foreign and hostile even
200 years after its settlement. Whilst it may be argued that a contemporary British
conception of landscape is rooted in the post-Enlightenment Arcadian-ism of the
18th  century, one might equally argue, as Marx indeed did, that  an earlier, post-
Reformation idea of landscape as wilderness underpins a particular American view
of the land.14 The American landscape held a particular dread for its English settlers
from their earliest contact with it. The woods, and the terrible things within them,
consumed the  colonists  from  the  days  of  the  very  first  plantations,  as  the  early
colonies were called. When John Smith, the Governor of the first English settlement,
Roanoke, returned to  it  after  three years’   absence in England,  he  found that  the
settlement  was  overgrown  and  deserted  and,  although  there  were  no  signs  of
violence, the settlers had completely disappeared:

We went along by the waterside, towards the point of the creek to see if we could find
any of their boats or pinnace, but we could perceive no sign of them . . . this could be
no other than the deed of the savages  our enemies.1 5

The next settlement, Sagadahoc, was quickly abandoned and Jamestown, the third
settlement, fared little better; in 1610, only three years after having been founded,
its inhabitants were in the process of deserting it when they met the English supply
boat sent to relieve them. They obviously had settled in a hostile environment and
they were an unhappy group of people. They tried to abandon the settlement on at
least three more occasions and were only with great difficulty dissuaded from doing
so,  sometimes  at  gunpoint,  by  their  Governor,  John  Smith.1 6 Beset  by  disease,
hunger and hostile native people, they often lapsed into melancholia. Brogan quotes
an early settler as complaining that `more do die here of the disease of their mind
than of their body.’ 17

The  next  wave  of  colonists,  the  first  successful North  American settlers,  were
what we would now term Puritans, people who found themselves out of place in the
England of their day, but more terrifyingly out of place in the land they arrived to
colonise. For  the  most  part,  they  were  drawn  from  a  particular  urban  sector  of
society and were what Christopher Hill terms (in a phrase borrowed from Slingesby
Bethal,  the  17th-century  anti-papist),  `the  industrious sort  of  people’ .18 If  they

14. K. Marx, cited in L. Buell, The environmental  imagination: Thoreau, nature writing and the formation
of American culture, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995, p. 60.

15. J. White, `The lost colony’  (extract from journal entry of 17 August 1590), in David Colbert (ed.)
Eyewitness  to America, New York: Vintage, 1998, p. 17.

16. H. Brogan, The Penguin  history of the United  States  of America, London: Penguin, 1990, p.  20.

17. Ibid., p.  21.

18. C. Hill, Society  and Puritanism in pre-revolutionary England, London: Secker & Warburg, 1964, p.
107.

Heritage Noire

145

weren’t  farmers  when  they  arrived  in  America, and  most  of  them  weren’t,  they
certainly felt that that was what was required of themÐ
that taming the land was a
moral imperative required by God. Andrew McRae has written about an agrarian
revolution occurring during the same period as the rise of Puritanism. This is the
culture of  agricultural improvement in  which  men were `propelled by  a  sense of
moral  duty  to  exploit  more  efficiently  the  riches  of  the  natural  world’ .19 John
Norden, author of an influential manual on husbandry, wrote in 1610:

Land is given to man, to the end that he should till it, manure it, and dresse it: namely,
he should set, sow and plant upon it, and in due discretion to convert every place to his
fittest fruite.2 0

The Pilgrims who began the serious colonisation of Northern America, then, were
urban householders who were confronted with the wild, pre-agrarian landscape of
New England and a Protestant God’s command to set, sow and plant upon it. An
additional  ingredient  in  this  mindset,  according  to  K.V. Thomas,  is  that  where
Catholicism tolerated and incorporated magic, Protestantism did not21 and so, in a
sense, invented it  as  a  problem. As a  consequence, in addition to  the  fear  of  the
woods that a mainly urban people had brought with them to the colonies, they had,
as Protestants, also imported a new and very potent paranoia, fear of witches and
magic.  In  the  settlers’   imagination,  it  may  be  argued,  there  was  an  elision  of  a
number of very potent fears, all of which came together in the location of the woods;
fear manifested as `Place’ .

The 18th century settler Crevecoeur, in his 1782 book, Letters from an American
farmer,  lists  a  number  of  reasons  for  fearing  the  woods. To  begin  with  its  very
proximity is seen as polluting:

By living in or near the woods, their actions are regulated by the wildness of the
neighbourhood . . . This surrounding hostility immediately puts the gun into their
hands: they . . . soon become professed hunters. This is the progress. Once hunters,
farewell to the plough. The chase renders them ferocious, gloomy and unsocial. A
hunter wants no neighbour; he rather hates them, because he dreads the competition.2 2

According  to  Crevecoeur,  proximity  to  the  woods  caused  moral  degeneracy,
idleness and  a  general  godlessness. In  the  wilderness there  were `no  temples  or

19. J. Thirsk, cited in A. McRae, `Husbandry manuals and the language of agrarian improvement’ ,  in
M. Leslie & T. Raylor (eds) Culture and cultivation  in Early Modern England, Leicester: Leicester
University Press, 1992, p.  36.

20. J. Norden, cited in ibid.,  p. 51.

21. K.V. Thomas,  Religion and the decline  of magic, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973, cited in C.S.L.
Davies, Peace, print and Protestantism 1450± 1558, London: Paladin 1977, p. 325.

22. J. Hector St John De Crevecoeur, S. Manning (ed.) Letters from an American farmer,  Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997 (original unedited version 1782), p. 53.

146

Sally J. Morgan

ministers’ , indeed, the very `name of religion . . . would be lost in the immensity of
these woods’ .23 The woods are godless, then, a place where even the best of people
could lose their souls, their minds and their lives.

The `Woods’   became the  thing  that Americans battled  against  on a  number of
accounts. They struggled against it as the actual wilderness that God had required
that they turn to cultivation and profit; and as the wilderness of the soul, the dark
place where God would not find them and where all sorts of terrors could prey on
them. It is in these New World woods that the makers of The Blair Witch Project set
their filmÐ
the  godless, pagan  woods of  an  irredeemably and perpetually foreign
country. The woods in which, according to the  Puritan New England villagers of
Hawthorne’s novel The Scarlet  Letter,  the  Devil  walks  abroad as  a  dark man. The
woods, where in 1970s’  films like Southern Comfort and Deliverance (referred to by
name  in The  Blair Witch  Project)  city  folk  are  hunted,  raped  and  killed  by  the
wilderness’s  degenerate  inhabitants. These  are  the  backwoods  of  the  American
psyche where, in David Lynch’s late 1980s’  TV series, and 1992 film Twin Peaks, the
depths are filled with depravity, violence and magic. People disappear, people are
murdered, people return after a long disappearance with no memory of what  has
happened  to  them. The  woods  of The  Blair Witch  Project are  the  quintessential,
Godless, American wilderness, peopled with phantoms, devils and savages.

Conclusion
Critics have seen The Blair Witch Project as an important milestone in the history of
cinema because of its use of cheap, accessible technology and its place outside the
studio  system.24 I  would  agree  with  this  view,  but,  as  I  have  shown,  its  greater
importance lies in the ways that it challenges the fundamental precepts of discourses
such as history and archaeology, and makes us question the ways that we come to
believe.  The  project  causes  us  to  interrogate  our  assumptions  around  the
relationship  of  Truth  to  narrative  and  to  scientific  methodology.  It  does  this
through its subversive and subtle re-figuring of familiar historical stories, whereby
the evidence it shows to the target audience seems familiar and convincing because
it borrows from histories and myths that they already half know. The narrative in The
Blair Witch Project is implicit rather than explicit. The audience is not given a story,
it is given evidence, and out of that evidence the audience itself makes the narrative;
the facts seem to speak for themselves. However, in this case, the facts, or rather the
methodology,  manipulates  us  into  mistaking  fiction  for  reality,  as  does  its  form,
which plays on our expectation that some forms of filmic representation are more
real or truthful than others.

The  Blair Witch  Project makes  unashamed use  of  a  plethora  of  references that
indicate Settler America’s uneasy and fearful relationship to that continent’s natural,

23. Ibid.

24. Newsnight, BBC2, Thursday 18 May 2000.

Heritage Noire

147

pre-agrarian landscape and  its  apparent  ability  to `un-civilise’ .  It  makes  knowing
reference to the Salem Witch Trials, to settlements that disappear, to sacred Indian
grounds, to European witchcraft being practised in the deep woods. It does this by
clever allusion rather than  by direct quotation and draws on an  assumed body of
shared knowledge, knowledge that exists somewhere between fact and myth.25 This
knowledge, as I have said earlier, is part of a kind of public history, an idea of the
past that affects our understanding of the present, and which is arrived at, almost
unconsciously, through the informal accumulation and clutter of myth and history
which is part and parcel of our everyday culture. If positive myths of the past are
structured  into  what  we  tend  to  call  heritage,  i.e.  shared  narratives  affirming  a
positive sense of self and region or nation, then The Blair Witch Project takes the same
notion and turns it on its head. It gives us, or rather its targeted audience, a dark
sense  of  history,  a  heritage  noire,  which  in  turn  unsettles  its  confidence  in  the
present.

Acknowledgements
This paper is a version of that given at `Public History Now: First National Public
History Conference’ , Ruskin College Oxford, 20 May 2000. My thanks go to Hilda
Kean and to the conference participants for their contribution to the development
of the paper.

25. For further discussion on this point see R. Samuel & P. Thompson, The myths we live by, London:
Routledge, 1990, pp.  1± 21.

148

Sally J. Morgan


