International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Unauthorising popular music heritage: outline of a
critical framework

Les Roberts & Sara Cohen

To cite this article: Les Roberts & Sara Cohen (2014) Unauthorising popular music heritage:
outline of a critical framework, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20:3, 241-261, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2012.750619
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.750619

Published online: 14 Jan 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1149

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 22 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2014
Vol. 20, No. 3, 241–261, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.750619

Unauthorising popular music heritage: outline of a critical
framework

Les Roberts* and Sara Cohen

Institute of Popular Music, University of Liverpool, 80–82 Bedford Street South, Liverpool
L69 7WW, UK
(Received 22 June 2012; ﬁnal version received 14 November 2012)

The purpose of this paper is to set out a critical and analytical framework with
which to explore the ways in which popular music heritage in the UK (or in
England more speciﬁcally) is variously understood, discussed, critiqued, prac-
tised or performed. Developed as part of a large-scale European project examin-
ing popular music, cultural heritage and cultural memory, our analysis is based
on qualitative studies of popular music heritage discourses that reﬂect a broad
cross section of sectors, institutions and industries. Adapting Smith’s concept of
authorised heritage discourse, we propose a three-way analytical framework that
theoretically and methodologically foregrounds those practices and processes of
authorisation that variously ascribe music heritage discourses with value, legiti-
macy and social and cultural capital. Focusing our discussion on the example of
music heritage plaques, we identify three categories of heritage discourse: (1)
ofﬁcial authorised popular music heritage, (2) self-authorised popular music her-
itage and (3) unauthorised popular music heritage. The arguments developed in
the ﬁnal section of the paper in relation to unauthorised music heritage are pre-
sented as a critical point of orientation – heritage-as-praxis – that works in dia-
lectical opposition to authorised heritage, or what we have more loosely termed
‘big H’ heritage.
Keywords: popular music; cultural heritage; plaques; praxis; ofﬁcial; intangible
heritage; anti-heritage; English Heritage; Heritage Foundation

Introduction
In March 2012, a plaque was installed on a property in London’s Heddon Street by
the Crown Estate, which runs a £7 billion property portfolio on behalf of the Queen
and the public estate. Its black colour distinguished it from the blue or green plaque
schemes run by English Heritage and Westminster Council, and engraved across it
in white were the words ‘Ziggy Stardust 1972’ to show that it marked the site
where 40 years previously David Bowie had been photographed for the cover of his
album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars. According
to Britain’s Daily Mail newspaper, it was one of only three plaques in the country
awarded to a ﬁctional character,
the others awarded to the detective Sherlock
Holmes (at 221b Baker Street, London) and the explorer Lara Croft (a block of ﬂats
in Derby).1 A representative from the Crown Estate explained to The Times: ‘This

*Corresponding author. Email: les.roberts@liverpool.ac.uk

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

242

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

will be for the foreseeable future a one-off. It needs to be. We don’t want to litter
the place with plaques, that would demean what we are trying to do’.2 Yet, despite
this description of the plaque as a ‘one-off’, it was one of a proliferation of popular
music plaques that have been erected in the UK and elsewhere in recent years. Of
course, what might count as ‘popular music heritage’ extends far beyond the erec-
tion of heritage plaques. These are merely one part of a multi-faceted music heri-
tage discourse in the UK and beyond but are nevertheless insightful in so far as
they illustrate the ways in which music heritage increasingly encompasses a range
of practices that are not reducible to ‘the music itself’ but linked to the wider
social, cultural and economic processes surrounding the production and consump-
tion of popular music histories and music heritage canons.

In western modernity, music has been commonly thought of as a bounded
object, product, text or thing with a ﬁxed and deﬁnable essence, as suggested by
the notion of ‘the music itself’. Yet as Born emphasises, music is never singular but
always a multiplicity, and it exists only in and through its multiple and changing
mediations. There is, thus, no musical object or text that stands outside mediation
(Born 2010, pp. 87–88). Contributing to this process of mediation are heritage prac-
tices such as the construction of music exhibitions and museums, monuments and
tours, collections and archives, books and ﬁlms.3 Material places and artefacts are,
thus, an important aspect of popular music heritage and our concern is with heritage
practices that relate these material sites to musicians and musical sounds and perfor-
mances. In the UK heritage plaques have increasingly been used in this way, mark-
ing places where musicians lived or died, places in which music was made or, as
with the Ziggy Stardust plaque, people and places imagined through music. These
plaques represent different and often competing interests and, thus, provide a fasci-
nating focus for research into the politics of music, memory and place whilst also
prompting debates about musical value that have been so central to popular music
studies.

In this regard, in the UK at least, where the number of music heritage plaques
is growing all the time and where heritage and the heritage industries are particu-
larly well-entrenched features of the cultural and economic landscape, the example
of plaques brings with it the recognition that the central issue in popular music heri-
tage is not music per se but the constellation of heritage practices that attach them-
selves to – and extract social, symbolic and economic capital from – popular
cultural forms such as music.

Taking, then, as its main point of focus the case of commemorative plaque
schemes, this paper sets out a critical and analytical framework through which to
explore popular music heritage in the UK (and in England more speciﬁcally) and
the ways in which it is practised, discussed and understood. In England, popular
music has been increasingly categorised as ‘heritage’ by individuals, groups and
institutions operating across a broad range of sectors,4 yet according to Lowenthal,
‘heritage today all but deﬁes deﬁnition’ (1996, p. 94), and Roberts (this volume)
points to some of the difﬁculties involved, such as the close intertwining of heritage
with memory, nostalgia and tradition; the tautological notion of ‘cultural heritage’
(Ashworth et al. 2007, p. 7); and the perplexing distinction between ‘tangible’ and
‘intangible’ heritage. Much like the term ‘culture’, the concept of ‘heritage’ mar-
shals a jumble of overlapping, disparate and at times contradictory meanings and a
burgeoning array of perspectives that frustrate attempts to pin it down. Moreover,
whilst expanding scholarly research on cultural heritage and constructions of the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

243

popular music past has produced rich and insightful studies (such as those cited in
this paper) there is as yet little connection between the two bodies of scholarship
and the notion of popular music as heritage is still relatively undertheorised.

The paper explores popular music heritage by drawing on qualitative research
conducted for the ﬁrst phase of an international collaborative project entitled ‘Popu-
lar Music Heritage, Cultural Memory and Cultural Identity’ (POPID).5 The research
involved interviewing representatives from the music and media industries and tour-
ism and heritage sector in order to examine histories of English popular music cre-
ated through ﬁlms, books, exhibitions and plaques, and to build a picture of
English popular music heritage. The second phase of the project, which is at the
time of writing only just about to begin, will involve research on audiences and
their musical memories in order to explore how popular music contributes to a
broader sense of place, history and identity in England. These two research phases
could be conceptualised in terms of a contrast between a heritage that is ‘ofﬁcial’
or top-down and one that is ‘unofﬁcial’ and bottom-up. Yet, this is a somewhat
rigid binarism, and one that could misleadingly imply a hierarchy of power and
authenticity, such as a pejoratively ofﬁcial ‘canon’ that threatens to overwrite or
hegemonise what might be perceived in contrast as the organically homespun
authority of vernacular memory. Instead, we aim to provide a more nuanced discus-
sion of popular music heritage that does not assess its perceived authenticity or sta-
tus but conceptualises it as a social and cultural process and considers how it is
practised or ‘performed’ in speciﬁc situations and contexts, often for different ends.
Scholars, such as Harvey (2008, p. 19) and Smith (2006, p. 34), have likewise stud-
ied the various meanings and uses of cultural heritage and how they are socially,
spatially and temporally enacted, and, as such, constantly remade and negotiated.
Smith, for example, challenges the notion of heritage as something that has intrinsic
value, arguing instead that ‘understanding [that] what heritage is and does may be
deﬁned by the discourses we work within’ (2006, p. 54, emphasis in original). She
illustrates this by focusing on what she describes as an authorised heritage discourse
(AHD), and our paper builds upon and adapts this by highlighting three categories
of discourse about popular music as heritage that we have so far identiﬁed through
our research in England: ofﬁcially authorised, self-authorised and unauthorised.

The paper’s three sections describe each of these categories in turn and provide,
through this typology, a critical framework for analysing the various ways in which
popular music heritage is not simply practised but also authorised and ascribed with
value, legitimacy and social and cultural capital. From the outset, however, it is
important to stress that our categorisation of popular music into three types of dis-
course is analytic rather than ontological, and the analytical focus is on the weight
of authority attached to them. It is, thus, on the recognition and validation of heri-
tage status and how ‘particular representations of the past … embody an intention-
ality – social, political, institutional and so on – that promotes or authorises their
entry [in the public domain]’ (Wood 1999, p. 2,
in Kansteinher 2002, p. 188,
emphasis added). As the discussion will show, the three categories are ﬂuid, shifting
and closely interrelated, and the distinction between them is ambiguous and blurred.
The paper argues, however,
that attending to these categories and the interplay
between them enables an approach to popular music heritage that moves beyond
familiar binary divisions (such as ofﬁcial/unofﬁcial) in order to explore its dynamics
as a situated, relational practice involving various, often contested negotiations of
the musical past. Lastly, although we have called this paper ‘Unauthorising Popular

244

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

Music Heritage’, the bulk of our analysis is in fact concerned with authorised popu-
lar music heritage. The arguments we have developed in relation to unauthorised
music heritage are presented as a critical point of orientation – heritage-as-praxis –
that works in dialectical opposition to authorised heritage, or what we have more
loosely termed ‘big H’ Heritage.

Ofﬁcial authorised popular music heritage
Heritage can be ofﬁcially authorised in a number of different ways. In the UK, for
example, government bodies may categorise a building as ‘heritage’ by including it
on an ofﬁcial register or awarding it a commemorative plaque. This gives it a spe-
cial status and may have moral and legal implications, increasing its value and
importance and making it worth protecting and placing under formal protection. For
Smith, such practices illustrate an AHD, a set of western ideas that is supported by
elite social groups and ofﬁcial organisations and policies, and, therefore, has power
and inﬂuence. Drawing on examples from the UK, the USA and Australia, she
shows how this AHD represents a ‘canon’ in that it produces and reproduces ideas
about what is worth being classiﬁed and promoted as heritage and where its value
lies. She illustrates not only some of the practices involved but the ways in which
this discourse is responded to and struggles over who controls it and how. Other
scholars have likewise highlighted the dissonant character of cultural heritage: how
it attracts differing and often conﬂicting perspectives and interpretations and raises
questions about cultural value and diversity, social power and inclusion (Tunbridge
and Ashworth 1996, Hall 2005).

The various plaque schemes authorised by UK central and local government
bodies, which commonly involve the erection of plaques marking sites connected to
writers, composers, scientists, philanthropists and so on, can be described as an act
of consecration that illustrates notions of cultural, social and artistic value and sepa-
rates the great from the good, imposing discrete distinctions and producing ‘discon-
tinuity out of continuity’ (Bourdieu 1991, Allen and Lincoln 2004, pp. 873–874).
Increasingly, it is an act inﬂuenced by economic factors and the use of plaques for
place marketing purposes is linked to the development of tourism and heritage
industries in cities and regions. The introduction of plaques commemorating popular
musicians is a relatively recent development and the discussion below illustrates this
by using the blue plaque scheme of English Heritage as an example of an ofﬁcial
heritage discourse, and shows how the case of Keith Moon highlights some of the
tensions and ambiguities involved.

Blue plaques and the case of Keith Moon
The UK Government Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) includes
heritage and tourism amongst its portfolio of activities, and works alongside English
Heritage, the government’s statuary advisor on the historic environment, to manage
and conserve ‘the physical
legacy of thousands of years of human activity in
[England], in the form of buildings, monuments, sites and landscapes’.6 Although
our attempts to interview the Minister for Tourism and Heritage proved unsuccess-
ful, in their reply to our request, the DCMS stated that ‘[the ministers] of course
recognise the important role and vibrant contribution of popular music to UK
tourism and heritage’, drawing our attention to English Heritage’s Blue Plaque

International Journal of Heritage Studies

245

scheme, and citing the example of the zebra crossing at Abbey Road (immortalised
on the cover of the Beatles album of the same name) as a ‘listed building’ that has
a strong connection with popular music (in 2010, the crossing was given Grade II
listed status following advice from English Heritage).

What is clear from the DCMS’s reply is that, from an ofﬁcial heritage stand-
point, what counts as ‘popular music heritage’ extends only to tangible sites or
buildings, such as Mendips, John Lennon’s childhood home in Liverpool or the
Abbey Road crossing in London. In a BBC news report about the Abbey Road list-
ing, a spokesperson from English Heritage explained that listings reﬂect sites of
architectural or historic interest, or in this case, a site that ‘has got cultural interest
in spades’.7 However, as with the Cavern Club in Liverpool, the Abbey Road cross-
ing is not the original and is sited in a different location. Functioning as a form of
what Dean MacCannell has termed ‘staged authenticity’ (1976), and as a pilgrimage
site (the hallowed ground upon which the Fab Four once trod), its cultural heritage
status is, therefore, as much attached to the idea the crossing represents as an intan-
gible cultural icon (an image from an album cover) as it is to an actual ‘authentic’
site, the materiality of which is conserved and protected for posterity. Similar obser-
vations can be made for the gates to the site of the former Strawberry Field Salva-
tion Army Children’s Home in Liverpool. To prevent damage by the constant
stream of Beatle’s tourists seeking out the location that inspired John Lennon’s
1967 song ‘Strawberry Fields Forever’, the original gates were replaced with repli-
cas which allow for ‘an authentic experience’8 without the attendant risk of damage
to the authentic object. Such examples point to sustainability through simulation,
and the consumption of a tangible heritage site but also of an intangible heritage
experience.

While it may indeed be the case that the Abbey Road crossing or Mendips
exude cultural interest ‘in spades’, in terms of ‘marking’ (MacCannell 1976) popu-
lar music heritage sites (whether by blue plaques or by awarding listed status), the
examples raise questions as to the criteria used for the evaluation of heritage status,
and why some sites are deemed worthy and others not. Many sites linked to popu-
lar music histories are, of course, of interest culturally. So what makes one stand
out as an ofﬁcial heritage monument and another merely as a site of general or ver-
nacular cultural interest? If Abbey Road, then why not also Waterloo Bridge, the
location where The Kinks’ Ray Davies was inspired to write his iconic hymn to
London, ‘Waterloo Sunset?’ What about the tree in Barnes in south-west London
where Marc Bolan died in a car accident in 1977? It has long been a place of pil-
grimage for Bolan fans, and is certainly a marked site as a ‘rock shrine’, but by
what measure is it possible to gauge whether it has more ‘cultural interest’ that just
those handful of Beatles-related sites that are afforded ‘ofﬁcial’ heritage status?
What about historically important venues or festival sites, such as the 100 Club in
London, the crucible of punk in the 1970s or the site of the original Isle of Wight
Music Festival? Do not they also have cultural interest in spades?

A good place to begin to address these questions is to consider the role (or
‘place’) of popular music in heritage initiatives such as English Heritage’s blue pla-
que scheme. At the time of writing, there are only three English Heritage plaques
honouring the life and work of popular musicians,
two of which are for John
Lennon (the one at Mendips, installed in 2000 and now managed by the National
Trust and another at the Montagu Square ﬂat in London that was Lennon’s home
for a few months in 1968), the third for Jimi Hendrix at the house in Mayfair where

246

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

he lived in the late 1960s. English Heritage outlines a number of criteria used for
the evaluation of names suggested for commemorative blue plaques. These include
the requirements that: ‘there shall be reasonable grounds for believing that the sub-
jects are regarded as eminent by a majority of members of their own profession or
calling’; ‘they shall have made some important positive contribution to human wel-
fare or happiness’; ‘they shall have had such exceptional and outstanding personali-
ties that the well-informed passer-by immediately recognises their names’; and that,
‘[w]ithout exception proposals for the commemoration of famous people shall not
be considered until they have been dead for 20 years or until the centenary of birth,
whichever is the earlier’ (see English Heritage 2010, p. 144).

Alongside the published criteria, there are also other factors that have bearing
on the evaluation process and indicate a certain ambivalence surrounding the hon-
ouring of rock and pop musicians. According to a member of English Heritage’s
Blue Plaques Team we interviewed, the controversial (and in many ways landmark)
decision to award Jimi Hendrix a commemorative plaque prompted many members
of English Heritage to resign in protest believing that ﬁgures such as Hendrix – seen
as ‘ephemeral’ in terms of their cultural signiﬁcance and of dubious moral character
(particularly with reference to drug taking9) – were not the sort of people who the
organisation should be seen to be honouring as heritage icons.10 The issue of
ephemerality, addressed in part by the 20-year dead rule and considered not to
apply in the case of Hendrix, is nevertheless cited by our interviewee as one of the
foremost reasons why so few popular musicians have been awarded ofﬁcial heritage
status. The factor that swung it for Hendrix, and which marked him out as some-
thing other than ‘just some pop star’, was his likely appeal ‘to a certain kind of
classically trained person on the virtuoso level’, which is cited as the probable rea-
son why Hendrix was the ﬁrst pop musician to get through (the plaque was erected
in 1997). In other words, it was his legacy as a musician of considerable artistic
merit and innovation that made him eligible, rather than his status as an important
cultural icon in post-war popular music history; an indication, perhaps, of leanings
towards a Leavisite approach to culture as serious and high-brow, catered to the
tastes of the educated and discerning listener rather than the vagaries and mass
appeal of (pejoratively) popular forms of cultural consumption.

That it is the proﬁciency and skills of the musician as a performing artist rather
than questions of character, personality or cultural iconicity that are brought to bear
on the evaluation process is well illustrated by the case of the Who drummer Keith
Moon, who died in 1978. The English Heritage position is that, as a rock drummer,
Moon needs to be measured against his contemporaries, and our interviewee cited
Led Zeppelin’s John Bonham (also deceased) as an obvious example. He explained
that for the Blue Plaque Team, the questions the case of Moon’s nomination raises
are: ‘Is he the most signiﬁcant drummer of that era?’, adding, ‘Would we commem-
orate the most signiﬁcant drummer anyway?’; ‘Has enough time elapsed to deter-
mine how much of an original he was?’; ‘How much of his fame is actually
connected with the hell-raising [i.e. Moon’s reputation as the wild man of rock]?’
As with all of the plaque nominations, the ﬁnal judgement as to whether Moon was
deemed worthy of honouring lay with the Blue Plaques Panel which is made up of
distinguished ﬁgures from the arts and academia, such as Stephen Fry, Christopher
Frayling, the historians David Cannadine and David Starkey or the former poet lau-
reate Andrew Motion. The view of the panel was that the case had not been sufﬁ-
ciently proved, so, after consideration,
the application was eventually rejected.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

247

that met

Frayling, who was on the panel
to consider the Moon application,
remarked that in order to properly assess whether he was a great drummer ‘you’d
have to wait until Ringo Starr is dead and [Phil] Collins is dead … We decided that
bad behaviour and overdosing on various substances wasn’t a sufﬁcient qualiﬁca-
tion to get a blue plaque’.11 The idea that the plaque might commemorate the cul-
tural legacy of Moon the character rather than Moon the drummer, or, as with
Hendrix, that it might be seen to be inappropriate to honour someone with a reputa-
tion for drug use, was the justiﬁcation for the application to be rejected. Moreover,
for English Heritage, the fact that many of Moon’s contemporaries are still living
further complicates the matter, perhaps bringing with it the expectation that they too
(or rather their surviving descendants) can look forward to the unveiling of heritage
plaques in their honour. Considered by the representative from English Heritage to
be a ‘cut above’, the Who drummer, John Lennon, unlike Moon, was also ‘a writer
as well as a player’. He was, thus, seen as a more appropriate musician to honour,
although the rationale behind the distinction, while broadly in accordance with the
published selection criteria, is upon closer inspection in many respects quite arbi-
trary and subject to the personal judgements and prejudices of those panel members
that happened to be assessing the application on the occasion in question.

The contradictions and general ambiguities surrounding the criteria for honour-
ing ﬁgures from popular culture history would doubtless be readily acknowledged
by many at English Heritage. Sensitivities to a perceived charge of elitism in terms
of who and what English Heritage consider worthy of cultural heritage status, and a
push amongst some within the organisation to embrace more popular and vernacular
cultural forms, can in part be gauged by considering how the term ‘cultural heri-
tage’ is applied and understood more generally. In response to this question, our
interviewee replied:

I would certainly deﬁne it broadly. As far as I’m concerned, it needs to be a lot more
than palaces and stately homes; I would go on that side of that particular argument …
[Cultural heritage is] everything really. It’s got to include popular culture as well as
high culture and it’s important to strike a balance, otherwise you are just leaving a lot
of people [and their stories] out of it. And, of course, what one generation considers
to be popular culture/mass culture suddenly becomes high culture for the next – it
develops in the way it is considered, and that is very hard to call as well.

As well as highlighting the difﬁculties in determining where and how to draw the
boundaries between eligible and ineligible forms of cultural heritage, the response
makes clear that what the term actually means in practice is contested and partial,
and that, at an individual rather than institutional level, what might count as ‘cultur-
ally signiﬁcant’ forms of popular music heritage are not necessarily those that are
reﬂected in ofﬁcial AHDs; in this case, the English Heritage blue plaques scheme.
Given these circumstances,
is perhaps not surprising that representatives of
English Heritage welcomed the emergence of rival ‘unofﬁcial’ heritage plaque
initiatives explained in the following section of the paper.

it

Self-authorised popular music heritage
If government-sponsored bodies, such as English Heritage, are examples of ofﬁcial
authorised popular music heritage, then should the countless other discourses of
popular music history and heritage that populate the landscapes of everyday cultural

248

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

consumption be understood as in some way less or unofﬁcial? The authorising
power of the music and media industries is no less ofﬁcial in terms of ascribing a
certain legitimacy and status to popular music texts, artefacts or sites as heritage
icons. This may involve promoting through the mass media ‘ofﬁcial’ lists and can-
ons of revered artists and albums, iconic events and festivals12 or the staple mythol-
ogies of popular music journalism. It may also involve the launch of ‘heritage rock’
magazines such as Mojo, Uncut, or Classic Rock; the release of lavishly re-pack-
aged box-set editions of classic albums; the production and broadcast of nostalgic
music documentaries and so on. Popular music heritage may likewise be promoted
by musicians, audiences, entrepreneurs and organisations who participate in particu-
lar musical cultures. Becker (1982) illustrates how notions of value and achieve-
‘worlds’ and the social and
ment are established and reinforced through art
ideological conventions that distinguish them, and this is evident in the construction
of popular music as ‘heritage’ within local genre-based music scenes, whether it
involves ‘do-it-yourself (DIY) heritage’ initiatives such as the revival of the 1960s
Canterbury Sound (Bennett 2004) or the celebration of country music as Liverpool
heritage (Cohen 2007). In addition to this, popular music heritage may be promoted
by the tourism industries and as part of commercial place-marketing initiatives, as
illustrated by maps of popular music heritage sites such as England Rocks!, devel-
oped by the UK’s national tourism body Visit Britain in 2007 (Cohen and Roberts
forthcoming).

Developed alongside their ofﬁcial counterparts, many DIY, localised or vernacu-
lar popular music heritage discourses can be described as self – rather than ofﬁ-
cially authorised, although again it is important to emphasise the ambiguity of these
categories. No matter how much authority is assumed through processes of
self-validation, claims to (or solicitations of) some form of ofﬁcial status may
invariably play an important role in terms of marketing and publicity, or ensuring
the sustainability and development of the heritage initiative or resource in question.
Ofﬁcial and self-authorised discourses may, thus, be closely interrelated and reafﬁrm
or contradict one another. As we discuss below, there may also be efforts to ascribe
self-authorised heritage with a more ofﬁcially authorised heritage status.

‘Unofﬁcial’ plaques and democratised heritage
From the perspective of English Heritage, the difﬁculties and controversies attached
to bestowing ofﬁcial heritage status on popular musicians are to a certain extent cir-
cumvented by tacitly endorsing the authority of rival plaques schemes and, in the
process, effectively franchising out the evaluation and awarding of popular music
heritage plaques to other organisations whose selection criteria are far less stringent.
In this respect, in addition to overseeing its own blue plaque scheme, the remit of
English Heritage now extends to providing an advisory role to other commemora-
tive plaques schemes, such as that developed by the charity the Heritage Foundation
which in 2009 unveiled its own plaque to Moon.

Aside from the more obvious absence of ofﬁcial government endorsement, not
to mention the kind of gilt-edged symbolic capital that marks out bodies, such as
English Heritage as prestigious public institutions, the main distinction between its
and the Heritage Foundation’s plaque scheme is that the latter is an example of
self-authorised popular music heritage. Whereas English Heritage’s role is to evalu-
ate heritage plaque nominations made by members of the public (Freddie Mercury,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

249

having died more than 20 years ago, is likely to be the next popular musician ofﬁ-
the Heritage Foundation’s plaque scheme operates on a more
cially honoured),
informal and culturally inclusive basis. From its initiation in 1991 (as The Dead
Comics Society, later to become Comic Heritage13), the Heritage Foundation has
mainly developed from the interests and background of its chairman and co-founder
David Graham. Graham, a retired marketing consultant, has drawn effectively on
his previous professional skills to establish a plaque scheme designed to raise both
greater awareness of the contribution and legacy of British entertainers as well as
the proﬁle of (and donations for) the charities which the organisation supports (such
as the Royal Air Force Bomber Command Memorial Fund Appeal). The plaques
commemorate ﬁgures from the world of show business and entertainment and are
commissioned either directly by Graham and the Foundation or by friends or fans
of the celebrity in question (a plaque unveiled to the ska singer Laurel Aitken, who
lived in a council block in Leicester, resulted from a recommendation by the sing-
er’s widow). Unlike English Heritage, the Foundation applies no formal eligibility
criteria other than that the recipient must be deceased (although there have been
exceptions to this ruling too, as with the plaque erected in 2008 to the Bee Gees
which was unveiled by former Bee Gee himself, Robin Gibb, who, until several
months before his death from cancer in May 2012, was the president of the Heri-
tage Foundation). In most instances, the minimum requirements are merely that a
name has been put forward.

As self-authorised markers of heritage status, the only real obstacles to over-
come in terms of authorising a plaque are bureaucratic and ﬁnancial: e.g. gaining,
where necessary, approval from local authorities to permanently erect the plaque; or
attracting corporate sponsorship to cover the costs of the unveiling (which are typi-
cally attended by celebrities and local or national media). Authority is exercised
through the intentionality of the individual(s) – whether friends, family members,
fans, etc. – who propose the award. It is self-validating in so far as it is not subject
to the ofﬁcial approval of a legitimising institution or panel of experts and peers.
The publicity generated by debate surrounding the Keith Moon plaque (rejected by
English Heritage and subsequently awarded by the Heritage Foundation14) helped
confer the impression of a democratising or inclusive idea of cultural heritage which
placed emphasis not so much on the legacy of the musician as professional or virtu-
oso artist as on his character and personality as a cultural icon.15 For Graham,
Moon’s reputation as a drummer is only part of the story:

[He was a] Raving nutter! But what a nutter. What a drummer. What a character. We
remember him and pay tribute to him, a) because he was a drummer for the Who, b)
because he was such a character and c) because of the public’s perception of him as a
drummer, a person and a member of the Who. It is all those things rolled into one. He
was one of the great characters of music.

When asked to comment on English Heritage’s more narrow eligibility criteria with
regard to plaque nominations, Graham replied:

You’ve got to look at plaques in such a way as to say to yourself: this person deserves
a plaque not just because they were top of their profession, whether it was a singer or
a sportsman, but maybe because of what they contributed to the fans, to the followers,
in terms of charisma and general entertainment, or the fact that they were so loved.
Because that’s another criteria.

250

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

However, looked upon as another criteria, the extent to which a musician was loved
by his or her fans is an extraordinarily difﬁcult factor to measure. By deﬁnition, a
popular musician or artist who commands a devoted and loyal fan base is inevitably
held with some degree of affection, hence popular culture, by dint of its popularity,
automatically becomes popular heritage. Taken to its logical extremes, it is possible
to envision a scenario whereby this more ‘democratised’ or free-for-all model of
popular music heritage eclipses the very culture to which it seeks to pay tribute:
heritage culture (or cultural heritage) as a self-sustaining and self-consuming indus-
try: pop indeed eating itself. The material analogue to this future vision of a mass
heritage pandemic is the spectacle of commemorative plaques breaking out like pus-
tules on the facade of every other building. To the extent that anyone can, in effect,
commission and erect a plaque, this is not an altogether inconceivable scenario, as
throughout England many local councils, charitable organisations, businesses and
trade associations continue to establish their own commemorative plaque schemes.16
Viewed against this somewhat variegated backdrop, English Heritage’s insistence
on a more formal and rigorous approach to questions of eligibility undoubtedly
enhances the perceived ‘heritage value’ of an award received under this ofﬁcial (i.e.
state authorised) blue plaques scheme as compared to the others.

One obvious mechanism by which to lend more weight and authority to self-
authorised music heritage initiatives is to seek the endorsement of celebrities and
public ﬁgures. In the case of the Heritage Foundation, the appointment of the afore-
mentioned Robin Gibb and former BBC Radio One disc jockey Mike Read as the
president and vice-president, respectively, has enabled the charity to signiﬁcantly
enhance its public proﬁle (former presidents have included the prog rock luminaries
Rick Wakeman and Phil Collins). The ability to call upon celebrity members,
patrons and trustees from the world of show business to attend charity events or
plaque unveiling ceremonies lends additional support to the activities of the organi-
sation and bolsters the heritage status of the performer being honoured.

Similarly, for the charity Music Heritage UK which, according to its website,
‘exists to promote, protect and preserve the UK’s musical heritage’,17 the appoint-
ment of celebrity ‘ambassadors’ helps to raise its proﬁle and establish vital contacts
in the music and cultural industries. As with the Heritage Foundation, Music Heri-
tage UK represents the activities of a single individual, in this case, chief executive
and founder James Ketchell, who, like Graham, is a popular music fan convinced
that the UK’s popular music heritage has not been sufﬁciently recognised. Much
younger than Graham, Ketchell, a professional in the charity sector, nevertheless
shares with the Heritage Foundation chairman a recognition of the contribution of
popular music histories to the UK’s national cultural heritage demonstrating the
extent to which the values and practices of ‘heritage’ are not age-speciﬁc but extend
at least part way across the social spectrum (although in other respects music heri-
tage remains an overwhelmingly white and male preoccupation). As with many
self-authorised music heritage discourses,
is as much the personal musical
heritage and history of individuals, such as Graham and Ketchell, that is being
memorialised as that which is claimed on behalf of a wider group or nation.

it

As well as seeking the endorsement of celebrities or ambassadors, the ability to
attract public funding (in the form of grants from the Arts Council, for example, or
support from the Heritage Lottery Fund), or claim charitable status, can further
boost the professional image of a self-authorised heritage initiative and blur the dis-
tinction between ideas of ofﬁcial and ‘unofﬁcial’. If, for example, a ‘DIY heritage’

International Journal of Heritage Studies

251

initiative, such as an online music archive or website (Music Heritage UK being
but one of many), is successful in securing funding or drawn into collaboration with
researchers and academics in the higher education sector, by what measure, and to
what extent could it be (re)classiﬁed as an ‘ofﬁcial’ heritage discourse? Does this
enable those involved to legitimately claim more authority than if it was the product
of entirely self-resourced DIY endeavours? These questions, while of some import,
have less bearing than those which seek to address not what speciﬁc music heritage
discourses may represent in terms of their perceived authenticity or ofﬁcial merit,
but what it is they in fact do: the instrumentality and performativity of music heri-
tage as a social and cultural practice.

One thing that Ketchell from Music Heritage UK aims to do, for example, is
award heritage (and charitable) status to historically signiﬁcant music venues to help
them not only achieve greater recognition but make them more secure and sustain-
able:

One of the things we hopefully want to develop over time is helping music venues
come up with alternative models. This is all very vague at the moment, but there is no
reason why you cannot become a charity or a social enterprise. So, a) that helps with
cutting your costs, but b) you are able to use it to bank on that heritage a lot more and
then c) you are able to perhaps, I don’t know, train a sound engineer or a lighting engi-
neer, or use it for rehearsal spaces, that kind of thing, so you are helping young musi-
cians. So, I think the charitable model could be quite good for lots of these venues.

In this sense, heritage becomes an asset in the absence of (ofﬁcially sanctioned)
listed status but also a strategic tool for preserving a building’s social, cultural and
economic value, and enabling its continued use for music-making and the music
industries. In the wake of New Labour’s enthusiastic embrace of culture- and heri-
tage-led regeneration strategies, and no less reconcilable to the Conservative-led
Coalition Government’s pronouncements on the so-called ‘Big Society’, in policy
terms, the idea of heritage here is one that appears wilfully on-message. It does not
so much represent the (in)tangible legacy of a historical past and a collective sense
of place, identity and cultural memory. Instead, it connotes an inheritance analogous
to that presided over by the executor of a family estate, and in this regard reinforces
an idea of heritage as both compliant with and shaped by the language and discur-
sive values of neoliberal economics.

If music heritage as a conspicuously charitable set of practices and motivations
goes some way towards instilling a sense of ofﬁcial sanction there remains nothing,
beyond the good intentions and dedication of those that volunteer their time and
resources to establish such initiatives,
that necessarily prevents self-authorising
music heritage discourses from serving as vehicles by which more self-serving
interests and values might equally be exploited. Without listed status, for example,
there is nothing that guarantees that a heritage venue would not at some point in
the future be gutted, redeveloped and transformed into, for example, luxury apart-
ments, as was the case with the Hacienda club in Manchester. And who is to say
that is not a more appropriate or economically viable cultural legacy? The preserva-
tion of a venue that kindles fond and nostalgic cultural memories for some might
seem,
the
museumiﬁcation of culture and everyday life that critics of the ‘heritage industry’,
such as Hewison, highlighted back in the 1980s in the nascent years of the
neoliberal experiment. In terms of bricks and mortar – the material sites of musical

further evidence of an inexorable shift

to others, as

towards

252

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

memory – the ‘preservation’ of cultural heritage is only meaningfully realised by
recourse to the ofﬁcial mechanisms put in place by policy-makers and heritage
bodies such as English Heritage. By way of illustration, the decision in January
2012 by the Minister for Tourism and Heritage, John Penrose, to reject an applica-
tion by English Heritage to ofﬁcially make the 100 Club in London a grade II listed
historic building (one of the reasons he gave was that it would not be in tune with
the spirit of punk) means that whatever nostalgic value or cultural resonance musi-
cians and audiences might attach to the club, the ‘bankable’ value of its heritage is
considerably outweighed by the site’s commercial appeal for investors and develop-
ers (the venue is located in Oxford Street in the heart of London’s West End).18

Ketchell from Music Heritage UK strongly condemned the government’s deci-
sion to reject the 100 Club bid.19 Responding to the question as to what the term
‘cultural heritage’ might mean, he acknowledges the difﬁculties in nailing down a
precise deﬁnition, noting simply, ‘I would describe it as our shared memories, on a
quite broad scale’. Commenting on the interplay between the tangible and intangi-
ble properties of heritage and memory, he goes on to stress the importance of place
(as reﬂected in the charity’s emphasis on music venues) and experience:

The memories you have of a particular time or place – at a music festival or concert
venue – then that is the place where those memories happened […] When you go
back to somewhere where you have got strong memories, they always come ﬂooding
back. And then, if that place is not there anymore, then it is a lot more difﬁcult to
have those memories […]; the essential thing is about the experience, and those expe-
riences happen in places.

Nora has noted that, ‘Memory attaches itself to sites [lieux de mémoire], whereas
history attaches itself to events’ (1989, p. 22). The importance of sites of memory
in music heritage discourses, as the above comments clearly demonstrate, is not so
much on marking events (e.g. ‘this is where the Sex Pistols played their ﬁrst gig’)
as providing a performative space in which experiential memories can be rehearsed,
acknowledged and re-embodied (‘this is what I remember from going to punk gigs
at the 100 Club in the 1970s’, or ‘this is where the Sex Pistols played’); or, as
ersatz nostalgia – described by Appadurai as ‘nostalgia without lived experience or
collective historical memory’ (1996, p. 78; see also Boym 2001, p. 38), a space
where inherited memories can be enacted and embodied (‘this is what I imagine
seeing punk bands at this venue must have been like’).

One of the chief functions of self-authorising music heritage practices is, there-
fore, to furnish a means by which to give substance to the ritual and performative
dimensions of cultural memory: the site of popular music heritage as an (in)tangible
place of pilgrimage. The growing popularity of and interest in music tours and heri-
tage trails, commemorative plaques and music-related lieux de mémoire reﬂects this
desire to map and materialise popular music histories and to give validation to the
experiential, affective and embodied contours of musical memory. This heritage
impulse has not been lost on tourist marketing agencies, such as Visit Britain, who
have sought to tap the emotional geographies of popular music culture in the UK
as a promotional tool for stimulating niche forms of cultural tourism (Cohen and
Roberts forthcoming). Self-authorising heritage can also function as an effective
marketing device capitalising on the nostalgic appeal of music heritage sites to
deliver speciﬁc instrumental objectives. For David Graham, for example, it not only

International Journal of Heritage Studies

253

helps to afford more ofﬁcial recognition to England’s rich and, as he would argue,
underacknowledged cultural and musical heritage, initiatives such as the heritage
plaque scheme also function as a means to market the activities of the Heritage
Foundation itself so as to generate publicity and (more crucially) income for the
charitable causes the Foundation supports.

Similarly, the Heritage Award scheme of Performing Right Society (PRS) for
Music (an organisation, formerly known as the PRS, that collects and distributes
royalities on behalf of its UK members) likewise functions as a marketing tool
for the organisation and a vehicle for publicising and rationalising its role as part
of the wider creative industries. Established in 2009, the scheme was set up, as
the Head of PR Barney Hooper explains, ‘to highlight who we are, how we rep-
resent writers, […] to recognise some of our most proliﬁc, high proﬁle, success-
ful members and place it in a context of where they began. […] We have a rich
heritage in this country of great writers, composers and also performers, and we
wanted to recognise that and we brainstormed and came up with the idea of
ﬁnding the place that a well-known band or group or singer-songwriter ﬁrst per-
formed: the performance birth place’. To date only a handful of heritage plaques
have been erected under the scheme, but plans are to extend this,
the latest
being a plaque for the band James at the Hacienda Apartments in Manchester.
The unveiling of these plaques attracts media interest and the attendance and
endorsement of celebrities as well as a web presence and coverage in PRS’s
own quarterly publication M.20 ‘Without doubt’, Hooper remarked,

[the marketing potential] is a huge consideration. […] It connects us in peoples’ minds
with music, with our members, with the music that they will recognise, remember and
love, and there’s a reason people can follow that career and create that music, and it
boils down to copyright law and the rights that protects their creative works.

it

One ﬁnal point worth considering here concerns the ambiguous placement of
the PRS for Music Heritage Award Scheme as an ofﬁcial or self-authorised music
heritage discourse. It is ambiguous only inasmuch as, in terms of the important
legal and ﬁnancial role it plays in the UK music industry, PRS bears all the attri-
butes of an ofﬁcial organisation, yet in its capacity as a music heritage awarding
body,
is very much a self-authorising initiative. Again, as with other plaque
schemes, what is striking is the seemingly arbitrary nature of the names selected:
Blur, Dire Straits, Jethro Tull, Squeeze, Elton John, Snow Patrol, Status Quo and
UB40, the uniting factor being the white, male and rock-oriented proﬁle of these
particular artists and groups. When we interviewed PRS, Hooper also showed us a
plaque the organisation had made for Spandau Ballet, who they were in discussion
with as a possible future recipient of the award. The criteria for selection are cited
as ‘availability’, and ‘willingness to engage’, and although they stress an endeavour
to be as broad as possible, Hooper also acknowledges a need for PRS to widen out
the scheme to encompass a more diverse portfolio of artists and genres. In keeping
with the other self-authorising heritage discourses we have discussed in this paper,
PRS for Music’s choice of artists also strongly reﬂects the personal tastes and music
heritage of the individual employees who set up and manage the plaque scheme.
Hooper, for example, notes:

254

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

[Music heritage is about] your formative years isn’t it? I was a teenager in the ‘90s,
so: Brit Pop and Indie Music; and obviously I was very keen to do Blur (as a huge
Blur fan) as our ﬁrst Heritage Award. I don’t know whether I swayed it …

Unauthorised popular music heritage
towards self-authorised popular music heritage demonstrated by the
The shift
examples in the previous section may be read, on the one hand, as a growing
democratisation of music heritage production and consumption and a tacit circum-
vention of ‘ofﬁcial’ bureaucracies of cultural heritage management. On the other
hand, however, it represents a problematization of the idea of heritage as the recog-
nition of a national cultural legacy or as a symbolic afﬁrmation of collective struc-
tures of cultural memory and identity. But then, in terms of popular music culture,
is English Heritage necessarily anymore representative of ‘English heritage’ (what-
ever, in practice, that might actually mean) than the more democratising clamour of
individual music heritage practices? Moreover, as a historicising framework by
which individuals and groups negotiate the relationship between contemporary
music cultures and those rooted in the past, just how relevant is Heritage anyway?
If music heritage has its ofﬁcial and self-authorised variants, then can we identify a
third that does not demand authorisation and could,
therefore, be described as

Figure 1.

(Un)authorising popular music heritage: critical and analytical framework.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

255

‘unauthorised’, and if so, then does this not effectively excise ‘heritage’ from the
equation altogether? These are questions we address in this ﬁnal section, which
focuses on vernacular memory and heritage-as-praxis (Figure 1).

Anti-plaques and heritage-as-praxis
In 2011, grafﬁti, doodles and paintings discovered on the wall of a Soho ﬂat for-
merly occupied by Sex Pistol John Lydon were likened, in terms of their archaeo-
logical signiﬁcance, to the Upper Palaeolithic cave paintings found in Lascaux in
southern France. Providing ‘a unique insight into the origins of the 1970s musical
the grafﬁti, according to archaeologists John Schoﬁeld and Paul
movement’,
Graves-Brown, is ‘a direct and powerful representation of a radical and dramatic
movement of rebellion’. Whatever one’s views as to the scholarly merit that can or
should be attributed to this early punk-era discovery, what appears a good deal
more noteworthy is the archaeologists’ negation of the idea that the grafﬁti in some
way constitutes ‘heritage’. Recoiling from the suggestion that the site should be
marked by a blue plaque (as this ‘would not be in the spirit of punk’; a line, as we
have seen, that would be echoed by the Minister for Tourism and Heritage in rela-
tion to the 100 Club in January 2012), for Schoﬁeld and Graves-Brown it is the
‘anti-heritage’ value of the grafﬁti that warrants attention. Deliberately going against
the grain of the values and conventions of ‘ofﬁcial’ UK heritage management,21
they assert:

We feel justiﬁed in sticking our tongues out at the heritage establishment and suggest-
ing that punk’s iconoclasm provides the context for conservation decision-making.
This is an important site, historically and archaeologically, for the material and evi-
dence it contains. But should we retain it for the beneﬁt of this and future generations?
In our view, with anti-heritage, different rules apply.22

The idea of anti-heritage presented here is interesting in that it stems from an
instinctual and avowedly political desire to provoke and challenge;
to subvert
– through a process of tactical détournement well in keeping with the situationist
spirit of punk – the dominant meanings and ideological assumptions that underwrite
what is typically understood as Heritage.

But the example is also instructive in nudging more forcefully the question as to
whether heritage is a productive framework, critically and historiographically, to
address the legacy of speciﬁc popular music histories. Feargal Sharkey, ex-member
of the post-punk band The Undertones and, in a more recent incarnation, chief
executive of UK Music, a lobbying organisation on behalf the UK music industry,
pinpoints both the ambivalent value of heritage to the music industry as well as the
wider historical context in which discussions of music heritage are more produc-
tively situated. ‘If it’s heritage’, he suggests, ‘it seems to go back a long way’. For
Sharkey, the idea of ‘popular music heritage’ relates strongly to issues of migration,
diaspora and the musical routes and transnational musicscapes that have had such a
formative inﬂuence on how particular UK music cultures and genres have histori-
cally evolved. Citing his own traditional Irish background as an example, he also
relates heritage to ideas of tradition and indigenous cultural origins. He historicises
the current obsession with all things heritage, attributing it to the desire of a post-
war baby boom generation to revisit and question the environment in which it grew

256

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

up: the inﬂuence of American music and artists on 1950s and 60s popular culture;
the social, cultural and intellectual revolutions of the era; the opening up of the edu-
cation system and so on. Viewed against this broader sociocultural backdrop, music
heritage is rooted in a particular historical moment; a time of dramatic change and
transition of immense signiﬁcance to those who were a part of this ﬁrst wave; this
ﬁrst great ﬂourish of post-war popular culture.

Beyond that, for Sharkey, the question of how to reconcile the idea of heritage
with the wider commercial imperatives of the music industry highlights the more
difﬁcult task of relating what he sees as a progressive, largely youth-driven culture
of popular music creativity and consumption with a backward-looking, nostalgic
and often reactionary discourse of Heritage. Striving to foster an environment where
a vibrant and the cutting edge UK music culture can thrive, Sharkey’s concerns lie
more with nurturing and supporting the next Tinie Tempah or Adele, not raking
over the relics of a dead musical past. As far as he is concerned, most young peo-
ple could not care less about the legacy of a bunch of ‘old farts’ like Led Zeppelin
or whether there is a Beatles Heritage map or tour on offer. Heritage, by this reck-
oning, is anti-culture. ‘Anti-heritage’, by corollary, augurs a more progressive form
of cultural engagement: musical history and legacy valued – whether pedagogically,
socially, culturally or politically – despite not as a result of Heritage. This critical
distinction hinges on the degree to which what might actually be meant by popular
music heritage in any given context represents the enactment of a musical praxis
that is rooted in the sociality and culture of everyday life, or a rareﬁed object or
spectacle that is more about the heritagisation of cultural practice (Roberts, this vol-
ume) than the performativity and discursivity of heritage-as-praxis. While there is
not the space to explore this much broader question in any level of depth here, it is
worth considering for a moment the example of the British Library Sound Archive
which holds one of the largest and most extensive collections of popular music in
the world. Andy Linehan, popular music curator at the archive, gave this response
to the question as to whether the term ‘cultural heritage’ was meaningful to him in
terms of his work as a popular music curator:

For want of a better word, yeah. I’m wary of the heritage [of popular music] just
being the Beatles. And one can understand why that might be the case. […] And
that’s why I don’t like the term heritage if you see what I mean. […] What I’m con-
cerned with is the cultural heritage of British music; our brief is to collect everything
and reﬂect everything that went on. […] I like the idea that we [the Sound Archive]
have collected over the years all the kind of musical inﬂuences that have ﬁltered
through to what’s happening now and you can go back and trace the path, and you
can make you own … you work out your own way of doing it […]; build your own
picture. And so I kind of see it as … you can come here and construct your history
and your heritage, if you like. We hopefully are providing the building blocks for you
to construct your [own] ideas. The notion of heritage is generally ‘the usual suspects’
and we are a lot more than that I think is what I try to get across.

If one were tasked to come up with an idea of musical heritage as an engaged, dis-
cursive, practice-oriented, creative and self-articulative form of cultural bricolage, it
is hard to think of a better description than the one Linehan offers here. Although
in terms of raising awareness of the British Library’s activities and widening the
access to and the appeal of its collections to the general public, Linehan accepts
that the ‘usual suspects’ model of heritage does have its place (and thus has instru-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

257

it

it gets by without even an awareness that

mental value), the processual idea of heritage-as-praxis to which he otherwise sub-
scribes is one that demands neither authorisation (self or ofﬁcial), museumiﬁcation,
nor tangible memorialisation (the unveiling of a plaque or monument, for example;
the totemic act that ‘ofﬁcially’ marks many authorised forms of popular music heri-
tage). Perhaps a distinction between ‘little h’ heritage and ‘big H’ Heritage is appo-
site here. ‘Little h’ heritage does not draw attention to itself; indeed, for the most
part
is heritage. Abstracted from
practice – from spatio-temporal grounding in the everyday – heritage-as-praxis
transmutes to heritage-as-object. Yet, as Crang observes, ‘There is no Heritage-
qua-object ‘out there’, heritage exists only in the ways it is enacted’ (1994, p. 351).
Processes of authorisation – of validating music heritage as heritage – constitute,
therefore, a reiﬁcation of music culture and history inasmuch as it is reduced to a
seemingly immutable object, the signiﬁcance of which owes as much, if not more,
to the ‘bell jar’ (Hewison 1987, p. 144) in which it is contained as any innate cul-
tural value that authorises its heritagisation in the ﬁrst place.

The difﬁculties in negotiating the tension between ‘little h’ heritage and ‘big H’
heritage, or between heritage-as-object and heritage-as-praxis, are well observed by
the black music historian and founder member of British reggae band Steel Pulse,
Mykaell Riley. Exploring the possibilities of curating an exhibition of UK black
music history at the Museum of London, Riley argues that it is incumbent on the
historian or curator to reﬂect and pay heed to the contingent positionality that
shapes speciﬁc narratives of popular music heritage and the subjectivities of those
who have a stake in these narratives and histories. Echoing Andy Linehan’s note of
caution with regard to the ‘usual suspects’, Riley stresses the need to challenge
dominant narratives and the uncritical regurgitation of facts that are circulated as
part of ofﬁcial discourses of popular music heritage, and to acknowledge and reﬂect
the ways in narratives shift depending on place, context, time and who you are ask-
ing. Historiographically and curatorially, therefore, the process of mapping black
music histories that Riley advocates, whether ﬁguratively or in cartographic terms,
reﬂects a living, dynamic understanding of cultural heritage that is topographically
inﬂuence. In
and chronotopically expressive of pathways and routes of musical
this chimes with Linehan’s emphasis on
other words: heritage-as-praxis. Again,
tracing musical pathways and ﬁnding your own way: building your own ‘map’ of
music heritage. For Riley, as with Linehan, music heritage is less about the past
than on the ways in which the past informs what is happening now, in the present:

Heritage, to me, is partly what you’ve inherited. Whether that’s consciously or subcon-
sciously. And it’s partly legacy. […] But at the same time it’s what informs you going
forward. […] In terms of black music in the UK heritage is increasingly about estab-
lishing that which has gone before. Just to say ‘look it did happen!’. […] So heritage
to me is about recognising that this did exist, it did have a major contribution to what
is now. And actually collating that and bringing it back into vision, because it’s simply
not there.

Conclusion: unauthorising popular music heritage
As we have seen, whether the erection of a commemorative plaque to, for instance,
the Who’s former drummer represents an ‘ofﬁcial’ or ‘unofﬁcial’ marker of popular
music heritage proves not especially useful in terms of understanding how heritage

258

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

functions and performs as part of speciﬁc popular music discourses in England. If
seen only in terms of representing a populist or unofﬁcial corrective to the ofﬁcial
‘snub’ of the English Heritage panel, then wider questions surrounding the perform-
ativity and intentionality of popular music heritage remain critically overlooked.
Similarly, whether the erection of a plaque on a building owned by the Queen in
order to pay tribute to the location where a 1970s album cover was photographed
(and a musician’s ﬁctional alter-ego once stood) represents a ‘tangible’ or ‘intangi-
ble’ form of popular music heritage is arguably of less signiﬁcance than the ques-
tion as to why it is there at all. Which is not to suggest that it should not be there
necessarily (although a convincing argument could doubtless be made in this
respect) but rather to shift critical attention towards a) the processes by which it is
authorised as a marker of musical heritage; b) what this authority brings with it in
terms of what it is the plaque ‘does’: i.e. how it performs and enacts in the social
world; and c) how this ofﬁcial or self-authorised discourse of music heritage (and
the distinction is by no means clear cut or ﬁxed) might inﬂuence, inform or interre-
late with other types of music heritage practice, whether authorised or unauthorised,
big H Heritage or little h heritage, heritage-as-object or heritage-as-praxis.

Commenting on the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland Ohio, Tim
Strickland, former creative director of the ill-fated National Centre for Popular
Music in Shefﬁeld (NCPM), suggests that the museum would not be anything with-
out the annual awards ceremony. As well as casting a sideways glance at the fate of
British popular music museums – the NCPM (1999–2000) and the British Music
Experience (2000-present) – Strickland’s comments highlight the extent to which
authorised music heritage discourses are almost always dependent on key symbolic
events as self-legitimising forms of focused gathering, or as mechanisms for capital-
ising on the media spectacle and publicity they generate. Award ceremonies, charity
events, trade fares and plaque unveiling ceremonies; the performativity of heritage
is predicated on the bureaucratic,
institutional and commercial frameworks that
authorise it and mark it out as an object in itself. ‘Big H’ Heritage is, therefore,
conspicuous heritage; heritage that draws attention to itself in order to exercise an
instrumental function.

However, while authorised discourses of popular music heritage make claims to
collective ideas of tradition, provenance and a shared cultural legacy to be cele-
brated and duly acknowledged, the extent to which these work to shape ideas of
nationhood, collective memory, place, locality and identity – the metonymic capital
upon which the cultural economy of the tourism and heritage industry is function-
ally dependent – is difﬁcult to reliably determine in the absence of analyses drawn
from audience-based qualitative research into the ways popular music heritage is
consumed, negotiated and performed in practice. This methodological approach
forms the basis of the second stage of our POPID research. Despite the authorising
claims of the music heritage industry (whether ofﬁcial of self authorised) just how
meaningful authorised popular music heritage discourses are in terms of how indi-
viduals’ celebrate and curate their own musical memories, or exactly how they
might inform or relate to personal ideas of heritage, memory and identity is by no
means self-evident. As we have argued, working alongside, or in some cases in
opposition to, authorised forms of popular music Heritage there exist a set of heri-
tage practices that can provisionally be described as ‘unauthorised’ but which are in
all other respects not really conceived of as ‘heritage’ at all. That is, they reﬂect
processes of engagement with musical pasts that draw on as well as contribute to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

259

both established and emergent educational or archival resources, and which appro-
priate that which went before as precursors to innovation and creativity not merely
as emblems and relics of a memorialised past. If these discursive and practice-ori-
ented understandings to music heritage praxis are indicative of the ways in which
audiences and musicians might more routinely engage with popular music histories,
then arguably it is not so much to the concept of ‘Heritage’ (big or little h) that pro-
ductively lends itself to ongoing analysis and debate in this area but the altogether
more diffuse theoretical terrain that encompasses the ﬁelds of personal and cultural
memory. Ethnographic work on music and memory currently being conducted
amongst audiences in the UK and its partner POPID countries will illuminate more
clearly and more intimately the relationship between popular music cultures of the
past and those of the present.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported as part of the Popular Music Heritage, Cultural Memory
and Cultural Identity (POPID) project by the HERA Joint Research Programme (www.
heranet.info) which is co-funded by AHRC, AKA, DASTI, ETF, FNR, FWF, HAZU,
IRCHSS, MHEST, NWO, RANNIS, RCN, VR and The European Community FP7 2007–
2013, under the Socio-economic Sciences and Humanities programme.

Notes on contributors
Les Roberts is a research associate in the School of the Arts at the University of Liverpool.
His research interests are in the cultural production of space, place and mobility, with a
particular focus on ﬁlm and popular music cultures. His recent projects include a GIS-based
study of ﬁlm, memory and urban landscapes and ethnographic research into popular music
as cultural heritage. He is an author of Film, mobility and urban space (Liverpool
University Press, 2012), editor of Mapping cultures: place, practice, performance (Palgrave,
2012) and co-editor of Liminal
travel, experience and spaces in-between
(Routledge, 2012) and The city and the moving image: Urban projections (Palgrave, 2010).

landscapes:

Sara Cohen is a professor in the School of Music and Director of the Institute of Popular
Music at the University of Liverpool. She has a DPhil in Social Anthropology from Oxford
University and is author of Rock culture in liverpool (Oxford University Press, 1991) and
Decline, renewal and the city in popular music culture (Ashgate, 2007). She is a co-editor
of the Routledge series Studies in popular music and religion and a member of the Editorial
and Advisory Boards of several journals, including Ethnomusicology Forum (Routledge) and
Popular Music (Cambridge University Press).

Notes
1. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2112047/Here-landed-Starman-Plaque-marks-Lon-
[accessed

don-street-David-Bowies-Ziggy-Stardust-touched-down.html#ixzz1vXsBKsPf
May 2012].

2. http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/world/plaque-to-mark-spot-in-london-where-ziggy-
[accessed May

stardust-aka-david-bowie-fell-to-earth/story-fnb64oi6-1226293331843
2012].

3. Gibson and Connell 2005, Cohen 2007, 2012, Frost 2008.
4. In the UK, the dominance of heritage and AHDs positions music histories in England
within a national discursive context that is markedly different to that operative in other
European countries (see other contributions to this volume).

5. The research is funded by HERA and developed in collaboration with project partners
based at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, the University of Ljubljana and Mediacult in

260

L. Roberts and S. Cohen

Vienna: http://www.eshcc.eur.nl/english/hera_popid/. See also related Australian-based
project: http://musicmemoriesproject.blogspot.co.uk/p/our-project.html.

6. www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/historic_environment/ [accessed 21 December 2011].
7. ‘Beatles’ Abbey Road zebra crossing given listed status’, BBC, 22 December 2010:

www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-12059385 [accessed 21 December 2011].

8. ‘Beatles’ Strawberry Field gates removed’, The Guardian, 10 May 2011: www.guardian.
co.uk/music/2011/may/10/beatles-strawberry-ﬁelds-gates-removed [accessed 21 Decem-
ber 2011].

9. As the interviewee pointed out, an obvious response to those who charged the organisa-
tion with ‘putting up plaques to a drug-taker’ was to remind them that the plaque that
ﬁrst launched the blue plaques scheme (in 1867) was to the romantic poet Lord Byron,
who famously indulged in the drug laudanum.

10. Dissenting voices within English Heritage were highlighted in a BBC2 documentary
about the plaque entitled ‘Picture This’ and broadcast on 5 June 1999 (see Cohen 2007)
11. ‘The Who’s Keith Moon to be honoured with ‘blue plaque’’, The Guardian, 2 February
2009: www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/feb/02/who-keith-moon-blue-plaque [accessed 14
April 2011].

12. As noted by Regev (2006, p. 2), for example, Anglo-American rock and pop is a major
ingredient in the canon of popular music, whilst Appen and Doehring (2006) illustrate
the canonisation of white, male rock through lists of the 100 greatest albums of all time
compiled by music journalists. See also Schmutz (2005).

13. As well as Comic Heritage, the Heritage Foundation now encompasses Musical Heri-
tage, Sports Heritage and Films and Television Heritage. See www.theheritagefounda-
tion.info/aboutus [accessed 23 March 2011].

14. The plaque was unveiled in March 2009 at the site of the Marquee Club in Soho, where

The Who often performed in the 1960s.

15. ‘Keith Moon gets plaque at last despite English Heritage snub’, The Independent on
Sunday, 1 February 2009: www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/keith-moon-gets-
plaque-at-last-despite-english-heritage-snub-1522532.html [accessed 6 January 2012].

16. For example, in a report published by Birmingham City Council in 2012, a proposal for
a plaque scheme and related tourist trail were put forward by authors of a report explor-
ing popular music heritage in the city. By way of precedent, the report cites the exam-
ples of Liverpool, Coventry, Rochdale and Bristol as the other UK cities that have also
erected plaques honouring popular musicians (see Birmingham City Council 2012,
p. 27–28).

17. www.musicheritageuk.org/about.html [accessed 6 January 2012].
18. ‘London’s 100 Club fails in bid to become a listed building’, NME, 9 January 2012:

www.nme.com/news/various-artists/61327 [accessed 11 January 2012].

19. See www.musicheritageuk.org/media/100-club-listed-status-denied.html [accessed 11 Jan-

uary 2012].

20. www.prsformusic.com/creators/news/Pages/HeritageAward.aspx; www.prsformusic.com/

creators/news/mmagazine/Pages/default.aspx [accessed 11 January 2012].

21. Schoﬁeld was in fact working for English Heritage’s characterisation team at the time.
Accordingly, this example also highlights the ways in which ofﬁcial, self-authorised and
unauthorised heritage can co-exist and intersect within a single ‘ofﬁcial’ organisation.

22. www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2064199/Sex-Pistols-grafﬁti-studied-archaeologists-
important-caves-Lascaux-southern-France.html?ito=feeds-newsx [accessed 21 November
2011].

References
Allen, M.P. and Lincoln, A.E., 2004. Critical discourse and the cultural consecration of

American ﬁlms. Social Forces, 82 (3), 871–894.

Appadurai, A., 1996. Modernity at large: cultural dimensions of globalisation. Minneapolis,

MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Appen, R.V. and Doehring, A., 2006. Nevermind The Beatles, here’s Exile 61 and Nico:
‘The top 100 records of all time’ – a canon of pop and rock albums from a sociological
and an aesthetic perspective. Popular Music, 25 (1), 21–39.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

261

Ashworth, G.J., Graham, B., and Tunbridge, J.E., 2007. Pluralising pasts: heritage, identity

and place in multicultural societies. London: Pluto Press.

Becker, H., 1982. Art worlds. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Bennett, A., 2004. New tales from canterbury: the making of a virtual music scene? In:
A. Bennett and R.A. Peterson, eds. Music scenes: local, trans-local and virtual. Nash-
ville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 205–220.

Birmingham City Council, 2012. Destination Birmingham: Birmingham, a music city. Report
of the Leisure, Sport & Culture Overview and Scrutiny Committee. Birmingham City
Council. www.birmingham.gov.uk/scrutiny

Born, G. 2010. Listening, mediation, event: anthropological and sociological perspectives.

Journal of the Royal Musical Association, 135(special issue 1), 79–89.

Bourdieu, P., 1991. Language and symbolic power. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Boym, S., 2001. The future of Nostalgia. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Cohen, S., 2007. Decline, renewal and the city in popular music culture: beyond the Beatles.

Aldershot: Ashgate.

Cohen, S. 2012. Musical memory, heritage & local identity: remembering the popular music
International Journal of Cultural Policy.

in a European capital of culture.

past
DOI:10.1080/10286632.2012.676641.

Cohen, S. and Roberts, L., Forthcoming. Heritage rocks! mapping spaces of popular music
tourism. In: S. Kruger and R. Trandafoiu, eds. The globalization of musics in transit:
musical migration and tourism. London: Routledge.

Crang, M., 1994. On the Heritage Trail: Maps of and Journeys to Olde Englande. Environ-

ment and Planning D: Society and Space, 12 (3), 341–355.

English Heritage, 2010. Celebrating people and place: guidance on commemorative plaques

and plaque scheme. London: English Heritage.

Frost, W., 2008. Popular culture as a different type of heritage: the making of AC/DC lane.

Journal of Heritage Tourism, 3 (3), 176–184.

Gibson, C. and Connell, J., 2005. Music and tourism: on the road again. Clevedon: Channel

Hall, S., 2005. Whose heritage? un-settling ‘the heritage’, re-imagining the post-nation. In:
J. Littler and R. Naidoo, eds. The politics of heritage: the legacies of ‘race’. London:
Routledge, 23–35.

Harvey, D., 2008. The history of heritage. In: B. Graham and P. Howard, eds. The Ashgate

research companion to heritage and identity. Aldershot: Ashgate, 19–36.

Hewison, R., 1987. The heritage industry: Britain in a climate of decline. London: Methuen.
Kansteinher, W., 2002. Finding meaning in memory: a methodological critique of collective

memory studies. History and Theory, 41, 179–197.

Lowenthal, D., 1996. The heritage crusade and the spoils of history. New York, NY: Free

MacCannell, D., 1976. The tourist: a new theory of the leisure class. London: Macmillan.
Nora, P., 1989. Between memory and history: Les Lieux de Mémoire. Representations, 26,

Regev, M., 2006. Introduction. Popular Music: Special Issue on Canonisation, 25 (1), 1–2.
Schmutz, V., 2005. Retrospective cultural consecration in popular music: rolling stone’s

greatest albums of all time. American Behavioral Scientist, 48 (11), 1510–1523.

Smith, L., 2006. Uses of heritage. Abingdon: Routledge.
Tunbridge, J.E. and Ashworth, G.J., 1996. Dissonant heritage: the management of the past

as a resource in conﬂict. Chichester: Wiley.

View.

Press.

7–25.


