V

4 ^»  —il  \M »—I HI  ff-

Figure 2.  Map of Pullman,  1885.  [Harper's Monthly,  Vol.LXX,  1885.

Figure  3.  View to  the North  East,  1890s.  Hotel Florence (central foreground), rallcar
manufacturing shops and water tower (behind) resdiential area (rt)  and Lake Calumet (top  rt).
[Pullman  Civic Organization & Historic Pullman  Foundation, Mrs.  Duane Doty.

in the world. He also asserted that  the town would be a good business venture,
by charging  rents  set to return  six per  cent  on  capital invested. In  addition,  he
hoped  to isolate his men  from  anarchists  and  other  trouble-makers  (as  he saw
them) in the labour movement who were stirring up unrest in the nearby slums
of Chicago.

Pullman, Illinois: Changes in Community Planning

11

Viittimm.  View  to  the  Hast.  1H<)0$. Greenstone  rhunh  surrowukil  by  housing.  1/tke

Calumet  (Miini). 

ll'ulhmm  Civic  Qrgimiiatkm  ft  Historic  Viillmtm  Foundation.  Mrs.  Duaiw  Doty.

t'ltjure  S.  I'lilhmw  Market  Hall  anil  Colomuule  Aimrlnicnts. 

I99S  (Rullt 

lft'J2). 

jTlu-  author.

Figure  6.  Fhreiuxllotd. 

199S. 

(Built  1881). 

/The  author.

12

Ted  Newcomen

. VfPES  of  PULLMAN HOMES  .

..SCALE 

i"sie'.

' CIVIL £KCtNrril.

TXO/<T  ELEVATION  or  FbtfR

or  FOUR

"or  Two  COYYAMS .

Figure 7.  Sketch of Types of Pullman Homes,  1896.  [Historic Pullman Foundation.

Within  three  years  total  company  investment  in  the  new  town  stood  in
excess of $6  million. Pullman had  created  a community  of 8,500 people, living
in  over  1,400  dwelling  units. In  addition  to  the  housing  there  was  the  factory
complex, water  tower,  administration  buildings, repair  and  maintenance shops,
two  railway  stations,  hotel,  church,  school,  shopping  arcade  with  theatre,
market building, stables, public park,  athletic fields,  and an  ornamental  lake.

Every  home  was  supplied  with  gas  (from  the  company's  own  gas  works),
piped  pure  water,  and  deep sewers  (to the  company's  sewerage  truck  farm  for
use  as  fertiliser).  Storm  water  drains  ensured  no flooding to  the  wide,  hard-
surfaced  streets and pavements. Kitchen refuse  was collected and fed to animals
on  a  neighbouring  piggery. Over  30,000  trees  and  shrubs  were planted  in  the
streets and parks, all raised in  the company  nursery which  also provided  about
100,000  flowering  plants  each  year  to  beautify  the  community.  There  were
homes for executive managers, foremen,  skilled craftsmen,  and labourers - each
according to their need.2

2.  Mrs. D. Doty, The
Town of Pullman: its
growth  with brief
accounts of its industries,
Pullman,  Illinois:
T.P.Struhsacker,  1893.
This  contemporary
account  of the  early
years  of Pullman  was
written  by the wife of  a
senior  company  execu-
tive  and  remains  a
useful  if  somewhat
biased  account  of the
town's  foundation.

Pullman,  Illinois:  Changes  in  Community  Planning

13

3. S. Buder,  Pullman: an
experiment in industrial
order and community
planning,  1880-1930,
New  York:  Oxford
University  Press, 1967,
p.208.

Kmv Houses,  I99S  (Bui/I  fXSI).  (The mtthor

irc  7li. I'lilhnan  Kxcatlivc  Resldemr.  IWi 

(limit  IXX1).  [The author.

Pullman was a miracle of corporate planning and social improvement during
a  period when  government  exercised  very little responsibility for its citizens. It's
little  wonder  perhaps,  that  an  international  jury  in  Prague  soon  awarded
Pullman a medal for being the world's  'most perfectly  planned  town'.3

Pullman  - A Less than  Model  'Worker's  Paradise'
Despite being  totally modern  in its physical environment,  the town  was almost
feudal  in its management  techniques. The inevitable  problems  came to a head
following  a  spectacular  nation-wide  economic  collapse  in  1893, when  the
business  world  underwent  drastic  contraction,  throwing  millions  out of work

14

Ted Newcomen

4.  A. Lindsey, The Pullman

Strike, Chicago:
University  of Chicago
Press,  1942, p.12.

5. L.E. Leyendecker,

Palace Car Prince: a
biography of George
Mortimer Pullman,
Niwot, Colorado:
University of Colorado
Press. 1992, p.258.

6. Buder, op. cit, note 3,

p.213.

I*/..
Figure 8. Arcade Park, ca. 1890s.  Row houses and Greenstone Church.  [Pullman Civic
Organization & Historic Pullman  Foundation, Mrs. Duane Doty.

across the entire country.4  George Pullman's  response was to cut the wages of
his workers in the wake of the recession. At the same time, he refused  to lower
rents or other company  charges in the town, but continued  to pay dividends to
shareholders.  He saw no connection  between  Pullman  as  an  employer and
Pullman as a landlord.

Following company practice, Pullman refused  to negotiate with workers over
grievances.  Events  escalated  to  involve  national  railway  unions,  boycotts,
blacklists,  court  injunctions,  and  strike-breaking.  Although  there  was no
violence in the town of Pullman, there was widespread  rioting  around  Chicago
and the use of Federal troops to restore order was hotly disputed.

The cost of the strike was high; two-thirds of the nation's rail transport was
paralysed,  a  dozen  people  were  killed,  over  $1 million  was lost  in  damaged
goods and property, and Eugene Debs, the leader of the union was imprisoned.
Pullman  workers  lost  $360,000  in wages  and some  men were  permanently
blacklisted from the railroad  and employment  with the Pullman  Company. The
strike was won by the employers, but the reputation of George Pullman and his
company  town  was  destroyed.  Its  creator  was  pilloried  in  sermons  and
newspaper  editorials  as  the  personification  of  heartless  capitalism.  George
Pullman became a bitter and frustrated  man, and was dead within three years.5

The Decline of Pullman,  1898-1960: dismantling the company
town
In October  1898, in the wake of anti-trust laws, the courts ordered the Pullman
Palace  Car  Company  to  sell  all  property  not  used  directly  for  industrial
production. Important shareholders were privately  pleased to be rid of the town
which many perceived a liability.6

Dismantling of the community began almost immediately with the sale of the
company  brickyard  and sewage  farm.  The factory  management  withdrew its
support for the many  local activities and sponsorship of sporting events. Within
a  year,  company-maintained  landscaping  had  been  reduced  to  an  absolute

Pullman,  Illinois: Changes in Community  Planning

15

7. Idem.

8. lindsey,  op. cit,  note

4, p.345.

9. P.R. Duis, The Saloon:

Public Drinking in
Chicago and Boston
1880-1920,  Urbana
and  Chicago: University
of Illinois Press, 1983,
p.42.

10. J. McLean. One

Hundred Years in Illinois
(1818-1918).  Chicago:
Peterson  Linotyping
Company,  1919, p.284.

11.  Buder,  op.cit., note 3,

pp.221-222.

minimum,  the ornamental  lake was filled in, and the playing fields built  over for
additional  manufacturing  facilities.  The  Chicago Sunday  Chronicle of  the  24th
September,  1899 reporting  that  '...a blighted  and devastated  Pullman  greets the
eye  from  the passing  train'.7

The  hotel  was leased  out and later  sold,  and the theatre  closed  in  1902 due
to  inadequate  fire  escape  facilities.  The  position  of  town  agent  was  abolished,
with  the  President  of the  Pullman  Savings  and  Loan  Bank  taking  over  duties
until  the  final  liquidation  was  complete.  The various  departments  of the  town
were  abolished,  the last  to go being  the Repair  Department  in  1907. The City of
Chicago  took  over  matters  such  as  sewage  disposal,  street  maintenance  and
collection  of water  bills - the attitude  of the company  had become one of a  total
lack  of interest  in  the town.8  In  1904 the Pullman  Land  Association  even  sold
brewers  and saloon  owners  a choice  plot  of land  next  to the town,  something  a
prohibitionist  like  George  Pullman  would  never  have  condoned.9

By November  1907, over $1 million worth,  or half of what  was available, had
been  sold.  It  still  took  another  ten  years  to  dispose  of everything  which  barely
reached  half  the  $4  million  figure  hoped  for. Many  homes  were  purchased  by
existing  tenants  but the largest  acquisitions  were by outside  speculators.10

As early as 1908, a Pullman  Homeowner's  Association  was formed  to try and
halt  the  gradual  decline  of  the  community  and  restore  the  towns 
'original
quality'.  The group  was  largely  ineffective  and  ceased  to  function  within  a  few
years  as most  of the original  residents  were  replaced  by  newcomers  seeking  the
cheaper  rents  of  Pullman.  Middle-class  residents  had  been  the  first  to  leave,
closely  followed  by  older  people  and  skilled  workers.  The latter  were  no  longer
needed when  the company  gradually  changed  over to building  all-steel railcars in
1907  - unskilled  workers  from  Italy  and Greece  moved  in to take  their  place.11
By  1910, Pullman  was just  another  industrial  suburb,  the  company  town
and  experimental  model  community  had  come  to  an  end.  Graham  Taylor
writing  in  The Survey  in  1915, described  Pullman:-

... the old town  is left  with  a forlorn  air of faded  glory... The old lawns  which
made each  street  beautiful  in the old days  are kept up or not as the present
owner  happens  to elect, and often  adjoining  premises  show  a glaring  contrast.
Hard,  bare  ground  in front  of the tenement  blocks permits  their ugly  monotony
to stand  out today in all its nakedness, a monotony  previously  softened  by the
flanking greensward  and hedges.

Erosion of Homogenous  Architecture
The lifting  of company  restrictions  saw the remodelling  of homes  into  shops and
by  1915  the  town  even  had  fifteen  saloons  in  converted  houses.  This  was  a
blow to businesses in the Arcade  and Market  Buildings,  and with  the opening of
a  new retail  development  in  nearby  suburbs  their  decline  was accelerated. The
Arcade  was  finally  turned  over  to  company  office  space  after  1922,  and
demolished  four  years  later;  the Church  was poorly  maintained  by a  dwindling
congregation;  and  the  Market  Building  stood  vacant  until  destroyed  by  fire in

16

Ted Newcomen

12.  Ibid., pp.224-226.

13. Idem.

14. J.S. Gamer  (ed)  The

Company  Town:
architecture and society
in the early  industrial
age, New York:  Oxford
University  Press, 1992,
p.7.

15. W.T.  Morgan, 'The
Pullman  Experiment in
Review1, Journal of the
American Institute of
Planners, VoLXX, 1954,
pp.28-29.

16.  Chicago Fact  Book

Consortium, Local
Community Fact Book
Chicago  Metropolitan
Area,  Chicago:  Chicago
Review Press. 1984,
p.133.

17. J.H. White, The
American Railroad
Passenger  Car,
Baltimore and London:
Johns  Hopkins
University  Press, 1978,
p.261.

1931.  Pullman was no longer an isolated  settlement, and the building boom in
the surrounding  area saw the town outstripped in population  and prosperity.12

1930s  - Fighting Back the Slum
Although  by 1930 over  half the dwellings  were owner-occupied, the population
had  actually  fallen  by 20% in the preceding  20 years.13  Whilst  private  homes
were generally well maintained, others, especially the tenement blocks were poorly
kept, still lacking bathtubs  and electricity, with shared  hall-toilets and sinks. The
Public  Park  with  its street  lights,  benches  and gardens  gave way to weeds and
vandalism; front yards and alleys were strewn with rubbish. Many of the dwellings
were unoccupied and by 1930 Pullman was fast becoming a slum.14

In  1933 another  attempt was made to halt the decline by a team formed by
the Pullman Bank, which  still held about ten percent of the dwellings in a trust
and soon began to rehabilitate homes. The first efforts  were said to be too lavish
and  later  improvements  concentrated  on  installing  bathrooms  and  restoring
exterior  appearances.  Many  old and decaying  wooden  porches  were  removed;
private  owners  followed  suit,  often  employing  the  same  contractors.  Three
tenement blocks were demolished because of excessive deterioration,  which also
removed  socially  undesirable  families  from  the area. The project  was seen  as a
success and within  three  years  people who had sold out and left  were  buying
back their former  homes.ls

1940s  - Fluctuating  Population
Despite  the Great  Depression,  Pullman's  population  changed  little  during the
1930s. However, during  and after  the Second World War it increased by more
than  a  third,  approaching  a  total  of  9,000.  This  was accommodated  by the
subdivision  of dwellings  into  more  than  one unit.  The population  during the
1950s  appeared  to stabilise, but high  birth  rates  in the post-war  era disguised
the fact that many adults were actually leaving the town.

Post  1960 - Racial Changes
The last thirty  years have seen the biggest population  changes, particularly the
racial  mix. Traditionally  an  all-white  neighbourhood,  the  1960s  saw at  least
3,000  whites move out to be replaced by 5,000 blacks. In 1970 the population
reached  a  peak  of almost  11,000  people,  equally  divided  between  the races.
Today,-North  Pullman  is almost  exclusively  black,  and the white  population is
confined  to an area at the southern  end.16

Industrial Performance  at  Pullman

Industrial  Growth

The  fluctuating and slowly  declining  fortunes  of the town  bore  very  little
relationship  to  the  prosperity  of  the  Pullman  industrial  empire.  By 1897
Pullman  controlled  90% of the sleeping car service in North  America  and had
the  largest  railcar  manufacturing  plant  in the world.  This  increased  to about
97% in 1940 and on a dollar revenue basis represented  a 99.9% monopoly—a
rare achievement in any business.17

Pullman,  Illinois:  Changes  in  Community  Planning

17

18.  G.R.  Taylor, Satellite
Cities: the rise of urban
America, New York:  D.
Appleton,  1915,  p.46.

19. Buder,  op.cit., note 3,

pp.218-219.

20.  M. Edgerton  & K.

Heise,  Chicago:  Centre
for  Enterprise Vols. I and
n.  Woodland  Hills,
Cal.:  Windsor
Publications, 1982,
p.349  &  432.

21.  White, op.cit,  note

17, p.XI.

22.  Illinois  Historic

Preservation  Agency,
The Pullman State
Historic Site:
opportunities for the
future,  A report
prepared  by Caminos
Ltd.,  1993,  p.4.

23.  Landmarks

Commission  of Chicago,
A Summary of
Information on the South
Pullman  Landmark
District,  Internal  report,
6th  March  1972,  p.13.

24.  Historic  Pullman

Foundation, Pullman:
Where the Past  Inspired
the Present,  Undated
and  unpaginated  notes.

However,  most  profits  came  from  the contracting-out  of Pullman  cars  to
railway  companies  and not from  manufacturing  sales.  This  resulted  in wide
fluctuations  in  the  number  of  employees  in  the plant.  Apart  from  seasonal
variations  in the freight  car shops,  there  were  regular  lay-offs  during  times of
low economic  activity  and a corresponding  take-up in boom years. One of the
main causes of poverty in Pullman was cited as 'very irregular  work'.18 Because
of the unskilled or semi-skilled  content of the work  after  1907, a large  floating
population of casual labourers  accumulated.

The  sell-off  of  Pullman-owned  land  around  the  town  encouraged  new
businesses  into  the  area.  Industry  slowly  encroached  on  all  sides,  and the
increased use of steel in manufacturing  saw greater reliance on coal for smelting
and higher levels of pollution.19 The Pullman  empire diversified  into other types
of  production;  during  the  Second  World  War  almost  40% of  output  going
towards  defence  contracts. After  the war there  was further  diversification  into
trucks and trailers plus more armaments for the conflict in Korea. Industrial cut-
backs  and restructuring  saw extensive  demolition  of the factory  buildings in
1957 - the last railcar was produced at Pullman in  1981.20

Post-war  Industrial  Decline

Railroads  had reached  a  peak  during  World  War II as the most  common
means of inland transport in the USA, taking a 98% share of all inter-city travel.
No other means of transport, not even the automobile, has ever achieved such a
monopoly. This figure was gradually  eroded by competition  from  air travel and
the private car, until what  was once commonplace became obscure and almost
forgotten.21  Rapid  decline  from  the mid  1970s  to  the  1980s  devastated  a
traditionally strong industrial employment base. More recently, a few companies
have  again  begun to make investments in new facilities  close to the town, but
this still falls  well short of past levels.22

Recognition  of Conservation  Values and Heritage  Status

Demolition  Versus Conservation
By the late  1950s,  the residents  of Pullman  had become  complacent;  to most
people it was just  another  suburb  of Chicago. Few locals  ever  considered the
idea of their town being significant  and worthy of conservation. All this changed
when it was discovered  that  a local Chamber of Commerce had funded  a study
on  the area  surrounding  the industrial  district.  The report  recommended  that
Pullman  be demolished  and replaced  by an industrial  park.23  Residents  fought
the  plans  by reforming  the Pullman  Civic  Organisation,  a  local  civil  defence
organisation  from  the Second  World  War. Flyers  were  produced  and taken to
'the  best  looking  house  on each  block'  to be distributed  to the community at
large. In 1960 a meeting took place in the local church, at which the capacity
crowd voted for the preservation  of their  town.24 The recommendation  to level
Pullman was defeated  and the City of Chicago became aware of the strong local
feeling  to defend  the town  against  so-called progress from  the outside. Another
attempt  in 1967 to allow  a large  motel  to be built  adjacent  to the residential
area was also overturned. However, it was realised that only official  recognition

18

Ted Newcomen

as  an  historic  site  could  provide  long-
term  protection.  To  this  end, 
the
Beman Committee was formed  - named
after  the town's original  architect.

the 

Official Recognition of
Conversation Value
In  1969  the  US  Department  of  the
Interior  created  the  Pullman  National
Historic  Landmark  District,  and,  in
addition,  the  town  was  listed  on  the
National  Register  of  Historic  Places.25
This area included all the townsite  and
buildings  occupied  by 
former
Pullman  Palace  Car  Company.  In
1970,  Pullman  was  declared  a  State
Landmark  by 
the  Illinois  Historic
Preservation  Agency.  Two  years  later,
after 
designation
process, South Pullman  was declared  a
City  of  Chicago  Landmark.  In  1991,
the  State  of  Illinois  acquired 
the
remains 
the  Clock  Tower/
Administration  Building/  Car  Shops
and  the  Hotel  Florence.  This  area,
covering  over  thirteen  acres,  became
the Pullman State Historic Site. Finally,
in  1992,  the  area  to  the  north  of  the
townsite  was  designated  the  North
the
Pullman  Landmark  District  by 
City's  Commission 
on  Chicago
Landmarks. (Figure 9)

exhaustive 

an 

of 

This official  recognition of Pullman's
significance  by  Federal,  State  and  City
authorities  has  helped 
to  prevent
further  deliberate  destruction,  and
facilitate  proposals  for  conservation.
Theoretically, 
strongest
locally  and  weakest  at  the  national
level. The following  sections look more
closely  at  the  many  local  amenity
groups and statutory  authorities which
have  greatest  influence  on  Pullman
today.

these  are 

25.  Illinois  Historic

Preservation  Agency,
Prospectus:  Pullman State
Historic Site. Springfield,
Illinois: IHPA  Historic
Sites Division,  1991,
p.3.

/nil
flUIL
OIIC

«)•*

ititk

•)*>>,

Figure 9.  Map of North  and South Pullman
Landmark Districts. The North  Pullman
Landmark District comprises the two outlined
areas  (a and b)  towards the top of the map.
The South  Pullman Landmark District is
marked in  black at  the bottom of the map. The
Pullman  State  Historic Site  is marked c. The
Pullman National Historic Landmark District
is  bounded by  the line 
Chicago Landmarks Commission.

-.  [City of

Pullman,  Illinois: Changes in  Community  Planning

19

26.  Interview  with  John

Vega,  Executive
Director,  Historic
Pullman  Foundation,

27.  Interview  with  Amy

Salazar,  President,
Pullman  Civic
Organisation.

The Historic Pullman Foundation  (HPF)26
The HPF is a not-for-profit  organisation founded  in  1973 to provide a vehicle for
local  conservation  activities. It  was  created  by  a  group  of residents  and  other
interested  people  who  act  in  a  voluntary  capacity.  The  organisation  has  a
salaried  Executive  Director  who  is  supported  by  a  full-time  office  manager.  It
was  originally  housed  in  the  Old Masonic Lodge Building,  which  was  the first
structure  to  be repaired  by  the  group,  and  now  used  as  a  community  centre.
The  Foundation  also  owns  the  burnt-out  ground  floor  shell  of  the  Market
Building which  still awaits funds  for  restoration  work.

In  1975  the  Hotel  Florence  was  purchased  by  a  descendent  of  George
Pullman  and  given  to  the  Foundation.  Although  now  owned  by  the  State
Government,  the  organisation  maintains  the  building  and  has  developed  a
successful  restaurant business. From its offices in the Hotel, the HPF conducts an
educational tour programme for school children  and provides other activities for
tourists  and  special  interest  groups.  In  1994,  they  opened  a  visitor  centre/
museum  in  a  nearby  hall  which  is  currently  open  only  at  weekends.  Current
visitor  traffic  stands  at  about  100,000  p.a.,  but  generally  they  spend  little
money locally and arrive mostly in the summertime. The HPF hopes to increase
this  figure, 
the  fluctuation  and
unpredictability  of tourist numbers.

the  season,  and  minimise 

lengthen 

like many  non-profit  organisations the HPF relies heavily on volunteer  part-
time  workers  and  without  adequate  funding,  growth  is  inevitably  hampered.
The appointment  of a full-time  Executive Director two years ago, should  enable
the foundation  to attract  extra income from  government  sources, in  addition to
charitable  donations  and  corporate sponsorship. The HPF would like to develop
as  a  major  educational  resource  offering  a  wide  variety  of  programmes  at
different  levels. Transitional funds  are required to employ staff to get schemes off
the  ground  which will in turn  attract  further  income. Other aspirations  include
providing advice to local residents on how to repair their homes sympathetically
and obtain tax credits for such work. Long-term ambitions include the purchase
of  some  houses,  and  their  restoration  and  opening  in  their  original  1880's
appearance.

The  Pullman  Civic  Organisation  (PCO)27
The PCO is also a not-for-profit  corporation run  entirely by local volunteers. The
organisation  was  instrumental  in  saving  the  town  from  total  demolition  and
forming  the  Historic  Pullman  Foundation.  To  this  day,  there  is  an  overlap of
committee  members  and  a  large  degree  of  co-operation  between  the  two
organisations. The PCO operates more at a grass-roots level and aims to promote
the  general  welfare  of  the  whole  community  as  well  as  preserving  its  historic
significance.  A  wide  range  of  community  and  fund-raising  activities  are
promoted, including a Garden Club which looks after  areas such as the Arcade,
and  Pullman  Parks.  There  is  also  a  Community  Watch  which  concerns  itself
with  crime  prevention,  senior  citizens  programmes,  a  neighbourhood  festival
and  other sporting, recreational and social undertakings.

The Beman sub-committee  advises local residents  on  aspects of conservation
and  sensitive  modernisation  of  homes.  The  overall  aim  is  to  preserve  the

20

Ted  Newcomen

28.  'Pullman:  The  Strike
of  1894',  Pullman Strike
Centennial Events and
Programs  1994,
Promotional
information,
unpaginated.

29.  Landmarks

Commission  of Chicago,
North  Pullman District,
Preliminary  Summary,
1992,  pp.1-12.

30.  'Pullman  Puzzle',
N'Digo,  14-17  May
1995, p.42.

integrity  of the  outside of buildings  and maintain  the homogenous  architecture
of the area.

A Housing Information  Committee provides lists of houses for sale or rent for
people  who  are  interested  in  moving  to  Pullman.  Experience  has  shown  that
long-term residents often  pass on their homes to relatives who no longer live in
the  area.  They  in  turn,  tend  to  sell  through  outside  estate  agents  with  little
understanding  of Pullman or its historic  significance.

Houses  in  Pullman  provide  more  character  for  less  cost  than  other  older
suburbs  of  Chicago.  Also  local  municipal  taxes' are  relatively  low.  There  has
been a modern trend for people to buy multiple units and convert them to larger
single  units,  reversing  the  pattern  of  previous  generations  when  homes  were
sub-divided.  Internally,  many  Pullman  homes  are  now  unrecognisable  from
their original late nineteenth-century  layout. There has been a gradual increase
in owner-occupation  as opposed to absentee landlords. The old tenement blocks
have  always  been  a  problem  due  to  lower  standards  of  construction  and
services, resulting in cheap rents and social problems.

The provision of public housing is obviously a racially sensitive issue with the
PCO. Their position, in common with many residents in the south of Chicago, is
to  oppose  more  public  housing  until  other  areas  of  the  city  reach  the  same
quota  as  themselves.  There  is  a  clear  preference  for  scattered  rehabilitation  of
existing  properties  rather  than  new  construction  en masse. This  is seen  as  the
least  harmful  option  for  preserving  the  architectural  and  social integrity  of the
area.

Historic  North  Pullman  Organisation  (HNPO)
The  HNPO  is  a  non-profit  community-based  development  corporation.
Established  in  1989,  'to  improve  the  quality  of  life  in  the  northern  half  of the
original  town  of Pullman  through  the  development  of real  estate—and  human
capital—by utilising human service programmes and other resources.' Its goal is
to  use  the  concept  of  Urban  Neighborhood  Preservation  as  a  vehicle  to
accomplish  community development by rehabilitating real estate and people.28

North  Pullman  is a very  different  area  from  the south  of the  town. Isolated
by  the  Administration  Buildings  and  Car  Shops,  it  developed  completely
separately. North Pullman homes were constructed later, in a simpler style, and
without  the same community  facilities  or landscaping. Original residents tended
to be mainly unskilled  labourers  and semi-skilled  iron-workers  from  the  nearby
Allen  Works,  Union  Foundry  and  Pullman  Car  Wheel  Works.29  Compared  to
predominantly  white, middle class, conservation-oriented  South Pullman, North
Pullman  is  almost  exclusively  black  and  considerably  poorer,  with  a  higher
resident turnover and more absentee landlords. It is less accessible and generally
uninviting  to tourists. The area has  also suffered  from  some particularly  savage
restoration  work  and  the  sub-division  of  dwelling  units  which  has  eroded  the
homogenous  architecture.  (FigurelO)  Representatives  of  the  HNPO are  difficult
to contact  and  controversial efforts  by the Historic North Pullman Development
Project  have done nothing to restore public confidence  in  the  area.30

Pullman,  Illinois: Changes in  Community  Planning

21

32.  Historical American

Engineering Record:
Pullman  Industrial
Complex (HAER No.  XL-
5),  National  Park
Services, US Department
of the  Interior,
Washington  DC, 19 76,

32.  Interview  with  Tim

Barton,  Preservation
Specialist,  Landmarks
Division,  City of
Chicago.

[The author.

Figure  10.  North  Pullman Houses, showing signs of poverty  and neglect in  1995.  (Built
ca.1885). 
Historic American Engineering  Record (HAER)31
In  the  summer  of  1976,  the  Historic  American  Engineering  Record  of  the
National Parks Service conducted a recording project with co-sponsorship by the
Historic  Pullman  Foundation.  A team  of four,  including  engineering  historians
and  architectural  delineators,  carried  out 
the  most  comprehensive
documentation  of Pullman's industrial  complex. The report  made extensive use
of Pullman  archives, local experts, former  employees and many  other resources.
A comprehensive  description  of buildings, their uses and industrial processes for
manufacturing  passenger and freight  cars was provided. Changes brought  about
by the  implementation  of new  processes were  also identified.  A full  set of large
scale  drawings  was  drafted,  comparing  Pullman  at  different  periods  in  its
development, in  1886,  1901, and  1913. Also produced  was a  three-dimensional
depiction  of the  works as it appeared  in  1886. To date, the HAER has  been  an
under-utilised  resource,  but  the  proposed  creation  of  a  museum  featuring  the
Pullman  car-works  may  finally  see  this  excellent  record  displayed  and
appreciated.

The  Landmarks  Commission  of  Chicago32
The  Commission  was  established  in  1968  following  public  concern  at  the
destruction  of  many  of  the  city's  great  buildings.  It  is  responsible  for
recommending  to  the  City  Council  that  individual  buildings,  sites,  objects,  or
entire districts be designated as Chicago Landmarks. To support the Commission
there is a professional  full-time  staff forming the Landmarks Division of the City's
Department  of  Planning  and  Development.  The  professional  staff  assist  in  the
designation  process  and  review  building  permits  for  nominated  buildings  and
new  structures/  alterations  in  Landmark  Districts,  which  are  similar  to
Conservation Areas in the UK.

Of  all  the  statutory  authorities  which  have  an  influence  on  Pullman,  the

22

Ted Newcomen

33.  Landmarks

Commission  of  Chicago,
Questions  and  Answers
for  Owners  of  Proposed
Chicago  Landmarks,
Undated  information
leaflet,  p.2.

34.  Interview  with
Roberta  Deering,
Director  of Chicago
Office,  Illinois  Historic
Preservation  Agency

35.  Illinois Historic

Preservation  Agency,
Pullman State Historic
Site: Development
Proposal,  1991.

36.  Interview  with  Harry
H. Hunderman,  Senior
Consultant,  Wiss,
Janney,  Elstner
Associates Inc.,  and
with  Phil  Hamp,
Principal,  Vinci-Hamp
Architects  Inc.,

Landmarks  Commission  is  potentially  the  most  powerful.  Once  designated  a
Landmark District, all building permit applications in the area must be evaluated
by  the  Commission  to  determine  whether  the  work  will  affect  any  'significant
historical  and  architectural  features'. Work  on  these features  must be approved
by the Landmarks Commission. The Commission has no jurisdiction over zoning,
and  designation  of an  area  does not  automatically  result  in  any kind  of public
improvement  in  a  community.  However,  Landmark  status  can  be  used  as  an
argument to support requests for works to be carried out.

It  is difficult  to  assess  whether  Landmark  status  has  any  effect  on  property
values in Pullman. The factors  affecting  value are so various, that the impact of
designation  alone  has  never  been  determined.  Certainly,  in  the  eyes  of  some
buyers.  Landmark  designation  is  seen  as  an  asset,  and  both  real  estate
advertisements and agents often  tout this as a selling point. As far  as real estate
taxes  are  concerned,  neither  the  valuation  of  the  property  by  the  County
Assessor's  Office  nor  the  rate  of  taxes  fixed  by  the  local  legislative  body  is
affected  directly by Landmark designation.33 The Landmarks Commission's long-
term  aim  is  to  retain  the  homogenous  external  architecture  of  Pullman's
original  design.  As  yet,  no  design  guidelines  have  been  produced  and  even  a
cursory  walk  around  the  town  reveals  unauthorised  and  unsympathetic
alterations still happening, despite Landmark  status.

The  Illinois  Historic  Preservation  Agency  (IHPA)34
The Preservation  Services  Division  of the  IHPA  administers  federally  mandated
preservation programmes as well as those authorised by the State of Illinois. The
most  important  of  these,  as  far  as  Pullman  residents  are  concerned,  is  the
Property  Tax  Assessment  Freeze  Program.  Owners  of  single-family  owner-
occupied  properties  within  a  designated  Landmark  District  are  eligible  for
property  tax  breaks.  Rehabilitation  of  the  property  must  comply  with  the
'Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation',  and owners must spend
at  least  25%  of  the  market  value  of  the  property  on  the  project.  The
Preservation  Services  Division  also  administers  a  number  of  other  schemes
which  may  have  relevance  to  conservation  in  Pullman,  including  Illinois
Heritage Grants, Federal Historic Preservation  Grants, and Federal Tax Credits.
The  Agency  is  also  concerned  with  the  protection  of  Pullman  under  the
'review  and  compliance'  process  of  Section  106  of  the  National  Historic
Preservation  Act. Any  project  funded  or  licensed  by the  federal  government  is
examined  for  its impact on  the site. A similar  law  in Illinois  also requires state
agencies to submit projects  for review prior to commencement. The IHPA is the
state  organisation  charged  with  the  development  of the  Pullman  State Historic
Site. In  1991, the Agency produced a prospectus highlighting the historical and
architectural  significance  of the  area.  The report  also contained  a  development
proposal outlining economic, environmental  and  educational  benefits.35

Restoration  and  Stabilisation  Design  Study36
The  IHPA  employed  consultants  to  carry  out  a  Restoration  and  Stabilisation
Design  Study  on  the  remains  of the  Pullman  Car Works. This provided  a brief
history and description of the buildings as constructed,  a condition survey of the

Pullman,  Illinois:  Changes  in  Community  Planning

23

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

©

.

©

©

©

©

©

©

©

(•

ho

I

P

WJE

WEST  ELEVATION  OF  THE  ADMINISTRATION  BUILDING
•CALK  t/r 

-  r-o*

NORTH  ELEVATION  OF  THE  ADMINISTRATION  BUILDING

Figure 11.  Pullman State Historic Site: conceptual drawing  of administration building,  by John  Vlncl
Inc. &  Wtss, Janney, Elstner Associates Inc., Chicago, 1995.  [Illinois Historic Preservation  Agency.

surviving  structure,  and a  materials  conservation  analysis.  There  was also  a
summary  of  emergency  stabilisation  work  carried  out  during  the  winter  of
1994-95.  The  final  part  of  the  report  included  long-term  stabilisation
recommendations,  a  conceptual 
restoration  design,  and  preliminary
implementation  plan. Baseline drawings of the structure  were constructed  using
a  CAD system  which  should  prove  useful  if  sufficient  funds  can  be  found
actually to implement the recommendations of the study. (Figure 11)

The  remaining  factory  and administrative  buildings  appear  to be in a very
serious  state  of  dereliction.  Certain  areas  have  been  demolished  for  safety
reasons as they were in imminent danger of collapse. Ingress of water  through
the roof is widespread, resulting in extensive damage throughout.  Unfortunately
a  poorly  executed  programme  of  emergency  stabilisation  work  has  actually
created as many problems as it has solved.

The Pullman Historic  Site  Community  Planning  Project
In  1993, the  IHPA  commissioned  a.firm  of  consultants  to  undertake  the
Pullman  Historic  Site  Community  Planning  Project.  This was designed  to help
identify  opportunities 
revitalisation  and
development potential resulting from the improvement of the State Historic Site,
as  well  as to minimise  potential  negative  impacts.  Seven  objectives  evolved to
guide the planning process:
•  Ensuring  the  project  was mutually  beneficial  to  the  State  and  the local

the  community 

to  maximise 

community.

•  Establishing  links between  the Pullman  State  Historic Site and surrounding

• 

neighbourhoods.
Identifying  challenges and issues to be faced  during the development of the
Pullman  State Historic Site.

•  Analysing and prioritising neighbourhood needs.
•  Recognising  opportunities  for Pullman  and surrounding  neighbourhoods to

benefit  from the Pullman State Historic Site.

•  Detecting  potential  negative  impacts  resulting  from  development  of the

• 

Pullman State Historic Site, and outlining  strategies to mitigate them.
Identifying  opportunities  for  instilling  a  sense  of community  ownership in
the museum  project.

The community planning process comprised a series of interviews, activities, and
events,  involving  residents  and  key  organisations  active  in  Pullman  and
surrounding  areas.  This  also  included  planners  from  the City  of Chicago and
other  authorities,  regional  development  bodies, major  industrial  users, the Port
Authority, transport  providers, and members of local business

The  community  planning  project  began  in  August  1992, at  the  Hotel
Florence.  The IHPA  publicly  discussed  the status  of the project  and described
their  ideas  for  development  of the Administration  Building.  This  session  also
provided  consultants  with  an  opportunity  to  describe  the  overall  planning
process and identify  issues of particular  concern. The next month a community
planning  workshop  was  held  to  present  what  had  been  learned  about  the
demographic and housing patterns in the study area. The issues identified  at the

Pullman, Illinois: Changes in Community Planning 

25

37. Interview with
Roberta Deering,
Director of Chicago
Office, Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency.

first meeting  and through  the continuing interview process stimulated  continued
discussion  of community  needs  and  desirable  improvement  projects.

In  November,  a 

two-day  design  conference  gave  residents,  business
representatives,  and  community  leaders  their  first  look  at  how  suggested
improvements  within  the  Pullman  State  Historic  Site  might  be  physically
integrated  with  the  existing  community.  A  concept  plan  developed  by  the
consultants  prior  to  the  meeting  was  then  refined  to  reflect  the  suggestions  of
participants.  People  responded  to  a  statement  intended  to  describe  a  common
vision for the future  development  of the  area, and  were given the  opportunity  to
rank the relative importance of the recommended  projects and programmes. The
following  improvement  objectives  (listed  in  priority order) were  established:
1)  Develop the  Pullman  State Historic Site
2)  Upgrade  and  revitalise housing  in  Pullman  and  surrounding  communities.
3)  Improve public  safety.
4)  Improve education,  employment  opportunity  and job  training.
5)  Preserve Pullman  National  Historic Landmark  District resources.
6)  Improve the  physical  and  visual  environment.
7)  Encourage  links  between  the  Pullman  State  Historic  Site  and  nearby

commercial  districts.

These  seven  objectives  provided  guidance  for  the  final  list  of  recommendations
produced by the consultants. These were not the only objectives to appear in  the
completed  report.  For  example,  although  industrial  infrastructure  improvements
were not  identified  as a priority by participants  at either  the first meeting  or  the
community  planning  workshop,  they  were  identified  at  other  stages  of  the
planning  process  and,  as  such,  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  concept  plan  for
the  area.  The  final  event  of  the  process  was  a  community  planning  congress.
Representatives  of  area  community  groups,  key  businesses,  the  City  of  Chicago
and  the  IHPA were  invited  to  meet  and  reach  agreement  on  the  Pullman  State
Historic  Site  Community  Vision  and  the  various  projects  recommended  to
achieve  its  completion.

The resulting report,  The Pullman State Historic Site: opportunities for  the future,
presented  a  vision  of  the  future  focusing  on  three  major  areas  of opportunity  -
community  revitalisation,  industrial  development  and  physical  improvements. A
strategic  action  plan  was  included  in  the  report  which  identified  short,  medium
and  long-term  activities,  and  the  organisations  responsible  for  each  with  an
indication  of potential  funding  sources.

ISTEA, Funding  and Plans  for a  Railway  Museum37
After  the  completion  of the  community  planning  process  the  IHPA obtained  $5
million  in  government  funds  under  the  Intermodal  Surface  Transportation
Efficiency  Act (ISTEA). Some of this money was allocated to the enhancement of
historic railroad structures, such  as the town of Pullman. By 1995  half a million
dollars  had  been  spent  on  emergency  stabilisation  of structures  in  the  Pullman
State Historic  Site. A further  $3  million  was to be allocated  to more  permanent
stabilisation  and  weatherproofing  including  a  Restoration  and  Stabilisation
Design Study. Another half million dollars was earmarked  for reports and  urgent

26

Ted Newcomen

repairs  to the Hotel  Florence.  ISTEA  funds  of about  $250,000  went  towards
planning  a  comprehensive  museum  in  the  Clock  Tower/  Administration
Building/  Car Shops  complex.  The museum  is to  encompass  a  wide  range of
topics  associated  with  Pullman,  the model  community,  railcar  production,  rail
transport,  labour  history,  Pullman  Porters,  etc. The next  phase  will  involve
applications  to government  agencies  and corporate  sponsors  for funds  to carry
out  conservation  work  and adaptation  to a  museum.  There  are also  plans to
repair  part  of the  derelict  Market  Hall Building  and convert  it to a repository for
all  Pullman  archives.

38. For further  informa-

tion on the 'Main Street
Program* contact the
National Trust for
Historic Preservation,
National Main Street
Centre,  1785
Massachusetts Avenue,
NW, Washington, DC
20036, USA.

Successful  Community  Planning  for  the  Regeneration  of
Historic  Areas
It may be too early to judge the effectiveness  of the  community  planning  process
at  Pullman  but the basic  elements  are gradually  falling  into  place  which are
known  to  be  essential  for  the  successful 
regeneration  of  any  historic
neighbourhood.  The following  list is based  on one of America's  most  successful
economic  development  programmes,  'Main  Street', run by the National  Trust for
Historic  Preservation.38

a)  Organisation  - the bringing  together  of all the different  interest  groups and
individuals  with  the aim of  working  towards  common  goals.  Each  group
naturally  comes  with its own  agenda, be it conservation  of buildings,  improving
the  housing  stock, job creation,  increased  retail  sales  to tourists  etc. The key  is
to  manage  these  conflicting  aspirations  in an intelligible  way so that  a  shared
vision is created  and all players  come to 'own'  the project.

b)  Design  - a  common  sense  pragmatic  approach  to the re-use  of buildings.
Early  visual  evidence  that  something  is happening  is coupled  with  a  long-term
wish  to  improve  the  local  environment  -  including  small 
'streetscape'
improvements,  facade  rehabilitation,  signage  control, etc

c)  Economic  Support  -  putting  an  area  on a  sound  economic  footing  by
attracting  a  mix of  funds  (private  and  public)  to  support  new  projects,
encouraging  start-up  businesses, and making  existing  firms  more  competitive.

d) Marketing - telling the community  and supporters  what  improvements are
planned  - promoting  a vision for the future.  Advertise  successes,  however  small,
using  the district's  historic  qualities  as  the thread  which  links  promotional
activity.

These  four  elements  are supported  by a further  eight  principles:-

•  Being  Comprehensive.  Ensure  a  continuous  and  on-going  series  of co-
ordinated  smaller  projects  which  impact  on as many  members  of the local
community  as possible. Never  bite off more  than  you  can chew by going for
one. huge  undertaking.

• 

Incremental  Objectives.  Set short-term,  achievable,  and visible  goals  which
are  backed  up by longer-term  objectives  (these  may be less  obvious  but  are
ultimately  more  critical). Small successes  build  confidence  and skills to tackle
bigger  problems  later on.

Pullman,  Illinois: Changes in Community  Planning

27

•  Maintaining  Quality.  Quality  is  everything,  be  it  physical  improvements  or
promotional  literature.  Always  employ  professional  full-time  staff.  Get  the
right 
'movers  and  shakers'  on  the  management  committees.  Retired
businessmen  or  local government  officials  with  time on  their  hands  are not
always the most suitable candidates.

•  Promoting  Self-help.  Ensure  support  and  implementation  is  by  the  local
community  who  must  'own'  the  project,  with  outside  advice  from  experts
when  required.

•  Encouraging  Change.  One  of  the  first  accomplishments  may  be  to  change

community  attitudes about the area  from  negative to positive.

• 

Identifying  and  Capitalising  on  Existing  Assets.  Get  to  know  an  area's
strengths  and  weaknesses. Emphasise the first, minimise the second  - stress
the accomplishments, not the problems.

•  Ensuring  a  Public/Private  Partnership.  Success  comes  from  involving  both
sectors,  each  making  its  own  contribution,  each  having  different  strengths
and weaknesses.

•  Being  Action-oriented.  Small,  early,  dramatic  improvements  will  reinforce
the  idea  that  something  positive  is  actually  happening  and  maintains  local
support.

Conclusion and Future  Directions
Pullman and its history are quintessential Americana, coming as they do during
the  United  States'  rapid  rise  to  pre-eminence  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth
century.  The  town  reflects  the  economic,  social  and  political  changes  in
America. It demonstrates the struggle between capital and labour, the evolution
of  the  factory  system,  and  the  phenomenon  of  succeeding  waves  of  mass
migration.  It  also  represents  the  decay  of  heavy  engineering  in  the  northern
United  States,  the  decline  of the  railway  system,  and  the  flight  of capital  from
the Midwest industrial  heartland  during the  1970s and  1980s.

The State of Illinois, in the form of the IHPA, will hopefully  continue to take
a  leading  role  in  implementing  the  recommendations  of  the  Pullman  Historic
Site  Community  Planning  Project.  Without  such  direction  to  ensure  co-
operation  between  a plethora  of interested organisations, the vision will remain
a  'wish-list'  and  the  long-term  conservation  of  Pullman  will  remain  in  doubt.
The development of Pullman  as a tourist  destination  and in  its maintenance  as
an  attractive  place to live seems best served by greater  involvement  of the City
of  Chicago.  In  particular,  further  research  needs  to  be  carried  out  into  the
management of North Pullman, solving the social problems which have allowed
the  area  to drift  into decay.

There  still  remains  the  need  for  community  consultation  to  establish  a
complete set of guidelines  for  the repair,  alteration  and improvement  of original

28 

Ted Newcomen

Pullman  dwellings.  Guidelines  should  be  distributed  to  all  local  residents,
architects,  building  contractors,  and  real  estate  agents  and  be  followed  up by
close  monitoring.  Pullman's  conservation  value  has  been  officially  recognised
and  steps  are  being  taken  to  halt  the  destruction  of  the  surviving  industrial
structures.  However,  the  long-term  prognosis  is  not  good;  current  economic
restraints  in  the  USA  make  the  funding  of  a  railway  museum  an  unlikely
prospect.  Funds  spent  on  temporary  repairs  and  weather  protection  to  the
administration  building  and  car-shops  will be  wasted  unless  the next  phase of
restoration  and conversion  to a museum can be carried out almost immediately.
As yet  authorities  do not  appear to have explored the  option  of trading-off  part
of  the  thirteen  acre  site  for  a  commercial  redevelopment  which  includes  tax
benefits  for  a  private  developer  in  return  for  work  on  the  remaining  Pullman
industrial  buildings.  Such  an  option  my  be  distasteful  to  some  conservation/
heritage purists but may be the only viable alternative to long-term  destruction.

The author  wishes to acknowledge the advice and assistance of all those persons interviewed and
mentioned in  the notes.  The assistance of the  University of York Department of Archaeology
Research Fund with  the preparation of illustrations is  also gratefully  appreciated.

Pullman,  Illinois: Changes in  Community  Planning 

29


