International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Monty Python’s Iconicity

Mike Parker

To cite this article: Mike Parker (2007) Monty￿Python’s Iconicity, International Journal of Heritage
Studies, 13:6, 514-520, DOI: 10.1080/13527250701570820
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250701570820

Published online: 28 Sep 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 395

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 13, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 514–520

Monty Python’s Iconicity
Mike Parker

MikeParker
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_256939.sgm
10.1080/13527250701570820
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2007Taylor & Francis
136000000November 2007

parkermlp8@aol.co.ukCultural icons have always played a significant role in the way societies define their
existence. Today it is difficult to imagine life without the hyper proliferation of image
production that is central to the way we live. These images do not share equal impor-
tance. Some transcend individuality and are central to our national or even interna-
tional  identity.  Some,  like  great  art,  may  even  reveal  insights  into  what  it  is  to  be
human.

In this article I would like to explore the nature of what we often refer to as ‘cultural
icons’, asking the central question as to whether it is possible to bring to the debate
elements or characteristics of iconicity that could lead towards a general definition of
cultural icons.

Identifying  or  attempting  to  categorise  the  nature  of  these  important  images  is  a
huge and difficult task. It is also one that can be highly contestable. Who is to say one
image  is  iconic  and  the  other  not?  In  the  absence  of  logical  defining  characteristics
we eventually  arrive  at  the  statement  that  ‘anything  can  be  an  icon’1  or  Warhol’s
15 minutes of fame; I categorically refute the possibility of either position. In this paper
I will consider Monty Python as an English cultural icon, partly in the hope that the
comedy team is well known enough to be familiar to most readers but mainly in order
to  argue  that  factors  of  iconicity  (within  my  definition)  deny  Monty  Python  iconic
status.

What is an Icon?

In the early 1970s the individuals associated with Monty Python’s Flying Circus were
among the most famous celebrities in the Western world. To the present day, the popu-
larity of their productions and their individual fame has proved durable on an interna-
tional scale. Recently, this popularity has resulted in Monty Python being nominated
for a place in ‘Icons, A Portrait of England’, an online collection of potentially iconic
imagery sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. It is the intention

Mike Parker, University of Central Lancashire. Correspondence to: parkermlp8@aol.co.uk

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701570820

International Journal of Heritage Studies

515

of this essay to look carefully at the reasons for the inclusion of Monty Python, and to
analyse any possible confusion surrounding icon categorisation.

The attempt by ‘icons on-line’ to gather together nominations for icons representing
England is commendable yet misguided. The resulting mishmash of images nominated
by the public reveals a lack of definition and structure. It can certainly be argued that a
formal definition—given the nature of the subject—may not be possible, but, in its
absence,  a  list  of  arbitrary  icon  nominations  is  just  that,  as  valuable  a  tool  for  the
comprehension of cultural phenomena as any other ‘top 100’ public vote. I am certain
that icons are more than this, so what is a cultural icon? ‘Icons on-line’ suggests certain
features as guidelines for potential nominations: 

Icons,  for  our  purposes,  have  to  be  uniquely  important  to  life  in  England  and  the
people  who  live  here.  That  we  can  all  agree  on.  Some  are  obvious.  Stonehenge.
Cricket.2

The first part of the statement we can accept without reservation; icons must signify at
a fundamental level something essential to a group of people with common interests.
This, as I will argue, can range from small subgroups of people to large communities,
nations, and even whole hemispheres. The connected statement is fraught with diffi-
culty. Some are not obvious. In this instance cricket.

As part of a working definition of iconic characteristics, I have suggested previously
that an icon, at any level, needs to have a distinct, reproducible visual image. Icons on-
line, from the same section as the quote above, recognises the ocular importance of this
specific requirement: ‘if no one has heard of it or knows what it looks like, it cannot be
an icon’. So what does cricket look like? It is reasonable to suggest that most people
would be able to formulate a mental image of a cricket game. Possibly, this may extend
to  countries  where  the  game  is  not  played  extensively,  such  as  the  USA.  It  would
certainly include countries where cricket is part of the national sporting culture, such
as Australia, the West Indies, India, etc. So, if people from widely disparate nations can
readily relate to a general cricketing image, how can we extricate and localise this as
purely English?

Cricket, as a generic image cannot be considered an icon of England. Yet there is
something unique about the image potential that applies directly to English culture.
These are the associated iconic images, i.e. ones that are mentally brought to the fore
when  the  terms  England  and  cricket  are  co-presented.  Some  of  these  would  surely
include the village green, Lords cricket ground, W. G. Grace, Ian Botham, and so on.
Equally, other cultures or subgroups would have the potential for associated imagery
around the generic term cricket.

Figure 1

English cricketUnfortunately, if we use the guidelines stipulated by Icons on-line, two of England’s
great sporting heroes (Ian Botham and W. G. Grace) would be excluded as, incredibly,
individuals are not to be recognised as icons within the on-line definition (is this possi-
bly due to a clash of publicity with the simultaneous public debate over the 100 greatest
Britons?): 

When we’re talking about icons we don’t mean people. Churchill and Darwin may live
on as historical figures but we won’t be including them as icons in this collection. This

516 M. Parker

Figure 1 English cricket

does not mean we ignore key individuals it just means that we will include Shakes-
peare’s plays rather than the man from Stratford.

Icons reflect what is characteristically human. The dramatic element linking all icons
is the  one  closest  to  human  perception,  the  tragic  element.  Rather  than  excluding
eminent people from a study of what we consider iconic we should focus our attention
directly  on  these  important  individuals.  How  is  it  possible  to  assign  credibility  to  a
discussion of icons that specifically excludes human icons yet places high on the list (as
the online nominations do) examples such as Robin Hood, Sherlock Holmes, Henry
VIII, Peter Pan, John Peel and, for our concerns, Monty Python? This is a difficulty
which  can  be  addressed  possibly  in  future  discussions;  for  now,  however,  we  can
concentrate on one specific proposed national icon.

Monty Python

Fame and celebrity do not automatically produce icons. The purely celebrity image,
although widely recognisable in its time, quickly fades when this fleeting fame is lost.
‘Of  the  moment’  celebrities  have  little  image  durability.  Monty  Python,  unlike  the
majority of comedy acts, has retained an importance within our national consciousness
that has, very importantly, transcended a generation. It is, after all, extremely funny.

People discovered Monty Python in the early 1970s; it was not created and marketed by
a media machine. 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

517

We didn’t have very long to do it, two or three days rehearsal, then we went straight
on. And it just went nuts. They were just crazy for it and we were going ‘Wow this is
interesting’. We had no idea of the wealth of love for Python or the depth of it or the
craziness or the fanaticism of it.3

It  has  even  been  suggested  that,  at  their  peak,  members  of  the  Python  team  were
perceived more as rock stars than comedians. At their height they were performing in
a very similar manner. In 1978 they performed several shows at the Hollywood Bowl,
to audiences who could recite most of the familiar script, identical to crowd participa-
tion at rock gigs.

The Monty Python comedy team fails as a national icon for two specific reasons, both
of which are essential features of icons within my developing definition. The first char-
acteristic  is  fairly  obvious.  Monty  Python  does  not  have  a  distinct  and  reproducible
visual image. What does exist is a series of recognisable interconnected images that do
not relate to one specific phenomenon. The images we have available are, admittedly,
very well known: the cartoon foot, the lumberjack, the silly walk, the parrot sketch and
various other snapshots from the Python films. The variation of these images dilutes the
symbolic  reference  in  a  manner  completely  opposite  to  that  applicable  to  a  specific
individual or object. For example, we may be able to produce a series of images of Elvis
Presley possibly at different stages in his career, but these always refer distinctly to an
unmistakable symbolic reference.

The lack of distinct imagery is compounded by the fact that the show was produced
by six individuals all of whom, if taken individually, do not necessarily refer us directly
to a Monty Python referent. These specific individuals were in reality comedy writers/
performers who created a series of hugely popular roles. Like all synthetic screen perfor-
mances, especially comedy performances, there arises a confusion between the comedian
and the character that diminishes the essence of any potential iconic status. Peter Sellers,
for instance, would be an unlikely iconic figure in the absence of Inspector Clouseau.
With an ensemble cast this difficulty is further exacerbated, and for Monty Python six-
fold (it is interesting to note that the early death of Graham Chapman has not resulted
in a strengthening of any associated imagery, as is usually the case with potential icons).
People simply don’t know what Monty Python looks like. Therefore we should not
be too surprised to discover that ‘icons on-line’ could have produced a series of images
to  represent  Monty  Python  rather  than  reproducing  a  single,  obvious,  image  that  is
unmistakeably Pythonesque.

Figure 2

The Monty Python teamThe members of the Monty Python team are undoubtedly comedy icons. The images
that we have, however diverse they may be, are nonetheless recognisable and durable.
However, of all the iconic subgroupings I would suggest that comedy is one of the weak-
est, producing very few iconic figures that have transcended the category into national
or international iconography. The lack of distinct imagery is a crucial element in this.
If we compare Python with some other figures who have transcended the comedy cate-
gory, it may assist my argument regarding the dilute nature of Pythonesque imagery.

518 M. Parker

Figure 2 The Monty Python team

As with all theories and opinions that touch on emotive themes such as music, art
and in this case comedy, the positions championed are often hotly contested. Taking
into account the realisation that iconic status is challengeable, there are, without doubt,
some comedians that have exceeded the boundaries of comic iconicity, and have gone
on to become national, or even Western, cultural icons. The Monty Python team does
not seem to have done this.

This  has  nothing  to  do  with  who  is  or  is  not  funny.  The  humour  generated  by
Python is internationally recognised as being amongst the greatest of all time. One of
their  films,  The  Life  of  Brian  (1979),  was  recently  placed  number  1  in  a  Channel  4
(TV) poll. Together with Monty Python and the Holy Grail (their first film) we find
them invariably in the top categories. A recent Google Internet search produced over
3  million  results.  These  are  very  funny  people  and  their  productions  are  durably
hilarious.

Laughter is a sole characteristic of the human race. Our ability to reason is based on
the fact that we are able to build abstract conceptual constructs on an innate perceptual
base. My theory of icons relies heavily on the idea that iconic individuals/objects grav-
itate  closely  to  this  perceptive  foundation.  Comedy,  in  this  respect,  always  plays
concept against concept, or concept against perception: 

The phenomenon of laughter always signifies the sudden apprehension of an incon-
gruity  between  such  a  concept  and  the  real  object  thought  through  it,  and  hence
between what is abstract and what is perceptive. The greater and more unexpected this
incongruity in the apprehension of the person laughing, the more violent will be his
laughter.4

Pythonesque  humour  works  at  an  extremely  refined  conceptual  level.  Examples  are
legion.  Starting  from  a  recognisable  base—the  archetypal  middle-class  professional,
the shopkeeper, the Canadian Mounty—the various performances clinically invert our
conceptions  of  what  these  individuals/institutions  mean.  The  professional  holds  an
office in the Ministry of Silly Walks, the pet shop owner sells dead animals yet refuses
to accept the ‘Norwegian Blue’ parrot is dead, the Mounty is a closet transvestite …
‘just like my dear papa’. Even the brilliantly simple coconut theme at the beginning of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

519

‘Holy  Grail’  (where  instead  of  riding  horses  the  ensemble  bang  two  coconut  halves
together) is extended into a brilliantly funny but equally complex humour sequence.

The  difficulty  with  this  particular  type  of  humour  is  that  it  is  not  universal.  Put
simply,  large  numbers  of  people  simply  don’t  ‘get  it’  (often  the  types  of  people  the
Python team were trying to ridicule). This significantly reduces the potential impact
that an associated image would have for  iconic status. This highly abstract humour
(again we need to repeat that complexity does not mean unfunny), by definition, is
distanced from a common perceptual base. This, together with the lack of a distinct,
reproducible, visual image, makes the possibility of Monty Python becoming a national
icon highly improbable.

Comedy icons that do transcend national boundaries are extremely rare, but they do
exist. One very satisfying aspect of studying icons is that any proposed theory, idea or
categorisation has to be confirmed by supporting examples. For example, if Tommy
Cooper is seen as fitting the broad classification of a comedy icon specific to England
(given the distinct, reproducible, visual image) then this may be generally accepted.
Does this, however, make him a national icon? Does his image have enough common
appeal to transcend his comedy status? Are there aspects of his character/persona that
reveal a human dramatic element, tragedy or sex? The answers to these questions are
probably negative. There are, nevertheless, examples of comedians whose appeal is to
the universal, perceptive, nature of humour, and whose connection to the public walks
the thin line between the humorous and the tragic. In two famous cases the individuals
concerned have not only gained national iconic status but have gone on to become
international cultural icons—Laurel and Hardy, and Charlie Chaplin.

My  categorisation  of  cultural  icons  relies  heavily  on  the  theory  that  associated
symbolic  imagery  is  strengthened  by  its  proximity  to  the  innate  perceptions  of  the
receiver. If we all, as human beings, have identical perceptual apparatus, then the most
powerful  iconic  imagery  must  appeal  directly  to  these  universal  human  features.
Complex, highly abstracted ideas—while being potentially hilarious or interesting to
many—do not necessarily achieve this direct appeal. Abstracted conceptualisations are
generally specific and, as such, are culturally determined. When iconic appeal tran-
scends the abstract and touches the universal—similar to the profound effect of great
music and art—the strength of the iconic image is concentrated into an iconic signa-
ture. Consider the images in Figure 3. Now it is not being suggested that these images
are  instantly  recognisable  by  everyone  who  views  them.  The  study  of  icons  is  not  a
scientific experiment. What I have tried to suggest here are possible reasons relating to
why the first two images would probably be identified by people throughout the world,

Figure 3 Cultural icons

520 M. Parker

across  generations  and  cultures  and  over  long  periods  of  time,  whereas  images  of
Monty  Python  are  not,  perhaps,  immediately  recognisable  even  within  our  own
national boundaries.

Figure 3 Cultural icons

Notes

1[1]
2[2]

3[3]
4[4]

Jencks, ‘Cathedral and bike shed’, 48.
From Icons on-line, ‘what do we mean by an icon? [accessed 20 August 2006], available at
http.//www.icons.org.uk/.
Palin et al., The ‘Pythons’ Autobiography, 178.
Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, 91.

References

Ashworth, G. J. ‘Editorial: On Icons and Icons’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 12, no. 5

(2006): 392–93.

Jencks,  C. ‘Cathedral and Bike Shed: Icons and the City. The Architectural Review (2006).
———. ‘The Iconic Building is Here to Stay’. City 10, no. 1 (2006): 3–20.
———. The Iconic Building: The Power of Enigma. London: Frances Lincoln, 2006.
Palin,  M.,  Jones,  T.,  Gilliam,  T.  and  Idle,  E.  The  ‘Pythons’  Autobiography  by  the  ‘Pythons’  (Monty

Python). London: Orion Books, 2003. 

Schopenhauer, A. The World as Will and Representation. Vol. 1 Translated by E. F. Payne. New York:

Dover, 1969.


