International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

A new model for memory work: nostalgic
discourse at a historic home

Christina J. Hodge

To cite this article: Christina J. Hodge (2011) A new model for memory work: nostalgic
discourse at a historic home, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 17:2, 116-135, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2011.541065
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.541065

Published online: 08 Feb 2011.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1050

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 17, No. 2, March 2011, 116–135

A new model for memory work: nostalgic discourse at a historic 
home
Christina J. Hodge*

Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_541065.sgm

(Received 29 September 2009; final version received 10 November 2010)

172000000March 2011
ChristinaHodge
chodge@fas.harvard.edu
10.1080/13527258.2011.541065
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2011Taylor & Francis

To  make  domestic  heritage  sites  useful  to  their  communities,  we  must
acknowledge discourses, define structures and critically examine the interplay of
our  own  and  others’  practices  of  commemoration.  How  do  agendas  of
remembering  and  forgetting  intersect  at  historic  dwellings?  These  issues  are
explored through the Elihu Akin House, a late eighteenth-century house museum
in a New England coastal village. Existing site narratives are dissected through the
social theories of Peirce and Bourdieu, revealing nostalgia as a structuring element
of  cultural  logics.  The  author  argues  that  mechanisms  of  nostalgia,  approached
critically, offer interpretive common ground for memory work at historic homes
(and  beyond).  As  a  material  and  emotional  discourse,  nostalgia  binds  memory,
place  and  experience.  This  study  proposes  a  new  model  for  heritage-makers
seeking  to  alter  site  narratives  without  undermining  a  site’s  established  worth.
They might identify then disrupt pre-existing nostalgic narratives, finally bridging
those  disruptions  through  additional,  critical  nostalgic  discourses.  New  and
established narratives can coexist, in harmony and in tension, and visitors should
be invited into the interpretive process.

Keywords: memory; nostalgia; heritage; narrative; semiotics; practice theory

Discourses of heritage
Memory work: heritage as practical experience

This is but a small sheaf among many others; for, as the floor of the woods is covered
with fallen leaves and pieces of detached bark, so the little woodland of my thoughts is
strewn over with these rough fragments and memories. Yet the old homestead still stands
as I have written it. There is no latchstring. It is always open to receive us. (Houston
1906, preface)

Archaeology specifically, and heritage in general, is increasingly framed as ‘memory
work’: an interdependent process of remembering and forgetting. Memory, whether
individual or collective, is not stable. Memory work is not about retrieving a past truth;
it is about reconstructing the past’s present, shifting legacies ‘in anticipation of the
future’  (Hallam  and  Hockey  2001,  p.  3).  It  often  comprises  the  creation  of  public
memories from private ones. Our professional responsibility is to be mindful about
this work, actively articulating what is being remembered or forgotten, how and why.
To make heritage sites useful, we must acknowledge discourses, define structures and

*Email: chodge@fas.harvard.edu

ISSN 1352-7258 print/ISSN 1470-3610 online
© 2011 Christina J. Hodge
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2011.541065
http://www.informaworld.com

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 117

Figure 1. The Elihu Akin House in Dartmouth, Massachusetts, 2007. Photograph by the author.
Figure 2. Elihu Akin House, 1905. Photograph by Henry B. Worth. Courtesy of the New Bedford Whaling Museum.

critically examine the interplay of our own and others’ practices of commemoration
(see also Edgeworth 2006, Little and Shackel 2007). Material and affective mecha-
nisms entangle individual memory with collective memory at history sites, a contested
process that reproduces structured social value and meaning. The domestic setting of
house museums affords certain possibilities, but core issues of memory and place are
universal.  This  case  study  considers  the  Elihu  Akin  House,  a  historic  house  in  the
north-east United States that is in the process of becoming a heritage site (Figures 1
and 2). Through it I propose a new model of heritage practice: one based in nostalgia.
The cornerstones of heritage practice are experience and narrative. These practices
reproduce meaning, identity, history and community at individual and collective scales.
This  conception  of  heritage  is  rooted  in  ontologies  of  materiality,  phenomenology,
practice and discourse. Materiality: people and things indivisibly and simultaneously
constitute each other. Phenomenology: physical, embodied experiences make spaces
meaningful. Practice: everyday engagements show and shape who we are, and new
experiences  transform  old  assumptions  about  the  world.  Discourse:  social  reality  is
broached as if it is brought into being through worldly practices. That is, practices do
not simply reflect social reality; they comprise it.

Material-based  discourse  analysis  is  a  powerful  tool  for  practical  critique  in
contexts, like heritage sites, where colonialism, capitalism and similar structures are
continuously experienced and created (Bender 2002, Paynter 2002, Smith 2006, Hall
and  Bombardella  2007).  As  Smith  (2006)  has  expertly  argued,  the  very  concept  of
‘heritage’ is self-evident only because of the efficacy of discourses in which it plays.
In this article, I first review the theoretical underpinnings of my analytical approach

Figure 1. The Elihu Akin House in Dartmouth, Massachusetts, 2007. Photograph by the author.

118

 C.J. Hodge

Figure 2. Elihu Akin House, 1905. Photograph by Henry B. Worth. Courtesy of the New
Bedford Whaling Museum.

(from Peirce et al. 1998 and Bourdieu 1977). Then I explore a key structuring logic of
memory work at heritage sites: nostalgia. The case study dissects current discourses
of memory and power at a historic farmstead in Dartmouth, Massachusetts. Analysis
of these discourses reveals assumptions, elisions, insertions and other mechanisms of
political and social legitimisation. After defining new goals for memory work at the
case study site, I propose a discursive manipulation of memory work there. I conclude
that,  if  correction  is  an  agenda,  we  should  first  evaluate  then  disrupt  pre-existing
nostalgic narratives, finally bridging the disjunctions through new, critical nostalgic
discourse.  For  this  technique  to  be  effective,  we  must  invite  the  visitor  into  the
interpretive process.

Theoretical groundwork: a summary of Peirce and Bourdieu
One should always be thoughtful and reflexive, and engagement with social theory is
one path to mindful heritage practice. I find elements of both Bourdieuian structural-
ism and Peircian semiotics helpful in critically thinking through memory-making at
heritage sites (Bourdieu 1977, Peirce et al. 1998). As are all useful theoretical frame-
works,  they  are  tools  for  systematically  thinking  through  and  beyond  familiarised,
naturalised or otherwise obscured cultural processes.

Charles Sanders Peirce forwarded a less-logocentric semiotics: a relational under-
standing  of  human  subjectivities  created  through  worldly  engagements,  which  is
represented  through  an  irreducibly  triadic  scheme  of  sign–object–interpretant.  His
work  now  enjoys  an  established  place  within  archaeological  studies  (Preucel  2006,
Joyce 2008, Knappett and Malafouris 2008, Mills and Walker 2008). His ideas are not,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 119

however, commonly applied to reflexive studies of heritage practice. This application
is  profitable  and  offers  to  unite  international  discussions  of  history-  and  memory-
making  through  archaeology,  history,  heritage,  museology  etc.,  in  new  ways.  In
Peircian terms, competing discourses signify as one of three hierarchical types of sign/
object relationships: icon, index and symbol (Peirce et al. 1998, pp. 13–17, Preucel
2006, pp. 56–57).1 Peirce originally proposed that everything can be categorised as
icon,  index  or  symbol.  But  the  comprehension  of  indexes  depends  on  established
icons,  and  ‘all  symbols  are  indexical  because  they  act  through  tokens  or  replicas’
(Preucel  2006,  p.  56).  I  would  make  the  further  point  that  things  can  function
simultaneously – even contradictorily – in more than one of these categories.2

Pierre Bourdieu proposed that established modes of practical/perceived understand-
ing  –  called  ‘habitus’  –  define  the  mechanisms  through  which  meaning  (including
memory) is created. Elements of habitus that are ‘doxic’ are assumed, unquestioned,
unarticulated. Through the role of interpretants, these doxas are reproduced in Peircian
symbols and underlie indexes and icons. Bourdieu called challenging new daily prac-
tices  ‘heterodoxic’.  Heterodoxies  might  create  new  icons  and  indexes.  Consciously
conservative responses are ‘orthodoxic’. Orthodoxies reiterate old icons or indexes and
can create new icons.

The Elihu Akin House, built ca. 1762 as a farmstead, is a ‘dwelling’: both a home
and a place of thoughtful and repetitive engagement, in this case with the past. The
once-‘forgotten’ property was purchased by the town of Dartmouth in 2008, and the
house has since been subjected to preservation and archaeological study. Like other
aspects of heritage, archaeology is a memory practice of assemblage, the creation of
a new and partial whole from collected – and recollected – fragments. As the Akin
House is reinvested with significance, it has been exposed and destabilised, selectively
recalled via narratives of history, identity and place. Critical reading of these narra-
tives,  facilitated  by  the  social  theories  of  Peirce  and  Bourdieu  just  described,  finds
nostalgia  is  a  key  structuring  element  of  the  newly  orthodoxic  and  heterodoxic
discourses  (practical  and  semiotic)  at  play.  Nostalgia  is  typically  under-regarded,
under-theorised  or  simply  dismissed  by  scholars  because  of  its  assumed  regressive
agenda.  I  argue,  however,  that  nostalgia  offers  compelling  common  ground  among
disparate memorial narratives, potentially including revision and critique.

Nostalgia as prospective memory
Some scholars, embracing a traditional understanding of chronology, posit time and
social process as separate subjects of inquiry (Paynter 2002, p. 86). Others envision
temporality as a human process that both informs and is created by anthropological
and historical study (Munn 1992). In this sense, archaeological time is an emerging
antidote to the linear time of historicism, alternatively proposing human time as non-
linear,  multi-temporal,  conflated,  flattened,  cyclical  and/or  embedded  (Lucas  2005,
Witmore 2006, 2007, Olivier 2008, Ruibal 2009; for time in anthropology see Munn
1992, James and Mills 2005). A phenomenological understanding posits that places
are also always ‘plural’, and heritage experiences are ‘both “of the moment” and some-
thing that extends forward and backward in time and place’ (Bender 2002, p. S107;
see also for example Shanks 1995, Paynter 2002, Smith 2006, Olivier 2008). Senses
of attachment and belonging are clearly also at play in historical, archaeological and
popular discourses surrounding the Akin House and other historic sites (Shanks 1995,
Paynter  2002,  Smith  2006,  Hodge  2009).  These  qualities  present  fertile  ground  for

120

 C.J. Hodge

nostalgia  and,  in  Peircian  terms,  shape  the  interpretant’s  role  in  the  construction
of meaning.

Nostalgia is an emotional engagement in a present-past and longing for a future
defined through the past. Over the early modern and modern periods, nostalgia has
absorbed idealised notions of home, homecoming and childhood, as well as longing
for a stable place of origin (Tannock 1995, Austin 2007). Nostalgia produces linear
time by distinguishing past, present and future. Yet it is also convoluted or entangled
time,  a  kind  of  prospective  memory  uniting  visions  of  the  future  based  on  present
perceptions of past conditions (experienced or imagined). It is a structuring element
of  cultural  logics,  therefore,  a  component  of  habitus  and  the  icons,  indexes  and
symbols it informs. As a material/emotional discourse, nostalgia is directly involved
in  memory-making  and  the  values  of  heritage  (Shanks  1995,  Tarlow  2000,  Smith
2006, Hall and Bombardella 2007, Shackel 2008, Hodge 2009). Any heritage site is
an institutionalised space that facilitates nostalgic experience. Gregory and Witcomb
(2007, p. 265) suggest nostalgia is especially potent at house museums, where visitors
‘experience a collapse of the present with the past’ in an atmosphere of presence and
absence, attentive to fugitive and acute senses of life inside a dwelling that has some-
how lost itself.

The Akin House has fostered nostalgic reflection since at least the Revolutionary
War, long before it became a heritage site (Hodge 2009). Recent heritage work there
has,  in  fact,  reactivated  these  engagements  by  re-introducing  the  site  to  public
consciousness. When the Akin House was an anonymous old home, it was quiet and
in the background. As an identifiable heritage site, it is destabilised and exposed. The
Akin House is now embroiled in tugs-of-war between heterodoxies and orthodoxies,
competing  meanings  as  icon,  index  and  symbol.  Nostalgia  is  integral  to  this  social
reproduction via competing visions of past/present/future, which are at stake and in
flux. To undertake best heritage practices in any context, we should critically evaluate
the stories we are and are not telling and the slippage between archaeological (or other
disciplinary) goals and already in-process interpretive practices.

Many scholars hesitate to engage with nostalgia, preferring to dismiss it as (at best)
distortion, misrepresentation and (at worst) regression, delusion and outright amnesia
(Tannock 1995, pp. 454–455). Better, we should, like Stuart Tannock (1995), confront
the  social  functions  of  nostalgia.  In  his  excellent  critique,  he  pursues  nostalgia  as
affective  habitus,  a  ‘structure  of  feeling  in  Western  modernity’  (Tannock  1995,
p. 453).  Nostalgia  reifies  a  subjective  separation  from  an  idealized  past  and
home(land) and, simultaneously, is a bridge across that separation. Those embroiled
in nostalgia do far more than wallow in sentimental denial. By invoking a ‘lost and
longed for earlier period’, they are ‘involved in escaping or evading, in critiquing or
in mobilizing to overcome the present experience of loss of identity, lack of agency,
or absence of community’ (Tannock 1995, p. 454).

How do nostalgic discourses – ways of thinking, assumptions, practices and mate-
rialities – create the structures of power and value within which heritage sites like the
Akin House work? How do agendas of remembering and forgetting intersect with the
uses of heritage? Who controls the production of this knowledge? When practising
heritage, how do you honour multiple stakeholders and the ‘public trust’ when prior-
ities are misaligned with or run counter to each other? To address these questions, I
explore some effective uses of nostalgia at a recent house museum exhibition. I then
explore the nostalgic discourses with which site stewards, the town of Dartmouth and
the public do – and might – remember the Akin House.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 121

Defining the model: narrative and nostalgia at the Artemas Ward House
Whether nostalgia underlies all heritage projects is debatable. That it is insidiously,
unquestioningly  ensconced  in  house  museums  and  domestic  heritage  sites  across
Europe and its former colonies is undeniable (see for example West 1999, Smith 2006,
Gable and Handler 2007, Levin 2007, pp. 93–142, Murray et al. 2007, Hodge 2009).
But should we eradicate it universally? Or might we, the heritage-makers, employ it?
Heritage professionals work to define the memory of others, to provide a framework
of convincing, collective understanding into which individual perceptions might fit.
Emotion and affect are as integral as practice and embodied experience (Gregory and
Witcomb 2007).

The work of Laurel Thatcher Ulrich and Ivan Gaskell at the Artemas Ward House
in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, has convinced me that nostalgia can be a powerful inter-
pretive tool. Gaskell and Ulrich foregrounded aesthetic qualities in their exhibition of
house  collections,  which  was  held  at  the  Fogg  Art  Museum,  Harvard  University
(Harvard University Art Museums 2006, Gaskell and Ulrich 2007). For me, however,
the 2006–2007 Ward House exhibition neatly critiqued – and simultaneously exploited
– nostalgic discourses. I read the exhibition as a model for integrating founding and
progressive narratives by exposing, historicising and manipulating the mechanisms of
nostalgia.

Artemas  Ward  was  a  successful  farmer  and  well-connected  Revolutionary  War
hero. The Ward House represents a particular, familiar genre of curiosity cabinet: a
historic house museum filled with material components of outmoded daily life. The
collection of objects, photographs, manuscripts and other memorabilia was amassed
during the nineteenth century, when the house was occupied by Ward descendants,
and  after  1925,  when  it  became  a  public  historic  museum.  Ward  women  were  the
primary agents of this memorial project, which transfigured objects into ‘icons’ of the
Ward  House,  ‘indexes’  of  historic  events  and  ‘symbols’  of  American  Republican
ideals, gentility and feminine and masculine domestic values (Figure 3). Many items
are  associated  with  particular  Ward  family  members  and  anecdotes,  the  founding
figures and narratives that underpin preservation of the site as a house museum.

Figure 3. Front hall of the Artemas Ward House in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts. This image was taken in the 1890s, when the house was privately owned and occupied by women descended from General Ward. They opened their home to visitors as a museum. The hall includes what were, at the time, salient indexes and symbols of the Revolutionary War period and its virtues: the flag, colonial-style furniture and a spinning wheel (inconveniently
located on the stairwell). Courtesy of the President and Fellows of Harvard College (HU4091.6).

Objects associated with Ward were removed from the home and exhibited at the
Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University in ‘counterpoint’ to those owned or made by
his female descendants, women who perpetuated an edited family history as national
history (Harvard University Art Museums 2006, 2009). Visitors to the Fogg Museum
found  General  Ward’s  late  eighteenth-century  cloak  next  to  a  day  gown  from  the
1880s, his ca. 1768 snowshoes near his nieces’ mid-nineteenth-century childhood sled
(Gaskell and Ulrich 2007). Gaskell and Ulrich’s exhibition critiqued an existing house
narrative by rupturing it: editing and re-contextualising objects from a heavily manip-
ulated  domestic  context.  The  curators  then  used  a  specifically  nostalgic  critique  to
bridge that rupture, making the site meaningful in the present.

In  the  exhibition  room,  Ulrich  and  Gaskell  disrupted  time  and  crafted  parallel
narratives:  the  nineteenth-century  nostalgic  narrative  assembled  by  Ward  descen-
dants and a simultaneous narrative of the nineteenth century in the current curatorial
voice.  Thus,  they  expertly  exploited  a  nostalgic  fascination  with  the  past  and  its
dated ideals, yet – crucially – embroiled the viewer in a critique of that same nostal-
gic impulse. This approach compounded the iconicity of materials on display, layer-
ing  eighteenth-,  nineteenth-,  twentieth-  and  twenty-first-century  references.  How
was  this  effect  achieved?  Through  interpretive  texts  and  material  arrangements  in

122

 C.J. Hodge

Figure 3. Front hall of the Artemas Ward House in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts. This image
was taken in the 1890s, when the house was privately owned and occupied by women descend-
ed from General Ward. They opened their home to visitors as a museum. The hall includes
what were, at the time, salient indexes and symbols of the Revolutionary War period and its
virtues: the flag, colonial-style furniture and a spinning wheel (inconveniently located on the
stairwell). Courtesy of the President and Fellows of Harvard College (HU4091.6).

which, 1) original and additive narratives were produced simultaneously and 2) the
visitor was explicitly invited into the interpretive process. Objects stayed the same,
but  orthodoxies  were  exposed  and  heterodoxies  introduced,  altering  the  symbolic
relations of signs to newly-afforded interpretants.

Discourses at the Akin House
Introduction
An uncritical nostalgia ‘approaches the past as a stable source of value and meaning’
(Tannock  1995,  p.  455).  As  the  Artemas  Ward  House  project  proves,  however,
nostalgic critique can successfully expose the past as an unstable source of value and
meaning. Mindful of nostalgia as a structuring logic of social relations, I here explore
specific, existing discourses of memory at the Akin House historic site.

Site stewards
The  five-room,  two-storey,  centre  chimney  Akin  House  was  built  in  1762,  making
it  one  of  the  oldest  extant  structures  in  the  town  of  Dartmouth,  Massachusetts
(Worth  1907,  p.  12).  Because  Dartmouth  has  lost  several  of  its  oldest  structures  to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 123

development  or  demolition  in  recent  years,  the  Akin  House  has  become  a  rallying
point  for  community  preservation.  Ownership  of  the  property  was  recently  trans-
ferred from a New Bedford, Massachusetts, preservation group to the town of Dart-
mouth  (King  2008).  A  second  preservation  group,  the  Dartmouth  Heritage
Preservation Trust (DHPT), immediately leased the property from the town.

The Akin House was first subjected to historical study in the early 2000s and soon
listed  on  the  State  Register  of  Historic  Places.  It  is  also  eligible  for  listing  on  the
National  Register  under  local-level  criteria  A  (patterns  of  national  history)  and  C
(distinctive construction and architecture) (Medeiros 2003). Founding narratives were
at the core of these nominations, and they re-positioned the Akin House as ‘signifi-
cant’ (for an extended discussion of founding narratives and the weight they carry, see
Beranek, this issue). This process justified acquisition and preservation of the prop-
erty,  creating  a  historic  site  by  remembering  what  happened  there.  The  founding
narratives  are  still  deployed  to  explain  investments  of  time,  money  and  other
resources.

The highlights of this founding narrative are as follows: 

● The  Akin  House  property  represents  the  unique  agricultural  and  seafaring
history of Dartmouth because the property once extended to the waterfront and
included fields and an orchard and because Elihu Akin was a prominent ship-
builder and a farmer.

● The  Akin  House  represents  the  spirit  of  American  independence  because  the
Akin family moved there after the British destroyed their main house in 1778;
son Jonathan Akin was impressed by the British and freed through the influence
of Benjamin Franklin (Akin 1778).

● The Akin House represents perseverance because the Akin family re-made their
lives after the British attack and because the house then remained in the family
for over 230 years, during which it changed little.

● The  Akin  House  represents  modern  individualism,  via  self-determination  and
romance,  through  Elihu  Akin’s  great-great-grandson,  Richard  Canfield  (born
1855), a flamboyant self-made Gilded Age figure. The Akin House was also a
location  for  the  silent  film  Down  to  the  Sea  in  Ships  (filmed  1921)  (2002
[1922]),  which  manifested  Colonial  Revival  values  in  a  romantic  adventure
story.

Ideals of stability are one nostalgic discourse at work in this narrative, in both story
and  materiality.  Like  other  historic  places,  the  Akin  House  is  a  Peircian  icon,  a
mimetic  likeness  of  its  own  earlier  selves.  The  physical  structure  is  not  currently
considered a reproduction or amalgamation, however, but something authentic. The
seeming persistence of this icon is read as stability. This narrative mechanism further
couples doxic, desirable moral qualities with this material one. Calling out the physi-
cal  persistence  of  the  Akin  House  demonstrates  and,  thereby,  legitimises  particular
conservative values, and it is one aspect of site narratives that I would edit.

More themes emerge around the nostalgic tropes of Homecoming and Pastoralism
(Tannock 1995): the house as refuge and the house as the place for self-made men.
The former emphasises the gendered domesticity associated with Victorian and later
ideals of home and family life. The latter couples these with modern endorsement of
the modest, determined and entrepreneurial American middle class. The 1922 silent
movie Down to the Sea in Ships, in which the Akin House appears, most clearly trades

124

 C.J. Hodge

Figure 4. Frame from the 1922 film Down to the Sea in Ships showing the main character
returning ‘home’ to the Akin House.

in these nostalgic ideas. The film is set not in the 1920s but in the early nineteenth
century.  Its  young  hero  is  introduced  through  his  homecoming  to  the  ‘Old  Home-
stead’, aka, the Akin House (Figure 4). He soon meets his childhood sweetheart in the
backyard, and they imagine themselves in this place as happy children.

Figure 4. Frame from the 1922 film  Down to the Sea in Ships showing the main character returning ‘home’ to the Akin House.

The Akin House obviously struck the movie’s director as essentially of the past,
as it does visitors today. The material qualities of the place support the film’s fabri-
cated nostalgia, within which normative ideals of childhood and the rural are much in
evidence  (Austin  2007,  pp.  106,  126–127).  The  man  and  the  house  simultaneously
become icons. Down to the Sea in Ships is steeped in the colloquial nostalgia of the
Colonial Revival, which celebrated the (supposed) virtue and simplicity of America’s
early days. Down to the Sea in Ships reveals the material, performative and phenom-
enological  qualities  of  nostalgia  (Austin  2007,  pp.  21–22).  These  qualities  are
repeated in current heritage processes, as the Akin House once again is set as a stage
for historical contemplation.

Reiterative stories of Elihu Akin, his son Jonathan, Richard Canfield and the idea-
lised Colonial Revival hero of Down to the Sea in Ships represent men suffering and
overcoming ruptures with home. These anecdotes have quickly become a priori truths
upon which the value of the Akin site depends, with demonstrable success. The house
is on the State Register of Historic Places; has received multiple preservation grants;
and  has  inspired  the  interest  of  many  members  of  the  public  and  a  few  heritage
amateurs and professionals. These nostalgic discourses are limited by (among other
things) race, age and gender, and they are dangerous if they continue to be repeated
without being questioned.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 125

From a corrective, heterodoxic point of view – one not yet written into site narra-
tives – the house is an ironic icon of the slippage and instability inherent in memory
practice. The superstructure is literally slipping off its foundation. The interior exists
in a reconstructed shell. Floors and ceilings are gone, beams and lathes are exposed
and mosaics of layered wallpaper and paint peel from any and all vertical surfaces.
Decay is everywhere (Figure 5). The Akin House is successfully resisting any effort
to  be  fixed  (or  affixed)  to  a  particular  period  or  story.  Nostalgia  can  still  work  to
broach  this  present-past,  but  as  an  entrée  to  the  complex  interstices  of  change  and
persistence rather than a comforting invocation of doxic stability.

Figure 5. A built-in corner cupboard and layers of peeling paint and wallpaper in the Akin House parlour, 2007. Photograph by the author.
Figure 6. Near-contemporary artefacts recovered during surface collection and excavation at the Akin House site in 2008 and 2009, including (left to right): iron scissors, bisque porcelain elephant figurine, white and green glass marble, two ‘Atomic Red’ Fiestaware saucer sherds, brown and turquoise stoneware plate sherd, two cigarette filters, plastic figure of a sweeping man, broken incandescent light bulb and three iron clothespin springs.
Photograph by the author.

Figure 5. A built-in corner cupboard and layers of peeling paint and wallpaper in the Akin
House parlour, 2007. Photograph by the author.

126

 C.J. Hodge

The town
The town of Dartmouth committed itself to the Akin House property by purchasing it
from  a  preservation  organisation.  The  Akin  House  is  specifically  mentioned  in  the
town  of  Dartmouth’s  most  recent  Master  Plan,  in  the  ‘Cultural  and  Historical’
subheading of ‘Section 5: Open Spaces and Recreation’: 

The  Dartmouth  Historical  Commission  …  [is]  working  on  the  preservation  of  the
historic  Akin  House.  Dartmouth’s  rich  history  is  preserved  in  its  many  cultural  and
historic  resources  …  Those  areas  need  to  be  protected  by  various  means  to  maintain
the  history  and  character  of  the  town  [emphasis  added].  (Bull  and  Recchia  2007,
pp. 5.32–5.33)

The  plan  describes  a  process  by  which  communal  identity  is  produced  by
historic properties. In this discourse, specific historic resources like the Akin House
are symbols for ‘town character’ and ‘town history’; that is, these values are mate-
rialised  and  conveyed  by  places  within  the  town.  Preservation  of  these  places
somehow  equals  preservation  of  the  town  as  a  cohesive,  distinct,  stable  place.
These  properties,  in  turn,  become  significant  because  they  materialise  doxic
themes.  The  significance  of  these  themes  to  town  history/identity  is  assumed  but
not  articulated  in  the  document,  and  they  are  thereby  naturalised.  The  nostalgic
practice  of  preservation  offers  to  overcome  perceived  threats  to  the  community,
recapturing  the  past  in  order  to  create  a  future.  Town  leadership  asserts  authority
and control by referencing continuity with the past, in essence, defining their – and
the town’s – authenticity.

Stability is important to the logics of nostalgia. In this regard, the town of Dart-
mouth  seems  anxious  about  itself.  It  is  threatened  by  discontinuity  while  simulta-
neously asserting continuity, a paradoxical tension often at play in nostalgia (Tannock
1995, pp. 456–459). Emphasising stability, according to the town, the Akin House is
not being restored, renovated or interpreted. It is being ‘preserved’. Material preserva-
tion, protection and maintenance index passivity and stasis. Mere existence is assumed
to  be  enough.  The  town  does  not  expect  its  historic  places  to  participate  in  active
public service missions, education or entertainment, for example. Nor are these places
(real or imagined) acknowledged as populated, lively, contested spaces. We cannot
assume, however, that the Akin House’s significance and usefulness are self-evident
or  self-sustaining.  As  at  any  public  heritage  site,  its  relevance  must  be  created,
nurtured  and  shared.  The  Town  Plan  does  nothing  to  further  an  active  vision  of
historic  resources  as  civic  tools.  On-going  work  at  the  Akin  site  will,  hopefully,
challenge this orthodoxy.

Memory  processes  are  driven  not  only  by  the  recollection  of  past  histories,  but
also  by  present  contexts  of  politics,  economics  and  social  relations.  As  a  planning
document, the Town Plan’s vision has real repercussions. Specifically, the Akin site,
its history and its future are re-visioned. DHPT, site archaeologists and other inter-
preters of history must be mindful and strategic as we are also reinvesting the house
with  significance.  In  an  atmosphere  of  politicking  and  budget  stress,  the  site  has
unsurprisingly become a fraught space. I have heard personally from individuals both
adamantly for and against expenditure of public funds on the Akin House renovation
(certain  funds  are  earmarked  for  local  preservation  per  the  Massachusetts  Commu-
nity  Preservation  Act,  Chapter  267  of  the  Acts  of  2000).  This  tension  is  one  way
agendas of remembering and forgetting intersect with uses of heritage.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 127

The public
It  is  now  a  truism  that  archaeology  is  accountable  to  a  variety  of  stakeholders.  At
existing heritage sites, archaeology often overtly embraces a public service mission
(Jameson and Baugher 2007, Little and Shackel 2007). This mission invites archae-
ologists not only to be accountable to the public(s) it serves, but also to be respon-
sive to voiced needs and concerns. Criticism is a constructive heterodoxic challenge
to  doxic  heritage  practice.  Yet  casual  comments,  visitor  log  notes  and  feedback
form responses from visitors, volunteers and students validate archaeological contri-
butions to heritage practice at the Akin House. They do not reveal where the project
is irrelevant, useless and disconnected. To date, the most sustained commentary on
the  Akin  House  heritage  project  by  a  non-project  member  is  found  in  blog  posts
from 2007 and 2008. I cannot confirm that the author represents the general public
perspective, but he is certainly a vocal member of the site’s stakeholder community.
In a July 2007 blog entry, ThirdMate (2007) ruminated on the Akin House and its

archaeology: 

I retreat … into giggling at the elaborate fantasy life of the ‘university’ ‘professionals’
in  my  neighborhood…  Years  ago,  when  I  first  experienced  the  magic  of  Dartmouth
Street … I noticed a ramshackle hovel … Little did I know that years later, I would be
donating to a fund that would restore the place to some semblance of community useful-
ness and historical integrity. Known as ‘The Akin House’, the little hovel I so derided is
a cause célèbre here on my corner of The Beach. One of the oldest extant homesteads in
Dartmouth  (because  the  British  forgot  to  burn  it  when  they  torched  the  rest  of  town
during the War for American Independence), hopes are to turn the Akin House into a
cultural  resource  center  …  Speaking  of  tools,  it  only  took  a  few  years  for  the  local
University of Massachusetts [Dartmouth] … to find a kooky way to capitalize on the
Little Grant Shack. My wacky neighbors … have taken it upon themselves to invite me
… to go digging through the Akin House’s kitchen midden to find a sense of history or
place or something amid the discarded pottery shards and Tupperware™ lids behind the
historically-preserved and quaintly-shingled Akin House. The last time I participated in
a ‘dig’, I was operating the Bobcat™ behind the New Bedford Whaling Museum where
performance artist Mark Dion3 pawed through the junk contemporary cultural artifacts
buried  at  site  of  the  former  O’Malley’s  Tavern  …  We  found  broken  bottles.  Lots  of
them. Thus, I am qualified to present the following hypothetical list of artifacts we’ll be
sure to find in the shadow of Elihu Akin’s hogged-roof shanty …
(1) A Dunkin’ Donuts cup, styrofoam.
(2) 312 filter cigarette butts, Newport Ultra-Light.
(3) Cassette tape wrapper, Aerosmith Get Your Wings.
(4) Aerosmith Get Your Wings 8-track.
(5) 7982 filter cigarette butts, Virginia Slim.
(6) Tab can.
(7) Section of orange-red-yellow-white shag carpet.

So  what  are  the  mechanisms  of  the  post’s  materially-engaged  discourse?  The
author establishes his authority through an emplaced and embodied narrative. While
‘experiencing’ Dartmouth Street, he ‘noticed’ the Akin House. ‘Years ago’ is a past
place and past time, for the author, the town and the house. Could anything be less
significant than a ‘ramshackle hovel’? A swayback ‘shanty’? It is material qualities
that make this ‘little grant shack’ vulnerable. The author donated money for its ‘resto-
ration’,  not  passive  preservation  but  active  ‘usefulness’.  In  his  idealised,  imagined
future the Akin House will be a place integral to and with integrity for his community.
Archaeological processes of ‘keeping time’ are a powerful ‘medium of hierarchic
power and governance’ (Munn 1992, p. 109). ThirdMate is wary of ceding this power

128

 C.J. Hodge

to what he perceives as community outsiders. In the blog posting, both the prestige of
the  local  university  and  the  authority  of  outside  professionals  (i.e.,  me)  are  openly
mocked (I wonder if ThirdMate would have felt the same if he knew I grew up in Dart-
mouth  myself).  The  heritage  group  is  ‘wacky’;  archaeology  is  ‘kooky’.  The  author
fears the local university is ‘capitalizing’ on the house, taking advantage of it, him and
his community. I am left wondering if the physical dwelling as the site of history is so
ingrained that the author finds heritage work beyond its walls transgressive. Perhaps,
ironically, archaeology loses credibility when it is local and visible.

The author obviously devalues the recent past, yet he simultaneously suggests a
way  forward.  ThirdMate’s  essay  integrates  time  and  community  through  place  and
material  culture  in  recursive  signification.  He  muses  about  the  ‘sense  of  history’
‘we’ll’ find in the midden, inserting himself into an imagined future on site. Whose
history is indexed through these imagined artefacts? These are symbolic items of the
1980s  and  1970s:  domestic,  everyday,  personal,  familiar  (and  rather  feminised,
perhaps to make them appear even less consequential). The list was meant as satire.
But these are things archaeologists might collect – I have collected similar things there
(Figure 6). They are also things many adult visitors would recognise from their own
pasts. Archaeologists can and must communicate the value of the everyday and recent.
The  lesson?  A  constructive  discourse  might  take  advantage  of  the  materiality  of
nostalgia,  investing  people  in  the  past  through  imaginative,  situated  experiences  of
these familiar places and things.

Figure 6. Near-contemporary artefacts recovered during surface collection and excavation at
the Akin House site in 2008 and 2009, including (left to right): iron scissors, bisque porcelain
elephant figurine, white and green glass marble, two ‘Atomic Red’ Fiestaware saucer sherds,
brown and turquoise stoneware plate sherd, two cigarette filters, plastic figure of a sweeping
man, broken incandescent light bulb and three iron clothespin springs. Photograph by the author.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 129

Public opinions, like scholarly interpretations, are not static. In September 2008,
ThirdMate  (2008)  again  reflected  on  the  Akin  House  and  its  relevance  for  current
Dartmouth residents: 

This ‘bail-out’ thing seems that it should apply to one of my favorite causes: The Elihu
Akin  House,  here  in  Dartmouth  …  Historic  preservation,  like  history  itself,  is  an  on-
going process. When I first saw the Akin House, I thought it was an abandoned shack
with very little to say for itself. It seemed odd that someone hadn’t knocked it down and
planted a Cumberland Farms [convenience store] on that sweet corner lot. But later, I
found out that this Akin Homestead was one place that wasn’t burned down by the Brit-
ish when they attacked. Even though the British troops were apparently very angry at
tavern owner Elihu Akin because he wouldn’t serve the lobsterbacks. And he built boats,
although I can’t tell whether he built them on his property because it’s far from the water.
But was it, back then? Did Clarks Cove reach all the way up to that rickety shed? No,
that’s  not  possible.  But  how  did  his  son  Jonathan  start  sailing  from  there?  And  find
himself in lockup writing letters to Ben Franklin and John Adams? Oh, there’s a letter
that  he  wrote?  And  did  they  write  back?  And  did  he  get  back  from  wherever?  Am  I
getting any of this right?

He  is.  He  is  also  engaged  enough  to  move  from  known  facts  to  anxious  questions
about  gaps  in  his  narrative  understanding  (the  ruptures  across  which  nostalgia
operates).

The 2008 post does not state if ThirdMate’s feeling about archaeology underwent
a similar shift. In general, however, attitudes shifted from the earlier post, from scep-
tically ambivalent/insulting to supportive/engaged. The change seems to result from
on-going  project  visibility  and  increased  awareness  of  Akin  founding  narratives.
There is also an increased appreciation for the uses of heritage when he writes, 

Without the 1762 Akin House, there may be nobody to answer these questions for me
now. Or in the future when I ask them again, because I will probably have forgotten the
answers. And maybe even the questions … So that’s why the Dartmouth Heritage Pres-
ervation Trust needs $250,000 to stabilize the old place and everybody should go to the
public hearing at 6:00 this evening in the Town Hall, basement room 103. To show soli-
darity with the past. For the future! Plus, we can use the skills common to the old place
while we all dig our own gardens and raise our own fowl and cattle since the economy
we’ve grown fat on and accustomed to is now over and done with [emphasis original].
(ThirdMate 2008)

Dartmouth  has  lost  a  rural  way  of  life  (a  discontinuity  with  the  pastoral  ideal).
The  author  suggests  that  the  Akin  House  might  help  recapture  it  and  use  it  in  the
future (prospective memory). The site could remind Dartmouth residents of the past,
marking earlier times as past, but clarifying and reordering that past for the future.
In this example, nostalgic engagement is actively creating a community by arguing
for  its  investment  in  a  historic  home,  showing  ‘solidarity  with  the  past.  For  the
future!’

Recollecting the old homestead
Narrative and memory work
Narrative is a powerful way to make sense of human temporalities (Paynter 2002).
Narratives surrounding the Akin House assemble fascinating fragments of Dartmouth’s
past  and  make  it  familiar,  knowable,  domestic.  The  tangible  presence  of  the  house
indexes themes of American historical meta-narratives such as entrepreneurial spirit,

130

 C.J. Hodge

principled sacrifice, independence, persistence and self-determination. These histories
are  created  social  memory  and  social  values.  They  are  not  yet  multivocal,  critical,
progressive or theoretically robust. As processes of commemoration, they normalise
deeply rooted hierarchical, racialised, gendered and temporalised power structures –
just  the  things  historical  archaeologists  love  to  decolonise,  engender,  embody,
democratise, de-sanitise etc. Undermine these narratives, however, and you undermine
preservation efforts to date and future hopes for the site. It is no wonder archaeological
‘research has been slow to become integrated into historic house museum interpreta-
tions’ (Stahlgren and Stottman 2007, p. 134).

Developing heritage narratives should be both critical and mindful of pre-existing,
successful discourses of power and knowledge. The Ward House exhibition integrated
founding  and  progressive  narratives  by  exposing,  historicising  and  manipulating  a
nostalgia that has always been based in material culture (Gaskell and Ulrich 2007). Its
curators played with rupture and continuity, exposing the unstable meanings the past
carries in the ever-shifting present. I have elsewhere historicised nostalgic narratives
at  the  Akin  House  (Hodge  2009).  In  this  article,  through  critical  consideration  of
current  heritage  discourses  at  the  site,  I  demystify  their  mechanisms,  exposing
discourses of power and knowledge. Based on this work, I conclude that future inter-
pretations – memory work – at the Akin House site should attend to nostalgia and: 1)
embrace the physicality of the house; 2) validate community; 3) explore the strangely
familiar; 4) assuage anxieties of exploitation; 5) be useful.

Making memory at the Akin House: nostalgic rupture and bridge
I have elsewhere advocated ‘for discussions with the house stewards to find points of
common ground and to introduce ways in which previously unexpected archaeologi-
cal results might be relevant to the house’s mission’ (Hodge and Beranek 2008). A
shared  recognition  of  the  appeal  of  old  things,  places  and  stories  is  one  such  area.
People long to connect with ‘their’ past. The Akin House, so strangely familiar as a
home, dwelling place and site of comforting stories, is already a place of nostalgia
(Hodge 2009). Existing discourses suggest people critically may be brought to imag-
ine themselves in one place – the Akin House – but in a variety of times. We can do
more than ‘allow for the possibility of subjective inflection through the processes of
recall  and  reconstitution’  (Meskell  2008,  p.  234).  We  can  exploit  it.  It  worked  for
Gaskell and Ulrich’s (2007) critical re-interpretation of the Artemas Ward House; I
believe it would work for the Akin House as well.

There is a postmodern impulse to undermine doxic narratives, exposing the natu-
ralised power relationships and social structures that create the world in which we live.
When scholars lay bare the ‘structures of perception and experience … the appara-
tuses of power’, we open the way to awareness and to change, remaking structures and
relationships (Grossberg 1997, p. 260). This agenda – which could be described as a
heterodoxic shift in habitus – is important and is the strongest argument for why heri-
tage matters. But it also risks undermining the legitimacy of house museums like the
Akin  House,  alienating  site  stewards,  town  representatives  and  the  public.  There  is
hope:  the  Ward  project  models  two  steps  to  creating  relevant  reinterpretations  of
historic  house  museums  which  are  to  1)  rupture  pre-existing  nostalgic  narratives
(doxas), 2) bridge those ruptures through critical nostalgic discourse (heterodoxies).
How? By 1) presenting original and additive narratives simultaneously and 2) inviting
the visitor into the interpretive process. To date, archaeological narratives push only

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 131

lightly against the founding narratives of the Akin House property.4 But new archae-
ological finds offer heterodoxic possibilities.

At the Ward House, scholars used old objects to remake a largely static exhibition
and dwelling. They reworked an existing narrative, both reproducing and critiquing it.
At the Akin House, ceramics and toys from many centuries – miniature teacups and
toy cars, Mr Potato Head pieces and clothespin clips – reveal a unique, but familiar,
domestic landscape of work, socialising and play (see Figure 6). We understand the
past  and  its  present  legacies  differently  when  we  take  more  than  men  into  account
(Voss  2006);  adding  these  artefacts  –  and  the  disenfranchised  women  and  children
they index – to site narratives would expose gaps in those narratives, rupturing them.
But  using  things  to  consider  experiences  of  women  and  children  could  also bridge
those ruptures. These artefacts strongly index nostalgic tropes of lost childhood, famil-
iar  domesticity  and  the  pastoral.  In  this  way,  the  Akin  House  might  expose  and
critique without too deeply undermining its own legitimacy. I believe an interpretive
focus on women and children would critique, but respect, existing symbolic engage-
ments with independence, persistence, seafaring and agriculture, romance and mascu-
linity.  It  would  simultaneously  integrate  new  evidence  and  corrective  interpretive
agendas (heterodoxy) into shared social memory.

Reflections
Historic places are inherently nostalgic: they are icons, indexes and symbols of the
past in the present, for the future. Playing on these existing discourses can mediate
between  stakeholder  and  professional  values.  Archaeological  narratives,  also  inher-
ently nostalgic (Hodge 2009, p. 17), can foster experiential learning through specific
stories, tangible links and formal narrated plots (Paynter 2002). Nostalgic tropes of
childhood, home, homecoming, continuity, discontinuity and the pastoral offer entrée
to alternative public memories narrated through Akin House archaeological finds.

Through  such  heterodoxic  memory  work,  we  might  remake  the  site’s  icons,
indexes and symbols. This strategy exploits rupture and tensions between individual
and collective memory. It would integrate visitors with aspects of the Akin property’s
past  by  way  of  their  own  recollections  and  imagined  emplacement.  Such  mindful
nostalgic  discourse  could  validate  a  sense  of  ownership  and  familiarity,  creating  a
‘sense of place and belonging’ while supporting vital archaeological critique (Bender
2002, p. S107; see for example Hodge 2009).

For all nostalgia’s dangers, it is incredibly useful. Nostalgia intrinsically includes
a ‘search for authentic origins and stable meanings’ (Tannock 1995, p. 453). This fact
does not mean it must find them. Nostalgia is, in fact, inherently unauthentic (experi-
ence not of the thing itself, always memory of the thing) and unstable (multivocal,
individualised, experiential, elusive). It is because of these very qualities that ‘nostal-
gic retreat comprises both critique and alternative’ (Tannock 1995, p. 459). It facili-
tates  ‘recuperation  of  previously  overlooked  historical  material  and  practices’
(Tannock 1995, p. 457). When heritage professionals engage critically with nostalgic
discourses – as interpreters of the Ward House do and the Akin House might – they
have a powerful tool for revealing doxic assumptions within their own, and others’,
histories.  That  is,  we  develop  new  perspectives  on  what  has  been  remembered  and
forgotten within processes of memory. Further, nostalgia is predicated on rupture with
the  past.  Foregrounding  discontinuity  might  clarify  that  we  re-create,  but  do  not
recover, the past.5

132

 C.J. Hodge

Existing heritage narratives, rife with nostalgic discourses, deploy the Akin House
variously as icon, index and symbol. In this way, the house inculcates social values,
power structures and collective and individual identities. To justify on-going commit-
ment to an ‘Akin House as heritage site’, new discourses must make the place desir-
able,  relevant  and  useful.  While  pursuing  this  goal,  new  memory  practices  must
acknowledge  that  enabling  one  mode  of  remembering  denies  and  displaces  others
(Weiss 2007). The Akin House, its history and its future are, simultaneously, being
remade.  Heritage  is  a  discourse  of  re-collection,  literally  finding  and  assembling,
making a past that lives in and for the present and, ideally, the future.

Nostalgia  has  implications  for  the  way  the  Akin  House  is  developed  as  a  heri-
tage  centre  serving  local  and  regional  interests.  As  a  material/emotional  discourse,
nostalgia already binds memory, place and experience. And – importantly for those
in  heritage  and  allied  professions  –  nostalgia  is  susceptible  to  manipulation.  At  the
Akin  House,  nostalgia  offers  pre-existing  common  ground  among  disparate  agen-
das,  in  this  case,  of  site  stewards,  town  and  public.  Processes  of  nostalgia  are  part
of the ways individuals perceive time and make collective memory at sites like the
Akin  House,  a  fragmented  place  recollected  through  the  things  we  find  and  stories
we tell.

Acknowledgements
My co-editor Christa M. Beranek is a friend and a scholar. I thank her, anonymous reviewers
and journal editor Laurajane Smith for helping to strengthen this piece; I thank assistant editor
Emma Waterton for her assistance with style details. Mistakes of fact and missteps of opinion
are my own. I am grateful to all contributors to this issue for their efforts and insights, here and
in the practical world of memory-making. They – alongside participants in the original confer-
ence session at the 2009 Theoretical Archaeology Group meeting in Palo Alto, California –
inspire me always to be more thoughtful, more engaged and more useful. I also recognise the
Dartmouth  Heritage  Preservation  Trust,  the  University  of  Massachusetts  Dartmouth  Depart-
ment  of  Sociology  and  Anthropology,  University  of  Massachusetts  Dartmouth  Claire  T.
Carney Library Archives and Special Collections and the Waterfront Historic Area League of
New Bedford for their support of archaeology and preservation at the Akin House heritage site,
past, present and future.

Notes
1. An ‘icon’ is a sign that refers via a mimetic likeness. A photograph of a house is an icon
of that house (see Figures 1 and 2). An ‘index’ symbolises an object by referring to that
object  through  proximity,  causality  or  effect.  The  Akin  House  indexes  a  ‘family’  even
though  no  one  lives  there  because  of  its  original  purpose  of  housing  a  family  unit,
expressed  through  a  conventional  architectural  form.  A  ‘symbol’  refers  to  a  thing  only
through  established  use  and  meaning.  The  Akin  House  now  symbolises  a  unique  town
identity.

2. While Peirce’s ontology is generally anti-anthropocentric, it accounts for perception via the
notion of ‘interpretants’, the understanding or context-specific translation of the original
sign  as  icon,  index  and/or  symbol.  Interpretants  are  not  subjects,  but  they  are  practical
subjective  understandings.  Accounting  for  interpretants  opens  an  accounting  of  context,
experience, bias and emotive response. Even so, Peircian semiotics, with its roots in scien-
tific realism, might be criticised as too static and descriptive for interrogating culture as
process (as in Preucel 2006). In realms of material practice, however, I believe that Peirce’s
semiotics  –  especially  the  concept  of  interpretants  –  couples  naturally  with  Pierre
Bourdieu’s structural framing of cultural logics and social reproduction.

3. Mark Dion was born in New Bedford and stages assemblage/museum/collection-inspired
interventions in spaces around the world. Coincidentally, I also participated in Dion’s 2001

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 133

New England Digs project. I was as conflicted about that project as ThirdMate seems about
mine (for a discussion of Dion, see Vilches 2007).

4. A standard site report for work in 2007 has been written (Hodge 2008); 2008 and 2009

reports are in process.

5. Historical archaeology in particular has been critiqued, I think unfairly, for what some read
as its overreaching claims to be a ‘direct bridge’ to the past (Mayne 2008). Few, if any,
practising historical archaeologists claim direct access to the past or that such a thing even
exists.

Notes on contributor
Christina J. Hodge is Senior Curatorial Assistant at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology,  Harvard  University.  Dr  Hodge  lectures  regularly  in  the  Harvard  Department  of
Anthropology, where she collaborates on the Harvard Yard Archaeology Project, and in the
Harvard  Extension  School  Graduate  Program  in  Museum  Studies.  In  the  summers  of  2007
through  2009,  she  taught  and  directed  the  Akin  House  Archaeology  Project  through  the
University  of  Massachusetts  Dartmouth.  Dr  Hodge’s  research  areas  include  the  historical
archaeology of New England, material culture studies, public archaeology and the curation of
museum collections.

References
Akin, J., 1778. Letter Jonathan Akin to Benjamin Franklin, 10 November 1778. The Ameri-
can Philosophical Society, Yale University, The Packard Humanities Institute. Available
from: http://franklinpapers.org/franklin/framedVolumes.jsp [Accessed 15 June 2008].

Austin,  L.M.,  2007.  Nostalgia  in  transition,  1780–1917.  Charlottesville:  University  of

Virginia Press.

Bender, B., 2002. Time and landscape. Current Anthropology, 43 (supplement), S103–S112.
Bourdieu, P., 1977. Outline of a theory of practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bull, M. and Recchia, A., 2007. Dartmouth master plan. Southeastern Regional Planning and
Economic Development District. Available from: http://www.town.dartmouth.ma.us/Dart-
mouth%20Master%20Plan.pdf [Accessed 18 April 2009].

Down to the sea in ships, 2002 [1922]. Film. Directed by Elmer Clifton. USA: Kino Video.
Edgeworth, M., 2006. Ethnographies of archaeological practice: cultural encounters, material

transformations. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press.

Gable, E. and Handler, R., 2007. Public history, private memory: notes from the ethnography
of Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, U.S.A. In: A.A.K. Levin, ed. Defining memory: local
museums and the construction of history in America’s changing communities. New York:
Alta Mira Press, 47–62.

Gaskell, I. and Ulrich, L.T., 2007. ‘A public patriotic museum’: artworks and artifacts from

the General Artemas Ward House. Harvard University Art Museums Gallery Series, 53.

Gregory, K. and Witcomb, A., 2007. Beyond nostalgia: the role of affect in generating histor-
ical understanding at heritage sites. In: S.J. Knell, S. MacLeod, and S.E.R. Watson, eds.
Museum  revolutions:  how  museums  change  and  are  changed.  New  York:  Routledge,
263–275.

Grossberg, L., 1997. Cultural studies: what’s in a name? One more time (1995). In: L. Gross-
berg, ed. Bringing it all back home: essays in cultural studies. Durham, NC: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 245–271.

Hall, M. and Bombardella, P., 2007. Paths of nostalgia and desire through heritage destina-
tions  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In:  N.  Murray,  N.  Shepherd  and  M.  Hall,  eds.  Desire
lines:  space,  memory  and  identity  in  the  post-apartheid  city.  New  York:  Routledge,
245–258.

Hallam, E. and Hockey, J.L., 2001. Death, memory and material culture. New York: Berg.
Harvard University Art Museums, 2006. Harvard’s Fogg Art Museum presents exhibition of
artworks and artifacts with both aesthetic and historic considerations. Harvard University
Art Museums News, August, 1–4.

Harvard University Art Museums, 2009. ‘A public patriotic museum’: artworks and artifacts
from the General Artemas Ward House, Oct 14 2006–Feb 11 2007. Fogg Museum. Available

134

 C.J. Hodge

from:  http://www.harvardartmuseums.org/exhibitions/past/detail.dot?id=19179  [Accessed
22 May 2010].

Hodge, C.J., 2008. Akin House Archaeology Project 2007 survey report. Unpublished material,

held in the Massachusetts Historical Commission archive.

Hodge, C.J., 2009. Materialities of nostalgia at the old homestead. Archaeologies: Journal of

the World Archaeological Congress, 5 (3), 488–510.

Hodge, C.J. and Beranek, C.M., 2008. Theorized dwelling: public archaeology at historic house
sites. Council for Northeast Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting, 23–26 October 2008,
St Mary’s City, MD.

Houston, P.G., 1906. Around an old homestead: a book of memories. Cincinnati: Jennings and

Graham.

York: Berg.

James, W. and Mills, D., eds. 2005. The qualities of time: anthropological approaches. New

Jameson,  J.  and  Baugher,  S.,  eds.  2007.  Past  meets  present:  archaeologists  partnering  with

museum curators, teachers and community groups. New York: Springer.

Joyce,  R.A.,  2008.  Practice  in  and  as  deposition.  In:  B.J.  Mills  and  W.H.  Walker,  eds.
Memory  work:  archaeologies  of  material  practices.  Santa  Fe:  School  for  Advanced
Research Press, 25–40.

King,  D.H.,  2008.  Historical  Commission  votes  to  approve  transfer  of  Akin  House  to  the
Town  with  lease  to  DHPT.  The  Dartmouth  Chronicle/South  Coast  Today.  Available
from: 
http://www.southcoasttoday.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080206/PUB02/
802060444 [Accessed 22 March 2008].

Knappett, C. and Malafouris, L., eds. 2008. Material agency: towards a non-anthropocentric

approach. New York: Springer.

Levin,  A.K.,  ed.  2007.  Defining  memory:  local  museums  and  the  construction  of  history  in

America’s changing communities. New York: Alta Mira Press.

Little,  B.J.  and  Shackel,  P.A.,  eds.  2007.  Archaeology  as  a  tool  of  civic  engagement.  New

York: Alta Mira.

Lucas, G., 2005. The archaeology of time. New York: Routledge.
Mayne,  A.,  2008.  On  the  edges  of  history:  reflections  on  historical  archaeology.  American

Historical Review, 113 (1), 93–118.

Medeiros, P., 2003. National Register of Historic Places Criteria Statement Form. Unpublished

material, held in the Massachusetts Historical Commission archive.

Meskell, L., 2008. Memory work and material practices. In: B.J. Mills and W.H. Walker, eds.
Memory  work:  archaeologies  of  material  practices.  Santa  Fe:  School  for  Advanced
Research Press.

Mills,  B.J.  and  Walker,  W.H.,  2008.  Introduction:  Memory,  materiality,  and  depositional
practice. In: B.J. Mills and W.H. Walker, eds. Memory work: archaeologies of material
practices. Santa Fe: School for Advanced Research Press, 3–24.

Munn,  N.,  1992.  The  cultural  anthropology  of  time:  a  critical  essay.  Annual  Review  of

Anthropology, 21, 93–123.

Murray, N., Shepherd, N. and Hall, M., eds. 2007. Desire lines: space, memory and identity in

the post-apartheid city. New York: Routledge.

Olivier, L., 2008. Le sombre abîme du temps: mémoire et archéologie. Paris: Seuil.
Paynter, R., 2002. Time in the valley: narratives about rural New England. Current Anthropology,

43 (supplement), S85–S101.

Peirce, C.S., Houser, N. and Kloesel, C.J.W., 1998. The essential Peirce: selected philosophi-

cal writings volume 2 (1893–1913). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Preucel, R., 2006. Archaeological semiotics. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ruibal,  A.G.,  2009.  A  review  of  Laurent  Olivier:  Le  sombre  abîme  du  temps:  mémoire  et
archéologie. Archaeolog. Available from: http://traumwerk.stanford.edu/archaeolog/2009/
01/the_dark_abyss_of_time.html#more [Accessed 18 January 2009].

Shackel, P.A., 2008. Memory studies in archaeology. The SAA Archaeological Record, 8 (1),

10–11.

Shanks,  M.,  1995.  Archaeological  experiences  and  a  critical  romaticism.  The  archaeologist
and  his/her  reality:  report  from  the  Fourth  Nordic  TAG  Conference,  Helsinki  1992.
Helsinki: University of Helsinki Department of Archaeology, 17–36.

Smith, L., 2006. Uses of heritage. New York: Routledge.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 135

Stahlgren, L.C. and Stottman, J.M., 2007. Voices from the past: changing the culture of historic
house museums with archaeology. In: B.J. Little and P.A. Shackel, eds. Archaeology as a
tool of civic engagement. New York: Alta Mira, 131–150.

Tannock, S., 1995. Nostalgia critique. Cultural Studies, 9 (3), 453–464.
Tarlow, S. 2000. Emotion in archaeology. Current Anthropology, 41 (5), 713–746.
ThirdMate, 2007. The Journal of H.M.S. Impossible: archaeology. Available from: http://www.

hmsimpossible.com/2007_07_01_archive.html [Accessed 13 September 2009].

ThirdMate, 2008. The Journal of H.M.S. Impossible: again with the Akin House… Available
from:  http://www.hmsimpossible.com/2008/09/again-with-akin-house.html  [Accessed  13
September 2009].

Vilches, F., 2007. The art of archaeology. Journal of Social Archaeology, 7 (2), 199–223.
Voss, B.L., 2006. Engendered archaeology: men, women, and others. In: M. Hall and S. Silli-

man, eds. Historical archaeology. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 107–127.

Weiss, L., 2007. Heritage-making and political identity. Journal of Social Archaeology, 7 (3),

413–431.

West,  P.,  1999.  Domesticating  history:  the  political  origins  of  America’s  house  museums.

Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Witmore,  C.L.,  2006.  Vision,  median,  noise  and  the  percolation  of  time:  symmetrical
approaches  to  the  mediation  of  the  material  world.  Journal  of  Material  Culture,  11  (3),
267–292.

Witmore, C.L., 2007. Between media archaeology and memory practices: two recent excava-
tions.  Archaeolog.  Available  from:  http://traumwerk.stanford.edu/archaeolog/2007/12/
between_media_archaeology_and.html [Accessed 6 December 2007].

Worth, H.B., 1907. Photographs of houses and public buildings in New Bedford, Fairhaven,

Acushnet, Dartmouth, Westport. New Bedford, MA: Kendall Institute.


