International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Including people with learning difficulties in
cultural and heritage sites

Jonathan Rix , Ticky Lowe & the Heritage Forum

To cite this article: Jonathan Rix , Ticky Lowe & the Heritage Forum (2010) Including people with
learning difficulties in cultural and heritage sites, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 16:3,
207-224, DOI: 10.1080/13527251003620743
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527251003620743

Published online: 12 Apr 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 740

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 16, No. 3, May 2010, 207–224

Including people with learning difficulties in cultural and 
heritage sites
Jonathan Rixa*, Ticky Loweb and the Heritage Forum

aDepartment of Education, Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom; bAccess to 
Heritage Project, Wrexham, United Kingdom
(Received 12 January 2009; final version received 1 December 2009)

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_462583.sgm

10.1080/13527251003620743
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis
163000000April 2010
JonathanRix
j.r.m.rix@open.ac.uk

This paper examines the processes involved in a participatory inclusive research
project  in  Liverpool  and  Merseyside,  UK.  The  project  involved  25  people  with
learning difficulties – the Heritage Forum – visiting 13 cultural and heritage sites
on  more  than  50  occasions  across  a  15-month  period.  The  research  provides  a
much needed resource at a time when there is a lack of provision for, and research
into,  the  intellectual  accessibility  of  cultural  and  heritage  sites  in  the  UK  and
globally. This paper details the research approach taken by the Heritage Forum,
providing a flexible protocol about ways of working with groups and individuals
with learning difficulties. It also reports on the Heritage Forum’s general findings
about the cultural and heritage sites, providing some initial guidance about how to
best include this diverse population.
Keywords:  inclusive  research;  cultural  and  heritage  sites;  access;  learning
difficulties

Introduction
There is a growing appreciation of the need to involve people with learning difficulties
in  assessing  provision  within  cultural  and  heritage  sites  (Rayner  1998,  Economou
1999,  Ruiz  2004,  Rix  2005)  and  of  the  value  of  cultural  and  heritage  sites  to  this
diverse population and the practitioners who work alongside them (Hooper-Greenhill
et al. 2002).1 However, there is still a lack of resources targeted specifically at those
who face barriers in relation to structuring thought, remembering and communicating.
Most of the developments that have facilitated access for people with learning diffi-
culties are based on improving access for other groups of disabled users (Ruiz 2004).
This  paper  reports  on  the  Access  to  Heritage  Project,  an  innovative  inclusive
research project carried out by 25 people with learning difficulties across an 15-month
period, in which they made over 50 visits to cultural and heritage sites to assess the
accessibility of provision. Prior to this project, the members of the research group had
rarely visited such sites, if at all. The recommendations of this group, known as the
Heritage Forum, provide valuable guidance to sites about how to engage with these
users and enhance their visitor experience.

*Email: j.r.m.rix@open.ac.uk

ISSN 1352-7258 print/ISSN 1470-3610 online
© 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527251003620743
http://www.informaworld.com

208

 J. Rix et al.

Current guidance for cultural and heritage sites
Cultural and heritage sites have few resources to assist in developing their provision
for people with learning difficulties, in attracting this audience and in dealing with
issues of intellectual access. The Museum Learning Collaborative archives (2003), for
example,  do  not  mention  this  area,  whilst  Inclusive  Information  (Playforth  2003)
offers  half  a  page  of  advice;  and  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts’  50-page
Accessibility Checklist (NEA 2004) has just three mentions of people with learning
difficulties.

A clear challenge for those sites wishing to broaden their provision for people with
learning difficulties, and for those trying to provide clear recommendations of how to
do so, is the enormous range of individuals who can fall within this label. For exam-
ple, in 2006 a report from the Deputy Prime Minister’s Office recognised the value of
good signage using both pictures and symbols along with text. However, it noted that
‘[t]here  is  no  generally  accepted  definition  that  clearly  defines  different  forms  or
degrees of learning disabilities’ (ODPM 2006, p. 13) and that because of the lack of
research across the breadth of individuals with this label it could not recommend a
single symbol system. These conclusions, therefore, turned the problem on its head,
recommending  that  designers  reduce  the  need  for  complex  signage  systems  by
creating  simple  building  layouts,  with  good  sight  lines,  providing  clearly  defined
routes with limited numbers of choices, incorporating landmark features and readily
identifiable key facilities; all factors that will benefit the way-finding of any users of
a site. This difficulty in describing the ‘needs’ of a group called ‘people with learning
difficulties’ is one of the reasons that cultural and heritage sites are advised to consult
with individuals with learning difficulties to assess the effectiveness of their current
and planned provision (Rayner 1998, Rix 2005, ODPM 2006).

Most published guidance for cultural and heritage sites that relates to this popula-
tion is in academic papers, or little known reports on small scale research projects, or
does not have people with learning difficulties and/or cultural and heritage sites as its
primary focus. For example, Access in Mind (Rayner 1998) is an out of print report
which discusses a range of projects that took place in the mid-1990s and the lessons
that can be learned from them in relation to museum text labels, audio guides, video
and IT, hands-on sessions, publicity materials, visual arts and consultation; whilst A
Tips  and  Techniques  Table  (California  State  Parks  2003)  is  designed  for  a  diverse
public which includes people with learning difficulties. Within available journals and
academic  reports  not  specifically  related  to  cultural  and  heritage  sites,  there  is
evidence of the important role food plays in making people feel safe, comfortable and
free to socialise in social contexts in which learning occurs (Bohata et al. 2002).There
is also evidence that people with learning difficulties find pictorial additions to signs
beneficial and that pictograms, symbols and story-board style pictures are particularly
useful (Lines et al. 2004). This research suggests that everyday symbols should be
used wherever possible and that sites need to consider how imagery could be used to
help people in understanding text. They note too the importance of colour in signs and
their use in way-finding, but highlight the need for further research in all these areas.
Within  research  papers  specifically  focussed  upon  this  population  within  the
cultural and heritage context, Rix (2005) gives detailed suggestions for best practice
in relation to audio tours, with the intention of providing a better starting point for
creating and assessing provision. He identifies research-based approaches for: estab-
lishing the purpose and process of a visit or tour; maximising recall of information;

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 209

making appropriate lexicon and grammatical choices; using referential material; and
mitigating  against  processing,  response  and  auditory  impairments.  Blewitt  (2004)
mentions, in passing, the importance of touch, smell and sight to people with learning
difficulties and that there is less need for verbal explanation in this context. A number
of papers mention the need for accurate and comprehensive, accessible information,
including in marketing, pre-visit information and on-site interpretative information.
They note too the importance of the personal attitude of managers and staff and their
lack of awareness of the needs of visitors with impairments and the simple things that
would  improve  access  (Goodall  et  al.  2003,  MENCAP  2003,  cited  in  Ruiz  2004,
Hartley et al. 2005, Rix 2005). The tendency to see provision for this population as
being in some way separate from the mainstream also needs to be confronted, requir-
ing a commitment to supply resources equitably and as part of the general provision
(Goodall et al. 2003, Hartley et al. 2005).

Consulting with people with learning difficulties
Prior to the Access to Heritage Project in Liverpool and Merseyside within the United
Kingdom, there had been no audits carried out by people with learning difficulties on
the  accessibility  of  cultural  and  heritage  sites.  The  growing  awareness  amongst
cultural and heritage sites that they need to remove barriers to access and engage with
the whole of the community they serve is evident in the Inspiring Learning for All
website (MLA 2004), where there are generalised statements about considering under-
represented  groups  and  different  learning  styles.  However,  people  with  learning
difficulties are frequently sidelined. For example, in a 2004 report for the Department
for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and the Department for Education and Skills
(DfES) it was noted that over 12,000 students were involved in the research but that
it was not ‘appropriate’ for ‘those from special schools to be asked to complete these
forms’  (Greenhill  et  al.  2004,  125)  and  that  ‘some  groups  of  pupils  with  Special
Educational Needs did not complete forms as it was considered inappropriate’. In the
follow-up report (Greenhill et al. 2007), no mention of this issue was made although
the same data was being drawn upon. From a social model perspective (Oliver 1983),
this aspect of the research process would be seen as a barrier to participation.

A key response to marginalisation has been research programmes that reflect the
interests, values and experiences of disabled people and have disabled people posi-
tioned  at  their  heart.  Emancipatory  Disability  Research  focuses  upon  the  need  for
research to be accountable and open throughout to a group run by disabled people,
with the skills and knowledge of researchers being at the disposal of disabled people
(Barnes  2003),  aiming  to  produce  accessible  knowledge,  using  methods  that  are
rigorous and place findings within their environmental and cultural context so as to
highlight the disabling consequences of society (UKDPC 2003).

Inclusive  research  by  people  with  learning  difficulties  has  developed  from  this
emancipatory research model. Walmsley and Johnson (2003, p. 16) identify three core
principles: ‘Research must address issues which really matter to people with learning
difficulties, and which ultimately lead to improved lives for them’; ‘It must access and
represent their views and experience’; and ‘People with learning difficulties need to
be treated with respect by the research community’.

This latter point is one reason inclusive research requires ongoing self-reflection.
The process of conducting and reporting academic research by its nature tends not to

210

 J. Rix et al.

be  inclusive  of  people  with  learning  difficulties,  excluding  them  through  complex
written academic text and strongly theorised academic debate (Walmsley and Johnson
2003). Walmsley and Johnson identify self-reflection as integral, both on the part of
the  participants  and  those  from  the  wider  research  community  working  with  them,
who in particular ought to reflect on their position relative to others in the process. The
risk is not only that the researcher’s social skills and creativity, their identity, values
and beliefs, become part of the equation influencing the findings (Ball 1990), it is also
the relative ease with which those supporting the people with learning difficulties can
come to dominate proceedings. As Traustadottir (2001, p. 26) suggests, ‘If we are self-
reflective  within  our  research  we  will  be  less  likely  to  run  the  risk  of  uncritically
reproducing Othering or oppressions’.

The aims of the research
The Access to Heritage Project, under the direction of the Heritage Forum, began in
autumn 2005. The Forum identified three aims: to assist and encourage people with
learning difficulties to access Merseyside’s culture and heritage sites – as is their right;
to enable heritage sites to learn from people with learning difficulties about how to
best  make  themselves  accessible  to  people  with  learning  difficulties  and  therefore
benefit  everyone;  and  to  create  intellectual  access  guidance  that  can  be  used  in
heritage sites everywhere.

It is worth noting that members of the Forum felt strongly that the aims identified
their ‘right’ to access sites, even though it was pointed out by others that this right did
not exist in law. The definition of heritage sites was also a broad-brush term to facil-
itate the understanding of the participants. In the report to funders, these sites were
described as castles, galleries, museums, old ships, churches, palaces and old houses,
but the Forum has also been involved with a wildflower centre.

Methods2
Establishing the Forum and its aims
This project identified and recorded the experiences of people with learning difficul-
ties in a manner over which they had control, producing results to which they have
access. It was run as much as possible on the basis of decisions made at meetings of
the Heritage Forum, convened at different venues throughout Liverpool and Mersey-
side  to  facilitate  member  attendance.  The  Forum  primarily  came  from  five  key
community groups operating out of day service resource centres and a school. Atten-
dance varied from three or four members to the full Forum, depending on time and
place of the meeting. Twenty-five people with learning difficulties were involved in
the  project  from  early  2006,  along  with  a  number  of  supporting  staff.  They  have
continued their work beyond this first access project.

In 2004, a project steering group was established to raise initial funds to employ
the project co-ordinator and establish the Forum. It was evident that discussions were
being dominated by people other than those with learning difficulties and so the steer-
ing group disbanded when the Forum was established. The steering group members
subsequently attended the Forum meetings as appropriate.

Since its formation, the Forum has been supported by a volunteer project leader,
who created funding partnerships and links with local administrative network. A project
co-ordinator (the second author), funded from grant income, facilitated meetings, visits

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 211

and communications between participants, as well as helping to maintain a momentum
for the project and the Forum. A number of gatekeeper personnel employed by cultural
and  heritage  sites  and  local  organisations  attended  the  Forum  meetings  at  different
times. A volunteer academic researcher – the first author – provided support to the
Forum, the project leader and project co-ordinator.

A  key  part  of  the  project  methodology  has  been  the  establishment  of  trust  and
respect between participants. During the first few meetings, people were encouraged
to find out about each other and their individual interests. As multi-sensory activity is
a valuable tool for people with learning difficulties, they also described which senses
they preferred to use. At all Forum sessions, visual images played a key communica-
tion role. Symbols, photographs and drawings were used alongside the written and
spoken word to facilitate the sharing and recording of ideas.

The Forum recognised that most of its members had little experience of cultural
and heritage sites, and so were unsure about what to expect and how to engage with
them. Before final decisions were made about the form of the project people needed
a number of visits to varying sites so that they could move beyond the novelty of the
experience.

The original project aimed to assess the accessibility of the cultural and heritage
sites, but a number of the gatekeeper personnel were eager for other possible activities
to be considered. Across a number of meetings at different venues, so as to include all
members, the Forum considered whether they would like to be involved in an arts-
based project, the original access project or an as yet undefined alternative. There was
a strong consensus to continue with an evaluative access project.

It was decided that the Forum wished to consider the whole visitor experience at
the cultural and heritage sites they visited. They wished to consider such things as:
how they found out about a venue, how they got there and what happened when they
got there; whether they felt welcome, how they found their way around and whether
they could understand what it was all about; and whether the site was aimed at them
and could hold their interest.

The arrangement of visits
The  project  co-ordinator  made  contact  with  sites  selected  by  the  Forum,  to  enable
them to demonstrate their preparedness to engage with this population, and to deal
with  concerns  about  the  use  of  photography  and  so  forth.  A  member  of  staff  was
invited to meet with the group during the visit, to take advantage of insights that the
visits engendered.

Each site visit typically involved about four people with learning difficulties from
one or two of the groups who make up the Forum. The Forum soon settled on a routine
that suited them best; arriving at a site at 11am, generally by taxi, then spending an
hour going around the site (or often, part of the site), and on to the Café for a discus-
sion  and  debrief.  The  feedback  to  the  cultural  and  heritage  sites  was  either  given
directly during these debriefing sessions or as an accessible written report.

The Forum also wished to take advantage of specific activities offered by cultural
and heritage sites. They joined a hands-on workshop led by museum education staff,
accompanied the guided tours available at several venues, and used audio tours that
were on offer. The Forum was also invited to support the development of provision at
St George’s Hall. They made 18 visits to the Hall, and were asked to advise the site
designers on signage and other presentation issues. The Forum also raised additional

212

 J. Rix et al.

funds  to  develop  a  temporary  multi-sensory  exhibition  for  St  George’s  Hall  in
conjunction  with  artists,  and  to  employ  a  film  maker  to  record  their  work  both  in
carrying out access audits and creating the exhibition.

Recording the experience
In the early stages of their work, it was important for the Forum to identify how they
could most effectively record their views on their visits to sites. The key factor was to
capture their responses as close to the visitor experience as possible. Discussing issues
in too much depth during a visit impeded the experience itself, and so meetings were
held immediately following. This debriefing session took place either just before or
during  lunch.  This  overlap  between  a  business  meeting  and  a  social  break  often
proved  valuable,  enhancing  social  cohesion,  raising  energy  levels  and  encouraging
broader and longer discussion.

A variety of tools were trialled to assist in the debriefing sessions. Video footage
was recorded, but its systematic use and evaluation proved to be challenging and it
was felt that additional expertise in film making or participatory video research was
needed. Disposable cameras and digital cameras were also trialled, but the former did
not provide images for use in debrief discussions, whilst equipment availability and
lack  of  prior  experience  restricted  use  of  the  latter.  Postcards  of  artefacts  were
obtained on occasion, too, proving of some value, but limiting discussion to predeter-
mined items.

Following initial visits, the Forum identified the need for a post-tour questionnaire
(see  Figure  1)  that  would  allow  participants  to  note  their  experiences,  their  use  of
different senses and what they had and had not enjoyed.

Figure 1. Post-tour questionnaire.

Figure 1. Post-tour questionnaire.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 213

The  questionnaires  were  a  valuable  tool  for  discussion,  allowing  participants  to
express  views  through  imagery  and/or  text,  in  the  company  of  peers  and  support
staff. These records did not form a typical research database, however. The majority
of comments recorded on these sheets were the result of discussion with support staff
who acted as scribes. The final words generally reflected the discussion which took
place rather than a clear-cut statement from an individual. Many of those involved in
the research rely to a considerable degree upon visual cues and non-verbal communi-
cation  approaches.  For  this  reason,  a  comment  such  as  Angela’s  ‘I  don’t  like  the
dark,  so  I  didn’t  watch  the  film’  needs  to  be  considered  in  the  same  context  as  a
visual  representation  such  as  the  one  in  Figure  2,  which  followed  the  hands-on
session.

Figure 2. Visual notes taken during a debrief session.

Such a representation could follow a series of short questions and single-phrase
answers, or a series of statements and physical gestures in response. This is one of the
reasons that the co-ordinator identified the establishment of trust as a key precursor to
the project. A trusting relationship between the support staff, project co-ordinator and
the  people  with  learning  difficulties  was  essential  if  views  were  to  be  interpreted
appropriately and given equal weight.

The Forum also wished support staff to raise issues based on their experience as
advocates  and  therefore  provided  them  with  their  own  questionnaire,  reducing  the
need to incorporate their views into the participant’s questionnaires when supporting
them.  The  project  co-ordinator  also  took  a  participant-observer  role  during  visits,

Figure 2. Visual notes taken during a debrief session.

214

 J. Rix et al.

being involved and responding to the actions and interests of the Forum members, but
not directing their focus. The project co-ordinator fed back questions that had arisen
from her observations to the Forum during the debrief session. She also reflected on
the experience with members of the Forum, the academic researcher and the project
leader. Across more than 50 visits, the project co-ordinator reported gaining insight
into the perspectives of the individual Forum members, as well as using her insight
into the views of others to help compare and contrast perspectives during debriefing
sessions.  Again,  the  informality  of  this  process  needs  to  be  underlined.  The  co-
ordinator  did  not  accompany  individuals  so  that  she  could  code  their  reactions  to
situations, or produce a diary of their experiences.

In  drawing  up  their  findings  and  recommendations,  the  Forum  used  a  form  of
theoretical  saturation  (Strauss  and  Corbin  1998)  in  an  ongoing,  informal  manner
appropriate  to  the  inclusive  research  process.  The  Forum  recorded  findings  on  a
particular category until they recognised that they were repeating themselves, and no
new relationships, properties or dimensions were emerging. Terms such as ‘theoreti-
cal saturation’, ‘properties’ and ‘dimensions’ were not used however; the first author
encouraged the project co-ordinator to ‘keep on going until there is nothing more that
anyone wants to say about something’. If an issue still lacked clarification, discussions
and  findings  from  previous  visits  would  be  used  to  frame  questions  on  subsequent
visits.

This research has aimed to be inclusive throughout. This written paper and the full
reports to funders are the inaccessible outputs of the research. The members of the
Forum are identified as authors not because they have participated in this write-up, but
because it is their work which it supports. In writing this report, the academic author
is very aware that he cannot provide the kinds of robust framework he would typically
look for in an academic paper. Quotes cannot be provided, because those which are
available  to  the  academic  author  are  not  ‘meaningful’  enough,  individually  robust
enough or reflective of how a view was constructed. There are no figures to be statis-
tically analysed because they were not collected. They would not have been meaning-
ful  to  the  majority  of  the  researchers.  The  findings  recorded  here  come  from
discussions with the co-ordinator, with support staff and the Forum. These discussions
have not been collated or coded in a manner which would exclude the Forum either.
They  have  been  recorded  in  visual  format,  accessible  versions  (see  Figure  3)  and
presented to the Forum for feedback. Comments have been communicated via the co-
ordinator, support staff and directly in a discussion with Forum members. Just as trust
was central to the process of research, so it is essential to the reading of the research
output.

Figure 3. Accessible, easy-to-read presentation of findings.

Figure 3. Accessible, easy-to-read presentation of findings.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 215

Findings
The findings can be categorised under two main themes. First, relationships and ways
of working: these findings apply to the personnel encountered at sites and how they
are, and can be, involved with these users (see Tables 1a and 1b); second, provision
design: these findings apply to the accessibility of the sites (see Table 2). We discuss
the former in more detail as the latter – though of equal importance to the Forum –
contains much which will seem familiar. In addition to these themes, there were three
additional outcomes. The members of the Forum developed the view that a consulta-
tion process should be undertaken involving people with learning difficulties when-
ever new interpretation is designed and made for cultural and heritage sites. It was
also evident how valuable it was for people to have their work recognised and show-
cased, particularly given that these users’ ideas have for so long been neither recogn-
ised nor showcased. The Forum also felt people with learning difficulties should be
supported to produce work of a high quality, not only to enhance the outcome of a
project but also the motivation, trust and respect that underpin it.

Relationships and ways of working
People with learning difficulties do not usually have wide experiences of cultural and
heritage sites and may not be aware of how to exploit their potential to the full. The
Forum  identified  that  it  took  up  to  10  visits  for  members  to  develop  heritage  site
literacy,  and  that  pre-visit  information  would  help  in  this  process.  Few  sites  make
links  with  people  with  learning  difficulties  and  their  service  providers,  or  actively
market available workshops to them. Perhaps as a result, they were unaware of what
was  available  for  them,  free  of  charge,  as  part  of  the  mainstream  and  programme
specific provision.

Typically, four hours were spent contacting sites, identifying the appropriate staff
member and making arrangements. Often they seemed hesitant about working with
the  project,  and  gave  the  impression  that  they  did  not  know  what  to  expect  when
people with learning difficulties came to the site. After discussions with the project
co-ordinator a number of site staff became enthused about visits, but this did not auto-
matically  permeate  the  workforce.  The  Forum  generally  did  not  feel  welcomed  on
arrival at sites. Few members of staff chose to meet the Forum to discuss their expe-
rience of a site. Only three sites asked for feedback. The co-ordinator reported that on
many occasions staff said they would join the group and then did not turn up. Despite
this, yet underlining the importance of people’s attitudes, the Forum found that the
best facilitator of access to a site is a tour guide who engages with people and builds
on their current understanding.

Staff hesitancy did not surprise the Forum. Many people working in cultural and
heritage sites have no experience of people with learning difficulties and are therefore
uncertain about what to expect and what to do. Only first-hand experience can teach
staff that they have to do very little that is different or difficult. As a consequence, the
Forum identified Disability Awareness training, involving people with learning diffi-
culties, as a key issue for sites, so they can build up a range of staff with experience
of involvement with this part of the community.

The  Forum  worked  best  in  short  bursts  across  a  longer  period  of  time.  This
provided flexibility for participants, and meant groups could focus on one contained
aspect of a site during each visit. An ongoing relationship of regular visits over several
months was appropriate, enabling the delivery of information a number of times and

216

 J. Rix et al.

in small chunks of no more than an hour. However, working with the designers at St
George’s  Hall  demonstrated  that  funders  and  heritage  practitioners  often  choose  to
operate schedules that constrain an inclusive approach. For example, time limitations
meant suggestions from the Forum could not be tested to assess whether they worked
as intended.

Planning for longer time frames is a response to issues of concentration and the
need to make sure people are understood. It is also a result of the ways in which the
wider  community  often  supports  people  with  learning  difficulties;  for  example,
transport  issues  means  that  starting  before  11am  excludes  many.  Strong  personal,
trusting relationships also need to be built across time, particularly given the key role
played  by  social  activities  within  the  project.  For  instance,  discussion  within  a  site

Table  1a. Findings  and  recommendations  of  the  Heritage  Forum  –  working  with  heritage
access consultants.

Venue attitudes and ethos 
• A consultation process should be undertaken whenever new interpretation is designed and 

made for cultural and heritage sites.

• Settings need to identify individuals responsible for initiating and responding to 

communication with this community of users.

• Contacting sites about issues of access should not be a drawn out process.
• Staff in settings often promise that they will accompany a group or join them for a 

discussion but do not turn up. This seems like bad manners, suggests that the people with 
learning difficulties are not important, and is very demotivating. Arrangements should be 
kept to … or false promises not made.

• Sites should build up a range of staff with experience of working with these users.
• When involving users in an access consultation, time scales need to be realistically planned. 

Most people with learning difficulties cannot be rushed.

• People enjoy having their work recognised and showcased.
• These users should be supported to produce work of high quality.

It is appropriate to focus on one contained aspect of a heritage site during each visit.

Effective visits 
• All visit arrangements must be flexible to the individuals and/or their groups.
•
• Attention tends to be kept for a maximum of one hour.
• A break for food is important as a social and refocusing opportunity.
• Starting a visit before 11am can cause problems with transport.
• Transport issues will often cause problems for those attending.
• A good pattern for a site visit is:

One hour visit/workshop
Short recall activity
Lunch (with discussion)
Longer recall activity

• Discussions about a visit can take place within a site’s café and still be effective.
• At least one member of staff should attend the post-visit recall meeting.

Uncertainties about working with people with learning difficulties 
• People in all walks of life find that their views of effective practice are transformed by their 

involvement with people with learning difficulties.

• When building a relationship with other organisations, such as funders, the involvement of 

people with learning difficulties breaks down barriers and motivates further engagement.

• Many people working in cultural and heritage sites have no experience of people with 

learning difficulties and are uncertain about what to expect and what to do. Only first-hand 
experience can teach staff that they have to do very little that is different or difficult.

• Heritage site staff can be enthused about an upcoming visit by discussions with an advocate 

prior to the visit.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 217

café  was  identified  as  both  effective  and  appropriate  largely  because  the  break  for
food was understood by all Forum members to be an important social and refocusing
opportunity.

Forum members needed to be strong self-advocates at times and recognised the
value of the project co-ordinator and other independent individuals to facilitate their

Table  1b. Findings  and  recommendations  of  the  Heritage  Forum  –  working  with  heritage
access consultants.

How should cultural and heritage sites involve people with learning difficulties? 
•
• These users have found it best to work in short bursts across a longer period of time. An 

It takes up to 10 visits for people to develop heritage site literacy.

ongoing relationship of regular visits across a period of several months is appropriate.

• Users intending to carry out access audit projects need to be strong self-advocates and/or to 

have an independent individual to facilitate their advocacy.

• Priorities should be set by the people with learning difficulties.
• Advocates should not be seen as the ‘access expert’ who can speak on behalf of the people 

with learning difficulties.

•

• Strong personal relationships need to be built between group members. Trust needs to be 

established across a period of time.
If others are arranging finances for the project or advising in any other way, they should 
attend meetings with the people with learning difficulties.

• The enthusiasm of people with learning difficulties for new experiences, and the pace at 
which they work, means that supporters/staff can easily direct a process with their own 
ideas, ways of working and/or ambitions without being aware of it.

• Supporters/staff must always constantly reflect on whether the people with learning 

difficulties are directing the process or whether they are being required to follow.

• Having a social element to projects is beneficial for all involved.
• Cultural and heritage sites need to provide individuals with the opportunity to assess 

proposed changes before they are finally implemented.

Involving supporters 
• Having consistent supporter presence and engagement is a key factor in the continued 

involvement of people with learning difficulties.

• Supporters can easily dominate proceedings, despite having the best of intentions.
• Providing supporters with a questionnaire allows them to raise issues based on their 

experience as advocates, issues sometimes not initially identified by the person with a 
learning disability.

• Providing supporters with a voice reduces the incentive to incorporate their views into the 

participant’s questionnaires/feedback.

• Supporters often wish/need to leave at set times (e.g. straight after lunch) to fit in with other 

activities.

Information gathering 
• People should be encouraged to explore different communication forms: pictures, symbols, 

signing, speech, written word, recorded word, audio, video, hands-on, and so forth.

• Views of individuals gathered in a variety of ways: visual questionnaires, observation, 

discussion in the moment, discussion retrospectively, drawing pictures and writing labels, 
brainstorming activities, taking photographs, recording with video, using postcards of 
artefacts, bring artefacts to individuals, workshops, regular meetings, discussion/interviews/
questionnaires with supporters.

• Digital cameras effectively allow for rapid recall and discussion. However, they present 

technical challenges, and raise issues of ownership.

• Accompanying (but not leading) people with learning difficulties as they visit a heritage site 

provides invaluable insights and opportunities to explore their perspective.
It is valuable to involve a wide range of individuals with learning difficulties so as to get a 
fuller picture of access challenges and opportunities.

•

218

 J. Rix et al.

advocacy. However, they felt strongly that priorities should be set by the people with
learning difficulties, and that advocates should not be seen as the ‘access expert’ who
could speak on their behalf. The project co-ordinator was aware that at times people
wanted  her  to  take  on  this  role.  For  example,  the  Forum’s  involvement  with  the
designers of St George’s Hall was mostly conducted through her attendance at design
meetings where she attempted to raise issues of access that had been identified by the
Forum. The Forum felt that if others are supporting them or being supported by them
they should attend shared, inclusive meetings.

Attendance  levels  at  Forum  meetings  and  site  visits  demonstrated  that  consis-
tent  supporter  presence  and  engagement  is  a  key  factor  in  the  continued  involve-
ment  of  people  with  learning  difficulties.  In  assessing  their  impact,  the  supporters
recognised  the  need  to  consistently  reflect  on  whether  the  people  with  learning
difficulties  are  directing  the  process  or  whether  they  are  being  directed.  For  exam-
ple,  supporters  often  wished  or  needed  to  leave  at  set  times  to  fit  in  with  other
activities.  At  meetings,  supporters  or  occasional  visitors  could  dominate  proceed-
ings  with  relative  ease.  Providing  supporters  with  their  own  voice  within
the process  –  such  as  through  the  support  staff  questionnaires  –  alleviated  this
pressure  somewhat,  as  well  as  highlighting  points  around  which  the  project  co-
ordinator could focus discussion.

This  capability  to  dominate  proceedings,  despite  having  the  best  of  intentions,
was  also  evident  when  defining  the  aims  of  the  project.  The  enthusiasm  of  people
with  learning  difficulties  for  new  experiences,  and  the  pace  at  which  they  work,
means that supporters/staff can easily direct a process with their own ideas, ways of
working  and/or  ambitions  without  being  aware  of  it.  For  example,  in  reflecting  on
their roles, the project co-ordinator and academic advisor both recognised how their
interests may have influenced the project. The project co-ordinator was interested in
tactile  art  experiences  and  under  considerable  time  pressure  at  St  George’s  the
Forum  chose  to  develop  a  multi  sensory  art  work;  whilst  the  academic  advisor’s
original proposal for an access project had largely been followed subsequent to the
Forum  taking  over  from  the  original  steering  committee.  Does  this  compromise
the Forum’s view that they wished to do this work, that they have carried it out in
the manner of their choosing, and have gained a great deal from it? Does it compro-
mise the supporters’ view that working with the Forum had a transformative effect,
changing  their  views  of  effective  practice  and  breaking  down  barriers  in  a  way
which motivated further engagement?

Provision design
The Forum’s findings in relation to enhancing site accessibility do not include any
dramatic changes from everyday practices within most cultural and heritage sites (see
Table  2).  These  findings  focus  upon  the  need  for  simplified  texts,  materials  and
designs,  along  with  visual  symbols,  consistent  and  accessible  way-finding,  sensory
experiences,  accessible  technology,  and  guides  (particularly  in  uniform).  Of  great
significance  to  the  Forum  is  their  conviction  that  approaches  to  access  that  would
benefit them would also benefit many others: for example, their recommendation that
heritage  site  staff  have  access  to  simplified  materials  within  rooms  to  help  when
discussing  a  site  and  its  artefacts,  and  their  recognition  of  the  need  for  plenty  of
seating throughout a site.

Table 2. Findings and recommendations of the Heritage Forum – making settings accessible.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 219

Providing additional opportunities for communication 
• Sites are most effective when more senses are being used.
• More use of sound, not muffled and not too many sounds going on at once.
• Audio text at the press of a button is well received.
• Videos and music create a sense of place and reduce reliance upon reading text to access 

information.
Interactive computer games are popular.

•
• Hands on exhibits create a very accessible space, but opportunities are currently limited.
• Exhibits need to have strong contrast in colour and texture to be accessible to all.

Strategies for effective signage 
• There is a lack and/or inconsistent use of symbols in interpretation.
• Most sites have unclear way finding.
• There need to be clear, large, symbol-based signs.
• Signs are needed for what can be done in different spaces (e.g. what to touch and what to 

• Colour coding for directions is helpful. Contrasting colours on floors and walls help to 

• Signs need to be clearly visible. Needs to be evident which artefacts they relate to.
• Signs should not be crowded, and should use large strongly contrasted fonts.
• A simplified text identifying key information should be used with supporting symbols/

sit on).

define a space.

pictures.

People as effective resources 
• The most effective access facilitator is a tour guide who engages with people and builds on 

their current understanding.

• The use of costumes brings a space to life.
• Providing simplified materials for guides within rooms would help both staff and visitors in 

discussing a site and its artefacts.

Strategies to attract people 
• Sites should tell people and their supporters about services available at their site, e.g. 

• Sites should proactively engage with these users, encouraging involvement in mainstream 

workshops.

activities.

• Pre-visit information would benefit this area of the community.

Making people welcome 
• On arrival people with learning difficulties need to be made to feel welcome.
• Disability awareness training is needed for staff, involving people with learning difficulties.
• There needs to be plenty of seating available throughout a site.

General factors 
• People with learning difficulties do not usually have wide experience of cultural and 

•

heritage sites, and do not know what is available at venues to use them to their full potential.
It often needs lots of shorter visits for people with learning difficulties to get the most out 
of a venue.
Information is best delivered when it is given lots of times in small chunks.

•
• A solution designed for some is also a solution for many others.

Discussion
This project has emphasised the relevance of the studies identified earlier in the paper.
It  has  shown  that  the  need  to  involve  people  with  learning  difficulties  in  assessing
provision within cultural and heritage sites can be met effectively if it is seen to be
about creating a relationship across an extended period of time. It supports the need

220

 J. Rix et al.

for  improved  signage  and  some  of  the  proposed  approaches  to  this  issue  (Rayner
1998, Lines et al. 2004, ODPM 2006). It emphasises the importance of the senses and
has at its heart social activities involving food (Blewitt 2004). It makes a clear case
for sites to produce accessible information, including marketing, pre-visit information
and on-site interpretation, and for them to challenge and enhance the personal atti-
tudes and awareness of their staff (Goodall et al. 2003, MENCAP 2003, cited in Ruiz
2004, Hartley et al. 2005, Rix 2005). Perhaps most important of all, it provides guid-
ance about how to undergo this process of consultation.

The work of the forum underlines the relative ease of this inclusive approach and
its  manageable  outcomes.  It  demonstrates  that  a  commitment  to  supply  resources
equitably and as part of the general provision (Goodall et al. 2003, Hartley et al. 2005)
need not be seen as a threat but as a reasonable, affordable and valuable opportunity
which can provide benefits for all users. It encourages cultural and heritage sites to
continue in their development of resources which allow people to explore through a
diversity of communication channels: 

Exhibitions  must  teach  to  different  learning  styles,  respond  to  issues  of  cultural  and
gender equity, and offer multiple levels of information. (Majewski n.d.)

The  informal  research  process  also  provides  evidence  that  cultural  and  heritage
sites can work with these users in ways with which they are already familiar. This may
seem a fairly unremarkable finding. However, the central issue for people with learn-
ing difficulties is that they want to be made to feel welcome. It is all about people
skills, yet when practitioners are asked about their views on working with people with
learning  difficulties  they  generally  highlight  the  need  for  ‘new’  skills.  Historically,
educators have complained that they do not have the skills, experience or resources to
effectively include people with learning difficulties (Allday 2009). As a member of
staff interviewed by Allday states: 

I think it is the toughest area museums have to deal with. There is hesitancy about work-
ing with such groups – partly out of ignorance of how to work with them. Exhibiting
material generated by projects working with people with learning difficulties is far easier
as  you  are  employing  other  agencies  who  are  specialists  at  working  with  people  with
learning difficulties. (Allday 2009, p. 42)

The significance of this continuing attitudinal barrier was recognised in a paper

prepared for the Heritage Lottery Fund in relation to excluded groups generally: 

A resistance to change and an unwillingness to engage with social issues are the most
powerful  forces  for  inertia  and  present  the  biggest  challenge  to  this  assessment  of
sectoral need. (Sandell 2002, p. 5)

The work of the Forum provides clear guidance for practitioners which demon-
strates that they already have the skills to engage with people with learning difficulties.
They just need to prioritise it. Once they engage they will find that they develop a more
positive attitude (Avramidis et al. 2000, Mittler 2000).

The importance of the personal is a significant outcome of this research. Much is
made of the values of Universal Design and the development of technologies which
facilitate multi-sensory experiences (Elliot 2007) and the need for individual technical
solutions to be effectively tested (Rix 2005). However, even though technology was
appreciated  by  the  Forum,  it  was  interaction  with  people  who  were  welcoming,
knowledgeable and responsive which created the greatest access to a site.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 221

The  individuality  of  people  with  learning  difficulties  is  often  greater  than  the
stereotype of their label might lead cultural and heritage sites to believe. If sites wish
to get a fuller picture of access challenges and opportunities they need to canvass a
wide range of individuals who fall within this label. They need to consider too where
they position these individuals. The Forum has had an impact, but from the margins.
It  was  produced  by  a  group  operating  outside  of  mainstream  provision.  Questions
about how cultural and heritage sites can best attract the attention of this population
need to be confronted; and how this can be achieved without simply calling upon day
centres or special schools or creating ring-fenced art projects. Perhaps most important
of all, sites need to question how they represent this integral part of the community.

Conclusion
This paper reports on an ongoing inclusive project undertaking an ongoing evaluative
process. The Heritage Forum in Liverpool and Merseyside are intending to continue
their work. Each site and each exhibition will present new challenges for users that
can usefully be assessed by people with learning difficulties. The Forum believes they
have an important role to play in meeting this need. They also wish for other groups
to follow their example and to begin the process of evaluating the provision in their
area. From the heritage site perspective this traditionally might have been seen as a
threat, but given the changing culture of sites and the kinds of outcomes presented by
the Forum, it can now be seen as an opportunity that is there for the taking.

Acknowledgements
Funding and support was received from: the Liverpool Capital of Culture Company, Liverpool
People First, the Mersey Partnership, Liverpool CC, Knowsley MBC, the NW Disability Arts
Forum,  Merseytravel,  National  Museums  Liverpool,  Royal  MENCAP  Society,  MENCAP
Liverpool and Libertas, the RTR Foundation, Liverpool LDDF, Knowsley LDDF, and the Arts
Council.

The following 13 sites around Liverpool and Merseyside were visited: the World Museum;
the Walker Art Gallery; the Maritime Museum; the National Wildflower Centre; Speke Hall;
the  Williamson  tunnels;  Metropolitan  Cathedral;  the  Anglican  Cathedral;  the  Conservation
centre; Lady Lever; Staircase House, Stockport; St George’s Hall; Tate Liverpool.

Notes
1. The term ‘people with learning difficulties’ is one of many used to describe people who are
identified as having differences in relation to thinking, remembering and communicating.
These individuals are commonly sorted into a whole raft of label subgroups which change
across the years (Rix 2006). In using the term ‘people with learning difficulties’ this paper
adopts the language advocated by self-advocates such as Simons (1992) and self-advocacy
groups such as People First (1992, 2006). They request that labelled individuals are recog-
nised  as  people  before  anything  else,  and  that  we  use  the  term  ‘learning  difficulties’  to
remind others that they can learn for the whole of their lives like everyone else.

2. The members of the Forum and where they were based are given in the notes on contribu-

tors, the funders and sites visited are listed in the acknowledgements.

Notes on contributors
Jonathan Rix is a senior lecturer in inclusion, curriculum and learning at the Open University
(UK). His research interests focus upon: policies, practices and language that facilitate inclu-

222

 J. Rix et al.

sion within the mainstream; capturing diverse perspectives; and developing models to facilitate
our thinking about the form and function of education.

Ticky Lowe has been the project coordinator for the Access to Heritage Project since 2005. She
is also a professional artist making multisensory-interactive pieces for heritage venues, and has
worked as an education officer devising workshops for a wide range of people and creating
accessible interpretation.

The Heritage Forum

Royal School for the Blind
Matthew Heard
Daniel Harwood
Christopher Bingham
Mark Anderson
Ricky Bemtham
Robert Stirrup
Lynda Hogan
Nichola McGorrin

Liverpool 8 Resource Centre
Tina O’Connor
Philip Foxley
Lila Wilson
Sheila Cosgrove
Brenda Walker
Liz Gouirah

Parthenon House
Donald Birchall
Lesley Marshall

Old Swan/DoveCot Day Centre
Antony Doran
Linda Sullivan
Dawn Newby
Angela Green
Sheila Letts

Halewood Resource Centre
Tom Barton
Eddie Barton
Barry Francis
Suzanne Faulkner
June Jenkins
Geraldine Regan

Project Leader: Alan Griffiths
Project Co-ordinator: Ticky Lowe

Project Supporters:
Jimmy  Cullen,  Eileen  Willshaw,  Kate
Rodenhurst, & Jonathan Rix

References
Allday,  K.,  2009.  From  changeling  to  citizen:  learning  disability  and  its  representation  in

museums. Museum and Society, 7 (1), 32–49.

Avramidis, E., Davies, P. and Burden, R., 2000. Student teachers’ attitudes towards the inclu-
sion  of  children  with  special  educational  needs  in  the  ordinary  school.  Teaching  and
Teacher Education, 16, 277–293.

Ball, S., 1990. Self doubt and soft data: social and technical trajectories in ethnographic field-

work. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 3 (2), 157–171.

Barnes,  C.,  2003.  What  difference  a  decade  makes:  Reflections  on  doing  ‘emancipatory’

disability research. Disability and Society, 18, 3–17.

Blewitt,  J.,  2004.  The  Eden  Project  –  making  a  connection.  Museum  and  Society,  2  (3),

175–189.

Bohata, K. and Reynolds, S., 2002. Engaging communities in learning. Dysg: Learning and

Skills Development Agency for Wales.

California  State  Parks,  2003.  All  visitors  welcome:  accessibility  in  state  park  interpretive
programs  and  facilities.  Accessibility  Section,  Acquisition  and  Development  Division.
Available from: http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=22651 [Accessed 4 December 2007].
Economou, M., 1999. Evaluation strategy for the re-development of the displays and visitor
facilities  at  the  Museum  and  Art  Gallery,  Kelvingrove.  Available  from:  http://
www.hatii.arts.gla.ac.uk/research/KelvinEval/KelvEvStrategyFinal.PDF 
7
August 2007].

[Accessed 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 223

Elliott, A., 2007. Developing accessible museum curriculum: the research, development and
validation of a handbook for museum professionals and educators. Thesis (PhD). Kansas
State University.

Goodall, B., Pottinger, G., Dixon, T. and Russell, H., 2003. Heritage property, tourism and the

UK Disability Discrimination Act. Property Management, 22 (5), 345–357.

Goodley, O., 2001. Learning difficulties, the social model of disability and impairment: chal-

lenging epistemologies. Disability and Society, 16 (2), 207–231.

Greenhill, E., Dodd, J., Creaser, C., Sandell, R., Jones, C. and Woodham, A., 2007. Inspiration,
identity,  learning:  the  value  of  museums  second  study.  RCMG.  Available  from:  http://
www.le.ac.uk/ms/research/pub1100.html [Accessed 2 August 2009].

Greenhill, E., Dodd. J., Philips, M., Jones, C., Woodward, J. and O’Riain, H., 2004. Inspira-
tion,  identity,  learning:  the  value  of  museums.  Available  from:  http://www.le.ac.uk/ms/
research/Reports/inspiration/Inspiration,%20Identity,%20Learning_Section%205.pdf
[Accessed 17 December 2007].

Hartley, K., Millar, S., Edmonstone, A. and Whitaker, S., 2005. Not in college, unemployed
and not much fun: barriers to further and higher education, employment and leisure and
cultural  opportunities,  for  people  with  communication  impairment  in  Scotland  and
Suggested  Solutions.  Royal  College  of  Speech  and  Language  Therapists  Submission  to
Scottish Parliament Equal Opportunities Disabilities Inquiry.

Hooper-Greenhill, E., Dodd, J., O’Riain, H., Clarke, A. and Selfridge, L., 2002. The impact of
the  Dfes  Museums  and  Galleries  programme.  Available  from:  https://lra.le.ac.uk/
bitstream/2381/27/1/learningthroughcult.pdf [Accessed 6 August 2007].

Lines,  A.,  Sims,  D.,  Powell,  R.,  Mann,  P.,  Dartnall,  L.  and  Spielhofer,  T.,  2003.  Bigger
pictures,  broader  horizons:  widening  access  to  adult  learning  in  the  arts  and  cultural
sectors. National Foundation for Educational Research, Report 394.

Majewski,  J.,  n.d.  Smithsonian  guideline  to  accessible  exhibition  design.  Available  from:

http://www.si.edu/opa/accessibility/exdesign/start.htm [Accessed 4 August 2009].

Mittler, P., 2000. Working towards inclusive education: social contexts. London: David Fulton.
Museums,  Libraries,  Archives  (MLA),  2004.  Inspiring  learning  for  all  website.  Available

from: http://www.inspiringlearningforall.gov.uk/ [Accessed 17 December 2007].

Museum  Learning  Collaborative,  2003.  Museum  Learning  Collaborative:  homepage.  Avail-

able from: http://www.museumlearning.com/ [Accessed 4 December 2007].

National  Endowment  for  the  Arts  (NEA),  2004.  Evaluate  your  organization’s  accessibility:
the  arts  and  humanities  accessibility  checklist.  Available  from:  http://www.nea.gov/
resources/Accessibility/Planning/Step6.pdf [Accessed 30 December 2007].

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM), 2006. Final report for signage and way finding
for people with learning difficulties Building Research Technical Report 6/2005. Building
Research Establishment for Office of the Deputy Prime Minister: London.

Oliver, M., 1983. Social work with disabled people. Tavistock: Macmillan.
People First, 1992. Letter to Mencap News, May.
People  First,  2006.  People  First:  homepage.  Available  from:  http://www.peoplefirst.org.uk/

whoarewe.html [Accessed 9 June 2006].

Playforth,  S.,  2003.  Inclusive  information:  resource  disability  portfolio  guide  6.  London:

Resource.

Intellectual Access Trust).

Rayner,  A.,  1998.  Access  in  mind:  towards  the  inclusive  museum.  Edinburgh:  Intact  (The

Rix, J., 2005. Checking the list: can a model of Down syndrome help us explore the intellec-
tual accessibility of cultural and heritage sites? International Journal of Heritage Studies,
11 (4), 341–356.

Rix, J., 2006. Does it matter what we call them? Labelling people on the basis of notions of
intellect. Ethical Space: The International Journal of Communication Ethics, 3 (4), 22–28.
Ruiz, J., 2004. A literature review of the evidence base for culture, the arts and sport policy –

Scottish Executive Education Department. Edinburgh: The Stationery Office.

Sandell, R., 2002. Museums, galleries and social inclusion. A paper prepared for the Heritage
Lottery  Fund.  Available  from:  http://legacy.hlf.org.uk/NR/rdonlyres/DF2FCDA8-85B3-
4A28-B68A-A59E2796951F/0/needs_inclusion.pdf [Accessed 4 August 2009].

Simons, K., 1992. ‘Sticking up for yourself’: self-advocacy and people with learning difficul-

ties. York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.

224

 J. Rix et al.

Strauss, A. and Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of qualitative research: techniques and procedures for

developing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Traustadottir,  R.,  2001.  ‘Research  with  others.  Reflections  on  presentation,  difference  and

othering’. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 3 (2), 9–28.

United Kingdom’s Disabled People’s Council (UKDPC). The social model of disability and
emancipatory  disability  research  –  briefing  document.  Available  from:  http://
www.bcodp.org.uk/about/research.shtml [Accessed 4 December 2007].

Walmsley J. and Johnson K., 2003. Inclusive research with people with learning difficulties.

Past, present and future. London: Jessica Kingsley Publisher.


