R. Dessaix,  Speaking
their minds, 1998,
pp.56-57.

Figure 1.  The Guggenheim Museum,  Bilbao (photo. L. Hegvold).

In  terms  of  museology,  there  are  good  reasons  to  take  note  of  what  is

written in Time,  Tate,  and indeed the Sydney Morning Herald,  chief among which
is that  they  are not  'refereed  journals'  which  means  that  they  actually  have a
readership, and in fact a readership which includes crucial decision-makers—not
only  politicians  and  professionals  but  also  generally  voters,  taxpayers,  tourists,
and  those most  important  of  all  decision-makers—members  of the  public, who
decide which  countries,  cities  and  museums  if any  they  will  visit  and  support.
Time is  obviously  at  the  top  end  with  its  estimated  twenty  million  readers of
whom over one million are believed to read Hughes's  art  column.4

At  Erst  glance  the  celebrity  of  the  Bilbao  Guggenheim  seems  largely  and
intentionally  due to  its spectacular  architecture,  and it  has  fed  architect  Frank
Gehry's  personal  and  professional  fame  as  well  as  drawing  upon  it.  In  the
context  of this  inquiry  we  must  ask  whether  it  could  have  achieved  the  same
degree of attention  had  it  not  been branded  as a  'Guggenheim'. It  may  also be
relevant  to  speculate  whether  so  daring  a  building  would  have  been
commissioned and completed without the authority of the Guggenheim name. It
was a huge investment for the Bilbao authorities, and the start-up costs of about
US$170  million  included  the  Guggenheim's  $20  million  advisory  fee  which
looks like insurance money for the success of the venture.

An  anecdote  may  illustrate  perceptions  of  the  significance  of  big  brand
names. My first  glance  at Kalgoorlie, in Western  Australia,  was  at  about seven
o'clock one cool morning in  1992. As the east-bound Indian-Pacific  train pulled
in, the sleepy passengers  were  advised that  there was  a one-hour  stopover  and
that  a  minibus  tour  of  the  town  was  available.  The  friendly  local  lady  who
drove the minibus amazed us by providing a commentary which barely touched
on  the  exuberant  gold-rush  architecture  but  highlighted  supermarkets  and  fast
food  outlets and even vacant  sites designated for them.

There  is  a  lesson  in  her  apparent  naivete  in  imagining  that  interstate  and
overseas rail travellers who have chosen  an early-morning tour of the  goldfields
capital  would  be  interested  in  noticing  a  Colesworths  or  a  Hungry  Macs.  It
relates,  inter alia, to  differences  between  local  and  visitor  perceptions.  Visitors

Cultural Franchising, Imperialism and Globalisation

59

5  Sudjic,  op.cit. pp.54-

58.

6  Ibid, p.57.

7  R. Hughes, 

'Bravo!

Bravo!',  Time, 3
November,  1997,
pp.66-7.

who are staying in town and will be looking for food might find this information
useful;  to  the  daybreak-tour  train  travellers  these  shops  will  be  utterly
uninteresting  except  perhaps  if  they  are  cleverly  adapted  old  buildings  or
bizarrely  located  new  ones;  but  to  some  locals  they  are  symbols  of  progress,
modernity  and the  urbanity of their provincial city. Why? Not because they  are
just  supermarkets  and  take-away  food  outlets,  but  because  they  are  brand
names—part of big chains, in some cases national or, even better,  international
global brands. A new locally owned and styled fish or pizza shop would not rate
a  mention  on  the  minibus  tour  but  KFC does.  Does  the  Bilbao  Guggenheim
similarly  benefit  from  its  family  name,  or  could  it  have  been  just  as  instantly
famous,  or even more so, if the amazing building had been built  and opened as
simply the Bilbao Art Museum?

Part of the answer might be thought to lie in the supposed quality guarantee
provided  by  a  major  brand  name,  in  which  case  the  word  'Guggenheim'  is
presumably  a guarantee  of quality. Interestingly,  though,  the parent  institution
is more famous for its architecture by Frank Lloyd Wright than for its collection,
and  while that may not matter  once its fame is established, it may  alternatively
point  to  the  characteristics  or  promise  of  the  emerging  brand:  'good  art  in  a
unique building'.

The Wright  and Gehry buildings are briefly  contrasted  by Deyan Sudjic who
articulates  Guggenheim  director  Thomas  Krens's  'tireless  efforts  to  build  the
world's first global  museum  brand'.  There  are  now  two  Guggenheims  in  New
York,  the  Venice  building  has  been  reopened,  and  Bilbao is the first franchise,
with  negotiations  underway  for  more  in  France  and  Austria  [and  Japan
although  Sudjic  does  not  say  so].  Clearly,  controlling  a  chain  of  museums
'simplifies  the  politics  and  economics  of  organising  touring  exhibitions  and
permits  greater  use  of  collections.  Local  authorities  eager  for  cultural  tourism
are  encouraged  to  fund  landmark  buildings  and  enter  into  franchise-type
management contracts with head  office  in USA.5

Sudjic  gives  a very  interesting,  provocative  and  perceptive  analysis,  but  we
may question his summation,  that this represents 'the paradoxical spectacle of a
small nation  asserting its cultural  identity  by importing  culture  [art  collections
and  architecture]  wholesale'.6  I would  put  a  different  spin  on  what  the  Bilbao
authorities  have  done. Perhaps,  like the  minibus  driver  in  Kalgoorlie,  they  are
underselling  their  own  cultural  identity  while  trying  to  boost  their  own
confidence  and  appeal to tourists by asserting their modernity,  internationalism
and  maturity.

International  cultural  power  politics  is  the  sub-theme  of  Robert  Hughes's
Time article  about  the  Bilbao  Guggenheim  and  the  Getty  Centre  in  which  he
claims they 'climax the age of American museum expansion'.7 In the sixties wie
used  to  talk  about  Coca-colonisation  to  suggest  that  ever-increasing  US
economic power conveniently symbolised by the dominance of world brands was
analogous  to  the  political  imperialism  of previous  centuries. It  is reasonable  to
ask to what extent the new global museum branding phenomenon  identified by
Sudjic  is  comparable  to  colonial/imperial  arrangements  which  created  many
still-existing museums all over the world.

In  the  days  of  Empire,  the  Churches,  like  the  Army  and  the  vice-regal
network,  provided  colonial  career  circuits  for  bishops,  military  officers,  and
governors  who  moved  between  India,  Canada,  Australia  and  Africa.  This  was

60

David Dolan

see I. Reid, Higher
Education or Education
for  Hire?, CQU Press.
1996,  particularly  the
chapter  on  teaching
English  literature.

see  S.  Sheets-Pyenson,
Cathedrals  of  Science,
McGill-Queen's UP,
1988;  and  R.
MacLeod  (ed) The
Commonwealth  of
Science,  OUP,  1988.

not  limited  to  the  British  Empire;  for  example  the  early  twentieth  century
religious  artist  Father Lesmes Lopez had  an  international  career  entirely  within
the  Benedictine  Order  painting  mural  frescoes  in  churches  and  monasteries  in
Spain, Australia and the Philippines.

The  old  European-based  imperial  systems  were  driven  by  mercantile  and
religious interests whxich created imperial and in some cases truly global brands
both  in material  products  and  in  services. Colonial universities  (and, to a lesser
extent, elite schools) were not  directly controlled  or administered  from  Oxbridge
but  they  were  staffed  by  Oxbridge  graduates,  imitated  Oxbridge  dress,
architecture  and curricula,  and  although  locally funded  they promoted imperial
rather  than regional or colonial values.8 It is not being facetious  to say that the
growth of the British Empire allowed the Church of England to develop from  an
isolated  national  denomination  into  a  franchised  global brand  of religion  with
central  control  and  a  guarantee  of  doctrinal  and  ritualistic  quality  and
consistency. Often,  this extended to architecture  with favoured  British  architects
providing off-the-shelf  plans for churches in the colonies. To what degree did the
same thing happen in museums?

In  terms of architecture, many  colonial museums  are reflections  of those in
Europe. All  around  the  world,  nineteenth-century  art  museums  are  as  similar
looking  as McDonalds  restaurants,  with  their  classical porticos  evocative of the
National  Gallery  in  London  or  many  German  institutions.  There  are  stylistic
echoes  of the  Victoria  and Albert Museum  in  Bombay,  in  Sydney,  and  sundry
other  colonial  capitals.  Systems  of  collection  development  and  specimen-
swapping  in  colonial  science  museums  have  been  extensively  documented.
Colonial  collectors  and  scientists  sold  specimens,  including  ethnographic
material,  and  supplied  data  to  the  theory-builders 
in  the  metropolitan
institutions.9  With  institutional  art  collecting  the  trade  went  the  other  way,  as
the  imperial  centres  found  a market  in  the  colonies, so it is a standard  lament
that  in  the  nineteenth  century  Australian  art  museums  spent  their  money  on
then  fashionable  English  academic and salon  artists rather  than  on old masters
or early modernists.

Because  of  the  location  of  the  major  art  markets  and  the  dominant  Euro-
centric view of art,  colonial museums  often  delegated  their  acquisition  decisions
to  European-based  advisors. In  Australia,  this  practice  continued  well  into  the
twentieth  century,  as  did  the  preference  for  recruiting  museum  directors  and
senior  staff  from  overseas.  Now,  in  the  1990s,  Australian  and  other  regional
companies, especially if in trouble, increasingly opt to recruit  an American chief
executive, as the current conventional wisdom is that only someone experienced
in the US marketplace can cope in the era of economic globalisation. It was not
so very different  a  century  ago. Then,  whether  we needed  a  chief  executive, a
professor,  a  government  department  head,  a bishop  or  a  museum  director,  the
call was usually to 'bring out a top man from England'. The recruitment process
commonly  involved  delegating  the  selection,  which  meant  that  the  purported
'top  man'  [never  a  woman  in  those  days]  often  turned  out,  too  late,  to  be  a
mediocrity  or  self-promoting  professional  pest whose  peers  had  contemptuously
nominated  him  because,  as  in  one  famous  but  possibly  apocryphal  195O's
reference  'his colleagues here in  England  would  all be delighted  and consider it
most appropriate if he were appointed to a permanent position in the Antipodes.'
This  amounted  to  a  system  of  patronage  which  along  with  other  factors

Cultural  Franchising,  Imperialism  and  Globalisation

61

mentioned above allowed cliques of senior museum staff  and trustees in imperial
centres to exercise considerable influence  over colonial cultural institutions they
generally  never  saw.  All  the  'National  Galleries'  as  they  were  then  called,
around  the  world, or  within  a specific  imperial  system  such  as the British,  can
be seen  as a sort of chain,  each locally funded,  but with a decidedly similar feel
as they  were all looking to the  same models. Thus National  Gallery was like a
global  brand,  in  that  you  could find one  almost  anywhere  and  go in  with  an
expectation  (not  always  met)  of  a  degree  of  quality  control  enforced  through
government  and  professional  ambition.  However,  the  imperial  centre  exercised
influence  rather  than  strict  control,  and  exercised its influence  far  more loosely
and  hegemonically  than  in  a  true  contractual franchise operation.  There  is  a
parallel to this today at the national level in geographically large countries, with
touring  organisations  and  professional  bodies exercising considerable  influence,
and  major  international  shows  generally  only  affordable  if  they  go  to  several
similarly  equipped  venues  chosen  for  non-competitive  locations  (e.g. the  same
blockbuster  is never seen in both Sydney  and Canberra). It seems reasonable to
regard the kind of operation which Sudjic describes in the Guggenheim group as
an  extension  and  intensification  of  the  colonial-imperial  scenario—similar  in
some respects but far more corporatised,  managerial  and market-driven.

There  will  of  course  be  new  and  unpredictable  consequences  of  museum
franchising  and  globalisation  especially if,  rather  than  being the climax as Time
suggests,  what  we  are  now  seeing is instead  the  beginning  of  a trend. Finally,
we  must  ask  what  may  be  some  of  the  predictable  consequences  for  practice,
careers  and  professional  education  if franchising and  globalisation  of museums
goes  on  apace.  We  can  try  to  do  this  by  extrapolating  from  the  colonial
experience while taking a sideways glance at corporate histories of globalisation.
A now-standard  account of the rise and fall  of modernism  in  art has it that

Paris was the undisputed centre of the avant-garde until Hitler whose taste in art
was linked to his politics created the school of New York by encouraging a mass
emigration  of the degenerate modernists, but then  in the  1970s  and  1980s  the
US art  hegemony  collapsed  and  centres fragmented and  multiplied  as Europe,
Japan  and  elsewhere  developed  strong  regional  art  practices  which  were  not
seen  as  a  provincial  reflection  of  any  monoculture.  Tension  between  the
supposed  centres  and  peripheries  has  been  a  feature  of  many  elements  of
twentieth-century  culture  and  at  century's  end  it  has  been  heightened  by  the
politics  of  control  of  mass  media,  multimedia  and  ever-developing  information
technologies. The increase in the number  of museums in the  1980s  and  1990s
has  been  linked  to  both  the  economics  of tourism  and  the  politics  of  regional
identity  and  it is generally  unnecessary  to choose between  these  as both  apply
in many cases.

Nor is it necessary to decide whether the predominant swing in recent years
has  been  towards  or  away from regionalism  or  monoculture.  What  is  clear  is
that  any  growth  in  museum  franchising  or  global  branding  will  create  a
museum job market  sector  (large or small) where standardisation  will require a
less regional and more global view. Even if the global style allows for a degree of
regionalism  it  is  likely  to  take  the  form  of  commodified  difference.  Corporate
loyalty will be expected,  and just  as in the bigger museums today this will be a
perceived by some as a challenge to an ideal of curatorial  autonomy. We might
think  that  excessive  demands  for  conformity  will be bad for museums  and bad

62 

David Dolan

10 Sudjic, op.cit. p.57.

for art, but as educators we will at least have to be aware of the demands of the
employers,  and  it  will not  be  all bad  if this means  insisting  on  a less romantic
and  self-indulgent  approach  to  curating  and  other  tasks.  Above  all  staff  will
have  to  be  good  at  what  they  do  and  good  at  communicating  to  a  mass
audience, but worthwhile museum education  already has that  focus.

Whether  there will be a bigger cake to share, in the sense of more jobs and
career  opportunities,  will  depend  partly  on  the  truth  or  otherwise  of  the
marketing  dictum  that  choice  stimulates  sales.  The  presumed  efficiencies
generated through  a chain  of museums may result in fewer  staff being required
for  the  same  result,  but  equally  might  be  articulated  to  permit  the  same  or  a
slightly  larger  staff  to  deliver  a  higher  level  of  activity  as  demanded  by  a
museum-visiting  public  growing  and  made  hungry  by  guaranteed  good
experiences.  It  is  estimated  that  the  annual  operating  budget  of  the  Bilbao
Guggenheim  will  be  about  SUS12  million,  which  is  comparable  to  the  biggest
Australian  museums  but  not  huge  by  world  standards.  Until  it  is  proven
otherwise we may assume that this sum is additional to present turnover in the
sector,  as  new  ventures  are  more  likely  to  expand  the  total  museum  market
than  to  acquire  market  share  at  someone  else's  expense.  The  concept  of  the
Bilbao Guggenheim investment multiplied ten or a hundred  times becomes quite
dramatic.

Obviously the resolution of some of these issues, in particular the question of
vibrant  regionalism  versus  monocultural  imperialism,  will  depend  on  how
museum  franchising  or global branding works out in practice, and if the initial
administrative  and  curatorial  policies  are  modified.  Although  the  Guggenheim
collection  includes  European  modernism,  the  Bilbao  Guggenheim  has  opened
with  a display consisting mostly of American  art  of recent  decades drawn from
the  central  (New  York)  Guggenheim  collection.  Hughes  sneers  that  this
represents  Krens's  taste,  and  Sudjic  describes  it  as  presenting  'a  view  of  the
world from the perspective of the Upper East Side' [of New York].10 It is a stark
contrast  to  the  situation  nearby  in  fiercely  regionalist  Barcelona  where  the
major  collecting institutions  concentrate  almost  exclusively on  local Catalan  art
(except  perhaps  Richard  Meier's  1996  Museum  of  Contemporary  Art,  which
anyway  is  more  focused  on  loan  exhibitions  than  on  collecting).  The
Guggenheim has a programme to acquire, at local expense, some Spanish art for
Bilbao.  In  view  of  some  of  the  assumed  efficiencies  and  other  rationales  for  a
franchising policy, this raises  an  interesting  scenario  which  does not  appear  to
have occurred  to Hughes or Sudjic. What  if:

a) the  'global brand'  chain  goes ahead  and there  are Guggenheims in Paris,

Vienna, and perhaps in several Asian cities;

b) regional collections are acquired in connection with  each of these;
c) sustaining  interest  and  visitor  numbers  requires  offering  a wide range of
art  and  exhibitions  (more  than  just  a  mix  of US and  local  art  in  each venue);
and

d)  the  politics  and  economics  of  organising  touring  exhibitions  and  other
Guggenheim  group activities means that  the whole Guggenheim  collection is to
some degree centrally curated  and managed  as one collection?

Will  the  whole  group  and  specifically  the  head  office  become  more
international  through  a  process  of  reverse  colonisation,  diluting  the  'late-
imperial  American'  culture  which  for  Hughes  initially  characterises  the  Bilbao

Cultural Franchising, Imperialism and Globalisation 

63

exercise? Will the Guggenheim group's senior staff be recruited  only in and from
the US?  If 'the world's first global museum brand' represents  multi-nationalism,
then  the  next  stage  (drawing  on  patterns  of  corporate  globalisation)  may  be
trans-nationalism.  Another  comparison  might  be 
(predominantly
performing)  arts  festivals  whose  directors  scour  the  world  for  something
different,  and  in  whose  programmes  the  once-dominant  European  classics  are
now greatly outnumbered  by acts from countries whose location  on the map is
only vaguely known to most of the audience.

the 

Can we imagine a real object-based  global museum group entity  answerable
to  no  national  cultural  agenda,  and  almost  as  dispersed  as  a  so-called  virtual
museum  which  is  everywhere  and  nowhere  in  cyberspace?  It  could  be
interesting to work for, but would be a demanding employer, and  a challenge to
the educators of professional staff. While pondering this we might take note that
the management  gurus are already saying that globalism as a concept is now a
bit dated, and are talking instead about 'globality'—a world in which everybody
can  be  connected  all  the  time  and  authorities  do not  have  as  much  leverage.
Perhaps  museums  will  bypass  globalism  or  pass  rapidly  through  that  phase
altogether,  and  at  the next ICOM conference  we will be trying to come to grips
with globality instead!

64 

David Dolan


