Rethinking Ainu Heritage: A Case 
Study of an Ainu Settlement in 
Hokkaido, Japan
Sidney C. H. Cheung

113000000July 2005
SidneyCheung
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS116033.sgm
10.1080/13527250500160500

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2005Taylor & Francis Group Ltd

sidneycheung@cuhk.edu.hkWith the colonisation of Hokkaido since the Meiji era, Western technologies were intro-
duced  to  Japan,  but  the  indigenous  inhabitants’—the  Ainu  people’s—ways  of  life  were
negatively affected because of the assimilation policy. Since the late 1950s, ethnic tourism
in Ainu settlements has grown and Ainu hosts in traditional costumes were often seen in
various tourist destinations in Hokkaido; Lake Akan was not exceptional. In this paper, the
historic development of an Ainu settlement is explained, and the contested meanings of
Ainu traditions and the social construction of Ainu culture in post-war Japanese society
from  the  cultural-political  perspectives  is  investigated.  With  the  focus  on  the  Ainu
settlement at Lake Akan, the paper looks closely into the changing indigenous living envi-
ronments and relevant activities held during the last several decades in order to discern how
Ainu heritage has been preserved and promoted as well as the social transformation that
Ainu people have undergone in the face of globalising Japanese society.

Ainu, which means ‘human’ in their own language, is also the word currently used by
the Japanese to signify the indigenous people who settled in the land from northern
Honshu to southern Kamchatka, including southern Sakhalin, the Kurile Islands and
the lower reaches of the Amur River. The definition of Ainu has always been contested
and  even  the  number  of  Ainu  people  in  existence  was  a  mystery  until  recently.
According to a population survey by the Hokkaido local government in 1999, a total of
23,767  Ainu  people  (defined  only  as  those  who  consider  themselves  Ainu)  lived  in
Hokkaido prefecture. As mentioned by many Ainu people, however, the number of

Sidney C. H. Cheung, Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: sidneycheung@cuhk.edu.hk

198

S. C. H. Cheung

Ainu is probably larger than that shown in the Hokkaido survey since there are many
Ainu who hide their identity, reflecting the fact that many Ainu descendants are still
trying to conceal their ethnic backgrounds and escape discrimination and social stigma.
During the Tokugawa period (1603–1868), there were approximately 20,000–30,000
Ainu inhabitants under the suzerainty of the Matsumae autonomous domain, located
in the southern part of the present Hokkaido. With the formation of the Japanese state
under the Tokugawa shogunate, the Ainu identity, as distinct from The Japanese, was
manipulated to enhance the prestige of those rulers of the Matsumae domain through
their control over the ‘primitive’ Ainu people. After the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the
northern island Ezo-chi was renamed Hokkaido, and became the largest area used by
the modern Meiji nation-state for experimentation with imported Western technolo-
gies. At that time, Western technologies included the production of dairy products,
salmon aquaculture, and canned product processing. These imported modern technol-
ogies enabled the supply of food to mainland Japan, justifying the idea of colonising
Hokkaido  during  the  early  Meiji  period  (1868–1912).  With  the  1899  Law  for  the
Protection of Native Hokkaido Aborigines, a policy of assimilation was forced upon the
Ainu, and their social structure and living environment consequently went through a
number  of  drastic  changes  as  restrictions  were  put  on  their  customs,  language,  and
means of livelihood.1 This law contained measures relating to land tenure and legal
land  expropriation  which  violated  the  Ainu  people’s  territorial  integrity  as  well  as
banning traditional subsistence strategies such as deer hunting and salmon fishing, and
also forced the Ainu to cultivate rice for the Japanese mainland. In the last century,
Ainu traditional lifestyles disappeared, and their rights have been overlooked within
Japanese society. Nowadays, traditional Ainu settlement can no longer be seen, and the
traditional  grass-thatch  Ainu  huts  are  almost  non-existent,  except  for  tourist  areas
where music and dancing performances and handicraft souvenirs are available.

In Japanese academia, Ainu studies were very popular before the 1970s. Apart from
economic growth, which made overseas research easier, one might speculate that the
change could be the result of the commodification of Ainu culture, impacted by the
tourism industry, in which ‘pure’ Ainu cultural traditions could no longer be found.
Even  though  it  would  be  important  to  understand  the  underlying  conflict  between
Ainu and Japanese within such a tourist arena, relevant ethnological and anthropolog-
ical research looking into the social and political aspects of Ainu–Japanese relations has
been  weakly  developed.  In  particular,  in  relation  to  Ainu  research  among  Japanese
scholars,  special  attention  was  paid  to  the  ethnic  issue  because  of  hostile  relations
between the Ainu and the Japanese in the past, so ‘studying Ainu’ became an area that
Japanese researchers considered ‘sensitive’ and where it was difficult to be objective.2
Only recently have Japanese researchers become interested in the meanings and signif-
icance of Ainu delegation in several world-class events at the turn of the 20th century,
including the St Louis Olympic Games in 1904, the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in
1904, the Japan–British Exhibition of 1910, and so on, and especially how and why
Ainu people were chosen to represent the modernised Japan at that time, which might
be considered a breakthrough.3 As for non-Japanese scholars, Ainu studies were silent
for a long time after Romyn Hitchcock (b. 1851), Gordon Munro (1863–1942), John



199

Batchelor (1854–1944) and others, who did extensive studies in the early 20th century.
In  the  late  1960s,  an  article  published  in  National  Geographic  broke  the  silence  and
renewed world interest in the ‘Sky People’.4 Since then, few books have reported on the
Ainu people and the most comprehensive English book was probably an edited volume
published after the exhibition of Ainu culture organised by the Smithsonian Institution
in 1999.5 Considering the lack of ethnographic study of Ainu people settled at Lake
Akan and relevant heritage preservation in the past several decades, this article aims to
discuss the historical development of Lake Akan as an Ainu settlement and explain the
contested  meanings  of  Ainu  traditions  in  post-war  Japan  from  a  cultural-political
perspective. With the focus on the emergence of Ainu settlement at Lake Akan, the
paper  examines  changing  indigenous  living  environments  and  various  cultural
activities held during the last several decades in order to discern how Ainu heritage has
been preserved and promoted as well as the social transformation that Ainu people
have undergone in the face of globalising Japanese society.

The Meanings of Ainu Heritage in Japanese Society

To understand the meanings of Ainu heritage within the socio-political changes taking
place in Japan, it is important to look into the changing meanings of Japanese culture
in the post-war era. With Japan’s defeat in the Second World War, bringing dramatic
changes  to  the  Japanese  nation,  the  search  for  Japanese  self-identity  was  seen  as
necessary for rebuilding society. The importation of Western knowledge and technol-
ogies was highly influential, reflected in Japan’s economic, political and military recon-
struction; at the same time, the Emperor, as Japan’s spiritual leader, was demoted from
deity to human being, reflecting a new weakness in the Japanese people’s general sense
of self-identification. American popular culture, commercialisation and urbanisation
invaded post-war Japanese society and challenged the so-called Japanese cultural tradi-
tion. These factors brought the Japanese a subtle change of social value and initiated a
quest for identity, especially during the era of development into an economic power in
the 1960s. In particular, the crisis of identity could be seen in numerous discussions of
Japaneseness (or nihonjinron in Japanese) by Japanese scholars as well as popular writ-
ers. The debate on Japaneseness reflects a crisis of identity, which in turn represents the
change  of  attitudes  of  Japanese  society  towards  the  non-Japanese  Others  including
indigenous inhabitants, foreign migrants, foreigners, and so on. Therefore, the discus-
sions of Japaneseness in the post-war period indicated a change in Japanese society that
can  provide  an  understanding  of  the  processes  and  dynamics  of  constructing  both
national and cultural identities in Japan.

Regarding the emphasis upon Japanese cultural uniqueness as a discourse in recent
decades, Aoki has suggested that the transformation of Japanese cultural studies as well
as ideas of Japaneseness should be divided into the following periods for a better under-
standing.6 First, according to Aoki, the immediate post-war period from 1945 to 1954
was the era in which Japanese culture was understood negatively, signifying the images
of imperialism and nationalism brought out during the Second World War. This was
followed  by  rapid  economic  growth  from  1955  to  1963,  when  Japanese  culture  was

200

S. C. H. Cheung

considered with emphasis upon historical relativity compared with Western develop-
ing countries. From 1964 to 1976, Aoki suggests, Japanese culture carried a positive
image  when  compared  with  the  previous  period.  Starting  with  the  Tokyo  Olympic
Games in 1964, Japan not only demonstrated its continuing rapid economic growth
but also, in the post-Olympics era, attracted overseas tourists and general international
attention to its culture. From 1977 to 1983, as the second part of the positive period,
Japanese  culture  became  even  more  widely  accepted  at  the  international  level.  In
particular, in searching for a Japanese success model in a worldwide context, concepts
such  as  Z-theory,  M-form  society,  No.  1  country,  Japanese  management,  etc.  were
popular and challenging concepts compared with Western theories of modernisation
and economic achievement.

Simply speaking, after Japan had experienced recovery from post-war poverty and
political inferiority, it undertook a search for national identity and Japaneseness as a
result of economic success and self-recognition on the international stage. Then, we
might want to ask about the situation of the Ainu people during such a rapid social
transformation. In fact, the Ainu people were undertaking various activities aimed at
the revival of Ainu heritage during recent decades, for example the Asir Chep Nomi
(Salmon Thanksgiving) Festival in Sapporo and Kanto-based Ainu movement through
a restaurant in Tokyo called Rera Chise (House of Wind).7 Even though requests for
formal  recognition  for  indigenous  inhabitants  and  financial  support  for  cultural
preservation had been raised for quite some time, the changes became obvious only
after the enactment of the Ainu New Law in 1997.8 Especially in relation to land claims,
the iwor project was expected to assist the revival of Ainu traditions in Hokkaido. In the
Ainu  language,  iwor  refers  to  a  remote,  isolated  mountain,  and  also  signifies  the
hunting ground of one village or a joint hunting territory shared by several villages;
therefore, it also means one’s living area and maintains the boundary, symbolising a
sense of belonging. The iwor project combines financial support and the return of land
to traditional practices (similar to iriaiken, which implies the right to use resources in
a  shared  territory  based  on  local  traditional  practices),  allowing  the  revival  of  local
traditions.  In  2001,  altogether  there  were  six  proposals  submitted  from  Sapporo,
Shiraoi, Obihiro, Shizunai, Kushiro, and Piratori; the Lake Akan area was included as
part of the Kushiro proposal. Yet, considering the cultural diversity in different regions,
it was possible that three or four of them might be accepted rather than only one, as
proposed in the beginning. It is not difficult to understand the controversy associated
with having just one iwor project presenting the totality of Ainu culture. In particular,
organisational  disputes  among  regional  groups  have  been  acute  during  the  last  few
years. These disputes reflect the increasingly recognised fact that Ainu culture is not
monolithic  nor  homogeneous,  but  has  regional  distinctions  within,  and  different
meanings to, the various groups.

During the author’s visit in 2003, Shiraoi was chosen officially as the core part of the
iwor project, with supporting facilities to be built in several locations. Ainu people at
Lake Akan were not as disappointed as might be imagined. A tourist destination such
as Lake Akan can probably generate revenue from the increase in the number of visitors,
and the revival of Yukar Theatre was one of their tourism-promotion strategies in 2004.



201

From 1 April until 20 May 2004, an Ainu theatre piece entitled ‘Yukar: Epic of the Hero’
was  performed  twice  a  day;  however,  many  informants  expressed  the  view  that  the
results were not as good as they had hoped. The high expectation might be related to
how people remembered the success of Ainu Yukar Theatre9 performance in the 1970s.
However,  given  the  long  tourist-dependent  development  in  most  Ainu  settlements,
traditional ritual has completely disappeared and new-style cultural performances were
never encouraged, nor put on to bring out their own voices; again, owing to the lack of
support  in  innovating  and  promoting  the  traditional  art  form,  the  performance  of
Yukar Theatre in 2004 indeed reflected the difficulties in Ainu heritage preservation.

Comparing the Bangarra Dance Theatre which took part in the indigenous segment
of the opening and closing ceremonies of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games and Ainu
folk dance taking place at Lake Akan merely for tourists, it is obvious that Australian
Aboriginal cultural representation has received different public recognition from the
Ainu people’s folk performances taking place mainly in tourist destinations. Again, we
need to understand the political meanings between Ainu Yukar Theatre and Bangarra
Dance Theatre. As Kapferer points out, the emphasis upon harmonic unity with nature
should be an important metaphor of egalitarianism within Australian nationalist ideol-
ogy  in  differentiating  itself  from  European  culture,  and  mentions  that  Australian
Aboriginals ‘are often represented as the most ancient, older than anything in Europe,
[and  this]  is  important,  quite  apart  from  any  empirical  validity,  within  Australian
nationalism’.10 But despite the differences between their social contexts, we can still
examine  the  apolitical  aspects  of  Ainu  cultural  preservation  in  many  ways.  Being  a
similar  indigenous  traditional  culture  much  used  for  commercial  activities  in  the
tourism  industry,  Desmond  raises  the  fact  that  the  hula  dance  sometimes  reflected
issues of history connected with current political situations and even gave reference to
sovereignty; furthermore, he adds that ‘some dances do include indirect references to
the  contemporary  situation  by  stressing  themes  of  justice  and  the  perpetuation  of
Native Hawaiian values’.11 Therefore, in order to study how Ainu heritage has been
promoted in contemporary Japanese society, this paper looks into the local context of
Lake Akan.

History of Lake Akan and its Social Development

To reach Lake Akan (see Figure 1), anyone travelling from Sapporo (the major city in
the southern part of Hokkaido) has to go to Kushiro or Kitami and then take the local
bus. It is located in the eastern part of Hokkaido with Kushiro marshland to its south.
In the Ainu language, akan means stable as well as not moving, which enhances its
stability given that there are active volcanoes and areas with hot springs around Lake
Akan.12 Together with the lake (which has an area of 13 km2 and is 38 m in depth),
‘male’ mountain Akan (1,317 m in height) and ‘female’ mountain Akan (1,503 m in
height),  a  developed  area  along  the  coast  of  the  lake  with  residential  and  business
activities  form  the  basic  components  of  the  physical  landscape.  With  the  natural
scenery, hot springs, and government-recognised natural heritage (a kind of spherical
algae called marimo found at the bottom of the lake in 1921), Lake Akan has been a

202

S. C. H. Cheung

Figure 1 Map of Hokkaido

well-known tourist destination since the 1920s. In addition, with the establishment of
Akan National Park in 1934, Lake Akan has been recognised as an important tourist
attraction in Hokkaido.
Figure 1 Map of HokkaidoLooking into the history of Lake Akan, the earliest formal historical document was
made by Matsuura Takeshirou in 1858, as mentioned by Irimoto,13 while the earliest
economic development brought by the Japanese was probably the forestry business of
Maeda  Masana,  which  began  in  1906.  The  relations  between  the  Maeda  family  and
Akan  Ainu  were  crucial  because  the  establishment  and  success  of  the  present  Akan
Kotan originated from the free use of land given to the Ainu people by Maeda Mitsuko,
the third successor of the Maeda family. Regarding the development of Akan Kotan as
the  indigenous  settlement  (kotan  means  settlement  in  the  Ainu  language;  see  also
Figure 2a and 2b), there were reportedly only four households in 1951 since most Ainu
were  seasonal  workers/artisans  living  somewhere  else  rather  than  in  the  Lake  Akan
area. In order to give most of them a stable environment to earn their living and to
concentrate on their work, in 1953 some Ainu people made their first appeal to Maeda
Mitsuko asking if they could settle in the area. The agreement was finalised only in
1959, which allowed the Ainu people to live and work in the present Ainu Kotan area
without  paying  the  Maeda  family  as  well  as  the  actual  landlord.14  Despite  repeated
questions, it was impossible to find a consistent answer regarding what kinds of usage



203

Figure 2a The overview of Ainu Kotan in Lake Akan.

Figure 2b Close up of shops in Ainu Kotan.

204

S. C. H. Cheung

Figure 2a The overview of Ainu Kotan in Lake Akan.
Figure 2b Close up of shops in Ainu Kotan.

had taken place on this slightly sloping piece of land. Some people opined that it was
farmland before, while others claimed that it was used to keep horses which were used
for transportation in the old days; however, it is true to say that it was a marginal resi-
dential  area  when  compared  with  the  centre  of  Lake  Akan  tourism  at  that  time.
One might ask whether the present residents of Lake Akan are local indigenous Ainu
people. In fact there are both Japanese and Ainu people living in this area and most of
them, as well as their fathers and grandfathers, came from outside. Most Japanese came
because of the tourism industry and worked in sectors such as hotels, souvenirs, food
and transport. The present Ainu people living at Lake Akan belong neither to one single
distinctive  group  with  common  origin  or  ancestor,  nor  to  a  regional  ethnic  group
sharing  common  local  traditions,  specific  ways  of  life  and  socio-historical  relations
with the landscape. The so-called Akan Ainu is a relatively newly emerged self-identity
among them, given the majority came from many different areas outside Lake Akan. In
other words, Lake Akan signifies a renowned tourist attraction combining the beauty
of  nature  and  the  indigenous  culture  of  the  Ainu  people.  For  example,  there  are
Japanese  who  were  attracted  by  Akan’s  mountains  and  have  been  living  there  for
decades,  and  also  some  attracted  by  outdoor  activities  such  as  hiking  and  fishing.
Besides many shops and hotels serving the visitors, about 30 shops in Ainu Kotan are
selling souvenirs, offering Ainu food and together with the Ainu Theatre performing
Ainu music and dance; most of the visitors are domestic tourists and most of the inter-
national tourists come from Taiwan.

In the early period, most of the Ainu people at Lake Akan were seasonal workers as
well as wood workers coming from nearby areas such as Kushiro, Urakawa, Shirarika,
Asahikawa, etc. In particular, Shitaku mentions that two or three Ainu-owned souvenir
shops appeared as the number of domestic tourists increased in the late 1940s.15 Most
of  the  Ainu  seasonal  workers  came  to  work  in  souvenir  shops  owned  by  Japanese
people  and  were  hired  mostly  to  craft  wooden  crawling  bears  (or  kibori  kuma  in
Japanese) in front of the shops as one of the tourist attractions. Ironically, the decora-
tive  crawling  bears  should  not  be  considered  as  the  ‘traditional  skills’  of  the  Ainu
people. The idea of a wooden crawling bear was in fact ‘imported’ from Switzerland in
1922 by ‘a descendant of the Tokugawa family in Owari, settled in Yakumo and started
up farms there’;16 the technical skills for producing them as souvenirs for tourists had
been taught by the Japanese in order to help the Ainu people earn a living after the
collapse of their traditional ways of life of hunting and gathering.17

Concerning the trends of souvenirs sold at Lake Akan in different periods, Shitaku
mentions  that  souvenirs  sold  in  the  1920s  were  mainly  postcards,  wooden  walking
sticks, and tobacco pipes, while wooden crawling bears were popular in the 1930s.18
Nowadays, the most popular woodcrafts sold at Lake Akan are tiny wooden accessories
(with patterns related to Ainu, Lake Akan or Hokkaido) for mobile phones.

Indeed, the influences brought to Ainu settlements by ethnic tourism were becom-
ing much more significant from the 1950s; the number of Japanese tourists visiting
Ainu villages began to grow much faster, and raised questions concerning the meanings
of Ainu traditional culture and ethnicity from Japanese perspectives. For example, the
image of Ainu with exotic facial features was commonly found in postcards, woodcrafts



205

and various souvenirs sold to Japanese tourists, and group photographs taken with an
Ainu chief in traditional costume reflected the prevalent discourse on Japaneseness and
emphasis on ethnic identity in the interest of self-conception, and, last but not least, the
emergence of ethnic souvenirs such as bear woodcrafts and Ainu couple dolls did in
fact reveal the Ainu image in the Japanese mind.19

Ainu Cultural Tradition at Lake Akan

The author’s first encounter with Ainu people at Lake Akan took place in the summer
of 2001 when visiting several Ainu settlements in Hokkaido in order to gain a better
understanding of the effects brought about by the enactment of the Ainu New Law.
After visiting Shiraoi and Nibutani in the southern part of Hokkaido, I went further to
the eastern part through Kushiro and tried to interview some Ainu people at Lake Akan
regarding their ways of life and changes taking place locally. Soon after I arrived, I went
to a café with local colour in the Ainu Kotan and started looking for historical back-
ground and relevant information about the Ainu people’s ways of life at Lake Akan. It
was  not  too  long  after  our  conversations  began  that  my  non-Japanese  identity  was
revealed. They asked where I came from and how I learnt to speak Japanese. I told them
that I had studied in Japan but had moved back to work in Hong Kong for some years.
Once I mentioned to them that I came from Hong Kong, the ok[amacr ] san (meaning mother
in Japanese) immediately told me that they had had some good times in Hong Kong in
1984, pulled out some pictures from their family albums and showed me the Iyomante
dance performance they did on the temporary stage in Victoria Park in Hong Kong. In
fact, that was probably one of the programmes held during the Hong Kong Asian Arts
Festival organised by the government in order to enhance knowledge of different kinds
of Asian art forms such as music, drama and dance among Hong Kong citizens. That
encounter  turned  out  to  be  the  beginning  of  the  long-term  friendship  between  this
family (family A) and me.

a¯

To examine the geographic distribution of family A, they were indeed living with a
pattern which inspired thinking about the flow of the Ainu people in contemporary
Japanese society. In family A, the father was originally from Kushiro while the mother
was from Urakawa. Their three children all grew up at Lake Akan. In recent years, one
of them has been living in Honshu but has not been doing any Ainu-related work. For
the  two  who  are  married,  their  spouses  are  Japanese  but  have  been  substantially
influenced by Ainu ways of life and have been actively involved in promoting Ainu
traditions  in  different  ways  such  as  selling  handicrafts,  singing  and  dancing.  One
couple has moved to Honshu, while the other has remained in Hokkaido living with
the parents. Therefore, members of family A not only moved from their home areas to
places with more (tourism-related) job opportunities within Hokkaido but also moved
to the Kanto area for a wider choice of careers.

A similar pattern was found in family B from whom the author received a great deal
of support during field research on the social development of Lake Akan. In family B,
both the Ainu father and the Japanese mother were from Kushiro, and had been living
at Lake Akan for a few decades. Their two children were living with them, and only one

206

S. C. H. Cheung

was working on traditional Ainu dance performance while the other was not. More
importantly, the father of the Japanese wife used to be the curator of Kushiro City Hall
in  the  1970s  and  was  a  recognised  figure  in  promoting  Ainu  culture  not  only  to
Japanese  society  but  also  to  worldwide  audiences.  His  efforts  were  remembered  in
particular  for  making  Ainu  Yukar  Theatre  well  known  and  successfully  presented/
performed both through the arrangements of UNESCO and the Guimet Museum in
Paris in 1976; a number of senior Ainu residents at Lake Akan recalled their good old
times and were proud to relate them.

Regarding the proceeds from Lake Akan’s tourism development since the 1980s, the
father  of  family  B  said  that  they  became  busy  making  their  own  living  and  did  not
continue the performances of Ainu Yukar Theatre. He added that they occasionally
performed  for  the  sake  of  cultural  exchange  (only  upon  invitation)  and  did  not
consider it for commercial purposes until recently. Therefore, on the one hand, we can
see how tourism development makes Lake Akan a unique place in the sense that the
Ainu  people  could  preserve  and  promote  their  heritage  as  well  as  folk  traditions
openly;  on  the  other  hand,  the  kind  of  tourism-oriented  development  did  not  give
space for the consideration of heritage preservation without commercial implications.
Families A and B are not exceptional cases at Lake Akan in relation to their involve-
ment with the promotion of Ainu culture at Lake Akan, and it is significant to look into
issues such as how Lake Akan has played the role of a channel among the Ainu people
in Hokkaido.

Major incomes have been determined mostly by the tourists, and the local commu-
nity has been supported by revenue generated through the tourism industry including
hotels, restaurants, souvenir shops, travel, etc. in recent decades. From a local perspec-
tive, people also admitted that the tourism industry helped to preserve Ainu culture in
some ways. Ainu culture has been the major attraction of Lake Akan, and there are at
least four institutes involved in either preserving or promoting Ainu culture, despite
the fact that most Ainu descendants can neither speak the language nor carry out any
Ainu  traditional  practices  and  rituals.  These  institutions  are  the  Akan  Branch  of
the Ainu  Association  of  Hokkaido,  the  Akan  Ainu  Industrial  Association,  the  Lake
Akan Ainu Association, and the Lake Akan Ainu Culture Preservation Society.

In particular, the Lake Akan Ainu Culture Preservation Society was founded in 1968
with the objective of preserving traditional dance, language and Yukar Theatre at Lake
Akan, and also aiming to participate in cultural activities in Japan in order to promote
Ainu culture countrywide. Again, cultural exchanges in the form of traditional dances
and folk music performances between Akan Ainu and other countries are very popular.
During  the  1970s,  Ainu  Yukar  Theatre  received  much  attention  and  was  invited  to
perform  in  Sapporo  (1972),  Kushiro  (1973),  Akan-cho  (1976),  Tokyo  (1976),  and
particularly  two  performances  in  Paris  (1976)  being  part  of  the  Japan  Festival
supported by the Japanese government for the sake of disseminating Japanese culture
to  the  world.  From  the  1980s,  members  of  the  Akan  Yukar  Theatre,  a  group  of
performing artists in the Akan area, have been going to Hong Kong, Taiwan, Australia,
North America (Alaska, Canada), and Europe (France, Italy) and have participated in
several major international arts events.



207

Lake Akan has been a famous tourist destination for wooden souvenirs crafted by
Ainu artisans, but nowadays it is even better known for several artists who are based
there. As mentioned above, most of the woodworkers were seasonal workers who had
merely stayed at Lake Akan during the tourism season but settled down after the Maeda
family gave them free land usage in the present Ainu Kotan. In addition to the Ainu
people who came and settled at Lake Akan, some Japanese also came to make art works.
It was obvious to see that their woodcraft motifs were often mixed with Ainu traditions,
natural scenery, animals, etc. And these indirect relations with the Ainu indigenous
culture have in fact showed the complexity of Ainu heritage.

As for the controversy over Ainu tradition and the divergence between the Ainu and
various  outsiders  (mainly  Japanese),  a  local  festival  at  Lake  Akan  serves  as  a  good
example. The debate over the authenticity of the tradition of marimo sai (sai means
festival  in  Japanese)  is  one  instance  which  highlights  the  discrepancy  between  the
definitions of traditional culture held by the public and those held by the Ainu people
who  recognise  the  inheritance  of  spiritual  value  rather  than  the  maintenance  of  an
ancient cultural practice from an unidentified origin in the past.20

Before going further, the origin of the marimo festival at Lake Akan needs explana-
tion. In the early 1920s, marimo was recognised as important natural heritage by the
Japanese  government;  however,  these  spherical  algae  were  continuously  taken  from
Lake Akan and even sold as souvenirs outside the Akan area. In the 1940s, marimo was
found  to  be  endangered  because  of  theft  and  environmental  changes  at  Lake  Akan.
Therefore,  to  preserve  marimo,  local  Ainu  people  began  the  festival  to  symbolise  a
ritual of return as well as the harmony of human and nature. According to traditional
Ainu  cosmology,  there  were  two  worlds—the  human  world  and  the  supernatural
world. They existed mutually, and living beings could travel from one to another easily.
In particular, from the Ainu’s point of view, an animal was a spiritual visitor, symbol-
ising  the  gain  of  natural  resources,  and  serving  as  a  messenger  that  bridged  human
society and the supernatural world; therefore, their visit in the form of animals to the
Ainu’s world actually denoted the gift-giving between man and the supernatural in the
Ainu cosmos. A similar explanation was used in the marimo sai as a form of return,
with the emphasis upon the marimo’s return to nature. The marimo festival was well
accepted  as  the  representation  of  Ainu  cosmology  and  the  festival  has  been  held  in
October every year since.

Nonetheless,  regarding  the  50-year  tradition  of  the  festival,  there  has  been  a
discrepancy between local Ainu people who believe that the festival is characterised by
the  Ainu’s  traditional  idea  emphasising  the  importance  of  returning  on  receiving
(symbolising  the  harmony  between  human  beings  and  nature)  and  outsiders  who
argue that the marimo festival is merely an ‘invented’ tradition in Akan.21 As for the
debate as to the authenticity of Ainu tradition, Ainu culture represents a meaningful
selective mix of practices and knowledge and is particularly recognised by people who
see indigenous tradition as the counterpart of mainstream culture. Actually, since the
1970s, grassroots indigenous movements organised by the Ainu people have become
more obvious, especially in seeking their indigenous rights in a national rather than
other perspective. Moreover, the process has not always been peaceful; for example,

208

S. C. H. Cheung

there were protests against the Japanese Society of Ethnology in the late 1960s, a sculp-
ture was blown up in Asahikawa in 1972, and a law suit for portrait rights was filed in
1985, all of which show the underlying hostility.22 Doubtless, what has changed most
since the 1970s is the awareness among the Ainu people that they need to preserve their
cultural traditions for their descendants; however, only a few Ainu remain who are able
to speak Ainu as their mother tongue and almost none of them are practising tradi-
tional ways of life. So, is it possible to recover and reconstruct Ainu heritage today?

Conclusion

In  different  parts  of  the  world,  indigenous  land  was  taken  by  authorities  with  little
justification; however, when indigenous people claim their rights over land use they
need to provide all kinds of justifications in order to support having their former land
returned to them. Even though some indigenous groups have succeeded in their land
claims, the procedure is usually long and tortuous. The social development of Ainu
Kotan at Lake Akan not only demonstrates a typical example of this slow return of
sovereignty but also provides an excellent observation for understanding the future of
Ainu heritage preservation in Japan. For the slow return of land use, we can see how
the Ainu’s indigenous living environment was taken away by the Meiji government and
later fell into the hands of the Maeda family; out of sympathy, a small piece of land was
given to some Ainu seasonal workers, which turned out to be the basis for preserving
Ainu heritage. Considering how they set foot at Lake Akan and presented Ainu tradi-
tional music, Ainu folk dance and Yukar Theatre to the visitors, there are at least two
unique aspects to the social development of Ainu Kotan at Lake Akan; first, most of the
Ainu people were outsiders, and came and settled in Akan because of the free use of
land given by the Maeda family; second, Lake Akan is a tourism-oriented place and
Akan  Ainu  are  used  to  performing  traditional  dance  and  music  to  visitors,  even
through  the  invention  of  the  marimo  festival.  Finally,  the  future  of  Ainu  heritage
depends on how the indigenous rights of the Ainu will be recognised at both individual
and national levels. With the Nogaku Theatre and Ningyo Johruri Bunraku Puppet
Theatre  being  proclaimed  by  UNESCO  as  Masterpieces  of  the  Oral  and  Intangible
Heritage  of  Humanity  in  2001  and  2003,  respectively,  one  might  ask  whether  Ainu
Yukar will be proclaimed as well as recognised at the international level for being one
of the three ancient epics in the world. However, this will not be possible until more
Japanese people consider the necessity of understanding and preserving Ainu heritage
from  a  mutual  perspective,  and  the  Japanese  government  seriously  considers  the
urgency and importance of preserving the Ainu’s tangible and intangible heritage for
coming generations.

Acknowledgements

The  initial  research  for  this  paper  was  made  possible  by  a  grant  from  Sumitomo
Foundation  (Japan)  for  the  research  project  entitled  ‘Rethinking  Ainu  Identity:  An
Ethnographic Study of Ainu Folk Art in Lake Akan, Hokkaido’.



209

Notes

1 [1] For  more  details,  see  Siddle,  Race,  Resistance  and  the  Ainu  of  Japan;  and  Howell,  ‘Making

“Useful Citizens” of Ainu Subjects in Early Twentieth-century Japan’.
See Cheung, ‘Japanese Anthropology and Depictions of the Ainu’.

2 [2]
3 [3] For more details, see Uemura, Modernity of Indigenous People; and Miyatake, ‘Ainu and Saint

Louis Olympic Games of 1904’.

4 [4] For  more  details,  see  Hilger,  ‘Japan’s  “Sky  People”,  the  Vanishing  Ainu’;  Together  with  the

Ainu, a Vanishing People.

5 [5] Books such as Peng and Geiser’s The Ainu: The Past in the Present; Siddle, Race, Resistance and
the Ainu of Japan and Sjoberg’s The Return of the Ainu: Cultural Mobilization and the Practice
of  Ethnicity  in  Japan  have  provided  important  information  since  the  1970s.  Fitzhugh  and
Dubreuil’s Ainu:  Spirit  of  a  Northern  People  was  probably  the  last  but  most  comprehensive
work of the 20th century.
See Aoki, The Transformation of ‘Japanese Cultural Studies’.

6 [6]
7 [7] For  the  revival  of  Ainu  heritage  in  the  forms  of  music,  festival  and  food,  see  reports  by
Peter  Hadfield,  ‘Ancient  Ainu  Emerge  from  the  Shadows:  Country’s  Original  Inhabitants
Take  New  Pride  in  their  Long-marginalised  Culture  and  Language’,  South  China  Morning
Post, 23 May 2001; Tomek Bogdanowicz, ‘Where Are the Ainu Now? In Search of Answers
about  Japan’s  Indigenous  People’,  The  Japan  Times,  2  March  2003;  and  Tomek
Bogdanowicz,  ‘Ainu  Revival:  A  Feast  of  Culture  on  Hokkaido  Menu’,  The  Japan  Times,  27
June 2004.

8 [8] The Ainu New Law (Ainu Shinpo in Japanese) was drafted and proposed in 1984, and finally
passed on 8 May 1997. It seems that the Japanese government has finally given formal recog-
nition to the Ainu as the indigenous minority within Japanese territory, at least in Hokkaido,
even though the general reaction to the endorsement was in relation to its late coming. Yet
with  the  initial  move  the  Ainu  people  expected  more  cultural  (preservation  of  language,
tradition,  etc.)  and  legal  (land  use,  discrimination  issues,  etc.)  recognition  of  their  social
status  in  Japan.  For  the  details  and  developments  of  the  Ainu  New  Law,  see  Stevens,  ‘The
Ainu and Human Rights’; Siddle, ‘An Epoch-making Event?’; and Cheung, ‘Ainu Culture in
Transition’.

9 [9] Ainu Yukar is considered one of the three ancient epics in the world; Ainu Yukar Theatre is

See Yamamoto, Akan National Park and Legend of Ainu.
Irimoto, ‘Marimo matsuri no sojo’, 327.
See Akan-cho History Committee, One Hundred Years at Akan-cho.
See Shitaku, Ainu oma (aynu ga yuku), 38.

the stage drama selected from episodes of the epic.
10[10] Kapferer, Legends of People, Myths of State, 142–43.
11[11] Desmond, Staging Tourism, 31.
12[12]
13[13]
14[14]
15[15]
16[16] Ohtsuka, ‘Ainu Handicraft—Tracing its History’, 139.
17[17] For details of the early development of woodcrafts among the Ainu, see Low, ‘Contemporary
Ainu  Wood  and  Stone  Carving’;  Shitaku,  Ainu  oma  (aynu  ga  yuku);  and  Ohtsuka,  ‘Ainu
Handicraft—Tracing its History’.
See Shitaku, Ainu oma (aynu ga yuku), 38.

18[18]
19[19] For the relations between the Ainu and Japanese people in the context of tourism develop-
ment,  see  Cheung,  ‘Change  of  Ainu  Images  in  Japan’;  ‘Men,  Women  and  “Japanese”  as
Outsiders’.
See Irimoto, ‘Marimo matsuri no sojo’.
See Lake Akan Ainu Association, Retrospect of Marimo Festival in 50th Year Anniversary.
Shimizu, ‘Cooperation, Not Domination’.

20[20]
21[21]
22[22]

210

S. C. H. Cheung

References

Akan-cho  History  Committee.  One  Hundred  Years  at  Akan-cho  (in  Japanese).  Akan:  Akan-cho

Office, 1986.

Aoki, T. The Transformation of ‘Japanese Cultural Studies’: Culture and Identity in Postwar Japan (in

Japanese). Tokyo: Chuo Koronsha, 1990.

Cheung,  S.  C.  H.  ‘Change  of  Ainu  Images  in  Japan:  A  Reflexive  Study  of  Pre-war  and  Post-war

Photo-images of Ainu’. Visual Anthropology 9 (1996): 1–24.

——.  ‘Men,  Women  and  “Japanese”  as  Outsiders:  A  Case  Study  of  Postcards  with  Ainu  Images’.

Visual Anthropology 13 (2000): 227–55.

——. ‘Ainu Culture in Transition’. Futures: The Journal of Policy, Planning and Futures Studies 35

(2003): 951–59.

——. ‘Japanese Anthropology and Depictions of the Ainu’. In The Making of Anthropology in East
and Southeast Asia, edited by S. Yamashita, J. Bosco and J. S. Eades. Oxford and New York:
Berghahn Books, 2004: 136–51.

Desmond, J. Staging Tourism: Bodies on Display from Waikiki to Sea World. Chicago and London:

University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Fitzhugh, W. W. and C. O. Dubreuil, eds. Ainu: Spirit of a Northern People. Seattle: University of

Washington Press, 1999.

Hilger, M. I. ‘Japan’s “Sky People”, the Vanishing Ainu’. National Geographic 131 (1967): 268–96.
——. Together with the Ainu, a Vanishing People. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971.
Howell, D. L. ‘Making “Useful Citizens” of Ainu Subjects in Early Twentieth-century Japan’. Journal

of Asian Studies 63 (2004): 5–29.

Irimoto,  T.  ‘Marimo  matsuri  no  sojo’  (Creation  of  the  marimo  festival:  Ainu  identity  and  ethnic

symbiosis). Minzokugaku Kenkyu (Japanese Journal of Ethnology) 66 (2001): 320–43.

Kapferer, B. Legends of People, Myths of State: Violence, Intolerance, and Political Culture in Sri Lanka

and Australia. Washington, D.C. and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1988.

Lake Akan Ainu Association. Retrospect of Marimo Festival in 50th Year Anniversary (in Japanese).

Akan: Lake Akan Ainu Association, 2000.

Low,  S.  M.  ‘Contemporary  Ainu  Wood  and  Stone  Carving’.  In  Ethnic  and  Tourist  Arts:  Cultural
Expressions  from  the  Fourth  World,  edited  by  N.  H.  H.  Graburn.  Berkeley:  University  of
California Press, 1976: 211–25.

Miyatake,  K.  ‘Ainu  and  Saint  Louis  Olympic  Games  of  1904’  (in  Japanese).  Journal  of  Faculty  of

Letters in Hokkaido University 108 (2002): 1–22.

Ohtsuka,  K.  ‘Ainu  Handicraft—Tracing  its  History’.  In  Message  from  the  Ainu:  Craft  and  Spirit.

Sapporo: The Foundation for Research and Promotion of Ainu Culture, 2003: 128–44.

Peng,  F.  C.  C.  and  P.  Geiser.  The  Ainu:  The  Past  in  the  Present.  Hiroshima:  Bunka  Hyoron

Publishing, 1977.

Shimizu,  A.  ‘Cooperation,  Not  Domination:  A  Rejoinder  to  Niessen  on  the  Ainu  Exhibition  at

Minpaku’. Museum Anthropology 20 (1996): 120–31.

Shitaku, T. Ainu oma (aynu ga yuku) (in Japanese), part 1. Kushiro: Fuji Print, 2001.
Siddle, R. Race, Resistance and the Ainu of Japan. London and New York: Routledge, 1996.
——.  ‘An  Epoch-making  Event?  The  1997  Ainu  Cultural  Promotion  Act  and  its  Impact’.  Japan

Forum 14 (2002): 405–23.

Sjoberg, V. K. The Return of the Ainu: Cultural Mobilization and the Practice of Ethnicity in Japan.

Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1993.

Stevens, G. ‘The Ainu and Human Rights: Domestic and International Legal Protections’. Japanese

Studies 21 (2001): 181–98.

Uemura, H. Modernity of Indigenous People (in Japanese). Tokyo: Heibonsha, 2001.
Yamamoto, T. Akan National Park and Legend of Ainu (in Japanese). Tokyo: Sofukan, 2003 [1940].


