The politics of community heritage: motivations, authority 
and control
Elizabeth Crooke*

School of English, History and Politics, University of Ulster, United Kingdom

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_444531.sgm

(Received 22 February 2009; final version received 15 September 2009)

10.1080/13527250903441705

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis
161/2000000January-March 2010
ElizabethCrooke
EM.Crooke@ulster.ac.uk

The community and heritage connection is one that is almost considered so natural
an affinity it hardly needs justification or explanation. This paper looks critically
at how community and heritage are understood and what arises when the two are
brought together. Through the consideration of examples in Northern Ireland, the
meaning of such engagement is explored with emphasis on motivations, issues of
authority and the value of community-heritage engagement as a means of control.

Introduction
Community is a multi-layered and politically charged concept that, with a change in
context,  alters  in  meaning  and  consequence.  According  to  the  situation,  different
priorities will come to the fore and the purpose of community-heritage engagement
will differ. This paper emphasises the importance of understanding the diversity of
that  engagement,  which  varies  according  to  social,  cultural  and  political  demands.
When,  for  instance,  community  is  associated  with  the  museum,  the  museum  space
becomes a ‘contact zone’ (Clifford 1997), where different meanings of community,
reflecting  assorted  assumptions  and  aspirations,  are  expressed.  Different  interest
groups  come  into  contact  within  the  museum  space  and  a  new  dynamic  arises.  It
follows then that the community and museum relationship can be interrogated from
multiple perspectives: that of government, the interests of the museum sector and the
desires of grassroots initiatives. Each brings with them a different idea of community
and a range of beliefs in the importance and contribution of heritage to their social,
cultural or political project. As these enter the heritage sector, or the museum space, a
new layer of meaning is introduced. By investigation of the synergies that arise when
these various layers of meaning interact, this paper offers a deeper understanding of
the significance of the relationship between community and heritage

Within  this  paper,  diversity  is  explored  through  the  analysis  of  examples  of
community  engagement  in  the  museum  sector  in  Northern  Ireland.  As  a  divided
society, the concept of community in Northern Ireland is politically charged – with
questions  concerning  belonging,  representation  and  agendas  underpinning  any
engagement. Looking at the examples of community projects within museums, as well
as those outside the official heritage sector engaging in their own community-heritage

*Email: em.crooke@ulster.ac.uk



 17

initiatives,  this  paper  scrutinises  the  motivations  underpinning  the  projects  and  the
messages they convey. It draws upon the example of those in museums engaged in
community-outreach;  those  in  government  departments  forwarding  museums  as
places  for  the  promotion  of  ‘good  relations’;  and  those  on  the  outside  developing
community-based  collections  relating  to  the  often  guarded  experiences  of  local
people. The connection between community and heritage will be revealed as a deeply
meaningful process that is caught up in a host of contemporary concerns.

Community, heritage and museums
The community and heritage connection is one that is considered so natural an affinity
that  it  hardly  needs  justification  or  explanation.  Community  and  heritage  are  both
vague and elusive ideas, yet together they have gained popular currency and are used
as the basis of multiple myths. Many understandings of community will refer to the
building  blocks  of  heritage  as  a  means  to  define  a  community  by  its  customs,
language, landscape, history, artefacts and monuments. These representations of iden-
tity  are  thus  selected  to  become  the  heritage  of  nations  and  communities.  This  is  a
heritage that is constructed and reconstructed according to time and place; on each
occasion heritage is redefined according to what is most expedient. In these scenarios
heritage  becomes  a  flexible  concept  that  is  reconceptualised  according  to  need
(Harvey  2001).  This  is  a  characteristic  that  heritage  shares  with  the  concept  of
community because it too can be difficult to confirm or describe and will be renego-
tiated  so  that  it  fits  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  being  used.  We  then  bring  the  two
concepts together, one justifying the other. Their ambiguity is proved to be no handi-
cap – in fact, that characteristic may well be their strength. Their malleability, twinned
with their appeal, allows the associations to be remade in a myriad of situations. Both
the  community  concept  and  the  idea  of  heritage  become  intertwined  with  the  lived
experience and expression of community. The community group is defined and justi-
fied because of its heritage and that heritage is fostered and sustained by the creation
of community.

Museums and heritage practitioners engaged in constructing, preserving and inter-
preting  heritage  experiences,  and  the  historical  or  cultural  record,  are  part  of  this
process. Within the United Kingdom and elsewhere, increasing acknowledgement and
integration of audiences within the museum, culture and arts sectors is now framed as
involving local people in the creation of community collections, community exhibi-
tions and community education programmes. Furthermore, if a local museum is not
connected with its community the rationale for the museum may come into question.
Moving from the position in UK museums where the creation of the post of commu-
nity outreach officer was fairly innovative, the integration of the community agenda
at every level within the museum is now essential. No longer considered the preserve
of a single appointment, best practice recommends that consideration of community
concerns is included in the brief of all staff. Such links have challenged museums to
explore  their  mission  statements,  modes  of  practice  and  relations  with  the  public.
Community has become a way of thinking that is running through every level of a
museum service shaping collecting, display and museum programming.

Not only is community the new way of thinking about museum audiences, muse-
ums are now directly linked to the social and economic agendas of public policy. In
the  UK,  the  plethora  of  community  policies  published  in  the  late  1990s  and  2000s
demonstrate  that  the  notion  of  sustainable,  inclusive,  cohesive  and  regenerated

18

 E. Crooke

communities was a major strategic government approach. Museums took on the chal-
lenge  and  many  were  keen  to  contribute  to  realising  such  objectives.  In  response,
museums developed social inclusion policies to guide collection, exhibition and audi-
ence development (Newman and McLean 2002). Despite community being for many
a grass-roots concept, community policy, as it has developed in the UK, is largely a
top-down approach. The community policy that has guided museum practice in recent
years is that shaped by government priorities. Government agencies would, of course,
argue that their policy is based on research within and amongst the identified groups,
but still the agendas have been captured and packaged within the context of contem-
porary political agendas and has filtered through to the museum sector via the chain
of cultural administration. In Australia, where the provision of community galleries is
well established, the collaborations are also closely related to government discourses
of access and equality. Witcomb (2003, pp. 81–83), in her discussion of a number of
examples, acknowledges the interplay of the production and representation of commu-
nity but has found that in many instances the museum–community relationship is one
that is co-operative, enabling a genuine dialogue between museums and community
groups.

Few would doubt that the goals of a cohesive, integrated or regenerated society are
worth pursuing. At each point, however, it is important to ask about the nature of the
power  relations  and  authority,  and  whether  those  are  explored  with  equal  vigour.
Reflecting on examples of community collaboration in a museum in New Zealand and
the  United  States,  Message  (2007)  claims  that  the  instrumentalisation  of  culture
cannot  be  doubted  and  in  her  examples  asks  whether  culture  is  being  used  as  a
resource for social management by the state or is actually a means to encourage open
and  inclusive  debate,  as  well  as  active  engagement  between  and  within  groups  of
people. For some within community development, and indeed working in museums,
it is the renegotiation of these power relations that is the real concern. For those work-
ing at the grass roots of community development it is the idea of social action that is
prevalent.  This  is  when  community  becomes  an  issue  of  exploring  democracy,
accountability and relations of power. Within the established museum sector this is
also relevant – with proponents advocating a rethinking of expertise and authority in
the interpretation and presentation of histories and cultures. In the United Kingdom,
for  instance,  the  theme  of  democracy  is  currently  explored  by  the  think  tank  the
Campaign  for  Learning  through  Museums  and  Galleries  (CLMG).  They  challenge
those in museums with the questions: Why should museum professionals dictate what
goes into museums and what gets displayed? Who says that the public should just be
consumers  of  culture?  Why  can’t  they  be  creators  as  well?  Their  proposal  is  that
museums  should  be  transformed  so  that  the  public  can  move  from  ‘consumers  to
creators’ and ‘from readers to authors’. This will enable the formation of a two-way
dialogue between visitors and institutions1 and test curatorial practice, with the nature
of authority and expertise within the museum now under interrogation.

Community: a political and social construct
The  impact  of  community  agendas  in  the  museum  and  heritage  sectors  reveals  the
power of community both as a concept and a form of engagement. Thinking about
community has challenged practice and dominated debate in both sectors for the past
decade. This has resulted in the development and pursuit of an entire policy area based
upon  a  concept  that  for  many  is  impossible  to  define.  The  idea  of  community  as  a



 19

constructed  concept  is  constantly  shifting,  continually  challenged  and  difficult  to
grasp, with cultural markers, created and defined by socially engaged groups, used to
define it. In some cases, as is often the case with the rise of nationalism and creation
of  national  communities,  these  markers  are  themselves  constructions,  fabricated  to
suit the needs of the emerging national community. When the term ‘community’ is
associated with a group of people, whether that is based on location, ethnicity, age or
sexuality, it is a label that has been created for expediency and purpose. Many of us
may go through our lives not giving a thought to the community to which we may
belong  –  often  we  like  to  avoid  such  labelling  and  prefer  to  move  freely  amongst
multiple situations. It is only when that freedom comes into question that we might
step back and assess the value of group belonging. As a result, very often a community
emerges as a community of action – the rural community may come together when
there  is  a  threat  to  rural  businesses,  high  unemployment  or  depopulation.  In  such
cases, claiming membership of a community is undertaken because it is expected that
an advantage will be felt from association with others. We are seeking out a gain that
will satisfy a need.

It is the balance and interplay of need and gain that underpins the construction and
experience  of  communities.  At  each  level  of  engagement  a  trade-off  is  negotiated,
which forms a relationship of exchange that brings rewards for participation. As they
connect  with  each  other,  community  members  and  community  leaders  occupy  and
interact within a framework of defined codes of behaviour marked by cultural symbols
– be that language, landscape, dress, religion or the interpretation of history. Within
the community there is a hierarchy of those who are most active, assume leadership,
and defend cultural markers. These are the people that create and sustain community
and  draw  the  members  together.  This  is  not  a  purely  altruistic  process  –  there  will
always be some sense of personal gain. The lack of altruism is not to devalue partici-
pation – it may well be the case that community is a positive experience for leaders
and members and an enriching and valuable process. Conversely, as experience and
the literature reveals, community can be a negative experience. Feelings of exclusion,
intimidation and insecurity can emerge for those who are on the outside, whether that
is voluntary or forced (Bauman 2001).

The concept of community, the community group that is realised, and the nature
of community engagement are interlinked. Engagement creates community by draw-
ing upon notions of unity presented as pre-existing. The idea of community has truly
succeeded when it is so embedded that it is rarely questioned. This occurs when the
existence of the community is thought to be beyond doubt and indisputable. Commu-
nity can then be used both as a galvanising force and a legitimising factor, which can
justify actions and interests of the group. This is when the formation of community
can have political force and the leaders can assume authority.

Community as a political construct in Northern Ireland
In  Northern  Ireland,  the  concept  of  community  has  particular  political  resonance  –
this  is  partly  because  the  term  is  freely  used  but  it  is  also  because  community  is
interwoven  with  issues  of  recognition,  rights  and  representation.  Dominic  Bryan
(2006, p. 605) observes that in Northern Ireland community is ‘central to the political
discourse of all the political parties and local activists, it is common parlance in much
government  policy  and  legislation  and  is  continually  quoted  by  those  demanding
peace and reconciliation’. It is also what he describes as a ‘negotiated process’ that

20

 E. Crooke

very  often  arises  from  ‘fear  of  “the  other”’  (Bryan  2006,  p.  608).  He  provides  the
example  of  paramilitary  groups  which  legitimise  their  existence  on  the  grounds  of
defending their community and their traditions. As a result, Bryan notes, in Northern
Ireland, ‘the phrase “community worker” or “community representative” is, at times,
read as a euphemism for paramilitary or ex-paramilitary’ (Bryan 2006, p. 614). This
provides  an  entirely  ‘other’  context  for  how  community  should  be  understood.  Of
course, wherever you interrogate the idea the political reality of the concept should be
considered.  In  Northern  Ireland,  community  contestation  has  been  the  basis  of  a
conflict  that  has  been  sustained  for  three  decades  and  is  a  legacy  that  is  currently
being  dealt  with.  There  is  a  political  charge  in  Northern  Ireland  associated  with
community  that  is  readily  visible,  one  that  may  also  exist  in  other  locations  but
simmers  further  below  the  surface.  Community  could  be  just  as  contentious  else-
where, but the impression of calm may lure those engaged in community activity into
a false sense of security.

In  Northern  Ireland,  state  engagement  with  community  is  most  readily  seen
through support and development of community relations work. The administration
of  such  work  has  altered  with  changing  government  structures  but  can  be  traced
through the activity of the Central Community Relations Unit (1987–2000) and later
the Community Relations Unit (CRU), now part of the Equality Unit of the Office of
the First Minister and Deputy First Minister.2 Early community relations work in the
region has been criticised as a means to manage the conflict, a form of social engi-
neering and as part of a pacification strategy (McVeigh 2002). Some, such as Bryan,
would  disagree  with  this  particular  perspective,  but  will  concur  that  community,
culture  and  identity  have  emerged  in  the  region  as  mechanisms  of  control  (Bryan
2006,  p.  615).  This  is  the  case  when  culture  or  community  is  cited  as  a  means  to
justify behaviour or manage responses. This sense of using community, culture and
identity  as  a  means  of  control  extends  beyond  the  politician.  It  can  also  be  found
within the community group and amongst the agencies that use community. They too
recognise the power of the lure of community and how particular interpretations of
culture, heritage and identity have influence.

Community heritage in a Northern Ireland museum
It  is  within  the  context  of  community  as  a  politicised  and  contested  concept  that
engagements  between  museums,  heritage  and  community  are  encouraged  and
formed. The Mid-Antrim Museums Service, for instance, has developed a Commu-
nity History Programme based around a principle of community engagement. They
hope  the  project  will  enrich  museum  programmes,  interpretation  and  collections.
There  is  also  a  further  underlying  principle:  ‘it  also,  importantly,  demonstrates  the
social value of museums and makes a significant contribution to the well-being of our
society’.3

The Community History Programme at Mid-Antrim Museums Service (December
2006–2008) was mostly funded by the European Union Special Programme for Peace
and Reconciliation (PEACE II) through Local Strategy Partnerships. Administered by
the Special EU Programmes Body (SEUPB), whose aim is to enhance cross-border
working between people and organisations in Northern Ireland and the Republic of
Ireland,4  this  specific  programme  aims  to  promote  economic  and  social  benefit  in
areas most affected by the conflict. Community is at the core of the work of SEUPB
with the request that projects should facilitate ‘co-operation or joint action between



 21

different communities and parts of the community or build cohesion and confidence
within  a  community  with  the  perspective  that  this  is  a  first  step  in  breaking  down
community divisions’.5 Target communities were those from disadvantaged areas that
had experienced high levels of violence; victims of the conflict; ex-prisoners and their
families;  young  people,  women  and  older  people  who  had  been  prevented  from
‘fulfilling their potential in society or the labour market’.6

The  Community  History  Programme  in  mid-Antrim,  which  was  part  of  the
community  outreach  activity  within  the  museums  service,  involved  20  community-
based  groups  and  focused  upon  the  exploration  of  the  histories  associated  with
division in Northern Ireland. With direction and content determined by the group, the
purpose was to consider shared histories and explore divisive periods with the aim to
effect  positive  cultural  and  attitudinal  change  as  well  as  building  positive  relation-
ships  within  and  between  groups.7  The  initiatives  were  also  aligned  to  the  Good
Relations  and  Community  Development  agendas  of  respective  Borough  Councils,
approaches shaped by A Shared Future – Policy and Strategic Framework for North-
ern  Ireland  published  in  2005  by  the  Office  of  the  First  Minister  and  Deputy  First
Minister.8

For  community  programmes  to  develop  within  the  museum  sector  in  Northern
Ireland, they need finance and, more often than not, the larger projects are enabled by
funding  embedded  in  community  relations  and  community  development  agendas.
This  link  is  almost  impossible  to  escape  –  if  a  museum  wishes  to  develop  a  high-
profile service, with activity that can be accounted for as relevant to society, it must
embed itself in current policy agendas. For Northern Ireland, the key agenda is that of
peace and reconciliation. This is immersed in community policy approaches as under-
stood and promoted by government both locally and nationally. A successful bid for
funding for such projects will reflect government policy and be fully involved in the
realisation of their objectives.

This  provides  a  context  for  the  community  outreach  work  of  the  Northern
Ireland  museum  sector,  rather  than  a  reason  to  rebuke  the  efforts  of  individuals  in
the  museums  working  with  local  people  and  funded  from  such  sources.  The
projects  developed  and  realised  by  the  Mid-Antrim  Museums  Service  are  impres-
sive  and  show  genuine  commitment  to  exploring  history  in  a  life-enhancing
manner.  The  museum  team  worked  with  groups  in  a  thoughtful  manner,  exploring
diverse  interpretations  of  histories,  places  and  collections.  Community  Groups,
composed  of  mixed  national  and  religious  groups,  senior  citizens,  ex-prisoners,
women and young people, each participated in workshops, reminiscence, field trips
and  produced  an  exhibition  that  was  displayed  in  local  centres  and  later  at  The
Braid, the flagship museum in Ballymena. The final exhibition included text panels
depicting  the  histories  they  had  investigated,  objects  donated  by  the  groups  that
held  significance  for  individual  members,  and  video-testimonies  of  the  impact  of
participation  in  the  programme.  In  the  same  room  experiences  of  members  of  the
Inter-Ethnic Forum (Figure 1 and 2) and women’s groups were displayed alongside
exhibitions  developed  by  a  group  composed  of  ex-paramilitary  prisoners  and  an
exhibition  developed  by  youths  from  a  troubled  estate  that  had  a  significant  para-
military presence.

Figures 1 and 2. Making History, Community History Programme exhibition, The Braid, February 2009. © E. Crooke, 2009.

Rather  than  causing  tension,  the  well-curated  and  managed  display  enabled
participants  to  move  beyond  past  experiences  and  the  stereotyping  of  histories  to
explore  new  avenues.  The  exhibitions  were  previously  displayed  individually  in
local community centres. This final display in The Braid provides an additional layer

22

 E. Crooke

of meaning to the project. Prominent public display of local community stories and
experiences in a professional museum introduces another set of values. Community
histories were woven into the canon of national experiences, such as migration or the
linen  industry  in  Ireland,  and  significant  historical  events  such  as  the  1801  Act  of
Union between Ireland and Great Britain and the First World War. This connects the
local  experience  with  national  stories  adding  significance  to  both.  Repeatedly,  the
participants  referred  to  the  enriching  experiences  and  positive  camaraderie  fostered



 23

Figures  1  and  2. Making  History,  Community  History  Programme  exhibition,  The  Braid,
February 2009. © E. Crooke, 2009.

amongst  the  group  and  with  museum  staff.  External  evaluation  concluded  that  the
programme was responsible for ‘reawakening civic pride’, led to ‘positive promotion
of a community which had previously suffered from negative images’, and had made
a ‘positive contribution to community cohesion’ (Social Research Centre and Vision
Management 2008).

24

 E. Crooke

Motivations amongst stakeholders

The  Community  History  Programme  was  realised  by  the  linking  up  of  three  very
different stakeholder groups: the funding agency, the museum, and the participants.
This is typical of many community projects in museums and the questions raised by
the synergies arising from the diversity of such associations can equally be applied to
other  examples  if,  in  each  case,  the  aims  and  objectives  of  their  engagement  are
considered. Each stakeholder has different priorities, varying understanding and expe-
riences  of  community,  and  distinct  expectations  of  their  contributions  to  a  project.
This  reflects  the  complexity  of  governance,  management  and  authority  within  each
stakeholder group – to expect motivations across such a range to be equal would risk
naivety. We can however question what this brings to the engagement and how mean-
ingful the associations are if the range of motivations and desired outcomes vary to
such an extent.

Each stakeholder group will have its own line of authority and mode of governance.
At each stage of funder, museum and community involvement, priorities will differ
and the motivation to be involved will be far-ranging. The specific aim of the SEUPB
PEACE II Programme, the principle funder, was to aid the creation of peaceful and
stable  society  and  to  promote  reconciliation.  Significant  to  this  was  addressing  the
legacy of violence of the recent past and taking advantage of opportunities arising from
the peace process.9 The objective of the Mid-Antrim Museums Service is to collect,
preserve and interpret the history of the region and provide accessible and enjoyable
public services. Participants in the Community History Programme were described as
motivated by an interest in local history and a wish to ‘learn, grow and socialise’. The
initiative was an opportunity to develop inter-community links and a chance to meet
new people. In the case of the Community History Programme there would, at one
level, have been a shared wish amongst the funder, museum and participant groups.
Each are, for instance, interested in a less divided society and in increased understand-
ing. Even if that is what is embedded in the work of SEUPB and their funding, it is
not the core rationale of the museum or participants. This is not the key motivation of
museum or individual participants. The outcomes that each stakeholder will be pursu-
ing,  in  order  to  be  satisfied  that  participation  was  worthwhile,  will  also  differ.  For
SEUPB, it is the objectives of the funding, for the museum it is more innovative public
programmes and, according to the programme evaluation report, for the individuals,
the desired outcomes was getting to know their histories and people of their area better.
Common  to  each  group  is  the  idea  of  change  or  transformation.  Underpinning
funding  agencies,  the  concept  of  change  is  general  and  wide-ranging,  such  as
‘enabling  greater  social  inclusion’  or  ‘community  cohesion’.  In  contrast,  amongst
participants  the  actual  change  may  be  more  subtle  and  personal.  These  may  be
changes  in  perceptions,  understandings,  and  relationships  associated  with  people,
places or histories. By providing the opportunity, the museum space becomes a loca-
tion  of  interaction  between  groups  of  people,  their  histories  and  their  agendas.  It
should also be a reactive space that needs to change with such encounters. In such
context, the nature of change may not match the language of funding agencies – the
particularities  are  more  elusive.  It  is  these  indefinable,  and  maybe  immeasurable,
changes  that  are  essential  to  enable  the  identifiable  shifts  at  societal  level.  This
complexity demonstrates that such engagement, with a range of stakeholders, is not
fixed nor is it definite. Instead, it is a negotiated process, a highly creative journey
with unpredictable consequences. It is almost futile to aspire to a project within which



 25

individuals  in  community  groups,  each  with  their  range  of  individual  experiences,
interests and motivations, could be shaped to attain the predetermined objectives of an
external funding agency. However, the skilled project applicant, who has to write the
funding bids and final reports, can author an account that will satisfy the fixed criteria
of  a  funding  brief  and  will  later  fine-tune  it  to  satisfy  other  audiences,  such  as  the
community  group  or  the  museum  board.  These  are  the  pragmatics  underpinning
community engagement within the cultural sectors.

The way the community programmes have been set up in Mid-Antrim Museums
Service is much like those in many museums in the UK. At the top level at least, first
and foremost the concern is the operation of the museum and the development of the
collection. Many in the profession would argue that for a museum that is where prior-
ities ought to lie. Social value is a concern that is mentioned later; in other words it is
secondary and eclipsed by fundamental museum concerns – collections and sustain-
ability. Whether collections or public programmes is advocated as the core museum
activity is dependent upon how the concept of a museum is understood. For the former
the collection is the defining matter of museums, it is what makes a museum unique
and  should  be  the  highest  priority  and  consume  the  greatest  proportion  of  museum
resources. In favour of the latter, public programmes are the rationale underpinning
the care and interpretation of collections and should take the lead. Bringing this even
further, for some those public programmes should have a social agenda based upon
the perceived needs of society. It is important that a museum’s position in relation to
priorities is established because, when engaging with community, where that priority
is placed matters. In the worst cases community engagement is simply used as a means
to tick a box or gain funding. The question remains, in a sensitive area like community
work, should an institution for which community development is not the leading prior-
ity, and which is not fully trained in the area, be engaged in such activity? There are
examples of when museum practice in community programmes has been exceptional;
nevertheless, is the museum the most appropriate institution for it?

Heritage within politicised communities
As noted by Bryan (2006), community in Northern Ireland is a concept often tied up
with  the  conflict  and  its  legitimisation  on  the  grounds  of  defending  perceptions  of
rightful territory, histories and traditions. With the signing of the 1998 Belfast (Peace)
Agreement a new power-sharing devolved administration was established in Decem-
ber 1999.10 Since that time Northern Ireland is regarded by most as a post-conflict
society. Even with the changing political context, community is still burdened with
this past legacy. Not only is the legacy of the conflict still very much a lived experi-
ence with people and areas experiencing deprivation due to the impact of the conflict,
the use of the term community has not lost the connotations of the earlier period.

So, when community groups engage in heritage projects, the contested nature of
community, and issues in relation to political context of their work, are still relevant.
It is still essential to ask whose history is represented, how identity and culture are
interpreted, and what the purpose of such engagement is. These questions are pertinent
to the many community-based heritage projects that have emerged across Northern
Ireland, such as in areas that have experienced high levels of conflict. These heritage
projects are valued by participants and serve a purpose identified by those involved.
Belfast Falls Community Council, established in the 1970s, aims to develop commu-
nity infrastructure and harness community activity in an area it describes as having

26

 E. Crooke

experienced ‘social injustice, economic discrimination and civic marginalisation’. The
Council has developed a sound archive of oral histories of local experiences both as
memorial and as a contribution to political and social transformation. This they hope
will later become part of museum display (Crooke 2007, pp. 124–128). In Derry, the
Museum of Free Derry, which opened in 2006 in the nationalist Bogside area of the
city, aims to tell a community story and not, in the words of the curator, ‘the distorted
version parroted by the Government and the media’11 (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Visitors in the Museum of Free Derry August 2009. © E. Crooke, 2009.

In these examples, community heritage, as a means to generate and share alterna-
tive histories, will find it impossible to escape the political context. In relation to the
Derry  example,  the  story  told  in  the  museum  is  the  experiences  of  Bloody  Sunday
when  on  30  January  1972,  26  people,  who  were  part  of  a  much  larger  civil  rights
march, were shot by British soldiers. Thirteen people died immediately and one a few
months later.12 The story told in the museum is an important one that is moving and
powerful; it is also one that is heavily contested. For the moment, the account told in
this museum is that espoused by the managing body, the Bloody Sunday Trust. The
aim of the Trust is to commemorate the events of Bloody Sunday and to ‘preserve the
memory of those murdered that day’, for the purposes of ‘truth, justice, reconciliation
and healing’.13 In Northern Ireland, the very notions of truth and justice are contested
– with challenges to what is presented as truth or considered justice. Nevertheless, a
single narrative is presented for the public that provides an account of the events of
the day according to that forwarded by the Trust. It is one that makes no attempt to
gratify alternative viewpoints, interpretations or audiences. In the sparse environment
of  the  museum  highly  sensitive  material  is  displayed  without  reserve  and  with
minimal interpretation.

Figure 3. Visitors in the Museum of Free Derry August 2009. © E. Crooke, 2009.



 27

The example of this display in the Museum of Free Derry raises questions about
the definition of community and ownership of histories, as well as the uses or purposes
of  museums  and  public  display.  Regarding  the  presentation  of  community,  the
museum is very much targeted at the Bogside community, which is where the shoot-
ings took place. However, the story is also relevant to other nationalist communities
in Derry and those belonging to other political persuasions within the city. Some hold
the opinion the Trust and Museum have taken ownership of and assumed authority
over a story that extends well beyond the Bogside.14 Furthermore, the display is one
of the public faces of the Trust and serves a purpose as a public contribution to its
justice campaign. The sensitive material on display validates and adds depth to their
pursuit. Museum display is a tool to achieve their goal. One of the important points
from  this  example  is  that,  in  a  region  where  the  majority  museums  follow  the
established paths of engagement with audiences, guided by principles of embracing
diversity, encouraging choice between stories and paths, as well as recognition of the
role of multiple communities, this museum stands out for its singular narrative and
overtly political purpose.

Conclusion: meaning and consequences of the associations between community 
and heritage
Community  and  heritage  are  not  only  malleable  concepts;  they  are  also  highly
emotive, closely guarded and are used to stake control and define authority. This paper
has  presented  examples  of  community–heritage  engagement  that  has  been  brought
into  museum  spaces.  Captured  within  the  walls  of  museums  and  on  the  panels  of
exhibitions, the synergies between community and heritage are concentrated. Within
individual  projects,  motivations  change  with  stakeholder  groups.  Amongst  them
different conceptualisations of community exist, heritage has varying purposes, and
the nature of gain will be different. The consequence of this is a form of engagement
that can go in a number of directions. It has a range of meanings that can be interpreted
and valued in different ways.

There  remains  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  two  community  projects
discussed in this paper. The Community History Programme is embedded in state struc-
tures  and  discourses  of  community  and  community  relations.  It  is  also  aligned  to
contemporary thinking in relation to museums and access. The Bloody Sunday Trust
project is independent of the state and has not evolved from a desire to renegotiate the
traditional power structures of museums. Both can be regarded as community-heritage
projects but the underpinning discourses are quite different. However, in each of the
examples cited the museum space becomes the contact zone, enabling public display
that  adds  impact  and  depth  to  project  priorities.  In  the  example  of  the  Community
History  Programme  the  final  exhibition  provided  the  visitor  with  a  glimpse  of  the
community  on  display.  The  experience  crossed  a  range  of  publics:  the  community
group, interested friends and family who attended the opening and revisit later, and
the chance visitor who views the exhibition in isolation from the project. Each will have
a different experience and impression of the exhibition and the community on show;
for each it will function differently. The crossing over of the experiences of these publics
is also crucial – the visitor with little experience of the groups concerned learns a small
amount of the experiences of the participants enabling new connections and familiarity.
In the community exhibitions, those involved have taken control of the public inter-
pretation and presentation of their story. By controlling their own narratives the group

28

 E. Crooke

is attempting to manage how others see them. This is not value-free; instead it is a
selective  process.  In  the  case  of  the  community  museum  developed  by  the  Bloody
Sunday Trust there is a sense of a heritage with a lot dependent on it. It is purposefully
told in an overt manner with the aim to gain support and understanding for the broader
campaign. In both examples of communities interpreting their history, public display
adds charge to the story as it is told and retold to visitors ranging from those knowl-
edgeable about the history to those who chance upon it. On each occasion the agenda
of the group shapes the experience provided for the visitor. With every telling another
person is drawn into the narrative and is invited to connect with it. Even if a visitor
does not later come directly into contact with the community on display, a link is made,
even if it is only in their imagination. Imagined communities, imagined stories and
imagined experiences are enhanced in the minds of the visitor and may even become
part of their personal story.

In both examples, community heritage has become a means to mould and commu-
nicate histories, understandings of identity, and definitions of culture and cultural rele-
vance  within  groups  and  to  others.  By  means  of  display  contributors  are  drawing
others into their project, disseminating the message further. By nature of its involve-
ment the museum space is implicated in this process. The result of this is a socially
and politically engaged heritage embedded in contemporary concerns and shared with
consequence.

Notes
1. http://www.community-relations.org.uk [Accessed 7 December 2009].
2. For  background  information  see:  http://www.ccruni.gov.uk/  and  http://www.ofmdfmni.

gov.uk/communityrelationsunit/index.htm; and http://www.nicrc.org.uk/.

3. William Blair, Museums Service Officer, preface of Mid-Antrim Museums Service (2008)

Making History in Mid Antrim, published as a record of the project.

4. For further details of their work see: http://www.seupb.eu/ [Accessed 7 December 2009].
5. EU Special Programme for Peace and Reconciliation Operational Programme 2000–2004
(quote  from  p.  31).  Available  from:  http://www.seupb.eu/documents/PEACE%20II%
20Operational%20Programme/FINAL%20CLEAN.pdf [Accessed 9 February 2009].

6. Ibid. (quote from p. 40).
7. As described in the Grant Application to the PEACE II programme for the Carrickfergus

Community History Programme, November 2005.

8. For  further  information  see:  http://www.asharedfutureni.gov.uk/  [Accessed  7  December

9. http://www.seupb.eu/aboutsus/about-us.aspx [Accessed 7 December 2009].
10. Since December 1999, devolution and the Northern Ireland Assembly has been suspended
for three periods regarding concerns about decommissioning of weapons and the ceasefire.

11. www.museumoffreederry.org [Accessed 7 December 2009].
12. For  more  on  the  event  see  http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/bsunday/  [Accessed  7  December

2009].

2009].

13. http://www.bloodysundaytrust.org/ [Accessed 13 February 2009].
14. Points raised by local people in conversation with me.

Notes on contributor
Elizabeth Crooke is Senior Lecturer in Museum Studies at the University of Ulster. She has
published  Museums  and  Community  (Routledge  2007)  and  Politics,  Archaeology  and  the
Creation of a National Museum of Ireland (Irish Academic Press, 2000). Her research consid-
ers the histories and meanings of museums and their collections.



 29

References
Bauman, Z., 2001. Community seeking safety in an insecure world. London: Polity Press.
Bryan,  D.,  2006.  The  politics  of  community.  Critical  Review  of  International  Social  and

Clifford,  J.,  1997.  Routes:  travel  and  translation  in  the  late  twentieth  century.  Cambridge,

Political Philosophy, 9 (4), 603–617.

MA: Harvard University Press.

Crooke, E., 2007. Museums and community: ideas, issues and challenges. London: Routledge.
Harvey, D.C., 2001. Heritage pasts and heritage presents: temporality, meaning and the scope

of heritage studies. , 7 (4), 319–338.

McVeigh, R., 2002. Between reconciliation and pacification: the British state and community

relations in the north of Ireland. Community Development Journal, 37 (1), 47–59.

Message, K., 2007. Museums and the utility of culture: the politics of liberal democracy and

cultural well-being. Social Identities, 13 (2), 235–256.

Mid-Antrim  Museums  Service,  2008.  Making  history  in  Mid  Antrim,  the  Mid-Antrim
Museums  Service  Community  History  Programme.  Ballymena:  Mid-Antrim  Museums
Service.

Newman,  A.  and  McLean,  F.,  2002.  Presumption,  policy  and  practice:  the  use  of  museums
and  galleries  as  agents  of  social  inclusion  in  Great  Britain.  International  Journal  of
Cultural Policy, 10 (2), 167–181.

Office  of  the  First  Minister  and  Deputy  First  Minister,  2005.  A  shared  future  –  policy  and

strategic framework for Northern Ireland. Belfast: OFMDFM.

Social Research Centre and Vision Management Services, 2008. Evaluation of the Community

History Programme – final report. Ballymena: Mid-Antrim Museums Service.

Witcomb, A., 2003. Re-imagining the museum. Beyond the mausoleum. London: Routledge.


