`Where it all Began’: the representation
of Malaysian heritage in Melaka
Nigel Worden1

Abstract
Melaka is represented in Malaysia’s tourist and heritage industries as the place `where it all
began’ . This  article  examines  the  meaning  of  this  slogan  in  the  context  of  the  cultural
policies of the Malaysian state in the 1970s and 1980s when constructions of the political
and  religious traditions  of  the  pre-colonial  feudal  Melakan  Sultanate  were  presented  as
emblematic  of  the  modern  nation. The  images  of  the  Sultanate,  of  colonial  rule  and  of
Malaysian nationalism in Melaka’s museums are analysed. The emphasis on ethnic Malay
heritage  also  indigenised  that  of  other  Melakan  inhabitants,  such  as  the  Portuguese
Eurasians or the Peranakan, and ignored that of the majority, later Chinese immigrants.
Finally the article questions the future of these representations with the shift in Malaysian
cultural  representations  in  the  1990s  to  those  of  a  modernising,  multi-ethnic  nation  in
which a feudal past plays a lesser role.

Key  Words:  Malaysia;  Heritage  Tourism;  National  Identity;  History,  Built
Heritage; Post-Colonialism

`The Birth of the Nation’
`Melaka’ , writes the best-selling Let’s go guide to Southeast Asia, `is Malaysia’s historic
city, where the pulse of national pride is preserved for public consumption’ .2 And,
indeed, Melaka provides a splendid example of the way in which history is packaged

1. This paper is based on fieldwork involving personal observations and interviews in Melaka between
1995 and 1999. An earlier version was presented at the First International Malaysian Studies
Conference, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 11± 13 August 1997. I am grateful for the comments
received at this conference, as well as for the invaluable advice and practical assistance of Khamis
Abas, Greg Acciaioli, Josephine Chua, Wayne Dooling, David Lowe, Rosli Haji Nor, John Tunbridge,
Christopher Wake and Kerry Ward. None of them, needless to say, are responsible for what I have
done with their ideas and resources.

2. Let’s go guide  to  Southeast Asia, New York: St Martin’s Press, 1998, p. 372. The Malay language
spelling of Melaka is now widely used in English-language publications in place of the anglicised
Malacca.

and promoted as heritage. It is the very model of what Ashworth & Tunbridge have
described  as  the  `tourist  historic  city’   in  which  an  appropriate  historic  image  is
identified  and  marketed,  and  then  preservation  and  conservation  policies  are
applied  in  conformity  with  this  image,  including  the  `reconstruction  of  what  is
thought ought to exist’ .3 What makes Melaka particularly interesting as a case study
is that heritage here is not only a product for a tourist market but has also been a
central  icon  in  the  construction  of  a  highly  contested  contemporary   Malaysian
identity.  For  Melaka,  in  the  words  of  the  plaque  unveiled  by  Prime  Minster
Mahathir in 1989 is, `bandaraya bersejarah Malaysia. Di sini semuanya bermula . . .
lahirnya sebuah negara’  (the historic city of Malaysia. Here is where it all began . . .
the birth of the nation). `Where it all began’  has become a key marketing slogan in
Melaka’s heritage and tourism promotion. But this begs the question of just what
began there, and to what extent the nation to which it gave birth has been moulded
to  coincide  with  the  Malaysian  state’s  cultural  policies.  And  following  recent
significant  shifts  in  these  policies  from  those  that  privileged  a  primordial  Malay
culture,  to  images of  the  multi-ethnic  and  newly  industrialised  state,  can  Melaka
still be the birthplace of the modern Malaysian nation?

In one sense, Melaka is a classic example of heritage creation and promotion for
a tourist market in a place that is otherwise in economic decline. Melaka has been
losing ground economically in Malaysia since the end of the 19th-century  rubber
boom;  by  the  early  1970s  its  population  had  stagnated  and  there  was  high
unemployment.4 By  the  1990s  all  of  this  had  changed. Tourism  had  become  the
most vibrant sector of Melaka’s economy, with a wide range of hotels from luxury
to budget, a specially restored and preserved heritage site in the city centre and a
range of sophisticated visitor services. Melaka now offered a ready tourist `package’
for  the  day  visitor,  with  a  clearly  signed  walking  route  visiting  museums  and
temples, a `Son et LumiÁere’ show to sum it all up and glossy brochures and books
to take away as souvenirs.

The state has been highly proactive in the promotion of tourism in many regions
of Southeast Asia.5 In Malaysia it was harnessed to the state’s broader project in the

3. G.J. Ashworth & J.E. Tunbridge, The tourist-historic city, London and New York: Belhaven Press,
1990. Quotation from G.J. Ashworth & T.Z. de Haan, `The tourist-historic city: a model and initial
application in Norwich’ , U.K. Field Studies  Series 6, Groningen: Geographical Institute,
Rijksuniversiteit te Groningen, 1985, p. 8.

4. J.I. Currie, `The economy of Melaka today and tomorrow’ , in Kernial Singh Sandhu & Paul
Wheatley (eds) Melaka: the transformation of a Malay capital c.1400± 1980, Vol. II, Kuala Lumpur:
Oxford University Press, 1983, pp. 351± 379, p. 379.

5. In the now voluminous literature on the state and tourism in the region, see especially R. Wood,
`Ethnic tourism, the state and cultural change in Southeast Asia’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 11,
1984, pp. 353± 374; M. Picard & R. Wood (eds) Tourism, ethnicity  and the state in Asian and Pacific
societies, Honolulu: University of Hawai’ i Press, 1997; and J. Forshee with C. Fink & S. Cate (eds)
Converging interests: traders, travelers and tourists in Southeast Asia, Berkeley: University of California at
Berkeley, Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Monograph No. 36, 1999.

200

Nigel Worden

1980s of promoting a distinctively Malay cultural identity.6 Penang and Melaka, in
particular, benefited from the increasing focus on cultural tourism (rather than sun
and  beaches)  that  climaxed  in  the  successful  1990 `Visit  Malaysia’   campaign.  In
Penang  the  emphasis  was  on  cultural  diversity,  `a  cultural  treasure  combining
Malay, Chinese, Indian and other heritages’ .7 But Melaka offered a rather different
image. Unlike Penang, which was a creation of the colonial era, Melaka presented
a heritage that was rooted in a distinctively Malay past. It played a key role in the
construction  of  Malay  self-identity  that  was  absent  in  Penang  and  its  appeal  was
directed  as  much,  or  more,  to  the  Malaysian  visitor  as  to  the  international
tourist.

Both the makers and the consumers of this rediscovered Malay heritage were the
products of the state’s New Economic Policy that in the 1970s and 1980s promoted
economic opportunities  for the bumiputera (`sons of the soil’ or ethnic Malays).8 In
1971 a state-sponsored conference on national culture had declared that `national
culture  must  be  based  on  the  indigenous  culture  of  this  region’.9 The  stress  on
Malay traditional culture thus emphasised the antiquity and local specificity of the
bumiputera over  other  Malaysians  such  as  those  of  Chinese  or  Indian  origin.
Malaysian culture in this sense became Malay culture. At the same time Malaysian
history,  as  promulgated  in  school  textbooks  and  national  academic  writing,
abandoned  its  colonial roots  to  become rooted  in Malay historical traditions  and
played down the significance of non-bumiputera histories in the national narrative.10

6. A.J. Stockwell, `Early tourism in Malaysia’ , in M. Hitchcock, V. King & M. Parnell (eds) Tourism in
Southeast Asia, London: Routledge, 1993, pp. 258± 270; Tan Wan Hin, `International tourism in
Malaysia: development, achievement and problems’ , Malaysian Journal of Tropical Geography, Vol. 22,
No. 2, 1991, pp. 163± 73; V. King, `Tourism and culture in Malaysia’ , in Hitchcock, King & Parnell
(eds) op. cit., pp. 99± 116.

7. J. Kahn, `Culturalizing Malaysia: globalism, tourism, heritage and the city in Georgetown’ , in
Picard & Wood, op. cit. (note 5), pp. 99± 127; R. Jones & B. Shaw, `Historic port cities of the Indian
Ocean littoral: the resolution of planning conflicts and the development of a tourism resource
potential’ , Occasional Paper No. 22, Perth: Indian Ocean Centre for Peace Studies, 1992.

8. The United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), which has dominated the governing coalition
of Malaysia since independence in 1957, came to power on a slogan of `Malaya for the Malays’  in
opposition to colonial attempts to remove Malay privileges over other ethnic Malaysians, notably
those of Chinese origin. On the marketing of `traditional Malay culture’ in this period see J. Kahn,
`Class, ethnicity and diversity: some remarks on Malay culture in Malaysia’ , in J. Kahn & F. Loh Kok
Wah, (eds) Fragmented  vision: culture  and politics in contemporary Malaysia, Honolulu: University of
Hawai’ i Press, 1992, pp. 158± 178.

9. H. Crouch, Government  and  society  in Malaysia, St Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin, 1996, p. 166;
M.I. Said, `Malay nationalism and national identity’ , in M.I. Said & Z. Emby (eds) Malaysia: critical
perspectives, Petaling Jaya: Persatuan Sains Sosial Malaysia, 1996, pp. 34± 73, p. 55.

10. Khoo Kay Kim, `Recent Malaysian historiography’ , Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 10, No.
2, 1979, pp. 247± 261; Khoo Kay Kim, `Local historians and the writing of Malaysian history in the
twentieth century’, in A. Reid & D. Marr (eds), Perceptions  of the past in Southeast Asia, Singapore:
Heinemann Educational, 1979, pp. 299± 311.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

201

The  promotion  of  Melaka’s  heritage  thus  represented  much  more  than  a  tourist
product.  It  was  a  critical  part  of  the  discovery  of `Malay-ness’   in  the  1970s  and
1980s.  Moreover,  in Melaka, local  history  and identity  were often  represented as
national and hence generically Malaysian. Melaka acted as a symbol for the nation,
not only as `where it all began’  in the sense of the local and physically specific, but
also as the creator of the values and norms of a wider notion of Malay-ness.

Melaka and the Malay Nation
This association of Melaka with Malay-ness was rooted in several factors. The 15th-
century  Sultanate  of  Melaka  is  portrayed  as  the  ancestral  state  of  peninsular
Malaysia,  serving  much  as  Majapahit  does  for  Indonesia,  to  emphasise  the
geographical  roots  of  the  modern  Malaysian  state.1 1 Melaka,  as  portrayed  in  its
museums, was founded by Parameswara, who was roaming the peninsula after his
exile from Singapore, and no mention is made of his Sumatran roots.1 2

But  the  Melakan  Sultanate  is  also  upheld  as  the  epitome  of  Malay  values  that
transcend  its  conquest  by  European  powers.  It  is  represented  as  prosperous,
dominating  the  trade  routes  of  the  region,  respected  by  outside  powers  notably
China and Siam, and internally harmonious despite its widely diverse population.
Of  particular  significance  is  the  political  identity  represented  by  kerajaan,  a  term
that is often incompletely translated as `kingdom’ but in fact implies more about the
authority of the Raja or ruler. Modern Malaysian academics have argued that `the
Malacca tradition’ of kingship, law and authority survived the Portuguese conquest
through the Johor-Riau empire and into the 18th century, and was by implication
preserved  into  the  modern  Malaysian  nation-state.13 The  glories  of  the  Melaka
Sultanate were extolled in the bangsa (nationalist) histories of the 1920s ± 1930s and
by the Malay nationalist movement in the 1940s, despite some ambivalence about
the competing claims of loyalty to ruler (Raja) and that to nation (bangsa).14 As a

11. S. Supomo, `The image of Majapahit in later Javanese and Indonesian writing’ ; and A. Reid, `The
nationalist quest for an Indonesian past’ , in Reid & Marr, op. cit. (note 10), pp. 171± 185, 281± 298.

12. On the controversies surrounding the links between the foundation of Melaka and the decline of
Srivijaya and Sumatran polities in the 15th century, see O. Wolters, The fall of Srivijaya in Malay
history, London: Lund Humphries, 1970, esp. pp. 108± 127. The excision of Sumatran origins follows
the propagandist narrative of the Sejarah Melayu, written in the 17th century to justify Melaka’s
claims to Malay hegemony.

13. Muhammad Yusoff Hashim, The Malay Sultanate  of Malacca, Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of
Education, 1989, pp.  267± 280; Haron Daud, `Konsep Raja dan Kerajaan daripada perspektif
historiografi Melayu’ , Akademika, Vol. 31, 1987, pp. 3± 14; Khoo Kay Kim, `The peninsula Malay
Sultanates’ , in Khoo Kay Kim, Malay society:  transformation and democratisation, Selangor Darul
Ehsan: Pelanduk Publications, 1991, p. 54; C. Pillay, `Some dominant concepts and dissenting ideas
on Malay rule and Malay society from the Malacca to the colonial and Merdeka periods’ , PhD
dissertation, Singapore: Department of Malay Studies, National University of Singapore, 1977.

14. A. Milner, The invention  of politics in colonial  Malaya, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1994, esp. pp. 193± 225, 273.

202

Nigel Worden

result, the Sultans of the federated Malay states were won over to UMNO’s version
of  Malay  nationalism,  especially  when  their  role  was  assured  in  the  post-colonial
constitution.15 In contrast to neighbouring Indonesia, where the feudal traditions of
pre-colonial Majapahit were a source of some embarrassment  to the revolutionary
nationalist movement, in Malaysia the Melakan feudal past was thus harnessed to a
nationalism that promoted the symbolic powers of the Sultans and monarchy. Even
those  on  the  left  of  the  nationalist  spectrum  utilised  an  idealised  notion  of  the
Melakan empire as a source of inspiration.16

Islam  is  a  further  feature  of  Melakan `tradition’  that  is  used as  a  metaphor  for
Malay-ness.  Brown  has  argued  that  the  increasing disparity  of  economic  position
among Malays in the 1970s and 1980s led to a greater stress on Islam as a means
of  forging  Malay  ethnic  unity,  not  least  by  UMNO  in  order  to  pre-empt  the
opposition  PAS  (Partei  Islam  Se-Malaysia)’s  claim  to  represent  the  faithful.
Increasingly,  Islam,  as  much  as  the  Malay  language,  became  a  marker  of  the
bumiputera.17 Yet for Islam to be a marker of the nation it needed to be associated
with  a  national  history  rather  than  with  PAS’s  appeal  to  a  wider  Islamic  loyalty.
Melaka’s Malay-ness thus included an emphasis on its position as the first Islamic
state of the Malay world.

Representing the Sultanate
With  these  issues  in  mind,  let  us  examine  in  closer  detail  the  nature  of  heritage
representation in Melaka. A starting point is its spatial organisation. According to
Sandhu & Wheatley, in Melaka, `the urban form of the present day is a palimpsest
from  which  no  one  age  has  been  able  completely  to  erase  the  imprint  of  its
predecessors’ .18 This is not  entirely  the case; physical remains  of  the  pre-colonial
town have been completely overlaid by later building. The heritage core of Melaka
is the space defined by the Portuguese, and later Dutch and British, buildings such
as the fortress, Stadthuys and Colonial Club building, which replaced remnants of
the  Sultanate  era. These  specially  demarcated  heritage  zones  are  separated  by  a
bridge from the modern, bustling, and predominantly Chinese, town.

This spatial patterning means that the Malay features of Melaka’s heritage have
had  to  be  inserted  into  an  overwhelmingly  colonial  built  environment. Thus  the

15. A.C. Milner, Kerajaan: Malay political culture  on the eve of colonial  rule, Tucson: University of
Arizona Press, 1982; A. Omar, Bangsa Melayu: Malay concepts  of democracy and community,
1945± 1950, Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.

16. M.I. Said, `Ethnic perspectives of the left in Malaysia’ , in Kahn & Loh, op. cit. (note 8), pp.
254± 281, pp. 258, 277.

17. D. Brown, The state and ethnic  politics in Southeast Asia, London and New York: Routledge, 1994,
pp. 248± 256. See also Said, op. cit. (note 9), pp. 60± 63; and K. Hamayotsu, `Reformist Islam,
Mahathir and the making of Malaysian nationalism’ , paper presented at the Second International
Malaysian Studies Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 2± 4 August 1999, pp. 2± 6.

18. K.S. Sandhu & P. Wheatley, `From capital to municipality’ , in Sandhu & Wheatley, op. cit. (note
4), pp. 495± 597, p. 565.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

203

Figure 1. Replica of the Sultanate Palace, built in 1986. The original site was on the hill behind, now

occupied by the Portuguese  fortress.

Ethnography & History and the Malay Literature museums are located inside the
Dutch  Stadthuys  (where  they  share  premises  with  a  restored  VOC  Council
Chamber),  and  the  Independence  Museum  is  in  the  British  Clubhouse.  The
colonial built environment is thus reclaimed by a Malay heritage. But it does not
stop here. The  absence of building and artefacts from the  pre-colonial era means
that  the  indigenous  past  in  Melaka  has  been  literally,  as  well  as  metaphorically,
reconstructed.  A  replica  of  the  wooden  Istana (Sultanate  Palace)  was  opened  by
Prime  Minister  Mahathir  in 1986 at the foot of St Paul’s  Hill, built  on  a  smaller
scale  but  modelled  exactly  on  near-contemporary   descriptions.  Although  the
original Palace was on the hill summit, with the houses of the lower-ranking nobility
on its slopes and at its foot, the presence of the colonial church and fort means that
the site of the replica has had to be located at the bottom of the hill.19 The Palace
replica is surrounded by the Historic City Memorial Garden in Islamic design, with
a  central  walkway  leading  to  the  main  entrance  of  the  Palace  and  containing  a
monument commemorating the declaration of Melaka as an historic city, topped by
a  golden  replica  of `a  Malay  royal  headdress,  a  symbol  of the  Malaysian  citizens’
allegiance to the throne’.20

19. Hashim, op. cit. (note 13), p. 211.

20. American Express, Into the heart of Old Malacca: Jejak Warisan/Heritage Trail, Melaka: Malacca
State Development Corporation, n.d.

204

Nigel Worden

Figure  2. Display of kerajaan court  ceremonial inside the replica Palace.

This striking building is a clear indicator of the type of heritage emphasis that is
placed  on  Melaka’s  pre-colonial  past.  Inside  is  housed  the  Muzium  Budaya
(Cultural  Museum)  with  replicas  of  the  court  and  its  ceremonial. The  economic
achievements  of  Melaka’s  pre-colonial  past  or  the  social  complexity  of  its
thalassocracy  are  overlaid  by  the  emphasis  on  kerajaan ceremonial  and  courtly
ritual, reflecting the emphasis of contemporary  chronicles which show that `a Raja’s
work was expected to be concerned largely with ceremony and convention . . . ª real
issuesº  were not the business of a Raja’ .21 The displays are visually arresting. But
even in the less  dramatic storyboards and mini-tableaux of the  History Museum,
there  is  little  attention  given  to  the  context  of  this  world  of  courtly  traditions.
Unsurprisingly,  and  characteristic  of  heritage  representation  in  many  places,  the
`underside’   of  Melaka’s  pre-colonial  past  is  missing.  There  is,  for  instance,  no
mention of the dangers of attack in Melakan streets, of the rampant diseases or of
the slaves who formed a significant part of the town’s labour force.22

21. Milner, op. cit. (note 15), pp. 48± 49.

22. Sandhu & Wheatley, `From capital to municipality’, pp. 544, 551± 552; L. Thomaz, `A escravatura
em Malaca no sÂeculo XVI’, Studia, Vol. 53, 1994, pp. 253± 316; P.-Y. Manguin, `Manpower and
labour categories in early sixteenth century Malacca’, in A. Reid (ed.) Slavery, bondage and dependenc y
in Southeast Asia, St Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 1983, pp. 209± 215; P.E. de Josselin de
Jong & H.-L. van Wijk, `The Malacca Sultanate’ , Journal of Southeast Asian History, Vol. 1, No. 2,
1960, pp. 20± 29, p. 28.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

205

This emphasis on the Rajas and the court is, of course, a direct product of the
importance of the Melakan kerajaan political tradition to contemporary  Malaysian
identity.  But  an  indication  of  the  ambivalence  that  a  feudal  past  presents  to  the
construction of the post-independence  nation is revealed in the representations of
the classic Malay story of Hang Tuah and Hang Jebat. In this legend, set during the
Sultanate period, Hang Tuah obeys the orders of the Raja to kill his life-long friend
Hang Jebat, who is accused of treason against the absolutist ruler. In the Hikayat
Hang Tuah, Hang Tuah is portrayed as the `paragon of Malay chivalry’  by following
the command of his Raja despite the personal costs of killing his friend. However,
in the course of the 1950s, Hang Jebat was re-defined as the righteous rebel who
stood up for justice, `a first foreshadowing of our present day generation’  in the era
of nationalism and anti-colonialism, although this fell short of an association with a
popular Robin Hood-type figure who might become too closely linked to the ideals
of  communist  insurgents. 23 In  modern  Melaka,  Hang  Tuah’s  mausoleum  is
preserved, and both figures are memorialised  in street names. Yet the issue of who
to regard as hero is ambivalent. The Son et LumiÁere show, remarking that `Malay
customs and culture would never condone Jebat’ s treachery’ , describes the conflict
as a `black day for Melaka’  and a cause of division `as has happened so often in our
history’,  implying  that  the  dispute  was  a  cause  of  the  Sultanate’s  ultimate
downfall’.24 However,  a  large  and  newly  installed  display  board  in  the  Muzium
Budaya  is  more  ambivalent.  Entitled  `Clash  of  the  Champions’  it  describes  the
contest as one of differing ideologies, `Hang Tuah stood for selfless service and blind
faithfulness  to  the  sovereign,  no  matter  what  the  sacrifice.  Hang  Jebat  advocated
justice . . . and was prepared to avenge [by] the most extreme methodsÐ
rebellion
. . . The end of the duel is not important; what is important is the spirit and what
one fights for in the encounter, and that still lives vividly unto this day’ .25 In this
account the virtue of loyalty to the Raja is not challenged, but the right to stand up
for justice is also maintained. The board thus marks a delicate balancing act between
the competing loyalties of the kerajaan and bangsa and deflects attention from their
inconsistencies in an appeal to personal morality.

There is, however, no ambivalence in the representation of Islam. Tableaux at the
History  Museum  represent  the  Sultanate  as  unambiguously  Islamic,  from  the
moment of the arrival of Sheikh Abdul Aziz and the instant conversion of Melaka’s

23. P.E. Josselin de Jong, `The rise and decline of a national hero’ , Journal of the Malay Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. 38, No. 2, 1965, pp. 140± 155; C.W. Watson, `The construction of the
post-colonial subject in Malaysia’ , in S. Tù nnesson & H. Antl Èov, Asian Forms of the Nation,
Richmond: Curzon, 1996, pp. 297± 322, pp. 309± 310. For this reconceptualisation in the broader
cultural context of the 1950s, see T. Harper, The end  of empire and the  making of Malaya, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1999, p. 285. Tuan Jebat became a hero of nationalism in the absence of
clear proto-nationalist leaders akin to Indonesia’s  Deponegoro; the communist insurgents fighting in
the forests in the 1950s were antagonistic to UMNO’s vision of an independent Malaya.

24. English soundtrack of Son et LumiÁere production, Melaka, 14 August 1997.

25. Signboard at Muzium Budaya, 15 August 1997.

206

Nigel Worden

Figure 3. Restored Dutch East India Company Council Chamber in the Melaka History Museum.

ruling prince. But academic writing has stressed the somewhat ambivalent nature of
Islam in the Melaka Sultanate. Islamisation was a more gradual process, rooted in
the context of a Hindu-Buddhist world, and much of the protocol of court life with
the  absolute  authority  of  the  ruler  so  vividly  portrayed  in  the  Palace  was  in  fact
Hindu  in  form  and  origin.26 Moreover,  Islam  in  the  Sultanate  was  far  from
orthodox,  being  relatively  tolerant,  open  and  permissive. 27 Indeed,  there  was  an
Islamic  revivalist  movement  in  19th-century   Melaka  that  explicitly  attacked  the
`impurities’  of the kerajaan elite.28

But none of this is evident in the displays of Melaka’s museums. There is no hint of
unease with the courtly tradition, no suggestion that its roots or its values are anything
other than purely Islamic. The association of the kerajaan with Islam, and of Islam and
the kerajaan with the Malay bangsa, is unambiguous. Islam is thus made indigenous
and  a  tenet  of  local  Malay  identity,  avoiding  extremism  without  losing  its  purity.

26. C. Wake, `Melaka in the fifteenth century: Malay historical traditions and the politics of
Islamization’ , in K. Sandhu & P. Wheatley (eds) Melaka: the transformation of a Malay capital
c.1400± 1980, Vol. I, Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1983, pp. 128± 161; A.C. Milner, `Islam
and the Muslim state’ , in M. Hooker (ed.) Islam in Southeast Asia, Leiden: Brill, 1983, pp.  23± 49.

27. L. Thomaz, `The Malay Sultanate of Melaka’ , in Anthony Reid (ed.) Southeast Asia in the early
modern era: trade, power and belief, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993, pp. 69± 90, p. 79; K. Johan,
`Undang-Undang Melaka: reflections on Malay society in fifteenth-century Malacca’, Journal of the
Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. 72, No. 2, 1999, 131± 150, pp. 136± 137.

28. Milner, Invention  of Politics, pp. 141± 153.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

207

Given the challenge of the PAS populist Islamic opposition party in the late 1970s and
1980s,  which  stressed  international  Islamic  unity  and  accused  the  UMNO-led
government of betraying the true faith, this interpretation is not surprising. 29

The authority for these heritage representations of kerajaan and of Islam in Melaka
comes not from academic writing but rather from the Sejarah Melayu (Malay Annals),
the masterpiece of classical Malay literature. The notion of Melaka as centre of the
Malay world stems directly from the traditions of the Annals and they are given high
prominence  in  the  Malay  Literature  displays  in  the  Stadthuys,  where  they  are
represented  as  not  only  acting  as  the  basis  for  the  creation  of  a  standard  Malay
language in the 1950s, but also as extolling the social values of the Sultanate and `a
source of reflection and guidance for the life of young people in our time’.30 However,
their historical accuracy has been much contested, with some scholars dismissing
them  as an `elaborate  fiction’  written  after  the  Portuguese conquest, while others
defend their status as a cultural rather than an historical document.3 1 As Hashim has
argued, the aim of the Sejarah Melayu was not to `establish some form of reality or
factual authenticity . . . [but] to try and sanctify the early Malacca rulers and the royal
family’ .3 2 The  Annals  portray  an  image  of  the  glories  of  the  Islamic  court  that
resonated with the needs of the kerajaan. They have considerably less to say about the
economic or social realities of 15th-century  Melaka. But they are used to give both
authority and authenticity to its current public history.

However, the interpretations of the Sejarah Melayu are modified in one important
respect. There  is  little  mention  in  Melaka’s  museums  of  magic,  which  plays  so
important a part in the AnnalsÐ
for instance, in the account of the origins of Malay
world through Raja Suran’s descent into the ocean. The closest any display comes
to  a  sense  of  the  mysterious  which  draws  from  the Annals  is  the  diorama  about
Melaka’s  founding  in  the  History  Museum  in  which  Perameswara  is  shown
choosing the site where a mousedeer intimidated his hunting dogs, a place `where
the weak  can triumph over the strong’.33 For  any blending  of magic with Islamic
tradition  is  unsuited  to  present-day  concepts  of  both  Islam  and  history. Thus  in
1977 the Melaka state government banned the annual Mandi Safar festival, a mass

29. K.S. Jomo & A. Cheek, `Malaysia’s Islamic movements’, in J. Kahn & F. Loh Kok Wah (eds)
Fragmented  vision: culture  and politics in contemporary Malaysia, Honolulu: University of Hawai’ i Press,
1992, pp. 79± 106; A. Mohamed, Malaysia’s Islamic opposition:  past, present and future, Kuala Lumpur:
Gateway, 1991.

30. Signboard at Malay Literature Museum, 14 August 1997.

31. Wolters, Fall of Srivijaya, esp. pp. 81± 83; Wake, `Melaka in the fifteenth century’, p. 130; Cheah
Boon Kheng, `The erosion of ideological hegemony and royal power and the rise of postwar Malay
nationalism, 1945± 46’ , Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 19, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1± 26, p. 10; A.H.
Johns, `The turning image: myth and reality in Malay perceptions of the past’ , in A. Reid & D. Marr
(eds) Perceptions  of the past in Southeast Asia, Singapore: Heinemann Educational, 1979, pp. 43± 67,
pp. 46, 64.

32. Hashim, Malay Sultanate, pp. 86, 208.

33. Diorama text at History Museum, 31 July 1995.

208

Nigel Worden

ritual bathing at the town’s Klebang beach, during which Koranic texts were dipped
into the water as protection against future suffering. Such a manifestation of popular
magical folk religion was considered contrary to Islamic tradition.34 Rejection of the
magical,  rather  than  the  mystical,  makes  Melaka’s  past  more  appropriate  to  the
needs  of  the  modernising  Malaysian  state,  in  which  magic  and  superstition  are
frowned upon and Islam is freed of any pagan associations.

The  strong  image  of  a  glorious  Malay  pre-colonial  past  conditions  the
representation of subsequent periods of Melaka’s history. As in all ex-colonial states,
the issue of how to deal with colonial heritage is a critical one. In Melaka the colonial
period was complex, with a succession of Portuguese, Dutch and British rulers. They
are not all treated in the same way in the town’s heritage representations.

The  predominant  power  represented  in  the  architectural  heritage  of  the central
`special space’  is Dutch, with the red-pink Stadthuys and church, and monument of
a  windmill  standing  incongruously  on  the  square  between  them. The  Portuguese
past is less apparent, with the notable exception of the Porta de Santiago gateway to
the former fortress. This reflects the destruction of earlier Portuguese constructions,
but is also explained by the financial and technical support given to the restoration
of  the  heritage  centre  by  the  Dutch  government,  including  the  restoration  of  the
Stadthuys.35

The  image  of  the  Portuguese  and  Dutch  given  in  Melaka’s  museums  is  also
strikingly different. The Portuguese are cast in the role of colonial exploiters, for it
was  they  who  were  responsible  for  the  destruction  of  the  Sultanate;  the  internal
divisions  and  succession  disputes  that  weakened  late  15th-century  Melaka  are
conveniently  ignored. Thus  in  the  Maritime  Museum,  housed  in  a  reconstructed
Portuguese man-of-war along the riverside, a board announces that `the Portuguese
. . . never followed the accommodating policy of the Melaka Sultanate but instead
followed the policy of crusaders by milking dry the wealth the trade brought’ .36 By
contrast the Dutch are portrayed neutrally, even approvingly. The faithful restoration
of  the  VOC  chamber  room  in  the  History  Museum  and  the  large  portraits  of
commanders, such as Jan Van Riebeeck, is even reminiscent of the respect that was
accorded to him in apartheid South Africa.37 The reason is not difficult to find. The
depiction of the Portuguese as destroyers and exploiters means that their opponents
can  be  portrayed  in  a  more  favourable  light,  which  accords  with  historical  Malay

34. Wee Hock Chye & Bonny Wee, You’ll love Malacca, Kuala Lumpur: Purple Production Sdn. Bhd.,
1998, p. 35.

35. Funded especially by the City of Hoorn in The Netherlands. I.L. Vis, `Het Stadthuys te Malacca:
een restauratie-plan voor het oudste VOC-gebouw in het verre osten’ , in Verslagen en Aanwinsten
1980± 81 van de Stichting  Cultuurgeschiedenis  Nederlanders  Overzee, Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 34± 44.

36. Signboard at Maritime Museum, 16 August 1997.

37. L. Witz, `Commemorations and conflicts in the production of South African national pasts: the
1952 Jan van Riebeeck tercentenary festival’ , PhD thesis, Cape Town: University of Cape Town,
1997.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

209

perceptions. In their rivalry with the Portuguese, the Dutch allied themselves with
the Malay ruler of Johor.38 Moreover, unlike the Portuguese (portrayed as fanatical
Catholics), the VOC was little interested in conversion and was tolerant of Islamic
practices. Their rule thus marked a much less dramatic break with the ideal vision of
the Sultanate than did that of the Portuguese, and is represented accordingly.

There is very little representation of the British in the public history of Melaka. In
the History Museum a single diorama represents the 19th century, citing the often-
quoted description of the town in 1879 as `very still, hot, tropical, sleepy and dreamy,
Malacca looks a town ª out of the runningº, utterly antiquated, mainly un-English,
a veritable Sleepy Hollow’.39 In part this reflects the decline of Melaka’s significance
in  the  19th  century,  when  first  Penang  and  then  Singapore  predominated  in  the
region;  in  1895  the  Straits  Governor  described  Melaka  as  commercially  `a  mere
suburb of Singapore’ .40 But although later rulers of Melaka, the British are seen as
having little to do with the Sultanate, and that is what is of primary significance.

The Nation Re-born: independence
The  kerajaan and  Islamic  traditions  of  a  pre-colonial  era  were  thus  central  to  the
representations of Melaka as symbol of the Malay nation. But they were not the only
national images to form part of Melaka’s heritage. Melaka’s role in the creation of
the Malaysian state was also emphasised through more modern features of its history
`as the national birthplace, where the nationalist movement began’ .41 The Naning
War, which took place in the Melaka state district of Alor Gajah in 1831± 1832, was
identified  as  the  precursor  of  the  independence  movement  in  a  search  for  early
struggles characteristic of all post-colonial states. Its leader, Abdul Said, identified
himself with the folk heroes of Malay legend and adopted titles used by the Melakan
Sultans as a means of evoking their magical and symbolic powers against the colonial
authorities.4 2 The image of Melaka as the pre-colonial precursor of the nation thus
conveniently  combines  with  its role as  the birthplace  of modern  nationalism.43 In
1956,  despite  protests  from  Kuala  Lumpur, Tunku  Abdul  Rahman  Putra  Al-Haj

38. D. Lewis, Jan Compagnie in the Straits of Malacca, 1641± 1795, Southeast Asia Monograph Series
No. 96, Athens, OH: Ohio University Center for International Studies, 1995, p. 15; C. Blagden,
`Report of Governor Balthasar Bort on Malacca’, Journal of the Malay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, Vol. 5, 1927, pp. 9± 367, p. 14; L. Andaya, `The kingdom of Johor’ , PhD thesis, Cornell
University, 1971, pp. 23± 24.

39. I. Bird, The golden  Chersonese and the way thither, London: John Murray, 1883, p. 125.

40. Sandhu & Wheatley, `From capital to municipality’, p. 518.

41. S. Hoyt, Old Malacca, Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1993, p. 70.

42. B.W. Andaya & L.Y. Andaya, A history of Malaysia, Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1982, p. 123.

43. In this way Malay nationalists overcame the problem of their Indonesian counterparts, who
struggled to link Yogyakarta, home of the anti-colonial revolution, with pre-colonial states such as
Majapahit. J. Forshee, `Domains of pedaling: souvenirs, becak drivers and tourism in Yogyakarta,
Java’ , in Forshee, Converging interests (note 5), p. 312.

210

Nigel Worden

Figure 4. Car used at the independence celebrations in 1957, displayed between the Sultanate Palace
and the Proclamation  of Independence Monument. The identification of the Sultanate and modern

Malaysia is affirmed.

chose  Melaka as  the place  to announce Malaysia’s  forthcoming independence, on
the  field  in  front  of  the  British  Colonial  Club,  now  home  of  the  Proclamation  of
Independence Monument.44 By this historic event the symbolism of Melaka’s past
was  used  as  an identifier  with  the future  of  the  new nation:  Melaka  gave  birth  to
Malaysia.

The  nature  of  Malaysian  independence  means  that  the  representation  of  the
nationalist movement at the Monument is rather different from that in many post-
colonial countries. For one thing there is no demonised colonial oppressor. There is
mention of the `anti-colonial struggles’  of the 19th century (such as the Naning War)
but little is said about the nature of 20th-century colonial rule and nothing on the
lifestyles of those who earlier inhabited the Club building. Malaysian independence
was  not  won  through  armed  conflict  against  a  colonial  power  and  there  are  no
memorials  to  glorious  military  engagements  or  revolutionary  heroes  of  the  kind
depicted  in  nationalist  museums  throughout  Indonesia.  Rather,  the  link  of
independence  is  made  with  the  15th-century  Sultanate,  depicted  in  the  opening
panels of the exhibition and so prominently represented in the reconstructed Palace

44. `Tussle over news on impending independence’ , in Chye & Wee, You’ ll love Malacca, p. 44; K.
Sim, `Merdeka Day in Malacca’, Corona, Vol. 8, 1956, pp. 224± 227; Harper, End  of empire, pp.
13± 14, 348.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

211

nearby.  The  opening  statement  reads:  `The  sequence  of  history  has  its  own
peculiarities. Melaka, the first Malay state to fall under the Western powers, became
the  place  for  the  declaration  of  the  date  of  independence  of  the  Federation  of
Malaya, 445 years later.’ 45 The process of negotiated settlement of the 1950s is then
recalled through a series of detailed information panels that emphasise the dignity
and authority of nationalist leaders  in images resonant of the Sultanate itself. The
Malay ruling elite that controlled the politics of independence is thus linked directly
to the Melakan past, maintained in the interim by British recognition and utilisation
of Raja authority.46 Here is no hint of the 1980s `Young Turk’ criticism of the `feudal’
character of the UMNO leadership.47

The representation of the Malaysian past in Melaka ends with independence. The
complexities of the post-independence nation and its internal conflicts are unfitting
subjects for a national story whose pinnacle was achieved in 1957 as a restoration of
the glories of the pre-colonial Melakan past.

Non-Malay Heritage
This  strong  association  of  Melaka  with  Malay-ness  inevitably  meant  that  a  non-
Malay  heritage  was  viewed  as  being  of  lesser  significance.  In  this  regard  the
contrast  between  the  symbolism  of  Melaka  as  the  birthplace  of  the  nation  and
contemporary  local realities was most acute. For Melaka was observed as early as
1879  as  being  `to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  Chinese  city’   while  `the  Malay  . . .
shuns  the  town  and  prefers  a  life  of  freedom  in  his  native  jungles’.48 By  1970
Malays  formed only  15%  of  the population  of  the  town,  although  they  predomi-
nated  in the  surrounding  rural region. A large majority of  Malaysians  of  Chinese
origin  was  characteristic   of  urban  settlements  throughout  Malaysia.49 However,
the  promotion  of  the  bumiputera in  Malaysian  cultural  policy  meant  that  urban
Chinese  heritage  and  history  was  consciously  down-played.  For  instance,  in  the
1980s, Yap  Ah  Loy  was  replaced  by  Raja  Abdullah  of  Klang  as  the  founder  of
Kuala  Lumpur  in  school  textbooks  and  official  histories.50 Melaka  was  much

45. Signboard, Proclamation of Independence Memorial, 14 August 1997.

46. C. Muzaffar, `Continuity and change in Malay ideas of the Melakan period’ , in K.S. Sandhu & P.
Wheatley (eds) Melaka: the transformation of a Malay capital c.1400± 1980, Vol. II, Kuala Lumpur:
Oxford University Press, 1983, pp. 47± 69, p. 48.

47. Brown, The state and ethnic  politics, p. 243.

48. Bird, The golden  Chersonese, pp. 132, 137.

49. M.S. Sidhu, `An introduction to ethnic segregation in Melaka town’  in K. Sandhu & P. Wheatley
(eds) Melaka: the transformation of a Malay capital c.1400± 1980, vol. II, Kuala Lumpur: Oxford
University Press, pp. 30± 46, p. 33; K.S. Sandhu, `Chinese colonization of Malacca: a study in
population change, 1500 to 1957’, Journal of Tropical Geography, Vol. 15, 1961, pp. 1± 26; M.S. Sidhu,
`Chinese domination of West Malaysian towns, 1921± 1970’, Geography, Vol. 61, 1976, pp. 17± 23.

50. S. Carstens, `From myth to history: Yap Ah Loy and the heroic past of Chinese Malaysians’,
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, Vol. 19, No. 2, 1988, pp. 185± 207, pp. 187± 188.

212

Nigel Worden

Figure  5.  Modern  Melakan street. The  majority  Chinese  population  of  the  town  is  absent  in  its

heritage representations.

more  easily  identified  with  a  Malay  and  a  national  past.  Representations  of
Chinese  and  other  ethnicities  of  local  significance  were  placed  firmly  in  this
context.

The representation of the Chinese in the heritage of this overwhelmingly Chinese
town is limited to the Peranakan. There is a special Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum
that is privately funded and located in a family house on Jalan Tun Tan Cheng Lock,
while  another  house  is  converted  into  the  Baba  Hotel. The  distinctive  feature  of
Baba Nyonya heritage is precisely its difference from that of the majority of Chinese
Malaysians.  For  the  Peranakan  are  highly  Malayised,  and  their  claims  to  a  long
period  of  settlement  in  Melaka  are  essential  to  their  identity.51 This  can  include
some  manipulation  of  history  to  suggest  that  all  Peranakan  originate  from  the
intermarriage  of Chinese and Malay in the 17th and 18th centuries, adopting Malay
language  and  dress,  although  otherwise  remaining  distinct  from  the  local
population. But a distinctive Peranakan identity emerged only in the mid-late 19th
century  in  opposition  to  new  Chinese  immigrants. 5 2 In  the  1980s,  UMNO  also

51. Chee Beng Tan, `Baba and Nyonya: a study of ethnic identity of the Chinese Peranakan in
Malacca’, PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1979, pp. 96± 97.

52. J.R. Clammer, `The ambiguity of identity: ethnicity maintenance and change among the Straits
Chinese community of Malaysia and Singapore’ , Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies,
Occasional Paper No. 54, 1979, pp. 3± 6.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

213

attempted to attract Peranakan support in order to broaden its membership.53 The
Peranakan were thus localised, nationalised and Malayised Chinese and as such had
a  role  to  play  in  the  heritage  representations  of  Melaka  that  was  denied  to  the
Chinese majority.

The  Peranakan  house  museums  claim  to  take  the  visitor  `back  to  revisit  the
traditional  lifestyles  of  the  Babas’ .5 4 Both  the  Baba  House  Hotel  and  the  Baba
Nyonya  Heritage  Museum  are  set  out  with  the  furnishings  and  possessions  of  a
typical late 19th-century  Peranakan family. Yet the families themselves are marked
by their absence. The result is an exoticisation of the Peranakan, and a freezing of
their  existence  in  a  past  time  that  bears  little  relation  to  the  present.  Indeed,  the
loss both  of  Baba  economic prominence  to  later  Chinese  immigrants,  and  of  the
favoured  political  status  they  enjoyed  during  the  British  colonial  period,  means
that  in  the  post-independence   era  there  was  a  breaking  down  of  Baba  identity
accompanied  by  a  sense  of  nostalgia  for  a  lost  past.55 In  contrast  to  the  official
state  museums  representing  the  glories  of  the  Sultanate,  which  is  resurrected  in
the  new  Malaysian  bangsa,  the  Peranakan  private  houses  appear  as  relics  of  an
increasingly  irrelevant  past.

The heritage roots of the distinctively Malayised Peranakan are also reflected in
the often mentioned Ð but probably apocryphalÐ
story of the marriage of the Ming
Emperor’s  daughter  Hang  Li  Po  to  the  Melakan  Sultan.56 This  event  marks  the
union  of  Chinese  and  Malay  as  well  as  indicating  the  respect  with  which  the
Melakan Sultanate was regarded by China, the greatest power of the time. But of
the history of the large majority of Chinese-speaking residents who descend from
19th-century   immigrants,  there  is  little  trace  in  the  museums  and  guidebooks,
although visitors are surrounded by Chinese shops and dwellings. The only Chinese
temple depicted in tourist literature  is the 17-century Cheng Hoon Teng Temple,
which is associated primarily with the Peranakan.

Neglect of  a  Chinese  heritage  has not  been  without controversy.  In  the 1980s,
plans by the Melaka state authorities to build on Bukit Cina, prime hillside land in

53. J. Jesudason, `The syncretic state and the structuring of oppositional politics in Malaysia’ , in G.
Rodan (ed.) Political oppositions in industrialising Asia, London: Routledge, pp. 128± 160, p. 157.

54. The Baba House, promotional hotel leaflet, Melaka, n.d. [1995].

55. Tan, `Baba and Nyonya’ , p. 229. From the late 1980s, a series of conventions held by the
Peranakan communities of Melaka, Penang and Singapore have encouraged a re-assertion of a
distinctive heritage; for instance, the theme of the 11th Baba and Nyonya Conference held in Melaka
in 1998 was `The Baba and Nyonya in the Eyes of the Youth’ .

56. On this legend and its academic debunking, see C. Cartier, `The dead, place/space, and social
activism: constructing the nationscape in historic Melaka’ , Environment  and Planning: Society  and
Space, Vol. 15, No. 5, 1997, pp. 555± 586, pp. 574± 575; and G. Wade, `Melaka in Ming dynasty
texts’ , Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. 70, No. 1, 1997, pp. 31± 69, p.
49. A recent publication of the Perbadanan Muzium Melaka (Melaka Museums Corporation)
acknowledges the controversy but sticks to its version of the story, Melaka Pengamatan  Lukisan dan
Diorama, Melaka: Perzim, 1998, p. 59.

214

Nigel Worden

the  city  centre,  were  strongly  contested  by  Chinese  residents  as  it  was  used  as  a
Chinese cemetery and held particular cultural significance as `a natural symbol of
the stake that the Malaysian Chinese community has in this country’ .57 Seen as a
direct assault on Chinese cultural heritage, the episode led to heightened tensions
and was only finally shelved in 1985 after protests in the national Parliament. In one
sense, the Bukit Cina controversy marked an opposition of urban development and
landscape  preservation  characteristic  of  many  cities,  but  in  Melaka  the  ethnic
element  of  a  Malay-led  local  state  assault  reflected  the  wider  sense  of  neglect  of
Chinese heritage in the town. But in defending Bukit Cina, much was also made of
its links with the remoter Melakan past, its association with the Hang Li-Po story,
and of its role as a symbol of `inter-racial relational significance in that era’.5 8 Given
the overwhelming dominance of the Sultanate era in Melakan heritage, this made
more  tactical  sense  than  a  focus  on  the  importance  of  the  site  to  more  recent
Chinese immigrants or even as a solely Chinese space.

Another non-Malay community that receives focus in Melakan heritage is that of
the casados, depicted as the descendants of Portuguese-Malay marriages in the 16th
century  who  have  maintained  some  of  the  traditions  of  their  European  origin
(notably Catholicism, music and dance, and elements of language). Dance displays
are a major tourist attraction, held at the Medan Portugis on the waterfront south
of the city centre, which is represented as the traditional casado kampung.

As Sarkissian has demonstrated, by no means all casados are descended from the
era  of  Portuguese  occupation  in  the  16th  century.  Moreover,  the  concept  of  a
distinct casado community and cultural tradition emerged only in the 1930s, and the
dancing and musical traditions began as a response to the visit of the Portuguese
Minister to Melaka in 1952.59 The Medan Portugis was built by the local state in
1984 and opened by Mahathir. The promotion of this exotic, invented tradition was
driven by the policy to boost tourism. But its timing was significant in other ways.
By the 1980s, UMNO was increasingly dependent on non-Malay support yet still
needed to  retain  its policy of  favouring the bumiputera. The Melakan  Portuguese,

57. Kua Kia Soong, `Bukit Cina belongs to the people’ , The Star, 22 December 1984, reprinted in
Kua Kia Soong, Malaysian Political Myths, Kuala Lumpur: Selangor Chinese Assembly Hall, 1990, p.
129. For the fullest account of the Bukit Cina controversy and its significance, see C. Cartier, `The
dead, place/space, and social activism’ ; C. Cartier, `Creating historic open space in Melaka’ , The
Geographical Review, Vol. 83, No. 4, 1993, pp. 359± 373.

58. Fan Yew Teng, `Bukit Cina should be preserved as it is’ , press conference statement, 19 August
1984, in Fan Yew Teng, If we love this countr y . . ., Kuala Lumpur: Egret Publications, 1988, p. 128.
See also Cartier, `Creating historic open space’ , p. 370. The controversy provides an interesting
contrast with the protests against Chinese cemetery removals in independent Singapore where there
was little element of ethnic exclusion by the state. B. Yeoh & Tan Boon Hui, `The politics of space:
changing discourses on Chinese burial grounds in post-war Singapore’ , Journal of Historical
Geography, Vol. 21, No. 2, 1995, pp. 184± 201.

59. M. Sarkissian, `Music, identity and the impact of tourism in the Portuguese settlement, Melaka,
Malaysia’ , PhD thesis, Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1993, esp.
Chs 2, 3, 6.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

215

while not defined as ethnically Malay, could, nonetheless, be represented as rooted
in the Malay past. By 1995, they had been admitted to UMNO membership and
were appealing for official bumiputera status on the grounds that `the facts of history
support  the  view  that  the  Portuguese  decedents  [sic]  are  of  Malay  stock  and
culturally they are closer to the Malays than the Portuguese’ .60 The casados, like the
Peranakan, were thus Malayised.

By contrast, the Chitties, who claim descent from Indian traders of the Sultanate
era, have been unable to stake a claim to such status, and are often associated with
later Indian immigrants of the 19th and 20th centuries. Lacking both an invented
tradition  that  could  be  adapted  for  tourism  and  also  claims  to  bumiputera status,
they  are  almost  absent  in  Melakan  heritage  representations  and  are  struggling  to
maintain a distinct identity.61

Melaka and the `Melayu Baru’ (New Malay)
The  heritage  representations  shown  in  Melaka  are  thus  a  product  of  the  cultural
policies and historical constructions of the 1970s and 1980s. They have not found
universal acclaim. Melaka was rejected as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in the
late  1980s,  on  the  grounds  that  too  much  of  the  original  city  centre  had  been
destroyed,  notably  the  original  waterfront.6 2 A  second  attempt  in  the  late  1990s
met  with  UNESCO  criticism  that  local  communities,  notably  Chinese  residents,
were being  neglected. Local conservationists  in both Penang and Melaka realised
that  `the  cities  will  have  to  come  to  terms  with  the  layered,  multi-cultural
occupation  of  their  historic  urban  sites’  and  complained  that  money  `has  been
mainly lavished on ill-researched museums and a sound and light show presenting
a  glossy  version  of  the  city’s  history  . . .  too  little  has  been  spent  on  restoration
itself’ .6 3

But  other  important  shifts  have  taken  place  in  Malaysia  that  render  Melaka’s
heritage  representations  less  appropriate  to  the  cultural  and  ideological  emphasis
of  the  modern  nation.  In  the  1990s  the  earlier  cultural  policy  of  bumiputera
promotion became outdated by the emergence of a Malay middle class that made
little  identification  with  a  feudal  past  but  looked  rather  to  inclusion  in  the

60. G. Fernandis, `Some historical aspects of the Portuguese in Malacca: terms of reference in
determining the bumiputera status of the Portuguese decedents [sic] of Malacca’, in G. Fernandis
(ed.) Save our Portuguese  Heritage Conference  95, Malacca, Malaysia, Melaka: published privately, n.d.
[1995].

61. D.J. Mearns, Shiva’s other children: religion and social identity  amongst overseas Indians, New Delhi:
Sage, 1995, pp. 26± 27, 178± 179.

62. C. Cartier, `Conserving the built environment and generating heritage tourism in Peninsular
Malaysia’ , Tourism Recreation  Research, Vol. 21, No. 1, 1996, pp. 45± 53, pp. 50± 51.

63. K.S. Nasution, `The challenge of living heritage cities in Asia’ , Urban Age, August 1998; K.S.
Nasution, `The soul of cities’, Far Eastern Economic  Review, 21 August 1997, p. 30. See also S. Yap,
`Dilemmas in historical landmarks’ , First International Convention of Asian Scholars,
Noordwijkerhout, 25± 28 June 1998.

216

Nigel Worden

modernising  world.  Politically,  UMNO  became  increasingly  dependent  on  the
non-Malay  vote.  The  result  was  a  cultural  policy  shift  marked  by  Mahathir’s
declaration  in  1991  of  Vision  2020,  by  which  Malaysia  aimed  to  achieve  full
economic  and industrial development by  the  year  2020. In so  doing, the Melayu
Baru  (New  Malay)  was  defined  not  by  ethnicity  but  by  urban  middle-class
identity.64 In  the  1992  UMNO  General  Assembly,  Mahathir  called  for  `a  new
culture  which  is  relevant  to  the  present  business  climate’  and  at  the  1997
Assembly he declared that `the Malay culture in this era is not the same with the
Malay culture when we were fighting for independence and during the early post-
independence  period’.65 English,  the  language  of  the  international  economy,  has
increasingly replaced Malay. The symbols of kerajaan have been down-played and
the constitutional role of the Sultans reduced, with Mahathir arguing in 1990 that
Melaka’s  fall  in  1511  had  resulted  from  the  Raja’s  self-indulgence  and  disunity
with his people.66 Such moves led to tensions within UMNO, and the symbols of
language,  kerajaan and  Islam  have  certainly  not  been  abandoned.  But  they  were
no  longer  the  predominant  defining  features  of  Melayu  Baru  in  the  2020
nation.

Modernisation  was now seen as the primary concern. In this context, Melaka, the
Historic City needed to remould its image. A 1992 publication by the Melakan state
government stressed that Melaka was `historical in one sense, modern in another’,
and `a growing industrial city and thriving holiday resort’ part of what will become
a `fully industrialised’  state by 2020.67 Golf courses, leisure resorts and a `Disney-
type  theme complex’ were  envisaged,  designed  to  attract  tourists,  especially  from
Japan and Singapore, who would hopefully stay for longer in the town.68 In all of
this, the earlier heritage concerns were played down or even ignored. For instance,
plans  in  1995  to  reclaim  more  of  the  shoreline  for  commercial  and  leisure
development  cut  off  the  Medan  Portugis  from  the  seafront,  thus  isolating  the
Portuguese  Community  from `the  natural  element  that  has  become  synonymous

64. A.B. Shamsul, `From Orang Kaya Baru to Melayu Baru: cultural constructions of the Malay
ª new richº ’ , in M. Pinches (ed.) Culture and privilege in capitalist Asia, London and New York:
Routledge, 1999, pp. 86± 110; Watson, `The construction of the post-colonial subject’ , pp. 319± 320;
Said, `Malay nationalism and national identity’, p. 64; Harper, End  of empire, pp. 371± 381.

65. W. Case, `Malaysia: aspects and audiences of legitimacy’ , in M. Alagappa (ed.) Political legitimacy
in Southeast Asia, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995, pp. 69± 107, p.101; `Redeeming dignity
of religion’, address by Prime Minister Mahathir to UMNO General Assembly, 5 September 1997,
< www.smpke.jpm.my /gn-data/ucapan.pm/1997/970905a.htm/ > , accessed 12 December 1997, clause
57.

66. Said, `Malay nationalism and national identity’ , p. 53.

67. Melaka: the  historic city of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia Mining Corporation Berhad, 1992,
pp. 129, 162± 163.

68. C. Cartier, `Megadevelopments in Malaysia: from heritage landscapes to ª leisurescapesº  in
Melaka’s tourism sector’, Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, Vol. 19, No. 2, 1998, pp. 151± 176;
`A developed state by 2010’, Melaka Highlights, Vol. 13, January± April 1997.

Malaysian Heritage in Melaka

217

with  their  History  and  Heritage’ .69 In  the  words  of  Prime  Minister  Mahathir  in
1992,  `Melaka  does  not  remain  a  mere  historical  curiosity  . . .  its  potential  as  a
centre for economic growth and investment is tremendous’ .7 0

However,  the  Southeast  Asian  economic  downturn  of  the  late  1990s  led  to  a
shelving  of  most  of  these  schemes  and  the  current  tourist  to  Melaka  finds  little
changed  from  the  heritage  images  of  the  late  1980s. Yet  as  national  economic
recovery  takes  place  the  focus  of  modernisation  is  likely  to  continue  the  down-
grading of Melaka as a symbol of the Malaysian nation. Kuala Lumpur’s Petronas
Twin Towers (the tallest buildings in the world) are a more appropriate emblem of
the  economic  drive  of  the  Melayu  Baru. As  the  Melakan  local  government  itself
recognises in its 1992 publication, `Melaka is the ancient capital of the nation while
Kuala  Lumpur  is  the  capital  of  modern  Malaysia.’ 71 It  remains  to  be  seen  how
Melaka’s heritage will adapt to this new context.

69. M.G. Singho, `Reclamation and the Portuguese settlement’, in G. Fernandis (ed.) Save our
Portuguese  Heritage Conference  95, pp. 22± 30, p. 23; M. Hiebert, `A sea change’ , Far Eastern Economic
Review, Vol. 158, No. 32, 10 August 1995, pp. 50± 51.

70. Melaka: the  historic city of Malaysia, p. 11.

71. Melaka: the  historic city of Malaysia, p. 157.

218

Nigel Worden


