An irreconcilable first-place: the precarious life of tourism and 
heritage in a southern European historic centre

Nick Dines

department of Criminology and Sociology, Middlesex university, london, uK

ABSTRACT
This  article  discusses  the  ambiguous  relationship  between  heritage 
tourism and everyday life in the historic centre of Naples. This area, long 
characterised  by  a  lower-class  residential  population  and  intermittently 
considered off-limits to tourists, has over the last two decades become the 
focus  of  a  burgeoning  heritage  tourism  industry. The  article  adopts  the 
idea of precariousness – understood contra conventional formulations as 
a condition that elicits both anxiety and emancipatory release – in order to 
make sense of the allure and repulsion that the historic centre exerts in tourist 
encounters with the city. Through three examples – a bus sightseeing tour, 
online responses to a New York Times article about Naples and local people’s 
perceptions of a pedestrianised piazza as a tourist contact zone – the article 
illustrates how the historic centre as a tourist destination is constituted by 
a mix of foreboding and excitement; where affective experience tends to 
trump the monumental gaze. Thinking in terms of precariousness not only 
underlines the contradictory role that this area plays in the local production 
of cultural heritage but also poses a challenge to those accounts that see 
in  the  advent  of  a  visitor  economy  the  inevitable ‘museumification’  and 
gentrification of historic centres.

Introduction
‘I want to invite everyone to visit our city because it is complex, contradictory, difficult, a bit of hell and 
a bit of heaven, but it is a city that is able to offer thrills and excitement’ (Il Mattino 1 August 2014).
The above statement was pronounced by the mayor of Naples, Luigi De Magistris, during a press 
conference in the summer of 2014 to announce plans for the city’s end-of-year celebrations. His choice 
of words sought to counterbalance the negative media narratives about Naples that, as occurs period-
ically in the city, had become dominant in the preceding months, despite the fact that the number of 
tourists in Naples had actually been rising since the previous year. Like the former mayor of Berlin, 
Klaus Wowereit, who famously described Germany’s capital as ‘poor but sexy’ in the hope of enticing 
creative workers and startups to the city (Connolly 2010), De Magistris appears here to willingly exploit 
the city’s equivocal attributes to galvanise economic, political and tourist capital. On the one hand, 
the public heralding of hell might seem like a cynical ruse for sidestepping social problems under the 
current era of austerity, or, if the co-presence of heaven and hell can be put to value, it simply represents 

CONTACT  nick dines 

 nick.dines@uniroma3.it

© 2016 nick dines. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

 

  143

the most brazen example of the über-predatory nature of contemporary capitalism. On the other hand, 
it could be interpreted as reassurance that the rougher edges of Naples were not about to be sanitised 
for the sake of a visitor economy. More banally, the reference to heaven and hell was a typical remark 
by a maverick mayor who was known to employ bold rhetoric.

The netherworld is a recurrent trope in the modern history of Naples. For example, during the 
era of the Grand Tour between the late seventeenth and early nineteenth centuries, when Naples was 
often the final stop in ‘destination Italy’ (Hom 2015), the city was proverbially described by outsiders 
as a ‘paradise inhabited by devils’ (Moe 2002). What I believe is noteworthy about this invocation is 
that De Magistris appears to acknowledge, and in doing so mitigate, a key dilemma that has beset 
local elites over the last two decades: the conviction, on the one hand, that the development of a tour-
ist and heritage industry offers a panacea to the city’s economic woes, and the apprehension, on the 
other, that this process is continually jeopardised by the incorrigible conduct of some of its citizens. 
Here, instead, the irresolvable is embraced as a promotional strategy and the idea of Naples as an 
unpredictable roller-coaster ride of emotions replaces the usual marketing of the city’s architectural 
and natural attributes as ‘easily consumable attractions’ (Salazar 2007, 24).

Without wanting to overestimate the significance of the words pronounced by De Magistris – who 
has been as prone as other administrators to agonising over the city’s unrealised tourism potential – 
they nevertheless point to tensions that underpin discourses and experiences of tourism in Naples. 
This article sets to unpack and make sense of these tensions in relation to the city’s historic centre 
(centro storico), which, since the early 1990s, has been reconfigured as the city’s principal tourist and 
heritage destination. This same area has long had a problematic relationship with ideas about local 
and national identity, civic pride, history, heritage and tourism. The reasons for this are multiple and 
complicated (for an in-depth discussion, see Dines 2012), but three key factors should be underlined. 
First, the historic centre coincides with the preindustrial, overcrowded metropolis that during the 
seventeenth century constituted one of the largest urban centres in Europe and which has long stood 
as a metaphor for the city’s putative deficiencies and deviations from Western urban norms. Second, in 
contrast to other major Italian cities such as Venice, Rome and Florence with their widely recognised 
monuments, Naples has held a marginal position with respect to national urban culture, which since 
the unification of Italy in 1861 has been rooted in the classical, medieval and renaissance citadels of 
the Centre-North. Third and most significantly, the historic centre continues to this day to be char-
acterised by a sizeable lower-class population and a host of informal and illicit economic activities; 
elements which, as I discuss below, are celebrated by some commentators as providing the area with 
its social, linguistic and cultural vitality, but denounced by others as stymieing, among other things, 
the development of a properly functioning heritage and tourist industry.

Like many cities across the world (Diamond et al. 2010), Naples has pursued a series of regeneration 
programmes that have revolved around harnessing tourism and heritage in the city’s historic centre. The 
fact that the ‘cultural turn’ in local urban policy did not fully emerge until the 1990s, and thus some-
what later than in other European cities, points to the ‘actually existing’ nature of urban regeneration 
(Rossi and Vanolo 2013), which is shaped by the global circulation of ideas but is embedded also in a 
particular set of geographical and historical conjunctures. In the case of Naples, a succession of local 
and national events between 1992 and 1993 signalled the death knell of the productivist logic that 
had defined postwar approaches to tackling the city’s socioeconomic predicaments. The termination 
of state intervention in the southern Italian economy and its substitution with self-confident rhetoric 
about autonomous development, the national anti-corruption trials that in Naples wiped out much of 
the political establishment and blocked redevelopment schemes in the old neighbourhoods, and elec-
toral reform that introduced the direct election of mayors and a new emphasis on consensus-seeking, 
symbolic politics all worked to elevate the interconnected questions of the historic centre, tourism and 
heritage to the top of the administrative agenda (Dines 2012, 47–55). Ever since, the fluctuating levels 
of national and international tourism in Naples have become a yardstick for evaluating the success 
and wider implications of urban renewal. Indeed, the city’s media and administrators have tended to 
view Italian and foreign tourists as privileged beneficiaries of regeneration in the historic centre but 

144 

  N. DINeS

also among the most newsworthy victims of crime and disorder in the city. As I discuss in this article, 
tourist narratives have similarly elicited apparently irreconcilable dichotomies: the heart of Naples is 
beautiful and repulsive, welcoming and dangerous; where the pursuit of authenticity is torn between 
staged encounters and the ‘unnerving […] helter-skelter’ of everyday life.1

If the historic centre of Naples over the last quarter of a century has been constructed and pro-
moted in heritage tourism discourses as a ‘first-place’ – in other words, the setting where the genesis 
of the city’s identity and history can be traced through physical legacies of the past and selected cul-
tural traditions and habits – it is also an unstable symbolic space that, on the one hand, is framed by 
anxiety, reprehension and self-flagellation while, on the other, is seen to elicit excitement and a sense 
of release. While such a contradictory state of affairs could be loosely described as ‘ambivalent’, this 
adjective remains too generic to build a critical analysis. Rather, I want to argue that the intercon-
nections between the historic centre and tourism can be better comprehended by thinking through 
the idea of ‘precariousness’, which is rooted in the tension between anxiety and emancipatory release. 
Precariousness, I contend, captures the unsettled and unsettling dynamics of tourism and heritage 
that need to enter into the ways in which we contemplate and write about historic centres. This 
particular condition calls for reflection because, first, it suggests a far more complex scenario to the 
unidirectional tale of commercialisation and gentrification customarily seen to trail in the wake of 
heritage tourism (D’Eramo 2014)2 and, second, it is not limited to Naples but is discernible in other 
socially-mixed historic centres across the world undergoing (and resisting) culture-led regeneration 
(Crossa 2009; Herzfeld 2015).

The article draws on ethnographic and textual research carried out in Naples over the last twenty 
years in order to examine the nexus between tourism, social class and place identity. My present 
interest in tourism can be construed as a ‘by-product’ (Graburn 2002, 24) of a broader study on the 
conflicts around urban change in Naples (Dines 2012). The article starts by taking issue with the 
exclusively negative connotations that many social science scholars have attributed to the concept 
of precariousness and argues for a more nuanced conceptualisation that takes on board its long and 
complex genealogy in Naples. I proceed to consider the significance of thinking about the historic 
centre of Naples as a ‘first-place’ and the implications that this has for a critical understanding of its 
relationship with tourism and heritage. In order to illustrate the precarious position of the historic 
centre/first-place in tourism narratives about the city, the article considers three cases: first, the audio 
commentary used on a bus tour around the ancient core of the city; second, online discussions about 
Naples among mainly US visitors in response to a travel article in the New York Times; and finally, 
interviews with Neapolitans who are habitual users of a ‘tourist contact zone’ that was created following 
the renovation of a monumental piazza.

Precariousness and heritage tourism
The idea of ‘precariousness’ can be usefully applied to make sense of the complex relationship between 
tourism, heritage and everyday social life in central Naples. This term needs to be qualified. Over the 
last few years, ‘precariousness’ has acquired currency in the social sciences as a label describing a 
general social condition that, particularly in the global North, has arisen from the casualisation of the 
labour market and reduction and/or privatisation of welfare provisions (Neilson and Rossiter 2008; 
Molé 2010; Muehlebach 2013). Constituted by extreme flexibility, impermanence and insecurity, it is 
seen to be the cause of a series of psychosocial pathologies in contemporary society, such as heightened 
anxiety about one’s future. As Andrea Muehlebach notes, precariousness and associated neologisms 
such as ‘precarity’ and ‘precarisation’ have become shorthand for the ‘multiple forms of nightmarish 
dispossession and injury that our age entails’ (Muehlebach 2013, 298).

I do not dispute the existence or severity of such processes, but rather the way in which precari-
ousness tends to be presented in solely negative terms and as the by-product of late neoliberal capi-
talism. Instead, here I want to recuperate a more multidimensional understanding of precariousness, 
which in Italy, as elsewhere, predates not only the current global crisis but also neoliberalism itself  

 

  145

(Negri 2015). Alongside the dimensions typically singled out – such as the angst, paranoia and exis-
tential frailty brought about by economic uncertainty – it is often forgotten that precariousness has 
held more ambiguous, indeed positive implications grounded in social and political autonomy and the 
emancipation from the constraints of wage labour (Berardi 2009, 30–32; Lorey 2015). Already deployed 
by radical thinkers and social movements in Italy during the 1970s, this dual sense of precariousness 
was particularly pronounced in Naples where the popular classes – or the ‘precarious proletariat’ 
according to some on the post-1968 Left (Esposito 1973) – were afflicted by job and income insecurity 
but at the same time were deemed to be more resourceful and to command greater sovereignty over 
their everyday lives than their proletarian counterparts. As Maria Antonietta Macciocchi, journalist 
and one-time Communist Party parliamentary candidate, wrote in 1968 with respect to the centre of 
Naples: ‘A sub-proletarian, who “invents” his work every day, has a precarious existence, but he does 
“enjoy” a form of freedom and independence from all bosses … This is why he looks down on the 
worker’ (Macciocchi 1973, 184). In lieu of constructing a detailed genealogy here, I want to simply 
stress how, at its origins at least in Italy, a precarious condition was one that was poised between 
anxiety and liberation.

How might all this be relevant to the issues under analysis here? Michael Herzfeld has recently 
engaged with the idea of precariousness in relation to historic conservation and gentrification in city 
neighbourhoods, viewing this as ‘the condition of the unemployed youth experiencing the impact of 
today’s neoliberal onslaught on human dignity [but which] also extends to monuments through offi-
cial neglect and over-exposure to tourists’ (Herzfeld 2015, 8). While it is possible to detect analogous 
denouements in Naples (Dines 2016), such a socially and historically specific definition of precarious-
ness echoes hollowly in a city where numerous families in the historic centre have experienced decades, 
if not centuries of un(der)employment, and whose continued residence during the postwar era was 
tested by crumbling housing, cholera, earthquake damage, organised crime, institutional neglect and 
threatened demolition long before the advent of neoliberalism. Again, without wishing to refute the 
dynamics that typically fall under its rubric, for the purposes of this article, precariousness seems to 
me especially evocative for capturing the restless interface between the (often frustrated) aspirations 
for tourism revival, the precedence of the everyday over the monumental in visitors’ representations 
of Naples, and the intractable elements of social life in the historic centre. As such, here precariousness 
incorporates within its ambit other actors (including tourists themselves) besides those subjects vul-
nerable to forms of structural violence like the ‘spatial cleansing’ that Michael Herzfeld has discussed 
in relation to central Rome and Bangkok (Herzfeld 2006).

Tourist narratives and experiences of Naples are commonly seen to be exposed to, among other 
things, disorder, crime, uncollected garbage and disreputable behaviour. This sense of perpetual risk 
heightens, on the one hand, anxiety among a variety of local actors who insist on safeguarding the civic 
and economic benefits of tourism (and who thus may call for remedial action to be taken against the 
reprobate); but on the other, it reaffirms claims made by tourists and Neapolitans alike that the city’s 
allure is precisely due to its offering an exceptional experience. Moreover, if the historic centre is to 
be understood as a ‘first-place’, then this is a site that is repeatedly blurred into more general tourist 
imaginaries about Naples. In other words, the geographical indeterminacy of ‘first-place’ can itself be 
understood as precarious: public anxiety that the historic centre is not properly secured for tourism 
and the cultural heritage industry, but also the respite that tourists are drawn to Naples less for the 
specific aspects of its built environment than for its array of atmospheres and spectacles, where even 
the most mundane forms of deviance can, within limits, exude an exotic charm. To cite the words of 
a world-famous city guide: ‘grand prix-style traffic, raucous squabbles, urchins’ impromptu football 
games in dusty, litter-strewn piazze: the sheer, frenetic energy here is astonishing’.3

Thinking through first-place in the historic centre of Naples
Before proceeding, it is important to tease out what ‘first-place’ might mean in relation to Naples. As 
Paula Mota Santos proposes in her editorial to this special issue, ‘first-place’ can be understood at its 

146 

  N. DINeS

most elementary level as a physical location that is assigned the symbolic and performative role as 
primogenitor of a social identity. A ‘first-place’ in Italian urban contexts is ordinarily associated with 
the term centro storico; an idea that brings to mind images of cobbled streets, piazzas and ancient 
buildings but one which is also bound up with institutional and public discourses about civic identity, 
urban history, heritage and tourism. However, it is important to note that the centro storico is a relatively 
recent concept, having first emerged during the late 1950s in planning debates about the deleterious 
impact of postwar urban growth (Dines 2012, 29–32). During the social and political upheavals in 
Italy of the 1970s, the term centro storico became subsequently charged with political significance as 
residents campaigned for rent controls and sanitary improvements to their central neighbourhoods. 
It was only in the 1980s, that the term entered into everyday usage (replacing the more generic cen-
tro) and would begin to be deployed by the tourism and heritage industries. Thus, while, the centro 
storico can be considered a form of ‘legal positivism’ (Herzfeld 2015, 9) that separates the ‘historic’ 
from the ‘modern’, it is also a popular designation that over the years has been invested with diverse 
and conflicting meanings.

According to current planning language, the centro storico of Naples officially coincides with the 
pre-1945 city in order to distinguish it from the disorderly expansion of the postwar period, which 
means it includes late nineteenth-century suburbs and the old cores of smaller settlements absorbed 
by Naples during the early twentieth century. The principal historic hub of the city is located along 
the waterfront: an immense urban area of roughly 17 km2 with approximately 250,000 inhabitants. 
However, in popular terminology, the centro storico refers to the section of the old city that lies to 
the east of San Martino hill, which therefore (and crucially) excludes the more salubrious, upper-
middle-class eighteenth and nineteenth century districts of Chiaia, Mergellina and Posillipo to the 
west. Since the 1970s, the Greco-Roman core of the centro storico has been dubbed the centro antico 
(ancient centre) and is the location of some of the city’s principal monuments. To complicate mat-
ters further the original settlement of Naples is not located in this area but on a nearby promontory 
overlooking the sea. Vestiges of this first ancient Greek settlement,4 amount to a few ruined parapets 
that are currently fenced off by a construction site. Given its location off the beaten track, this ‘very 
first-place’ has never been incorporated into mainstream tourist itineraries and remains a destination 
for the more intrepid, curious visitor – be they Neapolitan or from outside the city. Therefore, it would 
be more appropriate to speak of the co-presence of accumulated first-places in Naples that speak to 
the complex history of this city.

For the sake of this article, I concentrate on the area that is most commonly associated in popular 
parlance and tourist publicity with the centro storico, which has been the focal point of urban regener-
ation and which continues in large part to be dominated by a low-income or ‘popular’5 residential pop-
ulation, despite middle-class return and the settlement of a sizeable number of international migrants 
over the last two decades. However, the centro storico has not always been the place most associated 
with tourism in Naples. During the 1980s tourists and some (middle-class) Neapolitans commonly 
considered it ‘off-limits’ on account of earthquake damage, traffic congestion and its links with organ-
ised and petty crime. Still today it competes with other sites in the city (the hilltop residential districts 
that offer the famous panoramic vistas) as well as the nearby holiday islands and archaeological sites.
Initiatives by a succession of centre-left administrations after 1993 to revitalise this area sought 
precisely to resituate tourism in place. Concerted efforts were made to replace the extra-urban imagery 
traditionally associated with Naples (the view of Vesuvius and the Gulf) with new urban symbols in the 
centro storico, such as pedestrianised piazzas. These initiatives fed into a broader strategy of overturn-
ing the dismal international reputation of Naples and of mobilising tourism and heritage as resources 
that might resuscitate the city’s ailing economy (Dines 2012). However, exposed to the vagaries of city 
life and more unpredictable than the competing attractions of Capri, Sorrento or Pompeii, the centro 
storico has incessantly found itself reduced to the status of regional transport hub or, as occurred during 
the trash crisis between 2007 and 2010, blacklisted by the global media and tourist operators.6 Thus, 
over the last twenty years, dominant local narratives about tourism and heritage in the centro storico, 
articulated particularly by politicians, the press and middle-class residents, continually talk of the need 

 

  147

to reappraise and safeguard the cultural delights of the city against a backdrop of negativity. Visitors to 
Naples have constituted a sort of ‘virtual’ urban class who, endowed with honorary citizenship, have 
directly influenced debates about the city’s transformation. If an aspect of Naples is imagined to be 
disagreeable to the tourist-citizen, then it is considered detrimental to the whole of the city (Dines 2012, 
185–187). In other words, tourism in the centro storico has ultimately been perceived and narrated as 
precarious. It is not about affixing the centro storico into networks of international urban tourism but 
perpetually renegotiating its place on this map.

Finally, it is important to note that the centro storico has not always been central to collective identity 
formation in Naples, or to dominant ideas about local built heritage. On the contrary, until the late 
1980s much of the centro storico was widely considered eminently dispensable. After the 1980 earth-
quake, local political and business elites were still drawing up proposals for wide-scale demolition, 
while residents evicted from their homes campaigned for high-rise public housing units in the centro 
storico to halt their transfer to the periphery. In the meantime, many members of the Neapolitan 
middle class preferred to shun the old city altogether: following a major exodus from the centre after 
the Second World War, their social and cultural lives had been played out in the modern residential 
districts encircling the centre. Thus the growing insistence on tourism in the centro storico since the 
early 1990s has not simply been accompanied by investment in new infrastructure and the restoration 
of monuments but has involved a complex and contested process of redefining the significance of 
this space for Neapolitans and visitors, and has resulted in longstanding internal class divisions being 
reconfigured in terms of differing levels of ‘heritage consciousness’ (Dines 2016, 104, 105).

A sightseeing tour in ‘the largest historic centre in Europe’7
Until recently, bus tours in Naples would skirt around the historic centre, before progressing to the 
calmer hilltop sites with their panoramic views over the city. In 2013 the main sightseeing company 
added a shorter and cheaper route inside the ancient core of the historic centre. Instead of the usual 
double-decker buses, this tour takes place in an open-top minibus that is small enough to navigate the 
narrow, crowded streets and which allows passengers greater exposure to the sensory stimuli of the 
street than if they were sitting in the ‘protectionist’ shell of a coach (Larsen 2001, 89).8 When I took 
the tour in July 2014, I was the only passenger, and so on this occasion the principal sensation was one 
of mild discomfort, even if the passersby brushing against the side of the bus appeared uninterested 
in my presence. The impression, based on observations during frequent returns to the city, is that the 
historic centre tour is less popular than the traditional, longer itineraries and that it operates as an 
optional extra rather than the centrepiece of the local sightseeing industry.

Nevertheless, the attempt to connect the historic centre to a particular tourism discourse about 
the city’s cultural heritage is ostensible in the pre-recorded audio commentary that accompanies the 
tour. This pays far greater attention to anecdotes and traditions associated with the historic centre and 
which are preserved in its present-day atmospheres, than it does to describing the various monuments 
encountered on route. As we turn into a street locally known for its musical instrument shops, ‘we 
plunge into the atmosphere of the eighteenth century’; when we drive past bars and pizzerie, we are 
told of the ‘overwhelming aromas of food’ and recipes that are the stuff of ‘folklore’. At the same time, 
the city of the past is frequently portrayed as turbulent and unpleasant, as if to distance it from today’s 
historic centre and to suggest that the physical and social changes that have occurred during history 
have been for the better. Hence, the pedestrianised Piazza Dante (today a popular football pitch for 
local youths) was once more ‘lively and chaotic’ when it hosted travelling fairs and horse races; the 
slum clearance after the 1884 cholera outbreak led to the removal of ‘dark oppressive streets’ and 
helped make Naples ‘one of the most beautiful cities in the world’; while the erection of imposing fas-
cist buildings around Piazza Matteotti replaced ‘crumbling buildings’ and provided the city with new 
infrastructure. All of this commentary unfolds against the backdrop of the driver constantly hitting 
the horn at vehicles and pedestrians that stray across our path. Once dismounted from the minibus at 

148 

  N. DINeS

the end of the forty-minute round trip, the ticket seller explains that the tour is in part aimed at those 
tourists who would not feel confident to venture into the alleyways themselves.

Sensing Naples: disentangling the city’s allure and repulsion for tourists
From tourism industry narratives about the historic centre, I want to now turn my attention to visitors’ 
divergent perspectives of Naples, and consider the extent to which the city centre is a focal point. In 
order to do this I examine the thread of online reader responses to a New York Times article entitled 
‘Seduced by Naples’ published in December 2013 (Donadio 2013).9 According to its author, Rachel 
Donadio, Naples is a beguiling, contradictory city. At one point she declares that ‘earthy, squalid, 
slightly menacing Naples […] is one of the most romantic cities in the world’. Much of the newspaper 
article focuses on the centro storico (although without actually naming it). However, the significance 
of this central area in terms of tourism and heritage is continually undermined by the juxtaposition 
of attractive and disagreeable aspects. Thus,

the area is now a warren of dingy, narrow streets, churches, pizzerias and shops’, while [Caravaggio’s] unfathom-
able painting is tucked into the tiny church inside a palazzo so unassuming and smog-stained that an unwitting 
visitor could walk past it entirely.

Two things appear to be implied: first, that the ‘real’ Naples needs to be unearthed before it can be 
named and located, second, a visitor’s enjoyment of the city cannot be dislocated from the unappealing 
sensory experiences that accompany it.

In many ways Donadio’s article is typical of travel writing produced on Naples, in particular through 
its deployment of paradox and hyperbole to present the city.10 More interesting are the responses from 
readers who effectively highlight key dilemmas facing tourism in the city. Roughly a third of the 139 
comments are terse and peremptory: Naples is either the most beautiful city in the world or a hellhole 
to be avoided at all costs. However, the majority of comments, for the most part positive, take pains 
to explain the reasons for their judgments.

Like the article, enthusiasm and distaste for the city are both articulated through recourse to con-
tradictions. For instance, one commentator from North Carolina asks ‘How can a city have beautiful 
filth?’ (Arclight, NorCal), while another’s introspection suggests a degree of unresolved self-conflict: 
‘My overwhelming desire was to get out – not a typical reaction for me to cities, since I was born and 
raised in NYC and have lived in cities most of my life’ (SKK, San Francisco).

The visual spectacle of different sights – frequently reduced to generic references to ‘culture’ and 
‘history’ – competes with other sensory experiences: the smells of pizza and trash, the sounds of dia-
lect and crazy traffic. Indeed, the ‘scopic regime of the sightseer’ that John Urry has argued to have 
traditionally held sway in tourist experiences of heritage cities (Urry 1999), here plays second fiddle. 
Instead, the greatest emphasis is placed on the affective impact of Naples: its bigger-than-life reputation, 
its liveliness, the need to be street smart, and so on.

Other US cities such as New York are sometimes used as yardsticks. We are thus told that Naples 
‘makes Manhattan seem like Mayberry’ (Tony, Hatteras NC). The comment that provokes the most 
interactive feedback is posted by SW from Utah who frames her/his distaste for Naples with the fol-
lowing incipit: ‘Listening to recommendations to visit Naples is exactly the same as recommending 
that European friends visit Detroit during their trip to the US.’ In one reply, Avina (NYC) suggests 
‘If people want predictable but beautiful, they can go to places like Utah or Florence. If they want 
excitement and culture, they go to NYC … or Naples.’ The implication is that ‘SW’ is not attuned to 
comprehending the fascination of Naples. Commentators deflect commonplaces about ‘superficial’ 
tourists onto those who are not willing to move beyond the immediate negative impressions of the 
city. As Giuseppe (Greenwich Ct) retorted, ‘Dear guy from the middle of nowhere … Stay in UTAH 
and enjoy your processed big mac!’

The common suggestion that Naples offers respite from the typical urban experience of the global 
North chimes with Western fantasies about Italy ‘as a signifier of tradition and authenticity standing 

 

  149

against globalisation’ (Hom 2015, 11). However, here the fantasy is not about picturesque hill towns 
but one of urban grittiness. As one reader, Max Cornise from New York claims: ‘The most appeal-
ing thing is that Naples will be slow, very slow, to globalise … they are not jumping on the Michael 
Bloomberg “make us pretty” bandwagon.’ The city is seen to offer an escape from mundane global 
forces, not only in the pursuit of the exotic, but because it entertains nostalgic desires for an unadorned 
and non-standardised urban life.

The positive comments on Naples often allude to elements of risk. More than one person mentions 
that they were aware that crime was an issue before visiting Naples but they were able to overcome their 
apprehensions to enjoy the city. The unpredictability of first visiting Naples is framed as a quintessen-
tially precarious condition that elicits feelings of anxiety but also ultimately a sense of emancipation.
However, although most commentators will have likely spent a lot of their time in the centro storico 
(but for the usual excursions up to hill-top suburbs for the panoramic views), the centre is almost never 
explicitly referenced but is subsumed within generic enunciations about the nature of Naples. This 
geographical indistinctness can be explained by the prioritising of emotional-, smell- and sound-scapes 
over specific visual coordinates. Moreover, the city also lacks internal social differences. Neapolitans 
are essentially all the same. They are, for example, ‘tremendously messy [but] also extremely sociable 
and open’ (Davide, Madrid). There is no sense that, like anywhere else, collective identity is cut across 
by social difference or that its formation might be bound up with particular places. In the readers’ 
descriptions and interpretations of the city, no first-place or centro storico is singled out: there is just 
Naples and its aura of effect.

Locals in a tourist contact-zone: contested first-place
The paucity of references to the spatial and social structuring of the city in these visitors’ experiences 
of Naples contrasts markedly with local people’s interactions with tourism and heritage in the centro 
storico. To illustrate the conflicting understandings among Neapolitans about tourists in the historic 
centre, I draw briefly here on a previous two-year study of the transformation of Piazza Plebiscito, a 
former car park turned into a giant pedestrianised public space in 1994 and since promoted by city 
administrators and the local media as a tourist attraction and civic forum (Dines 2012, 136–141). 
Adapting Mary Louise Pratt’s well-known formulation, Piazza Plebiscito can be understood as a tour-
ist ‘contact zone’ where ‘cultures meet, clash and grapple with each other, often in contexts of highly 
asymmetrical relations of power’ (Pratt 1991, 34) and where subjects ‘engage with representations 
others have made of them’ (1991, 35). In particular, I want to concentrate on two interviews, the first 
with two employees of a council-run tourist information centre located on the edge of the piazza and 
the second with an unlicensed street vendor whose pitch was in the piazza itself.

The tourist centre employees – both of whom had recently moved from residential districts to live 
in the centro storico – articulate a detached, ‘civic’ discourse about the relationship between the new 
piazza and tourism. Piazza Plebiscito can only become a tourist attraction if it is first ‘re-appropriated’ 
by the citizens of Naples, echoing the city administration’s rhetoric about boosting civic pride through 
the regeneration of public spaces. As one of the employees exclaimed:

Tourism today demands a convivial relationship with citizens. You would never go to a place where people are 
unfriendly. Piazza Plebiscito is not part of an exclusive tourist itinerary. It’s an itinerary for Neapolitans where 
tourists also go to find local people.11

The employees imagine the figure of the Italian and international tourist as someone drawn to encoun-
ters  with  the  ‘natives’  rather  than  simply  someone  who  visits  historic  monuments.  However,  the 
piazza’s new tourist status is, at the same time, perennially endangered by local people – principally 
residents of the surrounding low-income neighbourhoods – who continue to misuse the piazza, for 
instance by crossing the pedestrianised space on mopeds or by organising rowdy games of football. 
The attention to public behaviour and an urgency to establish the limits of ‘civicness’ in order to 
encourage and safeguard tourism, preside over more banal questions such as the absence of public 

150 

  N. DINeS

amenities in the piazza. Socially and spatially circumscribed, these recalcitrant elements, which some 
of the NYT commentators might have considered key to the city’s general allure, here represent a 
source of anxiety. This is heightened by the fact that the ‘citizens’ who have ‘reappropriated’ the piazza 
on a daily basis are those very local users who are censored for their (mis)conduct. Tourism and the 
pedestrianised piazza are thus both perceived as civilising processes that espouse ideal futures in the 
face of a continually disruptive present.

The street trader – a resident of the adjacent Spanish Quarters, one of the poorest neighbourhoods 
in central Naples – welcomes tourists as a supplement to his unsteady income. The rise in earnings does 
not just come from increased sales of crushed ice drinks but from his creative ability to extract a higher 
price by engaging tourists in conversation (especially foreign ones) and providing them with advice: 
‘when tourists come with their expensive watches, we tell them: “Look, remove it, because people are 
eyeing you up”’.12 Ideas about heritage in Piazza Plebiscito are defined according to everyday social 
relationships with the space. So, the restored colonnade is appreciated because it provides a beautiful 
stage for a beer with his mates and a suitably secure place to roll and smoke joints. Meanwhile, officially 
promoted functions of the piazza are reinterpreted or simply not recognised. For instance, by occupying 
the piazza, the whole notion of the passeggiata – the afternoon stroll – is undermined. Likewise, the 
street trader speaks in terms of ‘acceptable’ illegality: although unlicensed, he keeps his pitch clean and 
tidy for the sake of piazza’s visitors but also by doing so he can convince local municipal police that he 
means well. It is this daily infraction of rules and the subversion of official discourses about heritage 
that ultimately brings him into contact with outsiders in the new symbolic heart of the centro storico.
To cite Pratt again, the street trader uses ‘the [tourist’s] language to construct a parodic, oppositional 
representation of the [tourist’s] own speech’ (Pratt 1991, 35). But as Pratt adds, among the perils of 
the contact zone are ‘miscomprehension, incomprehension … and [the] absolute heterogeneity of 
meanings’ (1991, 37). The trader manipulates the idea of cleanliness (and with it the council’s ‘civic’ 
narrative about tourism) to vindicate his irregular presence in the piazza, while his traditional, off-the-
books business is a knowing nod to the rough-and-ready allure of Naples, and yet an overemphasis 
on orderliness would risk spoiling the exoticised image of an ungroomed city with its ‘litter-strewn 
piazze’ (to recite Time Out) and ‘beautiful filth’ (as one of responses to the NYT article put it).

Conclusion
The three examples discussed above disclose the multiple levels of ambiguity that constitute the historic 
centre as a heritage tourism site and its position as a ‘first-place’ in constructions of urban identity. 
These ambiguities arise out of the co-presence of opposites: the centro storico as both a central and mar-
ginal site that enchants and repels visitors; Naples as a city that generates excitement and anxiety, and 
which is cut across by internal and external discourses about safety and risk, the ‘civil’ and the ‘uncivil’.
Given its concentration of facilities, sights and transport networks, the majority of tourists spend a 
lot of their time in the centro storico, regardless of whether they are aware that this is the local moniker 
or whether they distinguish this area from the rest of the city. At the same time, the idea of the historic 
centre as the monumental heart of the city and, hence, the provenance of much of the city’s tangible 
cultural heritage is undermined by the pre-eminence attributed to affect and the everyday in tourist 
and native representations of Naples.

In this article, I have argued that the concept of precariousness can be usefully adopted to elucidate 
the contradictory nature of tourism in Naples. At a rudimentary level, precariousness indicates the 
insecure state of tourism in Naples and the common sentiment that its development is vulnerable to 
various adversities: organised crime, uncollected garbage, general disorder and so on. Simultaneously, 
I have drawn on a more nuanced genealogy, especially pronounced in the postwar history of Naples, 
whereby precariousness is understood to be poised between anxiety and liberation, and, as such, my 
interpretation of the term departs from the one-dimensional, negative meaning that it commonly 
possesses in current sociology and anthropology.

 

  151

This reading of precariousness ostensibly resonates with the idea of the sublime that Dovey and 
King (2012) have employed to account for the anxious and awe-filled pleasure of ‘slum tourism’ in 
South and South-East Asia.13 Dovey and King focus primarily on the aesthetic gaze of visitors faced 
with the ambiguous spectacle of impoverished informal settlements. In my article, precariousness 
refers instead to a broader experience of tourism: to tourists beguiled and bewildered by the reputation 
of Naples; to local administrators and tourist operators aware and attuned to the city’s raw allure but 
apprehensive that this might potentially deter visitors and hinder the construction of a higher-minded 
cultural heritage; and to local residents who negotiate the tension between a rehabilitated sense of civic 
pride and the everyday (as well as tourists’ mixed feelings towards the city) as a means to make money 
and to continue to exist in the centro storico on their own terms. As such, precariousness points to an 
underlying impasse: the unpredictability of tourism as a social practice and economic resource. The 
perspective proposed here is not meant to downplay the structural and political forces at play in the 
historic centre or the uneven distributions of power and wealth that shape experiences of tourism. 
Rather, it poses a challenge to those perfunctory accounts that see in the advent of a visitor economy 
the inevitable ‘museumification’ and gentrification of historic centres. Indeed, thinking about heritage 
tourism in central Naples in terms of precariousness not only underlines the dilemmas of this par-
ticular case, but can also encourage a more incisive analysis of how the incongruous consequences of 
tourism in historic urban areas with disadvantaged populations are governed, perceived and resisted.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

 The citation is from the introduction to Time Out’s online guide to Naples. The page’s subtitle alerts the reader to 
a particular kind of urban tourist experience: ‘Stressful and chaotic it may be, but Naples remains a fascinating, 
compelling city’. See:  http://www.timeout.com/naples/features/439/naples-overview, accessed 29 February 2016.
 On this point, is important to underline that the development of heritage tourism industries in major Italian 
cities over the last 20 years does not simply reflect a shift in local government strategy but is also the outcome of 
bottom-up initiatives that have responded to the increasing precarization of labour markets and the devaluation 
of service-sector jobs. See, for instance, Emanuela Guano’s study of self-organised tour guides in the historic 
centre of Genoa (Guano 2015). Meanwhile, regarding the traditional trio of Rome, Florence and Venice, heritage 
tourism experiences are far more complex and conflict-laden than is often made out: for instance, on tensions 
around the 2002 European Social Forum in Florence, see Dines (2012, 32); on the relationship between tourism 
and World Pride in Rome in 2000, see Luongo (2002).
 http://www.timeout.com/naples/features/439/naples-overview, accessed 29 February 2016. The question of local 
organised crime, particularly in the wake of the international success of Roberto Saviano’s book Gomorrah 
(2007) and the television series of the same name, has at times contributed to the city’s ambiguous affective 
allure. See, for instance, a previous paper where I consider the (enthusiastic) misconceptions about the Camorra 
in British travel writing (Dines 2013, 413). More recently, the global interest surrounding Elena Ferrante’s 
Neapolitan tetralogy, and especially its vivid description of the city’s popular quarters, has added an extra layer 
of attraction to Naples (Mah 2016). The impact of the above two issues upon local tourism certainly warrants 
further investigation, but here the focus of interest is to specifically consider the heritage and tourist vocation 
of the city’s historic centre through a reframed notion of precariousness.
 This settlement known as Parthenope was founded in 680BCE, some 200 years before a new city (Neapolis) 
was established 2 km to the northeast.
 The adjective ‘popular’ (popolare) is used locally to categorise the class composition of much of the centro storico 
which consists in a mix of petite-bourgeois, working-class, unemployed and precariously employed inhabitants.
 It is worth noting that just as Naples has long lived in the shadow of Italy’s principal tourist cities (Rome, 
Florence and Venice), according to national and international tourist imaginaries it has also persistently held a 
marginal position in relation to more illustrious local destinations such as Capri, the Amalfi Coast and Sorrento. 
A commonplace during the 1980s, and one that still lingers to today, saw Naples as the disreputable place that 
tourists necessarily avoided or temporarily endured prior to arriving at these idyllic spots.
 These words are pronounced at the beginning of the pre-recorded audio commentary of the ‘Hystorical [sic] 
Centre – Cathedral’ tour organised by City Sightseeing Napoli (30 July 2014) All citations in this section are 
from the same text.
 For a discussion of sightseeing bus tours as constituting a particular tourist experience, see Larsen (2001) and 
Farías (2010).

152 

  N. DINeS

9. 

 For a discussion of qualitative analysis of user comments in media research, see Weber (2014). It is important 
to stress that the divergent readers’ responses to this article are not unique but are a common feature of recent 
(English-language) travel reports on Naples. See, for example, Cohane (2014) and Dunford (2016).

10.   For a discussion of similar rhetorical techniques used by the British media in its descriptions of Naples, see 

11.   Interview with author, 24 June 1999.
12.   Interview with author, 11 June 1999.
13.   For a broader discussion on this recent form of tourism in the global South, see the 2012 special issue ‘Global 

Perspectives on Slum Tourism’ in the journal Tourism Geographies (volume 14 issue 2).

Dines (2013).

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Nick Dines is research fellow in the Department of Criminology and Sociology at Middlesex University. His research 
explores the social and cultural politics of heritage-making in Italian cities and Mediterranean Europe more broadly. 
Recently he has started to work on the relationship between migration and cultural heritage in southern European 
port cities. He is the author of the monograph Tuff City: Urban Change and Contested Space in Central Naples (2012).

References
Berardi, Franco. 2009. Precarious Rhapsody: Semocapitalism and the Pathologies of the Post-Alpha Generation. London: 

Minor Compositions.

Cohane,  Ondine.  2014.  “See  Naples  and  …  You’ll  Find  a  City  on  the  Rise.”  The  Guardian,  April  26.  http://www.

theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/26/naples-napoli-new-art-scene.

Connolly, Kate. 2010. “Berlin: Poor but Sexy, and Oozing Creative Wealth.” The Guardian, January 22. http://www.

theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/22/berlin-new-economy.

Crossa,  Veronica.  2009.  “Resisting  the  Entrepreneurial  City:  Street  Vendors’  Struggle  in  Mexico  City’s  Historic 
Center.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33 (1): 43–63. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
2427.2008.00823.x.

D’Eramo, Marco. 2014. “UNESCOcide.” New Left Review 88: 47–53. http://newleftreview.org/II/88/marco-d-eramo-

Diamond, John, Joyce Liddle, Alan Southern, and Philip Osei. 2010. Urban Regeneration Management: International 

unescocide.

Perspectives. London: Routledge.

Dines, Nick. 2012. Tuff City: Urban Change and Contested Space in Central Naples. New York: Berghahn.
Dines, Nick. 2013. “Bad News from an Aberrant City: A Critical Analysis of the British Press’s Portrayal of Organised 
Crime and the Refuse Crisis in Naples.” Modern Italy 18 (4): 409–422. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13532944.20
13.801677.

Dines, Nick. 2016. “Ethnographic Reflections on ‘Oppositional Heritage Discourse’ in Two Post-earthquake Italian Cities.” 

 22 (2): 102–116. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1053401.

Donadio, Rachel. 2013. “Seduced by Naples.” New York Times, December 13. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/15/travel/seduced-
by-naples.html?pagewanted=all&module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Ar%2C{%222%22%3A%22RI%3A14%22}&_
r=0.

Dovey, Kim, and Ross King. 2012. “Informal Urbanism and the Taste for Slums.” Tourism Geographies 14 (2): 275–293. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2011.613944.

Dunford, Martin. 2016. “Why Naples Doesn’t Deserve to be the Place That Everyone Loves to Hate: Despite Its Dodgy 
Image,  the  Italian  City  is  Full  of  Unique  Charms.”  Daily  Mail,  February  7.  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/travel/
article-3434896/Naples-Italy-unique-charms-tourists.html#comments.

Esposito, Gennaro. 1973. Anche il Colera: Gli Untori di Napoli [Likewise the Cholera: The Infectors of Naples]. Milan: 

Farías, Ignacio. 2010. “Sightseeing Buses: Cruising, Timing and the Montage of Attractions.” Mobilities 5 (3): 387–407. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17450101.2010.494842.

Graburn, Nelson H. H. 2002. “The Ethnographic Tourist.” In The Tourist as a Metaphor of the Social World, edited by 

Graham M. S. Dann, 19–39. Oxford: CABI.

Guano, Emanuela. 2015. “Touring the Hidden City: Walking Tour Guides in Deindustrializing Genoa.” City & Society 

27 (2): 160–182. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ciso.12062.

Feltrinelli.

 

  153

Press.

Herzfeld, Michael. 2006. “Spatial Cleansing: Monumental Vacuity and the Idea of the West.” Journal of Material Culture 

11 (1–2): 127–149. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1359183506063016.

Herzfeld, Michael. 2015. “Heritage and the Right to the City: When Securing the past Creates Insecurity in the Present.” 

Heritage and Society 8 (1): 3–23. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/2159032X15Z.00000000035.

Hom, Stephanie Malia. 2015. The Beautiful Country: Tourism and the Impossible State of Destination Italy. Toronto: 

Toronto University Press.

Larsen, Jonas. 2001. “Tourism Mobilities and the Travel Glance: Experiences of Being on the Move.” Scandinavian Journal 

of Hospitality and Tourism 1 (2): 80–98. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/150222501317244010.

Lorey, Isabell. 2015. State of Insecurity: Government of the Precarious. London: Verso.
Luongo, Michael. 2002. “Rome’s World Pride: Making the Eternal City an International Gay Tourism Destination.” 

GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 8 (1–2): 167–181. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1215/10642684-8-1-2-167.

Macciocchi, Maria Antonietta. 1973. Letters from inside the Italian Communist Party to Louis Althusser. London: NLB.
Mah,  Anna.  2016.  “Elena  Ferrante’s  Naples,  Then  and  Now.”  New  York  Times,  January  14.  http://www.nytimes.

com/2016/01/17/travel/elena-ferrante-naples.html.

Moe, Nelson. 2002. The View from Vesuvius: Italian Culture and the Southern Question. Berkeley: University of California 

Molé,  Noelle  J.  2010.  “Precarious  Subjects:  Anticipating  Neoliberalism  in  Northern  Italy’s  Workplace.”  American 

Anthropologist 112 (1): 38–53. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1433.2009.01195.x.

Muehlebach,  Andrea.  2013.  “On  Precariousness  and  the  Ethical  Imagination:  The  Year  2012  in  Sociocultural 

Anthropology.” American Anthropologist 115 (2): 297–311. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/aman.12011.

Negri, Antonio. 2015. “Pablo Iglesias Con Toni Negri.” Otra vuelta de Turka, May 31. Accessed July 6, 2015. https://

www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOpTvdOXF9U&feature=share

Neilson, Brett, and Ned Rossiter. 2008. “Precarity as a Political Concept, or Fordism as a Exception.” Theory Culture & 

Society 25 (7–8): 51–72. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0263276408097796.

Pratt, Mary Louise. 1991. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession: 33–40. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25595469.
Rossi,  Ugo,  and  Alberto  Vanolo.  2013.  “Regenerating  What?  The  Politics  and  Geographies  of  Actually  Existing 
Regeneration.” In The Routledge Companion to Urban Regeneration, edited by Michael E. Leary and John McCarthy, 
159–167. London: Routledge.

Salazar, Noel B. 2007. “Towards a Global Culture of Heritage Interpretation? Evidence from Indonesia and Tanzania.” 

Tourism Recreation Research 32 (3): 23–30. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02508281.2007.11081536.

Saviano, Roberto. 2007. Gomorrah: Italy’s Other Mafia. London: Macmillan.
Urry, John. 1999. “Sensing the City.” In The Tourist City, edited by Dennis R. Judd and Susan S. Fainstein, 71–86.  

New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Weber,  Patrick.  2014.  “Discussions  in  the  Comments  Section:  Factors  Influencing  Participation  and  Interactivity 
in  Online  Newspapers’  Reader  Comments.”  New  Media  &  Society  16  (6):  941–957.  doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1461444813495165.


