75

2  C. Clifton  & C.

Spencer  (ed)  The  Faber
Book of Food, London:
Faber  & Faber,  1993.

3  M. Visser,  The  Rituab
of Dinner: the origins,
evolution,  eccentricities
and meaning of table
manners, London:
Grove  Widenfeld,
1991.

4  D. Bell & G. Valentine,

Consuming  Geographies:
we are where we eat,
London:  Routledge,
1997.

5  R.  Barthes,

Mythologies, London:
Jonathan  Cape,  1972.

6  P.C. Reynolds,  'Foods

and  Tourism:  an
Understanding  of Sus-
tainable  Culture',
Journal of Sustainable
Tourism, Vol.1  no.l,
1993,  pp.48-54.

7  see  also  S. Mennell,  A.

Murcott  & A.  van
Otterloo,  The
Sociology of Food;  eat-
ing, diet and culture.
London:  Sage,  1992.

8  Heath  in  Clifton  &

Spencer,  op. cit.  note
2.

9  F.T. Cheng, 

'Musings
of a  Chinese  Gourmet'
1954,  in: Clifton  &
Spencer  op. cit.  (note
2).

10 P.  Bourdieu,

Distinction:  a social cri-
tique of the judgement
of taste, Routledge,
London,  1984:
Barthes,  op. cit.  (note
5); Visser,  op.  cit
(note  3); Mennell  op.
cit  (note  7); P.C.
Reynolds,  'Culinary
Heritage  in  the  face  of
tourism'  in  Progress in
Tourism, Recreation  and
Hospitality
Management, vol.6,

cultures, new ways of eating and drinking, optimistically to previously untapped
pleasures and to new worlds—for  some the key motivation for travel. The Faber
publication  The Faber Book of Food2  sees  its  text  as  'a  celebration  not  just  of
gastronomic  pleasures  but  also  of  the  world  that  lies  behind  them'.  The
contents' list conjures  up  a veritable heritage  of culinary  cultures  all intricately
tied  in  with  the  physical  environment,  climate,  social  constructs,  heritage,
tradition  and  ritual,  all  serving  to  define  different  cultures,  'the  world  that  lies
behind them'.3 Here cooking is deemed central to culture, viewing it  'as part of
culture  which  remains  closest  to  people  and  matters  most'.  Bell  & Valentine4
even observe that  'commentators increasingly see consumption  as the  dominant
contemporary  cultural  force'. In this respect the opportunity  to share food  with
the  indigenous  population  is  arguably  central  to  the  new  tourist  experience.
Barthes5  argues  that  'food  is  a  system  of  communication.  To  discover  the
constituents  of  the  system,  it  is  necessary  to  create  an  inventory  of  food
products, techniques  and habits, and from  this observe patterns of  signification'.
Reynolds's6  suggestion  that  'the  system  of  attitudes,  beliefs,  and  practices
surrounding  food  may  be  an  important  tool  in  unravelling  the  overall  culture
pattern  of  a  community'  furthers  the  significance  of  food  as  key  to  cultural
identity; again meanings beyond the physical are stressed.7

This  is  also  evidenced  in  popular  media  representations  in  which  food  is
portrayed as central to culture and community living. Examples include: the role
of the pub  in  Coronation  Street  and  Eastenders  (UK 'real life'  soaps); while  the
'barbie' is constantly alight in Neighbours (Australian); street parties and village
mechouis  (France)  are  seen  to forge  and  cement  relationships.  Heath  recalls  a
London  wartime  street  party  with  'groups  of  people  eating  a  jolly  communal
meal in  the  same streets where bombs had fallen'.8  Food also offers  a poignant
reminder of cultural identity and traditions. Champagne, turkey, oysters and foie
gras immediately remind people of their  culture, their national rituals and their
associated  meanings.  Brits  in  the  UK  recall  Christmas  spent  with  family  in
Australia—the  dinner  eaten  outside,  sweltering  in  extreme  heat  with  all  the
trappings of an  British  Christmas  (the turkey roast) in  abundance  on the table;
Christmas would not have been Christmas otherwise!

Almost  unconsciously  we  carry  with  us  our  gastronomic  heritage.
Definitions  of heritage  do not reveal this; popular definitions  express heritage as
'property  that  descends  to  an  heir'  or  'something  transmitted  by  or  acquired
from  a  predecessor  or  predecessors;  a  legacy',  leaving  open  the  nature  of  the
'property'  or  the  'something'.  What  is  usually  meant  by  heritage  in  popular
culture is art,  architecture,  dance, folklore, language, literature, music, religion,
and  theatre.  Gastronomy  however  is  rarely  seen  as food for  inclusion  in  such
listings—although  it  is  generally  seen  as  a  part  of culture  it  is not  seen  as  an
aspect of heritage.

Cheng's9  encouraging  observation  that  'culture  has  something  to  do  with
eating,  drinking,  cooking,  living  and  taste'  reiterates  the  central  role  of food  -
sustenance  and  beyond  are  addressed.  The  'living  and  taste'  acknowledgement
recognizes the  symbolism imbued  and  the  societal  differences  between  cultures.
Cheng's  'something'  lacks  in  definition:  what  consumers  actually  derive  from
engaging  in  cultural  activities is rarely  enumerated.  The significance  of food in
society, however, has been frequently  addressed.10

The  recent  growth  in  importance  of  gastronomy  to  tourism  might  be

76

Jetske van Westering

no.l, 1994.

11 W. Wagner,  'Moderni-

sation  and Prestige:
tourism  as a motor of
social  change', in W.
Nahrstedt  & T.P.
Kombol, Leisure,
Culture and Tourism in
Europe: the challenge
for  reconstruction  and
modernization in
communities,  1997.

12 D. Chaney, The

Cultural Turn:  Scene-
Setting Essays on
Contemporary  Cultural
History, London:
Routledge, 1994.

13 Bourdieu, op. cit.

(note 10).

14 Wagner, op. cit. (note

11).

15 N. Elias, 'On Human

beings and their emo-
tions: a  process
sociological  essay' The-
ory, Culture and
Society, Vol.4, 1987.
pp.339-361.

16 Wagner,  op. cit. (note

11).

17 J. Urry, Consuming

Places, London:  Rout-
ledge, 1995.

18 A.L. Webber,  'Matters
of Taste: a joyous day
on  the trail of spires
in the fenlands'. Daily
Telegraph  Weekend,
31st October, 1998.

19 Reynolds, (1993) op.

explained  by examining  its place  in  contemporary  popular  culture.  Wagner11
states that  culture  should not be seen in its narrow  definition  of 'the Arts', but
as  'the norms  and behavioural  patterns  of everyday  life in a society  whatever
they  may be'. Culture  has different  meanings  in different  cultural  traditions -
cultural  groups have identifying  characteristics  and persistent forms  of patterns
of  thought,  value  and behaviour  (attitudes  and tastes)  which  represent  their
'life-world'.12  Accessing  culture  and distinguishing  oneself  through  taste has
been seen as one of the priorities of twentieth century society - the race to gain
social prestige is on.13 Wagner argues that  acquiring the culture of the targeted
social  group  spurs  the need  for  learning.14  As the result  of this  process of
'learning  culture'15  a  continuous  redefinition  of culture  takes  place,  with the
original  owners  of  a  social  class  defending  their  group  by  showing  newly-
acquired  behavioural  patterns.  Experiencing  the life-world  of others,  of those
living  in the country  visited  is becoming  increasingly  a  part  of contemporary
holidays;  visiting  other  countries  and  being  exposed  to  foreign  culture  can
introduce such new patterns to travellers and thus increase their prestige.16

This  paper  argues  that  increasing  prestige  through  travel  is maximised by
tourist  exposure to and engagement  in the foreign  culture.  Thus, for example,
heritage  without  active participation  from  the viewer is dead  heritage -  it is a
heritage that can be 'consumed' or 'gazed at'17 without being felt, lived through
or  internalised  and digested.  Gastronomy  is that  part  of culture  heritage  that
can, literally, be internalised  and digested. Gastronomy requires participation, it
offers  an opportunity to engage  actively in cultural  experiences and encounters
with locals, the basic everyday experiences that  food and drink offer.  The paper
therefore  argues  that  gastronomy  can play  a  decisive  role  in  the  traveller's
experience and that the place of heritage and gastronomy in culture, as well as
the synergy between heritage and gastronomy, warrant  academic  attention.

Gastronomy, Heritage and Tourism: old acquaintances  reviewed.
Gastronomy,  as a current  focus  for tourism, has two key strands;  'gastronomy
tourism'  and gastronomy  as an integral  aspect of tourism  (including the return
journey  and duration  of stay). However  food  (even  as gastronomy),  travel and
heritage  go back  a  long  way; they  are old Mends  and literary  and historical
texts  chronicle  their  association  extensively.  Given  the  essential,  sustaining
nature of food, to the early traveller it also offered  a qualitative element  to the
journey  undertaken;  it  clearly  provided  a  focal  point.  The raison  d'etre  of
Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales lay in the sheer fun of food,  travel and folklore, for
example. The journey for these  early  pilgrims  epitomised  the ethos  that  travel,
food  and story  telling  (folk-lore/heritage)  were  not separate  identities  but an
holistic entity. The pilgrims represented all walks of society; they revelled in the
en-route  interaction,  the  cross-cultural  exchanges,  the  social  experience  of
eating and drinking and travelling, the journey and the entertainment, the lively
interchanges  being all part of a serious intent. These early travellers had got it
right;  the  travel  and the destination,  were  as one, inseparable;  the whole  a
veritable  adventure,  with  food  and travel  of equal  importance to their  heritage
destination at Canterbury.

More recently Lloyd Webber's account of his Fenland trip,18 'a joyous day on
the  trail  of spires  in the fenlands  with  the Brig  and a  gamey  lunch  of local
delicacies',  reiterates  the inseparable  nature  of the relationship  between  food,

Heritage and Gastronomy: the pursuits of the 'new tourist'.

77

cit  (note  6).

20 A. Poon,  "The  "new
tourism  revolution"',
Tourist Management,
Vol.15, no.2,  pp.91-
92,  1994.

21 Ibid.

22 Reynolds  (1993)  op.

cit. (note  6)  and
Urry,  op. cit.  (note
17)

23 G. Richards  (ed)

Cultural Tourism in
Europe, Wallingford:
Cab  International,
1996.

24 M. Shackley,  Visitor

Management:  case
studies from World
Heritage Sites, London:
Butterworth  -  Heine-
mann,  1998.

25 Elias op. cit  (note  14)
and  Richards,  op.  cit
(note  23).

26 D. Pearce, Tourism

Today, Harlow: Long-
man,  1987.

27 B. Martin  & S.  Mason.

'The  Future  for
Attractions' Tourist
Management Vol.14,
no.l,  1993, pp.34-40.

28 Ibid,  and  also  Poon

op. cit  (note  20).

29 Wagner  op. cit  (note

11).

heritage and travel. His account renders food very central, even essential, to the
heritage excursion  experience,  the latter  offering  650 pre-18th  century  church
buildings in Norfolk alone. It thus seems strange that the links between food and
tourism have, until very recently,  been so underplayed  by the industry. Reason
might be cited in the dominance of the physical aspects of tourism over the past
three  decades -  the interest being  more on  sun  and  sand  at  a cheap price: the
'alternatives'  'beyond the physical'19 being,  until  recently,  beyond  the  financial
scope of the mass. Similarly, gastronomy also commanded  a role once-removed
from  the  mass;  people  judging  good  food  in  good  restaurants  was  the
prerogative  of  the  rich.  The  increased  accessibility  of  alternatives  has  dictated
the  1990s  cultural  focus  of  destination  choices.  This  has  had  a  substantial
impact  on  the  industry  with  the  more  informed  consumer  achieving  designer
label status  'the new tourist'20 for example.

The  'new  tourist'
Strangely  enough  it  appears  that  renewed  consumer  interest  today  serves  to
epitomise what was well-versed about travel in Chaucer's England. Poon argues
that there has been a shift  away from  the old tourism product, characterised by
standardisation,  and inflexible  packaged  holidays, towards  a flexible, segmented
and  more  authentic  tourism  experience.21  Both  Reynolds  and  Urry  also
acknowledge  the  decline  in  physically-orientated  holidays  and  the  rise  of
culturally-orientated  choices.22  Richards's  assertion  that  'cultural  tourism  is
clearly  an  important  and  growing  market',23  and  Shackley's  claim  that
'throughout  the  world  heritage  tourism  is  experiencing  a  period  of  rapid
growth'24 serve to underline this departure. These moves reinforce the changing
nature  of  the  tourist,  and  the  growth  in  the  tourists'  determination  to  be
involved in their holiday, reflecting  a need to engage and learn with culture and
alternative  modes  of  experience  being  the  focus  of  their  interest.25  Pearce
observes that travellers today are especially concerned  'with not just being there
but with participating, learning and experiencing the 'there' they visit'.26 Martin
& Mason  support  this view.27  They  contend  that  'the  thoughtful'  consumer  is
more  concerned  with  the  quality  of  life  rather  than  the  quantity  of  life.  They
also suggest  that  a  demand  for  greater  authenticity  and  real experiences could
well  fit  with  the  priorities  of  the  thoughtful  consumer.  Poon  identifies  these
consumers  as  the  'new  tourist'.  She  characterises  them  as  more  experienced,
more  environmentally  aware,  more flexible, more  independent,  more  quality-
conscious and harder to please than ever. In contrast to the old tourists they are
spontaneous,  unpredictable,  hybrid  in  nature,  and  they  no  longer  consume
along  linear  predictable  lines.  They  seek  to  experience  something  different,
showing at the same time a greater understanding,  appreciation  and respect for
what  they  have  gone  to  see.  Martin  & Masons'  'visiting  with  a  purpose'  is
reflected  in this view.28

An  explanation  for  the  new  behaviour  of  the  traveller  can  be  found  in
Wagner's concept of tourism as a motor for social change (1997).29 Recognising
the  contributions  of Bourdieu  and  Elias he  argues  that  an  increase  in  prestige
cannot be obtained by an increase in economic capital  alone; cultural  capital is
of  crucial  essence.  He  states  that  'the  cultural  elite  set  the  new  standards  of
fashionable  thinking,  dressing, speaking  and behaving in  general'. The  cultural
elite  is  constantly  seeking  and  inventing  new  ways  in  which  to  distinguish

78

Jetske van Westering

30 Shackley,  op. cit.

(note 24).

31 Ibid.

32  Urry, op. cit. (note

17).

33 Shackley, op. cit.

(note 24).

34 Poon,  op. cit. (note

20).

35 D. MacCannell,

'Staged  authenticity:
arrangements  of social
space in tourist
settings' American
Sociological  Review,
Vol.79, no.5,  1973.

36 Reynolds, op. cit.

(note 6).

37 J.C. Novelli  , 'Novelli's

Secrets', The  Times
Magazine, 26 Septem-
ber,  1998, p. 81.

themselves;  others  view  their  behaviour  and  follow  suit.  Tourism  is  an
important source for new ideas and behaviour: travelling to other countries  that
seem more advanced can provide the inspiration.

Heritage  Tourism: beyond bricks and mortar.
Heritage tourism in the UK alone is proving of substantial economic significance.
In  1995 sixty-seven  million  visits  to historic  properties  generating  more  than
£200  million in revenue were recorded.30  Given such  interest the management
of  heritage  sites  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult.  Shackley  warns  that  the
World Heritage sites are at risk citing:

'sheer pressure of numbers at peak times creates problems of safety, reduces
the pleasure of the visit and adversely affects the fabric of monuments and
buildings.'31

In  contending  that  visitors to sites  'deserve to receive an experience  that is
something  special,  something  unique',  she  acknowledges  that  large  visitor
numbers,  congestion  and pollution  affect  the quality  of the experience  offered.
Heritage  sites  are  symbols  of history;  they  are  cultural  icons.  The key idea
associated with visits to these sites is to see them in reality, or as Urry states to
'consume' or to 'gaze'.32 In many places gazing is limited to a specified time slot,
as in the tomb of Nefertari,  Egypt,33  whilst  visiting is restricted  to official  tour
groups, negating  any possibility of experiencing the surroundings  alone, to the
full.  Although  this  might  provide  satisfaction  initially  —the  'been  there,  done
that'  approach—it  is likely  that,  having  consumed  a number  of places  in this
way,  the  traveller,  certainly  the new tourist,  will  weary  of standing  on the
outside  looking  in, recognising  that  the experience  is  being  devalued.  Poon's
observation  that  the new tourist  shuns  regulation  adds  reinforcement  here.34
MacCannelTs concept of 'authenticity'  further  compounds the issue; he suggests
that  what  tourists  seek  mainly  is  the  authentic,  but  that  this  is  frequently
thwarted  since  those  being  gazed  upon  start  to construct  artificial  sites  which
keep  the  inquisitive  tourist  away.  35  Panoramic  viewing  stages  are set up;
parking  is  made  easy,  but  at  a  significant  distance,  and  further  tourist
attractions  detract;  tourist  spaces  are  thus  organised  around  what  he  calls
'staged authenticity'. If the tourist is confined to the bounds of the 'tourist gaze'
opportunities  to go beyond  the superficial,  to discover  the authentic,  are lost.
Reynolds points out that as authenticity becomes more popular it becomes more
expensive.36 He argues that food is perhaps one of the last areas of authenticity
that the tourist can afford  on a regular basis. The cuisine of another  country is
both accessible and affordable  for the new tourist. Local dishes eaten with eaten
with  the local  population  in a local  setting,  may provide  the tourist  with the
closest  of  encounters  with  the  authentic,  and  with  a  sense  of  having
communicated or maybe even briefly having been a part of that  culture. In this
way  gastronomy  can play a decisive role; the visit  and the culinary  encounter
complementing  each other giving a fuller  cultural experience.

Foods, dishes and drinks have a geographical identity; when interviewed for
French television Novelli37, a top chef and proprietor of five London restaurants,
was asked about his hometown (in France). His response caused the interviewer
immediately  to refer  to the dish  for which  the town  was renowned,  the food

Heritage and Gastronomy: the pursuits of the 'new tourist'.

79

38 Bell & Valentine, op.

cit.  (note 4).

39 J.M. Van Westering,

'Gastronomy, the
Importance of
Combining Tastes' in
J.S.A. Edwards (ed)
Culinary Arts and Sci-
ences,  Global and
National Perspectives,
1998.

providing  a  map  of reference.  Similarly  some  foods  are  all  too readily  identified
with  a  country  or  a  region,  such  that  it  is  difficult  to  remove  them  to  another
culture.  For  some  indefinable  reason  local  products  taste  better  in  situ.  They
frequently  complement  each  other,  and  are  combined  in  menus  of the  region of
origin—the  Charente  melon  filled  with  home-brewed  Pineau  des  Charentes  for
example.  This  is  also  the  case  for  European  wines  (distinguished  by  the
Appellation  Controlee  system)  and  some  cheeses  (similarly  controlled);  other
produce  and  dishes  similarly  have  firm  roots  in  their  region  of  origin.  Bell &
Valentines'  (1997)  concept  of  'eating  the  locality'  acknowledges  that  food  and
all  its  associations  are  rooted  in  the  locality.38  It  has  been  argued  previously
(van  Westering,  39  that  gazpacho  served  in  Deptford,  is not  gazpacho. Although
the  food  of  the  holiday  is  readily  available  back  home,  the  ingredients,  the
cooking  methods  can  all  mirror  the  ethnic  origins,  but  cannot  evoke  the
memories,  the  combinations  of  physical  and  cultural  environment.  Its  serving
warrants  a  hot  flamboyant  country  permeated  by  the  smell  of  sun  drenched
tomatoes  and  olives  fresh  from  the  market.  Tourists  soon  recognise  the
Spanishness  of  paella,  but  transportation  from  Spain  results  in  a  cultural  loss.
Such  loss  reflects  the  heat  of  Spain,  the  noise—really  the  bedlam—that
surrounds  the  meal.  No  English  restaurant  could  cope  with  the  raised  decibels
associated  with  normal  Spanish  conversation;  no  refined  English  person  could
suck  the  heads  off the  gambas -  neither  could  wine be drunk  from  a  well-worn
leather  bottle  passed  around  for  all  to  share.  Arguing  that  the  ambience  of  the
meal  is  as  much  part  of  the  experience  as  the  food  and  drink  itself  these
experiences  cannot  be replicated  elsewhere.

Food is accompanied  by  a complex heritage. This is its key contribution,  the
essence  of its  relationship  to  tourism;  this  is what  renders  it  a  focal  interest  for
tourism.  Although  it  is  almost  impossible  to  reproduce  the  meal  of  another
country  authentically,  as  it  is  indeed  removed  from  its  roots  and  the  culture
which created it, it is possible to use the dish for reminiscing and for  exchanging
experiences  with  others. In  this  way  the  new  tourist  benefits  from  the  holiday;
the  cultural  gain  from  people  met,  and  experiences  interchanged  has  social
value back home  and  serves in  the race for prestige.

Conclusion
The text has argued for the significance  of the impact of gastronomy  on  tourism.
Gastronomy  has  been  presented  as  the  vital  driving  force  of  differing  cultures
and  as the key to sustaining and developing tourism. As an  important  motivator
of  holiday  choice  it  is  seen  to  animate  cultural  interaction,  revealing  extensive
opportunities  for  further  pleasure  and  involvement.  For  all  tourists,  though
perhaps  here  for  the  'new  tourist'  in  particular,  where  all  facets  of  the  holiday
are  crucial,  gastronomy  provides  the  opportunity  for  valued  experiences  to  be
internalised.  In  consuming  the  locally produced  food  and  drink  the local area is
absorbed;  intrinsic  pleasures  are  embodied  and  savoured,  the  tourist  becomes
one  with  the  locality,  if  only for  a  brief  period.  Such  involvement  provides  the
memories,  the  lingering  mementoes  so  indelibly  linked  with  the  enjoyment  of
good food,  good wine and equally good table companions. In  this manner  tourist
expectations  can  be  fulfilled,  and  will  thus  encourage  future  participation;  the
tourist  will return,  or may seek similar experiences  elsewhere, and will certainly
enthuse  and  recommend.  Calvino expressed  this  as early  as 1981:

80

Jetske van Westering

401.  Calvino, Under the

Jaguar Sun, London:
Minerva, 1981.

The true journey  implies a  complete change  of nutrition,  a  digesting  of the 
visited  country  -  its fauna  and flora and its culture  (not  only  the different 
culinary  practices  and  condiments but  the  different  implements  used  ...). This
is the only kind  of travel that  has  a meaning  nowadays,  when  everything
else visible you  can  see on  television without  rising  from  your  easy chair.'  40

in  seeking 

In  this  way  gastronomy  can  be seen  as  a  force  in  sustaining,  developing  and
tourism  appears  highly  dependent  upon
promoting  heritage.  Heritage 
gastronomy 
the  heights  of  a  qualitative  cultural  experience.
Gastronomy  however  appears  to  be both  independent  and  gregarious  in  nature.
It  plays  a  role  in  promoting  tourism  per  se;  it  plays  a  role  in  constructing  and
sustaining  heritage;  it plays a  catalyst role in  addressing  a  tourist  attraction  mix,
and  in  its  own  right  it  has  become  a  recognised  tourist  attribute.  If,  long  after
the  event, gastronomy  is the key pleasure  recalled,  the  industry  might  do well  to
heed  the  message  that  food  is  edifying  the  nature  of  tourism.

Heritage  and  Gastronomy: the  pursuits  of the  'new  tourist'. 

81


