Remembering the buildings of the British labour movement: an
act of mourning
Nick Mansﬁelda and Myna Trustramb*

aSchool of Education and Social Science, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK;
bCentre for Museology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
(Received 21 July 2011; ﬁnal version received 8 March 2012)

This paper outlines the buildings of the British labour movement. Hitherto,
labour activists, historians and heritage professionals have focused on the arte-
facts and archives as opposed to the many historic buildings of the labour
movement. The narrative closely follows the course of the industrial revolution
and the accompanying development of the labour movement from its beginnings
in the eighteenth century. Examples cover a wide range including the artisan
trade societies, Utopian Owenite settlements and purpose-built radical and trade
union premises. The authors make a brief critique of the paper itself as an
example of the intangible heritage of the labour movement. It concludes with a
consideration of why these buildings are relatively neglected and suggests that
the notion ‘don’t mourn, organise’ might contain some clues as to speciﬁc rea-
sons for their neglect.

loss; mourning; Owenites;

trade societies;

Introduction
Organisations within the British labour movement often remember their glorious
past. But when it comes to the time-consuming and often costly work of preserving
archives, objects and sites of signiﬁcance the work falls – with a few exceptions
described below – to dedicated individuals and small groups rather than large
labour movement or heritage organisations. Most activists like to look back but not
look after. This is especially true of the built heritage, the subject of this paper. The
paper begins with the buildings of the eighteenth-century trade societies and moves
on to cover those of religious nonconformity and early nineteenth-century political
radicalism. The buildings of the Owenite socialists and Chartist movements are out-
lined and those associated with the consumer cooperative movements, along with
those of the trade unions and Mechanics Institutes. It goes on to cover late nine-
teenth-century structures from the socialist and Clarion movements and from the
Labour Party.

The paper concludes with a discussion of why these buildings, despite being the
subject of passionate political and personal attachments, have for the most part been
allowed to disappear. There are the practical, ﬁnancial and political reasons that lead

*Corresponding author. Email: myna.trustram@o2.co.uk

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

440

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

to the loss of so much of the built heritage. However, the paper digs deeper than
this and speculates that inner processes to do with loss and mourning are at play
here. The interplay of internal subjective affects with the external collective life of
the labour movement is evident in both the history that is narrated and the feel of
the paper. This dynamic between the psychological and the social lies at the heart
of psycho-social research which questions the traditional dualism between reason
and passion, between rational thought and affect (Clarke and Hoggett 2009). The
paper hints that a possible future direction for heritage studies lies in an exploration
of this dynamic between the social and the psychological.

The material culture of the labour movement has been studied and collected since
the 1950s. Worker-historians like Ruth and Eddie Frow who founded the Working
Class Movement Library in Salford, and John Smethurst are amongst the pioneers.
In the 1960s, the worker-historian, John Gorman, conducted a major survey of his-
torical trade union banners and also collected some incidental material on buildings
of the labour movement (Gorman 1973, 1985). From the 1980s, curators in social
history museums were inﬂuenced by Gorman, the History Workshop movement and
the Oral History Society and some developed an interest in the artefacts of the labour
movement. Gorman’s inﬂuence was also felt internationally in Scandinavia and in
the work of Andrew Reeves in Australia (Reeves 1988, Stahl 1988).

British labour heritage has been extensively covered in the Social History
Curators Group’s journal, Social History in Museums, and particularly in two con-
ferences on labour history in museums (Bott and Mansﬁeld 1988, Mansﬁeld 1991).
These sparked research and publications on the material culture of the labour move-
ment centred on the redevelopment of the People’s History Museum in Manchester
from 1989 (Mace 1999, Mansﬁeld 2000, 2003, 2004, Clark 2001, Martin 2002,
Mansﬁeld and Uhl 2003). Recently, these material culture studies have fed back
into social and political history research (Horner et al. 2008).

There is little literature on labour movement buildings as opposed to other mate-
rial evidence, so the authors have drawn on personal communications (1990–2011)
with the worker historians mentioned above plus others including Raphael Samuel,
Peter Carter and Gillian Lonergan. Whilst conventional architectural history, from
Pevsner onwards, has mainly ignored this type of building, the paper does draw on
some regional studies of labour movement buildings (Pevsner 1951–1974, Salveson
1987, Pye 1995, Fowler and Wyke 2009). Two joint conferences of the Society for
the Study of Labour History, the Ironbridge Institute and English Heritage were
devoted to the subject: The Landscape of Labour History in 1991 and Red Bricks
in 1996, at which the keynote speaker was Raphael Samuel, who referred to the
subject in some of his later work (Samuel 1996, 1998). These conferences attracted
large and concerned audiences including academics, trade union ofﬁcials, museum
staff, Workers Education Association tutors, planning ofﬁcers and students. English
Heritage also published a short article in their house journal and Bob Hayes pub-
lished a piece on the wider interpretation and commemoration issues relating to
working-class buildings (Cherry and Mansﬁeld 2002, Hayes 2004).

The industrial revolution
Britain created the world’s ﬁrst Industrial Revolution. From the late eighteenth cen-
tury, proﬁts from trade, fuelled by imperial expansion, and slave-produced goods,
were invested in industrial production; a process supported by both landowners and



441

middle-class entrepreneurs. Investment for the Industrial Revolution was centred on
iron and steel, coal, canals and railways and above all cotton textiles and the factory
system. Located in the north and west of Britain away from traditional centres of
wealth in the south and east, the Industrial Revolution continued its mushroom-like
growth. The Napoleonic Wars aided rather than hindered the process, with a
demand for military products and the opening of new world markets for British
exports. Large areas of the north of England became urbanised, with Manchester
becoming the world’s ﬁrst industrial city and the emergence of the world’s ﬁrst
labour movement (Thompson 1963). Its birth was in a troubled period, with the
climax of the long wars with France coinciding with the worst excesses of the
Industrial Revolution.

The early nineteenth century also witnessed political conﬂict as the ﬁrst work-
ing-class demands for the right to vote collided not only with the traditional sources
of older privilege from monarchy, aristocracy and gentry, but also with the new
dynamic breed of industrialists and factory owners. However, the emergent labour
movement did not primarily develop in the new factories whose large numbers of
unskilled women and children who were prepared to work for low wages were
initially difﬁcult to organise.

in handicraft

Trade societies
Instead, the early labour movement was linked to an older artisan tradition. Skilled
trades formed ‘trade
working men (women were not admitted)
societies’, small clubs to defend their institutions and customs: apprenticeship, tradi-
tional prices for work, pride in expertise and choice in the length of the working
day (Prothero 1979). Loose national networks of clubs arose with ‘houses of call’,
which were the ﬁrst buildings of the labour movement and were usually in meeting
rooms of public houses (Leeson 1979). They were located in the back streets of the
new industrial cities, for example, The Braziers’ Arms Salford, which was the house
of call for the tinplate workers, but were also in smaller, market towns where there
was a steady demand for goods not yet made in factories. Houses of call were
secret meeting places where artisans discussed politics and their trade and where
available work was publicised. Houses of call formed networks all over Britain and
Ireland for unemployed or striking tradesmen ‘on tramp’ to seek work or be helped
on their journey. In their early years, trade societies were underground, illegal and
embattled and endured legal prosecutions and police raids from allied employers
and government who saw the societies’ sturdy democracy as subversive and alien
(Mansﬁeld 1979).

The People’s History Museum in Manchester has reconstructions of trade society
meeting rooms showing their regalia, similar but often predating that of free masons.
Many of the houses of call can still be found as ordinary public houses and can be
easily identiﬁed from the adoption of the name of the trade, for example, Carpen-
ters Arms, Wheelwrights Arms. The heraldry of the trade is sometimes displayed on
the outside swinging sign, even when its use as a meeting place for the union has
long since ceased. Some trade societies died out as their handicraft skills were
replaced by mechanised processes (e.g. those of handloom weavers), but others
extended their inﬂuence to new factory-based trades. As textile mills and coal mines
expanded in the nineteenth century, the new factory trades learned from trade socie-
ties to develop their own unions. This new mass membership and bureaucratic trade
unionism later needed different sorts of meeting places and buildings.

442

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

Nonconformity
Another major inﬂuence on the British labour movement was nonconformist reli-
gion: evangelical Protestantism, separate from and usually in opposition to the
state-sponsored Church of England. From the late eighteenth century, denominations
such as Congregationalists, Baptists and Methodists (especially their Primitive
Methodist offshoot) developed self-governing working-class congregations. Their
ﬁrst act was to self-build a simple chapel to conduct their own services, which,
especially in rural areas or isolated pit villages, was seen as a rebellious act against
the establishment. Usually built by farm workers, coal miners or quarrymen,
nonconformist chapels were a snub (in stone or brick) both to their Church of
England religious opponents and to their political and economic oppressors, be they
gentry,
large farmers or industrialists. Chapels became centres of working-class
resistance, where workers developed their own culture of self-education, running
their own administrative affairs, and honing skills in oratory. Knowledge learnt in
chapels was readily transferable to other working organisations like friendly socie-
ties, cooperatives, political groups and trade unions, with the latter in particular
using chapels for meetings until acquiring their own buildings. Though mostly now
demolished in urban areas, hundreds of rural chapels still dot the British country-
side, with many being converted into holiday homes in recent years.

Radicalism
In the early nineteenth century, a radical political culture was being formed, coinci-
dent with both the Industrial Revolution and the wars with France. The democratic
ideas of Thomas Paine (forged in the American Revolution) were blended with reli-
gious nonconformity and early socialist experimentation to create a mass movement
in opposition to the corrupt and oligarchic old establishment. Early radicalism
embraced both working-class and middle-class elements, as industrialists themselves
were often excluded from the British political process by the landed gentry. It was
mainly an urban phenomenon and quickly developed its own premises in the
burgeoning towns. These could be the adaptations of nonconformist premises, like
the Ancoats Free Church built by the Bible Christians in Manchester (Tomlinson
1989). This was opened in 1821 on the second anniversary of
the Peterloo
Massacre, where 60,000 workers in Manchester, demanding the right to vote, were
dispersed violently with over 400 killed and wounded. The mass working-class
movement of the Chartists (see below) met at the Ancoats Free Church in the
1830s, as other venues were denied them, and it continued to house radical activi-
ties throughout its history.

Other radical premises were secular. London’s newly built Rotunda played an
important role in the Reform Crisis of 1831–1832, which led to the ﬁrst reform of
Parliament and a slight extension of the franchise. A surviving pencil drawing
shows a central meeting room with a crowded (all male) stage and audience
(Figure 1). Sometimes substantial, these radical meeting halls developed facilities
for refreshments. Largely unadaptable for other purposes, few of the buildings
survive now. The Ancoats Free Church was demolished in 1988, despite a protest
campaign identifying it with the heritage of the Peterloo Massacre. The ﬁnal
decision was made by the Labour Party-controlled local authority which still then
identiﬁed old buildings with dirt, recent industrial decline and oppression.



443

Figure 1. Drawing of radical meeting at the Rotunda, London, c. 1831. (Photo credit:
People’s History Museum, Manchester)

Owenism
In the new cities, industrialists often provided workers with housing. It was usually
of poor quality and lacked any urban infrastructure. Some more thoughtful industri-
alists built model housing for their workers alongside facilities such as shops,
schools, chapels and meeting places. This process was highly developed by Robert
Owen, the proprietor of the New Lanark mills in Scotland (Harrison 1969). A pio-
neer of Utopian socialist ideas, Owen was determined to mould the attitudes of his
workforce and form the characters of their children with a unique range of institu-
tions to change behaviours in the work place and through leisure activities. Around
his mills, he constructed schools, kitchens and dining rooms, temperance halls and
lecture theatres to impose a collective solution to the problems of the industrial rev-
olution. New Lanark was visited as a marvel of its age by many inﬂuential people,
though most were deterred by Owen’s increasing eccentricity and extreme secular-
ism. Owen and his family invested their considerable wealth in building ﬁve rural
communities in the UK and USA. All these failed and ruined the Owen family’s
ﬁnances. Probably cheaply constructed, no evidence of Owen’s colonies survive
today in Britain, though New Lanark itself was rescued from dereliction from the
1970s and as a World Heritage Site, has been successfully regenerated as a tourist
destination, in which Owen’s ideas on architecture have been interpreted, with a
range of visitor attractions.

Working-class radicals united with more moderate middle-class reformers in the
agitation to secure the Reform Act of 1832. Though this was the ﬁrst reform of the
old Parliament, where votes and seats could be bought and sold, it was still only a
step towards democracy, securing the vote for only 5% of the population. Most
workers felt tricked and betrayed and turned to radical solutions including Owen’s
ideas that attracted a considerable working class following. In some obscure parts

444

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

of England, in a parallel way to religious nonconformity, there are still some mate-
rial remains of Owenism to be found. In the Fens of East Anglia, a utopian socialist
community was founded at Manea Fen, Cambridgeshire in 1838. There was a
brickyard, a dining hall where ‘food would be cooked by a special scientiﬁc appara-
tus’, windmill and a cricket square, but everything ended in disaster. Most of the
colonists were urban artisans, keen to settle on cheap land in clean air away from
the city smogs, but few of them made successful farm workers. Little thought was
given to marketing or the practical export of goods produced in one of the most
isolated spots in England. Local opposition and harassment was fuelled by accusa-
tions of immorality with rumours of women held in common by the colonists,
leading to quarrels and the breakup of the community early in 1841. The main
building was still occupied as ‘Colony Farm’ until its demolition in the 1950s.

At the same time in the nearby market town and port of Wisbech, the Owenite
movement was led and funded by James Hill – a ship owner and banker (Mansﬁeld
1985). He built a Hall of the People in 1837, after engaging in correspondence with
Owen about its dimensions. The latter insisted on very high ceilings in the main
hall to accommodate his theories about the need for space to disperse ‘bad airs’ or
miasmas, as well as kitchens big enough for mass catering. This became the centre
for a lively working-class movement,
involving several hundred people, which
incorporated an infant school, library and cooperative store. There was a debating
club and a Mechanics Institute, run on the same lines as those discussed later in this
article. Visited and approved by Owen himself, the movement continued for three
years, until James Hill’s bank failed and with it the regular funding for Owenite
activities. Hill’s daughter Octavia was educated at the Infants school and in adult
life she went on to be a social reformer and one of the founders of the National
Trust, one of the UK’s principal preservation bodies. The Wisbech Hall of the
People though survives as the bar area of the community-based Angles Theatre,
though when the building was converted in 1978, a new ﬂoor was inserted, dividing

Figure 2. Owenite Hall of the People, Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, 1837. (Photo credit: Nick
Mansﬁeld)



445

the old Owenite ceiling space (Figure 2). Robert Owen went on to become the god-
father of the international cooperative movement, and his ideas on architecture
retained a surprising resonance within the whole British labour movement.

Chartism
As outlined earlier, the dissatisfaction with the limited franchise under the Reform
Act of 1832, based on strict property qualiﬁcation, led to further radical agitation.
This culminated in the struggle for the People’s Charter, with the Chartists becom-
ing the world’s ﬁrst working-class political movement. After the rejection of its
mass petitions by Parliament, some Chartists took up arms and various clashes with
the state occurred in 1839, 1842 and 1848. In the 1970s, John Frost Square, named
after the leader of the revolt, was built on the site of the bloody Chartist defeat at
the Westgate Hotel
in Newport, south Wales. The Labour council belatedly
commemorated the event by commissioning a mural to liven up this rather dour
civic space. In the nearby Blaenau Gwent mountains, the Chartist ‘Caves’, where it
is claimed that weapons were stored and pikes were forged, still survive in an
almost legendary way.

Other buildings retain a more subtle remembrance of the long clash between
labour, employers and the state. The city of Durham in north-east England was the
seat of a Palatine Bishop, who with neighbouring landowners dominated the
surrounding coalﬁeld. The County Hotel in the centre of the old city symbolised
the power of the established Church of England and its supporting gentry and coal
owners. A series of bitterly fought conﬂicts in the nineteenth century established
the strong, Methodist-inﬂuenced Durham Miners’ Association. Once a year this held
the Durham Miners Gala, where a mass procession of miners and their families,
with their trade union banners and brass bands marched through the city and took a
salute from their political heroes, assembled on the balcony of the County Hotel.
This annual occupation of ‘enemy territory’ still continues as a celebration of regio-
nal working-class identity, often from left-wing pit villages, which were referred to
as ‘little Moscows’, long after the closure of the last coal mine in the area.

Following the defeat of armed revolts,

the Chartists sought other ways of
achieving their goals. One method was to harness the ‘back-to-the-land’ movement
of Robert Owen and others, but with a political twist. This was proposed by Fergus
O’Connor, a member of the Irish minor gentry, who emerged as the main Chartist
leader. In 1845, he pledged his personal wealth in establishing the Chartist Land
Company. This bought six country estates, breaking them up into smallholdings of
1–4 acres, and erecting bungalow farmhouses and outbuildings. These were
allocated to subscribing Chartists by lottery with the aim of them becoming self-
sufﬁcient peasants and as propertied leaseholders would gain the land qualiﬁcation
to register for the vote, as deﬁned by 1832 Reform Act.

The mass Chartist membership in new cities, keen to leave the dirt and squalor,
subscribed their hard-earned money to over 600 local branches of
the Land
Company. However, as with the Owenites, most were factory hands or skilled arti-
sans not farm workers. O’Connor’s ideas of ‘spade husbandry’ were hopelessly
impractical in a highly capitalist British agriculture. The colonists found it difﬁcult
to grow and market produce, especially in face of the hostility of local farmers and
gentry. The inability of colonists to pay rent to the Land Company caused the
whole system to collapse in debt and recrimination. This was not helped by

446

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

O’Connor’s increasing erratic decision making, which led to mental illness and his
conﬁnement. Like Owen, O’Connor planned his settlements with social infrastruc-
ture like schools and meeting rooms and some of these buildings along with the
smallholdings are still in existence. The best preserved is the Snig’s End settlement
in Gloucestershire, where despite conversions over the years, some buildings retain
original features and are listed as architecturally important by the government. The
‘Hall of the People’ here survives as the village pub though it still has the separate
entrances for boy and girl school children along with the high ceilings for clean air
beloved by O’Connor as well as Owen (Figure 3). It is probable that O’Connor
himself designed the standard bungalows which formed the centre of each small-
holding: ‘on all the estates today, the shape is instantly recognisable, the centre
brought forward under a ﬂattened gable, a little ornament cut under the peak, a
chimney at each end of the roof tree, and the roof steeply sloping down at the back
to the working rooms behind the living quarters’ (Chase 2007, pp. 247–270, McKie
2008, p. 511).

O’Connor’s building designs may have been more practical

than his overall
grand plan. For despite the defeat of collective working-class efforts at utopian
in some areas the colonists with green ﬁngers and business
community living,
acumen (often from the same Chartist families) bought their functional bungalow/
farmhouses and their surrounding plots. They turned to specialised market garden-
ing and the nearness of cities like Birmingham to the Dodford settlement
in
Worcestershire and London to O’Connorsville near Chorleywood in Hertfordshire,
meant that they had a future in supplying produce to the city masses, a tradition
which still continues. These plans of the Owenites or Chartists may appear fantastic
in the early twenty-ﬁrst century, and the construction of buildings like Queenwood
or the Hall of the People in Snig’s End, seems foolhardy. However,
this is a
condescending view, given our hindsight, as no one in the early nineteenth century
knew the limitations and possibilities of the recently industrialised age.

Figure 3. Chartist Hall of the People, Snigs End, Gloucestershire, 1846. (Photo credit:
Cyfarthfa Castle Museum and Art Gallery, Merthyr Tydﬁl)



447

Cooperation
Meanwhile, a less utopian working-class initiative, no less inspired by Robert
Owen, was developing in the heartland of the industrial North. In 1844, a group of
mainly cotton mill workers established a cooperative shop in Toad Lane in
Rochdale, outside Manchester (Figure 4). Initially small scale, it sold basic unadul-
terated foodstuffs, free of the expensive ‘tommy shops’, company stores run by the
factory owners themselves. It offered membership of the society and a yearly
dividend. The business-like methods were highly successful and the ‘Rochdale
principles’ of the ‘Pioneers’ spread to the whole of Britain and internationally. Local
self-governing cooperative societies built a range of premises needed to provide
‘cradle to grave’ goods and services to working-class communities in industrial
areas. Premises ranged from small corner shops through suburban depots to huge
urban department stores that rivalled the private ‘grand magasin’. Factories of all
kinds, depots, mills, port facilities, funeral parlours and farms all became part of the
co-op empire. By the late nineteenth century, the cooperative movement dominated
working-class retailing in the UK, even rural areas. Co-op premises hosted many
social activities – the Women’s Guild, debating, dramatic and musical societies –
that reinforced their cultural dominance amongst the working class.

In the early twentieth century, the cooperative movement attracted innovative
and idealistic young architects. Its 86-strong architects department was responsible
for such striking modernist projects as the 1939 Luma Lamp factory, outside Glas-
gow (listed and saved in 1988) and the Trafford Park Flour Mills, near Manchester
that in 1903 was the largest industrial building in Europe. Co-op architects went on
to pioneer the ﬁrst British supermarket in Portsmouth in 1949 (Morrison 2003).

Figure 4. Rochdale Pioneers’ Museum, Toad Lane, Lancashire, 1844. (Photo credit:
National Co-operative Archives)

448

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

Figure 5. Yorkshire Miners’ Association headquarters, Barnsley, Yorkshire, 1874. (Photo
credit: Nick Mansﬁeld)

Trade unions
Trade unions developed from small embattled locally-based societies to national
bureaucratic but professional organisations. Initially only with skilled workers, and
charging high subscriptions, trade unions found a niche role in the well-developed
late-Victorian industrial structure, and proved themselves useful to manufacturers.
Wealthy unions erected their own regional or national headquarters buildings. In
1874, the Yorkshire Miners’ Association erected what is claimed as the world’s ﬁrst
purpose-built trade union headquarters in Barnsley (Figure 5). Unlike the coopera-
tives, British unions were largely uninterested in architectural innovation. Instead,
they wanted to show status, just like their industrial employers or any large private
or civic organisations of the late-Victorian period. In their buildings, trade unions
employed backward-looking rhetoric and images inherited from the trade societies
that also illustrated Victorian trade union regalia, membership emblems and banners.
So in 1860, the skilled Manchester and Salford Printers named their new headquar-
ters building Caxton Hall, after the ﬁfteenth-century English pioneer and follower of
Gutenburg.

The growth of British industrial and unskilled unions in the late-Victorian period
saw a new generation of buildings, often on a mammoth scale, provided by the
cheaper subscriptions from a mass membership. The coal miners in regions such as
Durham and South Wales could each boast a membership of 250,000. With high
accident
rates and occupational diseases, some unions invested in impressive
convalescent homes for sick and injured members, like that of the Lancashire and
Cheshire Miners at Blackpool, which rivalled any of the neighbouring grand hotels
along the resort’s seafront. In this period, trade unions developed as major powers



449

in the land which dealt as equals with government. Their national headquarters
buildings, mainly in London, reﬂected their economic and political status.

Nondescript structures with no special design features were also typical of the
wave of twentieth-century trade union buildings, but with the overall growth of
unskilled unions, especially for women, these ofﬁces were sometimes on a larger
and more prestigious scale than in the nineteenth century.

Mechanics Institutes
The prevailing accommodation between British labour and capital also played out
in the Mechanics Institutes movement. From the 1820s, these provided for the tech-
nical educational needs of particularly heavy industries as well as certain elements
of a liberal education. Whilst most were controlled and funded by employers, they
were tremendously popular with skilled working men (women were not members)
thirsty for self-education. By 1860, around 1200 had been established in the UK,
with a membership of around 200,000 (Gorman 1985, p. 60). Many erected their
own premises, usually with employers’ philanthropy, and like trade union buildings
with no particular architectural style. By the turn of the twentieth century, some
Mechanics Institutes had been taken over by local authorities, along with the techni-
cal education that they taught, whilst others developed into technical universities.
Some still survive, the Manchester Mechanics Institute of 1854, famous as the ﬁrst
meeting place of the Trades Union Congress (TUC), was rescued from dereliction
in 1987 by Manchester City Council. The building is now used as a conference
centre and as storage for the People’s History Museum.

Socialism
The growth of what Marx termed scientiﬁc socialism in Britain in the 1880s,
coincided with the extension of the franchise to more men in the 1867 and 1884
Reform Acts. However, emerging socialist groups (like the Social Democratic
Federation,
the Socialist League and the Independent Labour Party) were less
successful than the two mainstream political parties in attracting new working-class
voters. These both supported the capitalist system; the Liberal Party encouraged
trade union support with moderate social and economic reforms, whilst
the
Conservative’s appeal was to popular imperialism and a ‘beer and skittles’ culture.
Socialist groups were small, embattled and often quarrelsome. As well as holding
political discussions,
institutions such as bands, choirs,
cycling and drama groups, as well as political discussions. Because of widespread
hostility to anti-capitalist views, they found it difﬁcult to rent premises for their
activities. Pubs in working-class areas were especially out of bounds to socialists,
given the universal support
the Conservatives enjoyed from the brewing
industry. Instead, they sought their own premises in city centres or in the industrial
suburbs. These were modest or medium sized, with a ﬂexible hall and facilities for
refreshments. After initially renting, socialist groups often built their own premises,
sometimes with the members undertaking the building work themselves, or at least
ensuring that
In the
early-twentieth century, socialist decorations were sometimes used in churches with
working-class congregations and left-wing priests, or ‘red vicars’, such as St Mark’s
in Belgrave, Leicester, with its remarkable war memorial windows.

the tradesmen they employed were union members.

they developed cultural

that

450

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

The late-Victorian socialist movement enjoyed the well-publicised support from
artists like the acclaimed Pre-Raphaelite William Morris and Walter Crane,
the
pioneer of the Arts and Crafts Movement and a popular children’s illustrator
(Thompson 1955). Socialists took Morris’ dictum to have nothing in one’s house
that you do not know to be useful or believe to be beautiful to heart, and it became
a badge of honour to decorate their premises in the style of their socialist heroes
(Morris 1882). Sylvia Pankhurst (a member of the family whose name became syn-
onymous with Edwardian campaigns for women’s suffrage) used her art school
training to paint murals for the Hightown Socialist Hall. She was helped by RC
Wallhead, a self-taught painter and decorator similar to Frank Owen, the main char-
acter in the British socialist novel The Ragged – Trousered Philanthropists (1914),
who later became a Labour Member of Parliament. The hall, in Manchester’s east-
ern suburbs, was opened in 1903 by Walter Crane who also painted his own mural.
Such halls saw speeches by luminaries of the socialist and wider labour movements
and enabled local people, in this case Harry Pollitt, the future General Secretary of
the Communist Party of Great Britain, to begin their political career.
Although arguments over policy were common at national

locally
socialists of every stripe worked together to secure common premises, such as the
Hightown Hall. Alternatively, halls were erected by the dominant socialist group in
the locality, as with the Socialist Institute in Nelson, Lancashire (1908), a strong-
hold of the Independent Labour Party. Of the new socialists, only the middle-class
intellectuals of the Fabian Society held aloof from the move to property, conﬁdent
that their establishment links would ﬁnd them premises for their relatively small
enclaves.

level,

Figure 6.
Manchester)

Interior Manchester Clarion Cafe, 1908. (Photo credit: People’s History Museum,



451

The Clarion movement
The ecumenical approach was especially true of the buildings of the Clarion
movement. Established in 1895 in Manchester by the hearty ex-soldier and journal-
ist Robert Blatchford, Clarion was a newspaper and a cycling and rambling club
(Pye 1995). It used proselytising horse-drawn vans, as well as cafes to serve up
vegetarian food and socialist debate. The Manchester Clarion cafe, opened by
Blatchford in 1908, commissioned modern furniture and murals designed by Walter
Crane, who had recently come to the city as head of the School of Art (Figure 6).
To serve their cyclists and ramblers, the Clarion set up rural clubhouses, where
members could stay and enjoy clean country air and socialist fellowship, reviving
some of the ideals of the Chartists and Owenites. After being ejected from rented
premises by hostile rural landlords, Clarion members built their own clubhouses,
usually in a simple bungalow style, perhaps inﬂuenced by Chartism. Typical is the
Clarion Meeting House in Newchurch-in-Pendle, on the wild moors north of Man-
chester. Opened by the charismatic and mercurial socialist M.P. for Colne Valley,
Victor Grayson, in 1907, it still thrives today. Little survives though of socialist
holiday camps, also associated with Clarion but established by independent entre-
preneurs.

The Labour Party
From these small socialist beginnings, the Labour Party grew enormously after the
First World War, forming its ﬁrst government in 1924, only 24 years after its forma-
tion. Local Labour Parties rapidly established their own premises after 1918 as they
saw a real chance of gaining power. They occasionally took over socialist halls, but
always on a larger scale, with provision for social activities such as licensed bars,
dancing, bingo and rafﬂes, which were used to make money for political activities.
Unlike those of the earlier socialists, these were mainly utilitarian in their design and
often cheaply constructed. In a similar way to that described in other papers in this
special edition, sometimes members themselves (particularly building trade workers
or those unemployed in the interwar slump), built them, as a way of keeping costs
down. One example is the Romsey Town Labour Club, Cambridge, opened by Ram-
say MacDonald, the ﬁrst Labour Prime Minister in 1924 (Topman 2006).

in Britain preferred to be autonomous. This

Unlike the northern European model of social democratic and later communist
‘workers’ houses’, discussed in this special issue, individual unions or Labour Party
branches
stemmed from the
decentralised union structure, with skilled unions jealously protecting their social
superiority, and from the distinct localism in urban areas. In addition, some conser-
vative working-class people used Labour halls for social activities and were suspi-
cious of overtly left-wing political activity, particularly after the foundation of the
Communist Party of Great Britain in 1920. Therefore, Britain never developed the
model of united workers’ assembly halls as found in Germany, Denmark, Finland
and elsewhere.

Decline
Between 1945 and 1980, the British labour movement was at the height of its
membership and power. The late-twentieth century saw a decline in activism and

452

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

membership of both trade unions and the Labour Party. Less participation, more
bureaucratic models and amalgamations of the skills-based unions meant fewer
buildings for mass meetings were required. Cheaply-built halls became ripe for
low-grade conversion or demolition. Walton’s (2008, p. 159) description of the
co-op also applies to the whole of the labour movement: ‘It ran into trouble in
the 1960s, in common with other locally based, voluntarist, participatory, demo-
cratic institutions, when it encountered difﬁculty in adjusting its values and
expectations to the new cultures of consumerism and commercial popular enter-
tainment that took ﬂight in that decade’. With the passage of time, the involve-
ment of the labour movement in the construction or use of a building becomes
unknown. This could be on the part of statutory planning authorities but also
the local
the large twentieth-century union
buildings, like that of the Amalgamated Engineering Union in Peckham, London,
have been sold and/or demolished leaving only Congress House,
the London
headquarters of the TUC as a trade union ‘palace’, once so common as national
or regional headquarters.

labour movement

itself. Most of

the Tolpuddle Martyrs in Dorset, consisting of

Much has been lost, but some examples still exist. Some, such as the Romsey
Town Labour Club or the Newchurch Clarion House, are maintained and funded by
the same social activities for which they were set up. Some have become labour
shrines for the victories or heroic defeats of working-class history, like the TUC-
supported complex about
the
Wesleyan Chapel, Memorial Cottages, Martyrs’ Museum and the Dorchester Court
House, which hosts a huge yearly commemoration. The Rochdale Pioneers Museum
has welcomed visitors since the cooperative movement reacquired their original
store in Toad Lane, Rochdale in the 1930s. It has recently received a development
grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund to improve interpretation and facilities,
especially for the thousands of overseas tourists, including Japanese coach parties,
seeking inspiration at the shrine of the birthplace of modern cooperation. Other
labour movement buildings have also become small museums like the remote
Burston Strike School,
in south Norfolk, which commemorates a long-running
school children’s strike started in 1914 for their victimised socialist teachers. Other
redundant buildings like the Blackpool miners’ convalescent home or the co-op
Luma Lamp factory have been successfully converted into housing whilst retaining
the integrity of the original.

From the 1950s to 1960s, worker historians were the pioneers caring for the
material culture of the labour movement, including its buildings. Since 1990, it
has been done, with a few exceptions, by the Society for the Study of Labour
History. English Heritage, the main government body for historic buildings, has
commissioned a new book on the theme (Mansﬁeld in press). It has worked in
partnership with the Society for the Study of Labour History to provide guid-
ance for planners, developers, historians and activists; two conferences were held
in 1991 and 1996. The National Trust has opened a barely altered Chartist cot-
tage and smallholding, at Dodford, in Worcestershire. The Heritage Lottery Fund
has funded a major redevelopment of the People’s History Museum in Manches-
ter, which discusses labour movement buildings as part of its story of the British
working class. Whilst once signiﬁcant sites continue to become redundant and
are often ripe for redevelopment, growing knowledge about
their relevance has
made protection easier (Cherry and Mansﬁeld 2002). The central narrative of
labour movement buildings in Britain is clearly one of decline, but the examples



453

discussed here show that it is still possible to examine at ﬁrst hand the courage,
thrift, ambition, pride and sometimes delusion and foolhardiness displayed by
the world’s ﬁrst industrial working class as they attempted collective solutions to
their individual problems.

Conclusion
Many of these buildings are neglected in part because they have no place within
the dominant heritage discourse, which deﬁnes heritage as grand, tangible and aes-
thetically pleasing (Smith 2006). The issue is not so much over what is said about
the labour movement within this discourse, as it is for, say, indigenous peoples
(Smith 2006, p. 277), but rather its very absence. However, this paper’s description
of the life and death of labour movement buildings indicates the ambivalent rela-
tionship the movement itself has with its history. The wish to forget can be as
strong as the wish to remember (Shackel et al. 2011, p. 293). Heritage practices are
informed by the affective and irrational as well as the rational mind, which might
help to explain the passionate importance placed by some on these buildings and
the actual neglect they suffer. An analysis of this ambivalence and of the assump-
tion that preservation is always desirable would help to shed light on this complex
relationship with the past (DeSilvey 2006, Trustram 2012). Colloredo-Mansfeld
(2003, p. 246) alerts us to ‘The banal fact that material practice revolves around
loss more often than preservation – lustre fades, things fall apart, we eat soup’.
Complexity abounds when natural processes of decay meet the human desire to
both remember and forget. It is not clear quite how much preservation would ever
feel sufﬁcient. Not to mention who should do it.

These buildings have a moral electricity, because they are rooted in issues of
justice. Readers may have spotted that this paper is in itself a piece of intangible
heritage (Smith and Akagawa, 2009). It could be taken as an ‘authorising narrative’
(Waterton 2011, p. 361) which claims the territory of labour movement heritage.
The narrative implies a cohesive, progressive labour movement rather than a com-
plex array of different interests operating in rapidly changing political contexts. If
heritage is a cultural process (Smith 2006), it is worth speculating on what process
this paper is carrying out. Unlike some accounts of labour history (Samuel 1998,
p. xix), it asserts a clear trajectory, perhaps it even apes the grand narratives of the
mainstream heritage narrative. Current activists can locate themselves, or not, within
this trajectory; such identiﬁcation can be inspiring, consoling, dispiriting and so on.
Smith and Campbell (2011) remind us of the old labour movement slogan,
‘don’t mourn, organise’. The reluctance to mourn or grieve exists not only on the
left. President Bush announced on 21 September 2001 that now was the time for
action to take the place of grief at the attack on the Twin Towers on 11 September
2001 (Butler 2004, p. 29). If mourning is a process that helps one come to terms
with loss, then the process of heritage can be imagined as an act of mourning. Acts
of mourning are very similar to Smith and Waterton’s description of heritage as
‘knowing the past through remembering and commemoration’ (2009b, p. 53, see
also Leader 2008, p. 8).

The injunction not to mourn comes from a sense that mourning will impede the
process of creating change: remembering and feeling emotional might interfere with
action. It is worth noting here that heritage is often characterised as a reactionary
activity, a nostalgic adherence to the past (Hewison 1987; Smith and Waterton

454

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

2009a, p. 51). If one dwells too long on loss, then one’s potency and agency might
also be lost. Hence, perhaps in part the patchy record that this paper reveals of the
labour movement’s commemoration and memorialisation of
its material past.
However, failure to work through the meanings of loss also poses risks such as
extremes of vengeful reaction or a powerless melancholy.

The act of mourning is about integrating the lost object into one’s sense of self
and moving on (Leader 2008, p. 28, Reineman 2011). It is a process of understand-
ing and integrating what the lost object means to the mourner. This is also one of
the processes of heritage: relocating the lost object (literally as in lost things, but
also the lost internal sense of the past) within oneself and in the physical landscape.
Ambivalence about the lost object can interfere with this process of integration. The
processes of heritage are often framed in terms of making memories and meaning
(Smith 2006, p. 302). We suggest there is a further process, a psychological mecha-
nism, whereby memories are worked through in order to reach some acceptance of
loss, which is the process of mourning. This might be referred to as an analysis of
the ‘felt heritage’ as opposed to the heritage that is cognitively known but not
consciously felt.

Smith and Waterton (2009a, p. 300) say ‘the moment of heritage is a moment
when cultural, social and political values and meanings are recognised, scrutinised,
accepted, reworked or otherwise negotiated’. What can be added here is that the
moment of heritage also occurs when the meaning for the subject’s inner life is
recognised and scrutinised, consciously or unconsciously. The impact of heritage on
collective experience is often stressed and is particularly apposite when working
with the heritage of a collective movement like the labour movement. However, it
works at both an individual and collective level. In other words, heritage does
psychological work, for the collective and the individual, as well as social, cultural
and political work (Smith 2006, p. 308).

Let us ﬁnish with the words of Judith Butler: ’Many people think that grief is
privatising, that it returns us to a solitary situation and is, in that sense, depoliticis-
ing’. She goes on to say, ‘But I think it furnishes a sense of political community of
a complex order, and it does this ﬁrst of all by bringing to the fore the relational
ties that have implications for
theorising fundamental dependency and ethical
responsibility’(Butler 2004, p. 22). It is these relational ties that are fostered by
heritage practice.

Notes on contributors
Nick Mansﬁeld has, since 2010, been a Senior Research Fellow in History at the University
of Central Lancashire, Preston, prior to that he was the director of the People’s History
Museum, Manchester for 21 years. He is the author of English Farmworkers and Local
Patriotism, 1900–1930 and over 40 other publications.

Myna Trustram has worked in museums and galleries,
in curatorial, management and
research posts, for some 25 years. Her current research uses psychoanalytic object relations
theory to analyse the ‘Museum in the Mind’ – the inner symbolic meaning of museums and
collecting.

References
Bott, V. and Mansﬁeld, N., eds., 1988. Labour history in museums. Manchester: Co-operative

Union.



455

Butler, J., 2004. Precarious loss: the powers of mourning and violence. London: Verso.
Chase, M., 2007. Chartism – a new history. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Cherry, M. and Mansﬁeld, N., 2002. Where do you stand? The landscape of the labour

movement. Conservation Bulletin, 43, 16–17.

Clark, H., 2001. Raise the banners high. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Museums.
Clarke, S. and Hoggett, P., 2009. Researching beneath the surface: psycho-social research

methods in practice. London: Karnac.

Colloredo-Mansfeld, R., 2003. Introduction: matter unbound. Journal of Material Culture, 8

(3), 245–254.

Culture, 11 (3), 318–338.

DeSilvey, C., 2006. Observed decay: telling stories with mutable things. Journal of Material

Fowler, A. and Wyke, T., 2009. Buildings in the landscape: the ofﬁces of the Lancashire cot-
ton trade unions. In: J.F. Wilson, ed. King cotton – a tribute to Douglas A. Farnie, sage.
Lancaster: Crucible Books, 305–324.

Gorman, J., 1973. Banner bright – an illustrated history of trade union banners. London:

Penguin.

nal, 8, 128–136.

nal, 35, 10–14.

18, 3–16.

Gorman, J., 1985. Images of labour. London: Scorpion.
Harrison, J.F.C., 1969. Robert Owen and the Owenites in Britain and America. London:

Routledge and Keegan Paul.

Hayes, B., 2004. Heritage, commemoration and interpretation: labour and radical movements

and the built environment. North West Labour History Journal, 29, 48–51.

Hewison, R., 1987. The heritage industry: Britain in a climate of decline. London: Methuen.
Horner, C., Layton-Jones, K. and Stewart, D. eds. 2008. Visual collections as historical evi-

dence. Visual Resources, Special Issue, 24 (2), 101–217.

Leader, D., 2008. The new black: mourning, melancholia and depression. London: Penguin.
Leeson, R.A., 1979. Travelling brothers. London: Granada.
Mace, R., 1999. British trade union posters –an illustrated history. Stroud: Sutton.
Mansﬁeld, N., 1979. John Brown, a shoemaker in Place’s London. History Workshop Jour-

Mansﬁeld, N., 1985. James Hill and the Wisbech Owenites. Wisbech Society Annual Jour-

Mansﬁeld, N., 1991. Labour history in museums in the 1990s. Social History in Museums,

Mansﬁeld, N., 2000. Why are there no chartist banners – the ‘missing link’ in nineteenth-

century banners. Social History in Museums, 25, 35–44.

Mansﬁeld, N., 2003. Flat caps and cultural diversity – British working class stereotypes. In:
D. Jalla, ed. Europe and museums – identities and representations. Turin: Celid, 95–97.
Mansﬁeld, N., 2004. Radical banners as sites of memory: the national banner survey’. In: P.
A. Pickering and A. Tyrell, eds. Contested sites – commemoration, memorial and popu-
lar politics in nineteenth century Britain. Aldershot: Ashgate Press, 81–99.

in press. Red Bricks – labour movement buildings in England. London:

Mansﬁeld, N.,

Mansﬁeld, N. and Uhl, K., 2003. Banners: an annotated bibliography. Social History in

English Heritage.

Museums, 27, 43–54.

Martin, P., 2002. The trade union badge – material culture in action. Aldershot: Ashgate.
McKie, D., 2008. McKie’s Gazetter – A local history of Britain. London: Atlantic Books.
Morris, W., 1882. Hopes and fears for art. Boston, MA: Roberts Brothers.
Morrison, K.A., 2003. English shops and shopping: an architectural history. London: Yale

University Press.

Pevsner, P., 1951–1974. The buildings of England. London: Allen Lane.
Prothero, I., 1979. Artisans and politics in the early nineteenth century. Folkestone: Dawson.
Pye, D., 1995. Fellowship is life – the national clarion cycling club, 1895–1995. Bolton:

Reeves, A., 1988. Another day another dollar – working lives in Australian history. Sydney:

Clarion.

McCulloch.

Reineman, J., 2011. Between the imaginary and the real: photographic portraits of mourning

and of melancholia in Argentina. Journal of Psychoanalysis, 92, 1241–1261.

456

N. Mansﬁeld and M. Trustram

Salveson, P., 1987. The people’s monuments – a guide to sites and memorials in North West

England. Manchester: WEA.

Samuel, R., 1996. Past and present in contemporary culture. Theatres of memory. Vol. 1.

London: Verso.

Verso.

Samuel, R., 1998. Island stories: unravelling Britain. Theatres of memory. Vol. 2. London:

Shackel, P., Smith, L., and Campbell, G., 2011. Editorial: labour’s heritage. International

Journal of Heritage Studies, 17 (4), 291–300.

Smith, L., 2006. Uses of heritage. Oxford: Routledge.
Smith, L. and Akagawa, N., eds., 2009. Intangible heritage. London: Routledge.
Smith, L. and Campbell, G., 2011. Don’t mourn, organise: heritage, recognition and memory
in Castleford, West Yorkshire. In: L. Smith, P.A. Shackel, and G. Campbell, eds. Heri-
tage, labour and the working classes. London: Routledge, 85–105.

Smith, L. and Waterton, E., 2009a. ‘The envy of the world?’ Intangible heritage in England.

In: L. Smith and N. Akagawa, eds. Intangible heritage. London: Routledge, 289–302.

Smith, L. and Waterton, E., 2009b. Heritage, communities and archaeology. London: Duck-

worth.

59.

Stahl, M., 1988. Fackliga Fanor. Stockholm: Arbetarrorelsen.
Thompson, E.P., 1955. William Morris: romantic to revolutionary. London: Merlin Press.
Thompson, E.P., 1963. The making of the English working class. London: Penguin.
Tomlinson, V., 1989. Postscript to Peterloo. Manchester Regional History Review, 3 (1), 51–

Topman, H., 2006. The rise and decline of selected labour halls in the Greater London area,

1918–1979. PhD. Kingston University.

Tressell, R., 1914. The ragged – trousered philanthropists. London: Grant Richards.
Trustram, M., in press. The little madnesses of museums. In: A. Kuhn, ed. Little madnesses:

Winnicott, transitional phenomena and cultural experiences. London: IB Tauris.

Walton, J.K., 2008. Commemorating the co-op: nostlagia, identity and the visual traces of

the co-operative movement in twentieth-century Britain. Visual Resources, 24 (2), 159.

Waterton, E., 2011. In the spirit of self-mockery? Labour heritage and identity in the Potter-

ies. , 17 (4), 344–363.


