The Social Production of Heritage 
through Cross-media Interaction: 
Making Place for Place-making
Elisa Giaccardi & Leysia Palen

143000000May 2008
ElisaGiaccardi
elisa.giaccardi@colorado.edu
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_295548.sgm
10.1080/13527250801953827

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

The living relationship between intangible and tangible forms of heritage, as well as natural
and cultural heritage, is a situated one, always in place. Information and communications
technology (ICT) is opening up new ways of experiencing and thinking about heritage by
allowing  for  cross-media  interaction.  By  combining  different  media  and  technologies,
cross-media interaction supports the social production of heritage and creates ‘infrastruc-
tures’ that act as places of cultural production and lasting values at the service of a living
heritage practice.

Introduction

The understanding and preservation of cultural heritage is an essential element of the
human condition. We strive to understand the past and to explain and capture our own
lived experiences to leave a legacy for the future through the preservation of artefacts,
archaeological, historical and cultural sites and, increasingly, through evidence of our
relationships with the natural environment.

Information  and  communications  technology  (ICT)  is  opening  up  new  ways  of
thinking about cultural heritage by allowing for cross-media interaction. For heritage
work, cross-media interaction—which uses multiple media and technologies—creates
socio-technical infrastructures that enable novel interaction between a local commu-
nity  and  the  authentic  setting  in  which  the  artefact,  site,  or  natural  environment  is

Elisa  Giaccardi  &  Leysia  Palen,  University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder.  Correspondence  to:  elisa.giaccardi@
colorado.edu

282 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

encountered. In this paper, we aim to show through example how cross-media inter-
action can be brought to bear on the encounter with these artefacts and settings, and on
the socially produced meanings and values that a community ascribes to them. We also
provide an initial set of principles for cross-media interaction for designers and heritage
practitioners to help realise these objectives of place-making in heritage practice.

To contribute new perspectives on cultural heritage, the cross-media interaction we
envision taps Malpas’ understanding of place as existential ground,1 which is where our
experience and enduring relations with physical and social settings shape and define
our sense of belonging, identity and culture. The social and technical ‘infrastructures’
of  cross-media  interaction  allow  for  new  experiences  with  tangible  and  intangible
forms of heritage and natural and cultural heritage. They open up new ways of explor-
ing and articulating a community’s relations with the physical and social settings of
the heritage, thereby enabling a form of social production of heritage as the locus of
our sense of place; that is, as ‘the very matrix out of which human significance and
meaning arise’.2

The Social Production of Heritage

Challenged  by  contemporary  culture  and  emerging  ICT,  new  understandings  of
heritage3 are emerging that question boundaries between tangible, intangible, cultural
and natural forms of heritage and that urge adoption of new classifications, policies and
approaches for heritage practice.4 Cultural objects represent a multifaceted reality in
which aspects of physicality, interpretation and ascribed value combine to produce and
evolve the meaning of heritage. Through ICT we can facilitate the creative interaction
among these components to give them different functions and degrees of importance
according to the nature of the cultural object being represented.

The encounter between the complex reality of heritage and ICT is not only an oppor-
tunity but also a need. Some argue that cultural change is accelerating, requiring that
we need to develop principles of design capable of more holistically integrating tangible
and  intangible  resources:  ‘Objects,  collections,  buildings,  etc.  become  recognized  as
heritage when they express the value of society and so the tangible can only be under-
stood and interpreted through the intangible’ (emphasis added).6

As demonstrated in recent studies, however, cultural rhetoric often situates heritage
in  contrast  with  contemporary  human  life  and  culture,  thus  missing  the  sense  of
connection  of  past  and  present  that  ultimately  supports  a  commitment  to  heritage
preservation. Supported by recent studies in anthropology and human geography,7 for
example, Kato’s case study of the Shirakami-sanchi World Heritage Area demonstrates
how a local community’s conservation commitment is critical to heritage sustainabil-
ity, and that heritage is formed through long connection with place.8 Setten’s findings
about the Norwegian Jæren landscape heritage are similar. Of the farmers who inhabit
that landscape, Setten writes: 

They have measured their own practices against those of other family members as well
as other farmers in the local community (present and past). […] Thus the landscape
needs to be understood as lived and practiced within situations that are personal and



283

yet  social,  private  and  yet  public,  of  the  present  and  yet  of  the  past  and  the  future.
(Emphasis added)9

The living relationship between intangible and tangible forms of heritage, as well as
natural and cultural heritage, is a situated relationship, always in place. How can ICT
support and reinforce such a relationship?

‘Place’ in Heritage Practice

Sustaining the whole repertoire of embedded knowledge and social relations that are
responsible for the creation, communication and renewal of our sense of heritage10 is
fundamentally  a  place-making  process.  As  computing  becomes  more  pervasive  and
digital networks extend our surroundings,11 ICT can support this process by allowing
new ways to engage with the people, interpretations and values that pertain to a specific
setting. Bringing or strengthening a sense of place—and therefore, a living and sustain-
able relationship with heritage—means creating communication and interaction spaces
capable of sustaining a community’s engagement with the physical and social settings
of the heritage.

The  importance  of  place  in  the  design  of  information  technologies  for  human
communication and collaboration is increasingly a matter of discussion.12 McCarthy
and Wright have proposed a dialogical approach to the design of information technol-
ogies, promoting the importance of experience and engagement: 

A  sensory  and  affective  experience  becomes  transformed  in  thought  and  story,  a
building, the top of a mountain, and a chat room can become significant places for
people—not just physical structures, natural landscapes, or digital discourses, but also
meaningful and heartfelt places. When they become places, they become encultured,
such that natural landscape—as a place—is no longer just natural but also cultural.13

The idea of technologies of spatiality14 draws attention to creating and maintaining a
correspondence between computational and non-computational aspects of ubiquitous
computing settings. As Dourish explains: 

Technological  mediation  supports  and  conditions  the  emergence  of  new  cultural
practices, not by creating a distinct sphere of practice but by opening up new forms of
practice within the everyday world, reflecting and conditioning the emergence of new
forms of environmental knowing.15

Some designers have applied these concerns about encounters with space and place to
make people feel ‘at home’ in the museum or heritage site, engage them at the level of
personhood, and improve their experience as visitors.16 Little has been done, however,
to reinforce or even recover those structures of conversation between a community and
its physical and social settings that make the practice and meaning of place and heritage
evolve.

According to Parkes and Thrift’s chronogeographic perspective, a sense of place is
shaped through the interaction of a number of physical and social agencies, over and
over again.17 What matters is ‘the order which people give to the world—a perceived,
remembered, and expected order about objects, events and human nature’ (emphasis

284 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen
added).18 The objective of cross-media interaction is to articulate and sustain over time
structures of conversation between a community and its physical and social settings
that enable people to express their perceptions, interpretations and expectations about
the heritage.

Cross-media Interaction in Heritage Practice

Cross-media interaction can be powerful when people take active roles in the interpre-
tation  and  construction  of  heritage  and  their  experience  is  social  and  collaborative.
Collective storytelling plays a critical role in supporting a situated and narrative mode
of interpretation and construction of our sense of place and heritage.19 However, for
collective storytelling to promote engaging and sustainable forms of social production
of heritage, the design of technical infrastructure is not sufficient. Technical infrastruc-
ture cannot account alone for heritage practice, though it is critical to redefining our
encounters  with  place  and  social  practice.  Combining  technical  infrastructure  with
diverse media and actively promoting social interaction are vital steps to support the
tensional relationships between past, present and future, so that people can remember,
perceive, and imagine encounters with the heritage.

Learning from an Early Instance of Cross-media Infrastructure: The Virtual Museum of 
the Collective Memory of Lombardia (MUVI)
MUVI20 is an Italian project initiated in 1999 by the publishing house Sonar/ TiConUno.
It is based on a cross-media infrastructure comprising a website and radio transmission.
The goal of the project is to preserve the collective memory of Lombardia, one of the
northern Italian regions. To achieve this objective, MUVI collects and makes publicly
accessible  the  repertoire  of  photographic  pictures  and  correlated  memories  that  are
scattered through different family archives in the regional territory. These archives are
often unknown and relentlessly subject to loss. By leveraging personal accounts, MUVI
collects images and stories related to historical events and the everyday life of people in
Lombardia. However, the actual cultural heritage that MUVI aims to preserve comprises
not only the pictures (see Figure 1) and documents collected on the website but also the
memories these documents embody and the storytelling that brings them alive. MUVI
transforms its audience—the local community—into active heritage, and makes it the
main actor in the construction of the museum.

Figure 1 Photographs from the MUVI website.

To this end, different media are used to provide a forum that encourages and stim-
ulates people to tell their stories, listen to the stories of others, and connect these tales
together.  Each  medium  expresses  specific  properties:  the  legibility  of  the  Web  as  a
photo album, the legitimacy of voices on the radio, and the affective power of pictures.
In particular, the exposure to a warm medium such as the radio is important to encour-
aging involvement. Emotions play a fundamental role in the emergence, collection, and
preservation  of  actual  images  and  stories.  The  images  cue  and  inspire  stories  and
personal accounts, often unpredictably and in surprisingly rich detail. By exploiting
both the tangible and intangible resources of the community, the MUVI cross-media



285

Figure 1 Photographs from the MUVI website (courtesy of Sonar/TiConUno).

286 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

infrastructure  inspires  spontaneous  participation  from  the  local  community  and
supports the social construction of its cultural identity and sense of belonging to an
identifiable territory.

MUVI’s success—which measurably includes, over the span of four years, a collec-
tion of 5,000 pictures and 150 radio broadcasts—illustrates the importance of partici-
pation  and  storytelling  for  fostering  a  sense  of  place  and  heritage,  and  provides  an
early  example  of  a  cross-media  infrastructure  that  links  experience,  memory  and
imagination.

The Silence of the Lands Project
The  Silence  of  the  Lands  (SOL)21  is  a  project  initiated  in  2005  at  the  University  of
Colorado,  Boulder,  by  Giaccardi.22  SOL  is  a  cross-media  infrastructure  based  on
multiple  and  ubiquitous  computing  that  enables  the  capture  and  sharing  of  sonic
experiences of the natural heritage (more than 1,300 sounds from its launch in July
2007 to December 2007). The goal is to encourage an engaged and collective way of
‘listening to the land’. The ultimate objective is to sustain a form of social production
of the natural heritage that fosters environmental awareness and eventually supports
new forms of land interpretation and management. This work is based on the belief
that sounds are a personal and critical element of the natural heritage to be preserved.
Through  both  fact  and  imagination,  SOL  cross-media  infrastructure  cultivates  a
creative relationship between local communities and their land by enabling members
and stakeholders to connect to each other’s experiences, consider each other’s inter-
pretations and expectations, and inform actions within a shared narrative that unfolds
over time.

Technical Infrastructure

SOL builds upon a multiple and ubiquitous technical infrastructure combining loca-
tive and tangible media.23 The infrastructure cultivates the connection between a local
community and its land through a cross-media interaction affording: (a) data catching
(i.e.  capturing  sounds  from  the  natural  environment),  (b)  data  annotation  (i.e.
mapping the soundscape on the Web), and (c) data interpretation (i.e. creating an ideal
soundscape in the public space).

Data catching: capturing ambient sounds from the natural environment.   Participants
record  sounds  using  digital  recording  devices  or  sound  cameras  outfitted  with  GPS
mapping software (see Figure 2). The software allows the recorded sounds to be associ-
ated with their owner and placed on a map.

Figure 2 Boulder community members using the sound camera.

Data description: mapping the soundscape on the Web.   Sounds  are  shared  on  the
web in the form of an interactive soundscape. While geographic position, time, and
date are entered automatically, through the Web application participants are able to



287

Figure  2 Boulder  community  members  using  the  sound  camera  (photos  by  Larry
Harwood/University of Colorado).

add descriptions of the sounds they heard, indicate by means of colours whether they
liked or disliked those sounds, and comment on other people’s sounds (see Figure 3).

Figure 3

Interactive soundscape from the Boulder community members.

Data interpretation: creating an ideal soundscape in the public space.   By playing  with
the soundscape on a public interactive table (see Figure 4), participants are encouraged
to annotate and interpret sounds collaboratively and to create the ideal soundscape
they would like to preserve and in which they would like to live.

Figure 4 Prototype of the public interactive table for the  Silence of the Lands project (courtesy of the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History).

Social Infrastructure

A  critical  factor  to  the  project’s  viability  and  sustainability  is  participation  over  an
extended period of time. Although built-in support for participation is an integral part
of the technical infrastructure, sustained community participation and meaningful life
experiences  are  made  possible  through  support  of  an  active  and  permanent  social
infrastructure.24

In SOL, participation is organised through long-term partnerships with community
stakeholders  who  are  willing  to  explore  the  potential  impact  of  the  project  on  the
community’s patterns of interaction with the land. Simultaneously with the develop-
ment of the technical infrastructure, partnerships began in 2005 and evolved into an
outreach  programme  called  Community  of  Soundscapes  in  the  summer  of  2007.  In
collaboration with the City of Boulder Open Space and Mountain Parks and Water
Quality  Departments,  we  engaged  the  local  community  of  Boulder,  Colorado,  in
capturing  and  sharing  sonic  experiences.  Contextualised  within  the  City  of  Boulder
nature programmes and public hikes, the first Community of Soundscapes enrolled a
group  of  20  community  members  representative  of  different  age  populations  and
professional backgrounds.25 From July to September, participants engaged in ‘sound-
walks’ and workshops over six weeks, collecting and sharing more than 1,300 sounds.

288 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

Figure 3

Interactive soundscape from the Boulder community members.



289

Figure  4 Prototype  of  the  public  interactive  table  for  the  Silence  of  the  Lands  project
(courtesy of the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History).

The  pilot  was  successful,  with  participants  providing  useful  and  rich  feedback  for
programme  evaluation26  and  requesting  continuation  of  the  project  over  the  entire
year. Another programme will be launched in the spring of 2008 in collaboration with
the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History and will connect the City of
Boulder sponsored soundwalks with interpretive activities in the public space of the
museum. Both programmes are funded by the CU-Boulder Outreach Committee and
through  international  collaboration  between  the  University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder
(USA), the University of Brescia (Italy), and the University of Plymouth’s Institute of
Digital Art and Technology (UK).

Place-making with the Silence of the Lands

SOL  connects  personal  experiences  and  cultural  interpretation  of  natural  heritage
through a process of data transfer that allows information to migrate back and forth across
the natural environment, the website, and the public interactive table (see Figure 5).

Figure 5 Cross-media infrastructure of the Silence of the Lands: (1) GPS satellite; (2) sound camera; (3) wireless connection; (4) Web server; (5) website; (6) interactive table.

Information flow is designed to nurture the connection between the local commu-
nity and its land by remixing perceptual and imaginative processes of interpretation.
Place-making  with  SOL  links  experience  (as  reflective  of  embedded  perceptions  and
practices), memory (as the filter of encultered values and interpretations), and imagi-
nation (as reflective of intentions and expectations, and projection towards the future).

Experience

Sounds are captured from the natural environment and collected through the sound
camera (see Figure 5, no. 2). Each recorded sound is linked to the person who collects

290 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

Figure  5 Cross-media  infrastructure  of  the  Silence  of  the  Lands:  (1)  GPS  satellite;  (2)
sound camera; (3) wireless connection; (4) Web server; (5) website; (6) interactive table.

it  and  associated  with  GPS  data  determining  its  location  in  space  and  time  (see
Figure 5, no. 1). This is the activity that we have categorised as ‘data catching’. It encour-
ages a way of experiencing the natural environment that is authentic, direct and personal,
and ultimately reflective of one’s practices and values.

Memory

Once recorded, sounds are transferred from the sound camera to the online database
(see Figure 5, no. 4) and made publicly available on the website (see Figure 5, no. 5).
Participants can access and describe their own sounds and compose them in a personal
soundscape.27  The  outcome  of  these  individual  activities  is  the  collaborative  sound
mapping of the heritage. This is the activity that we have categorised as ‘data descrip-
tion’. It allows participants to recall their experiences through the filter of personal memory
and to superimpose their knowledge and perspectives on the physical relationship with the
natural heritage that is encouraged by the sound camera.

Imagination

The resulting personal soundscapes are the starting points from which members of the
community  then  collaboratively  construct  the  ideal  soundscape  they  would  like  to
preserve and in which they would like to live. Gathered around the public interactive
table (see Figure 5, no. 6), people are encouraged to collaboratively reinterpret existing
sounds and imagine their ideal soundscape. Over time, representations are produced



291

and integrated, and an image of the ideal soundscape evolves in a way similar to the
soundscape produced online. This is the activity that we have categorised as ‘data inter-
pretation’. It encourages participants to connect to the experiences of other community
members and to imaginatively build a shared representation through collaborative play.

Resulting Process

Each  of  these  cycles  of  activities  is  designed  to  create  a  unique  interaction  space
between the members of the local community, the authentic setting provided by the
natural environment, and the computational data that enable its social interpretation
and representation as natural heritage. A keystone is that members’ actions (e.g. their
own particular decisions about collecting and annotating sounds) not only stimulate
reflection on personal experience but also encourage reflection about others’ experi-
ences that may in turn inform subsequent action. By harnessing some of the barriers
between  people  and  settings  produced  by  spatial  distances  (‘voices  from  far  away’),
temporal distances (‘voices from the past’), conceptual distances (‘voices from people
with different knowledge and values’), and technological distances (‘voices embedded
in the artifacts’),28 the cross-media infrastructure of SOL enables information to flow
through  unique  but  layered  interaction  spaces  and  ‘circuit’  or  connect  cultural
experiences,  interpretations  and  expectations.  As  a  result,  the  community’s  shared
representation  of  the  natural  heritage  is  constructed  bit  by  bit,  according  to  new
forms  of  practice  encountered  in  the  interaction  spaces  across  which  information
migrates.

Discussion

The encouraging results of the SOL pilot illustrate the importance of locative technol-
ogies in fostering a deeper sense of connection to the heritage, and provide the example
of  a  more  pervasive  cross-media  infrastructure  in  which  the  spatial  and  temporal
dimension of information flow is critical for linking experience, memory and imagina-
tion in the process in heritage interpretation and construction.

Making Heritage a Living Practice

A living heritage practice must support the whole repertoire of knowledge and social
relations that are responsible for the construction, communication, and renewal of our
sense of place. This is possible only when we give people active and constructive roles,
and we engage them in connecting to each other’s experiences, considering each other’s
interpretations, and building insights that may lead to new meanings and relationships.
Participation and storytelling play a critical role in supporting such a situated, reflec-
tive,  and  narrative  mode  of  interpretation  and  production  of  our  sense  of  place.
Naming and interpreting the artefacts (MUVI) or the land (SOL) in which the heritage
is  encountered  is  a  form  of  storytelling  that  legitimates  personal  accounts  and
promotes heritage literacy. This provides a useful way for local communities to develop
a sense of ownership and commitment towards the heritage: 

292 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

The emphasis on cultural practices is important. It is participants in a culture who give
meaning to people, objects and events. Things ‘in themselves’ rarely if ever have any
one, single, fixed and unchanging meaning. Even something as obvious as a stone can
be a stone, a boundary marker or a piece of sculpture, depending on what it means
[…] It is by our use of things, and what we say, think and feel about them—how we
represent them—that we give them a meaning.29

Furthermore, collective engagement with heritage happens over time, with meaning
evolving as the past becomes more distant and the present changes. The means of heri-
tage engagement and production are built not only in space—which tends to be the
dominant dimension for this topic—but also, naturally, over time, where the past can
be projected in the present and in the future. The perspective explained here in this
paper foregrounds the dimension of time by harnessing its tensional flow as it aids in
our ability to perceive, remember, and imagine, and bringing these temporal and spatial
processes to bear on heritage work.

Realising Place-making in Heritage Practice

One major challenge of place-making from a cross-media point of view is enabling
and  activating  participation.  Finding  new  ways  to  address  this  challenge  is  key  to
keeping alive the heritage and the various perspectives that contribute to it. This last
section  provides  an  initial  set  of  principles  for  cross-media  interaction  useful  for
designers  and  heritage  practitioners  to  realise  place-making  in  heritage  practice.  To
illustrate each principle we will extract examples from the analysis and evaluation of
MUVI30 and SOL.31

Principles of cross-media interaction design

● Create socio-technical infrastructures. Technical infrastructure cannot account alone
for  heritage  practice.  Social  infrastructure  is  necessary  to  support  community
participation and regulate it sensibly over time. Social and technical infrastructures
must  be  synergetic.  In  MUVI,  for  example,  the  collection  and  interpretation  of
family pictures is facilitated by the collective storytelling promoted by community
stakeholders through radio programmes, where the stories narrated by members of
the community elicit personal memories and motivate other community members
to share their photo albums.

● Combine multiple interaction spaces. Different media and technologies exhibit differ-
ent properties. Likewise, different material and topological settings exhibit different
affordances for experience and social practice. Understanding the interaction qual-
ities and affordances of different media, technologies and physical settings is the first
step in combining them in a successful socio-technical infrastructure. In SOL, for
example,  the  sound  camera  encourages  an  emotional  experience  of  the  natural
environment  so  profound  that  community  members  are  willing  to  capture  and
share  their  sounds  on  the  Web  to  re-enact  their  sonic  experiences.  Similarly,  in
MUVI, the affective meaning of photographic images and the warm quality of the
stories told through radio are a strong trigger for personal and collective memory.



293

● Design for persistence. Socio-technical infrastructures must be designed to become
part of the practised setting to which the heritage belongs and be appropriated over
time by social practice. This persistence is important for maintaining and harness-
ing the connection with the tangibility of the heritage. In SOL, for example, some
community members felt more connected to the environment by using the sound
camera  as  a  sort  of  perceptual  appendix:  ‘I  went  on  a  night  hike  and  sat  and
listened to the intense duet between insects and the hum of the city—wished I had
brought the Sound Camera.’ Others felt more connected by using it and then leav-
ing it at home: ‘I enjoyed the way it called my attention to sounds I might not have
attended to otherwise. I have enjoyed those trails more when I walked them after
recording there.’
Pace participation. Engagement trajectories and entry points to the socio-technical
infrastructure must be designed to allow for pacing participation according to one’s
life patterns. Being able to engage in cross-media interaction by accessing the inter-
action space more suitable to you and by migrating from visitor to contributor and
from  contributor  to  visitor  when  needed  and  desired  is  crucial  for  sustained
participation. In MUVI, for example, the radio is the ideal entry point for the older
generation of community members, many of whom, in this case, seemed to prefer
listening  to  personal  accounts  of  stories  than  reading  them.  By  listening  to  the
radio,  they  are  encouraged  to  become  active  contributors  of  stories  and  pictures
and eventually browse the pictures provided by other members of the community
on the Web.
Encourage  conversation.  The  production  and  flow  of  information  across  multiple
interaction spaces is a powerful narrative mechanism. Transforming heritage objects
(e.g. family pictures, stories and sounds) in pieces of a social conversation on their
meaning and value requires bringing together not only the physical elements that
represent  them  (e.g.  photos,  words  and  audio  recordings)  but  also  the  multiple
perspectives that shed light upon how they were and are perceived and understood
by others. In SOL, for example, the way in which sounds are mapped and repre-
sented in the Web application enables visualisation of different interpretations and
encourages community members to explore and comment on others’ perspectives.
Legitimise personal accounts. Supporting the legitimacy of all personal accounts is
important to encourage collection and conservation of resources. Even seemingly
minor stories, if they have a chance to be told, might have unexpected value that
then  changes  their  status.  For  example,  when  people  have  brought  their  family
pictures  to  the  MUVI  headquarters  they  have  frequently  expressed  surprise  and
pleasure at the unexpected role that a photo brings in the new context: ‘Well, I did
not expect that my dad, playing in that village band … that this thing could be inter-
esting,  have  a  value  as  a  document.’  Similarly,  in  SOL,  stakeholders  were  able  to
discover and locate important spots in the natural habitat thanks to participants’
recordings of their personal sonic experiences in those locations.
Sustain narrative flow. Perceptions, cultural meanings and values associated with the
heritage must be brought to interact over and over again. This unfolding narrative
requires  the  connection  between  a  community  and  its  heritage  that  is  supported

●
●
●
●
294 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

both factually and imaginatively by cross-media interaction. In SOL, for example,
heritage  production  results  when  sound  collected  in  the  natural  environment  is
annotated  and  mapped  collaboratively  and  when  the  geography  of  the  heritage
evolves  according  to  the  collective  interpretation  of  the  meaning  and  value  that
pertain to the land.
Promote  a  sense  of  ownership.  Cross-media  interaction  must  allow  retaining  and
reinforcing ownership of the heritage. In MUVI, for example, the radio and website
together help maintain the association of family pictures to the place they belong
(i.e.  the  family  owning  the  photographic  album).  In  a  similar  way,  cross-media
interaction must maintain and harness the topological connection with the physi-
cality of the heritage. In SOL, for example, a sense of ownership is developed from
the act of annotating the land in which the natural heritage is encountered. A direct
result of a sense of ownership is a stronger sense of connection and commitment
towards  the  heritage.  One  SOL  participant  commented:  ‘I’m  more  interested  in
learning to recognize specific bird calls. Also, I’m more attentive to sounds, whereas
before I mostly got lost in my mind while walking.’ Another said: ‘I learned how
important sounds are in our environment and that I took them for granted. I am
interested to see how sounds change over time.’

● Activate social synergies. Activating and promoting social synergies between different
social groups or age populations is another important support mechanism to stim-
ulate collection and conservation of resources. Both in MUVI and SOL, studies have
documented new forms of collaboration that allow generations and social groups to
connect  and  learn  from  each  other.  In  MUVI,  collaborations  are  established
between  the  young  ‘digitally  expert’  generations  and  elderly  members  of  the
community who are attracted to the possibility of participating and sharing their
pictures  on  the  Web.  In  SOL,  one  participant  commented  after  listening  to  the
recordings of a musician participating in the programme: ‘I have always enjoyed
listening for natural sounds. I have now more appreciation for some of the more
appealing human-caused sounds’ (e.g. a hiker humming, a group passing by and
chatting, kids playing and laughing in the distance).

Towards a Living Heritage Practice

The research activities we have described here are motivated by the desire to address
the social production of heritage as a central issue for museology and heritage practice.
Other  researchers  and  practitioners,  by  envisioning  the  museum  or  heritage  site  as
places of interaction between people and artefacts, have guided the design of such sites
to support engaging experiences and interpretive exchanges. However, the bulk of this
work has revolved around enriching visitor experiences of curated museum objects in
the context of exhibit design,32 with less of a focus on emerging issues such as the social
production of heritage.

However, attention is shifting to these new concerns, not least because new cross-
media innovations are coming to the fore. But the goals are, of course, challenging. What
this contemporary attention to heritage needs is additional thinking about some of the

●


295

core  concerns  presented  here,  including  how  to  sustain  over  time  the  enduring  and
ecological system of experiences, interpretations and expectations that contribute to
continuous heritage interpretation and construction. We need to innovatively leverage
community resources that might support a new sense of connection, ownership and
commitment towards the heritage. We believe that the use of cross-media interaction
to supplement community-based heritage practices can support these pursuits. The goal
is to place ICT in the service of a living heritage practice, to envision it as a mediating
infrastructure for cultural production and the cultivation of shared and lasting values,
and to move beyond thinking about it in a limited role of object-augmentation.

Notes

1 [1] Malpas, Place and Experience.
2 [2] Malpas, this issue.
3 [3] Kalay et al., New Heritage.
4 [4] Munjeri,  ‘Tangible  and  Intangible  Heritage’;  Lowenthal,  ‘Natural  and  Cultural  Heritage’;

Davis, ‘New Museologies and the Ecomuseum’.

5 [5] Benedetti, ‘Virtuality and Reality in Enterprise’s Museum, Art Museum, Archeological Sites’.
6 [6] Munjeri, ‘Tangible and Intangible Heritage’, 13.
7 [7] Plumwood,  Environmental  Culture;  Rodman,  ‘Empowering  Place’;  Schech  and  Haggis,

Culture and Development.

Setten, ‘Farming the Heritage’, 74.

8 [8] Kato, ‘Community, Connection and Conservation’.
9 [9]
10[10] Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, ‘Intangible Heritage as Metacultural Production’.
11[11] Dourish, ‘Re-space-ing Place’; McCullough, Digital Ground.
12[12] Erickson, ‘From Interface to Interplace’; Harrison and Dourish, ‘Re-place-ing Space’; Dourish,

‘Re-space-ing Place’.

13[13] McCarthy and Wright, ‘Technology in Place’, 920.
14[14] Dourish  and  Bell,  ‘The  Experience  of  Infrastructure  and  the  Infrastructure  of  Experience’;

Brewer and Dourish, ‘Storied Spaces’.

15[15] Dourish, ‘Re-space-ing Place’, 304.
16[16] Ciolfi  and  Bannon,  ‘Designing  Interactive  Museum  Exhibits’;  Heath  et  al.,  ‘Crafting

Participation’.

17[17] Parkes and Thrift, Times, Spaces, and Places.
18[18] Moore and Golledge, Environmental Knowing.
19[19] Plumwood, Environmental Culture; McCullough, Digital Ground.
20[20] http://www.muvilo.it/
21[21] http://www.thesilence.org/
22[22] Giaccardi, ‘Cross-media Interaction for the Virtual Museum’.
23[23] Locative  media  are  based  on  technologies  for  geographical  mapping  and  positioning  (e.g.
GPS-equipped  smartphones);  tangible  media  are  based  on  the  manipulation  of  physical
objects over computational surfaces (e.g. interactive tables).

24[24] Giaccardi, ‘Cross-media Interaction for the Virtual Museum’.
25[25] Despite the requests, the number of sound cameras available restricted the number of partici-
pants. Those enrolled included writers, engineers, scientists, managers, designers, educators,
therapists, musicians and college students, whose ages ranged from 20 to 62 years.

26[26] Giaccardi, Freeston, and Matlock, Community of Soundscapes: Results and Evaluation, Internal

Report, University of Colorado at Boulder, September 2007.

27[27] A soundscape in SOL is the sonic equivalent of a digital photo album, but more immersive

and interactive, and annotated with several descriptors.

296 E. Giaccardi & L. Palen

28[28] Fischer, ‘Distances and Diversity’.
29[29] Hall, Representation, 3.
30[30] Giaccardi, ‘Collective Storytelling’.
31[31] Giaccardi et al., Community of Soundscapes: Results and Evaluation, Internal Report, University

32[32]

of Colorado at Boulder, September 2007.
See, for example, the design of the Hunt Museum (McCarthy and Ciolfi, this issue) and the
studies conducted at Tate Britain (vom Lehn et al., ‘Engaging Constable’).

References

Benedetti,  B.  ‘Virtuality  and  Reality  in  Enterprise’s  Museum,  Art  Museum,  Archeological  Sites’.
Quaderni  della  Fondazione  Piaggio,  Nuova  Serie:  Cultura  Europea  e  Musei  VI,  no.  1  (2002):
42–73.

Brewer,  J.  and  P.  Dourish.  ‘Storied  Spaces:  Cultural  Accounts  of  Technology  and  Environmental

Knowing’. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies (forthcoming).

Ciolfi,  L.  and  L.  Bannon.  ‘Designing  Interactive  Museum  Exhibits:  Enhancing  Visitor  Curiosity
through Augmented Artifacts’. In Proceedings of ECCE11, European Conference on Cognitive
Ergonomics 1. Rome: Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), 2002: 311–317.

Davis, P. ‘New Museologies and the Ecomuseum’. In The Ashgate Research Companion to Heritage

and Identity, edited by B. Graham and P. Howard. Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2008: 397–414.

Dourish, P. ‘Re-space-ing Place: “Place” and “Space” Ten Years On’. In Proceedings of CSCW 2006,
ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work.  New  York:  ACM  Press,  2006:
299–308.

Dourish,  P.  and  G.  Bell.  ‘The  Experience  of  Infrastructure  and  the  Infrastructure  of  Experience:
Meaning  and  Structure  in  Everyday  Encounters  with  Space’.  Environment  and  Planning  B:
Planning and Design 34, no. 3 (2007): 414–30.

Erickson, T. ‘From Interface to Interplace: The Spatial Environment as a Medium for Interaction’. In
Proceedings of COSIT 93, 5th European Conference on Spatial Information Theory. Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 1993: 391–405.

Fischer,  G.  ‘Distances  and  Diversity:  Sources  for  Social  Creativity’.  In  Proceedings  of  the  5th

Conference on Creativity & Cognition. New York: ACM Press, 2005: 128–36.

Giaccardi,  E.  ‘Collective  Storytelling  and  Social  Creativity  in  the  Virtual  Museum:  A  Case  Study’.

Design Issues 22, no. 3 (2006): 29–41.

———.  ‘Cross-media  Interaction  for  the  Virtual  Museum:  Reconnecting  to  Natural  Heritage  in
Boulder, Colorado’. In New Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage, edited by Yehuda Kalay,
Thomas Kvan and Janice Affleck. London: Routledge, 2007: 112–31.

Hall, S. Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices. London: Sage, 1997.
Harrison,  S.  and  P.  Dourish.  ‘Re-Place-Ing  Space:  The  Roles  of  Space  and  Place  in  Collaborative
Systems’. In Proceedings of CSCW 1996, ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work. New York: ACM Press, 1996: 67–76.

Heath, C., P. Luff, D. vom Lehn, J. Hindmarsh and J. Cleverly. ‘Crafting Participation: Designing

Ecologies, Configuring Experience’. Visual Communication 1, no. 1 (2002): 9–34.

Kalay,  Y.,  T.  Kvan  and  J.  Affleck.  New  Heritage:  New  Media  and  Cultural  Heritage.  London:

Routledge, 2007.

Kato,  K.  ‘Community,  Connection  and  Conservation:  Intangible  Cultural  Values  in  Natural
Heritage—The  Case  of  Shirakami-sanchi  World  Heritage  Area’.  International  Journal  of
Heritage Studies 12, no. 5 (2006): 458–73.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. ‘Intangible Heritage as Metacultural Production’. Museum International

56, no. 1–2 (2004): 52–65.

Lowenthal,  D.  ‘Natural  and  Cultural  Heritage’.  International  Journal  of  Heritage  Studies  11,  no.  1

(2005): 81–92.

Malpas, J. Place and Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.



297

McCarthy,  J.  and  P.  Wright.  ‘Technology  in  Place:  Dialogics  of  Technology,  Place  and  Self’.  In

Proceedings of Interact 2005. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2005: 914–26.

McCullough,  M.  Digital  Ground:  Architecture,  Pervasive  Computing,  and  Environmental  Knowing.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

Moore,  G.  T.  and  R.  G.  Golledge,  eds.  Environmental  Knowing:  Theories,  Research,  and  Methods.

Stroudsburg, PA: Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, 1976.

Munjeri,  D.  ‘Tangible  and  Intangible  Heritage:  From  Difference  to  Convergence’.  Museum

International 56, no. 1–2 (2004): 12–20.

Parkes,  D.  and  N.  Thrift.  Times,  Spaces,  and  Places:  A  Chronogeographic  Perspective.  Chichester:

Wiley, 1980.

Plumwood, V. Environmental Culture: The Ecological Crisis of Reason. London: Routledge, 2002.
Rodman,  M.  C.  ‘Empowering  Place:  Multilocality  and  Multivocality’.  In  The  Anthropology  of
Space  and  Place:  Locating  Culture,  edited  by  S.  Low  and  L.  Laurence-Zuniga.  Malden,  MA:
Blackwell, 2003.

Schech, S. and S. Haggis. Culture and Development: A Critical Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell, 2000.
Setten, G. ‘Farming the Heritage: On the Production and Construction of a Personal and Practised

Landscape Heritage’.  11, no. 1 (2005): 67–79.

vom Lehn, D., C. Heath, J. Hindmarsh and P. Luff. ‘Engaging Constable: Revealing Art with New
Technology’. In Proceedings of CHI 2007, SICHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. New York: ACM Press, 2007: 1485–94.


