International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Environmental interpretation is flowering in
Denmark

Arne Bondo‐Andersen & Marianne Linnemann

To cite this article: Arne Bondo‐Andersen & Marianne Linnemann (1999) Environmental
interpretation is flowering in Denmark, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 5:3-4, 161-170,
DOI: 10.1080/13527259908722262
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259908722262

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 78

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Key  Words
Agenda 21
Denmark
Community  forest
Environmental  education
Environmental
interpretation

Environmental  Interpretation is
Flowering in Denmark

Arne Bondo-Andersen  & Marianne
Linnemann

Abstract
Environmental  interpretation  is  flowering  in  Denmark. In  1986  it  was decided to
carry out a three-year experimental project with  14 environmental interpreters. Today
the  number  of environmental  interpreters  has grown  to 230.  The inspiration came
from  abroad,  but the project is established according to Danish cultural and democratic
traditions. Some Environmental Interpreters are employed by the State in the National
Forests,  others  by  counties,  local authorities,  museums  or  'green associations', but
they  are all linked together in the Environmental Interpreter Service with secretariat
in  The National Forest and Nature  Agency. A  modern organisation provides training
courses for the interpreters and has developed a series of active interpretation methods
in  order to make  experiencing nature  an important  tool in  modern  Danish environ-
mental  management  and inspire  a  positive  attitude  to  the future—to  sustainable
development and management.  The aim of setting  up an Environmental Interpreter
Service was to give people interesting experiences in and knowledge of the countryside
and  thereby a greater understanding of the complexity  of nature,  the conditions for
agriculture and perhaps an  increased environmental  consciousness. It  was also the
hope that if people had a greater understanding of nature, they  will love and care for
it  better. The Brundtland Report 'Our Common Future, the conference in Rio in 1992
and  Agenda  21  has  changed  the  Environmental  Interpreters'  work.  We  have
recognised,  that it is important to use live Interpreters and not only  technical media in
this  important  work. People respond best to personal, face-to-face interpretation. The
interpreters  try  to  create  a  love  of  nature,  and  at  the  same  time,  create  an
understanding of local and global environmental conditions.

Denmark  is a  small, flat, north  European  country  with  a  population  of roughly
five million and a total land area of about 43,000 square kilometres. Most of the
country,  62%, is cultivated  agricultural  land,  12% is wooded  and  another  12%
is permanent  grassland,  natural  areas, lakes and  streams. There  are hardly  any
completely  natural  areas;  everywhere  one  can  see  human  influence  on  the
landscape. The  changes  have  occurred  over  the last  7000  years. Denmark  is a
highly  industrialised  country  and  only  about  4% of the  population  is employed
in  the  agricultural  sector.  About  5% of  the  area  is  publicly  owned  and  these
areas  are primarily forests  and nature  areas.

In  Denmark  there  are  no  nature  parks  or  national  parks.  It  is  a  small,
densely  populated  country  and  the  whole  landscape  is  the  focus  of  protection.
Many  important  natural  areas  are  preserved  and  the  most  important  natural
landscape features  are usually protected—living  hedges, wetlands, heaths, lakes,
streams, marshes, forests,  woods and the  coastal  area. Recently much  has been
done to re-establish  natural  areas that  have been destroyed.

IJHS 5 (3 & 4)  161-170  © Intellect Ltd 1999

161

Denmark  was one of the  first  countries in the world  to set up a Ministry of
the  Environment.  Right  from  the beginning  in 1974 the Ministry  was respon-
sible  for the running  of the state  forests  and nature  conservation  areas.  Today
the  Ministry  of the Environment  and Energy  is responsible  for the protection of
nature,  and of buildings.  The Ministry  is also  responsible  for pollution  control,
physical  planning,  hunting,  wild  life  management,  raw materials  use,  energy as
well as managing  national  forests  and natural  areas.

Environmental  Interpretation  Experiment
In  the beginning  of the  1980s  it was  clear  that  in Denmark,  as in other  highly
industrialised  countries,  there was a growing  conflict  between  the population in
the  towns  and in  the  countryside.  It  was also  clear  that,  in  general,  the
population  did not really  understand  how vulnerable  nature  was nor  how
limited  our natural  resources  were.

The Ministry of the Environment  decided to make an extra  effort  to inform the

population  about  the necessity  of protecting  their  natural  resources. In the  mid-
1980s  it was decided  that  the country  should  go beyond  the usual  methods for
informing  the general  public  about  nature  conservation,  such  as brochures,  films,
videos,  exhibitions,  visitors  centres,  and try something  new in Denmark; the idea
of  environmental  interpreters  was introduced.  The inspiration  to use specially
trained people to meet the public face to face and 'interpret nature'  came from the
American  National  Parks.  In the  1960s  it  was brought  over  the Atlantic  to
Britain. In the 1980s it was  brought  further  over the North Sea to Denmark.

In  1986  it was decided  to carry  out a three-year  experimental  project  with
environmental  interpreters  in Denmark.  Although the inspiration  for the project
came  from  abroad  we did not copy  foreign  projects;  the Danish  environmental
interpretation  experiment  was established  according  to our own cultural and
democratic  traditions.  The State  earmarked  funds  to pay the salaries  of the 14
environmental  interpreters  during the experimental period. Some were  employed
by  the  State,  in  the  National  Forest  Districts,  others  by  counties, 
local
authorities,  museums  and  'green'  associations.  The State  paid  70% of the
salaries  of  those  who  were  not  state-employed.  The  14  environmental
interpreters  were  distributed  across  the whole  country,  but all were  based in
areas of greater importance for nature,  varying  from  urban  areas in Copenhagen
to  tourist  areas in the provinces.

The  Environmental  Interpretation  Experiment  was established  within  the
Nature  and Forest  Agency,  under  The  Ministry of the  Environment  and Energy.
Its  tasks  were:

to  co-ordinate and inspire  environmental  interpretation  work, to ensure  that
the  environmental  interpreters  worked  according to a common  objective, to
develop interpretation  methods and to organise  training and education for
interpreters.

Further,  an Environmental  Interpretation  Committee  was set up with  represen-
tatives  from  local  authorities,  museums,  green  associations  and organisations as
well  as  from  agriculture  and  forestry.  Through  the  membership  of the
committee,  these  bodies  had influence  and responsibility  for the environmental
interpretation  project,  which  proved  useful  to all parties.

162 

Arne Bondo-Andersen  & Marianne  Iinnemann

The  Environmental  Interpreters  were  not put in  uniform,  but nevertheless
there  was an  attempt  to  give  them  a  formal  common  identity.  An owl was
chosen  as the logo of the Danish Environmental  Interpreter  Service. The owl is
composed  of the old Chinese  signs  yin and yang.  Among  other  things,  these
signs are the symbols of a divine interpretation  of the wonders of the earth. The
symbol was displayed on the Environmental Interpreters' normal clothes.

the  visitors 

The Interpreters' job was to take people into the countryside and to inform
them  about Nature, the cultural heritage, agriculture and forestry. The aim was
to  give 
interesting
experiences in, and knowledge of, the
countryside  and  thereby  a  greater
understanding  of  the  complexity  of
Nature, the conditions for agriculture
and 
increased
environmental  consciousness.  It was
also  the hope  that  if  people  have  a
greater  understanding  of nature  they
will  love  and care  for it  better. The
14  Environmental  Interpreters  were
warmly welcomed by their local areas
and  the  activities  they  carried  out
became quickly popular.

perhaps 

an 

From Experimental  Project  to  Permanent  Service
In  1989 the Environmental Interpreter Service was made permanent and public
funds  were  set  aside  for  more  interpreters,  for  the continued  running  of the
Environmental  Interpretation  Secretariat and for training  and development.

The  National  Forest  and Nature  Agency  has been  in  the forefront  of the
work.  It now has around  50 trained  Environmental  Interpreters  who together
with  a  large  number  of  other  staff  organise  environmental  interpretation
activities for school  classes, trade  union  groups, firms, and associations  as well
as numerous  activities for the public.

As well many  counties, local authorities, museums and green  organisations
now  employ  Environmental  Interpreters.  In  addition,  other  staff  of  this
organisations  deal  with  environmental  interpretation.  Many  counties  also
publish  pamphlets  with  an  overview  of  all  the  public  Environmental
Interpretation  activities in the county.

In many natural history and cultural history museums it has become just as
important  to provide information  about  the cultural  history  of the countryside
as to display  the artefacts  in museums. With  the help  of Environmental  Inter-
pretation,  many  museums  link  cultural  traditions/  remains/  features  in the
landscape  with  their  own exhibitions,  thus  giving  the museum's  visitors,  both
local  people  and tourists,  a  better  understanding  of the  relationship  between
nature, culture and humans.

A  number  of  outdoor  and  nature  protection  organisations  also  have
Environmental Interpreters. The purpose of employing them is partly to create a
link  between  an  active  outdoor  life,  nature  and environmental  protection and
partly to make nature protection work. The green organisations are particularly
involved.

Environmental Interpretation is Flowering in Denmark

163

Over  a  period  of 11 years  the number  of Environmental  Interpreters has
grown  from  14 to about  230.  Roughly  half  are employed  as full-time  Environ-
mental  Interpreters  in the state  forest  districts, in the counties, the local  authori-
ties,  museums,  organisations  and self-  governing  institutions.  The others are
employed  elsewhere,  for  example  as  foresters  or  teachers.  However,  an
important  part of their  time is devoted to working as environmental  interpreters.

Brundtland, Rio, Agenda  21  and  Sustainable  Development
In  1987  the World  Commission  of the Environment  and Development  delivered
the  report  Our Common  Future.  The report  became  a  best-seller  in  Denmark
where  it was popularly  called  the Brundtland  Report  after  the chairman  of the
Commission, the Norwegian  Prime Minister,  Gro Harlem Brundtland.  Apart  from
producing the Brundtland  Report, the conference  in 1992  in Rio was  effective in
making  Environmental  Interpretation  an important  part  of general  education in
Denmark.  One  of the intentions  of Agenda  21 is that  through  information and
knowledge  the  population  should  be  encouraged  to  take  an  interest  in
environmental  and development  questions  in  order  to  promote  sustainable
development.  The slogan  'Think  global—act  local'  is increasingly  becoming  a
more  important  part  of the  Environmental  Interpreters'  work.

Brundtland  and Rio changed the Environmental  Interpreters'  work;  they  still
try  to create  a  love  of nature,  but they  try, at the same  time,  to create an
understanding  of local and global  environmental  conditions. They try to build a
link  between  the big global  environmental  questions  and peoples'  daily  life.
Environmental  Interpreters  try through  experience  to create  an  understanding
that  the interactions  between  nature  and man should  affect/influence  social
decisions and the life style of individual  people. They  must  actively inspire  people
to  take  an interest  in their  own environment.  They  have  contacts  on a  broad
front  in  the local  area,  with  schools,  residents'  associations,  kindergartens;
organisations  and associations.  Through  these  arrangements  they  come  into
contact  with  the people  and hope to establish  a dialogue  with  them.

The  Environmental  Interpreters  nearly  all started  their  activities  in biology
and  natural  science.  Gradually  they  have  involved  Water  Supply Stations,  Water
Cleaning  Stations,  Power  Plants,  Wind  Mills  etc. in the activities.

The aim of Environmental  Interpretation
The  strength  of the  Environmental  Interpreter  Service is that it is composed  of a
network  of people  who  work  to a common  definition  and with  a common aim.
The objective  of the  Environmental  Interpreter  Service is to assure  that  environ-
mental  interpretation  in  Denmark  is  delivered  to  a  professional  standard.
Environmental  Interpretation  in Denmark  attempts  to describe  and explain the
characteristic  elements and structures  within a landscape or an area as a whole.
Through  direct  experiences  the public  is led to  discover;  to  understand;  to
acquire  knowledge  about;  to respect  and to care for nature  and environment.

The  aim is to:

•  show  that  nature is a composite  whole  consisting of countryside, sea,
climate, plants,  animals, history and culture, of which  Man is a part, is
influencing  nature  and  dependent on it.
•  show  that  nature must be both  protected and used

164 

Arne  Bondo-Andersen  & Marianne  Iinnemann

• inform  how nature is a basis for trade and industry as well as for open-air
activities
•  give information  about the written  and the unwritten  rules  regarding  access
in the countryside
•  explain  local  environmental  conditions in order to clarify  the global
environment  and to work  towards a sustainable  life style
•  give information  on nature in towns and on the connection  between  urban
life and the environment

Experiences  in  Nature
Although  it  is  not  an  aim  of  environmental  interpretation  to  make  the
interpreters  popular,  this has happened. The real aim is to make the participants
aware  of  their  environment,  responsible  for  it  and  make 
them  want
actively  to  defend  it. It is not what  the environmental  interpreters  say about
ecology,  about  understanding  the landscape,  cultural  history,  agriculture and
the  environment  which  makes  them  popular,  but  the  way in  which  they
interpret it.

Providing  direct  experiences  in nature  is the hallmark  of Danish  Environ-
mental  Interpreters,  and they  have  developed  a series of educational  methods in
order  to make  experience  an important  tool  in modern  Danish  environmental
management.  The distinguishing  feature  of the Environmental  Interpretation
Service lies predominantly  in the methods  used;  activities  take place in the open
air with  active participation  in and experiences of nature. These methods  which
made  environmental  interpretation  popular  with  the public  and enabled  it to
find  a place in Danish  environmental  policy and in society.

It  started  with  classic guided  walks, but the environmental  interpreters  have
developed  new outdoor  educational  methods  designed  to interpret  nature and
the environment  and to combine  experience and knowledge. The interpreters try
quite  consciously  to  actively  involve  all the participants  and all  five  senses.
There  is great  interest  at  present  for what  is popularly  called  'thinking and
buying  green'.  Many  concern  themselves  with  this  concept,  schools,  museums,
television,  newspapers,  theatre  productions  and campaigns  which  are set up to
create 
the  environment.
Environmental  interpretation  is part  of this  green  wave  to do things  differently
in  society and create new approaches  for doing it.

interest,  understanding  and  awareness  of 

There  is  much  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  Environmental  Interpreters
Service's  attempt  to develop new methods  has had a domino  effect.  At present
schools  are searching  for experience-orientated  teaching.  Many  people  wish to
have  active  leisure  time  and active  holidays.  The environmental  interpreters
offer  activities  which  seem  to fulfil  a  growing  need.  This  demands  a  sense of
responsibility  and reflection  on the methods,  aims and means  which  are used in
environmental  interpretation.

Environmental  interpretation's  distinguishing  feature,  experiences  in nature,
has been shown to work in practice. The many years of development and testing
of its scope  means  that  its approach  will  continue  to be used  in the years to
come  to give  people  the possibility  of relating  to the local  and global  environ-
ment  through  experiences,  understanding  and  knowledge  of  the  natural
scientific  processes,  and of social and economic  conditions. Issues  such  as using
lesser  energy,  urban  ecology,  awareness  of resources  and of quality  of life  must

Environmental Interpretation  is Flowering in Denmark 

165

be  highlighted  and their  interpretation  must  be instrumental  in  making the
population  act consciously.

Financing  of Environmental  Interpretation  in  Denmark
Each  year  the Environmental  Interpreter  Service  in  Denmark  costs  about 40
million  Danish  crowns.  Most  of  the  budget  comes  from  public  funds.  The
secretariat  for the Environmental  Interpreter  Service is paid  by the Nature and
Forest  Agency  (the State).  Training  and  development  of  new  interpretation
methods  is paid  partly  by the Nature  and Forest  Agency  and partly  by the
Danish  Outdoor  Council with  funds  from  Football and Lotteries.

The Danish  Outdoor  Council is an NGO umbrella  organisation  for some 90
outdoor  and nature  protection  organisations  and plays a very  active role in the
development of environmental interpretation in Denmark and supports the work
strongly  with  funds  from  Football  Pools  and Lottery.  Around  50 organisations
receive grants  towards the salary of an environmental  interpreter.  Also training
and  development  of  new  interpretation  methods  are  supported  with
contributions from  the pools administered by the Outdoor Council..

Target  groups
Environmental  interpretation  is  aimed  at  the whole  of the Danish  population
and at tourists. Target  group  priorities differ  according to where the interpreters
are  employed  and work.  In  nature  conservation  areas  and at  cultural-historic
sites  with  many  visitors,  tourists  are often  the target  group.  Domestic  tourists
and/or  families  with  children  can also  be a  priority  in  several  areas.  In big
towns  or cities  the target  group  will be the town  population  and contact  with
an  especially important  group, children.

Surveys  shows  that  over  half  of the Danish  adult  population  knows  about
the  Environmental  Interpreter  Service. About  400,000  Danes  over  15 years of
age  participate  every  year  in one or several  of the Environmental  Interpreter
Service's  arrangements. In addition  activities  organised  for children  and school
classes  are estimated  to  contact  about  150,000  children.  Almost  50% of the
environmental  interpreters'  work  consists  of  face-to-face  interpretation.  They
organise  events  which  are  announced  in  daily  papers,  in  nature  walks
pamphlets and on local radio. Other activities are organised specially for schools,
kindergartens, residents'  associations, unions  and agricultural  and green associ-
ations.

The aim of the public activities is to make contact with the unorganised part
of the population and the tourists, especially children and families with children.
Enthusiasm for the activities is so great  that in many cases the participants  then
book an activity for the school, organisation  or association  with  which  they are
connected. A survey  shows that  the public  activities  particularly  attract  people
over  30 years  of age who are well  educated  and who are interested  in the
environment.  However,  we do not  know  how much  prior  knowledge  these
people  have  about  nature.  About  68% of the activities  are for  groups, e.g.
schools,  kindergartens,  residents'  associations,  unions,  firms,  agricultural and
green  organisations etc. The environmental interpreters  give a higher priority to
booked  activities  than  to  public  events  because  this  gives  them  contact and
dialogue with  people who would not spontaneously  attend the public events.

Children  are  a  high  priority  target  group.  In  Denmark  Naturskoler  (En-

166 

Arne Bondo-Andersen & Marianne Linnemann

vironment  Schools) have  therefore  been  set up for  school  classes, with  the aim
of  supplementing  the  environmental  teaching  in  schools.  In  the  Environment
Schools, the  teaching  takes  place in  nature. Today there  are  some  75 Environ-
ment  Schools  in  Denmark,  and  new  ones  are  being  set  up  every  year.  The
Ministry  of  the  Environment  and  Energy  is  co-operating  with  the  Ministry of
Education  on environmental  education.

Training
Training courses for Environmental Interpreters have been given a high priority.
Today  training  is  at  the  Danish  Forestry  College,  an  educational  institution
under  the  National  Forest  and  Nature  Agency. Almost  all  the  people  who  are
employed  as  Environmental  Interpreters  have  a  university  degree  in,  for
example, biology, environment,  cultural history, geology, agriculture or  forestry.
In  order  to  ensure  that  their  work  is  a  means  of  creating  a  modern
environmental  policy  and  in  order  to  develop  and  provide  training  in  modern
environmental  interpretation,  the  Nature  and  Forest  Agency  has  developed  a
basic-training  course  for  all  newly  employed  Environmental  Interpreters  and
follow-up  training  courses  for  trained  Environmental  Interpreters. The  aims for
the training is:

'Using the participants  experiences, knowledge  and  skills in  communication
and  interpretation  methods  the  training  has  to  make  them  able  to  fulfil  the
definition  and  the  aims  for  Environmental  Interpretation  by  developing  and
strengthening the participants in:

• activeness
• reflecting over your own practice
• pedagogical knowledge'

The training must give experiences, knowledge and skills in communication  and
interpretation  methods  in  practice,  theoretical  themes  and  art  subjects.  It  has
also  to  strengthen  participant's  identity  and  attitude  as  Environmental
Interpreters.

The training  course for new Environmental Interpreters is run  over a period
of 20 months. The whole training course includes 4 units and  3 project periods.
The main  subjects  are: the  professional  Environment  Interpreter;  interpretation
and  education  in  practice; human  change  of the  Danish  landscape  in  the past,
now  and  in  the  future;  and  public  interests  (conflicts)  and  environmental
problems.  In  the  project  periods  everyone  has  to  create  and  finish  a  project,
which  they present  at the beginning  of the following  unit. The training  course
is designed for those who are employed as Environmental Interpreters. However,
people who have environmental interpretation  as a major part of their work can
apply  to  participate.  These  include  staff  at  Environmental  Schools  and  state
forest districts.

Every  year  trained  Environment  Interpreters  are  offered  a  number  of  the
training courses. The courses supplement  the training  course for new employed
interpreters.  The  aim  of  the  courses  is  to  maintain  a  high  professional
environmental  interpretation  standard.  An  important  part  of  the  courses  is  to
give  the  interpreters  knowledge  of  new  theoretical  and  applied  research  and
innovation work within  educational theory, communication  and  interpretation,

Environmental Interpretation is Flowering in Denmark 

J67

environmental  problems,  nature  conservation  and protection,  cultural  history,
urban  ecology,  open air life and tourism.

Training is adjusted  regularly,  taking  account of current  issues and develop-
ments in the field of nature and environment.  Since  1987 the Nature and Forest
Agency  has organised  11  training  courses  for  newly  employed  interpreters.
Although  there are many who are very interested in attending the courses, only
20  people  are accepted  on each  course  each  year.  Roughly  230 people had
participated or are participating in the basic training  courses and have the right
to wear the Environmental  Interpretation  Service's logo - the owl.

In  order  to give  others  who are interested  in environmental  interpretation
an  insight into this work and the possibility of learning how to interpret  nature
and  environment,  the Nature  and Forest  Agency has also  developed  a series of
two-day  courses  in  environmental  interpretation  methods  and  interpretation
techniques. The courses are very popular and participants include teachers, local
government  and county  workers,  students  and active  members of outdoor and
nature  protection  organisations.

Developing  interpretation
Developing  interpretation,  education  and communication  methods has from the
beginning  been an important  element in the Environmental  Interpreter  Service.
To  strengthen  this  work,  The  Nature  and  Forest  Agency  and  the  Danish
Outdoor  Council  in  1994  set  up  a  Development  Workshop  on  Nature
Interpretation  for a  period  of three  years.  The aim of the workshop  was to
strengthen  and develop the knowledge and the methodological  basis of Environ-
mental  Interpretation  in Denmark. The task of the Development  Workshop was
together  with  the secretariat  to establish  evaluation  and development  projects.
Of  more  than  100 project  ideas  came  about  40  practical  projects  such  as
providing  information  about  local  and global  environmental  conditions,  urban
ecology, 
reflections,
environmental  education  and interpretation  for new target  groups.  When the
Development  Workshop  of Nature  Interpretation  ended  in  October  1997 the
project  persons  delivered  their  experiences  and reflections  in 22 project  reports
and  four  books. In addition  Environmental  Interpreters  were  offered  training in
for  instance  how to  link  local  and  global  environment.  Today,  the  Danish
Environmental  Interpreter  Service  has important  material,  which  will  be an
important  part of the future  development  of the Service.

environmental 

interpretation 

educational 

and 

The Danish  Rangers  Association
As the number  of environmental  interpreters  began to increase, the need  arose
for  a professional  association.  The Danish  Rangers  Association  was established
in  1992 and now has some  500 members—professional  interpreters  and other
part  time or voluntary  interpreters. It publishes a professional  magazine  entitled
Naturvejleder  Nyt (Environmental  Interpreter  News), and organises every year a
three-day  annual  conference  for all Environmental  Interpreters.

Future
Developments  over  the last  11 years  have  shown  that  interpreting  nature and
environment  is  much  more  than  just  giving  information  about  nature  and
culture.  Interpretation  is  an  integrated  and  necessary  part  of  modern

168 

Arne Bondo-Andersen & Marianne Linnemann

environmental  policy,  where  the  aim  is  to  create  an  understanding  of  the
environment,  to  encourage  people to  use resources  more  economically,  to  make
each  individual  act  and  take  responsibility  for  nature  and  environment  and
promote  a  sustainable  development.

Experience in Denmark  shows that  interpreting  the environment  outdoors in
nature,  using human  beings, environmental  interpreters,  is one way to  establish
an  understanding  of the  environment  and  hopefully  to limit  its deterioration  by
inspiring  a  positive  attitude  to  the  future.

Appendix
Environmental  Schools in  Denmark
The National Forest  and Nature Agency  (under  the Ministry of the  Environment
and Energy), the counties  and  the local authorities  have, over  the last  26  years,
set  up  a  special  type  of school,  the  Environmental  School. At  present  there  are
over  75  Environmental  Schools  in  Denmark,  of  which  27  are  situated  in  the
State  forests.

Environmental  Schools are not  an integrated  part  of the State school system.
The  concept  of  Environmental  School  teaching  is  not  mentioned  in  the  law
covering  state  schools  or  in  the  national  curriculum.  This means  that  it  is  the
local  school  authority  or  often  the  individual  teacher  who  plans  how  the
Environmental  Schools  are  to be  integrated  into  the  teaching.

It  is  the  view  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment  and  Energy  that  the
importance  of environmental  teaching  and  the  'green  element'  that  a number of
subjects  have  been  given  in  the  new  School  law,  will  have  the  effect  that
Environmental  School  teaching  will  be  important,  not  only  in  natural  science
teaching, but  also in a great number  of other  subjects  too where  there is a green
element.  It  is  also  the Ministry's  view  that  cooperation  between  the  Ministry of
the  Environment  and  Energy  and 
the  Ministry  of  Education  regarding
Environmental  Teaching  will  strengthen  the  environment  education  in  the
schools  and  the  teaching  in  the Environmental  Schools.

Often  an  individual  local  authority  decides  whether  it  wishes  to  set  up  and
run  an  Environmental  School.  Many  local  authorities.  The  Environmental
Schools  which  are  set  up  on  the  areas  which  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment
and  Energy  is responsible  for  are  established  in  cooperation  with  the state  forest
districts  and  one  or  more  of  the  neighbouring  local  authorities.  The  National
Forest  and  Nature  Agency  provides  the  land  and  the  especially  equipped
buildings,  however  the  running  of the  Environmental  Schools  and  the  salary of
the  Environmental  School's  staff  is paid  for  by the  local  authority.
Environmental School's teaching

Most  Environmental  Schools  have  a  set  of  written  objectives  and  even
though  there  are  big  differences  from  one  Environmental  School  to  the  next,
there  are three  concepts which  dominate  all the  objectives:

•  to experience Nature
•  to understand  Nature
•  to protect Nature

The  aim  of  Environmental  Schools  is  to  supplement  school  teaching  in  those
subjects  which  involve  Nature  and  the  Environment  so  teaching  does  not  only

Environmental Interpretation  is Flowering in Denmark 

169

take  place  in  the  classroom.  The  strength  of  the  Environmental  Schools  is  the
intensity  which  comes  from  experiences,  activities,  experiments  and  practical
tasks.  The  teaching  takes  place  in  surrounding  nature  outside  the  school's
normal boundaries. Through experiences the pupils develop an understanding of
the  interaction  between  people  and  nature  in  their  own  area.  The  underlying
idea  is  that  pupils  through  their  own  experiences  and  observations  develop  an
understanding  and  a  sense of responsibility for nature  and the environment  as a
basis for  involvement  and  action.

The  Environmental  Interpreter  is  often  employed  in  the  Environmental
School.  Sometimes  the  interpreter  is both  the  leader  and  the  only  employee. At
some  schools  they  are  more  than  one  employed  interpreter  and  teacher.  The
interpreter  is  the  expert  and  the  initiator  for  those  classes  which  visit  the
Environmental  Schools, whilst the teacher  is responsible for the teaching  during
and  after  the  visit.  The  possibility  of  visiting  an  Environmental  School  is
available  to  all year  groups i.e. from the  1st to the  10th  class.

Many  Environmental  Schools  publish  a  catalogue  with  descriptions  of  the
teaching  they  offer.  Previous  to  the  visit,  the  leader,  together  with  the  teacher,
adapts  the teaching so that  it corresponds to  the pupil's  class level and  the  part
of  the  curriculum  they  are  dealing  with  at  that  particular  time.  A  number  of
Environmental  Schools have worked  out  written  material which is sent to  those
classes  which  are  to  visit  them.  The  teaching  material  can  be  used  to  prepare
the  visit or  can  be used  afterwards.

A  visit  to  an  Environmental  School  usually  lasts  between  3  and  4  hours.
Some  teachers  choose  to  let the  class spend  a  whole  day  at  the  Environmental
School, others use the possibility of spending the night  at the school where  that
is  possible.  The  capacity  of the  Environmental  Schools  is  3,000  -  5,000  pupils
per  year  if  the  leader  alone  is  responsible  for  the  teaching.  When  the
Environmental  Schools  are  closely  connected  to  one  or  several  schools  it  is
normal  that  during  the  time  they  attend  school  a  class  will  visit  the
Environmental  Schools  at  one time.

Many  of  the  Environmental  Schools  are  so  close  to  the  schools  that  the
pupils  can  cycle  or  take  the  local  bus  over  to  the  Environmental  Schools.  The
closer the Environmental  School is to the schools the more normal it becomes to
use  it in the  daily teaching.
Environmental Interpreters
Nearly  all  the  leaders  of  The  Environmental  Schools  are  a  part  of  The
Environmental  Interpreter  Service.  They  get  through  the  same  training  course
first  for  new  employed  environmental  interpreters  and  since  through  the
training  courses  for professionals  interpreters.
Course for teachers
Only  a  small number  of Danish  school pupils will have  the possibility 'of visiting
an  Environmental School as there are only  70. Thus courses for teachers in  how
experiences in Nature,  activities  and  experiments  and how the environment  and
Nature  of the local area  can be integrated  into the teaching has become  a more
and  more  important  part  of  Environmental  Schools's  work.  Through  these
courses  the  pedagogical  methods  and  principles  which  have  been  developed  by
Environmental  Interpreters  and  by  the  Environmental  Schools  have  been
disseminated  to many  teachers.

170 

Arne Bondo-Andersen  & Marianne Linnemann


