An Account of Cultural Heritage
and Nature Conservation  in
Mustang, Nepal
H.H. Jigme S.P. Bista  and
Susanne  von  der Heide

Abstract
This article was presented as a paper to  'World Cultural Heritage: a global  challenge',
an  International Symposium  at  Hildesheim, Germany in  February  1997.  The paper
outlines  the  problems  of  attempting  to  develop a  combined  heritage  and  tourism
strategy for  the  small,  remote,  Himalayan  kingdom of  Mustang.  The development of
tourism  brings both opportunities and threats  to local people and their  identity.

North of the mountain  giants Annapurna  and Dhaulagiri, on a high plateau on
the  Nepalese  Territory  and  hemmed  in  by  a  chain  of  mountains,  some  6000
metres  high,  lies the  former  small  kingdom  of Mustang.  Up to  May  1992  this
'forbidden'  kingdom was completely inaccessible. With few exceptions, foreigners
were not  allowed to enter it.

Legends and myths swirl about Mustang, which is also called the Kingdom of
Lo.  The  fortress-like  capital,  Lo  Manthang,  is  located  at  3790  metres  and  a
single  day's  ride  from  the  Tibeto-Nepalese  border.  It  boasts  a  medieval  royal
palace  built  around  the fifteenth century  and  significant  Buddhist  monasteries
also from the fifteenth century -  like the Jhampa Lhakang with its very precious
wall-paintings  and the Thubchen  Lhakang with important  wooden carvings.

The inhabitants  of Mustang, the  Lopas, are related  ethnically  and  culturally
to the Tibetan sphere of influence. This finds expression in their way of life, their
script  and  their  festivals,  and  in  particular  in  their  religious  beliefs  which  are
oriented  to  Tibetan  Buddhism.  Within  Tibetan  Buddhism  there  are  various
schools  of  thought;  in  Mustang,  where  approximately  5,600  Lopas  live,  the
Sakya-Ngor  School  is  of  particular  importance.  This  Sakya-Ngor  Tradition  is
very  well known  in  Tibet  for  its patronage  of art  and  also for  its  philosophical
learning  and  scholarship  in  Tibet.  Only these monasteries  in  the  area  of Upper
Mustang, being outside Tibetan  territory,  have fortunately  survived  until  today,
authentically  consecrated  by  the  founder  of the  Sakya  Ngor  School,  Ngorchen
Kunga  Zangpo  (1382-1456),  of  the  mother-monastery  of  this  tradition  in
southern  Tibet, which  was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution.

Since the former  kingdom was opened up to tourism,  the people of Mustang,
with  the  support  of the  Nepalese  Government,  have been  trying  to build  up an
infrastructure  in order to keep the newly  accessible region from  being swamped
by foreign  tourists.  Officially  only  1,000  tourists  per  year  are  allowed  to  enter
Mustang.  In  1996  around  900  people  visited  the  former  kingdom.  Whoever
wants to visit Upper Mustang is required to pay a fee of 70 US dollars per person
per  day  to  the  government.  In  addition  the  costs of the  trekking  agency  must

168

ITHS 3 (3) 168-173 © Intellect Ltd 1997

The Jhampa Lhakang in  Lo Manthang,  Mustang,  built in  the  15th  century.  [Photo. Susanne
von der Heide.

be  calculated  as  nobody  is  allowed  to  enter  Upper Mustang  without  a  registered
Nepalese  travel  agency  and  without  a  liaison  officer.

Despite all the  potentially  negative  aspects of tourism,  this  is a  very  important
revenue  resource  in  this part  of the  world.  There  is little  alternative  to  a  positive
attitude  towards  tourism  in  this  area,  but  it  needs  to  be  promoted  in  a
sustainable  way,  particularly  in  this  region.  The  protection  and  preservation  of
the  valuable  natural  and  cultural  heritage  is  essential  to  the  success  of  tourism.
So far,  special  reforestation  programmes  have  been  implemented,  such  as  the
planting  of poplars  and  willows,  which  has  begun  in  all  the  larger  villages.  For
instance  tree  nurseries  and  herbal  gardens  have  been  set  up  in  Lo  Manthang
and  Kagbeni,  and  pasture  land  is being  fenced  in.  More help is needed  to  protect
against  shifting  river  courses,  more  bridges  have  to be built  and  more  foot  trails
need  to  be  laid  out.

Lodge  keeping,  and  offering  accommodation,  is  introduced  to  the  Lopa  so
they  may  have  their  own  source  of  income  and  to  show  visitors  the  homely
atmosphere  of  the  Mustang  tradition.  More  camping  and  picnic  sites  need  to  be
built  and  cooking  training  programmes  are  offered.

The  accumulation-  of  mountains  of  non-biodegradable 

rubbish  poses
additional  problems,  relating  to  their  disposal.  Waste  material  is  collected  and
buried  or  burned.  The  trekking  guides  have  to  collect  all  garbage  from  their
trekking  groups  and  hand  it  over  at  the  end  of  the  trek  to  specialty  designated
responsible  people  who  will  dump  or  recycle  it.

The  Upper  Mustang  Conservation  and  Development  Project,  which  was
especially  established  after 
these
activities.  The  project  engineers  and  co-workers  aid  in  maintaining  irrigation
systems  and  in  constructing  small-scale  hydroelectric  stations  -  as  for  instance  a
16  kilowatt  station  near  Tsarang,  the  second  biggest  settlement  in  Mustang.

the  opening  of  the  area,  has  supported 

Kerosene  depots  as  in  Kagbeni  and  Tsarang  are  also  necessary  because  they
supplement  the  quantities  of cow-dung  which  is used  instead  of firewood,  which

Cultural Heritage  and  Nature  Conservation  in  Mustang,  Nepal

169

is normally preferred  in Nepal and  is now  also in scarcity due to the increasing
demand  of  trekking  tourists.  Trekking  guides  sent  by  their  agencies  are
instructed to cook only with kerosene.

The  attempt  is  also being made  to  build  schools  and  medical  care  facilities,
for  which,  as  far  as  possible,  personnel  are  hired  locally.  Since  the  very  few
health posts that existed already are closed during winter because of the cold the
Project  has  established  a  secondary  health-post  station,  and  in  doing  so,  has
performed  a  particularly  great  service for  the  women,  children  and  old  people
who remain  behind in Lo in the winter.

Many Lopas migrate south  during the  cold period  and engage in  trade -  for
example in  textiles  and  herbs.  There  appears  to be  a  danger  that  this  seasonal
migration  may turn  into a semi-permanent migration, because the Lopas find  it
easier  to  make  their  living  in  the  lowlands  of  Nepal  and  India.  That  in  turn
indicates  that  more income-generating  programmes  and  activities  in  Mustang
need  to  be  generated  in  order  to  convince  the  people  to  stay  within  their
homeland.

These programmes need to be implemented as soon as possible, because there
is a real danger that  the traditions, and that means the identity of the Mustang
people, could so easily be lost.  In  this respect tourism in Mustang  implemented
in  a proper way can  also strengthen  the  local traditions.

In 

the 

local  Buddhist 

the  context  of  strengthening 

the
reestablishment  of  a  school  for  monks  in  Lo  Manthang  deserves  particular
notice. Ven. Khenpo Tashi Tenzing, the  abbot of the Choede Monastery, started
the  school  shortly  after  the  opening  of Mustang.  Currently  28  novices  from  all
parts  of Mustang  are  taught  there,  and  it  is also planned  to  open  a  school  for
female  novices.  Along  with  Buddhist  monks,  teachers  from  Kathmandu  are
employed in the Choede Monastic School - to teach both the local language and
the Nepalese language as Nepali is the lingua franca  of the country.

tradition, 

Moreover  it  is intended  to  restore  and  to  renovate  at  least  some  of the  old
monasteries.  In  the  village  of  Geling  the  entrance  of  the  lhakang  has  been
renovated  already  and  at  the  monastery  of  Tsarang,  which  dates  from  the
sixteenth century, a boundary  wall has been built in order to save the decaying
building.

Beside  the  two  outstanding  ancient  monasteries  Jhampa  Lhakang  and
Thubchen  Lhakang,  there  are  several  sites  in  the  capital  Lo Manthang  which
actually  should  be  listed  as  world  cultural  heritage  treasures  and  need  to  be
restored  and  safeguarded.  Luri  Gompa,  with  extraordinary  wall  paintings  also
belongs to these sites, as well as the Lo Gekar Gompa and other private chapels.
Additional  support  from  committed  channels  would  be desirable  at  some point,
given  that  the  maintenance  of  the  sacred  buildings,  including  their  unique
paintings  and  carvings,  involves  great  costs,  which  cannot  be  borne  solely by
the  people  and  the  Project.  The  security  of the  monastery  grounds  also needs
attention.  The  population  has  been  particularly  alert  following  the  robbery  of
sacred bronzes in Geling.

Tourists for  their  part  are well known  for finding  their  way into the  furthest
recesses  of  compounds  and  ferreting  out  revered  protective  deities,  which  are
often  inaccessible  even  to  the  local  population.  These  are  then  photographed

170 

H.H. Jigme S.P. Bista and Dr. Susanne von der Heide

and  perhaps  even 
countermeasures 
necessary  in  this regard  as well.

touched.  Some
are 
absolutely

the 

Since 

territory  of  Upper
Mustang  was  opened  for  foreigners  in
1992,  people  are  becoming  slowly
aware  that  the  cultural  heritage  is
under  threat.  This  was  one  of  the
reasons  why  the  Mustang  Cultural
Conservation 
was
founded.  The  aim  of  the  organisation
is  to  protect  the  culture  and  tradition
of Mustang's  ancestors.

Association 

The 

important  objectives 

that
should  be  observed  can  be  viewed  at
three  levels:

Wall  painting  of Luhipa. one of eight 
Mahasiddas  in Luri  Gompa, Mustang. 
[Photo.  Susanne  von der Heide. 

First,  at  the  level  of  research  and
documentation,  there  needs  to  be  a
goal  of  attaining 
a  comprehensive
inventory,  as  well  as  a  broad  general
knowledge  of  what  is  deemed  worth
protecting.

Second,  at  the level of preservation  there is a need to create  a protection  zone
at  Lo  Manthang,  where  no  new  building  should  be  constructed  within  the
medieval  walls  such  as  new  tourist  lodges  etc.

Finally,  and  most  especially,  at  the  level  of  education,  there  needs  to  be  a
cooperative  effort  of the local people, to pursue  a strong  educational  component,
e.g.  building  new  schools  like  the  already  existing  Choede  Monastic  School  for
novices,  and  further  extending  similar  opportunities  for  nun  novices  and  besides
to  other  branches  of  learning  such  as  establishing  an  Art  School  of  Thangka-
Painting  and  a  Centre  for  Medical  Education.

The participation  of all local population  groups  is essential  to create  a  feeling
of  consciousness  of  self-responsibility.  This  is  necessary  to  develop  a  clear
awareness  among  the  people so that  every  group  of local villagers  learns to  take
responsibility  of continuing  the  effort  in  the  long  run.  Only  in  that  way  can  the
culture  and  tradition 
be  guaranteed  for  the  people,  with  long  lasting
maintenance  and  sustainability.

Further  Reading

G.W.  Essen  & T.T. Thingo,  Die Goiter des Himalaya, Systematischer
Bestandskatalog, 2  Bd.,  Munich,  1939

Galerie  Robert  Burawoy,  Peintures du Monastere de Nor, Paris,  1978.

S.  v.d.Heide,  'Thakali  Field  Studies  -  Identification  Problems',  Journal of the
Nepal Research Centre. Vol.  8,  Wiesbaden. 1988,  pp.39-54.

S.  v.d.Heide.  'Die Thakali  des Thak  Khola  im  Distrikt  Mustang,  Central

Cultural Heritage  and Nature  Conservation  in Mustang,  Nepal

171

Nepal,  und  ihr  Wanderungsverhalten',  Reihe -  Schriften erdkundlichen
Wissens  Sudasieninstitut  Heidelberg,. Hrsg:  U.  Schweinfurth.  Stuttgart,
1993.

S.  v.d.Heide,  'Queries  and  Objectives  of  Appropriate  Technologies  in  the
Himalayan  Area'  in:  S.v.d.Heide  & T.T.  Thingo  (ed.)  Man and Environment
Nr.  1,  1995.  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  'Appropriate
Technologies  and  Environmental  Education  as  Possibilities  for  Intercultural
Perception  in  the  Himalayan  Area'  in  Bonn  1993.

S.  v.d  Heide,  'Ebene  der  Sehnsucht  -  Mustang',  Informationsschrift zur
gleichnamigen Ausstellung  im  Museum  Zundorfer Wehrtunn  Koln.  1995.

S.  v.d.Heide,  'Trekking  Tourismus  in  Nepal  -  Das  Annapurna  Conservation
Area  Project'  in  Konsequenzen des  Tourismus -  Ein  Reader mit  Beispielen aus
Entwicklungs-  und Schwellenliindern. Arbeitskreis  fur  Internationale
Wissenschaftskommunikation  e.V.  (AIW).  Hrsg:  K. Rieländer,  N.  Häusler,
Göttingen  1995,  pp.79-91.

S.v.d.Heide,  "From  Open  Air  Museum  to  Private  Collection  -  Participation,
Discovery  and  Involvement'  in  'Unity  in  Diversity'  International
Conference  on  Establishing  a  National  Ethnographic  Museum  in  Nepal.
January  1996  (Ed: National  Ethnographic  Museum  Management
Committee),  Kathmandu  1996.

H.  Hoffmann,  Symbolik  der tibetischen Religionen und des Schamanismus,
Stuttgart.  1967.

H.-G.  Hüttel,  'Archäologische  Siedlungsforschung  im  Hohen  Himalaja.  Die
Ausgrabungen  der  KAVA  im  Muktinath-Tal  /Nepal  1991-1992' Beitrage
zur  Allgemeinen und  Vergleichenden  Archäologie. Vol.  14,  pp. 47-163.  Mainz,
1995.

S.  Hummel,  Geheunnisse tibetischer Malereien. Leipzig,  1949

D.P.Jackson.  'The  Early  History  of  Lo  (Mustang)  and  Ngari'  Contributions to
Nepalese Studies,  Vol.4,  pp.39-56.  Kathmandu.  1976.

D.P.  Jackson,  'A  Genealogy  of  the  Kings  of  Lo  (Mustang)'  in  M.  Aris
(ed),  Tibetan Studies  in  Honour of  Hugh  Richardson.  Oxford,  1979,
pp.133-137.

D.P.  Jackson,  'The  Mollas  of  Mustang.  Historical,  Religious  and  Oratorical
Traditions  of  the  Nepalese-Tibetan  Borderland'  Library  of Tibetan Works and
Archives,  Dharamsala.  1984

H.  Karmay.  Early Sino-Tibetan Art.  Warminster.  1975

B.  Schmidt,  Dendrochronological  Research  in  South  Mustang'  Ancient
Nepal, Journal of  the  Department of Archaeology,  no.130-133,  pp.20-33.
Kathmandu,  1993.

T.  Schmid.  The  Eighty-five  Siddhas.  Ethnography  7.  Stockholm.  1958.

172 

H.H. Jigme S.P. Bista  and  Dr. Susanne von  der Heide

D.L. Snellgrove,  Himalayan Pilgrimage, Oxford,  1961,  2nd  edition  Boston
1981.

T.T.  Thingo  &  M.Schmidt-Thome,  'Materielle  Kultur  und  Kunst  der
Sherpa'  Beitrage zur  Sherpa-Forschung, Teil  III.  Innsbruck,  Munich,  1975.

G. Tucci,  Journey to Mustang.  Kathmandu,  1977.

R.  Vitali.  The Kingdom of  Guge, Puhrang.  New  Delhi,  1996.

Cultural  Heritage  and  Nature  Conservation  in  Mustang,  Nepal 

173


