 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Historical Archaeology and the Recent 
Urban Past
James Symonds

101000000March 2004
Taylor and Francis Ltd
rjhs10102.sgm
10.1080/1352725032000194231

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor & Francis Ltd

This  paper  examines  the  ways  in  which  international  historical  archaeologists  have
explored the recent past, in an effort to inform and contribute to contemporary debates
about social identity and social inclusion. It is argued that the archaeology of the mundane
and everyday can contribute to contemporary culture by creating a sense of community and
developing social cohesion. Emphasis is placed upon the archaeology of the recent urban
past and case studies are presented from New York, Sydney and Cape Town. The paper
concludes that the study of the materiality of urban social life offers a powerful research tool
for social scientists, and that archaeologists and heritage interpreters should make greater
use of this form of evidence within the context of early 21st-century urban regeneration
schemes in the UK.

Historical Archaeology; Material Culture; Social Inclusion; New York; 

Heritage and Culture in the UK

Heritage is a nomadic term which travels easily, and sets down roots—or bivouacs—in
1
seemingly unpromising terrain.

Heritage has indeed travelled a long way since Raphael Samuels’ prescient observa-
tion. In the course of its migration to new territories it has also changed its identity.
Exposed as a fraud and accused of idealising and commodifying the past during the
2
Thatcherite 1980s
 heritage languished in an intellectual wilderness for the greater part
of the 1990s. In the UK, the ‘heritage industry’, to borrow Hewison’s acerbic term, was
shunned  by  many  members  of  the  academic  community,  who  regarded  it  as  being
tainted  by  fundamentally  right-wing  associations.  It  was  arguably  only  sustained  by
injections of cash from sponsors who wished to project, and thereby legitimise, their
view of the present-day status quo into an imagined and ever more distant past. The

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

34

J. Symonds

unease that was felt by academics and others at the reconstitution of a single national
past,  and  one  that  was  furthermore  characterised  by  imagined  English  values,  has
3
subsequently been the focus of widespread debate by historians and archaeologists.
The term heritage was given a fresh start by the New Labour government in 1997. It
now  shelters  behind  the  alias  of  ‘culture’  and  resides  within  the  Department  for
Culture, Media and Sport. By this act, heritage was deftly re-branded. In this new mani-
festation it is no longer a source for an atavistic and sentimentalised form of comfort
and nationalistic pride but, rather, serves as a mechanism for advancing contemporary
cultural creativity and self-awareness. The new cultural heritage is proclaimed as being
central to the contemporary issues of social inclusion, sustainability and cultural diver-
sity. The case for rehabilitation was set out in the government’s 
Review of Policies Relat-
ing to the Historic Environment
Power of Place: The Future of the Historic
4
Environment
.
 As part and parcel of this re-branding of heritage the physical traces of
the past were themselves redefined. The term ‘historic environment’ is now widely used
as a catchall description for the cultural heritage. Unlike some previously used narrow
definitions of heritage it recognises that aspects of the natural and cultural world are
indivisible. The historic environment has no chronological limits and includes ‘all the
physical  evidence  for  past  human  activity,  and  its  associations  that  people  can  see,
5
understand and feel in the present world’.

 and subsequent 

What  has  been  the  impact  of  this  re-branded  form  of  heritage  upon  attitudes  to
social exclusion? One of the most significant changes is the recognition that heritage is
multi-faceted and is, by its very nature, frequently contested. It is no longer deemed
sufficient to perpetuate the grand narrative of ‘our island story’—or indeed to assume
that  the  idea  of  a  seamless  and  progressive  continuum  of  human  history  can  be
imposed from above: 

The  establishment  view  of  what  comprises  the  historic  environment—‘our  heri-
tage’—can  be  seen  as  exclusive  and  beyond  challenge.  The  word  ‘heritage’  often
carries  this  negative  connotation,  which  is  why  it  has  not  been  much  used  in  this
paper. However, when the collection of things making up heritage comes across as
more  democratic  and  open,  and  when  localness  and  multi-cultural  perspectives
become part of it, ‘heritage’ will become less excluding.

6

Hence, rather than regarding the physical legacy of past human actions as a body of
dead material, maintained by a social elite in order to legitimise contemporary estab-
lishment values and beliefs (while at same time offering a point of closure for the pre-
modern past) heritage as ‘culture’ offers a far more dynamic and fluid understanding
of possible pasts. If we accept Raymond Williams’s assertion that culture is a signifying
system ‘through which … a social order is communicated, reproduced, experienced
7
and explored’
 then it becomes possible to envisage a pluralised conception of signify-
ing practices and multi-layered discourses. This conception eschews the notion of a
fixed  and  immutable  heritage,  and  in  place  of  an  imposed  homogeneity  exposes
dialogues of difference, dissonance and diversity.

How can archaeology contribute to this new and dynamic manifestation of ‘cultural’
heritage? The approach outlined in this paper adopts an interpretation of culture that

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 



35

has been influenced by post-structuralist theory and post-modern literary criticism.
Material culture is identified as playing an active role in the shaping of cultural identi-
ties  inasmuch  as  it  both  reflects,  but  also  enables,  human  action.  It  is  argued  that
8
mundane  objects,  like  myths,  have  the  capacity  to  ‘transform  meaning  into  form’.
Taking this textual metaphor further, material culture may be regarded as a physical
manifestation of discourse, a tangible expression of social attitudes and beliefs that can
9
be transcribed and interpreted by archaeologists.
 The material record of human social
life  is  inclusive,  in  that  all  people  leave  traces  of  their  presence  in  the  world,  albeit
mostly through small and unconscious day-to-day acts. Bearing in mind Glassie’s belief
that ‘culture is not a problem with a solution’ and that ‘studying people involves refin-
ing  understanding,  not  achieving  actual  proof’,
  it  therefore  follows  that  historical
archaeology has the capacity to create alternative ‘ways of seeing’ that cross the entire
social spectrum. The potential implications for modern-day socially excluded groups,
who may wish to use archaeological evidence to revisit and refashion ideas about the
individual  and  community  in  the  past,  and  to  thereby  actively  question  systems  of
power and authority in the present, are profound.

11

10

Archaeology, Material Culture, and the Recent Past

The discipline of archaeology emerged as a method of studying the distant past. During
the 19th century, and for much of the 20th century, archaeologists attempted to char-
acterise  ancient  cultures  through  their  material  remains,  and  to  reconstruct  culture
histories  that  placed  these  cultures  within  a  broad  sweep  of  social  evolution.  This
‘culture-history’  approach,  which  assumed  a  direct  (but  unproven)  correlation
between ancient material culture and distinct ethnic or racial groups, has been discred-
ited by modern scholars, but persists in some regions of the world, where it is often put
to the service of nationalist or imperialist agendas.

12

Archaeologists have developed the study of contemporary material culture, and of
material culture from the recent past, in two ways. On the one hand, there has been an
interest in the ways in which what is often termed the ‘archaeological record’—i.e. the
material residues of human action, are constituted. Scholars such as William Rathje of
the University of Tucson have argued that the practice of archaeology should not be
limited to the exploration of ancient cultures, but should be ‘… a focus on the interac-
13
tion between material culture and human behaviour, regardless of time or space’.
Rathje’s famous Garbage Project, initiated in 1973, used archaeological techniques to
sort and quantify modern household refuse, in an attempt to explore consumer behav-
14
iour from the material residues that are left behind in trash-cans and landfill sites.
The  important  recognition  that  archaeology  has  the  capacity  to  comment  upon  the
interplay of material culture and human behaviour in contemporary society was devel-
oped in the 1970s and 1980s by a number of North American researchers.
 Although
many scholars, including Rathje, clearly set out to comment upon contemporary social
and economic practices, much of the research that was undertaken at this time focused
upon purely methodological issues. It was felt that an understanding of archaeological

15

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

36

J. Symonds

formation processes might be of ethno-archaeological value, and that a close-grained
understanding of production and consumption might somehow reveal laws of human
behaviour that could be applied to the patterning of artefacts from the more distant
past.

16

In  more  recent  times  the  field  of  modern  material-culture  studies  has  diversified
tremendously. British scholars such as Ian Hodder and Daniel Miller have stressed that
far from passively reflecting human behaviour, material culture plays an active role in
the negotiation and reproduction of social relations.
 Victor Buchli and Gavin Lucas
have  gone  still  further  in  their 
,  and  have
suggested that the act of archaeology constitutes objects for the formation of discourses
about absent or denied subjects, as a form of ‘creative materialising intervention, which
has redemptive and therapeutic powers which help individuals and communities cope
with painful contradictions that otherwise would remain unarticulated’.

Archaeologies  of  the  Contemporary  Past

18

17

The second way in which archaeologists have focused upon the material culture of
the  recent  past  is  through  the  pursuit  of  historical  archaeology.  The  term  historical
archaeology  emerged  in  North  America  in  the  early  20th  century,  and  was  used  to
describe  the  investigation  of  historic  sites  that  were  either  associated  with  famous
historical figures, such as Abraham Lincoln’s house in Springfield Illinois, or with land-
mark events, such as battles, that were deemed to be of importance to American or
Canadian  national  history.
  Much  early  work  concentrated  on  preserving  and
presenting historic sites from the colonial period, and archaeology tended to play a
relatively minor role, recovering the ground plans of buildings, and retrieving a selec-
tion of period artefacts in order to fill in the gaps in the received historical narrative,
and to illustrate aspects of everyday life. However, by the mid-1970s historical archae-
ology  had  shaken  off  the  image  of  ‘hand-maiden  to  history’,  and  had  matured  to
become  a  recognised  sub-discipline  of  archaeology.  James  Deetz,  the  pre-eminent
American historical archaeologist of the 1970s, broadened the definition of historical
archaeology to become: 

19

the archaeology of the spread of European culture throughout the world since the
fifteenth century and its impact on indigenous peoples.

20

This definition placed the making of the modern world at the centre of archaeological
research agendas, and focused attention upon the undocumented lives of ordinary men
and women. The rise of civil-rights movements, and the concomitant reassertion of
ethnic pride in the USA in the 1960s and 1970s, encouraged many historical archaeol-
ogists to explore issues of race, ethnicity, and social identity. This has led to a prolifer-
ation  of  studies  that  explore  the  lived  experience  of  African-American  plantation
slaves

 and other racially oppressed or socially disadvantaged groups.

21

Historical  archaeologists  have  investigated  the  archaeology  of  capitalism,  and  the
origins of the political and economic structures that dominate the modern world.
 In
attempting to unravel the material dimensions of capitalism, historical archaeologists
are forced to consider the socially constructed categories of race, class and gender.
 In
so doing, they draw attention to inequality and to contested pasts, and give voice to the

22

23

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 



37

otherwise silent individuals or groups who, by virtue of their illiteracy or lowly status,
are often confined to the margins of conventional history. One of the most important
aspects of this work is that it enables archaeologists to move beyond their traditional
stereotyped image of detached scientists, who hurriedly rescue material facts by exca-
vation, and present their findings in dry, and often inaccessible, technical reports, and
to be seen instead as cultural animators, with the capacity to shape debate, and thereby
engender social change.

Urban Regeneration in the UK: An Opportunity for Research

24

25

In the UK, the desire to recognise culture as ‘a key driver of the new economy’
 has
coincided with a shift in national planning policy that aims to provide four million
additional homes over the next 25 years. A target figure of 60% of these new dwellings
will be built upon brownfield sites.
 In North America the term brownfield is specifi-
cally used to refer to a contaminated site of any date that is in need of remediation.
However, in the UK, a brownfield site may be any area of previously developed land.
Most  brownfield  sites  in  Britain  were  formerly  used  for  industrial  or  transport
purposes and the majority of these sites date from the first phase of industrialisation,
i.e. ca 1800–1914. Elsewhere in Europe dates vary, according to the onset of industrial-
isation. Thus in Germany brownfield sites generally date from 1870 to 1940, and in
eastern and southern Europe from 1900 to 1970.

26

The need to regenerate brownfield sites has led to a variety of high-profile political
measures. English Heritage, for example, has strenuously promoted the reuse of redun-
dant historic industrial buildings. The resulting conservation-led renewal has gener-
ated  social  and  economic  benefits  in  many  inner-city  areas—the  so-called  ‘heritage
dividend’.
 An appreciation of the architectural legacy of British industrialisation has
encouraged a new generation of studies into regional post-medieval craft specialisms
and industrial processes.
Archaeology
and Planning
 has led to a steady increase in the amount of commercial archaeological
work  being  undertaken  on  urban  post-medieval  sites.  Unfortunately,  much  of  this
work has been small scale and site based. It has frequently lacked any form of theoret-
ical underpinning, and has rarely lent itself to broader interpretations, or syntheses of
findings.

 The introduction of government advice note 

27

28

29

The 

Review of Policies Relating to the Historic Environment

 made the important point
that  connections  should  be  made  beyond  England  to  other  continents  to  recover
shared histories that may have resonance with England’s minority and ethnic commu-
nities. The examples cited of other cultures affected by British imperialism included the
17th- and 18th-century Caribbean, with evidence of slavery; the Indian sub-continent,
with development of industries and railways; and the remains of colonial settlements
and gold rush encampments in South Africa and Australia.

30

In addition to the historical movement of people and ideas, work by international
historical  archaeologists  has  taken  a  global  perspective  on  the  explosion  of  British
manufactured  goods  that  emanated  from  the  UK  from  the  early  19th  century

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

38

J. Symonds

31
 Cutlery from Sheffield has been excavated from early 19th-century deposits
onwards.
32
in Sydney
 and pottery from Stoke-on-Trent may be found in dump deposits world-
wide. These discarded artefacts provide a common thread that links brownfield sites in
the UK—the onetime self-proclaimed ‘workshop of the world’—to a host of former
colonial towns and cities.

This paper argues that the historical archaeology of urban brownfield sites can play
a vital role in creating a sense of community and developing social cohesion and that
this can assist with issues of self-empowerment and social inclusion. Three case studies
are presented, from the international field of historical archaeology. The overall aim is
to demonstrate that the historical archaeology of the mundane and everyday can make
a positive contribution to contemporary culture. It is hoped that this paper will stimu-
late British archaeologists to study the recent urban past, and to examine the material-
ity of human social life in global perspective. In so doing, they will need to embrace a
new form of reflexive social archaeology, and to discard some deeply inscribed notions
about British national heritage. The rewards for this realignment and acceptance of
heritage as 
 are, however, likely to be diverse. Two clear benefits would be a far
wider public constituency taking an interest in archaeological research, and a recogn-
ised  stake  for  archaeologists  in  the  development  of  social  policy  and  educational
outreach programmes in areas undergoing urban regeneration.

culture

Historical Archaeology and the Recent Urban Past

How can historical archaeology contribute to the problem of urban social inclusion?
Gaining the interest, and perhaps above all trust, of the socially excluded is a notori-
ously difficult undertaking. In many urban areas the presence of high unemployment
and a large non-white ethnic population means that archaeology is regarded as an irrel-
evant or luxury pastime. The fact that the majority of archaeologists tend to be white,
male, middle aged and middle class also tends to create a barrier to communication.
Archaeologists are immediately assumed to belong to, and/or represent, the views of
the establishment, and are therefore viewed with suspicion. Archaeology, nevertheless,
has the capacity to appeal to a range of human emotions and senses, and by focusing
on human experience can transcend and challenge present-day formulations of class
and authority.

The case studies that follow are linked by the recognition that material culture plays
an active role in the formulation and presentation of social identity. Each study places
artefacts  recovered  by  archaeological  excavation  in  historical  context,  and  thereby
generates observations of relevance to contemporary social issues. By ‘holding a mirror
up to life’ historical archaeology is thus able to reveal the origins of different forms of
prejudice and inequality and to promote the need for greater social inclusion. Examples
have been chosen to illustrate three facets of work by historical archaeologists on the
recent urban past. These are: deconstructing the myth of the urban slum; exploring the
origins of the multi-ethnic and multi-racial modern city; and maintenance of social
identity in the face of oppression.

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 



39

Deconstructing the Myth of the Slum: The Rocks, Sydney

When the First Fleet landed at Sydney Cove in 1788, they were faced with a dense cover
of Red Gum and Banksia trees. The trees thinned out over the rocky western shore and
so this location, which came to be known as the Rocks, was the first area to be cleared
for settlement.

In 1994 a team of professional archaeologists augmented by 400 volunteers exca-
vated a plot of land between Cumberland and Gloucester Streets, at the foot of Sydney
Harbour Bridge. The archaeological investigation set out to establish new perspectives
on a physical and cultural transformation. In the space of 100 years the landscape of the
Rocks had changed from being a forested Aboriginal hunting and fishing ground to
become first a convict settlement, and latterly a densely occupied urban district that
housed tradespeople and the labouring poor.

Excavations revealed two half blocks of the 19th-century city and the remains of 42
former  houses.  More  than  750,000  artefacts  were  retrieved.  The  project  attracted
intense public interest. One thousand school children visited the site and scores of pass-
ers-by viewed the excavations in progress from a specially constructed viewing plat-
form. In discussing the significance of the project, Grace Karskens has commented that
many visitors were drawn to the site by the lure of buried treasure. One of the most
frequently  asked  questions  was  whether  the  archaeological  team  had  unearthed  any
gold or precious stones. However, beyond this usually flippant enquiry, many visitors
were clearly intrigued by the opportunity to encounter remains of the early city. This
was nowhere more apparent than among the descendants of those who had once lived
in, or close to, the Rocks: 

People are … drawn by that sense of connectedness with the past, the immediacy of
the physical, the tactile dimension, the recognition that though these generations of
people have gone forever, they nevertheless left behind them all these places, spaces
and things.

33

Historical archaeology allowed the transformations to be placed in historical context.
The time depth at once provided a sense of distance from the early days of European
colonisation, and the violence acted out upon the Aboriginal peoples, while at the same
time anchoring the present-day inhabitants of the city to the hopes, experience and toil
of  previous  generations.  The  focus  on  individual  human  experience,  family  and
communal life is significant. In contrast to the study of prehistory, historical archaeol-
ogy has the capacity to generate a sense of intimacy, inviting its audience to draw close
to learn about a known individual or family. The story of the Rocks, and the families
that lived there, was constructed by weaving together evidence for the materiality of
day-to-day life with oral and documentary history. This served to challenge established
views of the urban slum: 

Against those well-known official photographs of cramped back yards and muddy
courts, we can set private photographs of couples standing in front of neat houses
with  lace  curtains,  handsome  and  elaborate  dinner  sets,  articles  of  cleanliness  and
comfort. … And instead of the pale, anonymous ‘faces in the street’ or the hapless

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

40

J. Symonds

inhabitants of slumland, we can substitute real people with real names, family and
neighbourhood bonds, and the webs of social aspiration and cultural practice, in all
their varied complexity.

34

Archaeological work at the Rocks drew attention to the struggles and failures, as well as
the  successes  of  life.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  referring  to  the  experience  of  Irish
settlers. The Irish formed the largest non-English immigrant group to Australia prior
to  1947.  Many  Irish  immigrants  chose  to  settle  in  the  Rocks  and  the  neighbouring
district of Miller’s Point. Their presence was greeted with fear and suspicion and in
some  cases  open  hostility  by  the  English  Protestant  majority.
  Irish  immigrants
responded to this prejudice with a variety of tactics. At one level they established close-
knit self-help networks, and sheltered behind the public face of the Roman Catholic
Church. However, they also altered their social habits to fit in with Protestant values
and  practices,  effectively  attempting  to  beat  the  English  at  their  own  game.  Bridget
Meaney, an Irish orphan, consciously altered her identity to avoid persecution by aban-
doning  Catholicism  and  having  her  eight  children  baptised  in  the  local  Anglican
church.  The  lives  of  Bridget  and  her  husband  William  Merchant  were  nonetheless
marred by debt, and they were forced to abandon their possessions and the hotel they
ran in the Rocks in 1872.

36

35

As  already  stated  above,  one  thing  that  sets  historical  archaeology  apart  from
conventional social history is the recognition that material culture plays an active role
in the creation of identity and the performance of day-to-day life. Artefacts can be used,
in conjunction with documentary records, to offer an independent insight into human
behaviour. Irish identities left a ‘mingled yet insistent material representation’ in the
assemblages of artefacts that were recovered by archaeological excavation.
 After the
1840s, clay tobacco pipes used by residents of the Rocks often bore Irish nationalist
symbols or slogans. The word ‘Repeal’ appeared on many pipe bowls and referred to
Daniel O’Connor’s campaign to repeal the 1800 Act of Union between England and
Ireland. Other pipes were marked with the words ‘Erin- Go -Bragh’ (Ireland forever).
Fragments  of  jugs  and  ‘Irish’  ring-necked  decanters  represented  the  Irish  habit  of
drinking in groups. These were used to carry beer or rum from the pub to the place of
consumption. The Roman Catholic faith also left a clear signature in the form of rosary
beads, small metal medallions, and pendants carved in the shape of a cross from bog
oak.

38

37

The Origin of Multi-ethnic and Multi-racial Modern Cities: New York, Five Points

According to the historical archaeologist Rebecca Yamin, recent work in the Five Points
 This statement has
district of New York told a story of New York ‘becoming itself’.
since been imbued with a deep sense of irony, as artefacts and site records from the Five
Points project were destroyed in a basement store beneath the World Trade Center on
11 September 2001.

39

Prior to the late 18th century, the Five Points area had been outside the city limits. It
had been used as a burial ground by Africans and other socially marginalised groups.

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 



41

Waters from the Collect Pond had attracted a variety of proto-industrial activities, such
as slaughtering, tanning, and glue making. Domestic settlement only extended into the
area in the years following the American Revolutionary War. The African burial ground
was sealed beneath a thick deposit of soil and rubble in 1795 and a street grid was laid
out by 1825. By 1850 the area was among the most densely populated districts of New
York. The transformation from an industrial hinterland to a residential and commercial
district was matched by a sharp demographic shift. The pre-late 18th century popula-
tions of African and Euro-Americans were replaced by an influx of newly arrived immi-
grants: ‘The multi-racial, multi-ethnic character of New York was born in this period
40
and the Five Points neighbourhood may be seen as a crucible for its development.’
Overcrowding and poor living conditions soon led to the perception that this down-
town area of Manhattan was a slum. The Foley Square project allowed two areas of the
district to be investigated ahead of development by the General Services Administration
(GSA). The first—the former African burial ground—was located beneath a proposed
office block and the second, the Five Points junction, beneath the site of a proposed
Courthouse building. The questions formulated by the excavation team were explicitly
devised to explore working-class ‘cultures’ and the origins of racial mixing within the
city. What was the relationship between the two blocks? Did the descendants of Africans
who had been buried in the burial ground in the 18th century remain in the neighbour-
hood, and become part of the racial mix in the 19th century? Second, how did the area
gain its reputation as being the most depraved neighbourhood of the city? And what
was life like for the generally poor people who inhabited the area?

Excavations at Five Points revealed that the area had indeed been a crowded place.
The artefacts recovered threw light on working lives, in a number of ways. Yamin’s
interpretive approach to historical archaeology viewed material culture as a non-verbal
means  of  communication.  Far  from  being  mute  and  passive  objects,  artefacts  can
condition and sometimes control social action. Sherds of pottery or glass from broken
vessels show not only how workers chose to spend their wages but also, critically, who
or what they aspired to be. An important finding in this respect was the realisation that:
‘The working class did not imitate the middle class: it appropriated its symbolic para-
phernalia and used it in the discourse of everyday life.’

41

Descriptions of Five Points as a slum filled with drunken and depraved criminals
were not supported by the archaeological evidence. Instead, it seems apparent that the
image of the district generated in the 19th century was stereotypical and owed more to
middle-class perceptions of poverty and a desire to promote domesticity than to any
concrete reality.

42

Maintaining Identity in the Face of Oppression: District Six, Cape Town

An explicit attempt to explore the active role of material culture in everyday life has
been made by the University of Cape Town’s Research Unit for the Archaeology of
Cape Town (RESUNACT). Its research is based upon the following propositions about
material culture, namely that: 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

42

J. Symonds

G

G

G

G

G

material culture operates alongside language as a system of communication;
material  culture  has  marked  polyvalent  qualities  that  supplement  the  multiple
meanings of language;
this  polyvalency  opens  up  rich  possibilities  for  ambiguity  in  the  significations  of
meaning attributed to material culture;
such ambiguities of meaning become the focal points of the day-by-day dialectics of
domination and resistance;
the material traces of the past play a significant role in the formation of identities in
the present.

43

Martin  Hall,  Professor  of  Historical  Archaeology  at  the  University  of  Cape  Town,
recalls the story of District Six. Drawing upon the propositions set out above, he argues
that the material traces of the past can ensure that a sense of identity is kept alive in the
face of oppression.
 Streets and row houses were built upwards from the castle and
shoreline at Cape Town in 1838, following the abolition of slavery. The suburb was
named in 1867. It was the first destination for many immigrants to South Africa, and
had a dense population of mostly poor people. A little over 100 years later, in February
1966, the South African government issued a proclamation declaring that the district
would be cleared and redeveloped for white occupation. The 62,000 population (all but
1,000  of  whom  were  ‘coloured’)  would  be  removed  within  five  years.  Local  protest
groups  rallied  support  against  the  removals  and  resistance  crystallised  in  the  multi-
group  ‘Hands  off  District  Six’  (HODS).  Several  attempts  at  redevelopment  failed
between 1966 and August 1997; the Land Court overruled government and private-
sector attempts to redevelop the area and gave it back to its residents. By this time,
however,  demolition  had  already  cleared  most  of  the  houses  of  the  poor.  The  once
crowded and cosmopolitan district had been reduced to a shadow of its former self.
Although the footprints of some houses survived, many were marked only by rubble.
The  only  buildings  left  standing  within  the  network  of  overgrown  streets  were  the
former churches, mosques and schools.

For  Martin  Hall,  the  attempted  erasure  of  District  Six  represents  ‘a  single  place
within the apartheid geography of the Cape; a physical monument to those who had
been  dispersed  to  the  resettlement  townships  and  beyond,  and  to  those  who  had
successfully resisted the redevelopment of “salted earth” at the hand of others.
 Mate-
rial culture was used to give meaning to this struggle in a variety of innovatory ways.
South  African  intellectuals  instigated  acts  of  physical  commemoration.  In  1981  the
artist Sue Williamson heaped a pile of debris that included bricks, linoleum, a child’s
shoe, and a kettle, on the floor of a gallery in Cape Town. Williamson’s installation,
which was named ‘The Last Supper’, was surrounded by six shrouded chairs and was
accompanied by a backdrop of taped sounds of bulldozers and the recollections of resi-
dents of the district. Proceeds from the installation were donated towards the establish-
ment of a District Six community museum.

44

45

In 1996, archaeologists from the University of Cape Town’s Research Unit for the
Archaeology of Cape Town made a systematic collection of artefacts from demolished

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 



43

buildings on Tennant Street, at the heart of District Six. Finds were retrieved from a
mid-19th-century midden that contained domestic debris from the former tenement
houses. This was an exercise in public archaeology and the artefacts were used to teach
local schoolchildren about archaeological techniques. Some of the schoolchildren were
the children or grandchildren of the displaced. The exercise allowed them to witness
46
the excitement of discovery and to piece together and make sense of broken pottery.

The re-presentation of District Six continued in September 1997, when the District
Six Museum organised a Heritage Day sculpture festival attracting thousands of visitors
to commemorate the former suburb. One man who visited the site, Igshaan Jacobs, a
former  resident  forcibly  removed  from  Constitution  Street,  was  a  keen  collector  of
ceramic sherds. His attempts to reassemble a complete teacup from the sherds offer a
clear metaphor and underline the frustrations of reconstructing history from shattered
materials and fragmented memories: ‘this porcelain is how I relate to my history. If I
could just piece together one small cup from all the pieces I’ve gathered I would have
something to hold onto.’
 The story of District Six, and the oppression acted out upon
the former inhabitants, was kept alive in other ways. Williamson explored District Six
further, with her ‘Last Supper Re-visited’. In this piece, shown at the Venice Biennale
in  1993,  light  was  cast  through  resin-encased  fragments  of  debris  onto  a  shrouded
white table. The Diaspora was commemorated in a high-profile stage show. ‘District
Six—The  Musical’  opened  in  1987  and  toured  Cape  Town,  Johannesburg  and  Port
Elizabeth.

47

Discussion

The foregoing case studies demonstrate that historical archaeology can play an active
role in addressing the issue of social inclusion. The case studies are drawn from three
different continents, but each is concerned with the lives of the poorest inhabitants of
an  historic  city.  Narratives  are  pieced  together  with  the  assistance  of  archaeological
techniques and information, but the stories they tell contain much of interest to histor-
ical  ethnographers  or  social  historians.  The  critical  difference  between  historical
archaeology and these related disciplines is the capacity for archaeology to link the past
with the present through the medium of material culture. In the examples cited, mate-
rial culture has been used to go beyond the reconstruction of chronology, economics
and technology, to reveal intimate details of everyday life. As the Australian academics
Alan Mayne and Tim Murray have recently commented: ‘our job as historical archae-
ologists is to imagine the existence of other lives on the basis of the empirical informa-
tion we have before us.’

48

In  engaging  a  wide  public  constituency,  archaeology  has  certain  advantages  over
conventional history. Archaeological excavations on urban brownfield sites are by defi-
nition located in run-down areas undergoing regeneration. These sites are in the heart
of  the  poorest  districts,  in  areas  that  are  characterised  by  high  unemployment,  and
inhabited by a diverse range of ethnic and racial groups. As these areas are redeveloped,
archaeological  excavations  can  serve  as  a  ‘cultural  spectacle’.  Excavations  focus  the

 
 
 

 

 

44

J. Symonds

attention of residents and visitors to an area in a particular place. In so doing, they
inspire the creation of narratives that celebrate the changing locality and the commu-
nities that have lived there.

The artefacts recovered by excavation allow the materiality of day-to-day life to be
reconstructed. Unlike many historical documents, which were by and large written by,
or for, figures in authority, the material evidence does not privilege elites, but sheds
light on all levels of society. The finds recovered by excavation are not a ‘dead body’ of
material.  Like  oral  history,  artefacts  articulate  the  process  of  remembrance  and
commemoration. Memories of the past, including contradictory ones, endure because
they are ‘bound to the present for [their] survival’.
 The interwoven threads of oral
narrative,  conventional  documentary  history  and  archaeological  material  provide  a
powerful and reflexive collective mnemonic.

49

Excavations take place in open spaces, and can thus be regarded as interactive ‘muse-
ums  without  walls’.  They  lack  the  formality  of  municipal  museums,  which  are
frequently housed in grand public buildings, and allow onlookers to enter and engage
in dialogue, or to maintain their distance and anonymously observe work from the
street. In this respect it is crucial that adequate attention is paid to display boards that
welcome  visitors  and  detail  findings,  and  to  the  provision  of  on-site  interpreters  to
explain the latest findings to interested onlookers in a non-technical language. Many
large excavation projects also now host a Web site, with a daily bulletin page linked to
a photo gallery, or video clips.

Material recovered by excavation can act as a springboard for the cultural imagina-
tion that goes far beyond traditional forms of archaeological interpretation and dissem-
ination. It is, therefore, important that the stories created by archaeologists about a
particular locality or community are not dissipated as soon as the excavation project is
completed. The value of any large archaeology project must in part be measured by the
sustainable legacy that it leaves behind. One way of achieving a sustainable legacy is to
link archaeological interpretations to public art, by inspiring visual and other artists
and community arts groups to explore aspects of their individual or collective pasts
through creative media.

In Sheffield, England, the sites of early steel-making furnaces at Riverside Exchange
are being used to inspire the creation of steel sculptures that represent the metalwork-
ing industries that occupied the site in the 18th and 19th centuries. Riverside Exchange,
in common with many English brownfield sites, is located on the floor of a river valley.
This has enabled a second strand of interpretation to be created in the form of a themed
riverside walk. Durable display boards have been installed at intervals along the banks
of the River Don. The boards illustrate the historical development of the area, and high-
light adjoining features of archaeological interest. This has created a sensual cultural
corridor that links the City Centre and Kelham Island Industrial Museum, two other-
wise unconnected localities.

But  are  these  fairly  traditional  heritage  interpretation  methods  enough?  At  a
recent  unrelated  conference  on  heritage  interpretation  and  the  archaeology  of
slavery  in  the  Caribbean  a  number  of  black  participants  made  the  important  point

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 



45

that  the  archaeology  being  undertaken  in  the  Caribbean  is  never  truly  socially
inclusive  as  it  is  still,  for  the  most  part,  being  organised  and  conducted  by  white
middle-class  British  or  American  academics.  How  could  we  possibly  hope  to
empathise  with  the  experience  of  a  black  18th-century  slave?  Although  this  point
was well made, and must be treated with due respect, it does raise the rather danger-
ous proposition that only black individuals should comment upon the possible lived
experience  of  black  slaves,  only  Jewish  individuals  on  the  Holocaust,  and  only  the
descendants of famished Irish peasants on the Irish Diaspora. Interpretation should
not be guided by an assumed genetic predisposition, or by shallow empathy.

This  raises  the  critical  point  that  archaeology  on  its  own  can  only  go  some  way
towards satisfying the needs of social inclusion. Archaeologists must work in partner-
ship  with  others,  and  include  them  in  the  planning  and  execution  of  projects  at  all
stages.  In  terms  of  urban  regeneration  programmes,  this  will  entail  liaising  with
community  action  groups,  and  enabling  individuals  to  create  their  own  interpreta-
tions, based upon the archaeological evidence. The value of the case studies presented
above,  particularly  the  example  of  District  Six  in  Cape  Town,  is  that  archaeological
work went hand in hand with non-specialist local interpretations. This allowed local
action groups to claim ownership of their own cultural heritage, rather than feeling that
others had created it for their consumption.

Notes

[1] Samuel, 
[2] Wright, 

Theatres of Memory
On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain

, 205.

; Hewison,

The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline
.

[3] Boswell  and  Evans, 

Representing  the  Nation:  A  Reader

;  Colley, 

Britons:  Forging  the  Nation

1707–1837

; Lawrence, 

Archaeologies of the British
.

[4] English  Heritage, 

standing. The Historic Environment: Condition, Trends and Future Contexts
Power of Place: The Future of the Historic Environment
.

Review  of  Policies  Relating  to  the  Historic  Environment,  Paper  1—Under-
; English Heritage,

[5] English  Heritage, 

Review  of  Policies  Relating  to  the  Historic  Environment,  Paper  1—Under-

, 5.

standing
Ibid., 9.

, 13.

, 131.

Culture

Mythologies

Passing the Time in Ballymenone
, 13.
Debating the Archaeological Heritage

[6]
[7] Williams, 
[8] Barthes, 
[9] Yentsch and Beaudry, ‘American Material Culture in Mind, Thought, and Deed,’ 225.
[10] Glassie, 
Skeates, 
[11]
[12]
Ibid., 90.
[13] Rathje, ‘Modern Material Culture Studies,’ 2.
[14]
[15] Gould and Schiffer, 
[16] Buchli and Lucas, 
[17] Hodder, 
Cultures
.

Modern Material Culture Studies: The Archaeology of Us
.

Ibid.; Rathje, ‘The Archaeology of Us,’ 158–77.

The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings

Archaeologies of the Contemporary Past

, 4.
; Hodder, 

Reading the Past

; Miller, 

, 9.

[18] Buchli and Lucas, 
[19] Orser and Fagan, 

Archaeologies of the Contemporary Past
Historical Archaeology

, 25.

, 17.

Material

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

46

J. Symonds

, 5.

In Small Things Forgotten
Kingsmill  Plantations,  1619–1800:  Archaeology  of  Country  Life  in  Colonial  Virginia
;
The Material Basis of the Postbellum Tenant Plantations: Historical Archaeology in the

[20] Deetz, 
[21] Kelso, 
Orser, 
South Carolina Piedmont
.
Johnson, 
;  Leone,  ‘Some  Opinions  about  Recovering  Mind,’
742–60;  Leone,  ‘The  Georgian  Order  as  the  Order  of  Merchant  Capitalism  in  Annapolis,
Maryland,’ 235–62; Leone, ‘A Historical Archaeology of Capitalism,’ 251–68; Orser, 
A Histor-
ical  Archaeology  of  the  Modern  World
;  Paynter,  ‘Steps  to  an  Archaeology  of  Capitalism:
Material Change and Class Analysis,’ 407–33.

An  Archaeology  of  Capitalism

[22]

[23] Delle et al., 
[24] Brookes et al., 

Lines that Divide: Historical Archaeologies of Race, Class, and Gender

, 14.

Deep Roots, Real Achievements, Lofty Ambitions: Visions and Priorities for the

[25]

Cultural Life of Yorkshire and the Humber 2001–2010
Symonds,  ‘Archaeology  from  the  Brown  Earth:  The  Challenge  of  the  Urban  Renaissance,’
31–32.

, 9.

[26] English Heritage, 
[27] Cattell  and  Hawkins, 

Power of Place

, 8.

The  Birmingham  Jewellery  Quarter

;  Wray, 

One  Great  Workshop:  The

Buildings of the Sheffield Metal Trades
.

[28] Department of the Environment, 
[29] Palmer and Neaverson, 

Archaeology and Planning
.

Industrial Archaeology: Principles and Practice

, 3; Newman et al., 

The

Historical Archaeology of Britain, c. 1540–1900

, 2.

[30] English  Heritage, 

Review  of  Policies  Relating  to  the  Historic  Environment,  Paper  1—Under-

standing
.

, 18.

Ibid., 23.
Ibid., 109.
Ibid., 112–13.
Ibid., 107.
Ibid., pp. 108–9.

Archaeologies of the British
.
The Historical Archaeology of the Sheffield Cutlery and Tableware Trades 1750–1900
.
Inside the Rocks: The Archaeology of a Neighbourhood

[31] Lawrence, 
[32]
Symonds, 
[33] Karskens, 
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39] Yamin, ‘Becoming New York: The Five Points Neighbourhood,’ 1.
[40]
[41]
[42] Fitts, ‘The Rhetoric of Reform: The Five Points Missions and the Cult of Domesticity,’ 128.
[43] Hall, 
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47] Quoted in ibid., 161.
[48] Mayne and Murray, 
[49] Hutton, 

The Archaeology of Urban Landscapes: Explorations in Slumland

Archaeology and the Modern World

Ibid., 160.
Ibid., 161.
Ibid., 161.

History as an Art of Memory

Ibid., 1.
Ibid., 13.

, 157.

, 17.

, 5.

References

Barthes, R. 
Boswell, D., and J. Evans, eds. 

Mythologies

. New York: Hill & Wang, 1972.

Representing the Nation: A Reader

. London and New York: Routledge,

1999.

Brookes,  F.,  R.  Chandler,  and  B.  Mc  Loughlin. 

Visions  and  Priorities  for  the  Cultural  Life  of  Yorkshire  and  the  Humber  2001–2010
Yorkshire Cultural Consortium, 2001.

Deep  Roots,  Real  Achievements,  Lofty  Ambitions:
.  Leeds:

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 



47

Buchli, V., and G. Lucas, eds. 

Archaeologies of the Contemporary Past

. London and New York: Rout-

ledge, 2001.

Cattell, J., and B. Hawkins. 

The Birmingham Jewellery Quarter

. Birmingham: English Heritage and

Birmingham City Council, 2000.

Britons: Forging the Nation 1707–1837
In Small Things Forgotten. New York: Doubleday, 1977.

Colley, L. 
Deetz, J. 
Delle, J. A., S. A. Mrozowski, and R. Paynter, eds. Lines that Divide: Historical Archaeologies of Race,

. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.

Class, and Gender. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2000.

Department  of  the  Environment.  Archaeology  and  Planning,  Planning  Policy  Advice  Note  16.

London: Department of the Environment, 1990.

English Heritage. Power of Place: The Future of the Historic Environment. London: English Heritage,

2000.

———. Review of Policies Relating to the Historic Environment, Paper 1—Understanding. The Historic

Environment: Condition, Trends and Future Contexts. London: English Heritage, 2000.

Fitts, R. ‘The Rhetoric of Reform: The Five Points Missions and the Cult of Domesticity.’ Historical

Archaeology, 35, no. 3 (2001): 115–32.

Glassie, H. Passing the Time in Ballymenone. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1982.
Gould, R. A., and M. B. Schiffer, eds. Modern Material Culture Studies: The Archaeology of Us. New

York: Academic Press, 1981.

Hall, M. Archaeology and the Modern World. London and New York: Routledge, 2000.
Hewison, R. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London: Methuen, 1987.
Hodder, I. Reading the Past. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
———, ed. The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Hutton, P. H. History as an Art of Memory. Hanover and London: University Press of New England,

1993.

Johnson, M. An Archaeology of Capitalism. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.
Karskens, G. Inside the Rocks: The Archaeology of a Neighbourhood. Sydney: Hale & Iremonger, 1999: 18.
Kelso,  W.  M.  Kingsmill  Plantations,  1619–1800:  Archaeology  of  Country  Life  in  Colonial  Virginia.

Orlando: Academic Press, 1984.

Lawrence, S., ed. Archaeologies of the British. London and New York: Routledge, 2003.
Leone, M. P. ‘The Georgian Order as the Order of Merchant Capitalism in Annapolis, Maryland.’ In
The Recovery of Meaning: Historical Archaeology in the Eastern United States, edited by M. P.
Leone, and P. B. Potter. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1988: 235–62.

———. ‘Some Opinions about Recovering Mind.’ American Antiquity, 47 (1982): 742–60.
———. ‘A Historical Archaeology of Capitalism.’ American Anthropologist, 97 (1995): 251–68.
Mayne,  A.,  and  T.  Murray,  eds.  The  Archaeology  of  Urban  Landscapes:  Explorations  in  Slumland.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Miller, D., ed. Material Cultures. London: University College London Press, 1998.
Newman,  R.,  D.  Cranstone,  and  C.  Howard-Davis. The  Historical  Archaeology  of  Britain,  c.  1540–

1900. Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2001.

Orser, C. E. A Historical Archaeology of the Modern World. New York: Plenum, 1996.
———. The Material Basis of the Postbellum Tenant Plantations: Historical Archaeology in the South

Carolina Piedmont. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1988.

———, and B. M. Fagan. Historical Archaeology. New York: HarperCollins College, 1995.
Palmer,  M.,  and  R.  Neaverson.  Industrial  Archaeology:  Principles  and  Practice.  London  and  New

York: Routledge, 1998: 3.

Paynter,  R.  ‘Steps  to  an  Archaeology  of  Capitalism:  Material  Change  and  Class  Analysis.’  In  The
recovery of meaning, edited by M. P. Leone, and P. B. Potter. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press, 1988: 407–33.

Rathje, W. L. ‘Modern Material Culture Studies.’ In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,

vol. 2, edited by M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press, 1979.

48

J. Symonds

———. ‘The Archaeology of Us.’ In Encyclopeadia Britannica’s Yearbook of Science and the Future,

edited by C. Ciegelski. New York: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1996: 158–77.

Samuel, R. Theatres of Memory. London: Verso, 1994.
Skeates, R. Debating the Archaeological Heritage. London: Duckworth, 2000.
Symonds, J. ‘Archaeology from the Brown Earth: The Challenge of the Urban Renaissance.’ In Insti-
tute of Field Archaeologists, Yearbook and Directory 2001. Reading: IFA, University of Reading,
2001.

———. The Historical Archaeology of the Sheffield Cutlery and Tableware Trades 1750–1900. Shef-

field: ARCUS Studies in Historical Archaeology, 2002.

Williams, R. Culture. London: Collins, 1981.
Wray, N. One Great Workshop: The Buildings of the Sheffield Metal Trades. London: English Heritage,

2001.

Wright, P. On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain. London: Verso,

1985.

Yamin, R. ‘Becoming New York: The Five Points Neighbourhood.’ Historical Archaeology, 35, no. 3

(2001): 1–6.

Yentsch,  A.,  and  M.  C.  Beaudry.  ‘American  Material  Culture  in  Mind,  Thought,  and  Deed.’  In

Archaeological Theory Today, edited by I. Hodder. Oxford: Polity Press, 2001.


