The Eco-tourism of Cultural Heritage 
Management (ECT-CHM): Linking 
Heritage and ‘Environment’ in the 
Okavango Delta Regions of Botswana
S. O. Keitumetse

152/30000002009
S OKeitumetse
skeitumetse@orc.ub.bw; s.o.keitumetse@cantab.net
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_389253.sgm
10.1080/13527250902890811

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2009Taylor & Francis

The principles of eco-tourism allude to the importance of socio-cultural and psycho-social
aspects  in  natural  resources  management.  However,  approaches  to  natural  resources
management are more often addressed in isolation from cultural and heritage resources.
For  Botswana,  this  loophole  is  illustrated  within  a  community-based  natural  resources
management  (CBNRM)  programme  that  focuses  exclusively  on  natural  and  neglects
cultural  resources.  Botswana  Tourism  Policy  is  another  example.1  I  argue  that  these
management approaches negatively impact on sustainable conservation and development
of both natural and cultural resources. A case study of a community-based organisation
(CBO) called Sankuyo Tshwaragano Management Trust (STMT) is used to illustrate that
the current CBNRM programme originates from a management failure to perceive cultural
and  heritage  resources  as  components  of  the  broader  ‘environment’  and  hence  neglects
the significance of alternative resources in nature tourism. An operational point of depar-
ture for an Ecotourism of Cultural Heritage Management ECT-CHM model is identified
using  a  Community  Based  Cultural  Heritage  Resources  Mangement  (COBACREM)
approach  and  an  operational  definition  of  eco-tourism  that  acknowledges  alternative
resources suggested.

S.  O.  Keitumetse,  Research  Fellow  (Cultural  &  Environmental  Heritage  Tourism),  Harry  Oppenheimer
Okavango Research Centre, University of Botswana. Correspondence to: skeitumetse@orc.ub.bw and/or s.o.keit-
umetse@cantab.net

224

S. O. Keitumetse

Introduction: Research Aim

Integrating  cultural  resources  in  natural  resources  management  strategies  have  the
potential to resuscitate and promote community conservation of biodiversity as well as
curb resource use conflicts by nurturing and enhancing communities’ sense of place,
as well as a sense of communal identity that emanates from past human–environment
interactions rather than monetary/economic gain. However, natural resources manage-
ment approaches in most parts of Africa are more often addressed within a narrow
approach that isolates cultural and heritage resources as well as cultural landscapes. This
is largely due to a lack of reconciliation of local conservation needs with international
conservation  ideologies/conventions  that  originate  elsewhere.  The  ‘environment’  is
thus often perceived as comprising exclusively ‘the natural’ or biophysical components
without  the  significance  of  socio-cultural  elements.  Such  narrow  conceptualisation
results in formulation of resources management approaches that fail to identify and
acknowledge  the  socio-cultural  and  psycho-social  aspects  of  natural  environments,
hence disregarding a human–environment interaction component constituted within
archaeologies,  histories,  folk-life/folk-lore,  and  indigenous  knowledge  systems  of
protected areas of wilderness value (Figure 1).2 In a context where community-based
tourism depends entirely on wildlife and wilderness resources, such an approach results
in  an  undiversified  tourism  product  as  well  as  disconnecting  resident  communities
from their cultural landscapes. The Okavango Delta region in Botswana illustrates these
scenarios well.

A  definition  of  cultural  heritage  tourism  inevitably  derives  from  that  of  cultural
heritage but varies significantly in that cultural heritage tourism (CHT) is travel directed
toward  experiencing  local  traditions,  arts,  and  heritage  while  respecting  the  host
community and its surrounding environment.3 The components of CHT are cultural
heritage aspects such as monuments, archaeological sites, museums, and cultural expe-
riences such as festivals and communities among others. An eco-tourism of cultural
heritage management (ECT-CHM) in protected areas of the Okavango Delta regions
of Botswana will therefore constitute the aforementioned aspects within national parks
and game reserves.

Eco-tourism  is  a  component  of  sustainable  tourism  which  derives  from  a
broader sustainable development (SD) model framework. The concept of sustainable

Figure  1 The  Neglected  Interface  between  Heritage  and  Environment  that  Provide
Potential for Enhanced Ecotourism in Protected Areas of Ecological Value.



225

development  is  not  yet  appreciated  and  exploited  within  the  relatively  new  field  of
cultural heritage management. This is due to various factors, chief among them the
disassociation  of  cultural  and  heritage  resources  from  the  conventional  ‘environ-
ment’.4 However, variations of eco-tourism have existed in Botswana since the 1990s,
allowing for an analysis of the model in relation to cultural and heritage resources.

This article proposes and discusses an eco-tourism of cultural heritage management
(ECT-CHM) model within the sustainable development framework and illustrates the
importance of an integrated resources management approach (Figure 1) in protected
areas of the developing countries such as Botswana (Figure 2).

Figure 1 The neglected interface between heritage and environment that provide potential for enhanced ecotourism in protected areas of ecological value.

Sustainable Tourism in Protected Areas: Linking Heritage and Environment

Eco-tourism  as  a  form  of  sustainable  tourism  acquired  various  definitions  through
time  with  the  main  definition  coming  from  The  International  Ecotourism  Society
(TIES), which defines eco-tourism as ‘responsible travel to natural areas that conserves
the  environment  and  improves  the  well-being  of  local  people’.5  In  particular,  the
Botswana  national  eco-tourism  strategy  of  2002  adopted  this  definition  with  an
acknowledgement  that  ‘in  Botswana  eco-tourism  refers  to  the  country’s  cultural,  as
well as natural heritage, and great importance is placed on the active involvement (as
opposed to mere participation) of host communities and other Batswana’.6 While the
policy  wording  acknowledges  meaningful  participation  of  locals,  the  strategy  lacks
operational guidelines for implementation.

Although valued as a conservation tool, eco-tourism is also attracting a label as a
marketing  tool  for  a  particular  market  segment  and  has  been  criticised  as  focusing
‘almost exclusively on motives of the current traveler, and not on the impacts that such
travel has on the cultural and ecological environments of the setting.’7 This prompts
and challenges countries such as Botswana to focus on the host or local communities
in applying new fields of resource management using alternative resources. This article
covers this loophole by proposing an ‘eco-tourism’ approach focusing on alternative
resources within protected areas where nature tourism takes place.

In general the application of the concept of sustainable development in the field of
cultural heritage management in Africa has received peripheral attention.8 A prevailing
lack of adoption of the sustainable development concept in African heritage manage-
ment practices has resulted in uncoordinated policies and implementation strategies of
SD in CHM. However, in areas such as the UK the implementation and enforcement
of some sustainable development principles such as the ‘polluter pays principle’ have
facilitated  a  significant  incorporation  of  the  concept  in  cultural  (archaeological)
heritage management where the ideals of the SD concept’s precautionary principle are
partially implemented.9

Most of the SD principles, however, are somehow linked to cultural and heritage
management ideals. An example is provided by the option and existence values that have
been illustrated as potential uses of a heritage product.10 These use values benefit from
the ideals of the ‘precautionary principle’ as well as the ‘integrated life-cycle principle’
of SD illustrating an unexplored link between the SD concept and the field of CHM that

S. O. Keitumetse

226
perpetuates a disconnection with management models such as eco-tourism.11 The SD’s
‘integrated  life-cycle  principle’  calls  for  an  all-encompassing  approach  to  resources
management  while  the  ‘precautionary  principle’  calls  for  pro-active  approaches  to
resources management, both of which are applicable to cultural resources conservation
and management, as they are to natural resource management.

A brief history of Botswana’s CHM approach and/or lack thereof is outlined to illus-
trate the missing link between heritage and environment in the country’s protected
areas owing to a perception of protected areas as landscapes of only natural heritage
value. A case study of a community-based organisation (CBO) engaged in a policy-
oriented community-based natural resources management (CBNRM) project further
substantiate this disconnection at a community resource management level.

Brief History of Legislation with Relevance to Cultural Heritage Management in 
Botswana: The ECT–CHM Link

Since  Botswana’s  independence  in  1966  the  country  has  embarked  on  postcolonial
approaches  to  cultural  conservation  by  formulating  several  pieces  of  legislation
(Table  1)  that  include  (Figure  3)  the  1967  Anthropological  Research  Act,  the  1967
National Museum and Art Gallery Act; the 1970 Tribal Land Act; 1970 Monuments
and  Relics  Act  Chapter  59:03;  the  2001  National  Policy  on  Culture;  and  finally  the
2001  Monuments  and  Relics  Act  (re-enacting  the  1970  Act).  The  Monuments  and
Relics  Act,  1970  Chapter  59:03  laid  the  foundation  for  a  Monument  Commission
specifically for the independent Botswana but has achieved little in operationalising
the field of cultural heritage management in particular, although organisations such
as UNESCO were already ahead in this regard.12

A significant development is contained in the re-enacted Monuments and Relics Act
2001 that requires developers to undertake a pre-development Archaeological Impact
Assessment, hence protecting the undiscovered cultural resources and complying with
the precautionary principle of SD. However, the distinction between environmental
and  archaeological/cultural  impact  assessments  in  section  19(2)  of  the  same  Act
perpetuates an unnecessary disassociation between the ‘historic environment’ and ‘the
conventional environment’, creating a perceived exclusion of the former in ‘environ-
mental’ management activities such as CBNRM eco-tourism.

In contrast, the Botswana National Policy on Culture (2001) focuses on intangible
aspects of culture and heritage but fails to convey their relevance to either the natural
resources or the tangible (physical) heritage in protected areas,13 further perpetuating
a non-integrated approach to resources management. In the context of this policy, 

Culture … is understood … to be the whole complex of distinctive, spiritual, material,
intellectual  and  emotional  features  that  characterize  a  society  or  social  group.  It
includes not only the arts and letters, but also modes of life, the fundamental rights of
the human being, value systems, traditions and beliefs.14

A substantial focus on folk life blurs a rounded conceptualisation of operational frame-
works for local indigenous knowledge systems (IKS) associated with intangible heritage

Table  1
Approaches to Cultural Heritage Management in Botswana.

Summary  of  Post-independence  Legislation  that  has  Implications  for  Current



227

Year

Legislation

Brief description

1967

Anthropological Research Act

1967
1970

1970
2001

National Museum and Art Gallery Act
Tribal Land Act

Monuments and Relics Act Chapter 59:03
Monuments and Relics Act

2001

Botswana National Policy on Culture

To monitor social science research on 
indigenous communities
To guide museums establishment
To address issues related to tribal land 
allocation and use—cultural landscape
For protection of archaeological features
Re-enacted version of the 1970 Act that 
enforces pre-development Archaeological 
Impact Assessment (AIA)
Places focus on folk-life and folklore which 
can be categorised as intangible

Source: Keitumetse, S. O. ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management: Local 
Community Participation and Monument Tourism in Botswana’. Unpublished PhD thesis, Department 
of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, 2005.

as  legitimate  and  profound  constituents  in  environmental  tourism,  in  the  process
delaying  a  development  of  a  parallel  model  such  as  community-based  cultural  and
heritage  resources  management  (COBACHREM),  recommended  in  this  article  as  a
way forward.

CBNRM and Eco-tourism in Botswana: Adding the Cultural and Heritage Links

In  Botswana  the  CBNRM  programme  is  designed  to  enable  an  implementation  of
a community-participation model that facilitates sustainable use of natural resources
for conservation and revenue gain (Figure 4). The programme started in Botswana in
the 1990s and currently boasts an official registration of approximately 91 CBOs.15 The
CBNRM  programme  follows  a  global  eco-tourism  approach  that  emphasises  the
following, as outlined by Drumm and Moore:16 

benefits to the community;
private sector and resource conservation;
visitor education;
economic sustainability for the national park;
visitor impact management;
and, more recently, self-determination.17

The underlying ideology of the programme in Botswana is that ‘the sustainable use of
natural  resources  can  enhance  conservation  efforts  as  well  as  provide  economic
benefits  to  local  communities’.18  The  political  ideology  behind  the  programme
emphasises the need for a clear indication of who owns, has access to, and is eligible for
benefit from natural resources in designated protected areas of the Okavango Delta (see
Figure 2).

●
●
●
●
●
●
228

S. O. Keitumetse

Figure 2 Location of Botswana, Sankuyo Village (community).
Source: Okavango Research Centre 2008.

Figure 2 Location of Botswana, Sankuyo village (community).

Source: Okavango Research Centre 2008.Within the sustainable development framework in an African setting, CBNRM can
be attributed to the principle of local community participation (LCP) that constitutes
one of the 27 principles of the SD concept.19 In comparison with other SD principles,
the LCP principle dwells on the socio-cultural–economic characteristics of conserva-
tion. The LCP principle therefore proves to be a crucial basis for an integrated cultural
resources management practice.

Historically, and subsequently within the CBNRM model, adoption of the LCP in
resource management can be attributed to the western ideology of democracy inherent
within earlier socio-political philosophies of scholars such as Weber and Marx.20 The
supporting  framework  for  implementation  of  the  participation  principle  is  that  the
poor and oppressed should be mobilised by agents external to the state such as NGOs
and  should  be  encouraged  to  participate  in  decision-making  if  they  are  to  develop
socially and at a local level.21

In  Botswana,  the  significance  of  involving  communities  in  managing  wildlife
resources was recognised by the government around when the Wildlife Conservation
Policy, later extended to the Wildlife Conservation and National Parks Act (WCNP)
No. 28 of 1992, were formulated. The land use categories within the wildlife manage-
ment areas (WMAs) and controlled hunting areas (CHAs) contained within the 1992
policy  (part  III,  section  15  and  &  16  respectively)  were  established  (Figure  3).  The
various uses of wildlife that are permitted in WMA zones include subsistence, trophy
hunting, game viewing, and/or game farming,22 where a general principle is such that



229

Figure 3 Controlled Hunting Areas in Botswana’s Ngamiland District Where Most of the
CBNRM  Programes  are  Concentrated.  NG34  and  Moremi  Game  Reserve  are  Areas  of
STMT’s Santawani Lodge and Kaziikini Campsite Operations.

a community trust enters into a joint venture partnership (JVP) with a business oper-
ator and co-manages the natural resource. The resource lease for communities from
the government is 15 years while the sub-lease to the JVP is usually five years subject to
conditions of service to the community and conservation of the resource.23

Figure 3 Controlled Hunting Areas in Botswana’s Ngamiland district where most of the CBNRM programes are concentrated. NG34 and Moremi Game Reserve are areas of STMT’s Santawani lodge and Kaziikini campsite operations.

A model of distribution of benefits from the programme is outlined in the CBNRM
policy programme that has recently been reviewed where the government of Botswana
proposes  that  65%  of  the  proceeds  from  wildlife  resources  tourism  be  placed  in  an
Environmental  Fund  for  direct  utilisation  in  natural  resources  conservation.24  This
new approach, which varies according to the needs of various community trusts, leaves
35% of the financial proceeds from wildlife for community trusts to cover operational
costs and profit.

Cultural  and  heritage  tourism  development  becomes  significant  where  the  policy
makes a provision that where community trusts utilise revenues from wildlife to diver-
sify into other areas of business that relieve pressure in natural resources use, all profits
from such  establishments divert to the community trust. Hence diversification into
museums, in situ archaeological exhibitions, cultural villages (Figures 5 and 7), etc.,
would accord community trusts all the financial proceeds from their businesses as they
no longer have to share the conservation costs incurred by the Botswana government
in maintaining national parks and game reserves.

In Botswana a community trust is a legal entity established under Botswana laws
where all members share responsibilities and benefits and are entitled to fair participa-
tion and representation. The legal entity is also deemed to be legally accountable for its
operations as regards protected areas.25 Trusts formulate and register a notarial deed

230

S. O. Keitumetse

of trust, which is a legal requirement under the laws of the Republic of Botswana. In
CBNRM progammes a deed of trust stipulates the boundaries of a conservation area,
as well as the beneficiary ‘community’ (Table 3). Issues of resource ownership, sense of
‘community’ and belonging, distribution channels for benefits are impacted upon by
such criterion as later discussed. Inevitably, the potential implications of this criterion
require modification when applied to cultural heritage tourism development.

Examples of private sector community partnerships in CBNRM include a company
entering into an agreement with a community to carry out one or more of the following
as outlined by Roe et al.:26 

develop a new enterprise on communal land;
share the benefits with the community;
run an existing enterprise;
use an existing community facility;
develop a new facility;
buy in services or products;
and/or develop and market the services and products.

In  some  partnerships,  communities  reserve  their  entire  hunting  quota  for  subsis-
tence while others sell part of it to safari operators for trophy hunting. In all of the
business  agreements,  the  conservation  responsibilities  associated  with  a  quota
management system are transferred to the managing body, and concession fees paid
by safari operators may benefit community development in projects such as borehole
construction,  water  reticulation  projects,  groceries  allowance,  school  fees,  etc.  As
discussed  below,  transfer  of  conservation  responsibilities  through  lease  agreements
more  often  result  in  communities’  limited  interaction  with  the  resource/landscape
and consequent failure of locals to fully comprehend the practical and global ideals
of  conservation  attached  to  a  CBNRM  programme,  a  problem  that  can  be  solved
through  significant  adoption  of  an  eco-tourism  of  cultural  heritage  management
approach.

Case Study of Sankuyo Tshwaragano Management Trust (STMT): Perceptions of a 
Cultural Tourism Product

The  Sankuyo  Tshwaragano  Management  Trust  (STMT)  was  registered  in  1995  and
currently  operates  from  wildlife  management  area  NG34  and  the  adjacent  Moremi
Game Reserve which was recently voted the best game reserve in Africa by the African
Travel and Tourism Association. The community trust’s business operations currently
include  a  lodge  (Santawani)  and  a  community  camping  site  (Kaziikini).  A  cultural
village  project  named  Shandereka  (hard  work),  is  being  added  as  part  of  a  tourism
product in 2008 (Figure 7).
Source: Keitumetse 2007.Accrued benefits from the management of wildlife resources benefit residents of the
village of Sankuyo, who are recognised in a notarial deed of trust as eligible beneficia-
ries (see Table 3). The STMT has entered into resource management agreements with
the Botswana government for natural resources management and a business partner

Figure 4 Kaziikini community camp where the Shandereka cultural village project is set up.

●
●
●
●
●
●
●


231

Figure 4 Kaziikini Community Camp Where the Shandereka Cultural Village Project is
Set Up.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.

for tourism development to maximize revenue accumulation.27 The community Trust
views the Shandereka cultural village project as a form of tourism diversification.

Methodology: Data Collection

Ongoing research was conducted among the STMT management (100%) comprising
of  12  members  of  the  management  committee  (chairperson,  project  manager,  trea-
surer, secretary and additional members). Four members comprise village elders and
one village authority involved in the day-to-day operational activities of the community
trust and the Shandereka cultural village project, and has facilitated the conception/
inception stages of the project. The research investigated the following: 

STMT  management’s  idea  and  definition  of  a  cultural  heritage  product  in  the
context of the anticipated cultural village project.

● Cultural heritage ideas and aspects perceived suitable for showcasing to tourists
● Cultural  aspects  that  are  deliberately  excluded  from  public  consumption  as  a

conservation strategy for sustainable utilisation.

●
232

S. O. Keitumetse

Table 2 Example of Some of the Guiding Questions Used.

Sample Questionnaire Guide

landscapes of traditional and cultural value in NG34 and NG33?

1. Why a cultural village in protected area?
2. Which cultural components or products and why?
3.
4. Which living cultural activities?
5. Which eco-cultural activities?
6. Deliberate exclusion—for sustainability?

N = 16 individuals of STMT management.

A questionnaire requiring STMT management to state and/or list heritage aspects of
cultural  heritage  from  pre-determined  options  for  a  cultural  tourism  project  was
administered. The questionnaire survey was to assess preferred aspects of heritage for
a cultural tourism project, and secondly to assess definition of the attributes of heritage,
and thirdly to construct and provide alternative meanings where necessary to ascertain
the aspects of ‘heritage’ that community representatives prefer for tourism diversifica-
tion in protected areas.

Results: STMT Management’s Perception of a Cultural Tourism Product

The  STMT  management  includes  respondents  from  each  gender  group,  with  the
majority  being  male  (69%).  The  youth  comprise  69%  of  management  committee.
Composition of the STMT management could not be controlled through independent
sampling  as  the  group  already  exists,  hence  indicators  such  as  gender  and  age  are
dependent on an already existing composition.

In general the results of the questionnaire indicate that STMT management defines

cultural and heritage tourism characteristics using the following criterion: 

cultural practices that have diminished completely;

i)
ii) cultural  activities,  practices  and  objects  that  with  time  have  been  significantly
modified by modern lifestyles. For instance, girls’ initiation into puberty (ngwani
in local language). The practice used to be a 12 month process but is now reduced
to a week to accommodate the modern school system (Figure 5).

iii) Living heritage activities and practices such as traditional doctor role and activities.

Figure 5 An initiate in a traditional initiation attire performing for tourists.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.

The dominant attributes listed by STMT management as significant for cultural tourism
development in the Okavango Delta tracking and hunting skills and associated tradi-
tional equipment; processes of girl’s initiation rites (ngwani) ceremony; dancing and
associated folklore as well as equipment associated with these activities. For hunting,
this  perception  is  most  likely  influenced  by  the  current  focus  on  trophy  hunting
(consumptive tourism) as the most financially viable tourism activity in the Okavango
Delta  CBNRM  programme.  Archaeological  resources  or  their  future  potential  and
significance in protected area tourism are not alluded to at all. These resources, however,
form a relevant component of cultural heritage from an eco-tourists’ point of view.



233

Figure 5 An Initiate in a Traditional Initiation Attire Performing for Tourists.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.

Interview  responses  indicate  that  although  there  is  a  profound  interest  in
cultural tourism,  the  youth  respondents  (69%)  from  the  STMT,  who  make  up  the
majority  of  management  committee,  did  not  readily  identify  traditional  place
names, and associated cultural beliefs, norms, and practices as significant components
of  an  eco-cultural  tourism  project.  These  add  to  an  eco-tourists’  experience  of
human–environment interactions within ecological landscapes such as the Okavango
Delta.

In contrast, all interviewed elders (31%) within the management committee recog-
nised the past human–environment significance of ecological landscapes of wildlife in
the  Okavango  Delta.  Identification,  interpretation  and  packaging  of  the  historical,
linguistic and archaeological value of the landscapes can result in a tourism package
that would readily diversify nature tourism in the area. The unidentified opportunity
could be nurtured by policy implementers from government departments and parast-
atals such as the Botswana Tourism Board.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.Responses  relating  to  a  preference  between  a  cultural  village  and  a  museum  as  a
cultural tourism product yielded a dominant preference for a cultural village perhaps
owing to the anticipated Shandereka cultural village project. Further probing, however,
indicated  that  the  respondents  are  not  professionally  conversant  with  a  museum
concept as an alternative form of heritage tourism even though the high-paying tourist
is familiar with this product from their country of origin. Botswana’s main source of
tourists markets is Germany, the UK, and the USA.28

Figure 6 A villager discussing local indigenous knowledge and linguistic heritage associated with vegetation and plants within the Sankuyo area.

Only one (6.25%) management interviewee indicated that a cultural village is more
suitable for representation of the living heritage which the Trust intends to showcase,
whereas a museum requires a much more ‘static’ (tangible) form of heritage which the
community  trust  is  not  keen  on.  This  perhaps  owes  to  the  technical  nature  of  a
museum  operation  which  is  equivalent  to  the  up-market  tourism  business  that

234

S. O. Keitumetse

Figure  6 A  Villager  Discussing  Local  Indigenous  Knowledge  and  Linguistic  Heritage
Associated with Vegetation and Plants Within the Sankuyo Area.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.

communities lease out to a tour operator. A common practice in Okavango Delta tour-
ism is for community trust members to lease the once communal land to commercial
operators for approximately 15 years due to community trust management’s lack of
business and professional acumen, as well as a lack of financial capital to engage directly
in the Delta’s up-market tourism.

In practice, therefore, the lease period accords a temporary ‘ownership’ and ‘control’
to  the  concessionaire  (commercial  operator)  and  prompts  community  members  to
abstain from direct interaction, ownership and control of protected landscapes during
the often multiple lease periods. Cultural tourism promotion can therefore curb the
effects of total transfer of land management to a commercial operator and help sustain
a  meaningful  connection  between  local  communities  and  the  cultural  landscapes
imbued with ecological value, hence ensuring compliancy with one of the eco-tourism
principles  of  ‘respect  for  local  cultures  and  traditions’  and  ‘educate  all  stakeholders
about their role in conservation’.29

One of the questions assessed whether the STMT management committee’s ideas of
a cultural tourism product are informed by their knowledge and consideration of the
country’s tourism strategy of up-market tourists in low volumes. It became evident



235

that the STMT’s Shandereka cultural village project is motivated by the need to diver-
sify into a product that can be wholly ‘owned’ and operated by community members
with  minimal  leverage  on  tour  operators  and  the  dictates  of  the  country’s  tourism
policy.

As indicated earlier, the Botswana tourism policy attracts high-paying tourists with
a relatively higher education level. These are the type of tourists who are more likely to
undertake heritage eco-tourism activities, as illustrated through research conducted in
Micronesia which suggests that heritage eco-tourism is ‘a privilege of the middle-aged
wealthy’ comprising mainly of ‘adults predominantly between the ages of 36 and 50
(63.2%)  with  a  substantial  income  in  excess  of  $50,000  dollars  (US)  per  annum
(33%)’.30 Statistics from ongoing research at Tsodilo World Heritage site in Botswana
also support this conclusion with an indication of high-paying nature tourists willing
to pay a significant surplus for heritage resources conservation.31 An understanding of
these  psycho-social  characteristics  of  tourism  is  crucial  for  future  development  of
successful heritage eco-tourism projects such as Shandereka cultural village. Therefore
studies on the ‘the sociology of tourism’ will be more relevant in this regard.32

A question relating to the exemption of cultural and heritage aspects deemed sacred
or secret was embarked on to determine whether a degree of ‘screening’ is considered
during selection, interpretation and presentation of aspects of cultural heritage compo-
nents in the STMT’s new Shandereka cultural village project. Furthermore, the ques-
tion  was  to  assess  sustainable  approaches  to  the  new  initiative  of  cultural  tourism
development in protected ecological areas.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.Screening indicates a profound awareness of issues relating to sustainability (carrying
capacity, limits of acceptable change, etc.) of the resources in question. Respondents

Figure 7 A traditional doctor’s ‘house’ with a distinct architectural style at the  Shandereka cultural village.

Figure 7 A Traditional Doctor’s ‘House’ with a Distinct Architectural Style at the Shand-
ereka Cultural Village.
Source: Keitumetse 2007.

236

S. O. Keitumetse

indicated a preference to showcase ‘everything’ that is of cultural value to them. The
majority (94%) of the STMT management indicated no specific aspects of culture to be
excluded on the basis of secrecy, sacredness and/or fragility.

About 40% of the management team further justified non-exclusivity on the basis
that most of what they have considered as cultural heritage has already been eroded/
affected by the modern way of life, hence showcasing through the Shandereka project
will tend to resuscitate, rather than destroy the cultural value of those practices.

However,  it  has  been  illustrated  elsewhere  that  some  African  cultural  activities
depend  on  secrecy  for  sustainable  cultural  value  so  that  bringing  them  to  the  open
may  degrade  their  socio-cultural  worth.33  Quality  assurance  and  accreditation
measures  incorporating  both  weak  and  strong  sustainability  need  to  be  considered
when  planning  cultural  tourism  establishments  such  as  the  Shandereka  project  to
accommodate  sustainable  development  principles.34  Standardisation  procedures
have to be considered for a sustainable development of cultural tourism that is in line
with  the  country’s  conservation-based  policy  as  well  as  the  needs  of  tourists  who
currently visit the Okavango Delta in Botswana. As stated earlier, while the topic of
sustainable  development  has  been  widely  addressed  within  the  field  of  natural
resources  management  in  Botswana,  very  little  has  been  done  within  the  field  of
cultural heritage management. The development of heritage eco-tourism practice in
Botswana  tourism  faces  challenges  that  can  benefit  from  a  sustainable  development
framework.35

Discussion: Issues to Consider in Developing an Eco-tourism of Cultural Heritage in 
Protected Environments

Cultural  and  heritage  eco-tourism  provides  an  opportunity  for  communities  to
harness  alternative  values  attached  to  natural  resources  and  ecological  landscapes,
adding option and existence values to a monetary value.36 Placing multiple values and
meanings on a resource increases the chances for its sustainable utilisation as well as
conservation. Negligence of histories of human–environment interactions, local indig-
enous knowledge systems (Figure 1) that have always informed traditional conserva-
tion strategies of natural resources, limits the significance of community participation
in a CBNRM programme as outlined earlier.

It is sufficient to state that the ideologies, legal frameworks, policies and implemen-
tation strategies tend to focus solely on economic benefits to the exclusion of commu-
nities’  and/or  hosts’  opportunities  to  interact  directly  with  natural  resources  and
landscapes of ecological value, alienating communities through tourism lease agreement
exemptions. Sustainable cultural tourism can therefore enable communities to recon-
nect with the Delta landscape and environment that is currently a tourism product.
Furthermore,  this  approach  can  resolve  conflicts  of  natural  resource  use  currently
ongoing in some parts of the Okavango Delta and the Kalahari between local commu-
nities and business operators.

A way forward is to adopt an integrated approach that encompasses cultural and heri-
tage eco-tourism and provide a management approach that recognises communities’



237

intellectual and emotional attachment and past interaction with natural resources and
landscapes.37 The background information previously given on CBNRM indicates that
certain characteristics of CBNRM require modification if they are to be operationalised
within the field of cultural heritage management.

One such indicator is the concept, idea and/or definition of ‘community’ as used in
the CBNRM model.38 Proponents of the CBNRM programme have indicated that one
of the rationales behind a CBNRM programme is to provide a clear indication of who
owns, or has the right to develop, natural resources in a defined geographical environ-
ment.39 These indicators are usually spelt out in notarial deeds of trust and commonly
include geographical boundaries of wildlife management areas, age group, length of
stay in a particular geographical area (see Table 3), to mention but a few. Such criteria
are inevitably challenged by the ECT-CHM model where cultural affiliation in African
settings more often transcends geographical boundaries. The ECT-CHM model subse-
quently requires an assessment of exclusive rights to certain localities and resources

Table 3 Examples of Extracts from Selected Notarial Deeds of Trust (notaries) Deﬁning
‘Community’ and Eligible Beneﬁciaries in Various Community Trusts in Botswana.

Name of community trust

Definition of beneficiaries from deeds of trust

i)

Sankuyo Tshwaragano 
Management Trust (STMT) Deed 
of Trust No. 123/95

ii) Moremi-Manonnye Trust, 

Moremi village, registered 27 July 
1999

iii) Mapanda Conservation Trust – 

Lepokole village, registered 
November 2001

iv) Botlhale jwa Phala Conservation 
Trust, Lerala village, registered 30 
August 2002

Section 2.4: ‘the community’ shall mean the village residents 
of Sankuyo and associated homesteads administered by the 
Sankuyo kgotla (ward)
Section 2.6: ‘village residents’ shall mean any person 16 
years and older, resident in Sankuyo village or in associated 
homesteads administered by the Sankuyo kgotla
Section 2.7: ‘General members’ shall mean those citizens of 
Botswana, 16 years of age and older, who are residents of at 
least five continuous years standing in Sankuyo village or an 
associated homestead administered by the Sankuyo kgotla
‘Members of Moremi community of the age of 18 (eighteen) 
years and above’ (Moesi and Co 1999, 2).
Section 5.1 indicates that ‘The Trust shall be owned by its 
membership who shall elect a Board of Trustees to carry out 
its objectives’ (ibid., 5).
Further, section 6.3 outlines that:
‘All residents of Moremi shall be eligible to stand for 
elections to the Board of Trustees’ (ibid., 6).
Section 4.1.1 states that the general membership is open to: 
‘4.1.1 any person who is a member of Lepokole of or above 
the age of 18’ pg04
‘“General members” shall mean those citizens of Botswana, 
18 years and older who have been residents of Lerala for at 
least one continuous year’, p. 3
‘“the community” shall mean the residents of Lerala as well 
as those villages, settlements and homesteads which fall 
under the jurisdiction of the kgotla of Lerala’
‘6.2 All members of the community of Lerala shall be 
eligible to stand for elections to the Board of Trustees’, 
p. 6

238

S. O. Keitumetse

currently  promoted  through  the  CBNRM  programme  within  the  Okavango  Delta
regions.

Another aspect of eco-tourism that can be fully enhanced by the development of
heritage eco-tourism is skills development and meaningful community participation
which lags behind due to knowledge gaps in business ideologies that inform natural
resources  management  approaches  such  as  CBNRM.  Heritage  eco-tourism  in  the
context outlined earlier can close these gaps as it brings tourism enterprise within local
indigenous knowledge systems that are then readily conceptualised and transcribed by
local  communities.  The  knowledge  and  implementation  gaps  that  exist  in  CBNRM
leave  communities  to  participate  in  less  important  aspects  of  the  programme.  In
Botswana, it has been pointed out that ‘Skills development has taken place in areas such
as cleaning, guiding, cooking, skinning, craft production, processing of veldt products
and to a limited extent tourism management’.40 Experiences from Namibia, where the
CBNRM programme started in 1992, also show that community-owned ventures tend
to be complementary activities in the form of traditional village life, craft production,
etc.41 This indicates that due to lack of knowledge of tourism enterprise skills, local
communities  already  focus  more  on  activities  that  relate  to  their  traditional  and/or
local  knowledge  systems  although  other  opportunities  such  as  boat  cruises,  trophy
hunting, and safari tourism that yield high revenues exist in communal areas. Signifi-
cant development of heritage eco-tourism with proper policy guidelines can therefore
contribute to meaningful participation of communities in eco-tourism in Botswana.

In doing so, a distinction between industry eco-tourism and indigenous eco-tourism
have  to  be  considered.42  The  STMT  case  study  illustrates  that  community  trusts
address tourism from an indigenous tourism perspective and the private sector adopts
an industry eco-tourism point of departure, with the Botswana government policies in
a  middle-person  role.  In  contrast  to  industry  eco-tourism,  ‘indigenous  ecotourism
recognizes the special cultural links between indigenous peoples and natural areas’ and
hence can enhance community participation in a meaningful way as well as enhancing
tourists’ experience of a locality and country.43 However, the concept of indigeneity in
tourism  can  acquire  different  meanings  in  different  contexts,  and  therefore  needs
measures to avoid commodification of certain aspects of culture.44

Some practitioners argue that museums, interpretation centres and souvenir shops
can  perpetuate  a  commodified  form  of  cultural  tourism.45  However,  in  developing
countries such as Botswana where tourism infrastructure has incorporated indigenous
forms of tourism, construction of museums and interpretation centres become supple-
ments to an already reputable indigenous tourism offered to up-market tourists who
originate  from  places  where  such  establishments  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  overall
cultural experience. Furthermore, the fact that the type of tourist attracted by the strat-
egy is likely to prefer an eco-tourism approach makes it more likely that they will reject
(hence regulate) an outrageously commodified cultural product if offered. Through
demand  and  supply  principles,  the  up-market  tourists  themselves  will  regulate  the
existence of a particular cultural tourism product by reducing or phasing out demand.
In other words, the Botswana tourism strategy somehow forces a default compliancy
that can regulate the type of cultural product that can be promoted.



239

In this case communities’ lack of understanding of the global tourism context, as
well  as  tour  operators’  sole  focus  on  monetary  gain,  is  more  likely  to  commodify
exploitation of cultural heritage in an unsustainable way rather than demands imposed
by an up-market eco-tourist. The STMT illustrate this well through the Trust’s antici-
pation to ‘include everything’ within the STMT’s Shandereka project. The development
of  up-market  museums  and  interpretation  centres  by  business  operators  and  the
government is crucial in showcasing the histories of the Okavango Delta people and
human–environment  interaction  components  while  at  the  same  time  meeting  the
needs of an international up-market tourist. Training of community trust representa-
tives is important to ensure sustainable development of cultural tourism.

Standardisation and accreditation procedures involving various aspects of cultural
and  heritage  resources  need  to  be  embarked  on.  Identification,  inventorisation  and
development of these resources have to take place within existing models of conserva-
tion, which in the Okavango Delta involves carrying capacity and the limits of acceptable
change model.46

Conclusion: Managing Cultural and Heritage Resources within ‘the Environment’

The history of natural resources management in Botswana indicates a disconnection
between the conventional ‘environment’ and the historic environment imbued with
cultural and heritage resources. The same pattern is evident in international resources
management  approaches  embraced  within  the  broader  sustainable  development
framework  as  well  as  UNESCO  approaches.47  These  have  resulted  in  eco-tourism
models  solely  focused  on  natural  resources  excluding  meaningful  incorporation  of
heritage and cultural resources further disconnecting these resources from the overall
‘environmental  management’  approaches.  Inevitably,  programmes  such  as  the
CBNRM (since early 1990s) and consequently tourism (1990) and conservation (1992)
policies in Botswana have replicated these same patterns, resulting in an unsustainable
consumption (tourism) of both natural and cultural heritage resources in developing
countries.

In  addition,  the  prevailing  disintegrated  approach  to  resources  management
compromises environmental protection and conservation of natural resources through
models such as eco-tourism. As a way forward, communities’ meaningful participation
within frameworks such as the CBNRM could be enhanced through a focus on human–
environment interactions (histories and archaeologies of protected wilderness areas,
sacred landscapes), exploration of local indigenous knowledge systems associated with
these ‘cultural landscapes’ (traditional plants and associated traditional and cultural
uses). Heritage products within protected areas or conventional ‘environments’ will
include museums, interpretation centres, archaeological excavations and exhibitions,
sacred landscapes, IKS, to mention but a few (Figure 1), and integration into models
such  as  eco-tourism.  The  earlier  discussions  (Table  3)  are  sufficient  to  suggest  that
ideologies  and  legal  frameworks  (e.g.  notarial  deed  of  trust;  tourism  lease;  wildlife
management lease) that currently characterise the CBNRM programme and practice in
Botswana represent a ‘middleman’ approach (perpetuated by lease agreements) rather

240

S. O. Keitumetse

than a representation of host community members’ direct interactions with the envi-
ronment in its entirety (natural and historic).

In general the results indicate that both the Botswana government and private busi-
ness operators narrowly perceive of ‘the environment’ (biodiversity) as constituting
only the wilderness and wildlife, excluding a heritage of human–environment interac-
tions  (archaeological,  IKS,  folklore,  etc.)  and  local  cultural  values  attached  to  the
natural  landscapes  (Figure  1).  The  narrow  approach  creates  a  consumption  pattern
that  alienates  local  communities  and  limits  their  meaningful  participation  in  the
Okavango Delta tourism, sabotaging one of the key eco-tourism principles. As a way
forward, an ECT-CHM model has potential to provide opportunities for local commu-
nities to reconnect with protected ecological areas of cultural value as well as provide
an economic benefit from them.

Eco-tourism  principles  in  particular  involve  community  development,  empower-
ment,  and  self-determination.48  An  eco-cultural  tourism  or  heritage  eco-tourism
project within the suggested community-based cultural and heritage resources manage-
ment (COBACHREM) programme can enhance conservation ideals of eco-tourism by
providing the following: 

a) Development of archaeological heritage (archaeo-tourism) in protected areas of

wildlife and wilderness value.

b) Recognition of past and present eco-heritage (linguistics associated with traditional

vegetation, place, and wildlife in the park) (Figure 6).

Indigenous vegetation use and folklore and folk-life associated with it (Figure 6).

c) Living heritage as illustrated by STMT cultural village activities (Figure 5).
d)
e) Traditional season—animal and vegetation.
f) Recognition of cultural taboos, norms and believes associated with animals, plants

and protected landscapes.

g) Promotion  of  local  indigenous  knowledge  systems  associated  with  wildlife  and

wilderness resources as well as protected areas.

An  extended/refined  definition  that  encompasses  these  aspects  is  recommended  as
follows: 

Responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and improves the
well-being of local people through integrating human–environment interactions that
sustain  biodiversity  as  well  as  promote  eco-tourism  that  advocates  an  in-depth,
profound hence respectful understanding of diverse cultures of global citizens.

Finally, the development of eco-tourism of cultural heritage management in protected
ecological landscapes provides opportunities to promote tourism that provides an in-
depth  understanding  of  the  diverse  global  citizens  with  minimised  commodified
perception of cultures in developing countries as is currently the case with indigenous
communities such as the Basarwa/San/Bushmen in Botswana.49 Such global citizen-
ship is informed by a profound respect for other cultures relative to the environment,
providing an eco-tourist with a well rounded experience and forging a way forward to
using tourism as a vehicle for a culture of peace.50



241

Acknowledgements

This paper was originally presented at a conference in Scotland organised by Glasgow
Caledonian  on  Heritage  and  Environment.  Thanks  for  stimulating  discussions.  The
author  is  grateful  to  the  Office  of  Research  and  Development  of  the  University  of
Botswana for providing research funds under grant no. R765 for 2007–8, and to the
Harry  Oppenheimer  Okavango  Research  Centre  of  the  University  of  Botswana  for
conference travel funds.

Notes

1 [1] Republic of Botswana, Tourism Policy.
2 [2] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
3 [3] Skeates,  Debating  the  Archaeological  Heritage;  Carman  and  Keitumetse,  ‘Talking  about

Heritage and Tourism’; Steele-Prohaska n.d., 279.

4 [4] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
5 [5] The  International  Ecotourism  Society  (TIES).  Available  at  http://www.ecotourism.org/

webmodules/webarticlesnet/templates/eco_template.aspx?articleid=95&zoneid=2.

6 [6] Republic of Botswana, Botswana National Ecotourism Strategy, 5.
7 [7] Blamey, ‘Ecotourism’; Fennel, ‘A Content Analysis of Ecotourism Definitions’, 404.
8 [8] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
9 [9] Cf. English Heritage, The Monuments Protection Programme; English Heritage, Management of
Archaeological Projects; Department of the Environment, England 1990; and see Fisher et al.,
Implementing the Precautionary Principle.

10[10] Darvill, ‘Value and Systems in Archaeology’, 42–8.
11[11] Robinson, Agenda 21; Fisher et al., Implementing the Precautionary Principle.
12[12] Pule  1998,  22;  UNESCO,  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural

Heritage.

13[13] Republic  of  Botswana,  National  Policy  on  Culture;  Keitumetse,  Theorizing  Community

Representation.

14[14] Republic of Botswana, National Policy on Culture, 6.
15[15] Thakadu and Schuster, ‘Introduction’.
16[16] Drumm and Moore, Ecotourism Development.
17[17] Zeppel, ‘Indigenous Ecotourism’.
18[18] Roe et al., Getting the Lion’s Share from Tourism.
19[19] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
20[20] Lehmann, ‘Introduction’; Midgley, ‘Introduction’; Smith, Cultural Theory.
21[21] Midgley, ‘Introduction’.
22[22] Republic of Botswana, Tourism Policy, 8–9.
23[23] DWNP 1982.
24[24] CBNRM Policy 2007.
25[25] Republic of Botswana, Community Based Natural Resources Management Policy.
26[26] Roe et al., Getting the Lion’s Share from Tourism.
27[27] Republic  of  Botswana,  Community  Natural  Resource  Management  Lease;  Republic  of

Botswana, Tourism Lease.

28[28] WTTC 2007.
29[29] Drumm and Moore, Ecotourism Development, 13.
30[30]
31[31] Kgamanyane, ‘The Contribution of Rock Paintings’.
32[32] Cohen, ‘Sociology of Tourism’.

Spenneman et al., ‘Heritage Eco-Tourism in Micronesia’, 30.

242

S. O. Keitumetse

33[33] Keitumetse, Theorizing Community Representation
34[34] Black and Crabtree 2007; Neumayer, ‘Weak Versus Strong Sustainability’.
35[35] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
36[36] Darvill, ‘Value and Systems in Archaeology’.
37[37] Keitumetse, ‘Sustainable Development and Archaeological Heritage Management’.
38[38] Keitumetse, Theorizing Community Representation; Smithsonian Institution.
39[39] Arntzen, ‘Community Based Natural Resources Management Projects’.
40[40] Arntzen et al., ‘Main Findings of the Review of CBNRM in Botswana’, 18.
41[41] Roe et al., Getting the Lion’s Share from Tourism, 11.
42[42] Zeppel, ‘Indigenous Ecotourism’, 12.
43[43]
44[44] Keitumetse 2007.
45[45] Drumm and Moore, Ecotourism Development.
46[46]
Stankey et al., ‘Limits of Acceptable Change’.
47[47] UNESCO, Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage; Declara-
tion  and  Programme  of  Action;  Convention  for  the  Safeguarding  of  the  Intangible  Cultural
Heritage.

Ibid., 2.

48[48] Zeppel, ‘Indigenous Ecotourism’.
49[49]
50[50] UNESCO, Declaration and Programme of Action.

1LO 1989; Keitumetse 2007.

References

Arntzen,  J.  ‘Community  Based  Natural  Resources  Management  Projects:  Balancing  Conservation
and  Development’.  In  Natural  Resources  Management  and  People.  CBNRM  Support
Programme,  Occasional  Paper  No.  15,  edited  by  Schuster  and  Thakadu.  Gaborone:  IUCN
CBNRM Support, 2003.

Arntzen J., D. L. Molokomme, E. M. Terry, N. Moleele, O. Tshosa and D. Mazambani. Main Find-
ings of the Review of CBNRM in Botswana. Occasional Paper No.14. Gaborone: IUCN World
Conservation Union, 2003.

Black, R. and A. Crabtree. Achieving Quality in Ecotourism: Tools in the Toolbox. In Quality Assurance

and Certification in Ecotourism, edited by R. Black and A. Crabtree. Wallingford: Cabi, 2007.

Blamey, R. K. Ecotourism: The Search for an Operational Definition. Journal of Sustainable Tourism

5 no. 2 (1997): 109–129.

Botlhale  Jwa  Phala  Conservation  Trust.  Notarial  Deed  of  Trust  in  Respect  of  Botlhale  jwa  Phala
Conservation Trust, MA 339/2002. November 2002. Gaborone: Moesi & Co. Attorneys, Nota-
ries & Conveyancers.

Carman, J. and S. Keitumetse. ‘Talking about Heritage and Tourism’. SAA Archaeological Record 5

no. 3 (2005): 39–41.

Cohen, E. ‘Sociology of Tourism: Approaches, Issues, and Findings’. Annual Review of Sociology 10

(1984): 373–392.

Darvill, T. ‘Value and Systems in Archaeology’, in Managing Archaeology, edited by M. A. Cooper et

al. London: Routledge, 1995.

Drumm,  A.  and  A.  Moore.  Ecotourism  Development:  A  Manual  for  Conservation  Planners  and
Managers.  Vol.  1:  An  Introduction  to  Ecotourism  Planning.  Arlington,  VA:  The  Nature
Conservancy, 2002.

English Heritage. The Monuments Protection Programme: An Introduction. London: English Heritage,

1997.

———. Management of Archaeological Projects (MAP 2). London: English Heritage, 1991.
Fennel,  D.  A.  ‘A  Content  Analysis  of  Ecotourism  Definitions’.  Current  Issues  in  Tourism  4  no.  5

(2001): 403–420.



243

Fisher, E., J. Jones and R. von Schomberg. Implementing the Precautionary Principle: Perspectives and

Prospects. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006.

International  Labour  Organisation.  Convention  (No.  169)  Concerning  Indigenous  and  Tribal
Peoples in Independent Countries. Adopted on June 27, 1989 by the General Conference of
the  International  Labour  Organisation.  Available  at  http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/
62.htm (Accessed April 2009).

Keitumetse,  S.  O.  ‘Sustainable  Development  and  Archaeological  Heritage  Management:  Local
Community Participation and Monument Tourism in Botswana’. Unpublished PhD thesis,
Department of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, 2005.

———.  ‘Theorizing  Community  Representation:  Indigeneity,  International  Law,  and  Cultural
Sustainability’.  Unpublished  paper  submitted  as  a  fulfilment  of  a  requirement  for  a  Rock-
efeller Humanities Fellowship programme at the Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage,
Smithsonian Institution, DC, 2006. 

———.  Celebrating  or  marketing  the  indigenous?  International  Rights  Organisations,  National
Governments, and Tourism Creation. In Tourism and Politics: Global Frameworks and Local
Realities. Series: Advances in Tourism Research, edited by P. Burns and N. Novelli. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 2007.

Kgamanyane,  T.  ‘The  Contribution  of  Rock  Paintings  to  the  Economic  Value  of  Tsodilo  World
Heritage  Site.  Harry  Oppenheimer  Okavango  Research  Centre  Winter  Course  on  Research
Methods, University of Botswana, 2007.

Lehmann, D. ‘Introduction’. In Development Theory: Four Critical Studies, edited by D. Lehman et al.

London: Frank Cass, 1979.

Mapanda Conservation Trust. Notarial Deed Trust No. 123/95: Mapanda Conservation Trust. January

2002. Gaborone: Moesi & Co. Attorneys, Notaries & Conveyancers.

Midgley, J. ‘Introduction: Social Development, the State and Participation’. In Community Participa-

tion, Social Development and the State, edited by J. Midgley, 1986.

Moremi-Manonnye  Conservation  Trust.  Notarial  Deed  of  Trust,  MA  135/99:  Moremi-Manonnye

Conservation Trust. July 1999. Gaborone: Moesi & Co. Attorneys, Notaries & Conveyancers.

Neumayer,  E.  Weak  Versus  Strong  Sustainability:  Exploring  the  Limits  of  Two  Opposing  Paradigms.

Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2003.

Prohasa,  S.  ‘Ecotourism  and  Cultural  Heritage  Tourism:  Forging  Stronger  Links’.  Yale  F  &  ES

Bulletin: 278–281.

Pule, T. Archaeology and Museums. In Ditswa Mmung: Archaeology of Botswana. Gaborone: Pula

Press, 1998.

Republic of Botswana, Ministry of Environment, Wildlife & Tourism (MEWT). Community Based

Natural Resources Management (CBNRM) Policy. Gaborone: Government Printer, 2007.

———. Botswana National Ecotourism Strategy. Gaborone: Government Printer, 2002.
Republic  of  Botswana,  Ministry  of  Lands  and  Housing.  Tourism  Lease.  Gaborone:  Government

Printer, n.d.

———. Wildlife Management Lease. Gaborone: Government Printer, n.d.
———. Community Natural Resource Management Lease Gaborone: Government Printer, n.d.
Republic of Botswana, Department of Culture and Youth. National Policy on Culture, October 2001.

Gaborone: Government Printer, 2001.

Republic of Botswana, Ministry of Home Affairs. Monument and Relics Act No.12 of 2001, Gaborone:

Government Printer, 2001.

———. Monument and Relics Act 1970, Chapter 59:03. Gaborone: Government Printer, 1970.
Republic  of  Botswana,  Department  of  Wildlife  and  National  Parks.  Wildlife  Conservation  and

National Parks Act No. 28 of 1992. Gaborone: Government Printer, 1992.

Republic  of  Botswana,  Department  of  Tourism.  Tourism  Policy:  Government  paper  No.2  of  1990.

Gaborone: Government Printer, 1990.

Robinson, N., ed. Agenda 21 and the UNCED Proceedings. Third Series: International Protection of

the Environment, vol. 6. New York: Oceana Publications, 1993.

244

S. O. Keitumetse

Roe, D. M., M. Grieg-Gran and W. Schalken. Getting the Lion’s Share from Tourism: Private Sector-
Community Partnerships in Namibia. Poverty, Inequality and Environment Series No.1 Vols.
1–3. Namibia: IIED and NACOBTA, 2001.

Sankuyo Tshwaragano Management Trust (STMT). Notarial Deed of Trust, MA 11/2002: Sankuyo
Tshwaragano Management Trust (STMT). November 1995. Gaborone: Monthe, Marumo &
Co. Attorneys, Notaries & Conveyancers.

Skeates, R. Debating the Archaeological Heritage. London: Duckworth, 2000.
Smith, G. L. Impact Assessment and Sustainable Resource Management. Longman: Edinburgh, 1993.
Smith, P. Cultural Theory: An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.
Sorensen, M. L. S. Gender Archaeology. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000.
Spennemann, H. R., D. W. Look and K. Graham. Heritage Eco-Tourism in Micronesia: Expectations of

Government Officials. CRM 1 (2001): 30–32.

Stankey,  G.  H.,  S.  F.  McCool  and  G.  L.  Stokes.  Limits  of  Acceptable  Change  (LAC)  System  for
Wilderness Planning. Gen.Tech. Report INT-176, USDA Forest Service Intermountain Forest
and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT: 1985.

Thakadu, O. T. and B. Schuster. ‘Introduction’. In Natural Resources Management and People, edited
by O. T. Schuster and B. Thakadu. CBNRM Support Programme, Occasional Paper No. 15.
Gaborone: IUCN CBNRM Support, 2007.

UNESCO. The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orga-
nization (UNESCO) meeting, Paris, 17 October to 21 November 1972, 17th session. Convention
for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, adopted 1972.

UNESCO.  The  General  Conference  of  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural
Organization  (UNESCO)  meeting,  Paris,  29  September  to  17  October  2003,  32nd  session.
Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, adopted 17 October 2003,
Paris, France.

UNESCO. Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace (resolution A/53/243), Paris,

1999.

World Travel & Tourism Council. Botswana: The Impact of Travel & Tourism on Jobs and Economy.

London: WTTC, 2007.

Zeppel,  H.  Indigenous  Ecotourism:  Sustainable  Development  and  Management.  Wallingford:  Cabi,

2006.


