 , 2016
PuBlISHed WItH lICenSe  BY taYlor & franCIS
Vol. 22, no. 2, 131–144, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1108925

Crossed gazes over an old city: photography and the 
‘Experientiation’ of a heritage place

Paula Mota Santosa,b

adepartment of Political and Behavioural Science, fernando Pessoa university, Porto, Portugal; bCaPP – Centre for 
Public Policy and administration, university of lisbon, lisbon, Portugal

ABSTRACT
The paper analyses a group of photographs of the old city of Porto, a UNESCO 
World Heritage Site. The photograph is used as a medium to elicit the ways 
different social agents experience and relate to Old Porto as a heritage place. 
The photographs were collected as part of a wider research project on the 
way sense of place of Porto’s old city was differentially constructed by local 
inhabitants, tourists and the City Council. Illustrated postcards were also 
analysed. The findings demonstrate the usefulness of this particular form of 
image-based ethnographic research in understanding the forms in relation 
to a heritage lived-in place.

Introduction
The paper analyses a group of photographs of the old city of Porto (Northern Portugal), a UNESCO 
World Heritage Site. The photograph is used as a medium to elicit the ways different social agents 
experience and relate to Old Porto as a heritage place. Old Porto is a place that is at the core of a com-
plex interplay between different social groups as to what the city as a whole and its inhabitants stand 
for (Santos 2002, 2012); it is a place where Porto’s multi-vocal identity is being most visibly negoti-
ated, constructed, contested and heralded. The material presented here was part of a wider research 
carried out in the early 2000s that aimed both at identifying the images that different social groups 
have of Porto’s old core and at seeing how this urban area plays a role in the construction of a sense 
of belonging to Porto. The classification in 1996 of Old Porto as an UNESCO World Heritage Site has 
both epitomised and strengthened the aforementioned features of this part of the city.

The research strategy implied both the analysis of the production of an Old Porto sense of place 
by cultural producers (historians, film-makers, novelists and guidebook writers) and the way this 
part of the city was experienced and meaningfully constructed both by those who inhabit it – local 
inhabitants – and by those who visit it – tourists.1 Photography was chosen as part of the research 
methodology due to the fact that photography is a ubiquitous practice of the tourist. Thus, according 
to Sontag ‘[i]t seems positively unnatural to travel for pleasure without taking a camera along’ (1979, 
9); in fact, according to Urry ‘to be a photographer in the twentieth century … is so much part of travel 
and tourism’ (1990, 138). Also, the photograph is the closest we can get to a material objectification 
of the tourist gaze in as much as ‘[p]hotographs document sequences of consumption … [with] the 
camera as the device that makes real what one is experiencing …’ (Sontag 1979, 9). As consequence, 

CONTACT  Paula Mota Santos 

 pmsantos@ufp.edu.pt

© 2016 Paula Mota Santos

132 

  P. M. SaNTOS

the photograph is a materiality through which a sense of place can be both represented and produced 
to the extent that:

[t]he image is penetrated through and through by the system of meaning … The language of the image is not 
merely the totality of utterances emitted … it is also the totality of utterances received. (Barthes 1977, 160)

Because photographic systems are systems of controlled visibilities (and invisibilities), the photo-
graphic corpus presented here will show how the same medium, the photograph, can actually result 
from different relations to place and be differentially used/interpreted by its makers who chose to 
represent the same urban area in very diverse ways, so producing different ‘Old Portos’. One of the 
central points to this analysis is the understanding that photography is not a unified practice but a 
medium utterly diverse in its functions.

This paper will first consider briefly the nature of photographic representation to then proceed to 
elicit the process that the photographic-informed ethnography used. The four systems of representation 
or gazes over Old Porto identified will be then presented and analysed to finally move to a reflection 
on the data obtained and its implications for the understanding of the ‘experientiation’ of Old Porto 
as a lived-in heritage city. ‘Experientiation’ is used in Kant’s sense of knowledge of place as genuinely 
local knowledge that ‘is in itself experiential in the manner of Erlebnis, “lived experience”, rather than 
of Erfahrung, the already elapsed experience’ (Casey 1996, 18). As such, ‘experientiation’ is seen as a 
reflective practice, a knowing-in-action and a reflection-in-action whereby there is learning (assimi-
lation and production of knowledge) by engaging with performance (Schon 1990). The social practice 
of photography is thus taken in this paper as producing knowledge by engaging with performance.

Photographic systems of representation and ethnographic work
In Western thought ‘knowing’ has been closely associated with ‘seeing’ (Arendt cited in Urry 1999, 36), 
a stance that bears on photography by constituting it as a powerful form of knowledge of the world 
(Sontag 1979) and placing it centrally in today’s highly image-mediated late modernity,2. However, 
the importance of the gaze as translated in visual imagery in the experiencing of places other than 
‘our own’ predates the birth of photography, as clearly demonstrated by European cartography as 
related to the former’s overseas expansion from the late 1400s. According to Adler, the centrality of 
sight and of seeing was a way in which travellers could, ‘grasp this vast new world of things without 
being overwhelmed by it’ (Adler 1989, 19). By the end of the eighteenth century, visual experience 
and travelling for instruction had become systematically associated. Landscape painters, drawing 
instructors, writers and poets were inventing an assemblage of rhetorical and practical devices that 
not only heightened the visual experience, but also imposed a discipline on the way the viewer looked 
and in doing so arranged the world that was to be visually experienced (Osborne 2000; Robinson and 
Picard 2009). The development of the camera obscura (in the seventeenth century), the camera lucida 
(in the eighteenth century) and other optical mechanisms intensified and disciplined the viewers’ 
apprehension of what was before their eyes long before photography.3 According to Osborne, ‘by the 
time contemporary mass tourism emerges in the 1950s … tourist activity was entirely inseparable 
from the framing and fixing of visual experiences’ (Osborne 2000, 81).

However, the centrality of photography in the methodology for this study of heritage-Porto4 stems 
from the fact that photography is more than just an epiphenomenon of tourist activity. The act of 
photographing is assumed as the objectification of the tourist gaze (Sontag 1979; Urry 1990, 138; 1995; 
Crawshaw and Urry 1997, Robinson and Picard 2009), and therefore has been seen as the constitutive 
performance of the tourist experience itself. As Urry (2002, 129) states ‘[p]hotography has therefore 
been crucial in the development of tourism; they are not separate processes but each derives from 
and enhances the other’. Also, and more importantly, the taking of photographs is always a result of 
the photographer’s intentionality (Berger 1972): the images are a result of her/his decision about what 
is worth recording about a particular viewed ‘object’ and this is made literally visible through the 
showing of the photographs to others and to oneself. The reason for using the photographic image as 
a methodological tool in the ethnographic research on old Porto is not just that ‘[t]ravel becomes a 

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  133

strategy for accumulating photographs [and that] photography certifies experience’ (Sontag 1979, 9); 
rather it is, as Sontag states, because photography is actually one of the principle devices for experi-
encing something (1979, 10). Thus, the photographic gazes collected and analysed in this paper are a 
fundamental element to understand the experiencing of Old Porto as a heritage place.

Following fieldwork with both inhabitants and tourists visiting Porto, four different systems of 
photographic representation were identified as having a marked presence in the world under study. 
The systems were classified as following:

the officialdom gaze (as portrayed in the City Council’s tourist information leaflets);
the inhabitants gaze (as portrayed by local inhabitants’ photographs of ‘their’ place);
the commodity gaze (as portrayed by illustrated postcards);
the tourist gaze (as portrayed by tourists’ photographs).
The photographic component of the study on Old Porto was constituted by distributing disposable 
cameras to the photographing subjects.5 In the case of local inhabitants, after one year of fieldwork 
I selected two individuals – one male, one female – per each of the four Old Porto civil parishes 
who I then asked to photograph places of importance to them in the old city; each was asked to take 
a maximum of ten photographs.6 Concerning tourists, I approached them on the street, and after 
explaining the broad aims of the research asked them if they would be willing to use the disposable 
camera to replicate a maximum of 10 of the photographs they were taking with their own camera. On 
agreement, a meeting point and time were arranged in order to retrieve the disposable camera. The 
research worked with a total of 10 tourists who took an average of 10 photographs each.7 With regards 
the study of illustrated postcards, these were chosen because they are a staple tourist commodity: 
bought no longer so much as a vehicle to write to those back home, but frequently bought by tourists 
in order to acquire ‘good photos of the city’.8 Concerning the selection of the postcards analysed, I 
visited shops in the tourist areas of Old Porto and requested information about the most popular 
postcards. I then purchased the complete postcard collection for analysis.9 The images associated with 
the officialdom gaze are the photographs in City Council produced leaflets made available to visitors 
in the City Council Tourism offices.10

Old Porto as produced by different systems of photographic representation
The photographs collected were first analysed and then grouped into different categories according to 
the elements seen to be central to each image. The following charts present a breakdown for the four 
photographic gazes on Old Porto (Figure 1).

The officialdom gaze as portrayed by the City Council’s tourism information photographs produces 
a monumental city, one where the aesthetic value of the historic buildings is privileged (predominance 
of architectural details, churches and public buildings). Noteworthy is the absence of people in this 
gaze. The City Council’s depiction of place devoid of people is an important element in this heritage/
tourism-based system of representation. Dann (1996) has observed this absence of local subjects in 
photographic depiction in his study of British summer holiday brochures. Dann sees the absence 
of indigenous subjects in the photographic image as one element related to the expression of the 
availability value of a site for tourist appropriation. The invisibility, and therefore non-existence of 
people within the City Council’s system of representation of Old Porto is seen here to be linked not 
only to the production of an ‘empty place’ ready to be appropriated by its visitor, but also to a ‘regime 
of truth’ where the historic is turned into heritage, rendered a body without time (timeless), though 
never ahistoric. This stripping of time out of the heritage body also produces the naturalisation of 
this system of representation, because ‘nature’ as a primordial essence is also without time (Figure 2).
Within the officialdom system of (photographic) representation, Porto is a city made up of mon-
umental fragments of history: a series of architectural bodies disembodied from the city itself; a 
representation that is strengthened by the rhetoric of the image, in other words the way form is 
manipulated in order to persuade. Most of the buildings photographed are not only monumental in 

134 

  P. M. SaNTOS

Figure 1. the four gazes over old Porto: comparative charts.

nature but they are also photographed whole (full length), ‘face on’ (the facade), and are positioned 
in the centre of the picture and quite frequently along a vertical axis orientated from bottom to top 
(low angle shot), which creates a subjective sense of the object and enhances the monumental scale 
of the building. All these elements together produce a sense of respectful distance between the viewer 
and the viewed, mirroring what Bourdieu (1965, 116–119) describes in peasants’ photographs as the 
taste for the hieratic, where deference takes on the essence of centrality. The historic in this gaze is 
also strengthened by the negation of Old Porto’s present-day modernity, a result of the careful fram-
ing whereby adjacent ‘modern’ buildings, cars and people are off-frame: a rhetorical technique that 
strengthens the timeless (but never ahistoric) nature of Old Porto as ‘Historic Centre’.

Old Porto as photographed by the local inhabitants is not portrayed as a heritage place (Figure 1). 
When heritage bodies become part of the local inhabitants’ visual representation of place they do so 
in terms of their legibility as personal biography and are usually photographed without the defer-
ence and monumentality that marks the City Council’s photographic gaze. As one woman in her 50s 
noted of her close-up photograph of the Cathedral’s steps: ‘These are the steps where we used to play 
when children’. Although not unfamiliar, and often proud of the historic value of the place towards 
which they feel a sense of belonging, Old Porto for its inhabitants is a place of intimate memories: a 
space-time of a culture of relatedness (Carsten 2000). This is demonstrated by the predominance of 
photographs linked to personal memories. For instance, private buildings (usually the inhabitants’ own 
homes; Figure 3(a)), or urban units (the street as a public/private space of social interaction): ‘This is 
the square where we used to play football after school’ (male 50 years old; Figure 3(b)). Photographs 
of architectural details valued in terms of the legibility/memory of their personal biography and not for 
their aesthetic value: ‘This was our spot where we would get into the river for a swim’ (male 40 years 
old; see Figure 3(c)). Most noticeably, this personal legibility was demonstrated by the surfacing of 
people in images: ‘This is my family, one of the most important things in Old Porto for me’ (female 
25 years old; see Figure 3(d)). This emergence of the category people, although a limited presence in 
quantitative terms, is quite relevant when considering the context of the photographic exercise. My 

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  135

Figure 2. the officialdom gaze.

request when I handed over the disposable cameras was for people to photograph important things 
for them in the Old City. I had envisaged there being places in Old Porto that could constitute an 
alternative cartography to the ubiquitous tourist map; but in the inhabitant’s mind ‘Old Porto’ was not 
so much a set of places with people, but a set of people who inhabited those places. As a result, their 
photographs – as images but also as the uttered narratives on the photographs taken – objectified 
primarily a geography of affects.11

The commodity gaze objectified in the illustrated postcards, represents the Old City as a pictur-
esque place (Figure 1). The picturesque is a category of aesthetic figuration that several authors have 
associated with the tourist gaze since its inception among European elites during the late 1700s.12 The 
city as an aestheticised picturesque assumes the role of scenery, embodied here in the predominance 

136 

  P. M. SaNTOS

Figure 3. the inhabitants gaze.

of urban units and vistas (Figure 4(a) and (b); also one of the photos of 4(d)). Within the commodity 
system of photographic representation the city is constituted as a spectacle; a stage set where the 
‘on-holiday’ script unfolds and where traditional lifestyles are located. The latter are objectified in  
the category traditional, where working-class lives were photographed as endowing ‘local colour’  
(Figure 4(c)). It is interesting to note the surfacing of food as one of the components of the commodity gaze  
(Figure 4(d)). The centrality of food in the tourist experience and in heritage has been well underlined 
in recent literature (see for instance, Hall et al. 2003; Brulotte and Di Giovine 2014). The Otherness 
of the place visited is thus also constructed through the consumption of local products, in this case, 
port wine, which is the trademark product of tourist Porto in the globalised arena of present-day 
modernity.13

The tourist gaze depicted in the collected photographs illuminated some unexpected aspects of 
the tourists’ relation to the visited place (Figure 1). As a first and central point, the chart represent-
ing the tourist photographic gaze is the most kaleidoscopic of all four gazes, and appears to reveal 

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  137

Figure 4. the commodity gaze.

a more complex photographing subject than most literature on the tourist gaze usually allows, with 
the tourist not just a ‘collector of places often gazed upon and experienced on the surface’ (Urry and 
Larsen 2011, 73).

I shall start with the group of photos more closely related than any other to a sense of Otherness as 
cultural difference (this being a central tenet of the conceptualisation of tourism as a social practice): 
these were the photographs that fell under the category traditional (enclosing instances of local work-
ing-class lifestyles) (Figure 5(a)). Although Urry (2002, 13) refers to ‘the seeing of ordinary aspects 
of social life being undertaken by people in unusual contexts’ as one of the ways in which ‘a division 
between the ordinary and the visually extraordinary becomes established and sustained’ (Urry 2002, 
12), such images are not quantitatively relevant within Old Porto tourists’ overall system of visual 
representation. In fact, the fieldwork revealed that the limited presence of this category reflected 
self-consciousness on the part of the tourist. In the conversations held, some tourists (usually North 
European) expressed a sense of moral wrongdoing in photographing instances of local lives. The 
locality value of Old Porto’s inhabitants’ lifestyle was seen by them to be closely related with poverty 
and underdevelopment, inducing the tourist to feel it morally incorrect to objectify through the cam-
era individual lifestyles of subaltern Others that were clearly not being staged for their consumption.
The presence of people, food and details indicates a highly personal and profoundly social experien-
tiation of the heritage place by the tourist. The images of people are photographs of travel companions. 
This is a quite frequent practice in tourist photography, one that inscribes the person in the place being 

138 

  P. M. SaNTOS

Figure 5. the tourist gaze.

visited.14 Such photos serve as testimony to having been in a particular place, and are considered to 
do so more than photographs of the same place without fellow travellers. The fieldwork revealed that 
the most self-conscious tourist photographers tended to produce more pictures without people than 
the less self-conscious tourist.15 When asked why they photographed certain places the immediate 
answer was frequently ‘To be able to remember them later’. However, when questioned on the reason 
for duplicating the tourist-place photograph, but including one or more fellow travellers against the 
tourist-place icon (monument, vista, etc.) the answer was not so immediate. The subjects always 
needed time before replying and sometimes were not able to come up with an explanation. The most 
common explanation offered was ‘To show that we were really there’ (female 53 years old; Dutch).

Besides this need to produce material evidence of one’s presence in the tourist place, the memory- 
enabling role of the people-category photographs was also made explicit by the tourists. Explanations 
that referred to these photographs as material evidence of the passage of time were quite frequent: ‘We 
think it will be funny in some years’ time to see what we were like’ (female, 17 years old; German), 
or ‘To remember at a later date the people we were with in this place’ (male, 47 years old; Spanish). 
However, the people photos can also be considered the objectification of a metamorphic process. It is 
not so much, as has frequently been argued, a practice of appropriation of place (Holland 2000, 148), 
as the inscribing of one’s body in that place. Thus, out of two bodies (the person visiting and the place 
visited), just one is created (the place I/we visited). These photos are then the material form of an 
encounter, the visual depiction of a dialogical relationship: if place is transformed by my presence (for 
example, the photo of the monument/building with the friend/spouse in the foreground as different 
from the photo of the same place but vacant of the personal marker – the friend and/or the spouse), 
I, myself, am also transformed by place (the photograph displaying a different embodiment of the 
self: on holiday, perhaps with informal, lighter clothes, with a tan and a smiling face … maybe even 
in a playful pose) (Figure 5(b)).

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  139

Figure 6. the tourist gaze: details of humourous elements of the culturally different places. (a) Keeping a rooster in an old Porto 
street and (b) tiles displaying the name of a bar.

Again, by looking at the charts (Figure 1), we can verify that the tourist gaze does not seem to share 
many features with the officialdom gaze, revealing an experientiation of the place that is not tightly 
bound by the official representation of the City Council tourist information. However, the tourist gaze 
over old Porto does share with the illustrated postcard (commodity gaze) a strong presence of the vista. 
Indeed, if tourists’ steps are mediated by the tourist information that they use while visiting the place,16 
it would appear that the way they cast their photographic eyes over the city is more influenced by the 
orthodoxy of the system of photographic representation as embodied by the illustrated postcard than 
anything else. In both the tourists’ and postcards’ systems of representation of Old Porto, importance is 
clearly assigned to the panoramic take on the city whereby the tourist place is constructed as a landscape 
(Figure 5(c)). It is hoped the photograph will capture this spectacle in one single commanding glance 
and, by doing so, will succeed in portraying the essence of the place. This importance of the vista in 
both gazes seems to give some support to Osborne’s view that much tourist photography is quota-
tion from mass-mediated views of the place, being more a process of confirmation than of discovery 
(Osborne 2000, 79). However, this importance of the vista in the tourist’s photographic gaze should 
not be taken as the marker of a distanced gaze or a monolithic apprehension of the place. In fact, as 
already noted, the chart representing the tourist photographic gaze is clearly the most kaleidoscopic 
of all the four sets of photographs, revealing a subject much more sensitive to the particularities and 
idiosyncrasies of place than is usually presumed.

The impact of the encounter with place upon the visiting subject can be ascertained in the tour-
ist’s active pursuit of novel experiences, namely in the transformation of self through the sensing of 
new gustatory experiences as represented by the tourist-place local cuisine. The photographic data 
collecting was not the best vehicle for the explicit expression of food as a relevant element in the 
tourist experientiation of place (the category did not really fit well with the typology of data being 
requested to tourists: ‘places in Old Porto’), food has nevertheless surfaced to reveal the importance 
of this local culture-related sensory experience in the tourist experientiation of place (Figure 5(d)). 
The multiplicity of the tourist reading of Old Porto beyond its immediate heritage value is also visible 
in details. The images in this category are visual notations of situations that have surprised, amused 
or puzzled the eye of its maker. These images reveal a playful gaze, one attentive to the ludic side of 
place (Figure 6). The playful mode of the tourist is here embodied through photographs that explicitly 
underline a perspective that besides not being a distanced gaze (something achieved by not taking 
the heritage city just as landscape) is also particularly attentive and sensitive to the smallest details of 

140 

  P. M. SaNTOS

cultural difference. These detail photographs do not fall exclusively within the aestheticised skewness 
of conceptualisation of the tourist gaze in which ‘the ability of photography to objectify the world 
as an exhibition … in which every subject … is promoted into an item for aesthetic appreciation’ 
(Urry and Larsen 2011, 166). These photographs not only disclose the tourist gaze as more thinly 
meshed in its retrieval of the observed reality than usually allowed for within mainstream literature, 
as they clearly contradict the presumption that the tourist photograph is mostly quotation and rarely 
discovery (Osborne 2000, 79). The tourist images in details show how the tourist can adopt a very 
personal, individual and independent perspective in his/her relation to the heritage place in contrast 
to mass-mediated images of the place being visited.17

Crossed gazes over a heritage city: beyond photography
Out of all tourist places, heritage sites are those more heavily loaded with an attributed sense and 
meaning. It is not the case that all tourist sites are not loaded with meaning. In fact, tourists have been 
classified as ‘armies of semioticians … interested in everything as a sign of itself’ (Culler 1981, 127). 
However, a heritage site (even a touristified heritage site, such as Chichén Itzá in Mexico) possesses 
qualities that other tourist sites do not. This is not just a direct result from the constructed nature 
of heritage itself: as an added value attributed to a material (or immaterial) reality by a social group 
and that, by being classified as such, acquires an out-of-ordinary quality (Santos 2012; Silva and 
Santos 2012). It is also and more importantly to the argument made here, the ‘historic’ quality that 
the heritage site holds. This is something that translates itself into the understanding of the ‘historic’ 
as ‘authentic’ and heritage as ‘authentic tangible past’. To walk up the steps of the Kukulkan temple’s 
30-metre high pyramid in Chichén Itzá is to walk literally on the footsteps of Mayan priests and rulers. 
Tourist imaginaries (Salazar and Graburn 2014) in historic sites are thus embedded with a sense of 
authenticity that is likely to bear on its visitors with a gravitas that other imaginaries in any other type 
of tourist place – not even the hyperreal tourist sites – do not possess. As such, today Old Porto is 
no longer (as it was for many decades) just the old part of the city: it is the Historic Centre, the place 
where the oldest structures of the city are clearly landmarked in the tourist information available 
and can be seen and visited: it is the place where the monumental buildings narrate the century-old 
history of the city, and consequently of the Nation. To visit Old Porto is, for instance and if one so 
wishes, to step into the mediaeval house where Henry the Navigator – the Prince who masterminded 
the late 1400s maritime Voyages of Discovery – is reputed to have been born; it is to see the location 
of the nineteenth-century bridge over the Douro that collapsed under the weight of the mass of Porto 
inhabitants who were fleeing the invading Napoleon army; it is to visit Gustave Eiffel’s office where he 
carried out most of the work on his Old Porto iron bridge.

According to Bourdieu, the distinguishing principle between what is and what is not photograph-
able cannot be considered independent of an individual’s imagination. This position resembles a 
constructionist approach to representation by implying that the photograph’s interest derives not from 
its content but from what it means for one person or a group of people (Bourdieu 1965, 124–125). By 
having made use of the same medium of photography so as to elicit the crossed gazes that different 
social subjects (local inhabitants, tourists and official institutions) have of the same place (the World 
Heritage area of the city of Porto), this research makes it possible to shed some additional light over 
the way different social groups experience a lived-in heritage place. The photographic data collected 
and analysed depict Old Porto as a monumental and historic place (official city tourism institutions), 
an aestheticised vista and picturesque place (illustrated postcard) and a place of affects (local inhab-
itants). If these three gazes can easily be subsumed into one or two individual categories, this is not 
the case with the tourist gaze portrayed in the photographs collected and analysed. Given the weight 
of heritage as ‘authentic past made present’ together with the way Porto’s classification as a UNESCO 
World Heritage Site plays into the tourism market, it would perhaps not be unreasonable to expect 
that most of the tourist gaze photographs should display a stronger presence of what Smith (2006) 
has called the ‘authorised heritage discourse’ (AHD), i.e. the master narrative offered by, in this case, 

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  141

Figure 7. Classification of the old City – grouping of adjectives under general features and their respective frequency.

Figure 8. ‘My Mother’s front door: the hand I shook the most [in my life]’ (male, 48 years old).

heritage-Porto. However, as the collected data show, this is not the case. Certainly, there is an element 
of quotation in the Old Porto photographic tourist gaze. But the heritage-Porto that this photographic 
gaze displays is one that is experienced as a lived-in world, and not as a museum-like universe. This 
is a fact that is even more relevant if one considers the nature of the visited place: a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site since 1996, which, in 2014, was voted ‘European Best Destination’ by an international 
tourist association.18

This ability of the tourist to go beyond heritage (the metanarrative of tourist Old Porto) and to 
experience the heritage city as a lived world was also made visible through another medium: words. 

142 

  P. M. SaNTOS

Figure 7 portrays the results of a survey carried out with Old Porto visitors who were asked at the end 
of the questionnaire for five words that would express their understanding and classification of the 
Old City. While the data appear to confirm the importance of the visual in the tourist’s perception of 
place,19 I would like to draw attention to the classifications under the category attributes. These cate-
gories confirm the centrality of the historic (‘historic space’) in the experientiation of the heritage city, 
but they also reveal a more social–experiential dimension of the heritage place being visited (‘human 
attributes’ and ‘lived space’).

Concerning the inhabitants of Old Porto, the photography-based ethnography has shown the 
lived-in-space quality of the heritage city as strongly present in their experientiation of Old Porto (cat-
egories private buildings, urban units, details and people). However, as with tourists, local inhabitants 
in the narratives supplied on the photos taken equally expressed this lived-in quality of the heritage 
city in words. In the conversations held with local inhabitants over their photographs, each photo 
revealed itself frequently as the topos of more than one memory producing an Old Porto as weaved 
out of a ‘culture of relatedness’20 (Carsten 2000). The lived-in quality of the heritage city as a place of 
relatedness is something beautifully portrayed in one of the local inhabitants’ photo and the words 
given to explain it (Figure 8).

Conclusion
As  Susan  Sontag  states,  ‘[s]trictly  speaking,  one  never  understands  anything  from  a  photograph’ 
(Sontag 1979, 23). By making use of what has been seen as one of the centrally defining activities of 
the tourist (Urry 1995, 132–133), and by producing a photography-informed ethnography that went 
beyond the immediacy of the image, this study has disclosed a disjuncture. First, between the tourist 
photographic gaze and the officialdom and commodity gazes allowing us to perceive the tourist as an 
agent capable of constructing a relationship to the visited heritage place that goes beyond heritage 
tourism’s metanarrative of the historical. Second, between the inhabitants’ photographic gaze and the 
officialdom gaze allowing us to perceive how these two local groups, despite sharing the same space 
(Old Porto), inhabit different worlds. These two different worlds are constituted by a thickly woven 
culture of relatedness where people are the main architectural elements of the lived space (inhabitants’ 
world) and by the idea of heritage as truthful history that is evoked through the ancient monumental 
bodies of the Historic Centre (officialdom’s world). These two realms in fact share more than the 
same space: they objectify a genealogical narrative about Old Porto through individual life paths and 
individual historical facts, and, consequently, of the city as a whole. Because of these social-spatial 
dynamics, Old Porto as a lived-in heritage place is constituted as the synecdoche of Porto’s identity 
being the core element of the production of Porto’s sense of place.

By illuminating some of the social elements that are active in the construction of place and as such 
are integral to any process of heritage place construction and experientiation, the findings presented 
bear consequences for both academic analysis and for heritage practice and policy. If what makes 
things ‘heritage’, i.e. valuable and meaningful, ‘are the present-day cultural processes and activities 
that are undertaken at and around them, and of which they become a part’ (Smith 2006, 3), then the 
findings of this photography-based ethnography can be considered useful for those engaged in lived-in 
heritage places, namely Historic Centres. By clearly showing the heritage place as woven through a 
much more diverse set of performative social relations than traditionally admitted, the research carried 
out clearly shows that heritage and its correlated AHDs are not passively or uncritically experienced. 
In fact, the photography-based ethnography carried out and the diverse gazes it analysed, show the 
quality of heritage attributed to a place, no matter how authoritative, does not annul or obscure the 
other performative elements that constitute it as a place. As such, when considering a heritage place, 
either academically or within heritage practice and policy, it will be useful to keep in mind that there 
is place beyond heritage.

INTErNaTIONal JOUrNal Of HErIT agE STUdIES 

  143

Notes
1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
7. 

 For more information on these analyses see Santos (2002, 2007).
 According to Barthes (2000) the authority of the photographic image as a source of knowledge lies in its 
connection with the reality as light chemically impresses the photographic film producing a de facto glueing 
together of the photograph and its referent: ‘I call “photographic referent” not the optionally real thing to which 
an image or a sign refers but the necessarily real thing which has been placed before the lens, without which 
there would be no photograph’ (Barthes 2000, 76).
 On this type of process, see Urry’s (1995, 193–210) analysis of the cultural production of the Lake District as 
a place-myth and a tourist site.
 This term is used to signify the heritage constituted part of the city and its related narrative or discourse. This 
is done on the understanding that there is an additional Porto that is beyond the heritage area and its history-
based narrative.
 The subjects who accepted being part of this data collection were informed of the research aims and agreed to 
the future uses of the photographs.
 The younger male was 38 years old and the oldest 48; the younger female was 30 years old and the oldest 50.
 Although care was taken in selecting individuals who looked sociologically different (age set, gender and group 
constitution), the sample was a convenience sample composed of individuals who agreed to the researcher’s 
request. As such, this ‘tourist’ group was constituted by a variety of types: from older to younger couples, from 
groups of young adults to family groups and individual travellers. The nationalities were also varied: French, 
German, Dutch, Spanish, English and Swiss.
 Information obtained both through fieldwork and a written survey.
 The research analysed 76 postcards.

8. 
9. 
10.   The collection of leaflets analysed was comprised of 13 themed leaflets with an average of four photos per leaflet.
11.   The methodology comprised in-depth semi-structured interviews with local inhabitants-cum-photographers 

in which they explained the contents of each photograph and why these held personal importance.

12.   On the role of the picturesque in the tourist gaze, see for instance Lögfren (1999, 14–40).
13.   The postcard depicted in Figure 4(d) has in the centre of the photographic mosaic a chalice of port wine; in the 
bottom photo which is a vista of Old Porto, a traditional port wine river boat – the rabelo – is foregrounded. In 
addition, in some instances, the reverse side of the postcard was faintly printed (so the writing could take place 
undisturbed) with photos of fishes and seafood.

14.   On the importance of the photographing of fellow travellers, see for instance Sobel (2009) and Yeh (2009).
15.   The degree of self-consciousness was assessed through the pictures taken by the individual photographer/tourist. 
Those classified as more self-conscious were those who produced highly aestheticised Old Porto photographs 
with unusual viewpoints and attention to details that almost rendered these images abstract in their reference 
to the place of Old Porto.

16.   The fieldwork confirmed the influence of this written information on the tourists’ perambulations in Old Porto. 
The suggested routes in both City Council tourism leaflets and tourist guidebooks were compared with the 
actual routes taken by tourists visiting Porto revealing a strong correlation between them; for instance, there 
was a clear predominance of routes that started by the Cathedral and proceeded down to the river side while 
the opposite direction route very seldom occurred.

17.   Images circulated in tourism marketing and advertising, guidebooks, films, television and electronic media.
18.   http://www.europeanbestdestinations.com/top/europe-best-destinations-2014/#PORTO
19.   In humans over 90 per cent of knowledge about the external world is received through the sense of sight 
(Dodwell 1966 cited in Gold 1980, 52). The visual emphasis on the tourist experience can thus be interpreted 
as a consequence of this tendency, a skewness probably accentuated by the usually short amount of time spent 
in the tourist place.

20.   Local inhabitants’ life histories collected by the wider research also discursively display Old Porto as thickly 

weaved by a culture of relatedness.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Paula Mota Santos received her PhD in anthropology from University College London and is an assistant professor 
at Fernando Pessoa University, Portugal. Her work is centred on the relationship between social identity and space. 
She has been a visiting scholar in the Department of Landscape Architecture & Regional Planning, University of  
California – Berkeley. She has coedited journals themed issues and books on heritage in Portugal and Spain. She has 

144 

  P. M. SaNTOS

published several articles and book chapters on heritage, tourism, immigration, theme parks and film/documentary, 
and has also directed two documentary films.

Press.

References
Adler, Judith. 1989. “Origins of Sightseeing.” Annals of Tourism Research 16 (1): 7–29.
Barthes, Roland. 1977. Image – Music – Text. New York, NY: Hill and Wang.
Barthes, Roland. 2000. Camera Lucida. Vintage: Reflections on Photography. London.
Berger, John. 1972. Understanding a Photograph: Selected Essays. London: Pelican.
Bourdieu, Pierre, ed. 1965. Un Art Moyen: Essai sur les Usages Sociaux de la Photographie [Photography: A Middle-brow 

Brulotte, Ronda, and Michel Di Giovine, eds. 2014. Edible Identities: Food as Cultural Heritage. Farnham: Ashgate.
Carsten,  Janet,  ed.  2000.  Cultures  of  Relatedness:  New  Approaches  to  the  Study  of  Kinship.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 

Art]. Paris: Éditions Minuit.

University Press.

Casey, Edward. 1996. “How to Get from Space to Place in a Fairly Short Stretch of Time – Phenomenological Prolegomena.” 
In Senses of Place, edited by Steven Feld and Keith Basso, 13–52. Santa Fé, NM: School for Advanced Research Press.
Crawshaw, Carol, and John Urry. 1997. “Tourism and the Photographic Eye.” In Touring Cultures – Transformation of 

Travel and Theory, edited by Chris Rojek and John Urry, 176–195. London: Routledge.

Culler, Jonathan. 1981. The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. London: Routledge.
Dann, Graham. 1996. “The People of Tourist Brochures.” In The Tourist Image – Myths and Myth Making in Tourism, 

edited by Tom Selwyn, 61–81.Chichester: Wiley.

Gold, John. 1980. An Introduction to Behavioural Geography. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hall, Michael, Liz Sharples, Richard Mitchell, Niki Macionis, and Brock Cambourne, eds. 2003. Food Tourism around 

the World – Development, Management and Markets. Oxford: Elsevier.

Holland, Patricia. 2000. “Sweet it is to Scan… - : personal photographs and popular photography.” In Photography: A 

Critical Introduction, edited by Liz Wells, 117–164. London: Routledge.

Lögfren, Orvar. 1999. On Holiday: A History of Vacationing. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Osborne, Peter. 2000. Travelling Light: Photography, Travel and Visual Culture. Manchester, NH: Manchester University 

Robinson, Mike, and David Picard. 2009. “Moments, Magic and Memories: Photographing Tourists, Tourists Photographs 
and Making Worlds.” In The Framed World. Tourism, Tourists and Photography, edited by Mike Robinson and David 
Picard, 1–37. Farnham: Ashgate.

Salazar, Noel, and Nelson Graburn. 2014. “Introduction. Toward an Anthropology of Tourism Imaginaries.” In Tourism 

Imaginaries: Anthropological Approaches, edited by Noel Salazar and Nelson Graburn, 1–28. Oxford: Berghahn.

Santos, Paula Mota. 2002. “A cidade do Porto e o ser-se tripeiro como produção cultural [The city of Porto and to be 
a tripeiro as a cultural production].” In The Power and the Persistance of Stereotyping, edited by Anthony Barker, 
127–141. Aveiro: University of Aveiro.

Santos, Paula Mota. 2007. “The Cinematographic Representation of the City of Porto (As Seen by the Author in Six 

Films).” Doc Online 2: 31–59.

Santos, Paula Mota. 2012. “The Power of Knowledge: Tourism and the Production of Heritage in Porto’s Old City.” 

 18 (5): 8–15.

Schon, Donald. 1990. Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Towards a New Design for Teaching and Learning in the 

Silva, Luís, and Paula Mota Santos. 2012. “Ethnographies of Heritage and Power: Introduction.” International Journal 

Professions. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

of Heritage Studies 18 (5): 1–7.

Smith, Laurajane. 2006. The Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Sobel, Rebekah. 2009. “Connecting Cultural Identity and Place through Tourist Photography: American Jewish Youth 
on a First Trip to Israel.” In The Framed World. Tourism, Tourists and Photography, edited by Mike Robinson and 
David Picard, 229–238. Farnham: Ashgate.

Sontag, Susan. 1979. On Photography. London: Penguin Books.
Urry, John. 1990. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. London: Sage.
Urry, John. 1995. Consuming Places. London: Routledge.
Urry, John. 1999. “Sensing Leisure Places.” In Leisure/Tourism Geographies: Practices and Geographical Knowledge, edited 

by David Crouch, 34–45. London: Routledge.

Urry, John. 2002. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. 2nd ed. London: Sage.
Urry, John, and Jonas Larsen. 2011. The Tourist Gaze 3.0. London: Sage.
Yeh, Joyce. 2009. “The Embodiment of Sociability through the Tourist Camera.” In The Framed World. Tourism, Tourists 

and Photography, edited by Mike Robinson and David Picard, 199–216. Farnham: Ashgate.


