London’s Olympic waterscape: capturing transition
Michael Anton*, Bradley L. Garrett, Alison Hess, Ellie Miles and terri moreau

Department of Geography, Royal Holloway, University of London, London, UK
(Received 28 March 2011; ﬁnal version received 21 November 2011)

The waterways of London are an essential component of the city, with the River
Thames playing a prominent role in the heritage, history and identity of place.
The upcoming 2012 Olympics are highlighting the Lea Valley waterways in east
London as another important part of London’s waterscape, expanding London’s
global presence as a ‘water city’. As part of the Creative Campus Initiative, we
undertook a project based on the broad themes of water, London and the
Olympics that would give voice to the changes taking place. The result is Lon-
don’s Olympic Waterscape, a 20-minute ﬁlm comprising both ‘expert’ interview
material discussing broad themes and developments and an embodied record of
our engagement with the Olympic area during a brief period in the construction
process. The present article is about the journey we took through and around
the east London ‘Olympic’ waterways as we attempted to capture this
transitional moment on video.

Introduction
The waterways of London are political and historical substances that play a role in
the everyday lived realities of residents and inspire international imaginings about
what constitutes London as a global city. Writings by authors and poets such as
Dickens, Blake and Eliot have contributed signiﬁcantly to global perceptions of
London as a ‘water city’. The cultural heritage associated with these themes is
being consciously expanded and marketed as part of the upcoming 2012 Olympics.
The east London landscape, an area with a rich industrial history built around a ser-
ies of braided waterways in the Lea Valley, is under immense (re)construction in
preparation to host the main Olympic stadium, the athletes’ village and other venues
(see Figure 1).

The Lea Valley is a network of waterways ﬂowing through the east of London,
connecting with the Thames on its north side. The Olympic stadium is situated on
an island among four waterways, and the main Olympic site links Newham and
Tower Hamlets.1 Historically, these waterways, including an extensive canal system,
have played a major role in the industrialisation of the area, providing a route link-
ing London’s docklands to the rest of the country. Their close connection with trade
and industry meant that they were in a constant state of change, falling into gradual
disrepair as the Thames docks closed one by one. However, while the landscape fell

*Corresponding author. Email: michaeldavidanton@gmail.com

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

126

M. Anton et al.

Figure 1. Landscape in transition.
Credit: Michael Anton.

into dereliction, it was never vacant. Before the construction began on the chosen
Olympic site, houseboats moored along the rivers, various residents both lived on
and used the waterways, and many people passed through. While the area was not
the empty ‘wasteland’ it is often portrayed as (Almarcegui 2009), it has remained
for a long period one of the most socially and economically deprived areas of
London.

The Olympics have brought change to this river network with mixed results:
while the houseboats have been moved out and local businesses shuttered, the riv-
er’s locks have been refreshed, and though river access has been limited, barges
have been brought back into use. The Olympic Delivery Authority (ODA) hopes
that in the long term, the Olympics will bring more people to these waterways.
While the process of change is completely in character with the historical back-
ground of the area, the pace and scale of the operation makes it one of the most
dramatic interventions in the history of the landscape. While it may be straightfor-
ward to decry the event as a harbinger of doom for the pre-Olympic heritage of the
area, following Crouch and Parker (2003, p. 396), who write: ‘. . .heritage has been
explicitly deployed for political ends in the UK’, we also recognise that heritage
‘has always been produced by people according to their contemporary concerns and
experiences’ (Harvey 2001, p. 2). As a result of all the competing claims as to what
constitutes (and what will constitute) east London, the identity of the area is as
complicated and entangled as the topography. This substantial transitional period
can be understood through the constructed narratives of the ‘Olympics legacy’;
however, there is also, as our work uncovered, an opportunity to reﬂect on the other
stories, past, present and future, that these waterways tell. The transitional moment
we discuss took place during the building work for the 2012 London Olympics.
While the structures and stadium were built, the land- and waterscape were barri-
caded and a legacy was planned. We explored and ﬁlmed the site in the winter of
2009 and the spring of 2010, while the site underwent physical and ideological
transitions.



127

As Jones (2001) writes, large-scale international events (what he terms ‘mega-
events’) are increasingly becoming an important way for nations to gain interna-
tional credibility and, consequently, tourist revenue. Jones points out
that many
nations see mega-events, like the Olympics, as a shortcut toward global recognition.
It must also be recognised, however,
that event managers and state authorities
attempt to control the image of the event to glamorise the potential economic wind-
falls and downplay potential pitfalls. It is often only in hindsight that the negative
impact of such events is realised. Sports scholars see the 2012 Olympics event as
building on a long history of British sporting tradition, adding to a ‘value of sports
heritage for tourism’ (Wood 2005, p. 308). However, scholars such as Wood have
also underplayed the local effects of the Olympics on east London.

The present article is a written reﬂection resulting from a collaborative ﬁlm
project that we, as doctoral students in the Geography Department at Royal Hollo-
way, University of London (RHUL), initiated. The ﬁlm and the article ﬁll a gap
between ‘what was’ and ‘what will be’ the Olympic waterscapes of east London.
They present a consideration of heritage in the form of a narrative that visually
documents the transitional period found within a rapidly altering waterscape. The
project was generated from a call for submissions by the Creative Campus Initia-
tive (CCI), a scheme that joined 13 universities together in a venture aiming to
‘create and present high quality new artworks and cultural events inspired by the
Olympic and Paralympic Games’. As representatives of RHUL, in proximity to
the Olympics’ ofﬁcial rowing venue at Dorney Lake, Eton, we won a grant to
produce a ﬁlm traversing the broad themes of water, London and the Olympics.
Our intent was to give voice to the changes taking place within the Lea Valley
concerning archaeology, heritage, urban planning and cultural protests, as well as
to provide an accessible platform for further dissemination of these issues. The
result was London’s Olympic Waterscape, a 20-minute ﬁlm, which was exhibited
along with a selection of photographs, photobooks, postcards, DVDs and a website
documenting our journey along the waterways. As the ﬁlm is freely available for
viewing online, we would strongly encourage readers to watch it in conjunction
with this article.2

Filming and interviews took place between late 2009 and mid-2010, during
Olympic construction when the main stadium was present but not complete. During
the course of background research, we came to realise that the transitions occurring
within east London’s waterscape were being largely overlooked by historians who
wished to preserve the landscape before the change and often ignored by govern-
ment ofﬁcials who wished to market the ‘legacy’ of a transformed ‘wasteland’ area
in the post-Olympic period. In the ﬁlm, our interviewees, all experts in their ﬁelds,
provided contextualisation for our own experiences in the landscape. We chose to
interview people who would provide a range of historic perspectives: from the long
reach of archaeology to contemporary east London politics. These voices included
ﬁlmmaker William Raban’s refusal to be nostalgic about the Thames landscape;
writer Iain Sinclair’s cynicism about the Olympic project; history lecturer Toby But-
ler’s measured optimism that beneﬁts could come from the investment; Museum of
London curator Alex Werner’s description of historic precedent; and archaeologist
Nathalie Cohen’s cautious optimism for public access for the space. It was these
ideas, often conﬂicted, around the Olympics,
the historic signiﬁcance of east
London’s waterways and the impending legacy that acted as a backdrop for our
journey through the Lea Valley.

128

M. Anton et al.

The present article begins by looking at the ways that ﬁlm and video can be
used as critical geographic tools to capture landscapes in transition. Next we con-
sider the context, legacy and history of the 2012 Olympics in east London. We then
take a closer look at the waterways as a landscape and consider the ways in which
we used video to record the speciﬁc handover (or takeover) taking place there. This
includes an account of a ﬁlmic triathlon we undertook through and around the
Olympic waterways, underscoring the successes and failures of our methods and
our attempts to understand the place and landscape despite discouragement from
some contingents of the Olympic security forces. Throughout, the article explores
some of the ways that the heritage of the area is presented and contested. We end
with a discussion on the future of the Olympic site, and with a question over
whether the actual legacy of this dramatic geographic upheaval will meet the expec-
tations of various stakeholders.

Film and video as a geographic tool
Anthropologists have long used ﬁlm as a medium to record and interpret cultural
activity (Pink 2007), and while anthropology’s relationship to ﬁlm has steadily
bloomed over the last century, ﬁlm and video as method from a geographic perspec-
tive have largely been underutilised (Garrett 2010). In proposing London’s Olympic
Waterscape, we were interested in teasing out the possibilities of ﬁlm (or in this
case digital video) as a method for exploring a landscape at a range of scales. Film
has been noted for its usefulness in ethnographic work that gives particular attention
to close detail, yet geographically researchers have previously been more interested
in broader concepts relating to space, place, mobility and landscape. London’s
Olympic Waterscape was also an experiment in how video might be used as a tool
to depict intangible notions such as the construction of national heritage in an aca-
demic framework.

The idea was to use the video camera to capture a particular moment of a land-
scape under radical transformation, capturing the construction of a national heritage
moment. The moment that we chose to document was both an accident of circum-
stance, provoked by the time-frame for the project under the larger impetus of the
CCI, and intentional, in our effort to record the aspects of the development process
that many were overlooking. It was our goal neither to focus solely on the land-
scape before the 2012 construction began and the stories of what had been lost, nor
propagate a prolonged discussion about what would come to be after the develop-
ment is complete. We sought to inhabit, from the end of 2009 through to the fol-
lowing summer, a tenuous middle ground characterised by fragility.

As Crang and Tolia-Kelly (2010, p. 2316) point out, heritage sites are an ‘occa-
sion for doing and feeling, of connecting different sensations, representations, and
thoughts’. Using video allowed us to be mobile within the landscape, but also to
capture a mobile landscape and, in a sense, to depict heritage as narrative. The
ceaselessly ﬂowing waterways, the endless stream of trafﬁc going in and out of the
construction city, the incessant circular patrolling security apparati and the (dis)
located ﬂora and fauna seemed always in motion (Figure 2), with the backdrop of
bulldozers shoving around dirt and monotonous, endless beeping and grinding. The
vertical growth of Olympic structures and symbols seemed ripped from Iain Sin-
clair’s (2008) text when he described Hackney Wick as the place ‘where everything
disappears or is revised’ (p. 29).



129

Figure 2. Wildlife in motion.
Credit: terri moreau.

Our efforts were also inspired by Edensor et al.’s (2008) photograph essay on
the same site two years earlier, where the authors found ‘. . .the ﬂotsam of yesterday
[had] not been hastily cleared away, and obscure clues to past events [were] scat-
tered across the land, hidden in river beds and buried in the earth’ (p. 286). Depic-
tions of the early stage of construction in Gill’s (2007) photographs of the area
showed the fresh fencing and pristine billboards sitting amidst swampy islands in
the river, wildlife settling in to the new additions. We did not ﬁnd the land depicted
in these sets of photographs, but another; a landscape spiked with upheaval, some-
thing that seemed uncontainable in text or still snapshots. We sought to use video
to share in the movement, the ﬂow, the moments of encounter, non-encounter and
unexpected wonder that came with going to this place and attempting to immerse
ourselves in it. With video cameras trained on those multiple encounters – shot lit-
erally from the hip, the shoulder and the head – we captured a unique present.

We assumed that using video would allow us to realise our goal of interacting
with the place just as it was, but as we learned, stories are never that simple. Har-
vey (2001) has pointed out that too often heritage is deﬁned as something in the
present and encourages us to see heritage as a process, a verb, that works across
time. The adventures which make up the ﬁlm are raw and confused, frustrated and
hopeful, tightly wound, wet and visceral: the ﬁlm reﬂects what we saw and how we
engaged with place as well as our pain at trying to piece together a mass of occa-
sionally bizarre and sometimes mundane footage. In other words, the (always) con-
tested heritage process is embedded in the narrative of the ﬁlm.

At the beginning of ﬁlming, we contacted Olympic ofﬁcials to obtain access to
shoot on the site. Although we had been assured there was no opportunity for us to
ﬁlm inside the fence, we noted other crews – for example some from the BBC –
had been granted access. The compromise we reached with ofﬁcials was access to a

130

M. Anton et al.

balcony owned by the development project, overlooking the site. This ofﬁcial
ﬁlming location, alongside a pattern of ofﬁcial observation areas and a tape of ofﬁ-
cial footage given to us, began a ‘process of replication’, which Burch (2002, p.
10) describes as a signiﬁcant stage in the construction of tourist heritage sites. The
wide shots we ﬁlmed of the landscape were similar to those disseminated by news
agencies and used in other ﬁlms about the site, all of whom had shot footage from
the same balcony. Restricting ﬁlming to speciﬁc sites provokes dissemination of
homogenous footage, which can be identiﬁed as the manifestation of the penulti-
mate stage of sacralisation: ‘mechanical reproduction of the sacred object’ (Burch
2002, p. 10). The visual tropes of the Olympics were already being shaped through
a strict visual language, controlled by physical access to the site and distribution of
carefully chosen materials.

To escape this process of shooting repetitive footage, we had little option but to
ﬁlm from outside the site. The power relations of making the ﬁlm are, therefore,
visible in every shot, as our cameras skirt around the exterior fence trying to ﬁnd
interesting angles that would reveal something novel. Filming from unexpected
locations attracted the attention of security guards, who questioned our right to be
in these public spaces. When we were offered the opportunity we were open about
our role as student ﬁlmmakers, funded by the Olympics. Nevertheless security
guards typically made no attempt to ascertain our intentions and simply asserted
that we must ‘keep moving’.

Legacies
The notion of an ‘Olympic legacy’ cropped up frequently during our research and
ﬁlming and became a particularly poignant trope within the initial interview process.
This nebulous concept has been used to refer to an array of guarantees, policies and
plans associated with the Games and the future of the area, summarised by the East
London Research Institute, who state that: ‘[The] Olympic “legacy” offers bridges
between two potentially divergent narratives setting the practical accountancy (and
ﬁnancial and political accountability) of city planning, against the “creative” account-
ing that underpins Olympic dreams and promises’ (MacRury and Poynter 2009, p. 5).
We focused on the ‘practical accountancy’ and ‘dreams and promises’ speciﬁ-
cally directed at the Olympic waterways. During an interview, Environment Agency
representative Rob McCarthy discussed the ecological beneﬁts that a rejuvenated
‘blue ribbon network’ would bring to the area. Similarly, the Olympic Park Legacy
Company described how ‘[t]he restored canals and rivers will help bring the land-
scape back to life, whilst also creating inspiring places to work and play – right on
the water’ (Madelin n.d.). In another interview, Paralympic rower Helene Raynsford
hoped that part of the legacy would be to inspire more people to get involved with
aquatic sports taking place on London’s rivers. Historical geographer Toby Butler
imagined a new form of public transportation in the form of ‘water taxis like you
might see in Venice’. Iain Sinclair was more cynical of the idea, stating: ‘you can’t
have a legacy until it’s happened; a legacy is not something that you can set up in
advance’. Our ﬁlmic study of the heritage construction taking place in this area,
heard though the voices of stakeholders, pundits and theorists, do not ignore future
legacies, promises or the impacts of exclusion or marginalisation taking place while
this national event ‘heritage’ is constructed, it is a record of both of these things sit-
uated in between those ideas.



131

Landscape in transition: inhabiting place, journeying through space
Although other areas in London and around the UK are being reshaped as part of
the Olympics, the waterways around the main site offered the most dramatic exam-
ple of a landscape in transition. In our work, we have understood that ‘landscapes
cannot be objects simply understood, but instead exist as living, social processes
with the ability to generate values through a community’s knowledge of the past’
and by taking the decision to examine a landscape undergoing transition we
acknowledge that ‘[i]t is never complete and is perpetually under construction, and
thus can never be satisfactorily relegated to just one past or another, or one present’
(Waterton 2005, p. 314).

To engage with this notion of ongoing processes of landscape, we undertook a
number of activities in the Lea Valley:
touring; walking; running; cycling; and
kayaking. Throughout the process we came to agree that ‘landscape, its sites and its
is practiced; not only observed, read or understood’
representations of history,
(Crouch and Parker 2003, p. 399) and that in order to study a landscape we had to
embed ourselves in, and engage with it, through all of our senses (Tolia-Kelly
2007). ‘In short, the landscape is the world as it is known to those who dwell
therein, who inhabit its places and journey along the paths connecting them’ (Ingold
1993, p. 156); for this reason we strove to inhabit place, journey through space,
and document this wet land- and waterscape by all feasible means, despite our ini-
tial disappointment at limited ‘ofﬁcial access’.

The extra dimension of exploring a waterscape meant we paid special attention
to water as a changeable medium, with the ability to transport us in both metaphori-
cal and literal senses. Our journeys through this waterscape were not always direct,
and just as the rivers have been re-routed over time, we found we were often
blocked, detoured or forced out. How we moved through this transitional landscape
altered how we were affected by the changes taking place around us. The next sec-
tion aims to capture our experiences of travelling through and documenting the
waterways of the ‘Olympic’ Lea Valley. Articulated in these journeys are many of
the issues that have continued to be debated within and beyond the waterscape such
as how to acknowledge a landscape’s histories and identities and the already exist-
ing heritage of a place. With this landscape speciﬁcally, we were interested in how
to negotiate the tensions that existed between vigilantly restricted access during the
pre-Olympic period and the utopic post-Olympic legacies for the Lea Valley. Our
journey also raised questions about which groups of people might beneﬁt from this
intervention into the land- and waterscape.

Preparing for the journey
On two occasions we took guided tours through the area, with the Environmental
Agency and the Inland Waterways Association. These tours, the former ofﬁcial and
the latter unofﬁcial, allowed access to the fringes of the park and the towpath that
skirts the park without harassment or impediment. The appearance of the tours pro-
vided a type of overt camouﬂage: even with two video cameras, one still camera, a
visible clipboard and a guide, we did not raise the Olympic alarms, whereas ﬁlming
unaccompanied did. In the course of these tours, like ﬁlming under the rubric of
Olympic ofﬁcials, we experienced a repetition in narratives; certain places were
obviously designed to appeal to the pre-established stories now embedded in the
landscape. Recurrent motifs included that of the Forman’s ﬁsh smokery, a business

132

M. Anton et al.

originally threatened by the redevelopment, but after negotiation relocated to new
premises. Their story has become something of a meme in several projects repre-
senting the benevolence of redevelopment, perhaps a condition of their relocation
(see www.formansﬁshisland.com). While the Forman story enticed us, we still
desired to move beyond the repetitive stories of redevelopment.

When we began ﬁlming the site without a guide, numerous Olympic security
personnel stopped our progress and demanded identiﬁcation. This occurred while
walking the towpaths adjacent to the site which are public, pedestrian trafﬁc corri-
dors, not on the site itself. Despite our insistence that we had a right to ﬁlm in a
public space, the presence of the camera obviously upset security and they remained
adamant that we should cease ﬁlming and ‘move along’. It became clear after a
number of encounters that these requests were empty threats. After initially being
surprised to ﬁnd the area rather empty of human activity (as promised by the Olym-
pic authorities – a terrain vague), we began to suspect that these authoritarian tac-
tics, however hollow, had hounded people away from the perimeter. These
experiences made us question how appropriate these strategies are for policing pub-
lic areas. While particular Olympic pathways are designed speciﬁcally for the tourist
gaze with viewing platforms and information boards, the public towpaths at a short
distance from the site are, without explanation, seemingly not meant to provide the
same voyeuristic function for those holding cameras. So after weeks of being told
to ‘keep moving’, we began to do just that – by undertaking our planned Olympic
triathlon around the park.

The journey
Our triathlon consisted of running, cycling and kayaking in the area of Olympic
construction. One member of our team ran the perimeter of the site; a 13-mile route
ﬁlmed via a head mounted video camera (head-cam) that took in all of the accessi-
ble waterways surrounding the site (Brown et al. 2008). This isolated trip captures
the runner’s stare as they gaze intently at the river close to them, recording the pre-
carious divide between the land and the water, inviting the viewer vicariously to
live the runner’s own isolated interactions with the divided terrain: pounding the
slippery soil on the banks of the waterway.

The pathways that run alongside the canals and rivers of the Lea Valley have long
been used by cycling commuters; so, when we set ourselves the challenge of cycling
around the Olympic Park, this seemed one of our easiest tasks. As with all the ‘triath-
lon events’, we used the head-cam to record our experiences from a ﬁrst person per-
spective. The initial part of the journey was easy, ﬂowing alongside the river, taking
in the scenery and catching glimpses of the Olympic stadium through the chain link
fence. The problems began when we tried to circle round, ending up in an alleyway
of wooden board where ofﬁcials cheerfully told us we were not allowed through and
must turn back. On being shown out, we tried a different tack. Leaving the river we
headed to the road, only to ﬁnd ourselves heading the wrong way up a dual carriage-
way, with the stadium looming to our right through the rain, as grey as the landscape,
totally inaccessible. In this moment the contrast between the mythology of the Olym-
pic legacy and the reality of the development was most strongly brought home to us
when we spied, within the site, behind electric fences and CCTV cameras, a billboard
depicting a canal boat on a sunny day, thoughtfully suggesting that we should ‘relax’,
and reminding us our plight was temporary (Figure 3).



133

Figure 3. The Olympic legacy.
Credit: Michael Anton.

It seemed crucial to have footage from within the waterways, so kayaking was
the ﬁnal leg of our journey. The kayak was bulky on land, but in water it trans-
formed into an elegant form of conveyance. We launched the kayak on what we
thought was the outside of a ﬂoating barrier separating us from the Olympic site.
The spiked yellow barrier and signs saying ‘no entry’ (see Figure 1) gave the
impression that just one side was closed to the public. However, soon after putting
the kayak in the water, a boat with Olympic security appeared. Inadvertently, they
were blocked by their own water barriers and could not approach us. Eventually,
while ﬁlming kayak shots from a road bridge, security personnel were able to
approach one team member and demanded removal of the kayak.

While this altercation followed the street pattern, the kayak followed the bends
of the water away from the guards’ paths. The kayak’s positioning meant sitting
low in the water and looking up at the reinforced banks of the channel. The width
of the waterway suddenly felt more important, and peering over the edge of the
vessel, the water seemed deeper than from land. The kayak passed close to the
ducks and waterweeds we had ﬁlmed from a distance and the paddles’ swish sent
down drops of water onto us as they swung through the air and churned through
the water.

We came across numerous red placards informing of the watery domain of the
Olympic development and it was not long before we came to another ﬂoating yel-
low barrier. We turned back towards the road. The team removed the kayak and
headed to another waterway nearer the Olympic park. Again a patrol boat attempted
to reach the kayak. The team members quickly removed the kayak from one canal
and placed it into a parallel waterway where the security boat could not reach.
Although we continued to be monitored and intimidated, this time security did not
ask us to leave. Our previous experiences with security illustrated how unwilling

134

M. Anton et al.

Figure 4. The panopticon, taken from the ofﬁcial balcony.
Credit: terri moreau.
they were to allow our cameras to ﬁlm so close to the site. However, we felt the
shots from the waterways were integral to a ﬁlm about them, so on this occasion
we decided to at least avoid, and mostly ignore, the security personnel. This was a
difﬁcult decision, as it put us in a somewhat oppositional position to the Olympic
authorities funding us, and once again highlighted the impact that our presence as
researchers had.

We faced complex issues as we tried to dig beyond the compromised offerings
that satisﬁed local news crews describing site updates. The walkways, viewing cafe
and Olympic ﬂats framed the landscape for audiences, as these scripted spaces of
observation established parameters for our shots (Figure 4). Baudrillard (1994, p.
20) describes the televisual panopticon as: ‘if not a system of conﬁnement, at least
a system of mapping. More subtly, but always externally, playing on the opposition
of seeing and being seen, even if the panoptic focal point may be blind’. Like the
centre of the panopticon, the stadium radiated a gaze of control and security, situat-
ing ﬁlm crews in spaces of surveillance, mapping its surroundings into areas which
were and were not accessible.

Journey’s end
Community reactions to this heightened state of security and control over space had
clearly inspired small pockets of resistance: shocking pink grafﬁti on the sky-blue
hoarding surrounding the site commented on the site’s transition and closure and
was regularly erased by workers (moreau and Alderman 2011). The unofﬁcial
placement of furniture along the Olympic towpaths served as entertaining view-
points for those who wished to sit and watch the landscape morphing. The culmina-
tion of our experiences left us wondering, echoing some of our interviewees,



135

whether the 2012 ‘legacies’ are for the local people who lost (and are losing) access
to these places or for the appeasement of a more global audience of shareholders in
the interest of national heritage and international ‘legacy’.

While following the path of the waterways around the site, we had hoped to
have more spontaneous interviews with local people using the area, but we found it
vacant. As we moved around the construction site we found evidence of un-spoken
voices: grafﬁti, security cameras, barricades, homemade signs and massive bill-
boards. These communiqués provided a palpable sense of voiced non-presences
within the city and we ﬁlmed populations that subtly made their marks around the
periphery of the site (Figure 5). Despite this visible absence, our ﬁlming was always
accompanied by the waterways’ wildlife: egrets, coots, moorhens and mallards,
who greatly outnumbered the human population and who continued to nest on the

Figure 5. Material remnants and absent voices.
Credit: terri moreau.

136

M. Anton et al.

waters. The waterways were a heterotopic habitat, an alternative ecology where the
wildlife remained long after the human river residents moved out.

We kept a democratic ethic in arranging and editing the interviews, meaning that
the ﬁnished ﬁlm included some surprising and eclectic stories – including that of a
man who once made a living ﬁshing for and selling to pet shops a particular rare
worm found in the river. As we watched the footage we began to realise that as
ﬁlmmakers we were now a part of the story of this place and, as Iain Sinclair
pointed out when we interviewed him, that we were, therefore, ‘part of the prob-
lem’. Like our interaction with security, there was no possibility of uninvolved
observation. Thus, this project is clearly a social engagement in the production of
London’s Olympic Waterscape, a developing heritage narrative, at the time of a
transitional landscape.

The Lea Valley, the home of the London 2012 Olympics, is an area which has
been characterised by its waterways since the ice age but which also has a long
political history of land reclamation – in the change from raw wetlands to different
systems of water supply for the movement of people, goods and waste – a continu-
ous re-making of place. Eventually, it seems, this activity will all cease; buildings
will be knocked down, soil cleansed and structures removed or re-purposed. In
some places, these changes are retrograde – for instance, the daily movement of
building materials for the Olympic site lead to the re-opening of an old lock and
thus a rejuvenation of one of the canal systems. Whether the ﬁnancial investment in
these changes will be maintained after the Olympics have passed remains to be
seen. Whether that corporate investment will trickle down into the community, as
promised by the ‘legacy’, also remains in question. Thus, the complexity of the
Olympic legacy, often in contrast to the clear imperatives outlined by the ODA,
begins to come into focus.

Conclusion
It is our hope that the present article, in context with the rest of the discussions in
this special issue, furthers engagement with the issues expressed by our intervie-
wees, and encountered in our embodied interaction with the Olympic development
in the midst of the frenzied construction. Filming the site illustrated a distinct, if
temporary, loss of public access and provoked a resistance to alternative readings
that we did not anticipate. Throughout the Lea Valley it remains true that shops and
artists’ warehouses were forced to relocate or close, boats were moved to other
waterways, people were bought out, channels were dredged, soil excavated and
landscaping undertaken: for many, a way of life has disappeared forever. However,
for many this has been seen as the price to pay to overcome the entrenched poverty
of a long-neglected area of London. Following the thoughts of Bender (1993, p. 3),
it is clear that the heritage of landscape is ‘never inert, people engage with it, re-
work it, appropriate it and contest it. It is part of the way identities are created and
disputed, whether individual, group or nation state’. The relay of these develop-
ments is ﬁltered as much as possible by the ODA through access to the site; though
with the eyes of the world on the stadium, local and national media organisations
are quick to point out any potential problems.

Despite all of the discussion around the lasting legacy of the event taking place,
as we put this article together, the future of the site remained undecided. Through-
out our project, the stadium’s future use was always uncertain, and a few days



137

before the article was submitted a decision was ﬁnally reached. Two London
football teams, Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham United, composed proposals for
the stadium, each envisioning their own radical remaking of the area. The rejected
Tottenham bid suggested the stadium (so iconic in our experience) would be
levelled, while West Ham argued that some could be salvaged. Football fans’
debates again illustrated the power of place, as fans complained about moving stadi-
ums and leaving their old postcodes, suggesting that the that themes of displace-
ment, marginalisation, identity, anticipated legacy and sport will continue to inform
the re-making of this place long after the current debate dissolves.

Whatever the outcome of this particular mega-event, we feel that we success-
fully used ﬁlm to record a ‘heritage of the present’, a place and time that already is
almost unrecognizable since the time of ﬁlming. By the audio/visual beneﬁts of
ﬁlm, we were able to highlight the ongoing-ness of the place in a way that both cel-
ebrates those exciting changes and gives voice to those local geographies that will
be forever changed. We believe this project offers an interesting new avenue for
heritage scholars to think about the ways ﬁlm can be used to record images of the
present and spark discussions about the pasts and futures of heritage landscapes that
will exist, in audio/visual record, for years to come.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Amy Cutler for her contributions to the project,
Initiative for
funding the project, all of our project participants,
anonymous referees for their insightful comments on this paper.

the Creative Campus
the editors, and the

Notes on contributors
Michael Anton is a PhD student in geography at Royal Holloway, University of London.
His research interests include: live music; performance spaces; sonic methodologies; and the
(im)material components of place.

Bradley L. Garrett is a PhD student in geography at Royal Holloway, University of London.
His
include: urban studies; heritage; place; counterculture; visual
methodologies; and indigenous rights.

research interests

Alison Hess is a PhD student
in geography at Royal Holloway, University of London,
working in collaboration with the Science Museum, London. Her research interests include:
the history of British radio and the BBC; the aesthetics and presentation of technological
artefacts; and contemporary debates around material culture.

Ellie Miles is a PhD student in geography at Royal Holloway, University of London. Her
research interests include: urban heritage; city museums; representations of London; and the
ways museum work shapes public history. She is currently working at
the Museum of
London.

terri moreau is a PhD student at Royal Holloway, University of London. Her research
interests include: contested public space and art; strategic and tactical place inscription
practices; utopic understandings; memory and nationalism; and geopolitical humour. She
volunteers with a non-proﬁt organisation for child welfare and education.

Notes
1. A map of the area can be found at: www.london2012.com/olympic-stadium
2. The ﬁlm can be viewed at: http://vimeo.com/12349415

138

M. Anton et al.

References
Almarcegui, L., 2009. Guide to the wastelands of the Lea Valley: 12 empty spaces await the

London Olympics. London: Barbican Art Gallery.

Baudrillard, J., 1994. Simulacra and simulation, S. Glaser, trans. Ann Abor, MI: University

of Michigan Press.

Bender, B., 1993. Introduction: landscape – meaning and action. In: B. Bender, ed. Land-

scape: politics and perspectives. Oxford, UK: Berg Publishers, 1–18.

Brown, K.M., Dilley, R. and Marshall, K., 2008. Using a head-mounted video camera to
understand social worlds and experiences. Sociological Research Online, 13 (6). Avail-
able from: http://www.socresonline.org.uk/13/6/1.html [Accessed 11 December 2011].

Burch, S., 2002. Shaping symbolic space: Parliament Square, London as a sacred site. In: A.
Phelps, G.J. Ashworth, and B.O.H. Johansson, eds. The construction of built heritage: a
north European perspective on policies, practices and outcomes. London: Ashgate, 223–
236.

Crang, M., and Tolia-Kelly D.P., 2010. Nation, race, and affect: senses and sensibilities at

national heritage sites. Environment and Planning A, 42 (10), 2315–2331.

Crouch, D. and Parker, G., 2003. ‘Digging-up’ Utopia? Space, practice and land use heri-

tage. Geoforum, 34 (3), 395–408.

Edensor, T., Christie, C., and Lloyd, B., 2008. Obliterating informal space.

Olympics and the Lea Valley: a photo essay. Space and Culture, 11 (3), 285–293.

the London

Garrett, B.L., 2010. Videographic geographies: using digital video for geographic research.

Progress in Human Geography, 35 (4), 521–541.

Gill, S., 2007. Archaeology in reverse. London: Nobody Books.
Harvey, D., 2001. Heritage pasts and heritage presents: temporality, meaning and the scope

of heritage studies. , 7 (4), 319–338.

Ingold, T., 1993. The temporality of the landscape. World Archaeology, 25 (2), 152–174.
Jones, C., 2001. Mega-events and host-region impacts: determining the true worth of the
1999 Rugby World Cup. The International Journal of Tourism Research, 3 (3), 241–
251.

MacRury, I. and Poynter, G., 2009. London’s Olympic legacy: a ‘Thinkpiece’ report prepared
for the OECD and Department for Communities and Local Government. London East
Research Institute, University of East London. Available from: http://www.uel.ac.uk/lon-
doneast/documents/20101008-CLG-OECD-2012.pdf [Accessed 11 December 2011].

Madelin, R., n.d. Open space and waterways. Available from: http://www.legacycompany.co.

uk/future-plans/open-space-and-waterways/ [Accessed 11 December 2011].

t. and Alderman, D.H., 2011. Grafﬁti Hurts and the eradication of alternative

moreau,

landscape expression. Geographical Review, 101 (1), 106–124.

Pink, S., 2007. Doing visual ethnography: images, media and representation in research.
for Visual

Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press & Granada Centre
Anthropology.

Sinclair, I., 2008. The Olympics scam. London Review of Books, 30 (12), 17–23.
Tolia-Kelly, D., 2007. Fear in paradise: the affective registers of the English Lake District

landscape re-visited. Senses and Society, 2 (3), 329–352.

Waterton, E., 2005. Whose sense of place? Reconciling archaeological perspectives with
community values: cultural landscapes in England. International Journal of Heritage
Studies, 11 (4), 309–325.

Wood, J., 2005. Olympic opportunity: realizing the value of sports heritage for tourism in

the UK. Journal of Sport Tourism, 10 (4), 307–321.


