International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

The pit: landscape scars as potential cultural tools

Anna Storm & Krister Olsson

To cite this article: Anna Storm & Krister Olsson (2013) The pit: landscape scars as
potential cultural tools, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 19:7, 692-708, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2012.705060
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.705060

Published online: 20 Sep 2012.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 420

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2013
Vol. 19, No. 7, 692–708, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.705060

The pit: landscape scars as potential cultural tools
Anna Storma* and Krister Olssonb

aCentre for Baltic and East European Studies (CBEES), Södertörn University, 141 89
Huddinge/Stockholm, Sweden; bUrban and Regional Studies, KTH (Royal Institute of
Technology), 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

(Received 6 September 2010; ﬁnal version received 4 May 2012)

A huge and continuously growing pit is about to divide the Swedish mining
town of Malmberget into two halves. What once was the town centre is now a
200 metres deep hole, and private homes and key buildings like the old school
and the church have had to be demolished or moved. The pit
is a human
imposed ‘landscape scar’ epitomising the town’s lost golden age of mining, its
present situation of decline and uncertain future prospects – despite a recent
recovery in the mining industry. Although the pit is decisively present in the
local community, it is not articulated as signiﬁcant, especially not from a heri-
tage perspective. Why is this so? In this article, we examine the pit as a poten-
tial cultural
is indeed used by
individuals in this respect, but not in collective memorialisation. We conclude
that landscape scars deﬁnitely can constitute critical cultural tools, although they
may not always need to be labelled as belonging to an ‘authorized heritage dis-
course’. Instead, the potential of the landscape scar is to enhance the amount
and recognition of shared memories in the local community.

tool for heritage processes, and ﬁnd that

it

Keywords:
Sweden

landscape scar; cultural

tool;

industrial heritage; Malmberget;

Introduction
It used to be the centre of the northern Swedish mining town of Malmberget.
Today, it is just an enormous pit, 200 m deep and comprising an area of 21 ha,
dividing the town into two halves. Each year, the pit continues to grow, eating the
townscape bit by bit. The vast emptiness has become a deﬁning mark for Malmber-
get, epitomising its lost golden age of mining, its present situation of decline and
uncertain future prospects – despite a recent recovery in the mining industry. Even
though the pit is decisively present in the local community, it is not articulated as
being signiﬁcant, especially not from a heritage perspective. Why is this so?

The aim of this article is to examine landscape scars imposed by human activity
from a heritage perspective, and more speciﬁcally to investigate the pit as a poten-
tial cultural
tool for heritage processes. In general, we comprehend heritage as
human activities drawing on the past from a standpoint in the present. These activi-
ties often include elements of articulation and negotiation, leading temporarily to

*Corresponding author. Email: anna.storm@sh.se

Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

693

more collective agreement about the signiﬁcance of some particular engagement
with the past. When this occurs, it could be labelled as a heritage process, with
importance for creating identity and building communities. In a heritage process,
artefacts, physical sites and imagined places can work as triggers and stages, or,
with another concept borrowed from Laurajane Smith, ‘cultural tools’ (Smith 2006,
p. 44). In what respect can the pit be considered such a cultural tool for heritage
processes? Why is it not recognised as one? And ﬁnally, how can landscape scars
in general be understood from the perspective of heritage? The article is based on
original research within a multidisciplinary project, among other things comprising
a joint case study in Malmberget.1

Industrial heritage and heritage theory
The pit is a trace of industrial activity, and in the early years of industrialisation
industry was seen as the opposite of culture. Heritage, on the other hand, was per-
ceived as a condensed expression of culture, and consequently, it was for a long
time difﬁcult to comprehend industry as something belonging to a heritage process
(Alzén 1996). Nevertheless, already by the turn of the twentieth century, industrial
remains were acknowledged, at some level, as possessing heritage values and
included in exhibitions, documentation efforts and museums (e.g. Houltz 2003).
The initiative came from industrialists in league with scholars, i.e. representatives of
an elite position. A major shift in scale and perspective appeared in the 1960s and
1970s with the emergence of industrial archaeology, ecomuseums and, in Sweden,
the so-called dig-where-you-stand movement (Hudson 1963, Cossons and Hudson
1969, Delony 1984, Cossons 1993, Davis 1999, Storm 2008). All these later activi-
ties instead expressed a view from below (see e.g. Robertson 2012). The workers’
situation, detailed technical processes and the local community were the centre of
attention, which contrasted sharply to then conventional heritage processes and nar-
ratives (see also Dicks 2000). In the following decades, industry was gradually
included in the general understanding of heritage. Today, perhaps paradoxically,
industrial heritage, together with an engagement with military remnants, can be said
to occupy a position at the conceptual forefront with deliberations about dangerous
and difﬁcult heritage (Logan and Reeves 2009, Macdonald 2009). However, indus-
try has not become core of canonised high status heritage when it comes to heritage
management practise (Harnow 2011, see also Smith et al. 2011, p. 2).

There are many reasons for the hesitancy to include industrial memories in an
‘authorized heritage discourse’ (Smith 2006, p. 29ff), among them that cultural tools
related to an industrial past are often of a mundane character, and consist of compli-
cated, large-scale, polluted or otherwise devastated landscapes and built environ-
ments. While the encounter between industry and heritage has contributed to a
widening of the heritage concept, more attention is certainly needed within the ﬁeld
of industrial heritage, for example concerning transnational connections, narratives
of decline and non-Western areas and perspectives (Soyez 2009, see also af Geijer-
stam 2004, Avango 2005).

In relation to general heritage theory, we concur with the understanding that her-
itage is a cultural process ‘that engages with acts of remembering that work to cre-
ate ways to understand and engage with the present’ (Smith 2006, p. 44). One
obvious implication of this comprehension is that artefacts and sites have little
intrinsic worth in the context of heritage (Graham and Howard 2008, p. 2, see also

694

A. Storm and K. Olsson

Gibson and Pendlebury 2009, p. 1) and instead, their value is based on connotative
meaning and signiﬁcance to humans. In this respect, as cultural tools (Smith 2006,
p. 44) or, with another term, mnemonic devices (Gilloch 1996, p. 76), physical
objects and places can work as facilitators and, when addressing the pit as a poten-
tial cultural tool, we therefore ask what signiﬁcance it might carry, as a trigger, a
stage or a foothold, in a heritage process.

Another basic stipulation in contemporary heritage studies is that heritage pro-
cesses and cultural tools are multi-dimensional. Their signiﬁcance is constituted by
a complex mix of meanings and values, with layers of narratives and layers of
physical changes. This insight leads us in two directions.

First, some components of signiﬁcance are by necessity lost or suppressed in a
heritage process, since forgetting and construction of hierarchies are part of its
unfolding. As a consequence, heritage is not only closely connected to a spirit of
community, but also to conﬂict. Brian Graham and Peter Howard even assert that
dissonance is ‘intrinsic to the very nature of heritage’ (2008, p. 3, see also Ashworth
et al. 2007, p. 45) since heritage processes generate tensions between belonging and
exclusion, and negotiations over meaning and value reveal
the power relations
involved, which is analysed for example by Laurajane Smith via the concept of an
‘authorized heritage discourse’ (Smith 2006, p. 29ff). When examining why the pit
is not identiﬁed and articulated as signiﬁcant in the local community, the control
over deﬁning meaning and value forms an area where we will search for answers.

Second, the hierarchies of relative importance depend on physical as well as tem-
poral and geographical aspects. Previous research has dealt extensively with how cer-
tain meanings are connected to different groups of actors, sometimes in opposition to
each other, and also how different periods of time or different geographical settings
deﬁne which meanings and values are regarded as most
important (e.g. Rodell
2007). Less has been done when it comes to how certain meanings are connected to
physical places, which in themselves are characterised by continuous change (see
though Martins Holmberg 2006). In our analysis, we will demonstrate some of the
complexity in the connection between meanings and values of such places.

The pit in Malmberget: the case study
Malmberget was established in northern Sweden in the late nineteenth century, and
is located in a mountainous area that had been inhabited by nomadic Sami people,
and used as reindeer grazing land. The town expanded rapidly as a settlement for
miners, who were literarily living on top of the iron ore deposits. Newcomers were
moving in, and the establishment of the railway in 1888 marked a turning point.
The mining boom peaked in the mid-twentieth century and decisively changed the
landscape of the region, both above ground and underground. In the 1950s and
1960s, Malmberget was in many respects to be regarded as an ‘ideal’ welfare com-
munity. It housed public facilities such as two public baths, an ice skating arena
and three cinemas – far more than usually expected in a town of 12,000 inhabitants.
One fourth of these inhabitants were directly employed in the mining industry, and
their future looked bright (Forsström 1973, p. 187).

In the 1970s, the economic crisis hit Malmberget. Unemployment became a
major problem, and with few alternative workplaces, the physical signs of prosper-
ity and local conﬁdence – like public buildings and infrastructure – started to
decline. As of 2010, the number of inhabitants is 6000, out of which 1000 still

International Journal of Heritage Studies

695

Figure 1. The pit in the Swedish mining town of Malmberget has affected the town centre
since the 1960s. Roads where the old school, the peoples’ house and the church were once
located are now interrupted, and the buildings demolished or moved. Photo: Anders
Andersson 1980, Courtesy of Gellivare Bildarkiv.

work in the mine (LKAB, personal communication, 8 December 2010). The town
centre contains empty blocks, and young people move away to pursue education
and work. The stately owned mining company, LKAB, still dominates the commu-
nity in many respects, and the municipal body expresses a wait-and-see attitude.
Malmberget was, for a long time, the obvious centre of the municipality of Gälliv-
are. However, the actual town of Gällivare – a railway stop and centre for trade
located 5 km south of Malmberget – has now stepped forward as the more vivid of
the two places and, for example, the municipal administration and the local museum
are to be found in Gällivare.

Originally, the pit in Malmberget was an open cast mine that later started to
grow due to explosions and cave-ins caused by underground mining activities
(see Figure 1). It has affected the central area of Malmberget decisively since the
1960s, and in the following decades the inhabitants saw their church moved to
another place in the town, while several key buildings were demolished due to
unstable ground, among them one of the public baths, the old school and the peo-
ples’ house (Folkets hus). Many private houses also had to be abandoned or, more
recently, moved to new places. Surrounding the pit is a landscape of annual rings
of fences, marking its continuous growth. The hole itself is almost invisible from a
surface perspective, due to vegetation, and all that you see is young trees and roads
that end unexpectedly (see Figure 2).

In the early 2000s, the world market price for iron ore suddenly raised dramati-
cally and several of the ore bodies located underneath Malmberget immediately
became proﬁtable for mining (Thelin 2007). Hope was rekindled in the local com-
munity as new work opportunities came in sight. However,
the correspondence

696

A. Storm and K. Olsson

Figure 2. From the surface level, the pit is almost invisible, hidden behind fences and
vegetation. The distant continuation of the road is discernable on the other side of the hole,
in the midst of the picture. Photo: Gabriella Olshammar 2007.

between increased mining activities and employment
is not self-evident, since
modern mining techniques have reduced the need for people. Yet, the local view on
the pit is highly dependent on the fact that it represents mining as the backbone in
the local economy. At the same time as the pit is slowly ‘eating’ the town, it is
therefore also ‘feeding’ the community. When the pit grows, the mine is in produc-
tion, which to the Malmberget inhabitants means work and survival. Thus, when
the alternatives are either a forced, but short distance move from one’s home, or the
possible economic collapse of the whole town, the choice is fairly easy. The local
attitude has been described as ‘relaxed’ in relation to the past and the future; there
is sorrow in the forced abandonment, but also a ‘utopian energy’ that emerges from
this never ceasing movement (Holmstedt and Sörlin 2008, p. 57, see also Smith
et al. 2011, p. 1).

Apart from more modern residential areas in Malmberget that are threatened by
the pit, an area with older buildings owned by the mining company is on the verge of
forced abandonment. It is called ‘the Company Land’ (Bolagsområdet) and is spar-
sely occupied by workers’ dwellings and ofﬁcial’s residences, as well mining related
structures. Most of these buildings originate from the ﬁrst half of the twentieth cen-
tury, and the Swedish National Heritage Board has designated the area of national
interest for its cultural and historical values, and there are proposals for conservation
in the municipal planning (Gällivare kommun 1985, Riksantikvarieämbetet 1997).
Simultaneously, however, the mineral deposits are also designated as of national
interest by the Geological Survey of Sweden (SGU 2005), which implies that the
deposits will be protected against measures that may compromise their extraction.
Since further extraction may involve the grounds beneath the Company Land, two
principles of protection and two kinds of values, here stand in conﬂict.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

697

Figure 3. Malmberget town centre, built mainly in the 1960s, with a hot-dog stand and
empty shops. The pit is located just behind the high-rise building (compare to Figure 5).
Photo: Anna Storm 2007.

The present situation in Malmberget is marked by decline and uncertain future
prospects, in spite of the recent recovery of the mining industry. The image of a lost
golden age of mining and a prosperous welfare society is still close at hand, for older
as well as younger generations. An 18-year-old girl, for example, remarks that ‘the
very fact that Malmberget had three cinemas is completely beyond me’, while the
present town centre is described as a ghetto: ‘Only drunks and junkies live there
[…]. It is like a ghetto’ (Feldmann 2009, p. 31f). Still, there is something special
and attractive with this ghetto in comparison to the twin town of Gällivare: ‘It is
kind of desolate, a bit hard and a bit cold, it is a bit remote. It is rather special. Gäl-
livare is so, you know, ordinary, for everybody’ (Feldmann 2009, p. 33). However,
from an ofﬁcial point of view, the local government commissioner does not see any
potential in the dilapidated Malmberget centre. He instead expresses a wish that it
could be taken away totally: ‘I hope they ﬁnd valuable ore beneath every single
house up there, so that we can demolish the whole town. Because if this doesn’t hap-
pen […] Malmberget will simply become a slum’ (Nyström 2007) (see Figure 3).

Comprehensive municipal planning documents convey more cautious ideas
about the future of Malmberget. It is stated that everything that is planned might be
changed, depending on information provided by LKAB concerning its search for
mineral deposits (Gällivare kommun 2006, p. 5). The heavy reliance on LKAB is
illustrated by expressions such as ‘the hand that feeds us’ or ‘the mine is our bread
and butter’ used by municipal representatives (Johansson 2007, Nyström 2007,
Taivalsaari 2007 cited Feldmann p. 39). However, LKAB also owns big residential
areas, like the Company Land, as well as industrial areas, and work with plans that
could be changed at short notice. The building stock is cared for only as long as it

698

A. Storm and K. Olsson

is expected to be used for a further ﬁve years, otherwise it will not be maintained.
Overall, the company is guided by an ambition to keep control over land that can
possibly prove valuable for mineral exploitation (Thelin 2007).

A potential cultural tool?
What is the role of heritage in the liminal situation characterising Malmberget? The
narratives conveyed by local heritage institutions all show a remarkable concor-
dance (Martins Holmberg 2009, Johansson and Olsén undated). In the municipal
museum, a company museum and two heritage trails a pre-WWII period dominates,
along with three themes: the culture of the Sami people, the hard life of the settlers
at the turn of the twentieth century and the iron ore as a natural resource. The heri-
tage designation of the Company Land by the National Heritage Board,
if not
totally in accord, still reinforces the overall understanding of what is to be regarded
as signiﬁcant,
in this case the mining community’s built environment from the
beginning of the twentieth century (Riksantikvarieämbetet 1997, Gällivare kommun
2007). But is it these narratives that bring meaning and value to the inhabitants of
Malmberget today?

From the perspective of municipal planning, it is said that the past could consti-
tute a resource for future development, but ideas about how to make use of this
resource are vague. In general
terms, municipal planning documents talk about
historical roots bringing conﬁdence and directions for the future (e.g. Gällivare

Figure 4. The managing directors villa is one of the more spectacular wooden houses
located on the so-called Company Land, now too close to the fenced zone around the pit to
be maintained. Photo: Britt-Marie Kaati 2003. Courtesy of Gellivare Bildarkiv.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

699

kommun 2006, p. 40). More speciﬁcally, the ‘historical built environment’ is con-
sidered a potential resource to enhance attractiveness of the town of Gällivare by
moving key buildings from the Company Land to safer ground in Gällivare (Gälliv-
are kommun 2006, p. 21, 56, Thelin 2007). However, although some modern pri-
vate houses have actually been moved (Norrländska Socialdemokraten 2007, 2008),
representatives of the municipality seem to consider moving the older wooden villas
to be utopian, both from an economic and from a practical point of view (Johans-
son 2007, Nyström 2007). Also, though the Company Land is proposed for conser-
vation in the municipal planning, a municipal representative asserts that this will
not make any big difference concerning the buildings’ future (Normark cited
Olshammar 2009, p. 20) (see Figure 4).

Representatives for the mining company LKAB consider the Company Land to
be a resource in relation to recruiting (Thelin 2007). Some of the beautiful older vil-
las are used to attract new personnel with special competences who might be hesi-
tant to move that far north. Apart from the recruiting, the control of the area is
crucial to extracting the ore underneath, if this should become proﬁtable (Thelin
2007). The LKAB relation to heritage issues is thus not well developed when it
comes to the built environment, in comparison to other big industrial companies in
Sweden, especially within the iron and mining industry (Adamson 1998, Westin
and Strandänger 2002, p. 9, af Geijerstam et al. 2011).

What is then regarded as being important? To local inhabitants, as well as to
representatives of the municipality and the mining company, urgent themes of the
past and present are not primarily connected to the canonised stories found in the
heritage institutions. Instead, later changes, like the mid-twentieth century mining
boom and the decades of decline, occupy the centre of attention (Feldmann 2009,
Olshammar 2009, Olsson and Storm 2009). Also, the outstanding physical manifes-
tation for this recent past is – without doubt – the pit.

There are many witnesses who emphasise memory places of their youth in con-
nection to the pit: ‘You have special feelings for the pit because it is your childhood
home’ (Johansson 1996, p. 7) and the dreaming of days gone by are marked both
by high sensitivity and lamentation:

The garage, the laundry room, the boiler room, the kitchen, the lounge – all these
smells are ingrained in my mind and the doors ﬂing wide open as soon as the key
turns in the lock. […] Others have become reconciled with what I experienced as a
catastrophe for the town. They are born, live and love alongside the protective fence
and are not interested in listening to an outsider’s trips down memory lane. (Lindqvist
1995, pp. 120–121)

Young people instead talk about the pit as if it is almost a living being they
have learnt to relate to; an example is ‘the pit is coming’, an expression illustrating
is expanding closer and closer to one’s home (Feldmann 2009, p. 36).
how it
Another signiﬁcant experience deals with underground explosions in the mine,
which takes place every night at 12 o’clock. Eight-year-old children say that when
they were younger, they were afraid of the noise, but now they have become used
to it. In an exhibition of paintings drawn by local inhabitants of different ages,
someone depicted a monster that explained why there was so much rumbling in the
pit in the evenings (Feldmann 2009, p. 36, Ridderström 1995 cited Feldmann 2009,
p. 34).

700

A. Storm and K. Olsson

The pit is also a place that is actively used by people in Malmberget, in spite of
the fences, and access being strictly forbidden. The activities behind the fences
range from quiet walks with the dog and searches for Christmas trees to adventur-
ous bike tours in the young forest and climbing on one of the inner walls of the pit
(Olshammar 2009, p. 21ff). The pit is dangerous, and therefore attractive, but cer-
tainly also frightening. ‘Yes, it has a bit of a Chernobyl feel to it, because it is kind

Figure 5. A lorry is dumping waste rock into the pit. But with ongoing mining the hole
may just shrink in one end and expand in the other. (Notice the high-rise building of the
town centre in comparison to Figure 3.) Photo: Gabriella Olshammar 2007.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

701

of deserted and roads lead in the direction of the pit and suddenly come to an
abrupt end and houses just stand empty’ (Feldmann 2009, p. 36).

The government commissioner describes the pit as the only thing that actually
distinguishes Malmberget from other places and makes it special (Nyström 2007).
He underlines that the pit is something really worth seeing, something he shows
every important visitor, preferably from a helicopter, but also by going down into it
by car. The invisibility of the pit from the surface, which calls for helicopters and
cars, is indeed striking. In the late 1980s, an old hoisting tower was restored at a
cost of several million Swedish crowns to create a viewing tower overlooking the
pit. However, without any prior notice, the mining company suddenly fenced off
the hoisting tower for use (Olshammar 2009, p. 20). The reason was probably due
to unstable ground, but the lack of communication did cause frustration in the local
community, which reappeared later when another old hoisting tower was suddenly
burnt down as a training exercise for LKAB’s own ﬁre brigade (Olshammar 2009,
p. 15f).

For the mining company, the pit causes a lot of problems. There is dust coming
out of it, especially when there are cave-ins, which make nearby windows and laun-
dry dirty, and the company is under pressure to reimburse house owners for the
inconvenience (Lisinski 2007, Munck 2008). The security issues with fences, and
the prevention of border transgressions, imply a degree of responsibility, and there
is also an ongoing negotiation about how to compensate those who have to move
and leave their homes because of the pit’s expansion.

A few years ago the mining company started to ﬁll the pit; since it needed a
waste rock dump, and in order to prevent cave-ins; along with a more formal reason
to restore the landscape according to what is prescribed by legislation. At a pace of
eight truckloads an hour, day and night, the ﬁlling is estimated to take 10 years
(LKAB 2006, p. 38). However, the company does not entertain the prospect of rec-
reating a land that could be built on, but only an area for walking and biking (Wik-
ström 2007 cited Olshammar 2009, p. 22). However, company representatives
simultaneously assert that the pit might in fact never be ﬁlled completely because
of the continuous mining activity underground (Thelin 2007, see also Gällivare
kommun 2003, Nyström 2007). Instead, it may just shrink at one end and expand
in another (see Figure 5).

In sum, the pit carries many different meanings of importance to the local soci-
ety. It is a symbol for mining which is the backbone in the economy. It means work
and survival, at the same time as it means danger, dirt, forced household removal,
and also painfully clearly illustrates the local community’s heavy reliance upon the
mining company. It is talked about as a scary but somehow familiar living being
and as the only thing that distinguishes the town from other places. In relation to
the past, the pit represents the golden age of mining and the prosperous welfare
society of the 1950s and 1960s and the former town centre with its important build-
ings and lost places of childhood. The pit also mirrors and deﬁnes the present
declining town centre. The pit and the town centre are both regarded as desolate,
hard and cold, although also special and attractive because of these characteristics.
The uncertain future prospects of the town are physically taking shape in the pit, as
ever present questions are which part of the town will be the pit’s next ‘bite’, or
whether the pit and the town will ﬁnally die together. As a journalist formulated the
situation: ‘The sad thing is that Malmberget will probably die whatever happens. If
all
the mining stops

the ore is extracted, Malmberget will disappear, and if

702

A. Storm and K. Olsson

altogether there won’t be any jobs and everyone will have to move’ (Ridderström
1995 cited Feldmann 2009, p. 28). The pit carries meanings of importance in the
local society, but are these articulated as acts of remembering within a heritage pro-
cess? If so, why is the pit not recognised as a cultural tool?

it

Why is the pit not recognised?
One obvious reason why the pit is not explicitly recognised as a cultural tool for
heritage processes is that it is still part of an ongoing industrial activity. It does not
entirely, or even primarily, represent a past period of time. Instead, it is highly con-
nected to the present and to the future. Another apparent reason is that it is danger-
ous and almost
invisible. Although the fenced off area decisively marks
contemporary Malmberget, the pit itself is not easily taken into account. To estab-
lish a physical relation to the pit, one has to pass forbidden borders and enter dan-
gerous areas. A third explanation is probably its organic quality that
is
continuously changing, growing in one end and shrinking in the other. During an
individual lifetime, the pit is never as it was and different generations have met the
pit in different shapes. Perhaps it is even about to disappear completely within a
decade. A fourth cause is that the role of heritage in a conventional sense is occu-
pied by the nationally designated Company Land, along with the museums and her-
itage trails. To imagine the pit as belonging to the same category of cultural tools
as the museums and early twentieth century villas seems to be challenging. In addi-
tion, since even the Company Land has to be available for demolition if the mining
company decides to exploit the mineral deposits underneath, it is difﬁcult to invest
or activate heritage processes in this area as well. Because of the local familiarity
of adapting to the needs of the mining industry, the affection that people express
towards material structures is always conditioned.

Two mutually reinforcing powers control the signiﬁcance of the pit. On the one
hand, the mining company LKAB holds the power over the physical environment
and on the other hand, a dominant understanding about what constitutes heritage –
the ‘authorized heritage discourse’ – holds the power of how heritage processes
possibly can take shape in the local community (Smith 2006, p. 29ff). The ﬁrst
three reasons above connect directly to the physical circumstances of the pit, con-
trolled by LKAB with its limited interests in heritage issues, and the fourth reason
connects indirectly to LKAB via its control over the Company Land. All four rea-
sons also reﬂect a dominant understanding about what might constitute cultural
tools for heritage processes. A cultural tool usually represents something unambigu-
ously past, it is something that is visible and present, something with a deﬁned
form and with a prospect of not disappearing in the near future. None of these pre-
requisites are fulﬁlled in Malmberget and especially not by the pit.

Is there any opposition to be found towards the control over signiﬁcance and
future use of the pit and the Company Land? As could be expected, there are no
protests in the local community concerning the fact that the mine is in use, and
therefore contributes to the pit’s continuous growth. Neither are the consequences
of forced moving from one’s home causing any major protests. The government
commissioner mentions a local notion of ‘we have always moved’, which he inter-
prets as a chastened attitude and one of the reasons for the lack of protests
(Nyström 2007, see also Lindqvist 1995, p. 9). Concerning the dust, dirt and danger
there have been some protests, although very speciﬁc and mostly connected to the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

703

issue of economic reimbursement and not to the larger issue of the role of the pit.
When competing with economic and environmental concerns, values connected to
an industrial heritage perspective are in general often found disadvantageous (af
Geijerstam and Isacson, forthcoming). In Malmberget, the idea of heritage is limited
even further by the growth of the pit and the moving or demolition of buildings
(Holmstedt and Sörlin 2008, p. 51).

More surprising, perhaps, is that we have not found any consideration about the
pit being about to be ﬁlled and consequently, on its way to disappear. This circum-
stance seems not to have caused any reﬂection at all. Neither have we found any
serious lamenting over comparatively older buildings that have, or will have to be,
abandoned because of the pit, like those located within the Company Land. We
interpret this as an unsentimental or ‘relaxed’ attitude towards the built environ-
ment. Buildings that happen to be located above a workable ore body simply have
to be evacuated, demolished or moved – it is no more complicated than that. In
fact, it is clear that this line of thought has been prevalent for decades. In a LKAB
personnel magazine from the 1960s, for example, Malmberget is characterised as a
community that is ‘consumed’ and it is said that in mining communities, things get
older faster compared to other places (Henriksson 1963, p. 8).

Some symbolic events were however regarded as being more problematic. When
LKAB fenced off the restored hoisting tower for visitors overlooking the pit, and
when it used another hoisting tower as a training exercise for company ﬁre brigade,
frustration was noticeable. These examples are exceptions though, and we interpret
the generally very few protests to a long tradition in company towns of relying on
authorities, be it the company or the municipality (Isacson 2007, Storm 2008). In
this tradition, the authority will take care and do what is best for the community,
and you should not protest against the hand that feeds you. The dominance of
LKAB is evident and overwhelming, economically, physically and concerning what
is possible to think about the future. The wait-and-see attitude of the municipal rep-
resentatives is both a response to and an expression of this dominance.

In addition, and in spite of the existence of, for example, local dig-where-you-
stand activities (Nylander undated), the dominant understanding about what consti-
tutes heritage does not encourage an articulation of the pit as a cultural tool for her-
itage processes. Following Dolores Hayden, the power of the landscape to ‘nurture
citizens’ public memory, to encompass shared time in the form of shared territory’,
mostly remains untapped for the inhabitants in Malmberget (Hayden 1995, p. 9) or,
in other words, the individual memory or experience is not included in a collective
memorialisation employing the connections to a heritage place or a cultural tool
(Smith 2006, p. 303f).

Nuancing the heritage concept
By considering the pit as a potential cultural tool for heritage processes, it is strik-
ing how the pit’s physical characteristics challenge our understanding of heritage.
The pit is difﬁcult to see and experience, it changes form and could be on its way
to disappear in the near future, due to human intervention. How could it possibly
be turned into a cultural tool? And what would happen to the idea about heritage
processes if it did?

We believe that the pit’s potential to work as a cultural tool in fact is remark-
able. It simultaneously encompasses the present situation and draws on the past, by

704

A. Storm and K. Olsson

being both a continuum and a changing entity (see e.g. Smith 2006, p. 274f). Its
name, the pit (gropen) is in deﬁnite form, telling that it is not becoming a new hole
because its shape is changing. While this observation to some extent counts for all
cultural tools in heritage processes – to preserve a ‘frozen’ moment is of course
never possible – this is often simply neglected or seen as disturbing and, as a con-
trast, we believe this is one of the major strengths with the pit, and similar human
imposed landscape scars.

Another aspect of the pit’s special potential is that it represents absence in a
double sense, both physically and temporally; it is an empty space in the centre of
the town, but it also pinpoints the absence of what once was and what could have
been. Physical absence can be painfully obvious and emptiness even spectacular,
but the stories about absence might be difﬁcult to grasp and incorporate in heritage
processes. While living reality is absent for most cultural tools, the pit, much more
importantly, facilitates meanings about loss in the shape of absence. In this respect,
the pit is both presence and absence. It is something obviously present in itself, and
at the same time it is something absent, an emptiness where the former town centre
of ‘the good old days’ used to be. This is a category usually not activated in heri-
tage processes and which deserves attention, i.e. cultural tools that explicitly expand
on the theme of absence or even heritage processes triggered by horror vacui.

A third aspect concerns meanings and values of different generations connected
to the pit and its changing physical appearance over time. When the older genera-
tions primarily attach meanings of the lost golden age, memories of the disappeared
school or the peoples’ house, younger generations relate more directly to the pit as
an entity in its own. It is a living being moving closer to one’s home, a monster
rumbling in the nights and a territory of forbidden adventures. This division is not
clear cut, but the emphasis depends on which generation you belong to. Hence, lay-
ers of meanings, narratives and uses connect to the pit’s layers of physical changes.
In sum, the pit pinpoints the strength of being both a continuum and a changing
entity, it represents absence in a double sense and it shows how changing meanings
not only are related to time, place and actors, but also to a continuously changing
physical reality. Analysing cultural tools of heritage processes that go beyond an
‘authorized heritage discourse’ is challenging but necessary, and human imposed
landscape scars – like the pit – is a valuable category in this context.

Conclusions
In this article, we have examined a landscape scar from a heritage perspective, and
more speciﬁcally the pit in Malmberget as a potential cultural tool for heritage pro-
cesses. We found that the pit carries numerous meanings of importance in the local
society, including as a symbol for mining as the backbone in the economy, along
with a heavy dependence upon the mining company. The pit also connects to expe-
riences of forced relocation, danger and excitement, and to a uniqueness of the
town, to a lost golden age and the present situation of decline and uncertain future
prospects.

In our analysis, the pit comes forward as a potential cultural tool for shared
memories of the recent past, although not explicitly recognised as such neither by
local inhabitants and municipal representatives, nor by the mining company and
regional and national heritage authorities. The reasons for the lack of recognition,
we assert, relate to two dominant powers over control of signiﬁcance. The physical

International Journal of Heritage Studies

705

situation is controlled by the mining company LKAB, deﬁning the pit as part of an
ongoing industrial activity not belonging to the past, as a continuously changing,
dangerous and invisible place; characteristics not ﬁtting a conventional image of a
cultural tool of heritage processes. The conventional idea of heritage is the second
power, the ‘authorized heritage discourse’, which for example inﬂuences the munic-
ipality and the Swedish National Heritage Board to deﬁne the old villas of the
Company Land as heritage, and neglect the pit.

Finally, the study of the pit brought about a reﬂection about contemporary ideas
of more democratic heritage processes (see e.g. Gibson and Pendlebury 2009, p. 9f,
14), which has been not the least apparent in relation to industrial heritage and
urban settings (af Geijerstam 1997, Jönsson 2008). This striving is a response to
the identiﬁed hierarchies and conﬂicts ‘intrinsic’ to heritage. Several strategies have
been launched, e.g. to consider ‘pasts’ in plural (Ashworth et al. 2007, p. 4), to
include many voices and by analysing ‘subaltern’ heritage discourses (Smith 2006,
p. 35, see also e.g. Hayden 1995, Buciek and Juul 2008, Robertson 2008).

We are in no doubt that the principal desire should be for heritage processes to
become a way towards belonging, identity and empowerment for everyone. Never-
theless, we are not sure if explicit, articulated heritage processes are always the
route sought after. In Malmberget, we found the hierarchies and conﬂicts of heritage
to be easily recognised. However, although the pit was not understood as a tool for
collective memory (see e.g. Smith and Campbell 2011), it was indeed actively used
by individuals in the local community. Perhaps the pit’s signiﬁcance would not be
increased by labelling it a cultural tool within the frames of an ‘authorized heritage
discourse’. Instead, an enhancement of shared memories explicitly connected to the
landscape scar in the midst of the town is the potential and promise of the pit.

Note
1. The project ‘Structural change and cultural heritage processes’ included a group of seven
researchers from three universities representing the ﬁelds of ethnology, heritage studies,
urban planning and history of technology. Results have so far been presented in Svens-
son and Wetterberg eds. (2008) and Svensson and Wetterberg, eds. (2009).

Notes on contributors
Anna Storm is a postdoctoral research fellow at the Centre for Baltic and East European
Studies (CBEES), Södertörn University, Stockholm, Sweden. Her research interests include
Industrial heritage, from a historiographic as well as a contemporary perspective. She is
currently working on closed down nuclear power plants as possible memory sites.

Krister Olsson holds a doctoral degree in Regional Planning. His research at Urban and
Regional Studies, KTH (Royal Institute of Technology), Stockholm, Sweden has included
both theoretical and empirical studies of urban and regional development strategies and
planning. It has in particular been directed towards heritage management, urban planning
and design and place marketing. He is currently working at the National Heritage Board in
Sweden.

References
Adamson, R., 1998. Tankar kring svensk industrihistorisk forskning under 1900-talet.

Bebyggelsehistorisk tidskrift, 36, 9–20.

706

A. Storm and K. Olsson

Alzén, A., 1996. Fabriken som kulturarv. Frågan om industrilandskapets bevarande i

Norrköping 1950–1985. Thesis (PhD). Stockholm: B. Östlings bokförlag Symposion.

Ashworth, G.J., Graham, B.J., and Tunbridge, J.E., 2007. Pluralising pasts: heritage, iden-

tity and place in multicultural societies. London: Pluto Press.

Avango, D., 2005. Sveagruvan. Svensk gruvhantering mellan industri, diplomati och geove-

tenskap 1910–1934. Thesis (PhD). Stockholm: Jernkontoret.

Buciek, K. and Juul, K., 2008. ‘We Are Here, Yet We Are Not Here’: the heritage of
excluded groups. In: B.J. Graham and P. Howard, eds. The Ashgate research companion
to heritage and identity. Aldershot: Ashgate, 105–123.

Cossons, N., 1993. The BP book of

industrial archaeology. Newton Abbot : David &

Cossons, N., and Hudson, K., eds., 1969. Industrial archaeologists’ guide 1969–70. Newton

Charles.

Abbot: David & Charles.

Davis, P., 1999. Ecomuseums: a sense of place. London: Leicester University.
Delony, E.N., 1984. Industrial archeology in the United States 1981–1984. In Industrial
heritage ’84 national reports: The ﬁfth international conference on the conservation of
the industrial heritage, 117–123, Washington DC.

Dicks, B., 2000. Heritage, place and community. Cardiff: University of Wales.
Feldmann, B., 2009. ‘The Pit’ and ‘the ghetto’: on heritage, identity and generation. In:
B. Svensson and B. Wetterberg, eds. Malmberget: structural change and cultural heri-
tage processes. A case study. Stockholm: The Swedish National Heritage Board, 28–41.
Forsström, G., 1973. Gällivare kommun. Del 1. Malmberget. Malmbrytning och bebyggelse.

Luleå: Norrbottens museum.

holm: Carlsson.

Geijerstam, J.af., 1997. Arbetets historia. Guide till museer och miljöer i Sverige. Stock-

Geijerstam, J. af., 2004. Landscapes of technology transfer. Swedish ironmakers in India

1860–1864. Thesis (PhD). Stockholm: Jernkontoret.

Geijerstam, J.af., et al., eds., 2011. Sveriges nationalatlas. Bergsbruk, gruvor och metall-

framställning. Jernkontoret. Stockholm: Nordstedt.

Geijerstam, J. af., and Isacson, M., forthcoming. Brytpunkt Bergslagen. Industriarvets värde
och intressekonﬂikter. In: M. Holmström, ed. Kunskap om kulturarv – en samhällelig
angelägenhet (preliminary title). Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet.

Gibson, L. and Pendlebury, J.R., eds., 2009. Valuing historic environments. Farnham:

Ashgate.

Gilloch, G., 1996. Myth and metropolis: Walter Benjamin and the city. London: Polity Press.
Graham, B.J. and Howard, P., eds., 2008. The Ashgate research companion to heritage and

identity. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Gällivare kommun, 1985. Bevarandeplan för den kulturhistoriska bebyggelsen i Gällivare,

Malmberget, Koskullskulle. Gällivare: Gällivare kommun.

Gällivare kommun, 2003. Fördjupad översiktsplan för tätorten Gällivare-Malmberget-

Koskullskulle. Gällivare: Gällivare kommun.

Gällivare kommun, 2006. Fördjupad översiktsplan: Gällivare-Malmberget-Koskullskulle.

Koncept II Samrådshandling 2006-12-18. Gällivare: Gällivare kommun.

Gällivare kommun, 2007. Bebyggelsemiljöer

i Malmberget/Koskullskulle/Gällivare. En

kulturmiljöanalys. Gällivare: Gällivare kommun.

Harnow, H., 2011. Danmarks industrielle miljøer. Odense: Syddansk Universitetsforlag.
Hayden, D., 1995. The power of place: urban landscapes as public history. Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press.

Henriksson, A., 1963. När människan kom till Malmberget. LKAB-tidningen, no. 1.
Holmstedt, E. and Sörlin, S., 2008. Inte längre mitt hem. Malmberget 1969–1978, 2007–

Houltz, A., 2003. Teknikens tempel. Modernitet och industriarv på Göteborgsutställningen

2008. Luleå: Black Island Books.

1923. Thesis (PhD). Hedemora: Gidlund.

Hudson, K., 1963. Industrial archaeology: an introduction. London: John Baker.
Isacson, M., 2007. Industrisamhället Sverige: Arbete, ideal och kulturarv. Lund: Studentlit-

teratur.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

707

Johansson, K., 1996. Vid kanten av Gropen. In: Norrbottens museum. Människors upplevel-
ser av att bo i Malmberget i dag. Norrbottenprojektet. En nutidsdokumentation 1994–
1995. Luleå: Norrbottens museum.

Johansson, L., 2007. Interview. Recording and transcription available by authors, Jun 13.
Johansson, E., and Olsén M., undated. Gällivares och Malmbergets födelse. En väggmålning
av Erling Johansson i Centralskolan, Gällivare. Kalix: Gellivare Sockens Hembygdsför-
ening.

Jönsson, L.-E., 2008. Mitt och allas kulturarv – politisk risk och resurs. In: Jönsson,
L-E., Wallette, A., and Wienberg, J., eds., Kanon och kulturarv. Historia och samtid i
Danmark och Sverige. Stockholm: Makadam.

Lindqvist, S., 1995. Än kan man köpa en Portello på Sporthallsﬁket. Berättelser omkring

Malmfälten. Gällivare: Gellivare Sockens Hembygdsförening.

Lisinski, S., 2007. Hela Malmberget skakas av sprängningarna i gruvan. Dagens Nyheter, 3

LKAB, 2006. Årsredovisning. Luleå: LKAB.
Logan, W. and Reeves, K., eds., 2009. Places of pain and shame: dealing with ‘difﬁcult her-

Macdonald, S., 2009. Difﬁcult heritage: negotiating the Nazi past in Nuremberg and beyond.

February.

itage’. Abingdon: Routledge.

London: Routledge.

Göteborg: Makadam.

Martins Holmberg, I., 2006. På stadens yta. Om historiseringen av Haga. Thesis (PhD).

Martins Holmberg, I., 2009. The historicisation of Malmberget. In: Svensson, B. and Wetter-
berg, B., eds., Malmberget. Structural change and cultural heritage processes. A case
study. Stockholm: The Swedish National Heritage Board, 42–54.

Munck, A., 2008. Gropen i Malmberget växer. Dagens Nyheter, 3 November.
Norrländska Socialdemokraten, 2007. Ett av husen sprack när det ﬂyttades. Norrländska

Norrländska Socialdemokraten, 2008. Snart börjar husen rulla i Malmberget. Norrländska

Socialdemokraten, 4 September.

Socialdemokraten, 29 March.

Nylander, H., undated. Gräv där du står. Malmberget del 1. Malmberget: Gräv där du står.
Nyström, T., 2007. Interview. Recording and transcription available by authors, Jun 15.
Olshammar, G., 2009. Ruin landscape: a problem or history? In: B. Svensson and B. Wetter-
berg, eds. Malmberget. Structural change and cultural heritage processes. A case study.
Stockholm: The Swedish National Heritage Board, 15–27.

Olsson, K. and Storm, A., 2009. The past in the future Malmberget. In: B. Svensson and B.
Wetterberg, eds. Malmberget: structural change and cultural heritage processes–A case
study. Stockholm: The Swedish National Heritage Board, 55–77.

Riksantikvarieämbetet, 1997. Områden av riksintresse för kulturmiljövården i Norrbottens
län (BD) enligt 3 kap 6 § miljöbalken. Dokument uppdaterat 2011–11-15. Available
from: http://www.raa.se/publicerat/varia2012_8.pdf [Accessed 3 April 2012].

Robertson, I.J.M., 2008. Heritage from below: class, social protest and resistance. In:
B.J. Graham and P. Howard, eds. The Ashgate research companion to heritage and iden-
tity. Aldershot: Ashgate, 143–158.

Robertson, I.J.M., 2012. Introduction: heritage from below. In: I.J.M. Robertson, ed. Heri-

tage from below. Farnham: Ashgate.

Rodell, M., 2007. Från gotländska bunkrar till bosniska broar. En reﬂektion över materiell
kultur och monument. In: Frykman, J. and Ehn, B., eds., Minnesmärken. Att tolka det
förﬂutna och besvärja framtiden. Stockholm: Carlsson, 61–87.

Smith, L., 2006. Uses of heritage. New York, NY: Routledge.
Smith, L. and Campbell, G., 2011. Don’t mourn organise: heritage, recognition and memory
in Castleford, West Yorkshire. In: L. Smith, P. Shackel, and G. Campbell, eds. Heritage,
labour, and the working classes. Abingdon: Routledge, 85–105.

Smith, L., Shackel, P., and Campbell, G., 2011. Introduction: class still matters. In: L. Smith,
P. Shackel, and G. Campbell, eds. Heritage, labour, and the working classes. Abingdon:
Routledge, 1–16.

Soyez, D., 2009. Europeanizing industrial heritage in Europe: addressing its transboundary

and dark sides. Geographische Zeitschrift, 97 (1), 43–55.

708

A. Storm and K. Olsson

Storm, A., 2008. Hope and rust. Reinterpreting the industrial place in the late 20th century.

Thesis (PhD). Stockholm: Royal Institute of Technology.

Svensson, B. and Wetterberg, B., eds., 2008. Malmberget. Strukturella förändringar och

kulturarvsprocesser. En fallstudie. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet.

Svensson, B. and Wetterberg, B., eds., 2009. Malmberget. Structural change and cultural

heritage processes. A case study. Stockholm: The Swedish National Heritage Board.

Sveriges geologiska undersökning/Geological Survey of Sweden (SGU), 2005. Ämnen och
material av riksintresse enligt miljöbalken. Beslut. Ärende 46-1469/2003. 2005-03-01.
Available from: http://www.sgu.se/dokument/riksintressen/46_1469_2003.pdf [Accessed
27 April 2012].

Thelin, L., 2007. Interview. Recording and transcription available by authors, Jun 13.
Westin, H., and Strandänger, M., 2002. Näringslivet, kulturarvet och samhället. In: Westin,
längden. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet,

i

H., ed., Företagens kulturarv. Lönsamt
7–11.


