Tropes of a Texan trauma: monumental Dallas after John F. 
Kennedy
Hanneke Ronnes* and Anna Meijer van Putten

Department of European Cultural History, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_512729.sgm

(Received 15 May 2010; final version received 10 June 2010)

166000000November 2010
HannekeRonnes
h.ronnes@uva.nl
10.1080/13527258.2010.512729

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis

Dealey  Plaza  in  central  Dallas  serves  both  as  a  ‘cradle’  and  a  ‘grave’;  at  this
historic site Dallas was born and an American president died. The assassination of
President Kennedy on 22 November 1963 changed Dealey Plaza, the site where
the first citizen of Dallas settled in 1841, from a symbol of civic pride into a place
of guilt and shame. After the events of 1963, the Dallas community voiced a wish
to forget and hence, the exact location where Kennedy was murdered was initially
remembered by neither monument nor plaque. At the same time, America grieved
and  from  all  over  the  country  US  citizens  started  to  visit  the  assassination  site.
Dealey  Plaza  became  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  which  caused  a  change  in  the
monumental  landscape  and  eventually  transformed  civic  guilt  into  civic  pride.
This article offers an analysis of the responses to this Texan trauma in terms of
commemorative  heritage  and  describes  Dallas’  shift  from  ‘amnesia’ 
to
‘identification’, two contrary responses to traumatic, or mourning, heritage.

Introduction
One  of  the  myriad  American  responses  to  the  trauma  of  11  September  2001  was
museological.  The  events  of  that  day  stirred  new  exhibitions  as  well  as  complete
museums,  in  the  process  changing  the  way  in  which  curators  appraise  and  present
heritage  sites  dedicated  to  remembrance  and  mourning,  or  ‘mourning  heritage’
(Peckham 2003).1 ‘Where were you on 9/11?’ poses the future National September
11 Memorial & Museum on its website. Prior national suffering on a similar scope,
voiced in the same ‘where were you when’ idiom that characterises the 11 September
discourse,  was  caused  by  the  death  of  John  F.  Kennedy  on  22  November  1963  on
Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas. Indeed, immediately following 11 September, public
historians,  museum  curators  and  archivists  made  reference  to  the  Sixth  Floor
Museum  in  Dallas  –  the  museum  commemorating  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy  and  housed  in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  from  whence  the  shots
were fired – in discussions concerning the interpretation and presentation of this latest
tragedy and the consequential role of museums in processes of ‘civic healing’ (Gard-
ner and Henry 2002, pp. 43–49). The confrontation with ‘the raw material of history’
on  display  in  the  Sixth  Floor  Museum  was  perceived  as  ‘a  powerful  step  in  the

*Corresponding author. Email: h.ronnes@uva.nl



 391

Figure  1. The  Sixth  Floor  Museum,  the  former  Texas  School  Book  Depository  in  Dallas,
from where John F. Kennedy was shot. In the foreground is the ‘Bryan colonnade’ built in the
1930s and a tourist gazing at the site of the murder. (All photographs © H. Ronnes.)

process of questioning and understanding broader issues’ (Gardner and Henry 2002,
pp. 27–52). This Dallas museum, which took over 30 years to realise, did not only
serve as a template in the post 9/11 museum landscape, it also hosted one of the very
first exhibitions on the subject. Running from November 2001 until December 2002,
the exhibition titled ‘Loss and Renewal: Transforming Tragic Sites’ provided a snap-
shot of the tragic events of 11 September, framed in the context of other disastrous
turns in the United States history such as the assassination of John F. Kennedy. Visi-
tors were invited to share their memories and emotions regarding 9/11 at the close of
the exhibition, where self-written notes could be affixed on the wall around a photo-
graph  of  an  American  flag  sticking  out  of  the  debris  of  what  was  once  the  World
Trade Centre. The Sixth Floor Museum staff was ‘moved by the way local media and
community  members  were  drawn  to  their  venue  in  an  attempt  to  make  sense  of
September  11’  (Deen  2003,  p.  191).  The  immediate  reaction  of  Dallasites  to  that
other national tragedy, the death of John F. Kennedy four decades earlier, was of a
different  nature  altogether.  The  following,  touching  on  questions  of  memory  and
identity, will centre on the traumatic site where the murder happened, and how this
site developed in terms of its monumental infrastructure.

Figure 1. The Sixth Floor Museum, the former Texas School Book Depository in Dallas, from where John F. Kennedy was shot. In the foreground is the ‘Bryan colonnade’ built in the 1930s and a tourist gazing at the site of the murder. (All photographs are by H. Ronnes.)

Beginnings
Before the assassination of John F. Kennedy, Dealey Plaza, the scene of the murder,
marked the birthplace of the city and as such represented the very core of Dallas’ civic

392

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

pride. In 1841, Tennessee lawyer and tradesman John Neely Bryan established a trad-
ing post on this location along the Trinity River, allegedly naming it after his friend
‘Dallas’.2 Bryan settled there where the river’s three forks met and a river crossing
could be constructed, thus ensuring that Dallas became a gateway to the West. Within
a few years, Bryan’s post was blossoming: the town was planned, roads were under
construction,  people  arrived  and  businesses  sprang  up.  In  1846,  Dallas  became  the
county seat. Establishing itself as the primary production centre of cotton and grains,
and taking full advantage of its favourable location along the Trinity River, Bryan’s
trading post developed into a thriving city within decades. An iron suspension bridge
over the river and the railroads, both realised in the 1870s, further contributed to the
bustling urban landscape that had developed by the turn of the nineteenth century (Hill
1996).

Figure 2. Dealey Plaza and immediate environment, Dallas (illustrated by Frits Hoogesteger).
1 Field John Neely Bryan
2 Courthouse
3 Work Projects Administration monument commemorating the birth of Dallas
4 John Neely Bryan’s log cabin
5 Plaque commemorating John F. Kennedy
6 The Sixth Floor Museum
7 Philip Johnson’s John F. Kennedy Memorial
8 Dal-Tex Building
9 Criminal Courts
10 Records Building

One of the prominent figures in the Dallas arena at this time was English-born and
self-made George Bannerman Dealey. In the late nineteenth and first half of the twen-
tieth century, Dealey personified not only the influential Dallas Morning News, but is
moreover credited as a civic reformer (Cox 2005). Starting small with the advertise-
ment and introduction of the first trash-can in Dallas, placed right in front of the news-
paper’s front door, Dealey was soon to embark on a well-orchestrated campaign that
promoted the realisation of parks and playgrounds, better housing conditions and an
improved infrastructure (Cox 2005).
11 US Post OfficeDealey Plaza, named after the noted publisher and civic leader, formed the culmi-
nation of development projects in the heart of the old town, which commenced in 1927
and continued after the economic meltdown following the Wall Street crash two years
later. The Great Depression, though touching Dallas and Dallasites as it did all, was
alleviated as a result of the discovery of oilfields in 1930 (Biles 1994, pp. 4–20). That
same  year,  a  major  development  scheme  changed  the  course  of  the  Trinity  River,
which had been the source of tremendous problems owing to its recurrent overflow-
ing. Subsequently, Dealey Plaza – ‘the front door of Dallas’ – was created to establish
a new access way to the west side of the city across the now bypassed river. Three
roads coming unto the new plaza from the east end, Commerce Street (which used to
lead  unto  the  iron  suspension  bridge  across  the  river),  Main  Street  and  Elm  Street,
converged  at  the  west  end  of  the  square,  heading,  via  a  ‘triple  underpass’,  towards
more roads and ultimately the river. Towards the triple underpass, the three roads were
lined  with  grass  patches,  amongst  which  what  was  to  become  the  famous  ‘grassy
knoll’. The east end of the square was flanked by several buildings, amongst which
the Dallas Courthouse built in 1892, and the early twentieth century Dallas County
Criminal  Courts  Building  and  an  office  block  that  became  known  as  the  Dal-Tex
Building.  The  southeast  and  the  northeast  of  the  square  were  occupied  by  the  Post
Office built in 1937 and the early twentieth-century seven-storey masonry building,
initially  housing  the  Southern  Rock  Island  Plow  Company,  but  now  known  as  the
Texas School Book Depository (Abbott 2003, pp. 24–25).3

In his article ‘Mourning heritage’, R.S. Peckham (2003, p. 205) notes: ‘Although
heritage is associated with the preservation of artefacts, buildings and landscapes that
have survived from the past, in many cases heritage performs the obverse function: it
preserves things that have already been destroyed’. Built on the oldest foundation of
Dallas, Dealey Plaza’s essential status as the city’s historic centre ‘where it all began’,
was first monumentalised in the late 1930s, soon after the iconic Trinity River, closely
associated  with  Dallas’  origin,  had  changed  its  course  and  disappeared  from  sight
(WPA  1940,  p.  336).4  The  fact  that  the  river,  imperative  to  the  Dallas  origin  myth



 393

Field John Neely Bryan
Courthouse

Figure 2. Dealey Plaza and immediate environment, Dallas (illustrated by Frits Hoogesteger).
1
2
3 Work Projects Administration monument commemorating the birth of Dallas
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 Records Building
11 US Post Office

John Neely Bryan’s log cabin
Plaque commemorating John F. Kennedy
The Sixth Floor Museum
Philip Johnson’s John F. Kennedy Memorial
Dal-Tex Building
Criminal Courts

394

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

Figure 3. The ‘Bryan colonnade’, Work Projects Administration. Behind on the right is the
Sixth Floor Museum. A tourist is taking photographs.

shaping  the  ‘imagined  community’  (Anderson  1991),  had  retreated,  undoubtedly
contributed to the proclivity to remember the site.

Figure 3. The ‘Bryan colonnade’ as a part of the Work Projects Administration. Behind on the right is the Sixth Floor Museum. A tourist is taking photographs.

Another  incentive  for  the  memorial  that  was  conceived  was  the  celebration  in
Dallas of the state’s centennial in 1936 and Franklin D. Roosevelt’s attendance to the
centennial parade on Dealey Plaza. After the infastructural building activities on the
plaza  had  seized,  the  actual  memorial  site  on  Dealey  Plaza  was  created  as  one  of
the many – even within Dallas – New Deal projects (Leighninger 2007, p. 77, Taylor
2008, pp. 187–188).5 The Work Progress Administration (WPA) and National Youth
Administration (NYA) initiative consisted of two rectangular and elongated pools on
the east side of the square facing two peristyles, which were placed symmetrically on
either side of Main Street with, in between pool and peristyle, an obelisk. The obelisk
on  the  south  side  of  Main  Street  was  replaced  in  1949  by  a  statue  of  George.  B.
Dealey.  Towards  the  western  end  of  Dealey  Plaza  two  mirrored  quarter-circular
colonnades,  facing  each  other  on  either  side  of  the  three  converging  roads  and  the
grassy knoll, were coined the ‘Bryan colonnade’ and the ‘Cockrell colonnade’, after
the first inhabitant and founder John Neely Bryan and the settler family Cockrell, of
whom  especially  Sarah  is  noted  as  an  important  early  figure  in  the  Dallas  society
(York Enstam 1981, pp. 106–114). Architecturally, the plaza that came into being in
the 1930s is not unlike other contemporary courthouse squares in Texas; it is in fact
quite typical for its time (Veselka and Foote 2000, pp. 188–189).

The Bryan colonnade carries a simple plaque reading: ‘Work Progress Adminis-
tration 1938–1940’. In terms of a more explicit commemoration of Dallas’ origins by
means of an inscription, a second one on the remaining obelisk is more informative: 



 395

Figure 4. The pool, obelisk and peristyle on Dealey Plaza that form part of the 1930s New
Deal monument commemorating Dallas’ origins.

Dealey Plaza birthplace of Dallas within this small park was built the first home, which
also served as the first courthouse and post office, the first store and the first fraternal
lodge. Dedicated to the pioneers of civic progress by order of the park board.

The ‘first home’ that is referred to is the famous log cabin built by the first settler
John  Neely  Bryan.  Opinions  differ  on  the  question  as  to  where  exactly  the  ‘John
Neely Bryan’ – cabin, as it was dubbed, was situated. The Federal Writers’ Project
The Dallas Guide, one of the main New Deal initiatives in Dallas, realised approxi-
mately at the same time as the Dealey Plaza monument, rated this log cabin as the
city’s  number  one  attraction.  The  cabin,  the  guide  states,  is  a  reconstruction  of  the
original  cabin;  its  location,  however,  they  assessed  to  be  original  (Federal  Writers
Project 1940, p. 232, Sanders 1981).

Figure 4. The pool, obelisk and peristyle on Dealey Plaza that form part of the 1930s New Deal monument remembering Dallas’ origins.

Locale of loss
On  22  November  1963,  an  anti-Kennedy  advertisement,  paid  for  by  well-heeled
oilmen, appeared in The Dallas Morning News – incidentally, the newspaper of the
late George B. Dealey. Great discontent with Kennedy’s line of policy on the part of
the Dallas’ white elite was counterbalanced by general approval of his presidency on
the part of the city’s diverse populace. Dallas was made up of various minority groups
consisting of Catholics, Jews and blacks, many of whom lined the streets in November
1963  when  Kennedy’s  motorcade  passed.  It  is  believed  that  a  quarter  of  a  million
people, mostly Dallasites, flocked to the city the day of John F. Kennedy’s ill-fated

396

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

visit (Phillips 2006, p. 159). The anti-Kennedy ad confirmed Dallas’ reputation for
active  ultra-conservative  extremism  and  cast  a  shadow  of  guilt  over  the  city  after
Kennedy’s death on Dealey Plaza. As a result of both this reputation and corroborating
advertisement, Dallas would be blamed to a greater extent for this murder than other
cities  were  held  responsible  for  past  and  future  political  murders  in  their  streets
(Philips 2006).

Immediately following the assassination, the people of Dallas came to mourn at
Dealey Plaza. Flowers, notes and souvenirs were placed at the site, creating a tempo-
rary memorial, which in turn was visited by thousands of Americans from around the
country. ‘We love you. Please forgive us. The Ted Wilson Family’, one of the notes
read.  A  nine-year-old  girl  from  Dallas  wrote:  ‘I’m  sorry  Caroline  and  John  John.
Forgive  us’.  Still  another  one  begged:  ‘God  forgive  us  all’  (Exhibition  Sixth  Floor
Museum). Public opinion polls conducted shortly after the assassination indicated that
more than 80 percent of the Americans accused ‘the people of Dallas’ for the crime,
while 86 percent of the locals reported feelings of shame that the event had occurred
in Dallas.6 ‘The eyes of the world are upon us – and they will be looking with a critical
stare’, a state judge summed up the general belief (Exhibition Sixth Floor Museum).
Whilst Dallasites tried to cope with their feelings of guilt and shame, the nation tried
to come to terms with a loss. For the former this meant that their national identity,
which spoke of grief, collided with their local, city identity, which implied culpability.
Joe Dealey, George B. Dealey’s grandson, commented: ‘We are a tormented town’
(Abbott 2003, p. 30).

In the years that followed, collective national grief continued over the loss of an
ever  more  loved  president,  whereas  Dallas’  feelings  of  guilt  developed  into  a  slow
but  sure  amnesia  (Ashworth  and  Tunbridge  1996,  p.  108).  Already  in  the  first
month  after  the  assassination,  in  discussions  concerning  the  possible  need  for  a
Kennedy memorial, R.L. Thornton, former Mayor of Dallas, stated: ‘For my part, I
don’t  want  anything  to  remind  me  that  a  president  was  killed  on  the  streets  of
Dallas. I want to forget’ (Sixth Floor Museum 2000, p. 24). Civic leader and future
mayor  J.  Erik  Jonsson  maintained:  ‘The  decent  thing  to  do  is  let  some  time  lapse’
(Exhibition  Sixth  Floor  Museum).  Indeed,  in  the  first  seven  years  following
Kennedy’s death, the city of Dallas dedicated no memorials, monuments or plaques
to the former president. However, in spite of local political reluctance, federal poli-
ticians, a few Dallasites as well as a media offensive, stage-managed the raising of
money  amongst  the  public  for  a  monument.  A  30-day  mourning  period  was
announced  during  which  fund  raising,  ‘a  way  for  [an]  individual  to  show  his/her
love  and  faith  in  our  country’,  commenced  (Sixth  Floor  Museum  2000,  p.  6).  The
John F. Kennedy Citizens Memorial Committee asked the public to send in sugges-
tions as regards the type of monument, which fostered a great response (Sixth Floor
Museum 2000, p. 6).

The Kennedy Memorial turned out to be a hapless project, plagued from the start
by  much  hesitation  and  considerable  delays.  Heated  discussions  arose  between  the
members  of  the  Dallas  Historical  Monument  Commission,  soon  succeeded  by  the
John F. Kennedy Citizens Memorial Committee, over the form the monument should
take.  Some  desired  a  national  monument  rather  than  a  local  memorial  site,  others
opted for a Dallas monument, recognising ‘a need for a symbol of the city’s real love
and  deep  grief  over  Kennedy’s  assassination’,  and  then  there  were  those  who
remained  against  any  kind  of  tangible  memorial  (Sixth  Floor  Museum  2000,  p.  6).
Eventually  it  was  decided  that  the  monument  would  ‘not  be  constructed  as  a  place



 397

marking the scene’ but as ‘an effort to express the sympathy and dedication of the
people of Dallas’ (Sixth Floor Museum 2000, p. 3). Importantly, the Kennedy Memo-
rial ‘was never intended to address the assassination’. It was meant to symbolise the
freedom of John F. Kennedy’s spirit, not his death (Sixth Floor Museum 2000, p. 3).
The memorial was located on ‘neutral grounds’ one block east of the assassination site
and protected visually from that site by the Dallas Courthouse. A proposal to situate
the  monument  on  the  eastern  border  of  Dealey  Plaza  was  rejected  on  the  basis  of
predicted ‘traffic flow issues’ and ‘large numbers of visitors’ (Sixth Floor Museum
2000, p. 10). It seems curious that a site occupied with buildings that needed to be
demolished  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  memorial,  was  chosen  over  a  spacious
square like Dealey Plaza.

Figure 5. Philip Johnson’s John F. Kennedy Memorial. In the background on the right is the courthouse.

Even  when  the  decision  was  finally  made  to  establish  what  was  to  become  the
Kennedy Memorial conceived by Philip Johnson, it took seven years to realise, mostly
as  a  result  of  setbacks  related  to  the  simultaneous  construction  of  an  underground
parking  garage  below  the  designated  memorial  site.  The  combined  construction  of
memorial and parking garage in the meantime also meant that the log cabin, Dallas’
first house, would have to be moved from the courthouse yard to Elm Street and North
Market  Street.  The  cabin  from  now  on  was  out  of  sight  of  Dealey  Plaza,  the  very
square celebrating the city’s origins.

The  abstract  design  of  the  monument,  completed  and  approved  in  1966,  was  a
further attempt to even out the rough edges. Philip Johnson’s memorial was ‘oddly,
and  appropriately  enough,  a  place  as  much  about  the  “forgetting”’  as  about  the

Figure 5. Philip Johnson’s John F. Kennedy Memorial. In the background on the right is the
courthouse.

398

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

“remembering”’,  Richard  Brettell,  Founding  President  of  the  Dallas  Architecture
Forum,  noted  (Sixth  Floor  Museum  2000,  p.  29).  The  minimalist  structure,  which
consists of 72 concrete columns, measures fifty feet square, is 30 feet high and roof-
less. Once inside, the visitor faces a granite square austerely engraved with only three
words: ‘John Fitzgerald Kennedy’. Remarkably, the decoration of the corners are said
to possess a striking yet unintentional resemblance to the round log cabin of the John
Neely Bryan log cabin (Sixth Floor Museum 2000, p. 27).

Dealey Plaza pilgrimage
The actual site of the murder thus, for the moment, remained an empty place, devoid
of any monumental reference to what had occurred there in 1963. What was more,
both local citizens and officials toyed with the idea of demolishing the Texas School
Book  Depository;  an  unsanctioned  attempt  to  burn  down  the  structure  failed.
Concurrently,  Dallasites  were  faced  with  a  situation  in  which  more  and  more
Americans visited Dealey Plaza as a national site of mourning. G.J. Ashworth (2002)
distinguishes three common motives for people to visit ‘dissonant heritage’, which he
coined the uniqueness motive, the horror motive and the empathy motive. All three
are applicable in the case of Dealey Plaza. The fact that so many questions regarding
Kennedy’s murder – why, who, how – were left unanswered, may be added to these
motives.  Visitors  who  went  to  the  murder  scene  seeking  explanations  by  means  of
visible reminders found neither. Place authenticity being the principle pull – people
wished to view and be in the very place, the exact spot, where the assassination had
happened – meant that Philip Johnson’s memorial one block away did not resonate
with its supposed audience and attracted few visitors. Dealey Plaza, on the other hand
became, with time, a place of pilgrimage. At some point an X was drawn to mark the
location where Kennedy died and when this faded a second one was added, either as
a replacement of the previous X or as a means, as is sometimes suggested, to indicate
the two shots that were fired; who was responsible for the initiative is not clear. What
is certain though is that the self-designated ‘ephemeral monument’ proved far more
successful  and  enduring  than  the  ‘officially  sanctioned  monument’  (Holtorf  and
Williams 2006, p. 246).

For  decades,  Dallasites  were  reluctant  to  establish  an  in  situ  reminder  of  the
atrocity  that  had  come  to  define  their  city.  In  1975,  the  Dallas  Landmark  Priority
Designation assessed both the Texas School Book Depository and John Neely Bryan’s
log cabin of ‘second priority’, as ‘landmarks significant to the history of Dallas’ only,
not to the history of America at large. The Dallas Historic Landmarks Survey (1975)
made no reference to the John F. Kennedy assassination; equally, the Dallas Historic
Preservation Plans of 1981 and 1988, containing extensive historical accounts of the
city’s  buildings  and  its  history,  made  no  mention  of  the  assassination  of  John  F.
Kennedy or any buildings or monuments relating to the event. Concomitant to a lack
of  monuments  commemorating  the  slain  president,  few  to  no  schools,  streets,  or
buildings were named after him, unlike in other cities in the United States. Between
‘amnesia’  and  ‘identification’,  two  contrary  responses  to  the  heritage  of  trauma  or
atrocity  associated  with  perpetrators  vis-à-vis  victims,  those  Americans  that  also
happened  to  be  Dallasites  for  a  long  time  opted  for  the  former  (Tunbridge  and
Ashworth 1996, pp. 106–109, Sneed 2002, p. xxiii).

However,  the  sheer  number  of  people  visiting  –  ‘gazing’  upon  –  (Urry  2002)
Dealey Plaza made the telling of the story of the assassination on the location of the



 399

murder almost inevitable and eventually forced the reluctant Dallasites into action. In
1989, the Sixth Floor Museum opened its doors. Robert Decherd, one of the initiators,
affirmed this pragmatic stance: ‘The tragedy is a part of our city’s history and … the
fact that it occurred here in modern times [is] going to bring people to Dealey Plaza’
(Exhibition Sixth Floor Museum). Although plans for the museum remained contro-
versial with the public – some even feared that the exhibition would commemorate,
and in that way endorse Lee Harvey Oswald’s actions that took place from the ‘sixth
floor’ – the majority of the funding for the $3.8 million project came from organisa-
tions and individuals in Dallas County.

In  establishing  the  museum,  the  Dallas  community  leaders  sought  to  ‘create  an
environment  that  recaptures  the  optimistic  days  of  the  Kennedy  presidency’  (Hunt
1997, p. 6). Some voiced the hope that the museum would provide an opportunity to
clear the city’s name. In 1988, psychologist James Pennebaker questioned 200 Dallas
natives,  and  an  equal  number  of  outsiders,  about  the  assassination.  All  those  ques-
tioned were over the age of 30 (that is, they were old enough to remember the attack
on John F. Kennedy). The results were that 78 percent of the Dallasites believed that
the rest of the world still held them responsible, whilst only 25 percent of those not
native to Dallas pronounced that they blamed the city and its inhabitants for what had
happened on Dealey Plaza (Maraniss 1988).

The Sixth Floor Museum, located on the sixth and seventh floors of the former
Texas School Book Depository, follows a route that zigzags through the permanent
collection via information panels, TV-sets and display cabinets. The route starts with
an introduction of the slain president (which is anything but revisionist, excluding, as
it does, all accounts of Kennedy’s darker side) (Dallek 2003) and his short presidency,
including a piece of the Berlin Wall complementing the account of Kennedy’s famous
Berlin visit in 1961. The exhibition goes on to relate the story of Kennedy’s trip south
in November 1963, and more specifically his ill-starred visit to Dallas on the twenty-
second of that same month. One of the display cabinets exhibits the original tableware
that  was  laid  out  for  the  Dallas  lunch  that  Kennedy  never  enjoyed.  Next,  the  route
passes by the windows of the former Texas School Book Depository, providing a view
over Dealey Plaza and the corner from where Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shots that
killed the president. This corner has been restored to its 1963 appearance with card-
board boxes arranged according to photographs of the day of the shooting. Set off by
glass, it is the one place in the museum that is not accessible to visitors, ‘to protect the
historic flooring’ perhaps, but maybe also to avoid identification with Oswald and to
enable  a  detour  around  this  most  tangible  aspect  of  the  trauma.  The  presentation
continues with an overview of the numerous investigations into the murder, the crisis
hours immediately after the murder, and the national and world responses to the event.
Upon leaving the museum, visitors pass so-called ‘memory books’, in which personal
reflections, emotions and memories may be put to paper.

Newfound identity
In a research conducted on the collective memory of political events, a resemblance
between Dallas and Memphis, the city where Martin Luther King was assassinated in
1968, was found. Whereas Dallas’ urban landscape lacked any reference to the assas-
sination of John F. Kennedy in the years following the event, the same was true for
Memphis with regards to Martin Luther King. In the same vein, several buildings and
streets had been named after King in Dallas, in Memphis various schools and streets

400

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

Figure 6.
In the foreground, the 1930s New Deal memorial celebrating the birth of Dallas
City.  Visitors  only  pay  attention  to  the  later  monument  commemorating  John  F.  Kennedy,
situated between the peristyle and the obelisk.

had  been  called  after  Kennedy;  yet  not  vice  versa.  And  just  as  Dallasites  opened  a
museum  in  its  downtown  area  approximately  25  years  after  the  assassination  of
Kennedy,  authorities  in  Memphis  did  so  roughly  25  years  after  the  murder  of  the
famous civil rights leader (Pennebaker and Banasik 1997, p. 12).

Figure 6.

In white, the 1930s New Deal memorial celebrating the birth of Dallas City. Visitors only pay attention to the later monument commemorating John F. Kennedy, situated between the peristyle and the obelisk.

Six  years  after  the  opening  of  the  Sixth  Floor  Museum,  in  1993,  Dealey  Plaza
was destined a National Historical Landmark District. This official recognition of the
site as a place of national importance came long after the site had become a ‘destina-
tion’  for  the  American  people  (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett  1998).  Two  bronze  plaques
were  unveiled  on  the  square  on  the  day  of  the  thirtieth  anniversary  of  Kennedy’s
assassination. The first one displays part of the 1963 route taken through downtown
Dallas  before  the  car  carrying  the  president,  the  Texan  governor  and  their  wives
reached  Dealey  Plaza.  The  plaque  moreover  shows  some  of  the  landmarks  in  the
area,  such  as  the  courthouse,  the  triple  underpass  and  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository,  the  latter  highlighted  in  bas-relief.  Accompanying  the  map  is  the
following inscription: 

On  November  22,1963,  John  Fitzgerald  Kennedy,  thirty-fifth  President  of  the  United
States,  visited  Dallas.  A  Presidential  Parade  traveled  north  on  Houston  Street  to  Elm
Street and west on Elm Street. As the parade continued on Elm Street at 12:30 P.M., rifle
shots wounded the President and Texas Governor John Connally. Findings of the Warren
Commission indicated that the rifle shots were fired from a sixth floor window near the
southwest corner of the Texas School Book Depository Building, Elm and Houston, a
block north of this marker.



 401

President  Kennedy  expired  at  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital  at  1:00  P.M.  The  John
Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial plaza is nearby, bounded by Main, Record Market and
Commerce Streets.

Notwithstanding the factual narration of the events, this landmark, as was intended
with  Philip  Johnson’s  monument  23  years  earlier  and  with  the  museum  six  years
previously, remembered Kennedy’s spirit rather than his death. The former first lady
of  Texas,  Nellie  Connolly,  who  had  been  in  the  car  with  the  Kennedy’s  and  her
husband John Connolly on the day of the assassination, articulated the hope that ‘the
legacy of John F. Kennedy will inspire [future generations of Americans] to reach for
greatness in their own lives’ (Exhibition Sixth Floor Museum). An idiom of shame
and  guilt  was  now  shunned  and  replaced  by  one  of  optimism.  The  need  to  beg  for
forgiveness was no longer felt so ardently. The credo had become: ‘Step into Dealey
Plaza,  and  you  feel  you  are  on  sacred  ground…  This  is  the  necessary  pilgrimage’
(Exhibition Sixth Floor Museum).

From  a  situation  in  which  the  people  of  Dallas  were  more  or  less  ousted,  or
believed themselves to be ousted, from the nation by fellow Americans – unworthy to
be called Americans, even – they now harboured a piece of sacrosanct American soil.
The brochure of the Sixth Floor Museum carries the caption: ‘the Sixth Floor Museum
at Dealey Plaza. Where history was made. Have you visited?’; the museum’s introduc-
tory  book  speaks  of  ‘this  sacred  ground’  (Hunt  1997,  p.  6).  The  pendulum  swing
between ‘amnesia’ and ‘identification’ that is said to characterise the general response
to dissonant or traumatic heritage, had now firmly swung from the former to the latter.
‘The  deaths  that  structure  the  nation’s  biography  are  of  a  special  kind’,  Benedict
Anderson (1991) wrote in his famous Imagined communities; ‘to serve the narrative
purpose,  these  violent  deaths  must  be  remembered/forgotten  as  “our  own”’.  Dallas
‘owned’ Kennedy’s death, and whilst that ownership had been a burden for decades –
endemic of a specific Dallas’ biography and identity – this ownership now became an
asset. In 1993, it suddenly sounded: ‘Dealey Plaza has become a new source of pride
for  the  city  and  serves  just  as  G.B.  Dealey  envisioned  it  –  as  the  “Front  Door  of
Dallas”’.7

The location of the 1993 plaque, in this respect, is interesting. Set right within the
New Deal memorial celebrating Dallas’ birthplace, visitors often mistake the obelisk,
pools  and  colonnades  that  form  a  part  of  the  New  Deal  projects  for  the  John  F.
Kennedy memorial. The two monuments, and hence the two moments in history they
refer  to,  have  almost  become  amalgamated.  A  near  fusion  of  both  memorials  and
historical events is also suggested by the two structures facing each other one block
away on either side of Main Street, west of North Market Street: John Neely Bryan’s
log cabin vis-à-vis Philip Johnson Kennedy Memorial. As said, the latter is believed
to resemble the former and both occupying an almost empty square, the monuments
emerge as virtual mirror images. An amalgamation is also hinted at by the discovery,
during the construction of the Sixth Floor Museum, of John Neely Bryan’s cornfield.
The museum itself seems equally hybrid: this history museum is at the same time an
identity museum, which serves as a template for the presentation and communication
to the public of national traumas.

A  further  analysis  of  the  site,  however,  raises  the  question  whether  one  should
not,  rather  than  of  amalgamation,  speak  of  the  birthplace  being  encroached  upon,
intruded  or  contaminated  by  the  memorials  commemorating  John  F.  Kennedy.
Situated right in the heart of the New Deal memorial celebrating Dallas’ birthplace,

402

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

the  1993  Kennedy  plaques  dwarf  the  former  monument  on  account  of  the  much
greater  appeal  of  John  F.  Kennedy.  Hardly  anybody  pays  any  heed  to  the  1930s
monument commemorating the city’s foundation; all attention is geared towards the
1990s addition celebrating the former president. Moreover, John Neely Bryan’s lodge
– regarded either as the very first house in Dallas or as a replica of this house imbued
with symbolic value – was moved from what was taken to be its original location in
the 1930s and where it had been since, in order to make room for Philip Johnson’s
cenotaph. The Sixth Floor Museum, lastly, a world famous museum, overshadows the
neighbouring Old Red Museum of Dallas County History and Culture, housed in the
former courthouse.

The origin myth which is usually so important for the identity of a nation or a city
community,  and  which  was  orchestrated  so  carefully  in  Dallas  in  the  years  before
World War II, has been supplanted by this other, much later, memory. The death of
John F. Kennedy at the hands of Lee Harvey Oswald bequeathed Dallas with a new
Stunde nul: to be a Dallasite is related more to what happened to a president in 1963
than with the city’s birth through the arrival in the early 1840s of a first settler on the
Trinity riverbank. In short, to be an American as well as a Dallasite, is to visit Dealey
Plaza.

Conclusion
For  almost  half  a  century  now,  Dallas  has  been  struggling  with  the  controversy  of
having to address a site that has served both as ‘cradle’ and ‘grave’; a historic place
where Dallas was born and an American president died. Today, Dealey Plaza signals
the death of John F. Kennedy more than its status as the birthplace of the city. The
1930s memorial of Dallas’ origins – not surprisingly conceived the moment one of the
strongest signifiers of that origin, the Trinity River, had disappeared from the site – is
impeded upon by the commemoration of John F. Kennedy.

The assassination of President Kennedy on 22 November 1963, changed the site
from a symbol of civic pride into a place of shame and guilt that the Dallas community
wished to wipe from their city. At the same time, America grieved collectively and
millions of people visited the assassination site. It was these millions of visitors, not
the Dallas community, who turned Dealey Plaza into a site of commemoration.

R.S. Peckham (2003, p. 205) notes that heritage manages a loss and ‘functions as
a  cornerstone  in  the  construction  of  national  identities’.  The  same  is  true  for  local
identities. Heritage is often as much concerned with remembrance as with the act of
forgetting and even though Dallasites initially wished to forget, rather than to identify
with the tragedy of 1963, ‘traumatic events in the past can become so deeply imprinted
on  a  group’s  collective  memory  that  they  become  an  indelible  part  of  its  identity’
(Peckham 2003, p. 212). Guilt and shame played a lesser role in later decades, as was
evident from the opening of the Sixth Floor Museum in 1987, the 1993 commemora-
tion  on  Dealey  Plaza  of  Kennedy’s  assassination,  and  from  the  2001  exhibition  in
response  to  11  September.  Dealey  Plaza,  from  a  murder  scene,  became  a  ‘site  of
mourning’, and then ‘a site of pilgrimage’. As such, it came to serve, rather than to
blemish,  the  American  landscape  and  an  American  as  well  as  a  Dallas  identity
(Peckham  2003,  p.  212).  Dealey  Plaza  is  now  a  ‘National  Landmark’,  an  inclusive
rather than an exclusive American ‘destination’; a destination wherein an American
flag, albeit a flag sticking out of the rubble of the World Trade Centre, is no longer
incongruous.



 403

Notes
1. See  the  developments  as  regards  the  National  Sept.  11  Memorial  &  Museum:  http://
www.national911memorial.org/site/PageServer?pagename=New_Home 
[Accessed  21
April  2010];  note  also  the  exhibition  at  Smithsonian  (until  2006),  titled  ‘September  11:
Bearing  Witness  to  History’,  http://americanhistory.si.edu/september11  [Accessed  21
April 2010]; the exhibition at the Library of Congress ‘Witness and Response: September
11  Acquisitions  at  the  Library  of  Congress’,  http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/911/911-over-
view.html [Accessed 21 April 2010].

2. The uncertainty surrounding the origin of the city’s name has been taken to be indicative

of the ambivalence of Dallasites towards their past.
In 1898, a five-storey warehouse was built on the northwest corner of Elm Street and Hous-
ton Street. It was destroyed by fire in 1901, after which the same company built again on
the same location. It was this building that was the later Texas School Book Depository.

4. The WPA Dallas guide and history (Saxon and Holmes 1992), published in the 1940s, is

3.

one of the first guides to celebrate the plaza as a tourist site.

5. To name but a few of the projects: the Dallas Zoo, a park system and the Dallas Guide.
6. See  http://www.jfk.org/go/exhibits/dealey-plaza/change-of-focus  [Accessed  13  January

7. See  http://www.jfk.org/go/exhibits/dealey-plaza/reconciliation  [Accessed  13  January

2010].

2010]).

Notes on contributors
Hanneke  Ronnes,  lecturer  at  the  University  of  Amsterdam  in  the  department  of  European
cultural history, studied social and economic history, cultural anthropology, and post-medieval
archaeology.  Her  PhD  thesis  titled,  Architecture  and  elite  culture  in  the  united  provinces,
England and Ireland, 1500-1700, was published by Pallas, Amsterdam University Press (2006).

Anna Meijer van Putten holds a BA in cultural studies (2008) and an MA in cultural history
(2010) from the University of Amsterdam. Her MA thesis examines the role of Dutch heritage
in New York’s urban culture and identity around 1900. She currently works as a researcher in
the field of media.

References
Abbott, A., 2003. Dealey Plaza: birthplace, pride and shame of Dallas. American History, 38

Anderson,  B.,  1991.  Imagined  communities.  Reflections  on  the  origin  and  spread  of

(5), 24–29, 74–76.

nationalism. 2nd ed. London: Verso.

Ashworth, G.J., 2002. Holocaust tourism: the experience of Kraków-Kazimierz. International

Research in Geographical and Environmental Education, 11 (4), 363–367.

Biles, R., 1994. The South and the New Deal. Kentucky: Kentucky University Press.
Cox, P., 2005. The first Texas news barons. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Dallek, R., 2003. An unfinished life: John F. Kennedy, 1917-1963. Boston: Little, Brown and

Company.

90 (1), 191–192.

House Publishers.

Deen, R.E., 2003. Loss and renewal: transforming tragic sites. Journal of American History,

Federal  Writers’  Project,  1940.  Texas:  a  guide  to  the  Lone  Star  State.  New  York:  Hastings

Gardner,  J.E.  and  Henry,  S.M.,  2002.  September  11  and  the  mourning  after:  reflections  on

collecting and interpreting the history of tragedy. The Public Historian, 24 (3), 37–52.

Hill, P.E., 1996. Dallas: the making of a modern city. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Historic Landmark Preservation Committee, 1975. Dallas historic landmarks survey.
Historic Landmark Preservation Committee, 1981. Dallas historic preservation plan.
Historic Landmark Preservation Committee, 1987–1988. Dallas historic preservation plan.
Holtorf,  C.  and  Williams,  H.,  2006.  Landscape  and  memories.  In:  D.  Hicks  and  M.C.
Beaudry,  eds.  The  Cambridge  companion  to  historical  archaeology.  Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 235–254.

404

 H. Ronnes and A. Meijer van Putten

Hunt, C., 1997. Dealey Plaza: National Historic Landmark. Dallas: The Sixth Floor Museum.
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett,  B.,  1998.  Destination  culture:  tourism,  museums,  and  heritage.

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Leighninger  Jr.,  R.D.  Long-range  public  investment:  the  forgotten  legacy  of  the  New  Deal.

Columbia: University of South Carolina, 2007.

Maraniss, D., 1998. In Dallas, the lingering trauma. Washington Post, 22 November, p. 1.
Peckham, R.S., 2003. Mourning heritage: memory, trauma and restitution. In: R.S. Peckham,

ed. Rethinking heritage. Cultures and politics in Europe. London: I.B. Taurus, 205–215.

Pennebaker,  J.W.  and  Banasik,  B.L.,  1997.  On  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  collective
memories: history as social psychology. In: J.W. Pennebaker, D. Paez and B. Rimé, eds.
Collective  memory  of  political  events:  social  psychological  perspectives.  New  Jersey:
Mahwah, 3–20.

Philips,  M.,  2006.  White  metropolis.  Race,  ethnicity,  and  religion  in  Dallas,  1841–2001.

Austin: University of Texas Press.

Rubin, D., 1990. Little house on the plaza. Texas Monthly, no. 7, 40–45.
Sanders, B.S., 1981. The forgotten history of the four cabins built by John Neely Bryan and
the  true  history  of  the  little  cabin  on  our  courthouse  square.  Dallas:  Barrot  Steven
Sanders.

Saxon, G.D. and Holmes M., 1992 [originally written in the 1930s]. The WPA Dallas guide

and history. Denton: University of North Texas Press.

Sixth Floor Museum, 2000. The rededication of the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial. June

24, 2000. Dallas: The Sixth Floor Museum.

Sneed,  L.A.,  2002.  No  more  silence:  an  oral  history  of  the  assassination  of  President

Kennedy. Denton: University of North Texas Press.

Taylor, N., 2008. American made: The enduring legacy of the WPA when FDR put the nation

Tunbridge, J.E. and Ashworth, G.J., 1996. Dissonant heritage: the management of the past as

to work. New York: Random House.

a resource in conflict. Chichester: Wiley.

Urry, J., 2002. The tourist gaze. 2nd ed. London: Sage Publications.
Veselka,  R.E.  and  Foote  K.E.,  2000.  The  courthouse  square  in  Texas.  Austin:  Texas

University Press.

York  Enstam,  E.,  1981.  Opportunities  versus  propriety:  the  life  and  career  of  frontier

matriarch Sarah Horton Cockrell. Frontiers, 6 (3), 106–114.


