International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Community-based Heritage Management: a case
study and agenda for research

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

To cite this article: Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson (2000) Community-based Heritage
Management: a case study and agenda for research, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 6:3,
231-243, DOI: 10.1080/13527250050148214
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250050148214

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 735

Citing articles: 15 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 231± 243

Community-based Heritage
Management: a case study and
agenda for research
Andrew Hodges and Steve Watson

Abstract
Heritage  sites  regarded  as  important  are  safely  managed  by  the  state,  voluntary  or
private sectors but the majority of sites, despite statutory  protection, remain unrecognised
and  without a  role  in  their  host communities.  New schemes  such  as  the  Local Heritage
Initiative in the UK  aim to encourage communities  to recognise their heritage assets and
in managing them effectively to contribute to their preservation. With reference to the case
of Nether Poppleton near York (UK), the present study explores the factors and conditions
for  effective  community  management  displayed  in  one  locality  by  groups  who  are
successfully  conserving and managing a diverse set of local heritage sites.  Interviews and
joint  tasks  enabled  an  analysis  of  the  complex  range  of  factors  and  conditions  that  can
lead to a successful  community-based initiative. Future research will determine the extent
to  which  these  factors,  if  applied  to  other  sites,  might  produce  the  same  results.  The
importance of this agenda is underscored  by the increasing reliance on community-based
heritage  management  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere.

Key  Words:  Community;  Local  Heritage  Initiative;  Heritage  Management;
Research;  United  Kingdom

Responsibility for the management of  heritage sites is increasingly problematic in
the UK. The mixed economy of  access to  heritage  which has developed over the
last  century  has  resulted in  a  selective  presentation of  sites  based  essentially  on
their qualities as  visitor attractions or their importance as  determined by  experts
and  professionals  in  archaeology,  conservation,  architectural  history  and  related
disciplines.

The voluntary charitable sector in the  UK  has  a long and active  history in the
care of important buildings and monuments and the provision of access to them.
Perhaps  best  exemplified  by  the  National Trust,  however,  coverage  is  limited  to
the  more significant  buildings and  landscapes that  have,  by  happenstance, come
their  way.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/00/030231-13   2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd

The role of the state has been, primarily, to ensure that heritage is allocated a level
of  resources commensurate with  the  priority attached  to  it  by  society,1 and  that
public access is provided to important sites in state ownership.2

The  private  sector,  often  in  the  form  of  hereditary  ownership,  has  made  a
substantial contribution to the preservation of historic country houses. Nearly half
of the 2,013 non-ecclesiastical historic buildings and monuments open to the public
in  1997  were  privately  owned.3 The  private  sector’s  concern  with  business
objectives, however, is clearly paramount.

Inevitably, therefore, the imperatives and constraints described above have left the
vast  majority  of  smaller  and  nationally  less  significant  sites  and  monuments
unregarded by  a wider public and often unrecognised by the communities in the
midst  of  which  they  are  situated. As Ashworth  has  stated:  `All  heritage  involves
choice from a wide range of pasts, many of which will not be selected.’ 4 For much
the same reason there has, until relatively recently, been a failure to consider the role
of heritage in community life and its potential role in community development and
cultural identity.

Related to the low value attached to local and less important sites and buildings
is a tendency for communities to be detached from their local history. Furthermore,
the  oral  traditions  and  local  knowledge  that  once  supported a  sense  of  place and
which were often attached to specific sites and monuments, have been eroded by the
socio-economic and demographic discontinuities which have occurred in both rural
and urban communities over the last fifty  years. Walsh has provided a compelling
analysis of the processes that  have led to this detachment or dislocation: `What  is
necessary  is  a  rearticulation  of  discourses  based  on  the  locality,  a  manageable
context which permits the development of democratic discourse.’ 5

The  Local  Heritage  Initiative  (LHI)  recently  established  in  the  UK  seeks  to
address this  problem  with  grants  for  community-based initiatives  from  National
Lottery  funds: `Many  ordinary  landscape  features  don’t  have  a  special ª heritage
labelº  but provide the context for nationally recognised heritage, and often have as
much,  if  not  greater,  significance  to  people,  particularly  local  people.’ 6 For  the

1. Department of National Heritage and the Welsh Office, Protecting  our heritage: a consultation
document  on the built heritage of England  and Wales, 1996.

2. P.  Johnson  & B. Thomas, `Heritage as business’ see Walsh (note 5), in D.T. Herbert (ed.) Heritage
tourism and society, London: Pinter, 1995, pp.  170± 190.

3. English Heritage & the English Tourist Board, English Heritage Monitor, London: BTA/ETB
Research Services, 1997, p. 31.

4. G.J. Ashworth, `From history to heritage Ð
models’ , in G.J. Ashworth & P.J. Larkham (eds), Building  a new heritage: tourism culture  and identity  in
the new Europe, London: Routledge, 1994, pp.  13± 30.

in search of concepts and

from heritage to identityÐ

5. K. Walsh, The representation  of the past: museums and heritage in the post-modern world, London:
Routledge, 1992, p. 3.

6. Countryside Commission,  Local Heritage Initiative, Information Pack, 1997.

232

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

reasons given above, however, the extent to which local features are significant to
local people is problematic. It is important, therefore, to identify the factors which
are associated with the widely acknowledged desire of some communities to create
a  local  heritage  and thus  to  aid their development both  in cultural, and in some
cases, economic terms.7

Such movements are especially significant where the  actions of  individuals and
communities  indicate  an  expressed  need  to  restore  lost  connections  between
community,  place  and  past  or  to  adopt  new  ones.  Where  they  do  occur
developments of this kind would tend to support the assumption of the LHI, that
local communities can both recognise and value the sites which are local to them
and, with some initial funding, become actively involved in their long-term care and
management. An earlier government initiative Rural Action for the Environment was
predicated  on  such  community  involvement  and  Common  Ground,  a  small  but
apparently influential organisation based on the principle of local distinctiveness also
encourages this type of approach.

Existing literature ranges from discussions of community involvement in heritage
`projects’   to  the  scope  for  communities to  originate  a  process  of  recognition  or
adoption  that  might  lead  to  a  real  sense  of  ownership.  In  the  former,  heritage
professionals may tend to regard host communities at best as a resource from which
to draw support for their activities and priorities and, at  worst, an obstacle to the
same.

For Walsh,  the  past,  its  continuities and  discontinuities and  the  ways  in which
communities respond to these are central to any understanding of the development
of a sense of place. `Places are not just those localities in which people reside today,
they are also areas within which exist traces of past places which are now redundant.
Developing  a  sense  of  place  also  means  understanding how  previous  settlement
patterns in the locality have changed: how they may have expanded, contracted or
have even been deserted.’ 8

Hall & McArthur9 identify techniques for engaging community involvement and
consultation and the resolution of any conflict which may result from the process.
Taking it a step further, Binks10 identifies a role for the professional interpreter, not
just in provision for tourists but also for local communities with visitor attractions
in their midst. She proposes that `.  . . the common ground where interpretation and
community development meets is in a concern to create or enhance a sense of place,
to  establish  what  is  significant  and  valued  in  the  environment  or  heritage  of  a

7. For a recent analysis see E. Stewart & V. Kirby, `Interpretive evaluation:  towards a place approach’,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1998, pp. 30± 44.

8. Walsh, op. cit., p.  156.

9. C.M. Hall & S. McArthur, Integrated  heritage management,  London: HMSO, 1998.

10. G. Binks, `Interpreters in the community:  a discussion paper’ , in D.L. Uzzell (ed.), Heritage
interpretation, Vol. 1, The natural and built environment, London: The Bellhaven Press, 1989,
pp.  190± 200.

Community-based Heritage Management

233

particular  community,  and  to  provoke  action  for  its  wider  appreciation  and
conservation’ .11

Walsh  argues  that  museums  have  a  role  in  facilitating  engagement  between
communities and the places they occupy, and proposes that public service agencies
in the UK might adapt the eco-museum concept developed by RiviÁere in France,
from Scandinavian models.1 2

Russell has provided a useful survey of Australian thinking and experience in this
area and proposes an approach to heritage  that  is both community based and an
expression of cultural and economic development.

Some of the key ingredients are a concern for the community and its well-being,
particularly as determined by the members themselves; concern for the total
environment, including cultural heritage, with a recognition that it plays a strong role in
defining the community; and an exploration of ways  in which local heritage can be used
constructively in shaping the future.1 3

Russell’s  `social  and  environmental  relations  heritage  model’   advocates  the
integration of cultural development with the goals of conservation and provides a
useful starting point for the present research.

The influence of communities of place is, however, not easy to define and their
activities  are  often  difficult  to  analyse  and  interpret.  Much  has  been  expressed
through other agencies, often local authorities, whose activities might be assumed to
be an expression of local interest. However, the activities of local, community-based
groups are of increasing significance, not least because of the budgetary pressure on
official agencies and the consequent selectivity of their support in this area.

The omens, generally speaking, however, are not good. An obliviousness to local
heritage sites seems to be the norm in host communities, rather than a clamorous
desire to protect and preserve such assets. The authors are aware of the extensive
remains of a medieval castle in North Yorkshire, UK, which seem to be invisible to
residents of  the  village  beside which it  is situated. As Martin has  pointed out, in
relation to the Rural Action Initiative, the engagement of local communities remains
problematic.14 Even  when  such initiatives  are  aided by  professional involvement,
Binks  has  stressed the  need  for  training  the  individuals concerned.1 5 Before  we
speak,  therefore,  of  partnerships  and  of  locally  based  management  initiatives  it

11. Ibid., p.  191.

12. Walsh, op. cit., pp.  160± 175.

13. J. Russell, `Towards more inclusive, vital models of heritage: an Australian perspective’,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 3, No.  2, 1997, p. 78.

14. S. Martin, `Partnerships for local environmental action: observations on the first two years of
Rural Action for the Environment’, Journal of Environmental  Planning  and Management, Vol. 38,
No.  2, 1995, pp.  149± 165.

15. Binks, op. cit., pp.  198± 199.

234

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

would seem prudent to  pose some very fundamental questions about  the  factors
that  might  enable  communities,  firstly,  to  recognise  their  local  heritage  and,
secondly, to take practical responsibility for their long-term care.

This  is  not  to  take  a  pessimistic  view,  but  simply  to  acknowledge  that  the
dynamics and, therefore, potential of such activity within communities are not yet
well  understood. As  a  step  in  the  development  of  such  knowledge,  the  present
research has sought to identify the various factors and conditions which make for
successful and concerted community activity in the field of heritage management.
Management of the sites involved will generally fall outside the direct purview of
agencies in the public and private sectors, and the charitable sector as it is currently
constituted. The findings of this and future research are intended, therefore, to be
of  benefit  to  those  agencies  that  are  given  or  that  assume  the  responsibility  of
enabling  local  communities  to  take  responsibility  for  the  long-term  care  and
management of heritage sites.

Methodology
A  number  of  community-based projects  was  considered and  one  was  identified
which  has  been  exceptionally  active  and  successful  in  recognising  and  taking
responsibility for  elements of its local heritage. One case does not a theory make
but, by examining it in detail, those factors might be isolated and identified which,
if  applied elsewhere, might  produce the same level of success and thus provide a
speculative agenda for further research.

The case was selected because it exhibited an apparently high level of successful
community  action  dedicated  to  local  heritage  conservation  and  management.
Regular local press reporting of the various activities and the award of a substantial
grant from the National Heritage Lottery Fund to one of the organisations within
the  community  provided the  initial  evidence  that  something  of  significance  had
occurred there.

Having  selected the  site, key  individuals were identified and contacted. At this
stage informal exploratory discussions were held in order to evaluate the potential
for  further study  and  whether  the  site  was  indeed likely  to  provide material that
could be used to address the research objectives. Site visits and loosely structured
interviews were then carried out, usually on a group basis. The material from these
was combined with follow-up verbal and written communications, which helped to
reinforce, elucidate and clarify issues that had emerged during the interviews.

In return (and this  is always  important)  the  authors, with  the  support of  their
university-based research group, contributed advice and material  support for the
project that included carrying out various scientific tests and surveys on site.

Case Study: Nether Poppleton
Nether Poppleton, with its sister village Upper Poppleton, is sited on the outskirts
of the City of York and, since 1995, lies within the administrative boundaries of the
latter.  The  population  of  the  two  parishes  is  around  4,000.  Much  community
activity  is common to  both  parishes although  they  have  separate  parish  councils.

Community-based Heritage Management

235

Figure 1. The Manor Farm site at Nether Poppleton,  near York.

There is a strong sense of community in the village, as evidenced by the amount of
activity in a very large number of spheres including sports and social organisations
and, not least, various groups concerned with the village’s history and heritage.

For the most part, the history of the village is similar to that of others in the area
with  one  or  two  interesting  distinguishing  features.  It  is  probably  of  Saxon
foundation but the unusual dedication of the church (see below) to Saint Everilda,
a Saxon princess who is believed to have set up a nunnery near York, suggests that
it may have been a site of particular significance at that time.

Nether Poppleton also figures in the English Civil War from its connection with
Prince  Rupert  whose  forces  crossed  the  River  Ouse  at  Nether  Poppleton  and
reputedly used the tithebarn (see below) prior to the fateful battle of Marston Moor
in 1644. The colour that all of this adds to the history of the village is celebrated
keenly by its residents.

The Manor Farm Site
The main historic sites and buildings in the village are centred around the Manor
Farm. In this small area are located the key resources of the village’s heritage:

236

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

The moated site: adjacent to the river is the site of the medieval manor with massive
earthworks but no other structural remains.

The  parish  church:  a  small  but  interesting  church  with  indications  of  an  early
foundation and of having once been much larger.

The present manor house and dovecote: in private ownership, buildings of obvious age
and interest which have replaced the moated area as the main manorial residence at
some stage in the history of the site.

The tithebarn: a barn where that portion of the village’s agricultural produce which
was collected for the support of the church and clergy was collected and stored. The
present  building  dates  from  1543  and  has  connections  with  English  Civil  War
events.

The cartshed: a small 19th-century brick structure restored in 1996 through the work
of a local village trust.

The pond and wildlife area: a small heavily silted former farm pond with surrounding
rough grassland. Both are receiving active management.

Findings
The  factors  identified  in  the  research  are  outlined  below  and  can  be  grouped
immediately into those relating to the community, those which are characteristic of the
site itself and those concerning the way the community has organised itself to achieve

Figure  2. Surveying the moated site.

Community-based Heritage Management

237

Figure 3. Restoring the tithebarn.

objectives related to the site. Most of these factors are dynamic within themselves (that
is  they  have  experienced or  are  subject  to  change  of  various  kinds)  and  they  are
dynamic in relation to each other, in that they have interacted or are susceptible to
interaction in  various  ways. These dynamics have  defined the  nature  and  level  of
community organisation around heritage objectives at Nether Poppleton.

Community Factors
Critical mass. A key characteristic of the community has been the achievement of
a  kind  of  critical  mass expressed  through  a  well-developed  interconnected
organisational infrastructure, or network. Clearly this had not happened by accident
and the dynamics that  produced it are analysed below. In effect it meant that  the
community could generate a broad basis of support for its objectives. In association
with appropriate organisational and management skills this resource could be used
to generate further support, to allocate tasks effectively and to contain and deploy
a broad range of skills and capabilities within the various groupings which comprise
the network. Some informants felt that the size of the two villages acting jointly was
an important factor in this.

Existing  organisations. Two  of  the  village’s  `permanent’   organisations, the  parish
councils and the parochial church council, which provides a lay governance function
for the running of the church, were successfully approached to lend their support.
This was important, because of their political influence and the perceived gravitas
they would lend to the project. The support of Nether Poppleton parish council was
particularly vital  as  it  eventually came to  own  the  cartshed, wildlife area  and the
scheduled ancient monument containing the moated site as well as associated open
space with amenity value. The issue of ownership is discussed in more detail below.

238

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

Socio-demographic  profile. The  village  shows  many  of  the  characteristics of  rural
villages on urban fringes. There are early retired people who often seek the kinds of
activities associated with voluntary organisations. They are also representative of that
relatively well-off group which provides a ready market for the heritage industry16 and
it is likely that in such a location the skills and networks of a range of professional
people can be deployed ±  more so than in the average small business.

Ownership. The parish council eventually came to own the moated site and other
land of amenity value associated with the site. Ownership is probably critical but its
significance  is  slightly  underplayed  in  this  case  because  of  the  circumstances
surrounding it.  Of  particular interest is  whether  private  ownership of  a  site is an
impediment to effective community management. It should not strictly be so, but
there is a psychology of ownership as well as a legally defined status. If a site belongs to
an individual then social conditioning renders community activity in respect of it as
somehow inappropriate. Community ownership in this  case may  well  be  a  major
factor in the success of the project, but this would need to be tested in other sites.

Site Factors
The site. Obviously a prime factor was the site itself, and its particular richness and
diversity: four listed buildings, an ancient monument and a small natural area. Each
one of the component parts is clearly visible and of interest but the fact that they
form an integrated whole in a  clearly defined area  of  the  village  has  clearly been
advantageous in terms of the arguments for preservation and the development of the
project overall.

Threat and cause. Another factor was the threat of destruction. This occurred as a
result of the retirement of the tenant farmer and the subsequent break-up and sale
of the farm which was owned by the county council. A housing development was
planned on part of the site and it was this threat to its preservation, which provided
the initial cause.

Organisation and Management
Leadership. A preservation group was established and a public meeting indicated
widespread support throughout the community. This in turn enabled the steering
group to develop a network of contacts and communication within the village and
to  make  contact  with  external  agencies  and  potential  sources  of  funding. The
steering group consisted of ten to twelve people but could be confident of drawing
on  the  support  of  a  much  greater  number  of  interested  and  well-motivated
individuals depending on what was required to be done.

16. Johnson & Thomas,  op. cit., p. 179; D. Light & R.C. Prentice, `Who  consumes the heritage
product?’ , in G.J. Ashworth & P.J. Larkham (eds), Building  a new heritage: tourism culture  and identity
in the new Europe, London: Routledge, 1994, pp.  90± 116; N. Merriman, `Museum visiting as a
cultural phenomenon’ , in P. Vergo, The New Museology,  London: Reaktion Books, 1989, pp.  149± 171.

Community-based Heritage Management

239

The abilities of the key initiators have been crucial, however. Two or three people
have  been  instrumental  throughout,  and  have  provided  continuity,  drive  and
sensitive leadership. In this sense they are classic `social entrepreneurs’  of the sort
identified  by  Leadbeater,17 and  demonstrate  the  need  identified  by  Binks,  to
understand `. . . how communities work, how they are structured, how groups relate
to one another, recognising leaders, key individuals and policy formers’ .18

Managerial competence. Beyond leadership skills,  the  key  individuals involved  in
the project have at all stages shown a high level of managerial competence. One of
these people made the following observations which demonstrate the level of skill
involved  both  strategically  and  in  respect  of  human  resource  management  and
communications.

A first essential for preserving the Manor Farm area was to have enough people with vision
to see what could be achieved and to see it as a unity. What happened to the individual
parts had to be compatible with the area and not jar or conflict. A realistic approach was
important ±  each part of the area had to be financially viable. If one part failed, the special
character of the area would suffer and put the whole area at risk once again . . . Delegation
of jobs was important so that each member was actively involved and the workload was
shared (most members were still working). Each member had a useful part to play,
contributing in different ways to move the project forward . . . Communication, reporting
back, keeping the wider support group informed is very necessary.

The  individuals  and  organisations  have  also  shown  admirable  attention  to  the
thorny issue of fund raising, culminating in the award of a substantial grant from the
National Heritage Lottery Fund for the renovation of the tithebarn. A characteristic
of each of the organisations involved was that they were aware of all the sources of
funding for which they might be eligible. They had made themselves fund-raising
experts, another facet of their managerial skill.

There is no doubt that these skills and competencies will be tested to the full in
the future when the moated site and the soon-to-be-restored tithebarn have to be
managerially and financially viable as amenities for the village as well as representing
heritage  to  be  preserved.  Heritage  is  thus  transformed  into  an  asset  for  the
community through the application of appropriate managerial modalities.

Consensus. While  it  is  clear  that  no  major  conflicts have  taken  place  within  the
community over the life of the project and that there have been no opposing camps
in favour of the housing development, for example, the leaders have been sensitive
to the fact that  not every member of the community is wholly supportive. As one
informant put it: `promotion has to be done tactfully. It is important to recognise
that not everyone supports a project. On the other hand, if information is available,

17. C. Leadbeater, The rise of the social entrepreneur, London: Demos, 1997.

18. Binks, op. cit., p.  198.

240

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

at  least everyone has the chance to understand what  we are trying to achieve and
why. Tolerance is next best to support.’

Expressed interest in heritage. A village history society had been established some years
earlier by two people who were to become closely involved in future organisational
developments. The prime aims of the group were to study local history and to become
active  in the conservation of the  village’s  heritage. The society sustained an  active
membership of about thirty with half-a-dozen or so acting as organisers.

Organisational  skills. The  preservation  group  became  adept  at  spawning new
groups to cover specific briefs or areas of interest as they emerged or where a threat
appeared.  The  Preservation  Group  thus  spawned  the  Wildlife  and  Cart  Shed
Groups. In the process they attracted new individuals interested specifically in these
areas of concern. Later, the Tithebarn Group was established as a separate charity
and  later  still  the  Moated  Site  Management  Group  was  formed  by  Nether
Poppleton parish council.

Such spawning has major advantages in that it:

creates focus; groups are not distracted by too many projects;
provides expertise ±  especially valuable when groups are new and vulnerable;
increases numbers involved ±  by providing varied opportunities; and
creates  organisational  infrastructure to  support  and  sustain  activity  ±   because
membership overlaps between groups.

Network management. Once critical mass had been achieved there was a realisation
that  some  overall  umbrella organisation  might  be  necessary for  co-ordination of
activities, to aid effective communication and to prevent or manage any problems or
differences between the groups. The original Preservation Group was expected to
become defunct, having spawned a range of more specifically focused groups, but it
now seems likely that it will take on a network management role. This is particularly
significant as effective network management and development were issues identified
by Martin as problematic in the Rural Action for the Environment programme.19 It
may be significant that the network at Poppleton was self-originated, even though it
has strong external linkages, sources of advice and latterly finance. It remains the
case that none of the key organisational elements has had to be `parachuted in’ .

Inclusiveness. The steering group has been at pains throughout the process to avoid
any suggestion of a clique and its desire to include as many people as possible is a
stated aim of the  project. Against this  was the  need to  have  people involved who
possessed the right kind and mix of skills to be able to make things happen. A key
informant explained `. . . we also invited others to join us in order to achieve a cross
section of interested parties in the preservation of the Manor Farm area and from

19. Martin, op. cit., p.  162.

Community-based Heritage Management

241

d
d
d
d
[both of the neighbouring villages]. It was very important not to become a clique
but  to  remain  always  open  to  new  steering  group  members.’  Thus,  anyone  who
expressed an interest and wanted to be involved was welcomed.

Effective  communication  with  members  of  the  community  was  important  in
developing a sense of inclusiveness. Hence, efforts have always been made to create
exhibitions, to publish material derived from the various activities and to produce
progress reports for circulation within the two villages.

Discussion
To summarise the attempt at structuring the factors listed above and the dynamics
associated with them, the following proposition is offered:

1. a particular community type, with specific attributes, in conjunction with
2. a  particular  heritage  site,  that  is  one  with  sufficient  interest  and  a  cause  for

concern, can stimulate

3. particular management skills within
4. an evolving organisational framework, to achieve
5. specific community-based heritage objectives.

The  validity  of  this  proposition can  be  tested  against  other  cases  then  used as  a
predictive  model to  gauge  the  potential  take-up  of  grant  aid  such  as  that  which
forms the basis of the Local Heritage Initiative. It will also indicate the conditions
that must be met in order to realise fully the potential of community management
and to address any conditional or managerial deficits.

This  survey  should  at  least  signal  caution  where  community-based  action  is
proposed as  a  way  forward  for  heritage,  for  its  own  sake  and  in  furtherance  of
community  development  objectives.  The  findings  support  Martin’s  misgivings
about  the  community-based  imperatives  of  Rural  Action  and  resonate  with  the
concerns of Binks, that even professional interpreters need specialist training to be
effective  within  community-based  projects.  If  heritage  professionals  need  to  be
developed and prepared in this  way  what  does it  imply for communities who are
suddenly expected to take on the role of heritage managers? In this sense it may be
that  the  socio-demographic aspects  will take  precedence. One thing  the  research
rapidly  brought  to  mind  was  Lowenthal’s  perceptive  analysis  of  the  role  of  the
motivated newcomer: `To compensate for their lack of local roots, newcomers to old
English  villages  may  take  keen  interest  in  the  local  past;  they  often  come  to
dominate  historical  and  preservation  societies,  as  militant  defenders  of  old
landmarks against bulldozers manned, likely as not, by unsentimental village old-
timers.20 It may also be the case that groups or `sociations’  vary considerably in their
degree of cohesiveness and level of organisation.21

20. D. Lowenthal, The past is a foreign countr y, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, p. 38.

21. For an account of recent thinking  in this area see J. Urry, `How societies remember the past’ , in
S. MacDonald & G. Fyfe (eds), Theorizing museums, London: Blackwell, 1996, pp.  45± 65.

242

Andrew Hodges & Steve Watson

While the Poppleton case study shows what can be achieved, it also indicates the
need for considerable skill on the part of those involved. Can as much confidence
be placed in the generality of communities who might be expected to respond to
heritage management initiatives?

Clearly there is much to be done both in tracking the factors outlined above in
future  developments  at  Nether  Poppleton  and  in  testing  them  at  other  sites.
However,  any  agency  which  seeks  to  place  the  responsibility  for  heritage
management on communities, or which seeks to enable communities to take such
responsibility, should be aware of  the factors which favour success. Furthermore,
the research raises the inevitable question of whether such factors are the norm.

If Nether Poppleton is an unusually `good’  site what does it mean for others which
do not share its  advantages? What  does it  imply in terms of the  external support
necessary to  enable  such  development and  would the  provision  of  such  support
constitute in reality a genuine community-led commitment? Again, such considera-
tions can at this stage only contribute to the agenda for further research. It will be
crucial, however,  to  address this  question if  the  move  towards  community-based
management is to become a reality.

On  a  more  positive  note,  even  from  this  limited  case  study,  there  are  clear
indications  that  heritage  initiatives  of  this  sort  can  bring  advantages  and
opportunities for  community development. Such potential  is  certainly  worthy  of
further investigation.  In  this  context  Russell’s  social  and  environmental relations
heritage  model  is  at  its  most  helpful  in  recognising the  possibility  of  a  dynamic
relationship between physical remains, the communities within which they exist and
their conservation as `heritage’  in order to support the development of those same
communities.

Conclusion
Further research will establish the extent to which these factors and the dynamics
associated with them can be applied at other locations in order to produce similar
results. At the  very  least,  it  will  build upon the  existing study  by  elucidating the
relative importance of the factors listed above and possibly adding new ones to the
list. It will also shed light on the processes by which communities of place come to
acquire their  heritage  and  the  part  this  plays  in  developing  a  sense of  place  and,
possibly, of community identity.

Further  research is  also  essential, however,  if  a  significant  investment  is  to  be
made  in  community-based  heritage  management  by  official  agencies.  How
communities come to recognise and adopt their heritage is a key issue. Another is
how they then contribute to the long-term management of sites and monuments.
Therein lies an agenda that is surely worthy of further attention, and which has an
essential part to play in the way that heritage resources of all kinds are viewed in the
future. 

Community-based Heritage Management

243


