International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Resonant Materiality and Violent Remembering:
Archaeology, Memory and Bombing

Gabriel Moshenska

To cite this article: Gabriel Moshenska (2009) Resonant Materiality and Violent Remembering:
Archaeology, Memory and Bombing, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 15:1, 44-56, DOI:
10.1080/13527250902746062
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250902746062

Published online: 12 Feb 2009.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 712

Citing articles: 18 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 44–56

Resonant Materiality and Violent 
Remembering: Archaeology, Memory 
and Bombing
Gabriel Moshenska

1510000002009
GabrielMoshenska
gmoshenska@yahoo.co.uk
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_374776.sgm
10.1080/13527250902746062
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2009Taylor & Francis

In this paper I outline the commemorative potential of a historical archaeology of aerial
bombing. As an affective and challenging archaeology-from-below it offers glimpses of indi-
viduality and everyday life amidst the violence of warfare, inscribing shattered buildings
and material culture as sites of memory. Firstly I examine the tropes and themes that link
archaeology, memory studies and the history of bombing, both in popular imaginations
and cultural representations. These include ruins, fragments, depth, wounding, and the
contrast between bottom-up and top-down views of the world. I then develop these themes
to highlight the tensions between historical and mnemonic narratives of aerial bombard-
ment, the importance of a human centred approach to the commemoration of warfare, and
the roles of oral history and archaeology in these processes. Finally I briefly discuss a case
study of bombsite archaeology and suggest a valuable application for this technique in the
discourses of memory and bombing in contemporary German society.

Keywords: Bombing; Commemoration; Fragments; Historical Archaeology; Ruins; War

Ruin and fragmentation have been amongst the most powerful and pervasive cultural
themes in Western society from at least the Romantic period onwards, serving as alle-
gories,  analogies  and  metaphors  for  a  wide  range  of  social,  cultural  and  natural
processes.1 In this paper I use ruins and fragments as organising concepts to explore
the connections between my principal research interests: archaeology, memory, and
bombing; specifically the commemorative potential of an archaeology of bombsites.

The aerial bombardment of civilian populations is one of the most powerful, iconic
and despicable innovations of the recent past. Bombing has played a central role in

Gabriel Moshenska, University College London. Correspondence to g.moshenska@ucl.ac.uk

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2009 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250902746062

International Journal of Heritage Studies

45

shaping the nature of warfare for almost a century, from the first bombs dropped by
Italian aircraft on Libya in 1911 to the annihilation of Hamburg and Tokyo and the
‘smart bombs’ of modern high-tech warfare.2 My interest in bombing is primarily an
archaeological one, studying bombsites, air-raid shelters, and crashed aircraft, as well
as  the  more  portable  material  culture  or  ephemera  of  civilian  life  in  wartime.  The
historical archaeology of these sites and materials leads inevitably to encounters with
first-hand memories of the war on the Home Front.

Aside from its revolutionary influence in the conduct of warfare, bombing has also
had an extraordinary impact on modern culture; the horror of death from the air and
the  gothic  desolation  of  bombsites  have  influenced  artists  and  writers  including
Picasso, Henry Moore and Virginia Woolf. The devastation of aerial bombing featured
in science fiction and dystopian visions of the future from as early as 1670. In the 1930s
the impersonal destructive potential of the aircraft became a powerful symbol of the
dehumanisation  of  technology  in  the  works  of  Lewis  Mumford,  Rex  Warner  and
others.3

Further reading in and around my three fields of research has left me entangled in a
web of symbolism and wordplay that links archaeology, memory and bombing in rich
and often unexpected ways. The roots of these metaphorical strands lie in the ambigu-
ities and opaque language of memory theory, the powerful trope of archaeology both
as  practice  and  material  record,  and  the  struggle  to  comprehend  and  describe  the
devastation  of  bombed  cities.  The  risks  of  over-interpretation  of  apparently  trivial
figures of speech have been highlighted by Holtorf, but as a technique for demarcating
a field of interest and potential value I will argue it can at least have a limited use.4
Moreover,  it  is  worth  exploring  the  possibility  that  analogies  and  metaphors  might
have a discursive as well as a descriptive role. This paper is an attempt to explore the
points of correspondence, opposition and friction between my three fields, highlight-
ing themes, particularly ruin and fragmentation, that might lead to a clearer under-
standing of the strengths and potential outcomes of an archaeology of bombing. In
examining these themes I have asked the question: in what ways might an archaeology
of bombing become an archaeology of the memory of bombing?

Archaeology/Memory—Into the Depths

People believe that a deep underlying ‘essence’, an unchanging reality from the past,
exists underneath the sedimented layers of history. But as they dig, the past becomes
a ghostlike presence.5

The use of archaeological metaphors for memory and other functions of the mind is a
familiar  one,  most  notably  in  the  works  of  Freud  and  Walter  Benjamin.  The  latter
outlined  his  somewhat  belaboured  analogy  in  his  very  short  essay  ‘Excavation  and
Memory’. Benjamin argues that memory 

is the medium of that which is experienced, just as the earth is the medium in which
ancient cities lie buried. He who seeks to approach his own buried past must conduct
himself like a man digging. Above all, he must not be afraid to return again and again
to the same matter: to scatter it as one scatters earth, to turn it over as one turns over soil.6

46 G. Moshenska

There are two key elements here: the memory/earth analogy, passive and natural, and
the ‘emblematic description of the rememberer as archaeologist’, active and purpose-
ful.  Wallace  traces  Benjamin’s  model  further,  attempting  to  link  the  reshaping  of
memory by the subconscious to taphonomic processes in the archaeological record.7
However, compared to Benjamin’s image of the excavator Wallace’s passive, naturalis-
tic analogy has more in common with Freud’s archaeologies of the mind.

Freud’s repeated use of archaeological analogies in his writings is striking. Kuspit has
suggested that this was partly a cynical pitch aimed at the public, associating the unpop-
ular practice of psychoanalysis with the highly popular one of archaeology.8 Ruins are
an  image  that  Freud  exploits  in  several  cases,  most  notably  his  comparison  of  the
subconscious  to  catacombs  in  a  ruined  city.  However,  this  comparison  is  not  so
successful: the processes of entropy at work in physical structures are the antithesis of
Freud’s  notion  of  burial,  in  which  objects  and  memories  survive,  concealed  but
complete: 

Freud’s example of the city of Rome highlights the limits of archaeological analogy for
the mind, for the city has crumbled and decayed over time whereas painful as memo-
ries do not … ‘only in such rare circumstances as those of Pompeii’, Freud wrote,
could the direct analogy be made between the ‘psychical object’ and the ‘archaeolog-
ical object’.9

Clearly human agency in the forms of preservation and restoration affects the uses of
ruins as sites of memory. Ruined buildings and cities are a powerful source of imagery
and metaphor in themselves, as the sections on bombing will demonstrate. But we need
not  dig  for  ruins;  they  confront  us.  In  the  Dora  case  Freud  compared  himself  to  a
‘conscientious archaeologist’, giving his cautious but informed interpretation of the
fragments of memories. The idea of fragmentation or atomisation of memory, both
individual and collective, is an important link between my diverse fields of interest:
‘The fragmentary nature of the archaeological find becomes a metaphor for the real
content of memory.’10 Similarly, the metaphor of burial used by Benjamin is better
served by Freud: 

Like the archaeologist, the analyst also relies upon the fact that his patient has actively
repressed or buried particular memories so that they have been preserved and can be
later studied … All of the essentials are preserved, even things that seem completely
forgotten are present somehow and somewhere, and have merely been buried and
made inaccessible to the subject.11

But  for  Freud  burial  is  not  an  inevitable  effect  of  nature,  and  here  as  elsewhere  the
analogy begins to break down. The concept of ‘resistance’, a crucial aspect of Freud’s
theories,  represents  an  active  unwillingness  to  remember,  and  operates  through  the
distortion or evasion of memories. Resistance must be actively maintained over time,
and Freud compares this to the building up of layers of stratigraphy above archaeolog-
ical remains.

What are the key themes in the metaphors and analogies of memory and archaeol-
ogy? The performativity of the archaeological process and the physicality of its findings
provide dynamic and material terms for abstract and invisible processes of memory, a
‘roadmap  of  melancholy  and  mourning’.12  In  the  works  of  W.G.  Sebald,  Remmler

International Journal of Heritage Studies

47

identifies ‘an archaeology of remembering that relies heavily on spatial metaphors and
the experience of place [in which] texts enact cultural memory through the metaphor-
ical excavation of sites of destruction, disaster, and atrocity.’13 Implicit in this uncanny
imagery of destruction, disturbance and penetration is the idea of remembering as a
dangerous and potentially damaging process. All of these elements must be taken into
account:  the  popular  perception  of  connections  between  archaeology  and  memory,
digging and remembering appear to have become a popular mythology; perhaps they
always have been. The archaeological process can be a process of remembering, and
potentially of forgetting.

Archaeology/Bombing—Vertical Aggression

Archaeology and war have an enduring and ambiguous relationship—both create in
the very act of destroying.14

In  comparison  to  memory,  bombing  is  not  normally  linked  with  archaeology  but  I
believe that there are equally interesting points of connection and contrast. Again the
most  important  themes  in  this  relationship  are  ruins  and  fragmentation,  and  I  will
outline some of the particular complexities of these themes in this comparison. In this
context the Allied bombing of Pompeii in 1943 acquires a darkly humorous element,
raining  destruction  down  on  the  hitherto  un-ruined  ruins  of  Freud’s  model  of
memory.15

The  comparison  of  the  ruins  of  a  bombed  city  with  archaeological  remains  is  an
obvious one, based on physical appearance but with deeper connotations of epic strug-
gle, fallen empires and dead civilisations. The need to familiarise or contextualise the
trauma of devastation is another powerful source for this analogy. The author W.G.
Sebald  examined  the  phenomenon  of  bombing  in  great  depth  in  his  extraordinary
work On the Natural History of Destruction, in which he considers the human face of
the bombing war in Germany, the physical destruction, and what he perceived to be the
inadequate  cultural  response.  Archaeological  imagery  is  a  central  theme  in  Sebald’s
analysis of bombing and of memory, as recognised by Remmler: 

Sebald’s writing employs archival and archaeological methodologies for remembering
atrocity and other forms of destruction by human hand that is bound to an allegorical
poetics of remembrance, even as it demands a turn towards a visceral and material
engagement with sites and objects of memory.16

To Sebald, ‘The empty facades of Hamburg look like triumphal arches, Roman ruins,
or stage sets for some fantastic opera’. But what about the future trajectory of these
ruins,  these  ‘bits  of  buildings,  cornices  of  churches,  shattered  pediments’?  Sebald
suggests that if, as was briefly considered by the allies, post-war Germany had been
reduced to a purely agrarian economy, the ruins of the cities might soon have been
covered by grass and woodland, leaving only lumps and bumps in the rolling land-
scape.17 This never came to pass: the rubble was cleared and the cities were rebuilt over
the ruins. In an extraordinary image of this process, taken from Peter de Mendelssohn’s
Die Kathedrale, Sebald describes the protagonist 

48 G. Moshenska

putting to sea in one of the great barges used to clear the ruins; as the rubble sinks into
the depths, he sees the whole city down on the sea bed, complete and undamaged,
another Atlantis. ‘All that was destroyed above is intact down here, and everything
that is left standing up above, in particular the cathedral, is not present down here’.18

This raises another curious analogy in bombing and archaeology: the contrasting views
from above and below, ‘the up–down division [which] is one of the central metaphors
we live by’.19 The archaeologist’s view of a bombsite, on a human scale that highlights
fragmented remains of domestic life, contrasts with the bombardier’s view: ‘“I didn’t
see much of the city at all as I recall”, says a British airman who participated in the raids
over  Dresden’.20  This  difference  in  perspective  has  important  connections  with
memory  work,  although  it  should  be  noted  that  both  the  archaeologist  and  the
bombardier destroy that which is the focus of their efforts.

The process of reconstruction in bombed cities is also a process of forgetting. Sebald
laments this eliding of memory, even as he raises the idea that bombsites might become
the archaeology of the future. In the present the burial of bombed ruins, their transfor-
mation into archaeological sites, is the antithesis of the grand, almost classical remains
on the surface: 

The  rebuilt  cities  leave  few  traces  of  their  previous  destruction,  even  as  practiced
archaeologists would have a heyday in uncovering the many-layered remnants, the
bones and the artifacts, forgotten or bulldozed into the ground. It is the remnants in
plain sight that interest Sebald’s narrators, just as archaeological metaphors inscribe
the work of memory.21

The fragmented remains of bombed homes and cities will inevitably be salvaged—for
materials by the forces of reconstruction, for meaning by the poets and artists stalking
the rubble, and for patterns and order by the archaeologists: ‘The project of salvage
means the cataloguing of specificity’.22 In contrast to the chaos and violence of bomb-
ing, the archaeologists uniquely bring order to the bombsites: even as the bombing of
London revealed some of its greatest archaeological treasures, the archaeologists’ work
preceded  and  heralded  the  work  of  reconstruction.  Rose  Macauley  described  the
process: ‘Excavators had begun their tentative work, uncovering foundations, seeking
the Middle Ages, the Dark Ages, Londinium, Rome … a civilised intelligence was at
work among the ruins’.23

But for some the impact of archaeology on ruins is a negative one, applying ‘civilised’
order where none ought to be, removing the innate aesthetic qualities of the ruins, their
romance. Woodward regards the archaeologists’ work on spectacular ruins, in restora-
tion and conservation, as a battle against the forces of nature. In doing so he raises the
important issue of perspective: today’s ruins, symbols of violence, dispossession and
death, will be the delightfully melancholy and evocative beauty spots to inspire future
generations  of  poets  and  artists,  ‘the  butchered  families  and  their  burnt  homes  …
mulched into a soil of delirious fertility’. After all, he argues, in the early modern period
‘the ruins of the eight hundred medieval abbeys which had been seized, plundered and
sold by Henry VIII … seemed as raw, bare and painfully explicable as bomb sites are to
the modern age’.24 An archaeology of remembering must acknowledge the necessity of
forgetting.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

49

Bombing/Memory—Trauma, Wounding and Resistance

New ruins are for a time stark and bare, vegetationless and creatureless; blackened and
torn, they smell of fire and mortality.25

Within the broad and diverse field of memory studies, memories of violent conflict
feature prominently: ‘Work on the memory of war has lain at the heart of the broader
memory project’.26 Bombing is by far the most common manifestation or experience
of war for the civilian populations of twentieth century Europe. Historian Horst Boog
argues that ‘Whenever Germans think of the Second World War, they mostly think of
the bombing war, because it affected them directly and left an enduring impression on
their minds’.27

Here  again  the  crucial  metaphor  is  the  up/down,  above/below  dichotomy,  which
connect  bombing  and  memory  twice  over;  both  in  the  physical  relationship  of  the
bombers  above  and  the  people  below,  and  in  the  disparities  between  history-from-
above and history-from-below. Compared to Portelli’s airman who ‘didn’t see much’
of Dresden, ‘those who, like rats, await their fate in the hole of the air-raid shelter, see
nothing of the majesty of war—if there is such a thing. Anguished waiting is their lot’.28
The idea of bombing as an irresistible force lasted far longer than the reality; never-
theless Stanley Baldwin’s warning that ‘the bomber will always get through’ struck a
chord with many.29 The idea of bombers as inhuman, even godlike in their power is a
common  theme  in  memories  of  war:  ‘There  is  a  fatalistic  perception  of  the  war  as
destiny,  of  the  bombs  as  a  “bolt”  from  above,  unleashed  by  an  invisible  hand’.30
However, Jörg Friedrich’s claim that ‘the Allies could feel like the gods, who hurl light-
ning bolts at the vileness of the enemy’ belies the appalling losses suffered by the Allied
air-forces.31 The air-crew’s view was somewhat different: Richard Hillary compared
fighter pilots like himself to duellists, but suggested that bomber crews were merely
satisfying a childish urge to smash things.32

This  contrast  of  gods  and  humans  in  bombing  emerges  from  the  same  powerful
above/below metaphor. Portelli makes a powerful argument that this metaphor tran-
scends the immediate experience of bombing, drawing in themes of science, rationality
and history: 

The top down, outside, emic view from above possesses a superior (literally, higher)
power to perceive the global context, the general picture. The bird’s eye or bomber’s
radar  view  of  the  world  sees  farther,  and  retains  the  wholesome  detachment,  the
capacity for abstraction, the rational ability to concentrate on the objective and the
relevant (the target) and dismiss the irrelevant … On the other hand, the lower, (liter-
ally, inferior) point of view is narrowly focused, irretrievably bound to the detail, to
the concrete—shall we say, down-to-earth, grassroots—immediacy of material expe-
rience, and is inevitably twisted into and limited by the personal, emotional identifi-
cation and involvement.33

Memory-based  work  is  best  placed  to  provide  a  link  between  these  two  histories  of
bombing:  the  official  history-from-above  of  bombing  surveys,  hectares  burnt,  dead
numbered in thousands, and the history-from-below of the ‘I was there’ experience.

Another  curious  feature  of  bombing  and  memory  is  the  use  of  terminology  of
wounding  and  injury  as  a  metaphor  for  bombing  and  destruction;  the  city  or  its

50 G. Moshenska

population as a human body or ‘body politic’ is itself a common enough analogy. The
physicality and visibility of these wounds presupposes a process of healing in which they
will  disappear;  presumably  as  the  visible  symbols  of  traumatic  memory  vanish  the
memories fade too. In contrast, bombsites and destroyed cities that are deliberately left
as ruins are often used as memorials, as symbols of a refusal to forget. Examples of
this include bombed churches in London and Portsmouth, and the town of Oradour-
sur-Glane in France.34 In societies where ruins are so readily accepted as symbols of
traumatic memory, archaeological work will inevitably be regarded as reopening old
wounds. As Holtorf observes, the archaeologist who explores beneath the ground is an
ambivalent figure: ‘revealing secret truths undoes the status quo and causes change’.35
In some cases reconstruction rather than redevelopment of bombed sites has been used
to  promote  amnesia  and  forgiveness;  the  most  famous  recent  example  being  the
Frauenkirche in Dresden rebuilt with funds partly donated from Britain and America.36
Bombed buildings are clearly a potent physical metaphor for memory. The themes
of ruin and ruins are powerful ones; ruins preserved, hidden, or rebuilt are never with-
out  meaning  and  intent  as  wounds  to  be  flaunted,  healed  or  left  to  become  scars.
Equally, the process of bombing provides an analogy for its own histories from above
and  below.  The  memory  of  the  people  on  the  ground  is  a  history-from-below;  the
narratives of war written by the victors take a top-down view in every sense. The power
of this metaphor forcefully outlined by Portelli cannot be underestimated, as it includes
a call to action: the memories of the bombarded people must become part of the histor-
ical discourse.

An Archaeology of the Memory of Bombing?

I have argued that the archaeological process is closely linked to memory and remem-
bering; that the relationship between archaeology and bombing is one of tension and
contradiction;  and  that  an  archaeology  of  bombing  will  be  a  difficult  and  painful
process. But can it be a productive one? As I asked at the start: what might an archae-
ology  of  bombing  tell  us  about  the  memory  of  bombing?  Moeller  has  argued  for  a
history of bombing that puts memory at its core: ‘a history of the bombing war … in
which all the dead have names and faces, might get us closer to the multiple meanings
of the war’.37 To return to Portelli’s argument, a history of bombing must include these
names, faces and memories if it is to become anything other than a top-down, bombar-
dier’s-eye view of events. For Portelli the mechanism for bridging official history and
personal experience is oral history: 

Oral history, in essence, is an attempt to reconnect the local, native point of view from
below and the global, scientific point of view from above: to contextualise the local,
and to enable the global to recognise it. Oral history, then, brings history from above
and history from below into the same text—as it were, to the negotiating table—creat-
ing an equal dialogue between the historians’ awareness of broad spatial and temporal
patterns, and the local narrator’s closely focused personal narrative.38

This impassioned plea is rooted in the awareness that an inability to view bombing from
the  viewpoint  of  the  bombarded  makes  its  future  use  easier;  Portelli  cites  examples

International Journal of Heritage Studies

51

drawn from the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia as well as Allied and German bombings
of Italy during the Second World War. He concludes that ‘our capacity to see the whole
world depends on seeing single, small details like that … if only we could see them’.39
Which brings us back to the archaeology.

As Mellor has noted, the violence of bombing has the power to render metaphors
into brutal truisms. What can this discussion of archaeology, memory and bombing
contribute to the study of real conflicts and the real lives they transform and destroy? I
believe the answer lies in the fragments of everyday life destroyed by bombing, the frag-
mented memory of bombing, and the capacity of archaeological work to salvage and
interpret both of these. The power of objects and places from the past to evoke memory
in the present has been described as resonance: ‘Resonance is understood as the power
to be heard, to be seen, to be felt, and to be responded to through the existence of a
physical  marker  or  an  evocation  of  place’.40  This  highlights  the  rhetorical  power  of
material things and their use in literary symbolism: Mellor describes how Eliot’s The
Waste Land 

stacks up broken and resonantly jumbled material stuff. In this Eliot seems to have
typified how swathes of first-wave modernism had a yearning for locating in the urban
landscape  violently  disordered  debris—and  then  for  attempting  the  extraction  of
meaning from it.41

The power of an archaeological incursion into memory work is the ability to make its
very literal intervention into this resonant debris a spectacular and performative one.

Bombsite Archaeology in Practice

A bombsite is a ruin amidst fragments. While a ruined building can stand as a memo-
rial,  the  clearing  of  fragmented  remains  from  the  structure  is  a  finite  process  of
commemoration. This distinction is clearest if we compare the preservation of bomb-
sites  as  heritage  sites,  with  the  excavation  of  bombsites  as  sites  of  lived  memory.
Schofield estimates that ‘in England some 20–30 buildings damaged in the Blitz, and
otherwise during the Second World War, now stand as ruins … amounting on average
to less than one bomb site per major targeted city’.42 In his analysis Schofield notes the
rarity  of  these  structures,  and  their  unique  role  in  commemorating  the  civilian
casualties of war on a local scale, as arguments for their preservation and continued
protection.

In contrast to their stated importance, excavations of bombsites as bombsites rather
than as sites for development are extremely rare: it is worth considering a short case
study. The Museum of London’s Shoreditch Park community archaeology project in
Hackney, East London in 2005 aimed to recover the remains of bombed houses and
their  contents;  the  importance  of  community  involvement  and  memory  work  were
recognised by the organisers from the very beginning. The excavation focused on a row
of four terraced houses from an area that was heavily bombed both during the Blitz and
during the later V weapon campaigns. The foundations of the houses were revealed, as
well as the remains of concrete garden paths and outside toilets. A quantity of domestic

52 G. Moshenska

material culture dating from the Victorian period to the 1940s was also discovered,
including sewing equipment and children’s toys. In the three weeks of the dig more
than 4000 local people visited the site, including hundreds who helped out with the
excavation itself. In addition, more than 20 people who had lived on or near the site
during the war took part in an oral history project based around the excavation and
using  the  artefacts  recovered  from  it.  Towards  the  end  of  the  project  a  multi-faith
service of remembrance was held at the site in memory of those killed in the Blitz. For
the few weeks before the site was back-filled and the area restored, the bombsite served
as a focus for commemoration in different ways and on a number of levels: individuals,
families, local communities and faith communities. By design and by circumstance the
dig became a site of memory.43

From  the  relatively  comfortable  and  often  triumphalist  memory  of  the  Second
World War in Britain it is worth examining the very different memory of conflict in
Germany,  and  the  potential  cultural  and  mnemonic  impacts  of  an  archaeology  of
bombing. In the last few years the memory of the bombing of German towns has been
taken up by historians, journalists and writers across the political spectrum. Foreign
visitors  have  noted  a  popular  willingness  and  eagerness  to  discuss  the  bombing,
encouraged in part by parallel discourses in Britain and elsewhere around the ethics of
the  bombing  campaign.44  The  prophet  of  German  memory  of  bombing  was  W.G.
Sebald: too young to remember the war, Sebald grew up in a country laid to waste by
bombs,  where  the  physical  evidence  of  bombing  was  constantly  visible,  and  yet  the
events themselves were passed over in silence: 

the sense of unparalleled national humiliation felt by millions in the last years of the
war had never really found verbal expression, and those directly affected by the expe-
rience neither shared it with each other nor passed it on to the next generation.45

This pattern of unspoken trauma together with an absence of shared narratives of the
past  has  been  characterised  as  atomised  memory  or  ‘fragmented  memories’.  Sebald
(who notably ignores the works of Günter Grass) highlighted in particular the failure
of German writers to produce works that reflected the wartime and immediate post-
war experiences of Germans: he regarded this absence of a literature of bombing as a
‘scandalous deficiency’. He was equally scathing of the self-imposed silence of German
historians on the subject of bombing, although he singled out for praise the military
historian Jörg Friedrich’s early work on the Allied bombing strategies, noting that ‘his
remarks have not aroused anything like the interest they deserve’.46

Between Sebald’s untimely death in 2001 and the present, the public discourses of
bombing  and  memory  in  Germany  have  changed  beyond  recognition.  Indeed,  the
response to his book on bombing, published in German in 1999, is regarded as one of
the triggers. Moeller observed that ‘In remarkable ways, for the last five years, Germans
have  been  fighting  the  war  all  over  again’.  Together  with  Sebald’s  book  and  Grass’
Crabwalk, the spark that ignited this extraordinary national discussion was the seriali-
sation  and  publication  of  Jörg  Friedrich’s  Der  Brand:  Deutschland  im  Bombenkrieg
1940–1945.47 Moeller argues that Friedrich’s achievement is his description of ‘the face
of mass death’: 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

53

Suffering that is cordoned off in accounts that detail the ‘balance of destruction’ in
cubic meters of rubble and totals of lives lost, houses destroyed, and people displaced,
or even the photographs of moon landscapes of bombed out cities, can only begin to
convey a sense of the consequences for those who lived their lives between bomb shel-
ters and bombed-out residential areas and for whom sirens, blackouts, uncertainty,
death and fear became part of a daily routine.48

In this respect, Friedrich’s writings answer Portelli’s call for a history-from-below of
bombing, focused on the physical and emotional experiences of those on the ground.
But Friedrich’s work does not draw extensively on memory; rather, he trumpets its
absence,  and  his  history-from-below  remains  a  curiously  impersonal  one.  Schulze
notes that even 60 years on ‘victims of the Allied air raids on German towns still feel the
need to have their voices heard’.49

Urban rescue archaeology in German cities frequently encounters the remains of the
bombing  war:  rubble,  ruins  and  occasionally  unexploded  bombs.  The  possibility  of
creating  a  public  or  community  archaeology  of  bombsites  in  these  circumstances  is
challenging, but if the pattern observed in the British example above can be replicated
even in part the effects could be remarkable, and the archaeology of bombing could
become an element in the wider debates. In these circumstances an archaeology of the
memory of bombing could be of value as an arena for debate and discussion on several
levels including the academic, political and local.

Conclusion

Archaeologists do not dig grand narratives; we will never unearth the strategy of area
bombing or the moral debates that surrounded it then and now. The most useful thing
we can offer is the immediacy of small views of everyday life annihilated by bombing;
the debris of individuals, their homes and their possessions. Most importantly these
fragments and ruins are located in modern towns and cities in the present: more than
any ‘then and now’ photographs, this brutal juxtaposition detaches the suffering and
death from dominant narratives of memory and locates it firmly in the local, detailed
and specific, as Portelli demands. An archaeology of bombsites contributes to those
smaller scale, local narratives of war in which the dead have names and faces. I have no
doubt that the archaeology of bombsites will remain troubling and deeply controver-
sial, both in its practice and in its findings.

Many of the themes, tropes and metaphors that I have examined in the course of this
study  have  shown  themselves  to  be  representative  of  the  real  processes  of  memory
around bombsites, sites of bombing and their archaeologies. These powerful and essen-
tial themes include digging as remembering, the bonds between ruins and fragments of
landscapes and memories, and the resisting memories and archaeologies from below
versus histories from above. I have suggested an arena in which they could most fruit-
fully be explored; it remains to be seen whether they can make a substantial contribu-
tion. If nothing else, the pitiful shards of shattered domesticity should be an abject and
resonant presence in the modern world; their excavation a challenging and discordant
practice.

54 G. Moshenska

Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Cornelius Holtorf for his very detailed and constructive criticism of an
early draft of this paper. Thanks also to Victor Buchli, Leo Mellor, Chana Moshenska,
Joe Moshenska, Raf Salkie, Tim Schadla-Hall, John Schofield and the two anonymous
referees  for  their  sound  advice  and  comments.  This  paper  emerges  from  research
supported by the AHRC and UCL Institute of Archaeology. A version of this paper was
presented  at  the  MEICAM  ‘Constructions  of  Conflict’  conference  in  Swansea  in
September 2007.

Notes

1 [1] Thomas, ‘Assembling History’, 177–178.
2 [2] Fletcher, ‘The Hammering of Society’, 308; Lindqvist, A History of Bombing.
3 [3] Beer, ‘The Island and the Aeroplane’; Mellor, ‘Words From the Bombsites’; Saint-Amour, ‘Air

War Prophecy and Interwar Modernism’; Warner, The Aerodrome: a Love Story.

Saunders, ‘Excavating Memories’, 101.

Ibid., 137; Wallace, Digging the Dirt, 95.

Sebald, On the Natural History of Destruction, 41–43; Mellor, ‘Words From the Bombsites’.
Sebald, On the Natural History of Destruction, 56.

4 [4] Holtorf, From Stonehenge to Las Vegas.
5 [5] Till, The New Berlin, 10.
6 [6] Benjamin, ‘Excavation and Memory’, 576.
7 [7] Wallace, Digging the Dirt, 15.
8 [8] Kuspit, ‘A Mighty Metaphor’, 133.
9 [9]
10[10] Remmler, ‘On the Natural History of Destruction’, 45.
11[11] Wallace, Digging the Dirt, 94–95.
12[12] Prager, ‘Air War and Allegory’, 37.
13[13] Remmler, ‘On the Natural History of Destruction’, 60.
14[14]
15[15] Descoeudres, Pompeii Revisited.
16[16] Remmler, ‘On the Natural History of Destruction’, 59
17[17]
18[18]
19[19] Holtorf, From Stonehenge to Las Vegas, 16.
20[20] Portelli, ‘So Much Depends on a Red Bus’, 30.
21[21] Remmler, ‘On the Natural History of Destruction’, 52.
22[22] Mellor, ‘Words From the Bombsites’, 89–90.
23[23]
24[24] Woodward, In Ruins, 81, 97.
25[25] Macauley, Pleasure of Ruins, 453.
26[26] Finney, ‘On Memory, Identity and War’, 5.
27[27]
28[28] Lindqvist, A History of Bombing, 172.
29[29] Grayling, Among the Dead Cities, 148.
30[30] Portelli, ‘So Much Depends on a Red Bus’, 36.
31[31]
32[32] Hillary, The Last Enemy.
33[33] Portelli, ‘So Much Depends on a Red Bus’, 30.
34[34] Baker,  ‘Archaeology,  Habermas  and  the  Pathologies  of  Modernity’;  Schofield,  ‘Monuments
and Memories of War’; Stone, ‘A Memory in Ruins?’; Uzzell, ‘The Hot Interpretation of War
and Conflict’.

In Moeller, ‘On the History of Man-made Destruction’, 128.

In Moeller, ‘On the History of Man-made Destruction’, 124.

In ibid., 86.

35[35] Holtorf, From Stonehenge to Las Vegas, 50.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

55

Ibid., 41.

James, ‘Undoing Trauma’.

36[36]
37[37] Moeller, ‘On the History of Man-made Destruction’, 125.
38[38] Portelli, ‘So Much Depends on a Red Bus’, 30.
39[39]
40[40] Greenblatt quoted in Remmler, ‘On the Natural History of Destruction’, 43.
41[41] Mellor, ‘Words From the Bombsites’, 77.
42[42]
43[43] Blair et al, ‘The Archaeology of the Blitz’; Moshenska, ‘Oral History in Historical Archaeol-

Schofield, ‘Monuments and Memories of War’, 151.

ogy’.

Sebald, On the Natural History of Destruction, viii.
Ibid, 70; Schulze, ‘Review Article: Memory in German History’, 637.

44[44] Confino, ‘Telling about Germany’; Grayling, Among the Dead Cities.
45[45]
46[46]
47[47] Nolan, ‘Germans as Victims During the Second World War’, 10.
48[48] Moeller, ‘On the History of Man-made Destruction’, 109.
49[49]

Schulze, ‘Review Article: Memory in German History’, 647.

References

Baker,  F.  ‘Archaeology,  Habermas  and  the  Pathologies  of  Modernity’.  In  Writing  the  Past  in  the
Present, edited by F. Baker and J. Thomas, 54–62. Lampeter: St David’s University College,
1990.

Beer, G. ‘The Island and the Aeroplane: The Case of Virginia Woolf’. In Nation and Narration, edited

by H. K Bhabha, 265–290. London: Routledge, 1990.

Benjamin, W. ‘Excavation and Memory’. In Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings Vol. 2, edited by M.

W. Jennings, 576. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.

Blair,  I.,  F.  Simpson  and  G.  Moshenska.  ‘The  Archaeology  of  the  Blitz’.  Current  Archaeology  201

(2006): 486–492.

Confino, A. ‘Telling about Germany: Narratives of Memory and Culture’. Journal of Modern History

76 (2004): 389–416.

Descoeudres, J.-P. Pompeii Revisited: The Life and Death of a Roman Town. Sydney: Meditarch, 1994.
Finney, P. ‘On Memory, Identity and War’. Rethinking History 6 (2002): 1–13.
Fletcher, R. ‘The Hammering of Society: Non-correspondence and Modernity’. In Matériel Culture.
The Archaeology of Twentieth Century Conflict, edited by J. Schofield, W. G. Johnson and C.
M. Beck, 303–311. London: Routledge, 2002.

Friedrich, J. Der Brand: Deutschland in Bombenkrieg 1940–1945. Munich: Propyläen Verlag, 2002.
Grass, G. Crabwalk. London: Faber, 2004.
Grayling, A. C. Among the Dead Cities: Was the Allied Bombing of Civilians in WWII a Necessity or a

Crime? London: Bloomsbury, 2006.

Hillary, R. The Last Enemy. London: Pimlico, 1997.
Holtorf, C. From Stonehenge to Las Vegas: Archaeology as Popular Culture. London: Altamira, 2005.
James, J. ‘Undoing Trauma: Reconstructing the Church of Our Lady in Dresden’. Ethos 34 (2006):

244–272.

Kuspit, D. ‘A Mighty Metaphor: The Analogy of Archaeology and Psychoanalysis’. In Sigmund Freud
and Art: His Personal Collection of Antiquities, edited by L. Gamwell and R. Wells, 133–152.
London: Thames & Hudson, 1989.

Lindqvist, S. A History of Bombing. London: Granta, 2002.
Macauley, R. Pleasure of Ruins. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1953.
Mellor,  L.  G.  ‘Words  from  the  Bombsites:  Debris,  Modernism  and  Literary  Salvage’.  Critical

Quarterly 46 (2004): 77–90.

Moeller, R. G. ‘On the History of Man-made Destruction: Loss, Death, Memory and Germany in the

Bombing War’. History Workshop Journal 61 (2006): 103–134.

56 G. Moshenska

Moshenska, G. ‘Oral History in Historical Archaeology: Excavating Sites of Memory’. Oral History

35 (2007): 91–97.

Nolan, M. ‘Germans as Victims during the Second World War: Air Wars, Memory Wars’. Central

European History 38 (2005): 7–40.

Portelli,  A.  ‘So  Much  Depends  on  a  Red  Bus,  or,  Innocent  Victims  of  the  Liberating  Gun’.  Oral

History 34 (2006): 29–43.

Prager, B. ‘Air War and Allegory’. In Bombs Away! Representing the Air War Over Europe and Japan,

edited by W. Wilms and W. Rasch, 25–43. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2006.

Remmler, K. ‘On the Natural History of Destruction and Cultural Memory: W.G. Sebald’. German

Politics and Society 23 (2005): 42–64.

Saint-Amour, P. K. ‘Air War Prophecy and Interwar Modernism’. Comparative Literature Studies 42

(2005): 130–161.

Saunders,  N.  J.  ‘Excavating  Memories:  Archaeology  and  the  Great  War,  1914–2001’.  Antiquity  76

(2002): 101–108.

Sebald, W. G. On the Natural History of Destruction. London: Penguin, 2003.
Schofield,  J.  ‘Monuments  and  Memories  of  War:  Motivations  for  Preserving  Military  Sites  in
England’.  In  Matériel  Culture:  The  Archaeology  of  Twentieth  Century  Conflict,  edited  by  J.
Schofield, W. G. Johnson and C. M. Beck, 143–158. London: Routledge, 2002.

Schulze, R. ‘Review Article: Memory in German History: Fragmented Noises or Meaningful Voices

of the Past?’ Journal of Contemporary History 39 (2004): 637–648.
Stone, M. ‘A Memory in Ruins?’ Public Archaeology 3 (2004): 131–144.
Thomas,  S.  ‘Assembling  History:  Fragments  and  Ruins’.  European  Romantic  Review  14  (2003):

177–186.

Till, K. The New Berlin: Memory, Politics, Place. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press, 2005.
Uzzell,  D.  ‘The  Hot  Interpretation  of  War  and  Conflict’.  In  Heritage  Interpretation  Volume  1:  the

Natural and Built Environment, edited by D. Uzzell, 33–47. London: Belhaven, 1989.

Wallace, J. Digging the Dirt: the Archaeological Imagination. London: Duckworth, 2004.
Warner, R. The Aerodrome: A Love Story. London: Harvill, 1996.
Woodward, C. In Ruins. London: Vintage, 2001.


