International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Heritage diplomacy

Tim Winter

To cite this article: Tim Winter (2015) Heritage diplomacy, International Journal of Heritage
Studies, 21:10, 997-1015, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2015.1041412
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1041412

Published online: 13 May 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2931

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 19 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2015
Published with license by Taylor & Francis.
Vol. 21, No. 10, 997–1015, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1041412

Heritage diplomacy

Tim Winter*

Cultural Heritage Centre for Asia and the Paciﬁc, Alfred Deakin Research Institute, Deakin
University, Burwood Campus, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, Melbourne, Vic. 3125,
Australia
(Received 17 December 2014; ﬁnal version received 12 April 2015)

This paper explores the concept of heritage diplomacy. To date much of the
analysis regarding the politics of heritage has focused on contestation, disso-
nance and conﬂict. Heritage diplomacy seeks to address this imbalance by criti-
cally examining themes such as cooperation, cultural aid and hard power, and
the ascendency of intergovernmental and non-governmental actors as mediators
of the dance between nationalism and internationalism. The paper situates her-
itage diplomacy within broader histories of international governance and diplo-
macy itself. These are offered to interpret the interplay between the shifting
forces and structures, which, together, have shaped the production, governance
and international mobilisation of heritage in the modern era. A distinction
between heritage as diplomacy and in diplomacy is outlined in order to reframe
some of the ways in which heritage has acted as a constituent of cultural nation-
alisms, international relations and globalisation. In mapping out directions for
further enquiry, I argue the complexities of the international ordering of heritage
governance have yet to be teased out. A framework of heritage diplomacy is thus
offered in the hope that it can do some important analytical work in the ﬁeld of
critical heritage theory, opening up some important but under theorised aspects
of heritage analysis.

Keywords: heritage diplomacy; cultural diplomacy; governance; international
relations; UNESCO

Introduction
Deﬁnitions of heritage tend to frame it as an inheritance, a source of identity, as an
assemblage of values, discourses and materialities, or more broadly as a mediator
between the past and present, human and non-human. This paper speaks to such
themes, but does so by approaching heritage as an arena of governance, of institu-
tions, and as a space of both cooperation and contestation. It seeks not just to under-
stand heritage as an international phenomena, but how that international comes to be
made and remade through networks of capital and institutionalised practices of
governance. It recognises culture and nature as ‘political economies’, but looks to
move beyond such expressions in an effort to add some conceptual and analytical
depth to themes, issues and events that have been too readily overlooked within
accounts of the political and economic entanglements of heritage.

*Email: tim.winter@deakin.edu.au

© 2015 Tim Winter

998

T. Winter

To pursue such themes, I explore the concept of heritage diplomacy, asking the
question of how it might be deﬁned and in which geographic spaces or institutional
relations we should look if we are to ﬁnd the diplomatic. The paper rests upon the
premise that we ﬁrst recognise heritage as a form of governance, one that has
emerged in the modern era, involving the governance of space, of people, of cultures
and natures, of material worlds, and of time. Gamble (2007, 233) conceives gover-
nance in broad terms, suggesting it revolves around two elements: ‘ﬁrst a set of
fundamental laws, rules and standards – the ordering principles which provide the
constitutional framework for governing; and second, a set of techniques, tools and
practices which deﬁne how governing is carried out’. Across archaeology, anthropol-
ogy, architectural history, museum studies and heritage studies, analyses of this fash-
ioning of practices and standards and of frameworks for managing culture-natures
have privileged particular analytical scales and notions of the political. At
the
national level, the state has been the key vector of analysis, with trajectories of
internationalism primarily interpreted through frameworks of empire and the subse-
quent formation of an intergovernmental landscape, most notably UNESCO and its
key instruments of governance such as the world heritage framework and convention
on intangible heritage. The case for heritage diplomacy put forth here arises from
the sense that this picture needs complicating, and the assertion that considerable
analytical work still needs to be done to disentangle the complex structures and net-
works of agencies, funding structures, institutional collaborations, public and private
partnerships and competing notions of sovereignty, which, together, have given form
to heritage and associated ideas of conservation in the modern era.

To date, much of the analysis regarding ‘the politics of heritage’ has focused on
contestation, dissonance and conﬂict. A framework of heritage diplomacy can help
shed new light here, by recasting such themes in relation to the political culture of
international relations and diplomacy. But in recognising that contestation and co-
operation exist as two sides of the same coin, it seeks to offer a degree of analytical
balance. Heritage diplomacy enables us to read critically what is going on in the
space of collaboration, excavate a broader political history of heritage and conserva-
tion, and shed light on those entanglements of the political and economic, national
and international that have received less attention than they deserve. It also helps us
move beyond the commonly used frameworks of the colonial and postcolonial. In
understanding the internationalist histories of heritage conservation and governance,
such discourses come with the analytical baggage of exploitation and imposition,
and critiques of imperialist ideologies that cast the Other and its cultural pasts in a
certain light. As the examples presented below illustrate, a shift towards diplomacy
recognises these histories but opens them up in important ways, allowing us to more
easily recognise hidden forms of sovereignty and read the power relations of collab-
oration in terms of mutual gain and self-interest. It also creates an important space
for thinking through the complexities of cultural heritage destruction in Iraq and
Syria by bodies such as ISIS, and how organisations and existing diplomatic struc-
tures might respond.

Today, billions of dollars are spent every year on conservation; an ethos and
commitment driven by universities, governmental and non-governmental bodies and
a multitude of agencies, institutions and individuals clustered into a network of net-
works. It is a sector underpinned by the narratives and ideals that come from the ‘or-
ganisation of collective action’ (Prakash and Hart 1999). And yet interpretations of
this collective commonly take UNESCO as a metonym of global governance,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

999

reading it as a monolithic or monologic body that imposes Eurocentric world views
upon localised environments and institutions. By focusing on the institution itself,
and the cultural and natural spaces to which it directs its conduct, the academic cri-
tique of UNESCO has often revolved around claims of unprecedented levels of
power or, by contrast, its ineptness or impotence as an intergovernmental organisa-
tion (IGO). It is an analysis that also leads to overstatements concerning the sense of
ideological consensus and a global convergence of ideas. Indeed, those writing from
both within and outside UNESCO, whether it be defending or criticising it, have
tended to overlook the structural context within which it operates, the ways in which
its operations have reﬂected shifting world orders, and the consequences this has
had.

This ﬂattening of the international order can also be seen in the language of
‘international cooperation’; a near ubiquitous term in the conservation profession.
‘International cooperation’ collapses and conceals, working to remove the imbal-
ances and asymmetries of power, which are almost always built into collaborations
between agencies, individuals or countries. With the paradigm of the international
built upon a benign nomenclature of cooperation, partnerships and collaboration,
ideas of equanimity and equivalence have become the norm; a process that masks
over the subtle levels of exploitation and subversive power that habituate relations
of the inter-national. As a parallel, Yapp (2014) shows this same ﬂattening also
permeates discourses of ‘shared’ or ‘mutual’ heritage. Following Philips (2007) then,
to analytically excavate the complex political entanglements which have structured
the governance of heritage in the modern era requires an analytical disposition
towards not just ‘the politics of globalisation’, but also ‘the globalisation of politics’.
A conceptual frame of heritage diplomacy, one that is oriented by an understanding
of histories of colonialism, and the cultural politics of contemporary international
relations, is thus well placed to take up such analytical tasks.

The key implication here then is a realisation that our historicising of heritage
governance can beneﬁt from being situated within wider ideas about international
relations and international political economy. To that end, the following sections
explore heritage diplomacy as both history and concept. As the discussion proceeds,
it becomes evident that these two mutually deﬁne each other; how we think about
historicising heritage diplomacy is in part determined by how we frame it, and vice
versa. In order to more fully address the above themes and questions, the paper pre-
sents a broader history of diplomacy,
tracing its expansion over time, and the
coterminous unfolding of its analysis. And for those unfamiliar with such histories,
this is paralleled by a discussion of international and global governance as an impor-
tant historical trajectory of the last 150 years or so. In effect, such wider contexts
are offered as the basis for interpreting the interplay between the shifting forces and
structures, which, together, have shaped the production, governance and interna-
tional mobilisation of heritage in the modern era.

Given the limited space here, some clear analytical parameters have been set.
The paper is broadly informed by notions of diplomacy advanced within the ﬁelds
of international relations, international sociology and political science. In that regard,
it primarily seeks to understand heritage as an international phenomena, and con-
struct a framework for reassessing some of the ways in which we think about how
heritage has been a constituent of cultural nationalisms, international relations and
globalisation. In so doing, I fully recognise the existing bodies of literature that
account for the cultural politics of imperialism and colonialism. But rather than

1000

T. Winter

rehearse such arguments here, the aim is to bring into focus other analytical tradi-
tions, which, I would suggest, have yet to be adequately incorporated into our
understanding of the international formation and ordering of heritage. To that end,
the second half of the paper teases out the distinction between heritage in and as
diplomacy. Within the ever-expanding deﬁnition of heritage, there is also a need to
delimit the focus to particular actors and themes, with emphasis primarily being
given to the world of material culture, with natural heritage and intangible cultural
forms only touched upon brieﬂy.

Histories of governance and diplomacy
To gain greater analytical purchase on heritage diplomacy, we need to understand
two broader interconnected histories: that of diplomacy itself and its evolution; and
the emergence of international and global governance structures. In their combina-
tion, these two areas tell us much about how ideas of heritage and the conservation
of the cultural past have become internationally mobile, how notions of international
heritage governance have evolved over time and what forces are at play therein
today that are reorganising long standing structures.

Tracing the deep historical origins of diplomacy is the subject of much debate,
one that speaks to contested ideas of state formation and conceptions of international
exchange and political representation. Whilst examples of diplomatic exchange can
be cited as far back as Pharaonic Egypt and the Greco Roman classical eras, most
historians point to the Italian city-states’ system in the ﬁfteenth century as the ori-
gins of modern diplomacy. In his fascinating volume A History of Diplomacy, Black
(2010) describes this period as one of gift exchanges between European diplomats
and their hosts in Egypt, and between travelling envoys and bureaucrats in China.
France, in particular, was an early exponent of cultural diplomacy, sending its works
of art and intellectual knowledge around Europe, with Louis XIV being one of the
ﬁrst to identify the political value of using culture to ‘export French universalism’
(Gienow-Hecht and Donfried 2010, 17). Riello (forthcoming) also recounts gift
exchanges between ambassadors of the King of Siam and Louis XIV’s court as con-
tributing to the asymmetry of relations between France and Siam. Such examples
point to the idea that the origins of modern diplomacy lie as much in movement and
cross-cultural encounters as they do in the formation of states. For this reason, Black
argues that the story of modern diplomacy starts in the early modern period:

not because of any belief that modernity arrived with the sixteenth century, but because
European expansion substantially increased the pace with which distant societies were
brought into contact, creating a greater and more complex need for information gather-
ing, representation and negotiation. (Black 2010, 17)

The Italian city-states’ system is also the period when we begin to see the pursuit of
foreign policies. But whilst
international relationships, diplomatic missions and
‘thickening networks of resident industries’ (Berridge 2010, 3) were all features of
the early modern period, the concept of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would not
arrive for another two to three centuries. For Lane (2013), Napoleon’s expedition to
Egypt in 1798 – wherein scientists, artists and intellectuals formed part of the entou-
rage – provided a watershed moment. Indeed, France is typically recognised as a
pioneer of modern diplomacy, with Britain not setting up its foreign ofﬁce until
1782, and the United States following suit shortly thereafter with its own

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1001

Department of State in 1789. As the concept spread, China, Japan and Turkey were
among those that formally separated their domestic and foreign affairs over the
course of the nineteenth century. The city of Vienna, however, holds a unique posi-
tion in the history of international affairs, having played host to the Congress of
1815 in the wake of the defeat of Napoleon’s armies. Signiﬁcant for not just estab-
lishing the culture of modern international gatherings, the Congress also created the
foundations for a system of governance that gave power to a coalition of ﬁve. The
Concert of Europe would endure through to the breakout of World War I, with
Austria (Austro-Hungary from 1867), Britain, France, Prussia and Russia shaping
European affairs and relations by hosting more than thirty congresses and confer-
ences. As Dobson (2007) and Mazower (2012) both point out, the structures of
aristocratic diplomacy created under the Concert of Europe provided the blueprint
for structuring the international organisations that would follow, namely the League
of Nations and the United Nations. Across Europe and beyond, the nineteenth cen-
tury was also characterised by the internationalisation of the state. However, as
Sluga (2013) points out, an international subjectivity, at once both national and
international, also had to be created. As the century advanced, European powers
came to realise a proclaimed disposition towards internationalism helped rescue ‘the
mission of empire from its darker, dirtier side’ (Mazower 2012, 72). Compatibility
between the two – nationalism and internationalism – was thus fashioned, and
advanced, through emergent structures of international law, buttressed by ideas of a
commonwealth of nations and the civic duty of a new ‘international community’.
The end of the nineteenth century was thus characterised by the formation of a new
institutional landscape in the international space. Internationalism in Europe was
also fuelled by the exuberance attached to scientiﬁc knowledge and a belief in the
universalism of the region’s governmental, cultural and intellectual traditions.

The profound crisis and violence inﬂicted by World War I required this interna-
tional project to be both rescued and rethought. Among the various ﬁgures who
fought for peace at the time, Woodrow Wilson was vital to the rebuilding of dia-
logue, and the normalisation of post-war relations. In recognition of the limitations
of the French model of bilateral diplomacy, most notably its lack of speed, the cre-
ation of the League of Nations in 1920 inaugurated a new age of multilateral diplo-
macy. Bolstered by a commitment to democracy, the League was deﬁned by a more
open diplomatic culture than The Concert of Europe that preceded it. Of key con-
cern for the League was the relationship between international mobility and national
security. In setting the standardisation of passports as one of its ﬁrst tasks, the Lea-
gue quickly secured a newfound legitimacy in international governance and the
affairs of nation states. The rise of international standards, along with fast advancing
technologies of communication and transport, also meant countries geographically
and politically as far apart as Russia and Australia, Italy and Thailand were being
internationally uniﬁed and integrated. Of course, this was a period of major dispari-
ties between countries and regions, and the European empire – together with its
inbuilt imperialist attitudes towards the non-west, as identiﬁed by Said (1993, 1995)
and others – would provide the all-important foundations upon which the interna-
tionalisation of heritage as idea and form of governance would be built.

Aspirations for international governance structures, even the idea of a world gov-
ernment, in the inter-war years did little to disturb the core-periphery dynamics that
shaped the world system at that time. As we know, World War II shook this up in
ways that would prove permanent, triggering a wave of decolonisation as nations

1002

T. Winter

across Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Paciﬁc sought independence, and their
cultural and political sovereignty. This rapid expansion in the number of nation
states, together with widespread commitment to the future prevention of conﬂict
gave a whole new impetus to the internationalist project. As Sluga (2013, 79) states,
‘if the end of World War I was the apogee of nationalism then World War II was the
apogee of twentieth century internationalism’. Within the conceptualisation of the
newly formed United Nations, UNESCO was charged with the promotion of
science, education and intercultural dialogue for the peaceful integration of this new
society of states (Cameron and Rössler 2013). As the preamble of its 1945 Constitu-
tion famously declared: ‘wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men
that the defences of peace must be constructed’. As a facilitator of dialogue and
cooperation, UNESCO would ‘give fresh impulse to the spread of culture’, enhance
‘the democratic principles of the dignity, equality and mutual respect of men’ and,
in so doing, help found peace ‘upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of man-
kind’ (UNESCO 1945, preamble). Such high-minded egalitarianism would, how-
ever, not be reﬂected in its early organisational structure. As Sluga (2013, 106)
notes, of the 557 posts available in the UNESCO secretariat in 1947, 514 were held
by either English or French nationals. Despite this clear imbalance, to label the
founding of the new post-war intergovernmental landscape as merely Eurocentric or
neo-imperialist would miss the important political spaces it would open up for vari-
ous nation-states, both new and old.

Decolonisation, together with the Cold War would place culture and its gover-
nance in a whole new set of political relations. To suggest then that the creation of
UNESCO merely reproduced the hierarchies of value established under colonialism
would miss the complex ways in which culture was folded into new postcolonial
relations that would complicate previous East–West,
identities, and bilateral
North–South structures. Muppidi (2012) highlights how the pernicious legacies of
colonialism were rendered invisible in the international relations of the decolonisa-
tion decades, but within this account, Muppidi also recognises the ways in which
culture formed part of the rhetoric of self-determination and regional alliance. The
Bandung Conference, held in Indonesia in 1955, was crucial in this regard. As See
Seng and Acharya (2008, 3) note, the conference represented an important land-
mark, gathering together ‘the largest ever grouping of new entrants into the interna-
tional system’. More speciﬁcally,
it provided a platform for those non-aligned
countries from Africa and Asia to express their frustration in the UN, and the
destructive geo-political environment being created by the Cold War. The following
year, a number of Asian states met in Tokyo to request action by UNESCO for
improving East–West relations in ways that would better represent their interests and
enable a greater level of ‘mutual appreciation’ between Europe and Asia. In
response, UNESCO launched the ‘East-West Major Project’ in 1957 to stimulate
cultural relations and an interchange of ‘cultural values’. As Wong (2008, 349) puts
it, the initiative ‘represented an unprecedented intergovernmental effort to engage
states in dialogue around cultural identities in the midst of redeﬁnition and rising
ambiguity about the meaning of East and West’. Running through to late 1965, the
project would give voice to a number of Asian and Arab states in international
affairs and empower them to shape the discourse of an important intergovernmental
agency. UNESCO’s archives extensively document
the numerous conferences,
exchanges,
the Major Project
umbrella. The focus on cultural exchange and cultural values meant themes such as

reports and funded initiatives advanced under

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1003

history, folklore, traditional craft, archaeology and so forth featured prominently.
Interestingly, whilst such areas would today be labelled as ‘heritage’,
the term
features sparingly over the course of the project as it was yet to be part of the par-
lance of cultural policy or international discourse. The rise of heritage in the inter-
governmental arena would come some years later, most notably via the 1972 World
Heritage Convention.

Throughout

the 1950s and 1960s, China’s engagement with UNESCO was
somewhat marginal. The victory of the Chinese Communist Party in the country’s
civil war in 1949 – which led to the creation of the People’s Republic of China and
the retreat of the Republic of China government to Taiwan – marked the beginning
of a complex diplomatic entanglement with the UN and its other founding members;
the United States, Soviet Union and UK. With the US and its allies only recognising
the Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China until 1971, much
of the activity from Asia in the East-West Major Project came from India. As the
seat of a ‘great civilisation’, India used the initiative to advance its connections to
Europe by providing a gateway to Asia. The Calcutta based Ramakrishna Mission
Institute of Culture, whose programme of the 1960s on the ‘Study of the Traditional
cultures in Southeast Asia’ fell within the project, provides one such example. In
preparation for a series of courses, conferences, lectures and symposia hosted in
New Delhi and Calcutta, their ‘Scheme of Work’ report outlined nine key aims, the
second of which stated:

Development of one’s own culture and appreciation of other cultures: A true apprecia-
tion of foreign cultural values is only possible for a nation that is master of its own
destiny and of its own culture, and conscious of the genuine nature of its own per-
sonality. For this reason a campaign for the understanding of one’s own culture must
accompany efforts for the appreciation of the values of other nations.1

To enact this goal, a year-long course was structured around seven themes:

I. Mankind’s Common Heritage
II. Indian Culture (6 courses)
III. The Sister Civilisations (6 courses)
IV. The World’s Great Religions (6 courses)
V. Intercultural Relations (6 courses)
VI. Bases of Emerging World Civilisation (9 courses)
VII. Theories and Methods in the Study of Cultures (7 courses)

I cite this as a clear example of a wider postcolonial project seeking to (re)centre
Indian culture in world history via discourses of civilisation. Crucially, it was an
emergent political subjectivity that attempted to appropriate UNESCO’s framework
of international cooperation and mutual understanding in ways that countered the
structural, racial and cultural violence created under conditions of colonialism. As
the project’s other aims indicate, notions of sovereignty and equality were foremost
in the minds of those proposing the courses:

Equality of nations and equality of right to idiosyncratic development of cultures in
modern context: the aim of the courses will be to utilise, foster and harness the grow-
ing awareness of the equality of the society of nations in the international order, of
each country’s right to free and idiosyncratic development, of the right for constant
adjustment of traditional cultural features to the new forms of social, economic and
political life whether these be the product of internal evolution of via external contacts.

1004

T. Winter

The interaction of culture as a basis of mutual understanding: the courses of study will
review culture not only in isolation, but also in their correlation and their interaction.
The subject of the interaction of culture will be given particular emphasis as a new and
fertile line of approach. With the development of civilisation, the debt owed by each
culture to another culture has been compensated by an irreplaceable contribution. Once
they realise the debts which cultures owe to each other, the peoples will be brought to
mutual understanding and free and frank exchanges. Each culture appropriates to itself
what it has borrowed from others and endows it with a particular style. Hence the
interaction of cultures, if it takes place in a climate of equality and liberty, should not
destroy or compromise their individual nature.2

Such projects took place at a time when the US and its allies were deeply suspicious
of the penetration of UNESCO by the Soviet Union. The decision of Moscow to
sign the UNESCO constitution in April 1954, after eight years of boycotting the
organisation, led Dr. George Shuster, the Chairman of the US National Commission
for UNESCO, to issue a statement to Congress asserting ‘the presence of the Soviet
Union in UNESCO makes it more important than ever that the US provide effective
leadership. This is no time to reduce our interest or weaken our participation in the
Organisation.’3 One unlikely beneﬁciary of this was Indian culture. A number of
scholars, artists and conservators from the subcontinent were given scholarships by
the US-based Ford Foundation to participate in the East-West Major Project and tra-
vel to the headquarters of UNESCO and ICCROM in Paris and Rome, respectively.
Many further examples of an unfolding heritage diplomacy in this period could
be cited, but what the East-West Major Project vividly illustrates is the important
shifts taking place at that time in the space of international cultural governance, and
the mechanisms of international cooperation which underpinned it. Decolonisation
and the emergence of intergovernmental and nongovernmental agencies in the 1950s
were recalibrating the political structures within which ideas of culture and heritage
were being discussed, funded and exchanged. Heritage was being incorporated into
a new age of internationalism, one deﬁned by competing nation-state agendas con-
verging via a discourse of international collaboration advanced and mediated by
intergovernmental agencies like UNESCO, ICCROM and ICOM. In Asia, India was
far from alone in responding to this new dynamic. Japan’s post-war foreign policy,
oriented by a need to rebuild its image and standing in the region, similarly invoked
a language of mutual understanding to advance a narrative of peace and reconcilia-
tion. As Akagawa (2014) has demonstrated, this involved the development of an
ambitious cultural diplomacy programme designed to project a new image of Japan
into East and Southeast Asia.

Since this period – with the number of actors operating in the space of gover-
nance continuing to proliferate internationally – the arena of diplomacy has, by
implication, also evolved structurally; a transition some have described as a shift
from clubs to networks (Heine 2013). Rapid decolonisation meant the UN was made
up of more than 130 member states by the early 1970s, up from the 51 that consti-
tuted its founding in 1945. As Berridge (2010) notes, given the postcolonial sensi-
bilities and alignments that emerged in this period,
the nature of international
decision-making needed to evolve towards a culture of consensus. Precarious cold
war security, together with the struggle for economic sovereignty, meant the pursuit
of national interests ran alongside and thus shaped the ethos of internationalism in
the decades after World War II. The continuing trend towards economic integration
and the sedimentation of international law in a multitude of areas would, however,
ensure that mechanisms of global governance continued to be established. The

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1005

it

is important

post-war ideals of global economic and political recovery had created a new breed
of institution that sought to create order in the international space, namely the World
Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Trade Organisation (WTO) and
International Labour Organisation (ILO). As numerous studies have shown though,
in inﬂuencing both national and international economies via the discourse of ‘de-
velopment’, such institutions have consistently represented the interests of developed
states and the so-called Global North. Gosovic (2000) referred to this new landscape
of international governance and its ideational agendas as a ‘global intellectual hege-
mony’. Equally however,
to recognise the various organisations
designed to counter this power structure, which formed from the 1970s onwards.
Leaving aside those designed to deal with shared political and economic interests,
the formation of the Islamic Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organisation, or
ISESCO,
in 1982 represents one example of an agency conceived to facilitate
international collaboration and cooperation of non-Western countries in the ﬁeld of
culture.4 Complicating this picture still further has been the widespread emergence
of the non-governmental sector. Transnational civil society groups and locally based
non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) have dramatically pluralised debates
around development and conservation to include themes such as gender, human
rights, environmental sustainability and so forth, and at the same time added a vital
and critical voice to the debate about North–South relations and the inequalities cre-
ated both within and across countries by economic globalisation (Hobson 2012;
Exell and Rico 2014).

Clearly then, the ongoing ascendency of global governance in recent decades has
been deﬁned by a signiﬁcant increase in complexity which ensued from this rapid
expansion of actors and decision-makers. As Dobson (2007, 23) notes, it is a situa-
tion that demands a particular mode of analysis: ‘the key to understanding con-
temporary global governance is the capacity to identify the range of actors involved
in the act of management, as well as to uncover the variety of ways in which they
are connected to one another’. In teasing out the question of analytical precision fur-
ther, Philips (2007) presses the importance of carefully delineating between structure
and agency when reading the role of particular institutions in the international sys-
tem, and the importance of not privileging one over the other. For Philips, structural-
ist accounts of global governance too easily accept a sense of ideological consensus
in the contemporary world order; a position that allows them to critique bodies like
the World Bank as having a global reach:

There is a tendency, in discussions about epistemic communities, global technocratic
elites, transnational historic blocs and global development, to underplay the fact that
the dissemination of the Washington Consensus and other such ideas has not led to a
global convergence on these principles, whether we would celebrate or lament such an
eventuality. (2007, 101)

Although primarily concerned with institutions of the international political econ-
omy, Philip’s analysis has deep implications for how we think about the governance
of heritage, both cultural and natural. It is widely recognised that the rise of interna-
tional structures and institutions has ostensibly been a project emanating from the
West, driven by those invested in constructing a liberal order and its associated
forms of power. But in recognising this, it is also crucial to understand how this
structure intersects with and comes up against existing modes of governance operat-
ing at the national and regional level, or indeed in the localised contexts of everyday

1006

T. Winter

life (Smith 2006). Just to give one example, scholarship on heritage includes a spec-
trum of opinion concerning the merits, value and implications of the international
rise of heritage discourses and conservation governance. And yet, across this spec-
trum, from critical heritage theory to conservation advocacy,
intergovernmental
mechanisms of heritage governance, most notably those programmes advanced by
UNESCO, are frequently seen as holding a ‘global reach’, whether it be via law,
planning regulations, or the creation of an internationally roaming symbolic econ-
omy of heritage value. It is a reading, Phillips (2007, 103) suggests that principally
frames UNESCO as integrative; drawing ‘national, regional, subnational, suprana-
tional and all other “levels” of governance into an overarching “global” whole’.
Given the historical account outlined above, and today’s complex networks, I would
suggest signiﬁcant analytical gains can be made by moving towards an analysis that
conceptualises heritage as ‘a plethora of systems of rule which do not coalesce into
a single architecture of “global governance”’ (Phillips 2007, 103).

Whilst there is little doubt the formation of IGOs in the post-war period has
helped advance a particular paradigm and transnational epistemic community, the
governance of culture involves the norms, laws and policies being shaped via an
entanglement of state and non-state actors, and for proﬁt and not for proﬁt institu-
tions (Francioni and Gordley 2013; Harrison 2013). Indeed, heritage has become
one of those sectors of international discourse that can be characterised as a network
of networks. And yet within this, the state appears to be an enduringly powerful
actor. Given international organisations are often ‘ﬂimsy’, as Weiss (2013, 143) puts
it, and lack the resources and political clout to enact their missions, the state remains
a key force in international decision-making. To understand what this means for the
international ﬂow and circulation of ideas, people, funding and policies in the space
of heritage, we need to deﬁne diplomacy and heritage diplomacy at a more concep-
tual level.

Conceptualising heritage diplomacy
Deﬁnitions of diplomacy offer a valuable starting point for thinking through more
precisely what heritage diplomacy entails, and how it might be articulated and
identiﬁed in conceptual terms. A more conventional reading of diplomacy suggests
it is the ‘means by which states articulate, co-ordinate and secure particular or wider
interests’ (Jazbec 2013, 97). Similarly, for Murray et al. (2011, 711), diplomacy is
the ‘institutions and processes by which states, and increasingly others, represent
themselves and their interests to one another in international and world societies’.
The noting of others here recognises the historical account of international gover-
nance outlined above and the proliferation of actors and actions that now constitute
diplomatic activity and process today. Those pursuing more sociological readings of
diplomacy have thus foregrounded process and context in order to understand this
expansion and conceptual complexity. Through such a lens, diplomatic process
entails relationships, negotiation, representation, and in some cases, even art. In
moving beyond its initial base of government departments, embassies and ambas-
sadors, such accounts of diplomacy have thus opened out to include other actors
such as NGOs and IGOs, as well as a wider range of concepts and sectors. To that
end, the 2013 Oxford Handbook of Modern Diplomacy reﬂects this broadening of
debate through the inclusion of discussions of geopolitics, media, cultural diplomacy
and so forth. Likewise, lengthy chapters dedicated to food, refugee, health, sport and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1007

climate diplomacies are an explicit recognition of how diplomatic culture and prac-
tice permeates the conduct of various international sectors today.

At both the conceptual and empirical levels, there are distinct overlaps between
cultural and heritage diplomacy. For Cull, cultural diplomacy is the attempt ‘to man-
through making its (that nation’s) cultural
age the international environment
resources and achievements known overseas and/or facilitating cultural transmis-
sions abroad.’ (Cited in Gienow-Hecht and Donfried 2010, 13). Concise deﬁnitions,
however, belie the ongoing debate surrounding the term’s origins and the merits of
upholding or removing various boundaries, including those between public and cul-
tural, state and non-state, propaganda and information, and the degree to which the
cultural can be separated from the socio-political
(Snow and Taylor 2009).
Grappling with such questions, Gienow-Hecht and Donfried (2010, 8–10) identiﬁes
three schools of thought to account for the different structures and deﬁnitions of cul-
tural diplomacy. The ﬁrst focuses on the tension between propaganda and diplo-
macy, the second addresses those forms of cultural diplomacy outside and beyond
existing political structures, and the third looks at non-state based forms of diplo-
macy. An elaboration of such debates is unnecessary here, but the discussion below
highlights why the questions they raise remain germane to the unfolding nature of
heritage diplomacy today. With both cultural and heritage diplomacy often sitting on
the same side of the divide within Nye’s (2004, 2013) formational distinction of
hard and soft power, should the latter be seen as a subset of the former?

For a number of reasons, I would argue heritage diplomacy needs to be read as
empirically and conceptually distinct from cultural diplomacy. Notwithstanding def-
initional acuity, cultural diplomacy typically pivots around the projection or export
of a particular cultural form as a mechanism of soft power. Film, celebrity, sport or
fashion are among the frequently cited examples of cultural exports that help coun-
tries secure inﬂuence beyond their own national boundaries, with the United States,
France, Italy and India associated with cultivating successful programmes in these
spaces. In contrast, and as we shall see below, heritage diplomacy is more expansive
in that it not only incorporates the export or projection of a particular cultural form,
but also brings into focus bi- and multi-directional cultural ﬂows and exchanges. In
many cases, heritage, as a non-human actor, becomes activated diplomatically
because it speaks to notions of shared culture, even one culture. Equally, and again
as the following sections illuminate, heritage diplomacy extends beyond the use of
culture as a tool for international public and political relations; it acts as an arena of
governance, one that crosses borders, and becomes politicised as it straddles sectors
as diverse as architectural conservation, social development and post-disaster recon-
struction. In this regard, heritage diplomacy can broadly be deﬁned as a set of pro-
cesses whereby cultural and natural pasts shared between and across nations become
subject to exchanges, collaborations and forms of cooperative governance. Crucially,
recognition of heritage as a form of spatial and social governance also means it
incorporates forms of hard power too. This is most tangibly seen when heritage is
part of bigger developmental aid packages and associated structures of international
aid, as well as those instances such as Palestine and the Preah Vihear temple where
the logics of recognition are embedded in claims over territory.

But in looking to unpack this deﬁnition further, it is helpful to tease out the vari-
ous ways heritage acts both in diplomacy and as diplomacy. The following sections
pursue this theme, and the distinction is offered as an analytical heuristic rather than
mutually exclusive categories. Indeed, it is important to recognise and work with

1008

T. Winter

empirical ﬂuidity here if we are to navigate the complex and myriad forms heritage
diplomacy takes on.

Heritage in diplomacy
As noted earlier, one of the deﬁning characteristics of the modern heritage move-
ment has been ‘international cooperation’. 1878, the moment when the Society for
Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB) in Britain decided to include foreign pro-
jects in its programme, stands as one of the landmark dates in this history. Shortly
after the founding of the Society, William Morris travelled to Italy, and upon observ-
ing the removal of mosaics from the baptistry of St Mark’s Cathedral committed to
the establishment of a foreign committee. Hearing news of drastic renovation works
being undertaken at the Cathedral, the committee initiated a public campaign, with
Morris as its spokesperson. In Britain, newspaper stories were written and the writ-
ings of John Ruskin helped raise public appreciation of Venice’s architectural trea-
sures. By contrast, attempts to secure inﬂuence in Italy were less successful.
Ignorance of the Italian Ministerial system, together with blundered attempts to pre-
sent a memorial with 2000 signatures – a petition as such – meant SPAB’s efforts
were met with indignation. Morris and his colleagues were accused of being arro-
gant and morally highhanded in the Italian press and received strident letters of
rebuttal from offended government ministers. As Sharp (2005, 192) notes in his
account of the episode, ‘unfortunately it was too late for diplomacy’. Morris
attempted to shore up credibility for his campaign by establishing an international
committee, recruiting individuals from the United States, Germany, Russia, France
and of course from Italy. Although confrontations rumbled on, SPAB persisted over
a number of years, even expanding their presence in Italy to campaigns for protect-
ing the buildings across a number of cities, including Florence and Ravenna. With
similar preservation campaigns undertaken in Germany in the 1880s, those involved
learnt the art of cooperation:

In the decade after the ﬁrst St Mark’s campaign, the hamﬁsted approach of the St
Marks protest was replaced by a much more sensitive and diplomatic attitude. (Sharp
2005, 197)

Whilst SPAB’s efforts were certainly not the ﬁrst attempt to offer international assis-
tance, they can be considered as inﬂuential in inaugurating a template of inter-gov-
ernmental relations, institutional partnerships, public campaigns and assertions of
national sovereignty vis à vis the material past; one that would come to be repeated
over and over in the modern era. In its blunders, heated exchanges and strategies of
lobbying, the episode represents an early example of the diplomatic entanglements
that have come to be a hallmark of inter-national heritage governance. But equally
importantly, SPAB’s efforts in continental Europe were signiﬁcant in establishing
heritage in the diplomatic relations of nation states at that time. But as Sharp’s
(2005) and Swenson’s (2013) accounts both suggest the ethos of saving culture
through conservation was not only a political project in the recipient country, in this
case Italy, it also formed part of a sense of civic nationalism for the donor country
too. Despite not being an instrument of the state, SPAB encouraged and enabled
Britain to see itself as an enlightened nation, one with institutions and a people com-
mitted to the responsible care of a national culture, both home and abroad. As the
excellent volume by Swenson and Mandler (2013) illustrates, the same would apply

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1009

as Britain transitioned from merely plundering the material past of its colonial ter-
ritories towards a greater concern for preservation over the course of the nineteenth
century. Elsewhere, considerable detail has been offered by postcolonial scholars
concerning the role of distant antiquity in the imperial nationalisms of the nine-
teenth-century Europe, with studies by Hamilakis (2007) and Yalouri (2001) on
Greece, Edwards (2007) on Cambodia, Mitchell (1988) on Egypt, and Soejono
(2009) on the Dutch East Indies among the notable examples here. In such contexts,
the removal of artefacts for museum collections back in the Metropole, together with
in situ archaeology and architectural preservation, came to be framed as a practice
of responsible custodianship towards the material world. As numerous studies show,
such histories were – and remain – deﬁned by controversy, enduring as challenging
conundrums at the very heart of modern heritage diplomacy (Sylvester 2009).

Equally however, by foregrounding the exchange and cooperation dimensions of
diplomacy, we see how these political–material entanglements created important
foundations for the networks of collaboration that solidiﬁed in the aftermath of
World War II. As noted above, the structures of this cooperation became increas-
ingly complex, reﬂecting and responding to their broader national and geopolitical
contexts. The arrival of new nations to the international stage through decolonisation
heralded a new era of sovereignty and property claims over culture, with material
pasts being put to work in the forging of newly formed ‘imagined communities’ in
regions with deep histories of cultural exchange and ﬂows.

Perhaps most signiﬁcantly though, the arrival of the Cold War created a network
of international relations where superpowers advanced more formal strategies of soft
power to secure loyalty and alignment. As Peleggi (forthcoming) and Cherry (2009)
both show, this was evident in Southeast Asia during the Cold War, such that Thai
archaeology was supported by Western based networks and Vietnamese archaeology
by the Soviet Union. Looking more broadly, Luke and Kersel (2013) argue archaeol-
ogy emerged as an important component of foreign policy for the US government at
that time. But as I have suggested in the example of India’s involvement in the East-
West Major Project above, to understand this involves tracing complex networks of
interconnections between funding bodies such as the Rockefeller or Ford Founda-
tions, Europe-based agencies including ICCROM, ICOM and UNESCO, and national
and subnational institutions located elsewhere in the world. Since the end of the Cold
War, the networks of agencies involved in militarised spaces have expanded dramati-
cally as state based ‘coalitions’ and non-governmental agencies have increasingly
looked to heritage as a mechanism of conﬂict resolution and recovery. Wars in the
Balkans in the 1990s and the Middle East in the 2000s both procured constellations
of agencies involved in conservation diplomacy, as Galaty (2011), Luke (2013),
Rothﬁeld (2008) and Stone, Farchakh, and Fisk (2008) have all shown.

But it is also important to look beyond instances of war and post-war reconstruc-
tion to ﬁnd the less obvious ways in which heritage now operates within diplomatic
ties between states today. To that end, a multitude of examples could be cited, but in
exploring this sense of heritage in diplomacy, the aim here is to highlight the various
ways in which heritage ﬁgures into existing diplomatic ties and policy structure built
around trade, the bonds of colonialism, conﬂict or other strategic alliances. Within
such instances, heritage diplomacy often revolves around conservation aid, whereby
one country exports assistance to another; the Netherlands to Indonesia, Japan to
Egypt,
In addition to actual
conservation work, assistance can also include technology transfer, the training of

the US to Iraq. This takes on multiple forms.

1010

T. Winter

professionals and institute building – both of which are commonly referred to as
capacity building – or in the case of physical heritage sites, the development of man-
agement plans and upgrading of infrastructures related to urban planning or tourism
development. In such cases, heritage diplomacy is not dependent upon the notion of
mutual or shared culture as a mediator of relations. It is an argument that can per-
haps be most vividly demonstrated through the example of recent World Heritage
Committee meetings. The BRICs5 alignments Meskell (2014) accounts for in the
2012 and 2013 meetings, which includes an alignment between Russia and India
over nominations to the List, is not contingent upon a particular site speaking to a
cultural or historical conjoining. The nature of the heritage is not a variable in their
diplomatic alignment. Indeed, what studies by Meskell (2012, 2013) and Brumann
(2014) show is the various and sometimes unexpected ways heritage can be folded
into a political and bureaucratic culture that emerges from those multilateral and
bilateral relations which underpin the UN system today.

Heritage as diplomacy
These same meetings, however, equally demonstrate some of the ways in which her-
itage acts as diplomacy. As I have argued elsewhere, much of the momentum for
overturning the advice of the expert bodies in recent World Heritage Committee meet-
ings has come from state parties invoking a language of shared heritage. Terms such
as ﬂows, crossroads, cultural links, bridges, and histories of pilgrimage are liberally
used to justify inscription on the World Heritage List. Support for the nomination of
Historic Jeddah, the Gate to Makkah in 2014 primarily came from those members of
the committee able to proclaim historical or cultural afﬁnities. With the meeting tak-
ing place in Qatar, such interventions were explicit diplomatic gestures to the coun-
tries of the Arab region and Islam more broadly. But rather than construct the site and
its histories as a cultural or religious Other, speeches by Portugal, Jordan and other
members of the committee were carefully worded to highlight the historical connec-
tions of region, religion and trade; narratives of a shared heritage that pre-dates the
modern nation-state. It is now commonplace in these annual meetings for interven-
tions to be oriented around heritage as the bridge between nations, whereby connec-
tions from the past are signalled as the basis for future cooperation. Within the
discussion of Japan’s nomination of the Tomioka Silk Mills and Related Sites, for
example, the Turkish ambassador skilfully connected Turkey’s own history of silk
production to multiple sites and cultural traditions across Asia and Europe in order to
propose future modes of cooperation. Such moments illustrate how countries have
become increasingly adept at articulating how their own culture has diplomatic value,
both in the past and present. Sluga’s (2013) arguments regarding the opening up of
the state through the ongoing advance of liberal democracy and international capital
over the course of the twentieth century, noted earlier, are substantiated by what we
see in today’s World Heritage system. It is an arena that explicitly encourages states
to be internationally disposed, wherein norms of cooperation rely upon internation-
alised cultural nationalisms and the building of bridges through the identiﬁcation of
shared pasts. Sites like Angkor vividly demonstrate how this process plays out on the
ground today (Winter 2007). The propensity for countries to collaborate over serial
and joint nominations, constructing discourses and spaces of heritage that straddle
between and across their territories also reﬂects a trend towards using the world her-
itage framework as a mechanism for bilateral relations.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1011

Beyond this intergovernmental forum of cultural governance, culture in all its
forms is being activated as an agent of diplomacy. As we know, food, archaeological
remains, dress, music or monumental and vernacular architecture can all tell of cul-
tural connections, ﬂows and exchanges. But here we need to differentiate between
cultural relations and heritage diplomacy. The latter comes into play at particular
moments, particular contexts; where such cultural forms come to be directly or indi-
rectly enmeshed in foreign policy, or become subject to forms of governance driven
by internationally operating institutions invested in their conservation and manage-
ment. As noted in the introduction, shared cultural pasts foster both contestation and
cooperation. But this simple observation begs the more challenging question of what
conditions and forms of heritage elicit one over the other. Clearly, in connecting to
issues of territory and property, buildings and archaeological remains are prone to an
intensity of contestation and cooperation rarely seen in movable objects, even those
caught up in museum controversies. However, the degree to which UNESCO’s con-
vention on intangible heritage has facilitated cooperation and intracultural dialogue
between countries or, conversely, increased diplomatic tensions over dance, textiles
or cuisines remains unclear.

the political work heritage is being put

As the intentional destruction of cultural heritage in Syria and Iraq by ISIS in
early 2015 illustrated,
to continues to
increase. In addition to being appropriated for nation-building in ever more subtle
and far-reaching ways, cultural heritage is also increasingly incorporated into various
areas of international discourse. From debates about sustainability, citizenship and
identity, to the challenges of climate change and the international ﬁght against vio-
lent extremism, talk of heritage features more prominently than ever before. This
means the degree to which heritage is mobilised as diplomacy also continues to
ﬂourish. It was noted above that these categories of heritage in and as diplomacy
should not be considered as mutually exclusive. Indeed, it is important to read criti-
cally when and why such a distinction is being deliberately collapsed. For different
reasons, states around the world are pursuing a language of ‘shared heritage’ to
semantically shift material culture from one category to the other. Architecture,
archaeological remains, traditional dance forms, food and textiles are among those
cultural forms being discursively framed as shared heritage by former colonial pow-
ers and rising regional powers alike in the name of creating forms of historical and
cultural conjoining, a process that gives signiﬁcantly more diplomatic weight to their
contemporary international relations. Claims by India and Saudi Arabia of being cul-
tural and religious centres, for example, are diplomatically expedient when conduct-
ing relations with neighbouring countries that ‘share’ the cultural pasts of Buddhism
and Islam, respectively. Elsewhere, the British museum is using a discourse of cos-
mopolitanism to justify its ownership of the Elgin Marbles, such that notions of
post-national cultural signiﬁcance are invoked via expressions of antiquity as a
shared European heritage, conjoining Britain and Greece in ways that seek to
smooth out a diplomatically tense situation (Cuno 2014). Together, such examples
vividly illustrate why heritage as diplomacy is considerably more politically potent,
than merely heritage in diplomacy.

Conclusion
The ‘year zero’ destruction of the cultural past by ISIS in Iraq and Syria in 2015
presented a profound challenge for states and the ‘international community’ and

1012

T. Winter

revealed a new cultural politics that rendered existing diplomatic structures largely
ineffectual, and even counter-productive. Despite this, the widespread condemnation
by organisations and experts around the world illustrated how a concern for preserv-
ing, managing and protecting the cultural past has been one of the deﬁning features
of the modern era. Indeed, as I have suggested here the material past and its con-
servation has been a key mediator of the relations between nations, their govern-
ments and their people over the last one hundred and ﬁfty years or so. The desire to
preserve and curate material culture has at once brought nations together and
simultaneously kept them apart. Whilst extensive attention has been given to themes
like destruction, dissonance and conﬂict, it has been argued here that our under-
standing of material culture as an agent of diplomacy and diplomatic ties, bilateral,
multilateral and networked, remains much less developed.

With much of the academic focus on the globalisation of heritage focusing on
key agencies such as UNESCO, the complexities of the international ordering of
heritage governance and the different ways heritage has mediated international rela-
tions across different regions of the world over time has yet to be teased out. We
need to better understand the complex forces, the political logics that mean coopera-
tion and contestation coexist as two sides of the same coin. Productive work can be
done in reading more carefully how the international governance of culture works
and moves across space and boundaries, wherein networks of intergovernmental and
non-governmental actors now mediate the dance between the national and the
international. There is little doubt heritage will continue to be folded into new politi-
cal relations as it is further embedded in debates and initiatives around sustainability,
human rights, urbanism,
intercultural dialogue and so forth. Given international
cooperation in the heritage and conservation sector is largely oriented by an ideo-
logical commitment to resisting the transformative forces of mobile capital, heritage
diplomacy can also bring into focus fascinating tensions and contradictions, reveal-
ing how these agencies can actually serve the agendas of neoliberalism by mobilis-
ing culture and the state for economic purposes.

Finally, the paper has offered the broad-based conceptual foundations of gover-
nance and diplomacy as the basis for constructing a framework for understanding
some of the key forces that give shape and direction to these developments. I have
suggested that understanding the different ways heritage has been mobilised as
diplomacy and in diplomacy offers a valuable starting point for disentangling some
important but under theorised aspects of heritage in the modern era. But I have also
argued that heritage diplomacy provides a uniquely valuable vantage point for
understanding the various ways this landscape is now shifting under conditions of
global change, as states and other actors in different parts of the world increasingly
utilise a language of heritage and the governance of culture in their broader political
and economic relations and strategies.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge Toyah Horman for her help in organising and clarify-
ing data in this paper. This work was supported by the Australia Research Council Discovery
Scheme under Grant DP140102991 – The Crisis in International Heritage Conservation in an
Age of Shifting Global Power.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1013

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Funding
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council [grant number DP140102991].

Notes
1. Cited from Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, School of Humanistic Studies.
1960. Aims of the Courses. Calcutta: p1. See File: 008(540) A 01 RMIC, UNESCO
Archives, Paris.

2. Cited from Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, School of Humanistic Studies.
1960. Aims of the Courses. Calcutta: p3–4. See File: 008(540) A 01 RMIC, UNESCO
Archives, Paris.

3. US National Commission for UNESCO Statement by Dr George N Shuster, NC(54)7.
UNESCO archives, Paris, File no X 07.21 (470) Relations with USSR – Ofﬁcial Part I
up to 31/XII/63.

4. For further details of ISESCO activities and regional inﬂuence see Winter (2014).
5. BRICS is the acronym for an association of ﬁve major emerging national economies:

Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.

Notes on contributor
Tim Winter is a Research Professor at Deakin University, Melbourne. He has published
widely on heritage, development, modernity, urban conservation and tourism in Asia and is
editor of The Routledge Handbook of Heritage in Asia, and Shanghai Expo; An International
Forum on the Future of Cities (Routledge 2013). He is currently working on a book on
Heritage Diplomacy.

References
Akagawa, N. 2014. Heritage Conservation and Japan’s Cultural Diplomacy: Heritage,

National Identity and National Interest. London: Routledge.

Berridge, G. 2010. Diplomacy: Theory and Practice. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Black, J. 2010. A History of Diplomacy. London: Reaktion.
Brumann, C. 2014. “Shifting Tides of World-making in the UNESCO World Heritage Con-

vention: Cosmopolitanisms Colliding.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 37 (12): 2176–2192.

Cameron, C., and M. Rössler. 2013. Many Voices, One Vision: The Early Years of the World

Heritage Convention. Farnham: Ashgate.

Cherry, H. 2009. “Digging Up the Past: Prehistory and the Weight of the Present

in

Vietnam.” Journal of Vietnamese Studies 4 (1): 84–144.

Cuno, J. 2014. “Culture War: The Case against Repatriating Museum Artifacts.” Foreign
Affairs November/December. Accessed December 9. http://www.foreignaffairs.com/arti
cles/142185/james-cuno/culture-war

Dobson, H. 2007. “Global Governance and the Group of Seven/Eight.” In Global Gover-
nance and Japan: The Institutional Architecture, edited by G. Hook and H. Dobson,
23–39. London: Routledge.

Edwards, P. 2007. Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation 1860–1945. Honolulu: University

of Hawaii Press.

Exell, K., and T. Rico, eds. 2014. Cultural Heritage in the Arabian Peninsula: Debates,

Discourses and Practices. Farnham: Ashgate.

Francioni, F., and J. Gordley, eds. 2013. Enforcing International Cultural Heritage Law.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

1014

T. Winter

Galaty, M. 2011. “Blood of Our Ancestors: Cultural Heritage Management in the Balkans.”
In Contested Cultural Heritage: Religion, Nationalism, Erasure, and Exclusion in a
Global World, edited by H. Silverman, 109–124. New York: Springer.

Gamble, A. 2007. “Conclusion: The Meaning of Global Governance.” In Global Governance
and Japan: The Institutional Architecture, edited by G. Hook and H. Dobson, 232–244.
London: Routledge.

Gienow-Hecht, J., and M. Donfried. 2010. “The Model of Cultural Diplomacy: Power, Dis-
tance, and the Promise of Civil Society.” In Searching for a Cultural Diplomacy, edited
by J. Gienow-Hecht and M. Donfried, 13–29. New York, NY: Berghahn Books.

Gosovic, B. 2000. “Global

Intellectual Hegemony and the International Development

Agenda.” International Social Science Journal 52 (166): 447–456.

Hamilakis, Y. 2007. The Nation and Its Ruins: Antiquity, Archaeology, and National Imag-

ination in Greece. New York: Oxford University Press.

Harrison, R. 2013. Heritage: Critical Approaches. London: Routledge.
Heine, J. 2013. “From Club to Network Diplomacy.” In The Oxford Handbook of Modern
Diplomacy, edited by A. F. Cooper, J. Heine, and R. C. Thakur, 54–69. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Hobson, J. M. 2012. The Eurocentric Conception of World Politics. New York: Cambridge

University Press.

Jazbec, M. 2013. “The Sociology of Diplomacy: A General Outline with Some Aspects and
Dilemmas.” Perspectives: Central European Review of International Affairs 21 (1):
87–108.

Lane, P. 2013. French Scientiﬁc and Cultural Diplomacy. Liverpool: Liverpool University

Press.

Luke, C. 2013. “Cultural Sovereignty in the Balkans and Turkey: The Politics of Preservation

and Rehabilitation.” Journal of Social Archaeology 13 (3): 350–370.

Luke, C., and M. Kersel. 2013. U.S. Cultural Diplomacy and Archaeology: Soft Power, Hard

Heritage. New York: Routledge.

Mazower, M. 2012. Governing the World: The History of an Idea. New York: Penguin Press.
Meskell, L. 2012. “The Rush to Inscribe: Reﬂections on the 35th Session of the World Her-
itage Committee, UNESCO Paris, 2011.” Journal of Field Archaeology 37 (2): 145–151.
Meskell, L. 2013. “UNESCO’s World Heritage Convention at 40.” Current Anthropology 54

Meskell, L. 2014. “States of Conservation: Protection, Politics, and Pacting within UNES-

CO’s World Heritage Committee.” Anthropological Quarterly 87 (1): 217–243.

Mitchell, T. 1988. Colonising Egypt. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Muppidi, H. 2012. The Colonial Signs of International Relations. London: Hurst & Co.
Murray, S., P. Sharp, G. Wiseman, D. Criekemans, and J. Melissen. 2011. “The Present and
Future of Diplomacy and Diplomatic Studies.” International Studies Review 13 (4): 709–
728.

Nye, J. S. 2004. Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics. New York: Public

Affairs.

Nye, J. S. 2013. “Hard, Soft, and Smart Power.” In The Oxford Handbook of Modern Diplo-
macy, edited by A. F. Cooper, J. Heine, and R. C. Thakur, 559–574. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Peleggi, M. Forthcoming. Excavating Prehistory in the Cold War: Archaeology and Ameri-

can Neocolonialism in 1960s and 1970s Thailand. Currently in press.

Phillips, N. 2007. “Global Governance and the World Bank.” In Global Governance and
Japan: The Institutional Architecture, edited by G. Hook and H. Dobson, 92–109.
London: Routledge.

Prakash, A., and J. Hart. 1999. “Globalization and Governance: An Introduction.” In Global-

ization and Governance, edited by A. Prakash and J. Hart, 1–23. London: Routledge.

Riello, G. Forthcoming. With Great Pomp and Magniﬁcence’: Royal Gifts and the Embassies

between Siam and France in the 1680s. Currently in Press.

Rothﬁeld, L. 2008. Antiquities under Siege: Cultural Heritage Protection after the Iraq War,

Lanham. MD: AltaMira Press.

Said, E. 1993. Culture and Imperialism. London: Chatto and Windus.
Said, E. 1995. Orientalism. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

(4): 483–494.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

1015

See Seng, T., and A. Acharya. 2008. “Introduction.” In Bandung Revisited: The Legacy of
the 1955 Asian-African Conference for International Order, edited by T. See Seng and
A. Acharya, 1–18. Singapore: NUS Press.

Sharp, F. 2005. “Exporting the Revolution: The Work of the SPAB outside Britain 1878–
1914.” In From William Morris: Building Conservation and the Arts and Crafts Cult of
Authenticity 1877–1939, edited by C. Miele, 187–212. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

Sluga, G. 2013. Internationalism in the Age of Nationalism. Philadelphia, PA: University of

Pennsylvania Press.

York: Routledge.

Smith, L. 2006. Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Snow, N., and P. M. Taylor, eds. 2009. Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New

Soejono, R. 2009. “The Indonesia Reader: History, Culture, Politics.” In The Genesis of
Indonesian Archaeology, edited by T. Hellwig and E. Tagliacozzo, 27–33. Durham: Duke
University Press.

Stone, P. G., J. Farchakh, and R. Fisk. 2008. The Destruction of Cultural Heritage in Iraq.

Woodbridge: Boydell Press.

Swenson, A. 2013. The Rise of Heritage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swenson, A., and P. Mandler, eds. 2013. From Plunder to Preservation: Britain and the Her-

itage of Empire, C.1800–1940. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sylvester, C. 2009. Art/Museums: International Relations Where We Least Expect It. Boulder,

CO: Paradigm.

UNESCO. 1945. “Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization.” UNESCO. Accessed December 1. http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=15244&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html

Weiss, T. G. 2013. Global Governance: Why? What? Whither? Cambridge: Polity.
Winter, T. 2007. Post-conﬂict Heritage, Postcolonial Tourism: Culture, Politics and Develop-

Winter, T. 2014. “Heritage Studies and the Privileging of Theory.” International Journal of

ment at Angkor. London: Routledge.

Heritage Studies 20 (5): 556–572.

Wong, L. E. 2008. “Relocating East and West: UNESCO’s Major Project on the Mutual
Appreciation of Eastern and Western Cultural Values.” Journal of World History 19 (3):
349–374.

Yalouri, E. 2001. The Acropolis. Oxford: Berg.
Yapp, L. 2014. “Deﬁne ‘Mutual’: Heritage Diplomacy in the Postcolonial Netherlands.”
Paper presented at the Association of Critical Heritage Studies, 2nd Biennial Conference,
Canberra, December 2.


