International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Post independence in eastern Europe: Managing
the built heritage; the Belarus example

Robert D. Pickard

To cite this article: Robert D. Pickard (1997) Post independence in eastern Europe: Managing
the built heritage; the Belarus example, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 3:2, 81-94, DOI:
10.1080/13527259708722192
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259708722192

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 106

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Key words
Belarus
Granada  Convention
Malta Convention
Council of Europe
Architectural Heritage
Archaeological Heritage
Conservation

Post Independence  in Eastern
Europe: managing the built heritage;
the Belarus  example
Robert D. Pickard
Abstract
The Republic of Belarus is one the newly independent countries of eastern Europe which
aspires to gain membership of the  Council of Europe. This places an obligation on such
aspirant countries  to fulfil  the  requirements of  certain conventions. The Granada  and
Malta  Conventions set  out  obligations in  the  field  of  heritage protection and identify
that  parties  should  seek  to  exchange information  on  their  conservation policies and
afford mutual  technical assistance by sharing experiences. In  this  context  a programme
of support  initiated by  the  Council of  Europe to provide technical assistance  regarding
the development of heritage legislation and policy is reviewed.

This  paper  briefly  examines  the  context  of  the  built  heritage  in  Belarus
during 
the  period  of  Soviet  control  and,  in  more  detail,  the  development  of
machinery  for  its  protection  since  independence  by  particular  reference  to  the
capital  city  of  Minsk.  It  seeks  to  identify  current  issues  concerned  with 
the
development  of  management  approaches for  the  conservation  process  which  are
pertinent  to  many  other  eastern  and  central  European  countries  and  the  progress
made  in fulfilling  the  articles  of  the  Granada and  Malta  Conventions.  Moreover,  it
examines  the  action  presently  being  taken  by  the  Council  of  Europe  to  assist  this
process  by  way  of an  example  of  the  current  policy  to  support  countries  undergoing
transition  to  a  market  economy.

One  of the  key  factors  in  restoring  the  fortunes  of the  countries  of eastern  and
central Europe since the break up of the Soviet Union is the reestablishment  of a
sense of national pride. The physical presence of the built heritage has a material
and  spiritual  value.  Investing  in  cultural  assets  is  an  important = step  towards
sustaining  the  whole  of  society.  In  practical  terms  the  task  of  developing  new
legislation  and  administrative  systems  to  manage  the  built  environment  is  a
complex  process.  Heritage  assets  cannot  be  considered  in  isolation  as  the
privatisation  of property  rights,  new development,  investment,  taxation,  tourism,
social  and  environmental  issues  also  have  relevance.  A  balance  is  needed
between  setting  a  regulatory  tone  and  encouraging  investment  (safeguarding
both  public  and  private  rights)  as  these  countries  attempt,  at  varying  paces, to
move towards free-market  economy status.

Moreover,  while  the  concept  of  decentralisation  of  power  is  gradually  being
realised in administrative functions,  experience in this field is limited. The need to
ensure  effective  co-operation  between  different  levels  of  government  in  the
administration  of functions  is evident. Likewise the entrepreneurial  spirit must be
understood  within  official  processes  as  heritage  conservation  has  an  economic
base.  These  are  issues  which  the  Cultural  Heritage  Division  of  the  Council  of
Europe is now addressing in a developing programme of support.

IJHS 3(2)  81-94  © Intellect Ltd  1997

81

1.  Compendium  of Basic
Texts of the Council of
Europe in the Field of
Cultural Heritage, CC-PAT
(96)  58  rev.  Council  of
Europe,  1996.

2.  Convention for the
Protection of the
Architectural Heritage
1985, (the Granada
Convention) and  the
European  Convention  on
the Protection of the
Archaeological Heritage
(revised),  1992,  (the
Malta Convention).

Technical assistance by the Council of Europe
In  1992  the  Cultural  Heritage  Committee  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (CC-PAT),
under  the auspices of the Council for  Cultural Co-operation  (CDCC), which  unites
the  44  states  that  have  signed  the  European  Cultural  Convention  (1954),
commenced  a  technical  consultancy  and  assistance  programme.  Specifically  this
programme  has  offered  practical  assistance  to  meet  the  requirements  of  cultural
heritage  conservation  and  since  1993  it  has  provided  the  opportunity  for
technical  experts to assist in  the  formulation  of Specific  Action  Plans designed to
streamline  and  co-ordinate  the  work  commenced  in-the  new  Member  States of
the Council of Europe and  other signatories to the European  Cultural  Convention
mainly from  eastern  and  central Europe. This includes sixteen new members  and
a  further five countries  aspiring  to  full  membership. Since  1994  the  system  has
also provided follow-up  programmes to support the efforts  made by countries  that
have  given  effect  to  the  actions  and  strategies  indicated  following  technical  co-
operation missions.1

Under  this  programme  technical  co-operation  missions  have  been  conducted
in the three Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia as well as the Czech
and  Slovak  republics  and  in  the  war-ravaged  countries  of  former  Yugoslavia.
However,  in  1996  it was decided  to establish  a monitoring  and  evaluation  body
to support countries which  are having particular problems in transferring  to free-
market economy status. The Legislative Support Task Force (LSTF) comprises five.
technical  members  from  different  countries  to  provide  a  cross-section  of
experience  and  expertise.  The  views  of  these  members  are  coordinated  by  a
Special Adviser  to  the  Head  of the  Cultural  Heritage  Committee  and  to  the CC-
PAT Secretariat. The first countries to express an interest in this programme were
Belarus,  Russia,  Latvia,  Georgia,  Albania  and  Slovakia.  Since  the  LSTF became
operative  in  February  1997  new  heritage  legislation  adopted  in  Belarus  and
Latvia  and  a  draft  Bill provided  by  Georgia  have  been  considered.  The  scope of
review is intended  to widen  once other countries  are  able to provide  information
on  their  developing  laws  and  policies. However,  the  particular  difficulties  being
incurred  in  some countries  may  delay  this  process  as is evidenced  by the  recent
political turmoil in Albania.

In  the  context  of  this  developing  programme,  and  the  desires  of  these
countries  to  become  full  members  of  the  Council  of  Europe,  the  aim  of  this
assistance  is  to  enable  them  to  satisfy  the  objective  of  the  European  Cultural
Convention  (1954), i.e. to achieve greater unity between members of the Council
of Europe for the purposes of 'safeguarding  and realising the ideals and principles
which  are  their  common  heritage'  and,  specifically,  to  enable them  to  ratify  the
European  conventions  on 
the  architectural  and  archaeological  heritage,
respectively the Granada and Malta Conventions.2 These are international treaties
which  are binding  on  States which  are  party  to them. The Granada  Convention
provides  27  articles  under  the  broad  themes  of:  definition  of  the  architectural
heritage;  identification  of  properties;  statutory  protection  procedures;  ancillary
measures  (such  as  financial  support); sanctions; conservation  policies  (including
the  integration  with  town  and  country  planning  objectives);  participation  and
training;  European  co-ordination;  and  includes  a  number  of  more  generalised
articles concerning the signing of the convention, and the ratification,  acceptance

82

Robert Pickard

or  approval of proposals deposited with
the  Council  of  Europe.  The  Malta
Convention  provides  eighteen  articles
under similar themes.

3.  U. Novik,  Belarus - A
New  Country in Eastern
Europe. Technalohija.
1994.

Action in relation to  Belarus
The first  action by CC-PAT to assist the
Belarussian  authorities  in  the field of
heritage  conservation  commenced  in
1996  via a  fact-finding  mission  to the
city  of Minsk.  This  demonstrated  the
situation  that  had  existed  prior  to
independence  and  the  extent  of the
task  which  has  now  commenced  to
bring  a  new  recognition  of  the
importance  of the  archaeological and
architectural 
for  which
heritage  officials  are seeking  assistance
from  CC-PAT  and  the  LSTF.  In  this
context  the progress  in  setting  up an
effective  machinery  for  protecting the
heritage,  and the  extent  to  which  it
will  satisfy  the  Granada  and  Malta
Conventions, is addressed.

heritage 

Figures 1 and 2.  The Catholic Cathedral of St.
Mary  as it was in the late 19th century and
more recently with  a Soviet Empire style
frontage which is being dismantled while the
towers are being reconstructed according  to
architectural records. Internally  the  building
was adapted for use as a concert hall. Wall
paintings, finishes and arches are  being
restored by the Polish firm PKZ under the
supervision of Belarussian  conservators.

Conservation under  Soviet
control
Up to the early  20th  century,  Belarus
had  a rich  diversity of country  estates,
castles, churches and cathedrals. Much
of  this  legacy  was  ruined  by  the
occupying  Nazi  army  during  World
War  II. Minsk,  the  ancient  capital of
Belarus, was 95% destroyed. Following
the  war,  the  official  Soviet  attitude
towards  the  built  heritage  was not
positive.3 
religion
resulted  in the destruction  of churches
if they could not be adapted  (Figures 1
and 2). In Minsk, the historic core was
ripped  apart  by new communications
systems  and  mass  housing  schemes.
The  best 
examples  of  complete
architectural  styles that  remain in any
number  today are the grand  boulevard
developments  of Soviet  Empire  design
and 
the
Constructivist  style (Figure 3).

examples  of 

Intolerance 

isolated 

to 

Post-independence  in Eastern  Europe

83

In  1983  the  Communist  Party  of
Belarus  approved  the destruction  of all
standing monuments  that  could not be
adapted to other uses. However, despite
the unfavourable  political climate there
was  a  marked  change 
in  public
opinion  from  this  date  led principally
by  the Belarussian  Voluntary  Society
for  Historical  and Cultural  Monuments
Protection. As a body of expert opinion
it  was able  to give  advice  to all levels
of  local  administration  which  had
responsibility  for  the  protection  of
monuments  following 
legislation  in
1984  and  19864  and  acted  as  a
pressure  group  on  all  aspects  of the
cultural built heritage.

Figure 3.  Government buildings c  1926-7.

4. 'On the Protection
and Using of the
Monuments of History
and Culture' 1984 and
1986.

An investigation  of all archaeological monuments  within  Belarussian  territory
was  carried  out during  the early  1980s.  In  1984-5  another  investigation was
carried  out under the order of the Ministry of Culture with the aim of preparing
the list of monuments. Assessment of archaeology was seen as important  because
so  many  of the historical  structures  had been  destroyed.  Records  of buildings,
plans and archaeological data were needed for the reconstruction of the heritage,
an  avenue pursued  because of the vast scale of destruction.

For  example,  in  the  early  1980s  much  of  the  historic  core  of  Minsk lay
derelict.  In  1982 the  Troitzkoye  Predemstye  quarter  was chosen  as  a  model
reconstruction  project.  By 1987 apartments  and  artists'  workshops  had been
developed  in  buildings  with  recreated  facades.  The opportunity  was taken  to
incorporate  new  communications  and  services.  The  ensemble  serves  as  a
reminder  of the old city  within  the built-up  concrete  jungle  of modern  Minsk
(Figure 4).

More recently  this  form  of heritage  protection  has been  criticised.  While the
reconstruction  was purported  to replicate the original finish and configuration of
buildings, modern roofing materials were used and some of the sites were entirely
new.  No real  attempt  was made  to  recreate  the  interiors.  Restoration  work
performed  in  this  period  has  also  been  faulted.  There  was  no  division  of
responsibilities  between  the financing  and supervision  of works. The controlling
inspectors  of  works  did not  have  specialist  expertise  and  projects  were  often
financially  led rather  than  led by the needs of the building. Decisions were made
according to the taste of particular politicians. Nevertheless, it can be fairly  stated
that  the 1980s  brought  a new recognition  of the value  of the heritage  both in
official  terms  and in the eyes of the public. During  the beginning  of perestroika
the task of saving the heritage was officially  recognised.

Post Independence  Heritage  Administration
The  process  of  moving  from  a  totalitarian  system  to  a  democratic  society
commenced  when  Belarus  declared  its economic  and political  independence in
1991.  A Presidential  Republic  was subsequently  formed  in  1994. Inevitably it

84

Robert Pickard

Figure 4.  The
reconstructed  Troitzkoye
Predemstye quarter.

5.  'On  the  Protection  of
Historical  and  Cultural
Heritage1  1992.

6.  Articles  9.4  and  9.5.

been 

have 

engulfed 

will  take  time  to  change  attitudes
which 
in
centralism  since the Bolsheviks came to
power in Belarus in  1919. Even so, the;
establishment  of  high-level  culture
based  on  recapturing  the  values  which
have  developed  throughout  the  history
of  Belarussian  society  is  seen  as  a
necessary  part  of 
the  democratic
process.  This  has  been  identified  in  a
new  heritage  law  which  was  adopted
by  a  Decree  of 
the  Belarussian
government  on  13th  March  1992  and
implemented  in  1993.5

. policy  on 

The  articles  of  this  law  effectively;
cancelled  previous  Soviet  legislation
and  set up new machinery  for  heritage
protection.  State 
the
registration  and  protection  of  historical
monuments  is  now  being  shaped  by  a
new  organisation  set  up  by  the  decree
of  the  Cabinet  of  Ministers  in  1991
(article  6).  The  State  Inspection  on  Historical  and  Cultural  Heritage  Protection
(SIS)  was  set  up  with  an  independent  remit  (article  7)  although  it  was  linked
financially to the Ministry of Culture and  has since been brought  under its direct
control.  Under  article  8  its  officials  are  charged  with  dealing  with  all  policy
matters relating to the preservation of material and spiritual values (as defined in
articles  1, 2,  3 and  45) relating  to architectural  and  archaeological monuments,
their  condition  and  surroundings;  the  protection  of  such  monuments  including
controlling  alteration  work  and  how  they  are  used,  and  the  policing  of  activity
associated with them; research on the heritage in connection with the creation of
a  state register of protected monuments; and implementation  of all aspects of the
law. Article  4  of the  Granada  Convention  and  article  2 of the  Malta  Convention
identify  the need for such a  'competent  authority'.

The process  of registering  and  categorising  monuments  for  protection  on  the
basis  of  their  'historical  or  cultural  value'  is  to  be  determined  by  the  new
Scientific  and Methodological Council (SMC) (articles  11, 18,  19, 20, 21). This is
the  first  step  towards  fulfilling  the  requirements  to  identify  monuments  for
protection  and  prepare  and  maintain  inventories  under  article  2  of  both  the
Granada  and Malta Conventions. Under Soviet law categories of importance were
established  at  three  levels -  the  Soviet  Union  level,  the  Republic  level,  and  the
Local  level. Four  new  levels  of  value  have  replaced  these:  type  0  World  Value;
type  1 International  Importance; type 2 Important  to the culture of the Republic
of Belarus; type 3 Regional Value.6 Spiritual Values have two classifications  Type
A  and  B  -  under  article  45.  While  many  European  countries  have  adopted
different  levels  of  protection,  there  is  no  legal  obligation  to  provide  a  world  or
international  category.  The  LSTF  has  indicated  that  this  aspect  of  the  heritage
law  may  warrant  amendment,  for  example  that  Criteria  for  Selection  in  a

Post-independence  in  Eastern  Europe

85

particular  category  should  be  identified.  The  provisions  also  allow  for  the
protection  of  individual  monuments  and,  separately,  monuments  of  'complex
value'  (article  22)  as  is  required  by  article  2  Granada  Convention,  such  as  an
ensemble of buildings which can be registered  for protection  as a complex as well
as its component parts being separately  registered.

No  values  have  been  attributed  to  monuments  at  the  present  time.  More
research  is  needed  to  provide  information  which  may  be  used  to  determine  the
importance  of and  reevaluate  each  monument.  In  essence  this  process  will  take
the  form  of a review  by the  SMC of all existing  monuments  that  were  protected
under  Soviet  law  and  an  examination  of  new  evidence  relating  to  items  which
may be deemed worthy of protection. Moreover, the SMC will notify  the owner or
user  of any  item newly proposed for  protection,  as well as the  local  authority  in
which it is located, so that temporary protection is given until a decision is made.
This  is  currently  one  of  the  most  significant  actions  of  the  new  administrative
machinery  as  it  has  commenced  a  basis  of  protection  in  accordance  with  the
Granada  and Malta Conventions.

There  is an  intention  to  record  all relevant  historical  information  concerning
monuments on  a Databank  of Cultural Heritage  (article  25)  and  although  this is
yet  to  be  established,  once  in  operation  this  should  satisfy  the  requirements  of
article 2 of both the Granada  and Malta Conventions. The database will store all
scientific,  published  and  other  material  connected  with  registered  monuments of
value. Owners  and occupiers of heritage property will be required  to provide any
information 
including  project  documentation
concerning restoration work. Some preliminary work has been undertaken in this
field (in  Minsk)  with  the  assistance  of  Soyuz  Tech  Services,  a  recently  formed
private company, which has commenced mapping the development of the historic
core of Minsk on behalf of the SIS using information  technology.

their  property 

relating 

to 

The decree proposes to establish  an  independent  Heritage  Foundation  (articles
88 and  89) to provide finance  for restoration  activity under the law. In effect  this
will  be  for  the  branches  of  activities  which  are  not  yet  in  operation  such  as
investigation  and  scientific  research  in  the field of  restoration  and financially to
assist  the  owners  of  monuments.  This  will  aim  to  fulfil  article  6  of  both  the
Granada  and  Malta  Conventions  which  specifically  indicate  the  need  to  arrange
for  public  financial  support  to  maintain  the  architectural  heritage  and  for
archaeological  research. The Foundation  will be funded  from  three  sources. First,
punishment  fines  will  be  made  against  transgressors  of  the  strict  code  of  the
heritage law  (articles  94-97) -  a requirement  for  sanctions is indicated  in/articles
3  and  10  Malta  convention  and  article  9  Granada  Convention.  Secondly,  there
will be  commercial  activity  associated  with  the  use  of heritage  property. Finally,
voluntary contributions  are anticipated  from  Belarussian  nationals who emigrated
during  World War n. The Foundation  will distribute money by collective decision
apart from  where donations have been given for specific projects.

At  the  present  time  the  state  budget  is the  main  source  of  financial  support
(articles  86  and  87).  The  new  regime  recognises  the  need  to  develop  a  more
professional  approach  to the  elaboration  of conservation  projects  than  under  the
Soviet  regime.  Thus  a  dialogue  has  begun  concerning  development  of  the
material,  technical  and  social basis for  works  within  the  possibilities provided by
the state budget. A practical scrutiny of required works will be carried out by the

86 

Robert Pickard

Figure 5. The  settlement
of Sevemy Pereulok,
characteristic of traditional
Minsk  timber buildings,
which is under temporary
protection.

r:

SIS  before  costs  are  determined.  In
other  words,  it is intended  that  works
will now be led by proper analysis and
methodology  and  not  dictated  by
available  finance.  The  SIS  role  in
overseeing  conservation  projects  is to
be  supported  by  the  Committee  for
Restoration 
and  Conservation  of
Historical  and  Cultural  Monuments
(the restoration  committee), established
in  1994,  in  association  with  a
Scientific  Centre. While the 'restoration
committee'  lies  within  the structure of
the  Ministry  of Culture,  its purpose is
to  provide  independent  scrutiny  of the use of available  state  funds.  Since 1991,
91 items of heritage value have been  financed  in this way. However, such  direct
support  will  have to be reduced  in coming  years  due to the present  shortage of
state  funds.

Thus  significant  progress  has been  made  towards  implementing  an  effective

system for the preservation of the Belarussian  cultural built heritage.

Heritage preservation  and urban planning  in  Minsk
The  pre-independence  system  of land-use  planning  in  Belarus  had little  or no
regard  for heritage  protection. For example by 1987, apart  from  the Troitzkoye
Predemstye project,  the city planners of Minsk had expected the total  destruction
of the remaining  historic core. While the heritage law is regarded  as sacrosanct,
there is an obvious necessity to find compromises particularly as pressure mounts
to  transform  the society and economy  of Belarus by allowing new development.
Although  a hierarchy of legislation  has not been  established,  a new relationship
is  currently  being  forged  at the local  level  where  development  control  is now
administered.

This  is perhaps  best  seen  in  Minsk  which,  as the capital  city,  is the main
focus,  albeit limited, of new development  activity. The Committee of Architecture,
Town Planning and Land of the Minsk Executive Committee (the local authority)
has  created  a dialogue with the SIS to safeguard  existing monuments within the
city. The chairmen  of both the SIS and local  committee  have been  co-opted into
the SMC. A new development plan (which will provide the basis for granting new
building  permits)  was  largely  approved  in  1996  subject  to  the  satisfactory
inclusion  of policies for heritage  protection.  These  include five identified  historic
areas within the core which have been the focus of recent study.

However,  other  areas  still  need  to  be  resolved.  These  include  the few
remaining  late  19th- and early  20th-century  timber  buildings  located  in the
suburbs  which  are not registered  as monuments  and stand  in the way of what
is  considered  to  be  opportune  land  for  new  development  (Figure  5).  These
buildings  have  no services  and are in poor  condition  and are considered  to be
too low in the list of priorities for support from the state budget. It is proposed to
relocate  these  buildings  in  an  open-air  museum  where  they  will  be protected
under the heritage law as a territory ensemble, the purpose being to recreate an

Post-independence in Eastern  Europe

87

historical  document  of how people  lived  at  the turn  of the last  century. At
present  the financial resources  for this  project  are not available  and there  is a
danger  that  their  already  poor  condition  will deteriorate  making  them at risk of
being  lost  altogether.  Apart  from  this, it is accepted  that  some of the historical
detail  may  be  lost  in  the  process  of  dismantling, 
transportation  and
reconstruction.

The  LSTF has indicated  the need  to make  a clear  distinction  between  single
monuments  and such  complex  monuments.  Moreover,  while  co-operative  action
has commenced in Minsk, the relationship between urban  planning and heritage
legislation has not been clarified  and in this context there is a need to coordinate
provisions  for  the  protection  of  urban  complexes  and  heritage  protection  in
general  (articles  1 0 - 13 Granada  Convention). Without firm liaison  procedures
the process remains  open to difficulties  concerning  priorities regarding  protection
and  development needs.

A  second  concern  is in relation  to the archaeological  monuments  located in
the  centre  of Minsk  underneath  existing  structures  and roads. The birth  of the
city is covered by five metres depth of soil and is known  to include remnants of
buildings  dating  back  to the  llth  century.  There  is a  desire  to preserve  such
ancient  monuments  with  so little  of the standing  heritage  remaining  and they
have been indicated for protection in the new development plan. The hope, is that
any  new development  in this  area  will  provide money  for further  investigation.
However,  as with  the situation  of urban  complexes,  there  is a  need  to have  a
legislative  approach  to the integration  of urban  planning  and the protection of
the archaeological heritage  (article 5 Malta Convention).

In  connection  with  this  a  major  initiative  has been  commenced  by the SIS,
with the support of the local authority, to regenerate part of one of the identified
areas  in the historic  core  which  dates  back to the 12th century,  known  as the
Upper Town. The intention is to recreate the area as a cultural and tourist centre
with a balance of commercial uses to attract  capital investment. The idea is that
business  development  will  be  used  to  support  financially  a  programme  of
restoration  and reconstruction.

The Upper Town  regeneration
The present  initiative was forged  out of an earlier,  failed,  programme  in which
the  local  authority  rehoused  remaining  residents  and  handed  over  existing
buildings  to  commercial  companies.  However,  the  economic  situation  in
Belarus  prevented  any  financial  support  from  the  state  budget.  Investing
companies  were  not  prepared  to  pay the cost  of  servicing  the  whole  area.
Moreover,  legislation  restricted  the  right  to lease  property  to five years.  With
works  estimated  to  take  three  years  this  only  allowed  two years  to  receive
income  from  sub-letting  restored  property.  This  was insufficient  to recoup the
cost  of works  and so there  was no incentive  to  invest.  Without  supervision,
many of the buildings were vandalised  and some have been totally  lost.

The task of regenerating  this quarter is complex and controversial. Two main
problems are apparent. The first relates to the approach to be adopted bearing in
mind  the earlier  much  criticised  approach  taken  in the Troitzkoye  Predemstye
quarter.  The  second  problem  is  related  to  how  the  programme  can  be
economically  implemented  bearing  in  mind  that  there  is  a  desire  to  use a

88 

Robert Pickard

Figure 6. The
commencement of
restoration works  to an
18th-century  building in
the  Upper Town.

considerable number of the buildings or
sites  for  cultural  purposes  (and  as
tourist  attractions)  including  a  library,
a  music  school,  a  concert  hall,  a
theatre  and  a  cultural 
foundation,
which  the  state  budget  cannot  afford
and  otherwise  have  little  commercial
value.

The 

by 
and 

record  of 

first  problem 

has  been
examining
approached 
archaeological 
topographical
records  of  buildings  and  streets  from
research  conducted  between  1974  and
1994  backed  up with  archive details of
architectural  plans  and  photographs  to
provide  a  detailed 
the
historical  development  of  the  Upper  Town.  The  original  street  and  building
configuration  that  existed  in  the  late  19th  century  will  be  recreated.  Further
work  is  planned  for  'stationary  archaeological  excavations'  with  preliminary
investigations  taking  place  by  trial  bores  before  construction  work  commences,
and  archaeological  supervision  of  building  works  associated  with  original  sites.
The intention  is  that  the  remains  of standing  buildings  will be restored  and  lost
buildings  and  streets  will  be  reconstructed  -  the  latter  will  be  for  commercial
propositions  and  according to extant elevation  plans. The idea will be to  attempt
to  represent  the  most  characteristic  features  of  these  buildings  externally  with
interior  finishes  provided  in  a  modern  style.  In  general,  reconstruction  will  not
apply  to  extant  buildings;  however,  where  only  fragments  remain  the  SIS  has
approved demolition.

The regeneration  process will require the area to be fully  serviced. Supervision
by  archaeological  experts  will  allow  for  delays  where  important  remains  are
discovered so that  necessary archaeological excavations can be completed. This is
important  as the notion  of rescue archaeology  is identified  in  articles  5 and  7 of
the Malta Convention although the LSTF has indicated that, in general terms, the
heritage law does not sufficiently  clarify  instructions  for consent for  development,
for  the  supervision  of,  and  report  on,  works,  and  for  the  withdrawal  of
authorisation  in archaeologically  sensitive areas.

A  few  historically  important  buildings  remain  remarkably  intact.  These
include  a  handful  of  buildings  dating  from  the  17th  to  the  19th  century
including  an  Orthodox  church  and  a  house  once  occupied  by  the  pianist
Vankovich.  Pre-19th-century  buildings  were  generally  of  a  higher  quality  of
construction  than  later, buildings and often  survive in better condition  (Figure 6).
However,  the  extent  of restoration  works required  in  many  cases will  inevitably
involve substantial  reconstruction.
-  This initiative  commenced  in  1991  when  the  national  budget  was  in  deficit.
Thus  the  second  problem,  of  attracting  capital  investment  in  the  Upper  Town,
has  had  to  be  resolved.  This  is  to  be  achieved  by  allowing  business  activity  to
help pay for the restoration  works. While only  20% of the extant built land  area
within  the  Upper Town  has  been  designated  for  commercial  use,  new  buildings

Post-independence  in  Eastern  Europe

89

7. Articles 9.4 and 9.5.  will  be  reconstructed  on  sites  where  buildings  have  been  totally  lost.  After five
years  of negotiations  an  agreement  has  been  made  to  allow  shops,  restaurants,
offices,  banks as well as an hotel (within  a building still occupied by the military)
as well  as  cultural  uses. A model  was  found  in  St. Petersburg,  Russia,  where  a
joint-stock  company  had  been  created  in  which  investors  were  given  a right  to
lease, and  decide the  use of historic buildings, for  a period  of 99  years. The cost
and  profits  of  restoration  under  the  this  arrangement  were  shared  on  a  50/50
basis between  the parties.

On this basis the Belarussian Cabinet of Ministers approved the setting up of a
joint-stock  company,  Stary  Mensk,  to  assist  in  regenerating  the  Upper  Town.
Stary  Mensk  was  established  with  two  schemes  to  encourage  investment  in  the
historic quarter.  First,  in  return  for  a lease of 49  years the restoration  costs will
be  borne  by  the  investor  and  Stary  Mensk  on  a  50/50  basis  and  the  income
resulting from sub-letting  the property  will  then  be shared  between  the  investor
(80%)  and  the  state-owned  company  (20%)  until  the  costs  had  been  recouped
and  then  on  a  50/50  basis. Secondly,  in  return  for  a  lease  of 49  years  and  an
entitlement  to  receive  50%  of  the  income  from  sub-letting  the  investment
company  will  pay  the  full  cost  of  works,  half  of  which  will  be  repaid  to  the
investment  company  by  Stary  Mensk  on  completion  of  the  works.  Investing
companies  will  also  be  entitled  to  receive  discounts  from  company  profit  tax
under  dispensations  created  in  the  Revenue  and  Profit  Taxation  Law in  relation
to  works  implemented  to  save  'objects  of historical  value'.7 The  money  received
by  the  state  company  would  then  be used  to  pay  for  appropriate  investigations,
providing  a new  service network for  the whole area,  supervising  works, and  the
restoration  of buildings for cultural uses.

The first investor in  the area  came in  1993. By mid-1996, eight Belarussian
firms had  taken  one of the two investment  options bringing  in  an  investment of
approximately  USS  2  million.  US$  50,000  has  been  spent  on  archaeological
investigations  in  relation  to  developed  sites  and  serviced  land,  the  work  having
been  supervised  by  experts  from  the  Scientific  Centre.  All  reconstruction
development  has  had  prior  approval  by 
the  Restoration  Committee.
Reconstruction  work  is  now  virtually  completed  in  relation  to  a  few  multi-
purpose  commercial  buildings.  These  buildings  provide  an  external  replica  of
buildings  that  originally  existed  on  the  site. The surrounding  streets  are in poor
condition,  being  mainly  bare  soil or  gravel,  but  work  is  taking  place  to provide
pavements  and  kerbs.  The  service  network  is  70%  completed,  a  necessary
precondition to the successful  regeneration  of the whole area. (New investors will
be required  to  pay  a  contribution  towards  the  cost  of installing  the  total  service
network.) Foreign firms have started to sub-lease commercial buildings. However,
little progress has been made in relation  to the restoration  of extant buildings for
cultural uses.

Significant  progress  is  to  be  made  by  the  year  2000.  With  the  current
administrative,  legal  and  financial  problems  this  objective  is  far  from  certain.
Nevertheless, the joint-stock company approach has been important in  attracting
finance  to  restore  the  built  heritage.  A  similar  initiative  has  commenced  in
relation  to the town of Brest and another joint-stock company is proposed for the
town  of  Viciebsk.  At  the  present  time  the  role  of  the  local  authorities  is  very
important in the formulation  of such joint-stock companies as state  organisations

90 

Robert Pickard

(such  as  the  SIS)  are  precluded  from  becoming  involved  in  commercial  trading
activities  (article  10). The  potential  of raising  finance  in  support  of the  heritage
was  not  envisaged  when  the  heritage  law  was  drafted.  The  Restoration
Committee was originally  a co-founder  of Stary Mensk but this was prevented by
the Supreme Council of the Parliament. However,  there is now some prospect for
amending the law for this purpose.

law 

itself 

for  heritage  protection.  The  heritage 

Emerging  problems
Much  progress  has  been  made  in  developing  a  machinery  to  administer  the
preservation  of  the  immovable  heritage  of  Belarus  since  independence  in  1991.
The need to restore cultural values was recognised immediately by the  enactment
of  the  heritage  law  and  the  establishment  of  the  SIS  to  oversee  the  national
framework 
is  extremely
comprehensive.  It  provides  a  detailed  code  relating  matters  concerning  the
definition  and  classification  of  items  of  historical  and  cultural  value;  policy
guidance  on  action  for  their  preservation  and  restoration;  and  provisions  to .
safeguard  the heritage through financial support, sanctions for transgressors of the
law,  and  the  use  and  ownership  of items  of value. However,  the  system  is now
facing practical difficulties  which threaten the progress that has been made so far.
First,  since  the  introduction  of  new  Presidential  powers  in  1994,  there  has
been  a  reorganisation  of  local  administration.  Existing  officials  who  had  co-
operated  with  the  SIS  have  largely  been  replaced,  creating  the  need  for  new
relationships  to  be  forged.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  SIS  operates  from  the
central  government  level  means  that  local  representation  at  the  regional  and
local  levels  in  some  areas  of  Belarus  is  virtually  non-existent.  The  national
government  has  appointed  a  'Principal  Regional  Inspector  for  the  problems  of
heritage  protection'  in  each  of  the  seven  administrative  regions  of  Belarus  and
ten  Senior  Inspectors  in  districts  (a  further  three  Senior  Inspectors  are  provided
by  local  authorities  in  the  Minsk  Region  and  Viciebsk  Region  where  there  were
very  few changes  in  local  administration  after  the  1994  reorganisation). But the
SIS has only  30 members of staff in total, including administrative staff,  and thus
few  specialist  staff  to  supervise  heritage  matters.  During  the  creation  of  the
heritage  law  about  65  officials  in  SIS  were  expected  but  even  if  this  target  is
achieved  the  protection  service  may  still  be  left  short  of  necessary  staff  for  the
task  in  hand.  The  Grodna  Region  has  the  largest  number  of  district  inspectors
(four)  and  has  set  up  its  own  department  for  restoration  which  means  that
finance  is  received  directly from the  regional  budget  to  assist  some  projects  on
historic  sites  and  buildings,  but  little  progress  has  been  made  in  developing
similar local bodies in other regions.

This  situation  has  been  criticised  by  the  Belarussian  Voluntary  Society  for
Historical  and  Cultural  Monuments  Protection  on  two  counts.  First,  that  local
authorities  are  not  obliged  to  be  responsible  for  the  protection  of  cultural
monuments under the heritage law, making the system too centralised. Secondly,
unlike the pre-independence legislation the society has not been given any role to
oversee and advise on heritage matters. Without sufficient  expert staff  the society
is  doubtful  of the  effectiveness  of the  new  procedures  in  practice. Moreover,  the
LSTF has indicated  the need for provision,  if possible by law, for  public and  non-
profit  making  organisations  to be involved  in  the  development  of heritage policy

Post-independence in Eastern Europe 

91

(article 14 Granada Convention, article 9 Malta Convention) and, particularly, for
local  authorities  to  be more  effectively  involved  in  heritage  management  (article
13 Granada Convention).

In  practice  the  present  shortage  of  manpower  means  that  it  is  difficult  to
police  heritage  assets  (under  article  32  inspectors  only  have  three  days  to  stop
damaging  works).  As  a  result  many  archaeological  monuments  have  been
damaged  or  destroyed  in  recent  years  which  means  little  progress  towards
fulfilling  articles 3 and 4 of the Malta Convention which require, respectively, the
prevention  of  illicit  excavations  and  removal  of  elements,  and,  the  provision  of
adequate  physical  protection  measures.  There  is  very  little  opportunity  for
financing  archaeological  research  and  rescue  archaeology  (article  6  Malta
Convention)  except where joint  venture  arrangements  are  adopted. Furthermore,
in some cases architectural  monuments  are being adapted  without  permission or
have  been  altered  in  a  different  way  to  that  which  was  approved.  Thus  while
relevant  procedures  have  been  adopted  to  establish  a  'competent  authority'  for
the  control  of  works  (as  required  under  article  4  Granada  Convention),  in
practice the machinery is not yet sufficiently  organised.

There  are  proposals  to  make  sanction  regulations  through  the  regional  and
district  authorities  which  will  define  the  importance  of  punishments.  However,
the financial  resources  are not yet available to fulfil  the sanctions articles in both
the Granada  and  Malta  Conventions. This creates  a  further  problem  in  that  one
of the  potential  sources  of  money  for  the  proposed  Heritage  Foundation  is  not
being realised.

The paucity  of expert  staff  has  also meant  that  there  has  been  slow progress
in  developing  appropriate  regulations  for  the  supervision  of  works  to  existing
monuments.  The  importance  of  guiding  documents  has  been  stressed  by  the
LSTF. However, while the heritage law provides the framework of legal provisions
(articles 47 - 61) it lacks supporting  documents to guide the supervision  of work
whether  it is in  the form  of repair,  restoration,  reconstruction  or1 the  adaption of
existing  buildings. The  members  of  SMC are  not  permanent  employees  and  the
operation  of  its  work  in  relation  to  the  reevaluation  and  registration  of
monuments has  barely begun  due to the present  shortage  of financial resources.
Thus important data on monuments  which would assist the supervision  of works
are  not  available.  This  has  led  to  criticism  regarding  the  authenticity  of
restoration  work  and  that  too much  emphasis is being placed  on  reconstruction
activity. Moreover,  there  is concern  that  it  may not be possible  to safeguard  the
lowest level of value (the proposed  type 3 monument  of regional value).

These  problems  are  largely  due  to  the  present  poor  state  of  the  Belarussian
economy.  Clearly,  one  avenue  of  securing  the  necessary  funding 
is  by
encouraging  private  investment  in  heritage  property  such  as  through  the  joint
venture  approach  of  Stary  Mensk  in  the  historic  core  of  Minsk.  However,  it  is
now becoming apparent that  the laws on property ownership and investment  are
limiting this possibility.

Many  potential  investors  are  keen  to  have  outright  ownership  of  heritage
property as this provides the greatest opportunity for relief from company property
tax against restoration works (30%) but there is a reluctance to allow this, despite
the  legal  possibility  having  been  created  (article  65),  because  the  principle  of
private  ownership  is  not  yet  culturally  or  psychologically  accepted.  This position

92 

Robert Pickard

has  become  somewhat  entrenched  following  the loss  of historical  artefacts (the
movable heritage) via sale on the black market in the early days of independence.
Relief on tax on leased property is only  given at 3% and it is generally  regarded
that the limitation on the length of lease of 49 years (as in the Upper Town) is not
long  enough  to induce  investors  bearing  in mind  that  the model  on which the
arrangements  for the operation  of Stary  Mensk  were  made  was based  on a 99
year lease. Moreover, the overall level of tax is so high that potential investors can
obtain a higher return from  investing in a bank -  this in itself is a major  hurdle to
any  investment  in  heritage  property.  It  has  also  been  realised  that  the the
potential of foreign  investment  has been  considerably  reduced by legal provisions
dating from  1991 which prevent foreign  companies from  owning property.8
Despite  these  financial  and  logistical  difficulties  the  most  difficult 

task
presented  by the heritage  law is arguably  the restoration  of what  are termed
'spiritual  values'.  This  term  is applied  to such  matters  as town  emblems, and
names  of streets,  villages,  and towns  which,  traditionally,  have  been  passed on
from  generation to generation. The essence of 'spiritual value'  (articles 3, 42, 43
and  67) has been lost during the Soviet period when  names of places and streets
were  changed.  Their  restoration  is important  to the cultural  identity  of Belarus
today.  However,  action  to return  these  values  will  need  painstaking  research of
surviving documents and society.

8.  'Law on Foreign
Investment'  (1991),
Article  4  (Organisational
and  Legal  Forms and
Types of Foreign
Investment).

9.  ICOMOS International
Charter for the
Conservation and
Restoration of Monuments
and Sites, 1966.

10.  Burra  Charter
adopted  by ICOMOS
Australia  as a
supplement  to the Venice
Charter  (1978).

Conclusions
Since the process of developing a new system of heritage protection in 1991 most
of the proposed official  organisations have been established. Yet this country, like
many  other  new republics  in central  and eastern  Europe,  is in  a  transitional
period. The fortunes  of the built heritage remain  in the balance  while there is a
shortage  of manpower,  expertise, and controlling  regulations. Much  will depend
on the political will of the government to safeguard  the Belarussian  culture.

It  is  difficult  to  see how the  national  budget  will  be  able  to  provide the
necessary finance to complete the work  proposed by the SIS in the short  term.
Nevertheless,  proposed  changes  in tax, investment  and property  ownership are
now  under  consideration  to  allow  wider  ownership  rights,  longer  leases and
encourage foreign  investment. Whether the desire of the SIS to become a party in
joint  venture  arrangements  will  be possible  remains  to be seen.  There  is no
apparent  reason  why this  should  not be allowed if the purpose is for non-profit
reasons, that is, to support the restoration of the heritage.

There  is  a  recognition  of  the  tourist  potential  of  heritage  and  relevant
ministries  are considering  setting  up a Joint  Council  on Heritage  and Tourism.
However,  this  may encourage  further  reconstruction,  or a  scale  of restoration
activity  which  largely  amounts  to reconstruction.  This can be best  observed in
relation  to the Upper Town  regeneration  project.  Whether  this  approach  can be
justified  on such  a large scale is questionable.  Article  9 of the Venice  Charter  9
acknowledges the process of restoration  as long it is based on respect for original
materials  and  authentic  documentary  evidence.  However,  the  importance  of
Australian  ICOMOS Burra Charter  1() is now accepted  amongst a wider audience.
Article  13  identifies  the process  of restoration  as being  appropriate  if 'there is
sufficient  evidence of an earlier state of the fabric and only if returning the fabric
to  that  state recovers the cultural  significance  of the place'. This is important in

Post-independence  in Eastern  Europe

93

11.  M. Petzet, Principles
of Monument
Conservation, ICOMOS.
Journals of the German
National Committee X.
1992.

12. R.D. Pickard,  'Action
in relation to heritage
legislation and
administration
organisation,'  European
Heritage,  No. 2, Council
of Europe, 1997.

the  context  of  both  historic  buildings  and  historic  quarters.11  As  so  much  of  the
heritage  of  Belarus  has  been  lost,  an  argument  may  be  put  forward  for  the
approach  which  has  now  been  adopted.

Leaving  aside  these  philosophical  issues  it  is  clear  that  the  heritage  officials
currently  need  support  in  the  development  of  policy  and  procedures.  Much
progress  has  been  made  towards  developing  an  effective  system  of  heritage
protection  for  the  built  environment  and  the  heritage  law  already  partially
satisfies  the  articles  of  the  Granada  and  Malta  Conventions.  There  is  a  clear
desire  to  meet  the  requirements  of  these  European  Conventions  which, have  been
ratified  by  a  wide  audience  of  countries.  The  Council  of  Europe's  CC-PAT  is
encouraging  a  process  of  mutual  technical  assistance  and  training  (articles  18
and  19  Granada  Convention;  article  12  Malta  Convention)  through  the  exchange
of  experts  and 
the  co-ordination  of  European  conservation  policies.  The
Belarussian  authorities  have  shown  a  willingness  to  seek  assistance  and  the LSTF
has  enabled  a  process  of  on-going  monitoring  and  evaluation  through 
the
provision  of  advice  on  procedures  supported  by  periodic  technical  visits  which,  it
is  hoped,  will  ensure  the  protection  of  cultural  assets  in  Belarus  in 
this
transitional  period.12  This  opportunity  can  only  be  beneficial  to  Belarus,  and
other  countries  that  have  sought  support,  so  long  as  there  is  a  real  intention  to
adopt  the  mechanisms  which  are  put  forward.  This  remains  the  outstanding
uncertainty.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  accepted  that  the  process  of  operating
an  effective  policy  of  heritage  management  will  take  many  years  within  the
current  logistic  reality.

94

Robert  Pickard


