2. J.  Tesitel  at  al..

Sustainable Development
Strategy for  Sumava
Biosphere  Reserve, final
report, 1997.

General Characteristics  of Linear 'Economic' Models

To be able to understand  this type of model, it  is necessary  to start  with  an
economic interpretation  of the marginal  area. From the economic point of view
'marginal' means an  area out of the main economic stream. It does not play an
important  role  in  the  economic  development  of  society.  The  origin  of  this
situation  may  lie  in  complex  combinations  of  social  and  environmental
conditions. Marginal  areas  are  frequently  mountain  regions. They  may  also be
frontier  or  marcher  areas  as  is notably  the  case  in  the  post-communist  states.
The 5umava region is a practical example of just  such a marginal mountainous
frontier  zone.

Such  areas  are considered  marginal because  of the  comparative weakness of
economic factors such as land, labour and capital. The labour pool is often small
and  poorly  qualified.  The land  itself,  the  soil,  is usually  poor  with  low  fertility.
The  availability  of financial and  technical  capital  is insufficient.  Natural  capital
may  be  rich  but  in  a  form  which  cannot  be  used  immediately  for  economic
production.

The  i?umava  area  fits  the  economic  characteristics  of  marginal  areas  in

almost all criteria:
-  87% of the  agricultural  land is of low  fertility,
- there is a weak pool of labour, both in terms of numbers  and of qualifications,
- a lack of financial capital is characteristic  of this region

The ^umava  area  lies outside the main  stream  of Czech political  and economic
life,  its  citizens  have  restricted  access  both  to  the  political  decision-making
process and to markets.2

The  existence  of marginal  areas  may  be  understood  as  an  expression  of  an
imperfectly  functioning  economy, in much the same way as phenomena such as
inflation  and  unemployment.  Marginal  areas may  be seen  as one of the spatial
dimensions  of  market  failure.  They  may  be  considered  as  being  a  result  of
inefficiency,  caused  by  a  failure  fully  to  exploit 
the  available  resources  of
society.  Government  intervention  is  one  of  the  most  common  approaches  in
attempting 
to  correct  all  market  failures.  Such  interventions  could  be
characterised  briefly  as efforts  to improve  both  the  efficiency  and  the justice of
society's  income  distribution  and  to  ensure  a  stable  economy.  The  same
approach  can  be  applied  to  marginal  areas.  It  is  an  effort  to  improve  the
efficiency  of resource exploitation  in the area,  as well as to reduce the  injustices
in social income distribution,  by providing an  equal chance to gain  a job and a
comparable living  standard.

Such governmental polices are an effort  to offset  the effects  of the weaknesses
of the economic cycle in marginal areas. This approach is a typical example of a
linear  'economic' model solution. In a linear model approach the major problem
is  to determine  the  factors  which  act  as limits  to growth,  and  then  seek ways
to  overcome  them.  This  is  done  by  comparing  the  limits  and  developmental
resources  of  the  area.  Inevitably,  the  extent  to  which  the  limiting  factors  are
overcome  depends  on  the  cost,  including  the  social  cost,  of  removing  them.
There  is  some  similarity  with  cost-benefit  analysis,  but  working  in  a  spatial
dimension

Beyond  the Models of Marginality

217

3.  B.S. Sadler  & W.E.

Cox,  'Water  resources
management:  the  socio-
political  context',  Nature
and Resources, Vol. XXII,
No.3, 1986, pp.12-19.

There are many political, social and environmental factors which, in addition
to economic ones, serve to limit local development in marginal areas. In a linear
model, the way of overcoming  these limits is to introduce the missing resources
into  the  area  from  outside  sources,  in  the  form  of  subsidies  or  other  kinds of
governmental assistance. Such models do not take into account the autonomous
resources of the  area.

Such  linear,  economic  models  do  not  take  into  account  the  causes  of  the
emergence of these marginal  areas nor  the development  of these  areas in ways
broader  than  economics.  They  represent  a  one-dimensional  form  of  help  from
the government, which is based on the pragmatic support of a single vision. The
only aim is to increase the satisfaction  of needs in the  area.

Linear models have several advantages.

1. The problem is simplified  to enable the application  of a number  of isolated
solutions.  Such  models  are  not  complicated  by  complex  interpretations  of
reality, as, for instance  those supplied by sociology.

2.  They  allow  the possibility of using  existing legislative  and  economic tools

without  the need to change  them.

3.  They enable relatively fast  solutions with  the possibility of controlling  the
results comprehending  the  economic and decision  spheres, which  are similar to
the administrative  approach  of problem solving.

There are several disadvantages, however.

1.  The  linear  model  does  not  take  into  account  feedbacks  from  the
autonomous  resources  of  the  area,  social,  environmental,  economic.  Many  of
these  resources  represent  the  heritage  value  of  the  region.  Unanticipated
feedbacks,  which  so often  accompany  the  suggested  solution,  then  evoke many
interrelated problems.

2.  Linear  models  tend  to  produce  short-term  decisions,  and  many  of  the
solutions  remain  isolated.  Solutions  which  such  models  produce  are  frequently
offered  as being the only possible solution. Alternatives  are rare.

3.  The  marginal  area  is  unlikely  to  be  considered  as  a  source  of  positive
benefits.  The  considerable  advantages  for  society  in  the  form  of  healthy
environments,  open  air  recreation,  clear  drinking  water,  are  usually  available
without payment. They do not  appear as costed profits  for  society.

4.  Such  models  rarely  respect  the  individual  marginal  area  as  an

autonomous system with its own ways and sources of development

5. Linear models may  cure symptoms. They do not  investigate  or reveal  the

frequently  less obvious causes of the problem of marginality.

Altogether  linear,  economic  models  are  largely  unable  to  find  sustainable  and
stable solutions for the problems of marginality. 'A basic cause of this failure has
been  the  predominance  of  limited  agency  perspectives  in  managerial  decision
processes. Agencies  tend  to  view  those  alternatives  as  ends. For  example,  dam
construction  can  come to be viewed as a socially desirable end in itself by those
agencies with a dam construction  mission.'3

In  Figure  1A,  the  linear  model  indicates  three  major  problems  or

218

Miloslav Lapka, Eva Cudlinova

-  major  local  shortcoming

I 

]- absent  resources  added  from  outside

Figures 1A & IB.  The linear model, ideal function.

shortcomings within the area. These problems represent  'local limitations' of the
marginal  area, which are to be removed by application of benefits from  external
sources.

When,  in Figure  IB, the missing  resources  are added  from,  or implemented
by,  outside  sources the problems  of the marginal  area  are solved. In the ideal
and imaginary  final situation the  'local shortcomings'  have  disappeared.

Local  Shortcomings  in  the &imava  Mountains
The main limitations to development in this area can be divided into five groups:

1) Financial problems

Financial  problems  manifest  themselves in deficiencies  of investment  capital for
developing  infrastructure,  making  waste  tips,  investing  in  new services and
building. In 5umava  there is lack of capital for starting businesses in the obvious
areas  of recreation  and tourism,  including  spa development,  as well  as in the
ecological agriculture  sector.

2) Demographic and social problems

The  area is sparsely  settled.  There are simply not enough  people to implement
the  new development  plans  for  the  area.  The  evacuation  of  the  numerous
German-speaking  inhabitants  after  World War Two, meant a loss of 45% of the
local  population,  and resulted  in a  lack  of traditional  connectedness  with the
land.  Basic  standards  of  good  husbandry  were  adversely  affected,  and the
security  requirements  imposed  in  a  border  area  did not  encourage  post-war
settlement.

3) The application of the law 114/92 - Law of Nature and Landscape Protection
This  law  has  the  same  form  for  all  three  Czech  national  parks  (5umava,
Krkonose, Podyji). It does not take into account the specifics of each area and its
wording  allows  ambiguous  interpretation.  Both  these  facts  are very  important.
Their  combined  result  is  that  a  clear  legislative  frame  for  the  economic
development of the area is largely missing.

Beyond the Models of Marginality

219

'/f/iiiv  2/1. /i/rr/i,  SJIMKV  CIIK! moor/dm/  grasses in  the Stanava.

Figure  2B. 4  tarn  in  the high  Sumava.

4) Unfinished  process of privatisation  in the area

The  history  of this  area  over  the  last  sixty years  has  resulted  in  great  lack of
clarity about property rights, especially those dealing with agricultural  land and
recreational buildings. Conditions in the property market are inevitably unstable.
5)  Communication  between  Village  administration  and  .Sumava  National

Park  Authority.
The National Park  management  authority  is an  important  and  powerful  stake
holder  with  much  influence  in  the  area.  Its  rules  often  impose  significant
restrictions on the economic development of villages.

220

Miloslav  Lapka,  Eva  Cudlinova

The  empirical  data  used  in  identifying  the  five  groups  of  problems  mentioned
above  derived  from  a  workshop,  held  in  Vimperk  in  1996.  Among 
the
participants  were  mayors  of  villages,  members  of  National  Park  management
and  experts.4

3  a)  In  marginal  areas  the  main,  or  initial,  problem  often  produces  a  whole

chain  of  subsequent  secondary  and  tertiary  problems.

3  b)  The  feedback  occurs  in  a  situation  where  the  solution  of  a  problem  is
removed  from  the  marginal  area  only  to  return  as  know-how  and  the  whole
process  repeats  itself.

4. J. Tesitel et al. 1996,

op.cit.

Figure 3 A.  The linear model -  the reality. The rise of secondary and tertiary problems

Fig.3a

^ ^_ 

- original  major  shortcoming

1 - absent  resources  added  from  outside

I 
i n S|  - similar  secondary  problems, connected  to  the  original  shortcoming,  created  by  the

attempted  solution

|  „ 

|  - tertiary  problems, consequent  on  the  attempts  to solve both  original  and  secondary

problems

| 

:|  - extent  of problem  outside  the marginal  area

•  - the  attempted  solution  path

^^m 

- original  major  shortcoming

| 

|.-  absent  resources  added  from  outside

K S S I ' .-  similar  secondary  problems, connected  to  the  original  shortcoming,  created  by  the

attempted  solution

I  • 

|.-  tertiary  problems,  consequent  on  the  attempts  to  solve both  original  and  secondary

problems

| 

|  - extent  of problem  outside  the marginal  area
•  •- the  attempted  solution  path
'  •- the  feedback  loop, solutions  derived  outside  the  marginal  area  but  returned  to  it

Figure  3B.  The linear model -  the  reality. Solutions  returned as knowhow  and feedback

Beyond  the Models of Marginality

221

Examples of emerging secondary problems in &unava  Mountains
The  lack  of  financial  resources  and  the  problems  arising  from  an  unsuitable
demographic  structure  are  used  as  exemplars  of  secondary  problems  in  the
' umava  Mountains. These two problems are closely connected.

Financial  problems
Direct governmental support  is perceived  as the solution  to the lack of financial
capital in the area. The success of this method largely depends on the existence
of available participants in the society - those social groups who are able to use
the  input  money  in  accordance  with  the  intended  social  aims. At  this  point,  a
secondary  problem  immediately  occurs.  There  is  a  major  shortage  of  local
businessmen  or  potential  entrepreneurs  in  the  area,  who  have  appropriate
qualifications  and sufficient  enthusiasm.

Unsuitable  demographic  structure
The  problem  of  an  unsuitable  demographic  structure  could  be  solved  by
immigration  into  the  area.  There  are  indeed  plenty  of  applications  to  settle  in
the  ' umava  Mountains. However, this solution  also creates secondary  problems
because  of  the  lack  of  capital  and  of  space  for  building  new  apartments.
Therefore,  the  mayors  of  many  villages  inevitably  reject  many  of  these
applications.  Furthermore  the  emigration  of  young  people  from  the  5umava
region  exacerbates  an  initial  demographic  problem.  Would-be  emigrants  are
markedly younger than  would-be immigrants.

In Figure 4 two initial problems are in conflict. For example, the general lack of
parking  places,  while  the  only  potential  parking  place  is  a  meadow  with  a
wealth  of  protected  species.  The  solution  of  these  problems  creates  chains  of
secondary  and  tertiary  problems  which  have  similar  conflicts.  Here  are  two
examples of conflicting  problems in the £umava  Mountains
Figure 4.  Actual  relationships betwen solutions in  a marginal area

• - Problem  -  original  major  shortcoming

]-  Solution  -  absent  resources  added  from  outside
|-  Secondary  problems,  connected  to  the  original  shortcoming,  created  by  the

attempted  solution

| 

. 

|- Tertiary  problems,  consequent  on  the  attempts  to  solve both  original  and

secondary  problems

I 
X 

I- Extent  of problem  outside  the  marginal  area
- Conflict  between  problems  -  solving  one  problem  exacerbates  the  second

problem

$ 

-  Non-conflicting  problems  - solving  both  problems  together  is possible

222

Miloslav  Lapka,  Eva  Cudlinova

5. B. Blazek, Method of

Explication of Hidden
Predispositions, (in
Czech), Prague: UKE
1977.

6. K.R. Popper,  The  Open
Society and Its Enemies ,
London:  Routledge &
Kegan  Paul, 1969.

The building  of  new  housing
The lack of flats, can  also be seen as a conflict  between  the village authorities on
the  one  side  and  the  management  of  the  National  Park  on  the  other.  The
conservative  restrictions  imposed  by the National  Park  are regarded  by many  as
the main  obstacle to building  new  apartments.

Property  Rights
The National  Park  is the  only  owner  of the  many  forests  in  the  area.  Similarly,
it  has  ambitions  to  own  all  the  agricultural  land  in  this  area.  This  creates  a
potential conflict  between farmers  and the management  of the park. The  fanners
do  not  accept  the  park's  ownership  ambitions  and  are  very  concerned  at  the
amount  of authority  in the  hands  of the park's  managers.

General  Characteristics  of Non-Linear  Ecological  Models
The outstanding  feature  of non-linear models is the  existence of interactions  and
feedbacks  with  the environment,  which in  turn  leads to  an  understanding  of the
system  as  an  organised,  autonomous  unit.  This  can  be  referred  to  as  an
ecological type  of model.

This  kind  of model  focuses  not  only  on  the  marginal  area  itself  but  also  on
the  central  one. The  non-linear  approach  does not  view  the  main  problem  as  a
specific kind of shortcoming,  a problem which must  be solved from  outside, as in
a  linear model. A non-linear model views marginal  areas as produced because of
the conflict  in  visions of two socio-cultural  systems. These visions do not  belong
to  any  specific  geographical  area;  the  adherents  of  these  different  visions  may
live  in  both  the  marginal  and  central  areas.  Quite  frequently  the  same  person
may  hold both  visions, depending  on their  location.

The  non-linear  ecological  model  is a  reaction  to  the  very  limited  application
of the linear  model. Ecological models are more open  to  other  kinds of data  and
knowledge  enabling  one  to  find  the  'hidden  predispositions'.5  To  uncover  these
hidden  predispositions  one  must  ask  those  questions  which  can,  paradoxically,
be very  simply  answered  when  one is within  either  the  central  or  the  marginal
context.  The  problem  arises  when  the  answers  to  questions  are  generated
outside  the  frame  of  these  visions.  The  appropriate  questions  are  often
philosophical  and  concern  visions of the future,  perceived values of preferred  life
styles  etc.  Such  questions  may  be  thought  to  be  of  little  value  to  the  objective
scientist,  thus  they  are  usually  not  dealt  with.6  But  these  questions  are
extremely  valuable when  it is important  to identify  the  conflict  between  differing
visions. In  that  case, they may  help to reveal a possible solution  to the problems
of marginal  areas.

The  advantages  of non-linear  ecological models  are: -
1) The solutions  to  the  problems  of marginal  areas  do take  into  account  the

mutual  interactions  within  them.

2)  Marginal  area  are  considered  as  autonomous  systems,  though  connected

inevitably  with  the  central  area

3)  The  marginality  of  an  area  is  understood  to  arise  from  the  conflict

between  differing  visions concerning  the  management  of the  area.

4) The proffered  solutions  to  problems tend  to  be long  term.

Beyond  the  Models  of  Marginality

223

5) The solutions  take  into  account,  and  build  on,  the  positive  features  of  the

area.

6)  Such  models  consider  the  positive  economic  development  of  areas  under
examination  and  the  possible transformation  of the  local  economies  in  the  future.

There  are,  however,  disadvantages  of  non-linear  ecological  models,  which  can
often  lead  to  their  being  ignored  especially  from  the  centre:  -

1)  Non-linear  models  usually  do  not  lead  to  immediately  practical  solutions

to  the  problems.

2)  Such  models  do  not  give  sufficient  emphasis  to  the  practical,  usually

economic,  shortcomings  of  the  area.

3)  They  tend  not  to  react  very  quickly  to  short-term  changes  in  the  area's

circumstances.

4)  Their  practical  application  is often  more  difficult,  especially  more  complex,
than  applications  of  a  linear  model. The language  deployed  is itself  usually  more
philosophical  and  sociological  than  economic.

Figure  5  shows  schematically  how  a  marginalised  area  can  be  created  by  a
conflict  between  the  central  and  local  visions  of  the  management  of  the  area,
given  existing  environmental  conditions. Both visions  have  a  central  core,  which
has  also  its  spatial  dimension,  which  can  be  called  Respected  Values  and
Respected  Areas.  When  the  general  aim  of  these  two  visions  is  very  similar
(marked  as  +  in  the  diagram)  then  the  character  of  the  area  will  be  determined
mostly  by  environmental  conditions.

Figure  5B  shows  the  case  where  the  conflict  becomes  more  intense,  which
will  result  in  the  enlargement  of  the  area  regarded  as  marginal.  This  situation
occurs  when  the  main  aims  of the two  visions are largely  opposed  to  each  other.
(Marked  as  +  and  -  in  the  diagram).  The  border  of  the  marginal  area  in  this
case  will  depend  more  on  the  local  economy,  local  political  structure  and  the
attitudes  and  values  of  individuals  and  groups,  than  on  the  over-arching
environmental  conditions.

Figure  5.  The  marginal  area  as  a  conflict  of  visions

Figure  5a. Conflict between central and local 
visions 

and local visions

Figure 5b. Increased conflict between central

m 

- respected  areas  and  values

M Hj  - respected  areas  and  values

-  areas of conflicting  values 

'

|~~| 

- areas  of conflicting  values

+ 

- goals of the  two  visions  are  identical
-  goals of the  two  visions  differ

I 

- possible expansion  of  conflict

+ 

- goals  of the  two  visions  are  identical
-  goals  of the two  visions  differ

224

Miloslav Lapka, Eva Cudlinova

Potential Conflict  between Visions in the Jumava  Mountains
The conflict  between the various visions of development in this marginal  area is
reflected  in  the  wide range  of plans, concepts  and  programmes  both  of  central
provenance  and by local associations and organisations. The central vision does
not  seem  in  any  way  better,  nor  does  it  have  more  validity,  than  the  local
visions. There are several examples of this. There are various documents  which
are characteristic  of the objective vision of central planning  agencies and  which
relate  to  the  3umava.  The  Territorial  Plan of the Sumava  Mountains  of  1991,
represents  the  official,  governmental,  central vision. It  is an  attempt  to describe
the  development  of  the  area  in  all  of  its  complexity.  This  plan  is  focused  on
improving the economic development  and enhancing  the prosperity of the  area.
The  protection  of  the  environment  is  taken  into  account  in  connection  with
potential  environmental  damage  resulting  from  this  development.  The  main
weakness  is  the  limited  validity  of many  parameters  of  this  document,  which
was written in  1989 and has not been updated. Economic and political changes,
including ownership, have been dramatic in the intervening years.

the  Care  of 

The  Plan  for 

is  an  example  of  a  strongly
conservationist  vision,  and  is  concerned  solely  with  the  management  of  areas
perceived  as environmentally  valuable. This plan  is only  one-dimensional,  as it
takes no account of humans  and their  activities in the  area.

the  Sumava 

The  Trilateral Concept of the Sumava  Region Development  is a  document  which
considers the Sumava region in a much broader context. Sumava is not seen as
an  isolated  designated  and  protected  area  along  the  southern  boundary  of  the
Czech  Republic,  but  part  of  a  wider  environmentally  valuable  area  which
includes 
(Bayerischerwald)  and  part  of  Austria.
Unfortunately,  the parameters  of this document  are in  no way  compatible  with
other plan documents, and so it is used only in advisory manner. This document
can  be  regarded  as  a  combination  of  and  compromise  between  three  central
visions  emanating  from  Prague,  from  Berlin  (or  perhaps  Munich)  and  from
Vienna. The area is not  aided by being viewed  as trebly marginal.

the  Bavarian  Forest 

local  organisations.  Several 

There  is  a  local,  insiders'  vision  of  the  area,  which  can  be  examined  by
considering  some  characteristics  of 
local
organisations  arose  as a reaction  of the  local population  to the  situation  in  the
region, a reaction  which changed after  the proclamation  of the National Park of
Sumava. The main  aims of these organisations  are to support economic activity
in  the  area  based  mainly  on  tourism  and  recreation,  and  especially  health
services  with  spas.  Some  of  the  main  local  organisations  in  the  area  are:  the
Union  of £umava's  Villages, the Development Agency of the Regional Union of
^umava's Villages, and the Union of Lipno Villages. (Lipno is the large reservoir
much  used for water-based  recreation.)

The application of an ecological model to the jfumava  area demonstrates  that
two important questions are left unanswered. First there is nothing in the model
to determine  which parts of the local and  which  parts of the central vision will
be  combined  to  provide  a  unified  programme  for  the  area.  Second,  the  model
does not suggest where the responsibility for  the future  of the area  ought to lie.
This model  shows  the  probable  evolution  of a  marginal  area  over  historical
time.  At  stage  1)  centres  arise  which  concentrate  the  resources  of  the  region.

Beyond the Models of Marginality 

225

enabling the central places to prosper. Later,  2), there is further  development of
the  centres,  which  has  the  effect  of  concentrating  the  region's  resources  in
towards  the  centres  thus  resulting  in  the  creation  of  marginal  areas  on  the
borders of the region. Stage 3) shows the later, opposite process. The centres are,
by now, stabilised and  expand  their  influence  to the marginal  areas. From  that
position  two  different  evolutionary  paths  could  occur.  Block  I  shows  the
coexistence of two types of centres; the old type and new ones which developed
in the formerly  marginal  areas. Block  lb  suggests the possibility that  these new
centres may again centralise most of the resources, resulting in a new  marginal
area  arising  in  the  place  of  the  former,  older,  centres.  The  development,  and
subsequent decay of, different  cultural centres in all world cultures are examples
of  this  process.  Former  marginal  areas  become  recognised  for  their  heritage
values, and move once again to centre stage.

Block  II,  however,  shows  another  kind  of  possible  evolution.  First  the  old
centres  expand  into  the  marginal  areas  (Ha).  Such  a  situation  may  happen
when new deposits of raw materials are discovered in the marginal  areas, when
the  expansion  is  not  of  a  different  nature  from  the  old  centre,  but  merely  an
extension of the same values.  Again these once-marginal centres could begin to
concentrate the labour and financial resources from the rest of the area  and the
process of marginality would be continued  (lib).

Discussion
Both types of model, non-linear ecological and linear economic models described
above represent  a  considerable  simplification  of reality.  In  practice,  neither  the
pure linear nor the pure ecological model can be found.  There is a  considerable
danger in the absolute isolation, and juxtaposition, of these two kinds of models,
when  they  can  become considered  as  opposite,  and  opposing,  views  of reality.
The  relationship  between  linear  and  ecological  models  determines  the  future
evolution  of an  area. The linear model contains features  of an  ecological model
as  indicators  of  the  problems  as,  for  example,  when  the  opinions  of  experts,

Figure 6.  Pulsary model of marginal and central areas.

| 

| - former marginal area 

• - centre

-marginal area

Onew  type of centre

226

Miloslav Lapka, Eva  Cudlinova

town  mayors,  local  businessmen  are  sought.  Ecological  models  inevitably  use
the  techniques  more  normally  associated  with  linear  models  when  concrete
solutions to certain problems must be produced.

In  practice,  various  combinations  of  ecological  and  linear  models  are  used
more or less intuitively. Each type of model has a time scale for which it is most
appropriate.  Non-linear  models  usually  enable  a  detailed  and  qualitative
discussion  about  the  history  and  possible  future  of  the  marginal  area  to  be
encouraged. Such models provide platforms  for the identification,  in quite precise
terms,  of  the  basic  conflict  of  visions  usually  obscured  in  debates  about  the
marginal  area.  They  make  overt  the  agenda  which  is  more  normally  hidden.
This broader  debate is best continued  into more specific  discussions  about  local
problems, which  are often  best solved from  the  central  governmental  level in  a
manner  typical of linear models.

The conflict  of vision which can  lead to the creation  of a marginal  area,  can
also be represented  as a very  intensive  conflict  of cultural  capital. Some writers
consider  marginal  areas  as  a  place  for  preserving  the  heritage  of  cultural
diversity.7  Cultural  capital  may  be  viewed  as  an  accumulation  of  the  non-
biological  heritage,  providing  human  societies  with  the  means  and  adaptations
necessary to deal with the natural environment. This process of adaptation in the
context  of cultural  capital  is composed  of many  technological  and  philosophical
elements  on  the  one  side  and  the  natural  environment  on  the  other.8  This
understanding  of cultural  capital  is very  close  to  Leopold's  definition  of  human
culture which is not based on opposition to nature, the more common viewpoint,
but on understanding nature.9 There are too many distinct elements in the whole
of the cultural capital for an  absolute equilibrium ever to occur. Each element of
the system is accumulated in different  time periods, and itself develops at variable
speeds. This  means  that  cultural  capital  is  multi-dimensional  in  both  time  and
space. We use only  a part  of this  heritage,  while creating  other  elements  anew
and  forgetting  many  others.  But,  as  a  society  puts  to  use  one  element  of  its
cultural  capital  e.g.  a  technological  element,  all  the  other  elements  still remain
available. It is a question of permanent coexistence. Paradoxically, sometimes the
greatest  wealth  of cultural  capital  lies more  in  what  is prepared  as the  reply to
future  questions than in what is being used currently.10

The geography of the Czech Republic has certainly helped to create its marginal
areas  as also border  areas  and  heritage  repositories. However, this investment of
heritage cultural capital into marginal areas is commonplace. Perhaps marginality
to the currently dominant economic central system is the most common reason for
the  survival  of  both  urban  and  rural  sites  for  sufficiently  long  to  become
repositories of heritage values. Marginal areas can be the places which  allow the
non-dominant  levels  of  cultural  capital  their  full  identity,  places  of  cultural
diversity,  mirroring  the  protected  natural  areas  as  areas  of biological  diversity,
preserving  potential  cultural  capital.  Cultural  reservations,  such  as  open-air
museums  of folk  architecture,  or eco-museums,  already  exist in  many  countries.
But  marginal  areas  could  be  much  more  than  places  for  heritage  tourism  or
cultural sightseeing, so often  taken out of their culture and period, and where the
visitor  is  presented  only  with  a  facade.  Marginal  areas  can  be  places  where
cultural  capital,  in the form  of ethics, ways  of thinking  and managing  land  and

7. F. Berkers  & C. Folke,

'Investing  in  Cultural
Capital  for  Sustainable
Use of Natural  Capital'.
Paper  presented  at  the
Second  Meeting of  the
International  Society  for
Ecological Economics,
Aug.1992,  Stockholm.
A  shorter  version  of
this  paper  appeared  in
Ecological Economics
vol.5,  pp.1-8,1992.

8. J.VJ. Bennett,  Ecological

Transition:  Cultural
Anthropology and Human
Adaptation, New  York:
Pergamon,  1976. A.H.
Hawley,  'Ecology  and
Human  Ecology' Social
Forces , Vol.22,  1944.
R.M. Netting, Cultural
Ecology, Illinois:
Waveland,  1986.

9.  G.F. Vaughan,

'Ecology.  Economics
and  Ethics', Economic
Policy Outlook,  Delaware
Agricultural Natural
Resources, vol.2, no.4.
pp.1-4.  1992,  after
Leopold,  1949.

10.  E. Cudlinova  & M.

Lapka,  'Cultural  Capital,
Rural  Ethics  and
Approaching
Sustainability,'  in
Ecology,  Society,
Economy, Proceedings  of
the Inaugural Conference
of the European  branch  of
the International Society
for  Ecological Economics,
23-25  May  1996.
Universite de Versailles,
Paris-France. Tome I.
Session  V-A. pp.12,
1996.

Beyond  the  Models of Marginality

227

life,  values  and  attitudes  of  the  inhabitants  are  normal  parts  of  everyday  life.
Marginal  areas  can  then  be,  not  museums,  but  places  for  the  carriers  of  non-
dominant kinds of cultural capital, both traditional and alternative.

A  fundamental  misunderstanding  sometimes  occurs  when  discussing  the
future  of  cultural  capital  of  marginal  areas.  Complete  restoration  back  to  the
dominant  cultural  position  is not possible. Indeed in  the case of many  marginal
areas,  such  cultural  dominance may  never  have  been  the case. Marginal  areas
may  become  places  for  the  conservation  of  cultural  capital,  but  complete
historical reconstruction  of the whole system of the  area  is not possible, even if
it were desirable. Some kind of transformation  is inevitable.

Countries  which  lack  marginal  areas  become  those  without  space  for  non-
dominant  levels  of  cultural  heritage  to  flourish,  either  geographically  or
mentally.  Paradoxically  too,  the  potential  of  marginal  areas,  their  cultural
capital,  could  transform  itself into  development  potential, becoming  the driving
force  for  the  future  development  of  society.  In  the  case  of  a  collapse  of  the
dominant socioeconomic system, countries with many marginal  areas are those
which  have reserves to provide alternatives as was shown in model Figure 6.

Such speculation can raise new questions. Perhaps the definition of marginality
as  evidence  of a  kind  of failure  of  the  social,  cultural  and  economic  systems of
society needs to be revised. Such definitions  inevitably suggest that the failures of
the  marginal  areas  need  to  be  removed,  at  virtually  any  price,  to  make  the
marginal area compatible with the conditions of the central area. The new model
suggests that many marginal areas may already be acting as alternative centres.
In  general  the  overarching  conflict  which  pertains  in  marginal  areas  is  the
conflict  between  the various  visions for  the management  of the  area,  including
the  debate between  marginality  as  a  potential reservoir  for  cultural  capital  and
identity  and  marginality  as  lack  of  development.  Beyond  this  debate  between
visions are hidden deeper conflicts. There is the conflict  between cultural  capital
layers,  seen  very  clearly  in  the  in-migration  to  many  marginal  areas. There is
the  shortage  of  resources  and  functions  in  comparison  with  the  central  area,
which therefore tends to dictate the final outcome. Even the deliberate use of the
marginal  area  as  a  reservoir  of  counter-culture  may  well  be  at  the  dictate of
central  resources  and  values.  Lastly  there  are  still  many  weaknesses  in  the
economic  valuation  of  qualitative 
in
neoclassical economic theory.

(positive  externalities) 

indicators 

Figure 7.

228

Miloslav Lapka, Eva  Cudlinova

11.  Law  114/92

Protection  of  the
Environment  and
Landscape  in  the  Czech
Republic.

Endnote

We  would  like to  thank
our  colleagues  Miloslav
Gottlieb  and  Josef Maxa
for  their  helpful
comments  and  coopera-
tion.  We  are  also
grateful  for  the  possibil-
ity  of using  the  data
gained  in  research
Land-use and the Future
of the  Sumava
Mountains,  and
Sustainable Development
Strategies for  Sumava
Biosphere Reserve.

Conclusions
The major  features  of marginal  areas have different  definitions  according to the
kind  of  model  used.  Linear  models  regard  problems  and  shortcomings  as  the
most  obvious  distinguishing  features  of  marginal  areas.  From  the  economic
point  of  view  these  are  mostly  shortages  of  labour,  land  or  capital,  though
shortages of entrepreneurship  are also often  identified.  These shortages are then
seen  as the cause of the more concrete problems of the marginal  area.

The most  obvious  feature  of  a  marginal  area  in  an  ecological  model  is  the
conflict  between  the  final  visions  of its function  and  management.  This  conflict
is at the heart of all the problems of the marginal  area. Such a conflict  acts as a
common denominator  to the study of all the problems of the area. It is mostly a
conflict  between  the  visions  of  the  future  of  the  area  held  at  the  centre  and
those held locally.

Both  models  have  their  own  value  and  importance  in  the  management  of
marginal  areas.  The  most  important  is  the  time  scale  at  which  the  use  of  a
particular  kind  of  model  is  relevant.  Linear  models  can  be  understood  as  a
practical  steps  leading  to  the  realisation  of  a  certain  vision.  Ecological  models
offer  the  tools,  needed  to  question  and  analyse  this  vision.  Both  models  have
advantages  and  limitations  in  application. Empirical results  seem to reveal  that
the  worst  situation  seems to occur when  the body responsible  for  an ecological
model has no presence in  the  marginal  area. This responsible body needs to be
an  independent  institution,  with  the  core  of  its  activity  being  to  provide  a
synthesis. In our example of the 3umava  Mountains, the most obvious body to
take on this role is not well qualified  to do so. The management  authority of the
National  Park  has  a  powerful  preference  for  its  own,  mainly  protectionist,
interests.  A  general  formulation  of  future  visions  of  the  area  can  hardly  be
expected  to  emanate  from  this  institution,  whose  role  is  defined  and  limited
under law.11  Marginal  areas  represent  a potential space for  the  permanent co-
existence of both central  and non-dominant  layers of cultural  capital. From this
point  of view  marginality  provides  a  potential  place  for  the  emergence  of new
centres.  Such  new  centres  cannot  be  simply  mechanical  reproductions,
repetitions of all the former  layers of cultural capital. This is always a process of
accommodation  of the  cultural  layers  to  new  conditions. The main  importance
of  cultural  capital  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  its  manner  of  thinking,  values  and
attitudes,  it may be a potential  source for  the  solution  of some problems which
exist  or will occur  in  present  centres. In  particular,  of course,  we may  look for
assistance  toward  the  solution  of major  environmental  problems  and  questions
of the relationship between man  and nature, pollution  and energy use to which
our present industrial  culture cannot find a sufficient  answer.

Beyond  the  Models of Marginality

229


