The Politics of Area Conservation 
in Cairo
Ahmed Sedky

112000000May 2005
AhmedSedky
sedkyahmed@hotmail.com
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS107013.sgm
10.1080/13527250500070303

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2005Taylor & Francis Group Ltd

The historic core of the Arab-Islamic city has always played an integral role in the forma-
tion of the identity of the contemporary Arab city. It serves as the reference for the city’s
character. This is especially so in Cairo, where historic quarters still act as the city’s most
influential  social  and  cultural  source  of  inspiration.  Today,  many  forces  of  neglect  and
deterioration have diminished this role. While attempts have been launched to confront
this situation, they have focused mainly on restoring the historic city of Cairo, itself a World
Heritage Site. This paper probes the actual reasons for the deterioration of the historic core
of  Cairo,  as  well  as  those  that  dominate  the  current  efforts  for  revitalisation.  In  these
processes it is the political dimension that is the most influential in the decision-making
affecting the proposed urban changes in historic Cairo.1

Despite the numerous studies and proposed urban upgrading schemes presented by
professional individuals and institutions, as well as by international organisations, the
deterioration of the built environment in historic Cairo has accelerated, especially after
the 1992 earthquake. Safeguarding historic Cairo has thus become a serious problem.
The extensive literature that discusses the various facets of urban problems of the historic
fabric falls short of reaching the level of implementation; it does not promote a prag-
matic, comprehensive perspective. For example, although the 1997 study of the United
Nations  Development  Projects  (UNDP)  presented  an  exceptionally  comprehensive
vision of how to upgrade and safeguard the historic city, it is still nothing more than an
exemplary pilot study.

Ahmed Sedky, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD). Correspondence to: 
sedkyahmed@hotmail.com

114 A. Sedky

This inquiry deals with a sophisticated urban phenomenon in a very problematic
political  context.  Therefore,  the  inputs  to  the  present  phenomenon  vary  greatly,
which contributes to its sophistication. Consequently, such an investigation serves as
a showcase, exhibiting the problems of one of the richest heritage-management case
studies,  as  well  as  providing  an  analytical  technique  that  is  used  to  probe  a  very
important  dimension—the  political  one—to  interpret  the  deficiency  of  heritage
management.

Focusing on the case of historic Cairo (see Figure 1), the stakeholders involved in
heritage conservation in Cairo can be classified into three groups. The first comprises
the individuals and local communities, made up of local interests such as small busi-
nesses  and  industry  associations,  and  conservation  and  community  groups.  In  this
paper this group will be referred to as the Users group, shortened to ‘U’ group. The
second is that of the international organisations concerned with safeguarding heritage,
such as the representing offices of the United Nations Education, Science and Culture
Organisation  (UNESCO)  and  the  International  Council  on  Monuments  and  Sites
(ICOMOS). In this paper this group will be referred to as the World group, shortened
to ‘W’ group. The last, yet most influential, is the state as represented by governmental
institutions, departments and agencies responsible for area conservation such as the
Supreme  Council  of  Antiquities  (SCA),  which  is  a  department  of  the  Ministry  of
Culture, the Cairo Governorate, and the Ministries of Housing, Tourism, and Trans-
portation, as well as the incorporated consultancies and state universities and research
centres. This last group is referred to as the Nation group in this paper, shortened to
‘N’ group.
Figure 1 Historic Cairo.Each  group  has  its  own  demands,  perspectives  and  priorities  in  dealing  with  the
historic area. Therefore, any desired upgrading of this area needs to be a negotiation
process  that  addresses  the  demands  and  priorities  of  these  three  groups.  When  this
process is crippled, it is inevitable that conflicts and obstacles to achieving the effective
quality of area conservation will occur.

This problem of conflicts is growing. Governmental institutions monopolise both
the strategy making and the implementation of area conservation schemes in Egypt,
since they are recognised as the official and approved approach to area conservation.
The political model in Egypt is a state-centred one. Grindle and Thomas describe this
model as one in which the state defines the social problems and solves them.2 This paper
focuses, therefore, on the political dimension since it is the state that practises major
control and makes decisions through its national organisations involved in area conser-
vation in historic Cairo.

A Theoretical Model to Explore Area Conservation Policies

In planning in general, the policy-making process is a dynamic and circular one. Once
it starts, it proceeds in a sequential process that includes: problem identification; policy
formulation;  policy  implementation;  and  policy  evaluation;  with  possible  policy
adjustment that may take us back to problem identification once again.3



115

Figure 1 Historic Cairo.

Each policy develops in a policy arena. In such an arena many participants, such as
those  identified  in  the  present  research  as  U,  N,  and  W  groups,  intervene  in  policy
making. Each group has its degree of influence, depending on the political system and
the context and the case concerned. For example, we find that the W group, represent-
ing international organisations concerned with cultural heritage, such as UNESCO, has
a strong influence when discussing and deciding upgrading policies of an international
World Heritage Site, such as the Great Pyramids Plateau in Giza. We find also that the

116 A. Sedky

N group has the upper hand when dealing with deteriorated vacant plots of historic
buildings of national concern. However, such cases are exceptional. Most situations, at
any  urban  site,  are  affected  by  all  three  groups,  making  area  conservation  decisions
quite complex.

The policy-making interaction occurs on three levels: power arrangement/model;
values and interests; and institutional arrangement (see Figure 2). The power arrange-
ment/model  is  the  ideology  of  the  predominant  political  system  that  organises  and
defines the extent of the interaction and power practised by individuals, organisations
and agencies (U, N, and W groups) influencing the formulation of area conservation
policies.

Figure 2 Developed from Attia’s model (1999, 44, figure 2.1) combined with the general model drawn by Hall (1994).

The values and interests level of policy-making is that where each group involved in
the area conservation policy-making process defines the meaning of the historic area
and how to conserve it.

Finally, the institutional level deals with who does what. It is at this level that the flow
of administrative obstacles in the conservation policy-making process can be traced.
This model can be explored by examining the process of area conservation in historic
Cairo.

An Overview of Policies of Area Conservation in Cairo

The defined actors (the N, U and W groups) pursue area conservation in Cairo within
a political paradigm that is responsible for the current active policies. These policies are
shaped by the current power arrangement, the values and the interests of the different

Figure 2 Developed from Attia’s model (1999, 44, figure 2.1) combined with the general
model drawn by Hall (1994).

parties involved in area conservation in historic Cairo, as well as by the actual frame-
work through which the actors play their roles.



117

Power Arrangement

N group
After the 1952 Revolution, and during the presidency of Gamal Abdel Nasir (1954–
1970), Egypt adopted socialism. This was a political ideology pursued under military
patronage; generals and officers headed most of the civil institutions. This created and
maintained a centralised administrative model that is still active today. For example,
Mayfield describes the political system of modern Egypt as a highly bureaucratised one
that dominates the whole country economically, socially and politically.4 Egypt repre-
sents an example of government in which the role of the state has been shaped by a
belief in a guardian or ‘… nation state ideal’.5 In such a paradigm centrality reaches its
peak in every national project, and many of the most technical planning problems are
not sorted out without direct interference from the president himself.6 This is a strict
type  of  top-down  planning  mechanism,  a  prioritisation  in  which  the  nation-state’s
agenda  comes  before  all  other  considerations.  Representatives  of  the  Ministries  of
Culture and Housing maintained that, regardless of their own planning or technical
considerations, supreme political orders took priority and might even alter a complete
planning scheme.7

This centralised administrative model persisted even after the state adopted the open
market and liberal policies introduced by President Sadat’s (1970–1980) ‘Open Door’
economic  policies  aimed  at  liberating  the  Egyptian  economy  from  public-sector
domination, as well as the current privatisation process of most of the governmental
amenities and services. It is still the generals or those from a military background who
are established in the posts dealing with urban management and involved with civil
problems.  For  example,  General  Mahmoud  Yassin,  the  Deputy  Governor  of  Cairo
Governorate, is the coordinator of the Executive Committee that acts as the executive/
municipal  supreme  authority  in  historic  Cairo.  Furthermore,  according  to  the
Supreme Administrative Court, when the Governor (who is supposed to be a civilian)
is absent, his deputy, who is the head of the police in his Governorate, becomes respon-
sible  for  any  municipal  problem.8  General  Emad  Maqlad  is  responsible  for  the
construction projects at the Ministry of Culture.9 This militarisation of the government
has  also  encouraged  some  ex-generals  from  the  secret  police  to  establish  a  private
contracting company that won several tenders from the SCA to pursue restoration of
many Islamic monuments.10 In general, the state maintains and supports this situation
legally.

Furthermore, based on intensive fieldwork, it can be deduced that the most influential
organisations involved in area conservation in historic Cairo are: the Cairo Governorate;
the Ministry of Housing; the Ministry of Culture; and to a very limited extent the Ministry
of Tourism. These organisations dominate the heritage management arena in historic
Cairo,  coordinating  among  themselves  through  the  militarised,  or  ex-militarised,

118 A. Sedky

mediators mentioned above. Other involved ministries or organisations, whether or not
governmental, work merely as associates with the four main organisations.

U group
The economic privatisation and liberation efforts pursued by the state are not paral-
leled with ‘institutional thickness’,11 that is, the development of a strong institutional
presence, of local syndicates, and financial, institutional, and local chambers, that can
interact to balance the relationship between the people and the state in its current shift
away  from  the  subsidies  and  patronage  of  socialism  to  open-market  mechanisms.
Unfortunately these processes of economic liberation are not supported by effective
social schemes. In general, the ‘individual’ is absent from the contemporary political
message, not only in Egypt but also in the Arab world generally. The individual’s rights
are  not  respected  or  relayed.  They  are  compromised  for  higher  political  titles  and
objectives, such as national security and national benefits in general.12

The Constitution even threatens civil rights. Its articles 47 and 48 subject them to
unlimited  restrictions  by  the  state,  which  is  described  paradoxically  as  unconstitu-
tional.13 Moreover, the emergency laws, supported by Presidential Decree Number 105
issued in 2000, and Number 38 issued in 1997 to extend Act 162, introduced in 1958,
put great restrictions on community participation in decision making. National secu-
rity was given priority over individual’s rights. In general, the system is closed and not
open to public scrutiny.14 Inherited public disputes between the current administrative
system  and  decision-making  mechanisms  have  created  a  gulf  of  distrust,  which  is
supported by a lack of transparency, and insensitive policies and legislation derived
mostly from political events rather than the community’s benefits. Another factor that
cripples  cooperation  between  the  state  and  the  community  has  been  the  delay  in
enforcing laws and urban decisions.15

The gap between the state and the local community has also widened through the inef-
fectiveness of NGOs in Egypt, as well as by the ineffectiveness of the currently introduced
human rights laws. The Egyptian press maintains that Egypt’s newly introduced (in
2003) human rights laws have not scrutinised Act 105, issued in 1980, which limits indi-
vidual  rights  and  freedom.  They  also  mention  the  comment  made  by  the  Egyptian
Minister of Higher Education, who is also a state consultant for international laws.16
The minister maintains that such a human rights law introduced by the government is
essential at this phase, mainly to give a democratic image of Egypt and to maintain that
Egypt respects human rights so as to avoid any foreign political pressure; yet it has never
been maintained that this law was introduced as a response to the current gap between
the state and local communities.17

Furthermore, the passive role of the community is expressed in cultural qualities of
indecision, procrastination and indifference, which Tuma identifies as responsible for
the current passive role of Egyptian society.18 Instead of resisting the centralised model
(described above), the community avoids direct clashes with the government by paving
the way for slack regulations and a habit of carelessness, an indecisive administrative
mood,  and  procrastination.  Thus,  local  communities  become  mired  in  a  mood  of

indifference. This allows the state both to defeat them and neglect them at different
levels of administration.



119

W group
The  international  organisations  and  the  funding  agencies  concerned  with  heritage
conservation  have  no  direct  impact  on  the  situation  in  historic  Cairo.  They  cannot
interfere much in Egyptian politics or in the policies of heritage management. The role
of UNESCO, for example, is limited to recommendations relating to accurate conser-
vation as they have been elaborated in the international charters of conservation. Even
when inaccurate work is pursued that might jeopardise the authenticity or the integrity
of  any  monument  individually  or  of  the  historic  area  as  a  whole,  UNESCO  and  its
representatives  in  Cairo  play  a  relatively  passive  role,  and  sometimes  they  overlook
what is in jeopardy to avoid any claim of political interference. For example, despite the
fact that some work of restoration, such as that pursued in the Mosque of Sarghatmish
was condemned by the World Heritage Mission in its August 2001 report (p. 19) and
that work in the al-Azhar Mosque was criticised, UNESCO did not explicitly express its
dissatisfaction with the low quality of restoration conducted in historic Cairo. Another
instance  was  when  the  Governor  of  Cairo  insisted  on  creating  the  Southern  Traffic
Access through the urban fabric of the Darb al-Ahmar, exposing 23 monuments in Bab
al-Wazir Street to heavy traffic (see Figure 3), and the UNESCO office in Cairo only

Figure 3 Khayr Bek Complex (built in the 16th century), Bab al-Wazir, al-Darb al-Ahmar
Area, one of many valuable historic buildings that will be drastically affected if heavy traffic
is directed to Bab al-Wazir Street.

120 A. Sedky
met with the Governor.19 The UNESCO cultural representative requested only that in
future the Governor inform the UNESCO office in Cairo of any developments that the
Governorate planned to pursue in historic Cairo.20

Figure 3 Khayr Bek Complex (built in the 16th century), Bab al-Wazir, al-Darb al-Ahmar Area, one of many valuable historic buildings that will be drastically affected if heavy traffic is directed to Bab al-Wazir Street.

Values and Interests

N group
Despite the fact that the Ministry of Awqaf (the Ministry of Islamic Religious Endow-
ments) owns almost 80% of the historic properties and has the legal and religious right
to possess many historic structures according to ancient and still legal deeds, the state
does not involve it effectively. For example, according to Presidential Decree Number
83, 2000, regarding the Supreme Council of Tourism, the Awqaf was neglected and had
no representatives on the Council while the SCA (which is concerned with restoration
and the physical aspects of the historic buildings) had its representative. This means
that only the SCA is allowed to participate, while the Awqaf (which owns the buildings
and is involved with social and cultural aspects of the area which might be jeopardised
by  tourism)  is  not  included  on  this  Council.  This  is  because  the  state’s  interest  is
expressed  through  the  plans  and  schemes  proposed  and  implemented  by  the  main
actors involved in area conservation in historic Cairo, i.e. the Cairo Governorate, the
Ministry of Housing and the Ministry of Culture.

The Cairo Governorate is mainly an executive body. As expressed by the Governor,
its main objective is to generate investments and benefits through tourism,21 regard-
less of how tourism would affect the authenticity of the historic area.22 In coordina-
tion  with  the  Ministry  of  Housing,  the  Governor  is  interested  in  realising  national
planning schemes, such as vehicular access links between the city outskirts and new
expansions. A case in point was the Azhar Tunnel from El-Muizz li-Din Allah Street to
Azbakiya Square (see Figure 1). This was a major traffic project to link the new satellite
centres  with  other  parts  of  the  city  by  flyovers,  highways  and  tunnels,  by-passing
historic Cairo.

Regardless  of  all  the  voices  raised  in  parliament  against  this  costly  scheme,  the
Governor and the Minister of Housing insisted on executing the project to give the area
a civilised look. It cost 890 million Egyptian pounds, much more than the 200 million
Egyptian  pounds  for  an  open  tunnel  crossing  only  the  distance  underneath  Azhar
Square, where most of the historic monuments are concentrated. The savings could
have  been  used  to  solve  the  chronic  and  lethal  problem  of  the  rising  water  table  in
historic Cairo that is currently being dealt with only on a piecemeal basis. Furthermore,
the tunnel is not very suitable for this dense area, and it is not sufficient to carry all the
crossing traffic. It was easily blocked after an accident in which 11 people were injured,
and a traffic jam occurred that lasted for about 90 minutes.23 The tunnel is closed after
midnight to avoid car accidents. Therefore, the official authorities responsible for traf-
fic in Greater Cairo do not recognise this tunnel as an effective intervention. The tunnel
was also originally meant to replace the flyover that causes visual problems in this area.
However, as a result of traffic congestion it was decided not to dismantle the flyover,
and today it continues to carry traffic.24



121

Such  schemes  are  strategies  for  expanding  investment,  and  economic  and  urban
growth for Cairo 2017, the main agenda that motivates the work of the General Orga-
nization of Physical Planning (GOPP), which is part of the Ministry of Housing.25 The
GOPP cooperates with the Governorate, as mentioned above, to achieve the national
agenda for growth and development. However, the GOPP is a consulting body that
provides recommendations and designs and suggests schemes to the Ministry of Hous-
ing, in which the minister is not only the political power but also the superior technical
authority for planning decisions issued by the Ministry of Housing.26 Therefore, the
minister can override the decisions, recommendations and contracts proposed by the
GOPP as the consultant. These contracts can produce financial benefits for the ministry
when it acts as a restoration or conservation contractor for different beautification and
area conservation schemes, rather than prioritising community benefits or the well-
being  of  the  physical  heritage.  For  example,  the  accuracy  of  the  restoration  work
conducted in the Azhar Mosque by Arab Contractors (a major construction company
of the Ministry of Housing) under the direct supervision of the Minister of Housing
himself was questioned because of its low conservation profile. The company introduced
new marble panels to beautify the ancient entrance of al-Azhar Mosque (see Figure 4)
and also sandblasted the ancient stones on its façade. Financial gain rather than authentic

Figure 4 The Mezaynen Gate of al-Azhar (built in the 18th century). The marble ‘fencing’
and  its  decorative  motifs  were  introduced  during  the  restoration  of  the  mosque  by  the
Ministry of Housing and the Arab Contractors Company.

122 A. Sedky

conservation seems to have been the real motive. Currently there is also a scarcity of
major construction projects, on a national scale, for which the Ministry of Housing used
to be the designer, organiser and executor.27

Figure 4 The Mezaynen Gate of al-Azhar (built in the 18th century). The marble ‘fencing’ and its decorative motifs were introduced during the restoration of the mosque by the Ministry of Housing and the Arab Contractors Company.

The Ministry of Culture, through the SCA, is supposed to be concerned with the
physical heritage. Yet its speed and the questionable accuracy of its restoration work
draw questions about its real interests in historic Cairo.28 In addition, the Ministry of
Culture has a double standard in dealing with buildings in the historic area. For exam-
ple,  Mashiyakhit  al-Azhar  Building  (the  1930s  administrative  building  of  al-Azhar,
located in al-Azhar Square) has been registered as an historic building according to the
current  law,  even  though  it  was  built  less  than  100  years  ago.  At  the  same  time  the
ministry  neglects  other  historically  and  architecturally  valuable  structures  that  are
located outside historic Cairo.29 This double standard of dealing with heritage accord-
ing to geographical location, when coupled with the Minister of Culture’s struggles to
remain in control and to be the main actor in area conservation in historic Cairo, might
suggest that the Ministry of Culture in historic Cairo is not concerned primarily with
safeguarding the physical heritage.

This  is  illustrated  further  when  considering  the  fact  that  the  Minister  of  Culture
established  the  national  organisation  of  al-Tansiq  al-Hadari  (lit.  Civilised  Manage-
ment).  What  is  meant  here  is  ‘urban  management’;  however,  the  word  ‘urban’  in
Arabic is hadri not hadari (which means literally ‘civilised’). Certainly this cannot be
a  spelling  mistake  since  it  is  the  title  of  a  very  important  organisation,  established
through presidential decree, to be headed by the Minister of Culture. Therefore, it is
likely  that  the  term  hadari  (civilised)  is  used  intentionally  rather  than  the  more
appropriate  hadri  (urban),  and  reflects  the  concern  with  giving  the  city  a  civilised/
modern image through the artistic management of open spaces, especially since this
term hadari (civilised) has been much used recently to promote upgrading schemes.
This  gives  the  term  legitimacy  in  the  media,  and  they  present  it  to  the  public  as  a
national  goal  (to  make  Cairo  beautiful).  This  new  fact  will  put  the  Minister  of
Culture  in  charge  of  open  urban  spaces,  a  duty  which  thus  conflicts  with  the
responsibilities  of  the  Governor  of  Cairo  and  the  Minister  of  Housing.  It  also
conflicts  with  any  future  potential  role  that  might  be  played  by  the  Minister  of
Environment.

U group
The U group is best represented by the everyday users of the locality—mostly people
who live and work there. They are interested in maximising those values that are signif-
icant to their daily life, including social, economic, psychological, spiritual and cultural
values. They might, however, jeopardise the other tangible heritage values esteemed by
the N group, such as historic and aesthetic values or even the environmental (hygiene)
qualities. For example, local communities or individuals might produce additions to
enlarge their living space, but contrasting with the visual historic image of the area. This
contributes to the gap between the local communities and the officials and planners
pinpointed above.30



123

W group
The main values of the W group are those discussed in international charters, such as
the  Washington  Charter  (1987)  for  area  conservation.  International  organisations
value the tangible qualities of heritage, such as architecture and urban landscape, as
much as the intangible ones such as the coexistence of cultural and ethnic multiplici-
ties.  The  W group  admits  that  physical  upgrades  are  necessary  for  the  traditional
community;  however,  such  developments  are  recommended  to  be  culturally  sensi-
tive—pursuing development while considering and complementing the cultural values
of the local communities. This was even expressed through a growing call to allow for
change and development to keep the traditional alive and not to museumise it, while
respecting the givens of the past. This is achieved through adopting cultural perspective
for development.31

Institutional Framework

Government ministries are supposed to cooperate and to integrate their roles for the
revitalisation  of  historic  Cairo.  The  problem  is  that  there  are  many  organisations
involved in this national project, which makes environmental and municipal manage-
ment very complicated.32 There are institutional conflicts among organisations. For
example, the Ministry of Tourism is authorised to issue licences for shops that offer
tourist services according to Act One, 1992. However, this might contradict the plans
and schemes pursued by the municipal authorities. In addition, distrust is common
between the Ministry of Culture and the Governorate.33 To avoid conflict it is neces-
sary  to  have  an  official  (governmentally  recognised)  definition  of  the  role  of  each
organisation, as well as a widely accepted definition of heritage and heritage manage-
ment and the ways to safeguard it, and to organise the roles of each of the organisations
involved. For example, the Egyptian Constitution does not contain any article relating
to the safeguarding of heritage, the environment or local communities.34 This can be
interpreted as resulting from the enthusiastic concern of ‘… politicians to proceed with
area conservation projects, without first specifying clearly or agreeing on a formal basis
regarding heritage definition and the organisation framework that can achieve its safe-
guarding’.35  This  was  illustrated  by  the  Egyptian  press  questioning  the  intellectual
standing  and  references  relating  to  the  conservation  work  in  Egypt  in  general.36
Therefore, Faruq Gowida openly criticised this statutory oversight and demanded an
effective law that would protect Egypt’s heritage and organise its safeguarding.37

Figure 5 Superficial urban beautification. Plastering and painting only on the elevation overlooking the main routes in Qasr al-Sham, to the south of historic Cairo adjacent to the historic Coptic Quarter. Work conducted by the Ministry of Culture.
Figure 6 Lethal cracks left in the load-bearing walls of houses in the Qasr al-Sham Area as a result of insensitive construction work by the Ministry of Culture.
Figure 7 Painting and polishing the stonework of the elevations of houses in al-Darb al-Asfar Street was the main goal of restoration, rather than dealing with their dangerous and dilapidated condition. This was so because the restoration of the historic mansions in the area was given priority over upgrading for the local community. Work conducted by the Mushrabiyya Institute under the auspices of the SCA, Ministry of Culture.

In the actual framework of urban management in historic Cairo, municipal manage-
ment  is  supposed  to  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Governorate,  led  by  the  Governor,
before  the  National  Revitalisation  Project,  as  illustrated  by  Serajaldin.38  However,
following growing attempts and calls for the revitalisation of historic Cairo, the Ministry
of  Culture  is  regarded  as  the  main  coordinator  responsible  for  urban  upgrading.39
Government support for the Minister of Culture and his role was made clear through
the establishment of the Ministerial Committee, which is to be chaired by the Minister
of Culture, and is supposed to draw up the principles and guidelines for the Executive
Committee, headed by the Governor. Yet, the Ministerial Committee has hardly met,40

124 A. Sedky

Figure 5
Superficial urban beautification. Plastering and painting only on the elevation
overlooking the main routes in Qasr al-Sham, to the south of historic Cairo adjacent to the
historic Coptic Quarter. Work conducted by the Ministry of Culture.

which leaves the Executive Committee without guidance and without a code of conser-
vation ethics and principles with which to pursue urban upgrading. These struggles and
gaps among the organisations involved, on one hand, and among them and the local
communities, on the other, account for the lack of trust and the ‘indecision, procrasti-
nation and indifference’ mentioned above.41

Conclusion

Within the current centralised authoritarian political model, it is the state that domi-
nates  and  determines  planning  and  upgrading  strategies  and  their  implementation.



125

Figure 6 Lethal cracks left in the load-bearing walls of houses in the Qasr al-Sham Area
as a result of insensitive construction work by the Ministry of Culture.

Individuals’ interests are not prioritised in such a state-centred political mechanism
and strategies. The U group is regarded as weak and vulnerable. Thus, the interests of
the  N  group  are  prioritised  and  its  agenda  and  efforts  are  directed  towards  money
generation, predominantly through development for tourism.

Meanwhile, the W group, acting as consultant, is more or less ineffective. Its values
and interests, such as the historical integrity and the authenticity of historic areas and
monuments, are likely to be compromised. This is especially so in the absence of a clear
national system of values in which the priorities of each group are balanced, organised
and rearranged in every case, based on the collective value and nature of the area, site
or structure to be conserved.

126 A. Sedky

Figure 7 Painting and polishing the stonework of the elevations of houses in al-Darb al-
Asfar Street was the main goal of restoration, rather than dealing with their dangerous and
dilapidated condition. This was so because the restoration of the historic mansions in the
area was given priority over upgrading for the local community. Work conducted by the
Mushrabiyya Institute under the auspices of the SCA, Ministry of Culture.

Despite the predominance of the N group (governmental organisations) in general
over the U and W groups, the values and priorities of each governmental organisation
are not clearly specified, and legislative support, national guidelines/frameworks and
charters for heritage and urban management are missing. This has led to a mosaic of
zones of control within historic Cairo, creating territorial domains of administrative
control. For example, the areas located to the north of the Northern Walls and Bab al-
Nasr Cemetery are the responsibility of the Governorate. The areas to the south of the
Northern  Walls  and  al-Darb  al-Asfar  Area  are  under  the  control  of  the  Ministry  of
Culture. The area between the Mosque of Amr and the Coptic Quarter is dominated by



127

the Ministry of Tourism, while the Coptic Quarter, within the historical walls of the
Roman Fort of Babylon, and its cemeteries are dominated by the SCA (see Figure 1).
There is, however, some limited coordination of effort; for example, the Governorate
gives administrative support to the Ministries of Housing and Tourism, and is involved
in communications seeking various agreements with the Ministry of Awqaf through
the  Executive  Committee.  Yet  the  coordination  between  the  Governorate  and  the
Ministry of Culture is not as effective.

Consequently,  there  is  a  huge  gap  between  the  different  parties  involved  in  area
conservation, especially among local communities on one side and the organisations
and authorities responsible for conservation planning on the other.42 This conflict in
values  and  interests  fosters  inter-organisational  conflict,  wherein  each  organisation
tries to gain the upper hand in conservation planning in one or more areas in historic
Cairo.  In  the  absence  of  coordination  and  comprehensive  planning,  administrative
conflicts and environmental deterioration inevitably continue.

Notes

1[1]

The present inquiry was supported by a workshop organised by the author to examine the
attitude of the professionals representing different organisations involved in conservation in
historic Cairo. This workshop was held on 12 and 13 September 2001 at the Italian Archaeo-
logical Centre in Cairo as part of the empirical work of the author’s PhD research.
Grindle and Thomas, Policy Makers, Policy Choices and Policy Outcomes.

2[2]
3[3] Hall, Tourism and Politics.
4[4] Mayfield, Local Government in Egypt.
5[5]

Attia, ‘Planning for Sustainable Tourism Development: An Investigation into Implementing
Tourism Policy in the North West Coast Region of Egypt’ (unpublished PhD thesis, Develop-
ment  Planning  Unit,  UCL,  London,  1999),  109.  Such  a  state-centred  political  system  is
promoted, thanks to the unclear identification of the state’s ideology, even in the Constitu-
tion,  that  fluctuates  between  socialism  and  democratic  liberal  systems  as  maintained  by
Shihata, My Will/Advice to my Country, 223–53.
The president continually interferes to stop conflicts between different governmental organi-
sations  that  cripple  the  implementation  of  major  national  projects,  reported  in  October
Magazine, no. 1386, 18 May 2003, 3. This is because of the power granted to the president as
the supreme power. He can issue decrees with the power of laws, according to Act 6, 2000,
that support the continuation of working with Act 29, 1972.
This  was  maintained  by  the  representatives  of  the  Arab  Bureau,  General  Organization  of
Physical Planning (GOPP), Ministry of Housing, SCA, and Ministry of Culture, as well as the
representative  of  the  Cairo  Governorate  during  the  workshop  sessions,  12  September  2001
(see note 1).
Al-Akhbar (newspaper), 30 April 2002, 11.
Interview, August 2002, with Gamal Amir, Architectural Consultant for Edarat al-Mashroat
(the Project Department), Ministry of Culture.

6[6]

7[7]

8[8]
9[9]

10[10] Williams, ‘Transforming the Old’, 223–53.
11[11] The  concept  of  ‘institutional  thickness’  is  introduced  by  Amin  and  Thrift,  ‘Globalization,
Institutional “Thickness” and the Local Economy’, 102. The term ‘thick’ is used to establish
legitimacy and nourish relations of trust.

12[12] El-Helo,  Karam,  ‘The  Absence  of  the  “Individual  Citizen”  from  the  Arab  Modern  Political

Message’, Al-Hayat (newspaper), 30 March 2001, 10.

128 A. Sedky

Shihata, My Will/Advice to my Country, 229–33.

13[13]
14[14] Rivlin, The Dynamics of Economic Policy Making in Egypt.
15[15] Revealed by Claudio Acioly, representative of the International Institute of Housing and Devel-
opment Studies—IHS, a Netherlands-based organisation, co-founder of the Urban Training
and Studies Institute (UTI) and project team leader of the TRHUD project with the Housing
Building Research Center—HBRC of the Egyptian Ministry of Housing Public Utilities and
Urban  Communities,  which  is  involved  in  various  urban  regeneration  and  development
projects in Cairo. Interviewed in September 2002.
16[16] Akhbar al-Yum (newspaper), 21 June 2003, 16–17.
17[17]
18[18] Tuma, ‘Institutionalized Obstacles to Development’.
19[19] Abdel-Hadi Tamam, Al-Ahram (newspaper), 6 May 2002, 14.
20[20] Revealed  by  Dr  Mizuko  Ugo,  cultural  division  at  the  UNESCO  office  in  Cairo,  interview,

Ibid.

November 2002.

21[21] Revealed by the Governor of Cairo, Dr Abdel Rehim Shehata, in an interview about the efforts
of the Governorate in historic Cairo in The Seminar of Islamic Thinking Programmes, broad-
cast at 9 p.m., Channel One, Egyptian TV, 4 December 2001.

22[22] The  Governor’s  Decree  457  for  1999  promotes  the  production  of  pastiches  of  historical

architectural features, as emphasised in article 3.

23[23] Al-Ahram, 16 August 2002.
24[24] Al-Ahram, 3 September 2002.
25[25] Revealed  by  Mrs  Huda  Edward,  head  of  the  Greater  Cairo  Department,  GOPP,  Egyptian
Ministry  of  Housing,  during  her  presentation  given  in  the  symposium  organised  by  the
author on 13 September 2001.

26[26] Dr Ibrahim Sulayman, the Minister of Housing, is not only the highest political and technical
authority  in  the  ministry  but  also  represents,  in  parliament,  the  people  of  a  great  part  of
historic Cairo, those in the Gamaliyya District, where most of the current area conservation is
being implemented. He thus blocked public scrutiny of any intervention introduced in the
area.

27[27] Zeinab Ahunbay, ‘Evaluation of the State of Conservation of al-Azhar Mosque’ (ICOMOS-

UNESCO, August 2000), cited by Williams, ‘Transforming the Old’, 461.

29[29]

28[28] Targeting  the  restoration  of  195  monuments  in  eight  years,  i.e.  restoring  an  average  of  24
edifices a year; Williams, ‘Transforming the Old’, 465–66; therefore the accuracy of restoration
when working to such deadlines is highly questionable.
In al-Ahram, 19 May 2000, 3, Khalid Mubarak reports on the deterioration of Prince Toghai
Palace. It dates from the turn of the 20th century, and represents a transitional and rare archi-
tectural style that deserves protection. The Ministry of Culture and the SCA have neglected it
and left it to deteriorate. Furthermore, Mohamed Salmawi, al-Wafd (newspaper), 3 January
2002, 14, reports on the insistence of the Ministry of Culture to demolish the first mechanical
press in Egypt introduced by the Ottoman Viceroy Mohamed Ali in the early 19th century. The
Ministry of Culture not only neglects the historical and patriotic value of such a heritage, but
also resists the prime ministerial decree against this action of demolition. This is attributable
to the absence of any clear system of listing and classification of monuments of architectural
and historical value.
Shehayeb and Sedky, ‘Heritage Conservation against What?’, 2, figure 1.

30[30]
31[31] UNESCO, Change in Continuity.
32[32] Leitmann, Rapid Urban Environmental Assessment from Cities in the Developing World.
33[33] The Hai (lit. the district, the local planning authority representing the Governorate) in the Qasr
al-Sham Area developed a negative attitude towards the administration when it waited until
the Ministry of Culture financed and implemented the urban upgrading in the area without
coordinating it with Misr al-Qadima Hai. The Ministry of Culture came with restoration orders
for the residential, unhistorical houses, which meant a huge cost for the local community that



129

they could not afford, and a complete alteration of the work implemented by the Ministry of
Culture  in  the  area  (Figs  5–7).  The  Hai  and  the  Governorate  were  unaware  of  this  urban
upgrading pursued by the Ministry of Culture so they kept away from this work until it was
finished instead of coordinating with the Ministry of Culture and its planning office (Historic
Cairo Organisation). This attitude victimised the people of Qasr al-Sham who could ill afford
the expense of restoration. Their houses are currently suffering from severe cracks that might
necessitate the residents being evacuated for safety reasons. This information is based on the
author’s  field  visits  and  observations  in  the  Qasr  al-Sham  Area  in  2001  and  2002  and  on
interviews with Medhat Sabri, Mohamed Taha and Abu Khalid, community members from the
Qasr al-Sham Area, August 2001.
Shihata, My Will/Advice to my Country, 249–53.

34[34]
35[35] This  note  was  given  by  Mr  David  Leven,  Senior  Planner  at  the  Planning  Services  Division,
Scottish Executive Development Department, during the third discussion session on 16 June
during the activities of the Institute of Historic Building Conservation (IHBC) Annual School,
15–18 June 2000, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow. His comments criticised the role of the
politicians  and  their  involvement,  with  such  involvement  lacking  a  sufficiently  intellectual
and statutory basis, unlike Scotland that is relatively more advanced in heritage management
and also has a more democratic political set-up in comparison with Egypt.

36[36] Atef al-Kilani and Rose Samah Samir, El-Yousif, no. 3816, 28 July–3 August 2001, 47–49; Ehab
El-Hadari,  Akhbar  al-Adab  (newspaper),  18  November  2001,  10;  Pascal  Ghazleh,  al-Ahram
(weekly), 5–11 April 2001, 17; and Fayza Hassan, 28 February–6 March 2002, 20.
37[37] Reported in al-Ahram (daily newspaper, international issue), 12 March 2000, 16.
38[38]
39[39] UNDP, Rehabilitation of Historic Cairo, 156, figure 20.
40[40] This committee gathered only once in the 1990s and never again, as maintained by Professor
Yahya al-Zini, the Coordinator of the Ministerial Committee and the technical coordinator of
the Committee of al-Tansiq al-Hadari, interview, August 2001.

Serajaldin, ‘Planning and Executive Institution for Urban Development’, 163.

41[41] Tuma, ‘Institutionalized Obstacles to Development’; see note 17.
42[42] The only exception to that is the work of the Aga Khan Cultural Service in Egypt (AKCS-E) in

the al-Darb Al-Ahmar Area at the heart of historic Cairo.

References

Amin, Ash, and Nigel Thrift. ‘Globalization, Institutional “Thickness” and the Local Economy’. In
Managing  Cities:  The  New  Urban  Context,  edited  by  Patsy  Healey,  Stuart  Cameron  et  al.
Chichester: Wiley, 1995: 91–108.

Grindle, M. S., and J. W. Thomas. ‘Policy Makers, Policy Choices and Policy Outcomes: The Political

Economy of Reform in the Developing Countries’. Policy Sciences 22 (1989).

Hall, C. M. Tourism and Politics: Policy, Power and Place. London: Wiley, 1994.
Leitmann, J. Rapid Urban Environmental Assessment from Cities in the Developing World: Methodology

and Preliminary Findings. UNDP/UNCHS/World Bank (UMP14), 1995.

Mayfield, J. Local Government in Egypt: Structure, Process, and the Challenges of Reform. Cairo: The

American University in Cairo Press, 1996.

Rivlin, P. A. The Dynamics of Economic Policy Making in Egypt. New York: Praeger, 1985.
Serajaldin,  Mona.  ‘Planning  and  Executive  Institution  for  Urban  Development’.  In  Challenges  of
Urban Expansions: Cairo as a Case Study, Proceedings of the Series of Architectural Changes in
the Islamic World, 11–15 November 1984, Cairo, AKCT: 163–74.

Shehayeb,  Dina,  and  Ahmed  Sedky.  ‘Heritage  Conservation  against  What?  A  Model  to  Explain
Adverse Change in Historic Districts’. In Proceedings of the First International Conference of
the  UIA-WPAHR-V  Work  Programme:  Architecture  and  Heritage,  Biblotica  Alexandrina,
Alexandria, 14–16 March 2002, CD format.

130 A. Sedky

Shihata, Ibrahim. My Will/Advice to my Country (in Arabic). Cairo: General Egyptian Book Authority,

2001.

Tuma, Elias. ‘Institutionalized Obstacles to Development: The Case of Egypt’. World Development

16, no. 10 (1988): 1185–93.

UNDP. Rehabilitation of Historic Cairo. Cairo: Supreme Council for Antiquities (SCA), 1997.
UNESCO. Change in Continuity: Concepts and Tools for a Cultural Approach to Development. Paris:

Vendome, 2000.

Williams, Caroline. ‘Transforming the Old: Cairo’s New Medieval City’. Middle East Journal 56, no.

3 (2002): 457–75.


