Tourism and cultural encounters in ‘the last frontiers’
Anna Huebner*

Department of Culture and Global Studies, Aalborg University, Copenhagen, Denmark
(Received 6 October 2011; ﬁnal version received 24 January 2012)

Host-guest encounters often play a key role within tourist experiences of culture
and heritage. However, these encounters have increasingly been seen to shape
and negatively inﬂuence local culture. In his report from early 2011, Shackel
presents an example of the cultural encounter between local residents and one-
day tourists arriving to the Eastern Greenlandic village of Kulusuk. While much
of his account revolves around the covert resistance of locals, he also critically
addresses the validity of authentic tourist experiences. This brief note attempts
to elaborate on the concept of authenticity, and suggests some issues to consider
when discussing tourist experiences,
resistance and future tourism
developments in a place like Kulusuk.

local

Introduction
Heritage tourism, and its implications for local communities and their ‘living cul-
tures’, have received a great deal of attention in the past. This involved positive
aspects, such as tourism’s contribution in strengthening identity, and its role in pov-
erty alleviation and economic independence; as well as negative effects such as
examples of ‘staging culture’, or impositions of heritage on local communities by
‘outsiders’ (see, e.g. Dallen and Gyan 2009). In his short report ‘A snapshot of
tourism in Greenland’, Shackel (2011) illustrates how imposed authenticity and the
tourist quest for the ‘real’ experience can lead to local resistance, based on the
example of the East Greenlandic Inuit village of Kulusuk. Kulusuk is a small vil-
lage with around 300 inhabitants set on an island, also named Kulusuk, on the east-
ern coast of Greenland, around 100km south of the Arctic Circle (Figure 1). While
there are a number of touristic operators offering packaged tours around Kulusuk
and neighbouring Tassilaq, lasting from one night to longer periods, the trip offered
by the Scandinavian airline that Shackel (2011) mainly refers to in his report, is
currently the only one-day excursion available to Greenland from Reykjavík from
early June until mid-September. The day-trip is straightforward, and includes a
ﬂight to/from Kulusuk, a guided walk through the village, and a visit of a local arts
and crafts shop, as well as a kayak and a drum dance demonstration. The way back
from the village to the airport is cut short with a boat ride. Overall, tourists booking
into such a trip spend around four hours wandering in Kulusuk. In 2011, around

*Email: to.annah@t-online.de

Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis



863

Figure 1. Kulusuk during spring.

1000 visitors took the opportunity to travel to the village for a day (personal com-
munication, Head Ofﬁce Air Iceland Reykjavík, 6 Oct 2011).

that

During a week-long stay in Kulusuk and Tasiilaq, Shackel (2011) describes how
‘modern inﬂuences’ have threatened and shaped the identity and heritage of the vil-
lage and its population. In this regard, he (2011, p. 87) argues that one-day experi-
ences are ‘cultural ﬁction’, and that anyone engaged with it;
is the (non-
Indigenous) tour guide, the airline offering the tour and, lastly, the tourist booking
such a trip; eventually determine what ‘heritage is best to preserve’. Accordingly,
Shackel (2011, p. 85) recognizes ‘covert resistance’ by local Inuit against foreign-
ers. This includes, for example, translating Inuit words of insult sung in a drum
dance, or observing locals retreating into their houses when a group of Japanese
walks through the village. On the other hand, he objects to one-day experiences not
depicting the ‘true’ life of the Inuit who live in ‘overwhelming poverty, unemploy-
ment and [with a] high rate of alcoholism’ (p. 87). The so-called ‘back region’, the
‘true’ and ‘genuine’ region which is revealed only to an insider, remains entirely
unknown to one-day tourists. This brief note attempts to add to Shackel’s (2011)
illustration by broadening the discussion on the ‘authentic’ cultural encounter and
on the touristic experience in Kulusuk. Delineating the concept of authenticity from
a tourism perspective may help to gain further understanding for an emergent covert
resistance against largely predeﬁned experiences of visitors.

Tourism and the authentic experience
In the tourism literature, authenticity is commonly related to aspects of culture and,
in this regard, is meant to reﬂect a ‘reality’ (Cohen 2004, p. 103), an ‘ideal’ (Wang
2007, p. 793) or something ‘genuine’ (Salamone 1997, p. 307). Furthermore, authen-
ticity is associated with nostalgia and romanticism and, hence, often considered as

864

A. Huebner

an epitome for the ‘old’ (Salamone 1997, Wang 1999). Typically, the ‘old’ is accen-
tuated to other spaces and times, which is, to other places and/or cultures which are
distant to one’s own and to pre-modernity (MacCannell 1973, Salamone 1997, Wang
1999, Cohen 2004). In a tourism context, authenticity accordingly serves as a coun-
ter-balance for individuals in a contemporary society searching for the (spatial and
spiritual) ‘other’ (MacCannell 1973, Wang 1999, p. 350, Timm Knudsen and Waade
2010). As Cohen (2004, p. 103) notes, ‘Modern seekers […] desire to overcome the
opposition between their authenticity seeking-self and society’ and therefore ‘look
elsewhere for authentic life’. The often so-called ‘last frontiers’, destinations which
are not easily accessible and which are associated, in western society at least, with
myths of early explorers and ancient cultures and traditions, depict destinations
where ‘unspoiled’, ‘authentic life’ can still be experienced.

However, in a time in which much of the touristic activity and cultural learning
is ‘packaged’ for mass-consumption, much of the culture and its immediate environ-
ment is being ‘commoditized’, and therefore said to be condemned to be inauthen-
tic. Commoditization has been described as turning something of cultural value
(e.g. arts, crafts or dance) into a (paid) product or service for touristic consumption
(Medina 2003, Cohen 2004). Critics distinguish between different types of com-
moditization. One argument
is that as tourism development accelerates cultural
commoditization will lead to the loss of authenticity (Greenwood 1977). Hence,
commoditization as something ‘customized’ or ‘staged’ stands in opposition to the
‘pure’ experience (Greenwood 1977, Cohen 2004). The ‘staged’ culture is turned
into an obviously faked product and remains static. Some cultures may have found
to represent culture in a (visible for the tourist) ‘front region’,
staging useful
whereas the other, the ‘real’ culture, is preserved internally (Fagence 2001, Cohen
2004). Yet, the idea of a static culture is contrary to the idea of a culture in constant
transformation (Greenwood 1977, Salamone 1997). Such a dynamic is inﬂuenced,
for example, by the ‘old’ and the ‘modern’. In some cases, this may lead to an
emergent culture that is still inter-related to its origins (see Figure 2). Thus, the per-
ceived authenticity is inﬂuenced by different expectations held by the individual
about the cultural experience itself and the tourism setting.

authenticity of 

culture 

given 

´dynamic´ 

semiotics, dialectics 

created 
´staged´ 

transformed 
´emergent´ 

Figure 2. Authenticity of culture.

Wang (1999, p. 352) clariﬁes these different expectations of authenticity by dis-
tinguishing between the ‘authentic experience’ and the ‘toured objects’. She consid-
ers, for instance, nature tourism to predominantly offer an ‘authentic experience’
(that of nature), whereas a ‘toured object’, such as a museum or an amusement
park, is more critically approached in terms of their authentic reﬂection. Yet, this
deﬁnition is vague, considering that nature, if turned into a staged product, can also



865

be perceived as inauthentic. On the other hand, a museum, as a unique composition
of arts and other cultural objects, could also be considered as authentic. There are
different arguments found in the literature over whether an object or a culture is
authentic or inauthentic. From an objectivist viewpoint, an authentic object automat-
ically leads to an authentic experience (Wang 1999). An ‘expert’ assesses the object
and declares it authentic or original, which is in line with an epistemological experi-
ence. This makes the object itself static. From an emic point of view though, this is
not possible, as ‘toured objects’ are naturally excluded from an ‘authentic experi-
ence’ (Boorstin 1964, Wang 1999, p. 352). Alternatively,
the object would be
deﬁned as being ‘pseudo authentic’, meaning that the observer turns something
expectedly inauthentic into an ‘authentic experience’ merely by witnessing
(Boorstin 1964). People are, or may wish to be blinded and ‘fooled’, as the exam-
ple of the amusement park Disneyland illustrates where, according to Fagence
(2001, p. 207) ‘a reasonable degree of pseudo-realism is acceptable to most visi-
tors’. Thus, although being somewhat static, Disneyland, as an admitted and obvi-
ous simulation, may still be an ‘inﬁnite retreat of the [authentic] now’ for the
majority of its visitors (Wang 1999, p. 355). Constructivism refers to such an indi-
vidual evaluation and, thus, to the individually believed authenticity of an object or
a symbol
in different contexts (Wang 1999). Although such a statement would
make culture itself a process and, thus, dynamic, some scholars concede that the
authenticity of the origin of the culture needs to be approved, which may be a difﬁ-
cult
task to undertake (Cohen 2004). In contrast, a postmodernist perspective
focuses on the experience itself rather than on the object. Thus, commoditization,
and with it inauthenticity, does not represent an obstacle to an authentic tourism
experience. As Wang points out the ‘authentic experiences in tourism are to achieve
[… an …] activated state of Being within the limited process of tourism’ (Wang
1999, p. 352). Reaching this ‘Being of Self’ underlines the ontological idea behind
a postmodern/existential perspective.

Kulusuk and the one-day tourist
Although data is scarce on travel motivations of day visitors to the island of
Kulusuk, as well as on their expectations and preconceptions, these are, assumingly,
manifold. Kulusuk, for many, may be the epitome of traditional Inuit living in con-
formity with a harsh and likewise unique nature. While Shackel (2011) implicitly
contests the authenticity of such portrayals and experiences in his account, others
may be more ‘satisﬁed’ with what they ﬁnd, and with what they are presented with
during their day trip to the island. Even though much of the experience is, accord-
ing to Shackel (2011), ‘staged’, the very moment of listening and watching, of feel-
ing and seeing the environment or a cultural performance like a drum dance or a
kayak demonstration may be described, by other spectators, as authentic. Even if
the audience may be aware of the inauthenticity of the performance, the act of actu-
ally witnessing the dance and the singing may render it authentic. While Fagence
(2001) would identify an encounter during such a cultural performance as a ‘real
pseudo-experience’, Taylor (2001, p. 24) more carefully argues such cultural perfor-
mance to be part of the, though not necessarily ‘real’, ‘cultural experience, where
tourists and actors meet half way’. The ‘staged’ drum dance can be said to serve as
a communication of values and of objects to the tourists, but also to the hosts them-
selves (Bunten 2011). To exemplify the latter, Shackel (2011, p. 85) himself

866

A. Huebner

observed ‘several of the village’s children sitting and watching the performance’.
Thus, performances can also be considered an opportunity to pass on the drum
dance to younger generations (Figure 3). Additionally, while the dance may be
‘staged’, and while the lyrics may contain words of insult, there may also be the
possibility that this, in a way customized performance, has manifested itself in the
local culture, and that this ‘staged’ dance has therefore also become authentic (Fig-
ure 2). In the end, it may be argued though that the individual and the search for
the authentic, solipsistic self may be the most important promoter of authenticity.
Shackel (2011) would claim neither the drum dance nor the kayak demonstration to
the ‘real’ Inuit culture. However, both Shackel (2011) and his fellow
represent
day-tourists experience aspects of the culture that embrace Kulusuk’s place in their
individual worlds, and each such experience is connected to a particular cultural
preconception of what constitutes the daily life of the Inuit.

Figure 3. Drum dance performance by the local Anna and her grand-child in the only hotel
of Kulusuk.

Conclusion
Overall, Shackel’s (2011) report prompts many questions relating to ethical values,
economic outputs, and to the cultural integrity of tourism. Yet, little research has
been done either on one-day or multiple-day tourists’ cultural experiences in small
communities in Greenland, or on locals’ perceptions of tourists and on touristic
development in Kulusuk to date. An inherent problem of the culture of Kulusuk is
of what can actually be deﬁned as the culture or the ‘traditional’. It must be ques-
tioned whether this is at all possible to determine, and whether this needs to be
determined at all. Kulusuk, as have other Greenlandic communities, has steadily
been inﬂuenced by external inﬂuences, making it difﬁcult to further delineate such
inﬂuences. In fact, if a static culture or tradition canon is clearly deﬁned, then it
must also be questioned whether authenticity of cultural performances and, more



867

generally, of a day-trip taken to Kulusuk, may ever be taken as a means to judge
authenticity in the context of local resistance. Accordingly, more research is needed
to identify to what extent identities of local performers are forged to conform to
tourists’ cultural expectations. To what extent could the observed insults in the
drum dance lyrics mark boundaries directed at the ‘intruders’, if at all these serve
as tools of resistance? In this regard, Bunten (2011) describes the touristic encounter
between consumer and Indigenous people when examining Native Americans work-
ing as guides for a tribally owned tour operator in southeast Alaska. She notes their
conﬂict when displaying culture that often complies with already existing represen-
tations within popular culture. In contrast to the drum dance performance in Kulu-
suk though, the tour guides show overt resistance to such representations by openly
questioning neo-colonial power relations, and by challenging visitors’ perceptions
of modern life of Native Americans. As such, they both comply with the stereotype
set out in the tour description, but simultaneously ‘resist being objectiﬁed’ (Bunten
2011, p. 61).

Furthermore, we should question whether locals would distinguish between dif-
ferent tourist cultures at all; that is, for instance between the day-tourist, an individ-
ual tourist, a tour guide or a researcher arriving to the island? How would different
cultures inﬂuence the host culture, a phenomenon that has frequently been observed
in the past in other contexts (see, e.g. Mbaiwa 2011)? What constitutes an exotic
and authentic place for these tourist cultures? How much authenticity do tourists
want to bear or, in other words, to what extent do motivations to venture into the
‘back area’ of Kulusuk exist? What role do economic beneﬁts deriving from tour-
ism play for the local population?

This response to Shackel (2011) attempted to extend his discussion on the
impacts of tourism on Inuit culture. However, it also tried to open up the idea that
authenticity, and with it local heritage and culture, are concepts which need further
clariﬁcation before statements can be made which render something ‘right’ or
‘wrong’ in tourism development in Kulusuk, particularly in the absence of a local
voice. As indicated by Shackel (2011), community meetings or a representative
chosen by the community to start representing Kulusuks’ interests could be a start-
ing point. Moreover, questions could be asked about the backgrounds of tour guides
leading one-day tourists through the village. More research needs to be done to fos-
ter a dialogue, and to highlight the advantages and disadvantages of tourism devel-
opment and of touristic offerings in Kulusuk, and their inﬂuence on local culture.
Since Erik the Red, the Inuit have been confronted with outsiders, and these have
and will always be part of Kulusuk. Indeed, much of what Urry (1990) termed the
‘tourist gaze’ is visible in Kulusuk, and ways must be found in the future to over-
come barriers and to minimize touristic impacts. Shackel’s (2011) short report, and
this note, could therefore be small, initial steps to caution local and international
tourism stakeholders that more attention needs to be paid to the integration of small
communities like Kulusuk, particularly when considering an increasing touristic
development in Greenland and growing Indigenous resistance.

Acknowledgements
I like to thank an anonymous reviewer and the editor for reading and commenting on an
earlier version of this note as well as Karina Smed whose classes in Tourism Cultures and
Intercultural Encounters inspired me.

868

A. Huebner

Notes on contributor
Anna Huebner received an MA in tourism from the Aalborg University in Copenhagen. She
has a keen interest in issues relating to Polar tourism as well as to climate change and its
meaning for tourism consumption and development.

References
Boorstin, D.J, 1964. The image: a guide to pseudo-events in America. New York, NY:

Atheneum.

Bunten, A.C., 2011. The paradox of gaze and resistance in native America cultural tourism:
an Alaska case study. In: J. Skinner and D. Theodossopoulos, eds. Great expectations:
imagination and anticipation in tourism. Oxford: Berghahn Books, 61–81.

Cohen, E., 2004. Contemporary tourism: diversity and change. London: Elsevier.
Dallen, T.J. and Gyan, N.P., 2009. Cultural heritage and tourism in the development world.

Oxon: Routledge.

Fagence, M, 2001. Tourism as a Protective Barrier for Old Order Amish and Mennonite
Communities. In: V.L Smith and M. Brent, eds. Hosts and guests revisited: tourism
issues of the 21st century. Elmsford, NY: Cognizant, 201–209.

Greenwood, D.J, 1977. Culture by the pound: an anthropological perspective on tourism as
cultural commoditization. In: V.L Smith and M. Brent, eds. Hosts and guests revisited:
tourism issues of the 21st century. Elmsford, NY: Cognizant, 201–209.

MacCannell, D., 1973. Staged authenticity: arrangements of social space in tourist settings.

American Journal of Sociology, 79 (3), 589–603.

Mbaiwa, J.E., 2011. Cultural commodiﬁcation and tourism: the Goo-Moremi community,

central Botswana. Journal of Economic & Social Geography, 102 (3), 290–301.

Medina, L., 2003. Comoditizing culture:

tourism and Maya identity. Annals of Tourism

Salamone, F.A., 1997. Authenticity in tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 24 (2),

Shackel, A., 2011. A snapshot of tourism in Greenland. International Journal of Heritage

Taylor, J.P., 2001. Authenticity and sincerity in tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 28 (1),

Timm Knudsen, B. and Waade, A.M., 2010. Performative authenticity and spatial experi-
ence. Rethinking the relation between travel, place and emotion in the context of cultural
economy and emotional geography. In: B. Timm Knudsen and A.M. Waade, eds.
Re-investing authenticity: tourism, place and emotions. Bristol: Channel View, 1–19.
Urry, J., 1990. The tourist gaze: leisure and travel in contemporary societies. London: Sage.
Wang, N., 1999. Rethinking authenticity in tourism experience’. Annals of Tourism

Wang, Y., 2007. Customized authenticity begins at home. Annals of Tourism Research, 34

Research, 26 (2), 349–370.

(3), 789–804.

Research, 30 (2), 353–368.

Studies, 17 (1), 81–88.

305–321.

7–26.


