International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

The Churchill–Roosevelt Bases of 1940: The
Question of Heritage in their Adaptive Reuse

John E. Tunbridge

To cite this article: John E. Tunbridge (2004) The Churchill–Roosevelt Bases of 1940: The
Question of Heritage in their Adaptive Reuse, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 10:3,
229-251, DOI: 10.1080/1352725042000234433
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725042000234433

Published online: 03 Aug 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 338

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 10, No. 3, July 2004, pp. 229–251

The Churchill–Roosevelt Bases of 1940: 
The Question of Heritage in their 
Adaptive Reuse
John E. Tunbridge

103000000July 2004
JohnE.Tunbridge
jtunbridg@ccs.Carleton.ca
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS10302.sgm
10.1080/1352725042000234433
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor & Francis Ltd

The  US  military  bases  in  the  British  Western  Atlantic  colonies,  negotiated  between
Churchill and Roosevelt and formalised in the 1941 Destroyers–Bases Agreement, were all
abandoned by the 1990s. In the process of their reuse the question of heritage meanings
arises. From existing thoughts on heritage in older military bases, the paper considers the
legitimacy of recent (living memory) bases as heritage, by reference to various cases among
which Malta is particularly persuasive. The Churchill–Roosevelt bases and their heritage
potential are then reviewed. The paper examines the three principal naval/military bases
involved,  namely  Argentia  (Newfoundland),  Bermuda  and  Chaguaramas  (Trinidad),
with respect to what heritage perspectives exist among redevelopment agencies and other
concerned institutional actors. In all cases heritage constitutes a recessive if not contentious
issue among the priorities of base reuse in now post-colonial environments.

Keywords: USA; British Empire; Naval Bases; Heritage Tourism; Post-colonialism; 
Adaptive Reuse; Malta; Bermuda; Trinidad; Newfoundland

While  the  development  of  overseas  military  bases  continues  apace,  it  may  seem  at
least  premature  to  consider  the  heritage  significance  of  vacated  bases  of  recent
vintage—for  present  purposes,  those  created  within  living  memory.  Anyone  super-
ficially  familiar  with  such  places  might  dismiss  them  as  eyesores—scars  upon  the
landscape,  occupied  by  nondescript  utilitarian  structures,  sites  often  casually  aban-
doned in a contaminated state requiring ‘environmental remediation’. The quest for
heritages  to  buy,  sell  or  claim  is  a  hallmark  of  our  time,  however,  as  this  journal
testifies.  Furthermore,  the  manifold  human  impacts  of  such  bases  should  be

John Tunbridge, Carleton University. Correspondence to: jtunbridg@ccs.Carleton.ca

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725042000234433

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

230

J. E. Tunbridge

sufficiently apparent for an acceptance of their heritage significance, at least with the
passage of time. On home territory this should be perceptible enough. Overseas bases
may  generate  more  complex  heritages;  even  shaping  a  political  threat  where
contested foreign presences are concerned, such as the US bases in Saudi Arabia.

The object of this paper is not, therefore, to establish that former military bases have
heritage implications. Rather, it is to examine how convincing a case can presently be
made for the heritage status of recent bases; what particular heritage attributes might
be ascribed to some of the many 20th-century bases now abandoned; and how far these
attributes are being recognised by the principal actors concerned with their current
adaptive reuse. The worldwide scale of this abandonment, primarily a post-Cold War
‘Peace Dividend’, creates an issue far larger than the subjects of this examination. We
should now begin to consider the heritage meaning of these former bases, in a post-
2000 world.

The approach pursued here is to review the existing recognition of older military
bases  as  heritage,  typically  for  tourism.  The  relationship  between  older-origin  and
20th-century bases is then examined to determine both the continuities and the new
dimensions  of  heritage  with  which  the  latter  might  be  infused.  Insights  on  old-to-
recent  continuities  and  their  heritage  implications  are  derived  particularly  from  the
case of Malta. The argument is then relayed to a specific set of vacated recent bases
around  the  Western  Atlantic  from  Canada  to  South  America,  in  which  the  current
and potential recognition of heritage by decision makers concerned with base reuse is
examined  in  the  light  of  their  economic,  social  or  political  priorities.  The  main
emphasis  is  upon  naval  bases;  prior  to  the  20th  century  these  were  the  strategic
bastions of empire, and they also typically involved the most impressive installations
among  bases  constructed  during  both  world  wars,  although  by  that  time  variously
interdependent  with  army  and  air  facilities.  The  examination  is  based  upon  wide-
ranging fieldwork, documentary and archival research, and personal interviews with
field  sources  and  among  the  diplomatic  community  in  Ottawa,  conducted  between
2000 and 2003; concurrent work on Malta has provided a benchmark of significant
comparison.

Heritage Recognition in Early Bases

The pedigree of military bases extends as far back as military architecture itself; much
of the enduring physical legacy of the Romans or Normans could be so characterised.
European naval bases often extend back many centuries, notably the Venetian Arse-
1
nale,
 while the global reach of European power required the construction of various
early colonial bases. Nelson’s Dockyard, the focus of heritage tourism in Antigua, is a
notable example.

‘Victoriana’  nevertheless  captures  the  essence  of  heritage  development  in  long-
established military bases. To a large extent this is the legacy of British 19th-century
naval  supremacy  and  associated  imperial  expansion,  which  gave  a  largely  Victorian
character  to  Portsmouth  and  other  British  bases,  while  fuelling  the  development  of
their colonial subsidiaries, some of which (such as Halifax in Canada, Simonstown in

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

231

South Africa) remain in local use. The Royal Naval Dockyard in Bermuda is a prime
example  of  colonial  naval  Victoriana  that  has  been  reclaimed  for  heritage  tourism,
2
oriented to marine access.

Older  naval  bases,  increasingly  redundant  through  defence  cuts,  have  a  well-
accepted heritage significance, despite environmental problems. Pinder and Smith, and
3
Clark,  have  recently  reviewed  their  opportunity  and  challenge.
  Unlike  commercial
ports, naval waterfronts (like all military bases) reflect state power and identity, and
their reuse responds to political rather than market motivation. The question of how
far heritage recognition can be extended to recent bases is raised by the above authors
and now requires consideration. It is not a question of academic judgement so much
as its acceptance by those whose interests are involved.

Twentieth-century Base Heritage Recognition

The  first  consideration  is  the  recognition  of  progressively  more  recent  heritage
resources, as the concept of heritage has gained widening acceptance. Add to this the
simple passage of time, particularly now that everything of which we speak is the prod-
uct of an earlier century, and the case for recent bases as heritage resources becomes
more persuasive. As ever, what heritage values we choose to ascribe to these resources
is up to us. Such ascriptions are both likelier and potentially more diverse when the ‘us’
in question remember, personally or from elder social discourse, the phenomena in
question and particularly the pain or gain they meant. We may also be more susceptible
to  the  heritage  interpretations  of  others  if  they  relate  to  our  own  actual  or  possible
experience. Thus heritage may be a more vivid issue before it is personally blunted and
generalised by the further recession of time.

One  of  the  most  cogent  arguments  for  the  legitimacy  of  recent  bases  as  heritage
resources is the trajectory of the USA as a naval/military power. Its origins are embed-
ded  in  the  national  foundation  mythology,  but  the  unprecedented  global  scale  and
reach of its power are a, indeed the, 20th-century story. Thus its naval bases are dispro-
portionately  recent  in  their  growth  and  this  has  prompted  growing  heritage  recog-
nition  for  recent  artefacts  within  them.  Pinder  and  Smith  document  this  for  Mare
4
Island, San Francisco;
 it is likewise true of the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston, the
5
adaptive  reuse  of  which  has  had  major  heritage  implications,
  and  is  inescapable  at
Pearl Harbor where the relics of the Japanese attack in 1941 form a national shrine. It
is arguably a short logical step from this to recognition of heritage in US overseas bases
of that vintage.

More generally, most major naval bases are evolving continuities in which later and
usually  peripheral  elements,  and  perhaps  linked  bases  of  other  services,  have  been
added to early core areas, creating an integral whole from the heritage identity of which
the  recent  components  cannot  easily  be  separated.  Portsmouth  displays  this  long
space–time continuity to the present. Its well-documented reclamation issues include
the heritage legitimacy of its most recent structures, notably Boathouse No. 4, a utili-
tarian  1938  industrial  building  that  accommodates  temporary  exhibitions,  while  its
6
merits as a scale-discordant wartime-era structure are contested.

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

232

J. E. Tunbridge

Heritage Continuity through Time: The Case of Malta

Malta  provides  particular  insight  on  the  heritage  significance  of  recent  bases.  The
‘Island  Fortress’,  of  its  George  Cross  royal  proclamation  of  1942,  epitomises  both
historical depth and geographical breadth of naval/military base development, bridg-
ing the European and overseas colonial scenarios. Grand Harbour was already fortified
when the Knights of St John settled there in the 16th century and established a naval
base  within  expanded  defences,  ultimately  constructing  the  fortified  city  of  Valletta
after defeating a Turkish siege. This is central to national and tourist heritage, Valletta
being a World Heritage Site. The arrival of the British in 1800, welcomed as liberators
from  French  seizure,  caused  the  superimposition  of  a  colonial  naval  base  upon  the
existing  facilities:  continuing  their  use,  literally  superimposing  a  ropery  upon  the
Knights’ galley store, and expanding the naval waterfront around most of Valletta’s
7
expansive harbours to become the Royal Navy’s largest overseas base.
 A treasury of
Victoriana  was  thereby  grafted  onto  the  pre-existing  ‘fortscape’  and  created  in  its
defensive hinterland.

The 20th century further intensified and expanded the base as it reached its apogee
8
by the First World War
 and technology advanced. Indeed, its best-remembered heri-
tage narrative is more recent still. From 1941 to 1943 Malta heroically resisted the Axis
siege,  the  naval  dockyard  being  the  principal  target.  The  nearby  civilian  population
endured unprecedented bombing, warships were repaired under fire, and the ‘Pedestal’
9
convoy in August 1942 narrowly saved Malta from starvation.
 Subsequent decline of
the British base, to its ultimate withdrawal in 1979 in a strained atmosphere,
 left an
equivocal  official  attitude  to  the  naval  heritage.  Its  relative  neglect  has  more  to  do,
however, with an excessive supply of material remains relative to demand
 and to the
continued use of the dockyard by Malta Drydocks. However, the heritage endures in
museums, memorials and the popular memory.

10

11

Significant to the present argument is the historical depth that Malta provides to the
existing conception of older bases as heritage, and the continuity through time that
again demonstrates not merely the inseparability of the recent from the older but the
apex of the heritage story within living memory. Most significant, however, is the conti-
nuity  over  space  whereby  recent  outlying  elements  formed  an  integral  part  of  the
whole. In the Second World War the defence of the naval base became a combined
services operation run from an underground command centre; air support was critical,
as it was Malta’s destruction of Axis convoys that doomed Rommel in North Africa.
The key Ta’Qali air base was built only in 1940;
 if such installations form an indelible
part of larger local/global heritages (albeit tenuously commemorated), surely so may
their contemporaries in the Western Atlantic.

12

The Churchill–Roosevelt Bases and their Heritage Potential

The  above  discussion  has  assembled  reasons  why  the  heritage  significance  of  recent
base artefacts and associations might be generally recognised, but noted that recogni-
tion is not necessarily forthcoming among those directly involved. The subjects of this

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

233

paper  will  now  be  considered  against  this  background.  The  Western  Atlantic  bases,
which are our central concern, extended in an arc through Newfoundland to Bermuda
and the West Indies, specifically the Bahamas, Jamaica, Antigua, St Lucia and Trinidad,
to Guyana (then British Guiana). Their spatial logic, less visible today, was pressing in
1940; they could provide the USA and its Panama Canal with a front line against the
potential German threat, they were all in British colonies, and Britain’s urgent need for
surplus US destroyers gave America a bargaining chip to negotiate their lease. Thus,
through tortuous negotiations recorded by Churchill, was born his Destroyers–Bases
Agreement with Roosevelt in 1941, by which time the exigencies of wartime dictated
that  they  were  already  being  bulldozed,  in  every  sense,  into  place.  The  British–US
convergence  thus  signalled  occasioned  some  of  Churchill’s  most  memorable  words:
‘Like the Mississippi, it just keeps rolling along … Let it roll on—full flood, inexorable,
irresistible, benignant, to broader lands and better days.’

13

The deal was widely accepted on account of the global emergency, but despite their
loyalty  it  did  not  pass  without  protest  in  the  colonies  themselves,  where  it  meant
unprecedented disruption and intrusion, or in the principal powers. The granting of
99-year  leases  was  the  cause  of  widespread  concern  on  the  British  side,  a  perceived
inequitable burden which was in fact to evaporate as the unanticipated independence
of most colonies concerned led to gradual renunciation of all the leases until the final
US  withdrawal  from  Bermuda  and  Newfoundland  with  the  end  of  their  Cold  War
utility in the 1990s.

14

In most of the territories a single base was built, usually an air base concerned with
maritime surveillance. In Newfoundland, Bermuda and Trinidad, however, multiple
bases were constructed with much more extensive dispersion of supporting installa-
tions, and all services represented with a major objective being the integrated defence
of the naval bases, created in all three as complements to existing naval facilities in the
Continental USA and its Caribbean territories. As a result, the USA became a major, if
dispersed, presence across the large land-mass of Newfoundland and an overwhelm-
ingly pervasive fact of life in Bermuda and Trinidad. Accordingly, it is in these three
territories that subsequent reuse and the issue of heritage loom largest in the following
discussion. However, the nature of the US impact, and the kinds of heritage it might be
expected to have engendered, were and are common to all base recipients. Impact can
be discussed under three headings applicable to base construction in general, and three
that are particular to this interface in culture, space and time. Overlaps exist between
the headings.

Disruption Impact

The first impact was disruption, of people, property and environment—more or less
true of all new military bases but aggravated in the present cases by the sheer speed of
enactment under emergency provisions. This caused great upset in the densely popu-
lated islands, especially Bermuda, even after US compromise resulted in much coastal
landfill, and in Trinidad where Governor Sir Hubert Young’s defence of local interests
led to his recall;
 and spacious Newfoundland was also locally traumatised by enforced

15

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

234

J. E. Tunbridge

16

resettlement, notably at Argentia.
 In retrospect some interesting tradeoffs between
human and environmental costs can be seen; had Young deflected the US naval base
from Chaguaramas to Caroni Swamp, Trinidadian fishing and recreation would have
been spared but the nation would have lost what is now its prime nature reserve, home
to the Scarlet Ibis which is its national avian heritage symbol.

Employment Impact

Secondly,  there  was  the  positive  impact  of  employment  opportunity,  civilian  skills
being called upon both in the construction and maintenance of bases, attracting more
than locals in Newfoundland. To this can be added the multiplier employment and
profit accruing from  dealings with local tradespeople, and revenues to government.
Such benefits had particular significance in that nearly all these colonies were economic
backwaters  that  had  just  struggled  through  the  Depression,  and  there  were  locally
specific problems in those of prime concern; Newfoundland’s insolvency had caused
its retrogression to colonial status, Bermuda depended on war-impeded tourism after
losing  its  US  agricultural  market,  and  labour  unrest  in  Trinidad  had  led  to  a  Royal
Commission investigation.

17

Human Liaison Impact

The third impact was the human relationships forged between locals and base person-
nel,  running  the  gamut  of  human  experience  but  in  their  most  positive  form  the
creation of family alliances. Like disruption and employment, this is a generic impact
that has deeply imprinted Malta and doubtless other major base recipients, but again
in the present context it is accentuated by the establishment of exotic links that brought
hitherto essentially British worlds more clearly into North America. This is particularly
true  of  formerly  isolated  Newfoundland,  racially  most  susceptible  to  intermarriage
(discussed below).

18

All of the above impacts are thus magnified in this context. They are nevertheless
applicable in other places and times; all are documented in the creation of Malta’s and
Bermuda’s  British  naval  bases,
  though  the  further  back  in  time  the  less  likely  the
impact on living consciousness or the heritage creation that plays upon it. The follow-
ing impacts, however, are US specific. They apply to other recipients of US bases, nota-
bly Canada and Britain itself, but nowhere else with such profound effect as in these
societies so small and so close to America’s massive gravitational pull.

19

Cultural Impact

The  most  obvious  was  the  impact  of  US  national  cultural  attributes,  which  by  this
very  wartime  diffusion  became  internationalised:  the  ‘coca-colonisation’  effect,
latterly  ‘McWorld’.  Apart  from  cars  and  baseball,  entertainments  provided,  and
exposure to novel products and amenities often generously donated or shared, local

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

populations’  immersion  in  Hollywood  values  was  accelerated,  with  resultant
questioning of their British ties.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

235

Racial Impact

More complex was the destabilisation of local racial equilibriums. Black inhabitants of
the  warmer  colonies  were  astonished  to  see  white  Americans  performing  manual
labour, and drew the appropriate conclusions. White elites were (further) dismayed to
find that the expected US reinforcement of their thin ranks included black US regi-
ments (not yet integrated). These same regiments were equally unpopular with local
black males, whose women they purloined. Thus biracial pressure was applied to the
USA  to  replace  these  regiments  in  Trinidad  and  was  not  greatly  mollified  by  the
advent  of  Puerto  Ricans  instead!  More  generally,  nascent  US  black  activism  pene-
trated  host  populations.
  The  colour  bar  was  lifted  in  Bermuda.  Newfoundlanders
were least affected, but might have seen a black person for the first time via the new
US connection.

20

Resource Impact

21

The  scale  of  US  material  resources  had  a  dramatic  effect  at  both  collective  and
personal levels. British infrastructural investment in support of its bases had certainly
brought  great  benefits  to  Bermuda  and  Malta.
  But  in  the  present  cases,  primitive
infrastructure was perforce upgraded very quickly, provided major windfalls like the
significantly named Churchill–Roosevelt Highway across northern Trinidad between
Chaguaramas and Waller Field bases, and was ultimately donated where appropriate.
Antigua  thereby  acquired  its  electricity  generating  facilities
  and,  along  with
Bermuda,  St  Lucia  and  Guyana,  its  airport.  Similarly,  superior  emergency  services
were made available. Wages paid did not merely supplement existing employment but
exerted inflationary effects and at times drained labour from the existing economy, as
from plantations in Trinidad.

23

22

Many of these impacts, particularly those that were US specific, were so pervasive
to the alteration of lifestyles and aspirations that they may be difficult to translate into
tangible heritages, particularly for those who do not even remember the Americans’
departure. However, base closure did leave powerful material and human ‘hangover’
effects  from  which  local  heritages  might  well  be  constructed.  It  also  left  different,
though  related,  heritages  for  the  Americans  themselves;  and  yet  others  for  ‘third
parties’ interested in the military relics or the various historical dimensions of the base
phenomenon. These likely heritages will now be considered, prior to examination of
what is actually remembered, at the institutional level, in the principal sites involved.
All are clearly apparent or can be logically deduced from the variety of field, enquiry,
Web site and published sources used. Like all heritages they are susceptible to percep-
tion  changes  over  time,  perhaps  with  evolving  mutual  discordances  requiring
management.

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

236

J. E. Tunbridge

Pre-base Heritage

The first is the heritage of the pre-base environment and dispossession from it. This is
primarily a local issue of lost homes, livelihoods and valued places, the expression of
which may well be a political play for greater compensation (restitution being generally
denied). It may be similarly constructed and used at the post-colonial national level.

Socio-economic Heritage

Secondly, there is the socio-economic legacy of the base in its human relationships and
employment dependencies, which will be felt locally as a counterweight to disposses-
sion and will be felt also by the US service veterans of the base.

Material Heritage

Third is the material legacy of the base as a landscape and a residual assemblage of
surviving structures and artefacts. This is, of course, the most visible resource and may
generate a range of heritage perceptions among locals, national governments, former
US-base personnel and global tourists, depending on the nature of their association
with or interest in it.

US Veterans’ Heritage

A fourth heritage is the translocated camaraderie of the US veterans themselves; for
many of them their time at the base may have been the most exotic and formative, if in
some cases traumatic, period of their lives. Quite apart from any local liaisons formed,
Little Rock, Ark. and Philadelphia, Pa. were far away, if not as far as for the characters
in 

South Pacific
.

Heritage of Intrusion

Fifthly,  the  base  may  acquire  the  image  of  an  intrusive  presence,  and  an  affront  to
national  sovereignty,  in  the  perception  which  newly  or  nearly  independent  govern-
ments may foster for their own purposes. Such political heritage construction is typi-
fied by Mintoff’s Malta, where the British military withdrawal was symbolised in terms
discordant with historic ties of affection.

24

Geopolitical Heritage

The sixth heritage is abstract yet fundamental, namely the geopolitical meaning of the
bases. This may be perceived by the nation, at least with respect to its own part in it, but
it is an unlikely priority since it was directed by external forces. It is most relevant on
the global tourism scale, primarily to so-motivated visitors from the external princi-
pals,  here  the  USA  and  Britain.  These  bases  represented  the  first  spatial  interface

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

237

between nascent and declining protagonists of what was to become the North Atlantic
alliance, and the tangible start of a US–British relationship that endures into contem-
porary  geopolitics.  How  large  even  the  North  Atlantic  market  would  be  for  this
heritage, and how motivated local decision makers might be to capitalise upon it, are
moot points.

We  noted  that  the  base  impacts  discussed,  their  remembrance  and  their  heritage
potential  are  as  applicable  to  the  small,  single-base  scenarios  as  to  the  larger  cases
discussed  below.  Most  of  the  smaller  cases  entered  straightforward  reuse,  however,
usually as airports, sometimes with national military reuse of ancillary structures (as at
Timehri  in  Guyana),  though  some  remain  abandoned.  In  none  of  these  cases  were
diplomatic  representatives  able  to  identify  any  particular  heritage  issues.  Argentia,
Bermuda and Chaguaramas are distinguished, however, by their scale and former naval
activity, with waterfront locations of key significance for reuse and heritage identity.
This ABC trio is distinguished also by similar public creation of autonomous authori-
ties charged with socio-economic reuse of the facilities; they frame the heritage policy,
or lack of it, that constrains other heritage proponents. In Bermuda’s case, its tiny size
and single redevelopment authority justify combined discussion of what were actually
two main bases. In the other cases at least two further ex-bases merit research beyond
this paper; one former Newfoundland air base (Stephenville) also has a redevelopment
agency and a provincial heritage Web site;
 and in Trinidad Waller Field, informally
reused for agriculture and recreation, has inspired grassroots heritage activism
 as its
hauntingly evocative airstrips fade into the encroaching bush (see Figure 1).

26

25

Abandoned Runway at Waller Field, Former Air Base, Trinidad. This was among the World’s Busiest during the Return of Transatlantic Forces in 1945 (J. E. Tunbridge, 2002).

Figure 1 Abandoned Runway at Waller Field, Former Air Base, Trinidad. This was among
the World’s Busiest during the Return of Transatlantic Forces in 1945 (J. E. Tunbridge,
2002).

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

238

J. E. Tunbridge

Argentia, Newfoundland

Argentia  was  chosen  as  a  naval  base  because  of  its  strategic  proximity  to  the  North
Atlantic  convoy  routes  and  the  deep-water  access  afforded  by  Placentia  Bay  (see
Figure 2).  These  same  attributes  favoured  this  location  for  the  historic  meeting  of
Churchill and Roosevelt aboard naval vessels nearby in August 1941, which resulted in
the  Atlantic  Charter,  and  also  permitted  the  leaders  to  observe  Argentia’s  progress.
This seminal event is sacralised in the Atlantic Charter National Historic Site, on the
adjacent shoreline, a short drive north of Argentia. The global heritage significance of
the site is thus irrefutable. The Argentia Management Authority (AMA), created by
federal Canadian and now-provincial Newfoundland governments, is seeking to capi-
talise on very much the same marine strategic attributes that attracted the Americans
in order to generate primarily industrial reuse of the site. It is most interesting that it
has appropriated the Churchill–Roosevelt global heritage to extol the strategic virtues
of its location.

27

Argentia: Location within Province of Newfoundland and Labrador; St John’s, the Capital, is 100 km Air Distance (Argentia Management Authority Publicity, ca 1997, with permission).

This is, however, doubly ironic from our more usual perspective of heritage for indi-
vidual consumption, for tourism or local identity purposes. The AMA’s mandate is
limited term, ultimately devolving to the town of Placentia, which may compromise
heritage motivation; and it is an employment mandate above all, compensating for the
loss of the base and its local services impact, which accentuate Newfoundland’s long-
standing economic malaise. Its emphasis on industrial location invites conflict with the
preservation of artefacts and sites of tourist or local heritage significance; it also does
little to allay the remoteness of Argentia in terms of land access. Fortunately, part of the
base  was  relinquished  for  a  seasonal  ferry  terminal  years  before  its  closure,  so  that

Figure 2 Argentia: Location within Province of Newfoundland and Labrador; St John’s, the
Capital, is 100 km Air Distance (Argentia Management Authority Publicity, ca 1997, with
permission).

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

239

summer surface travellers from Nova Scotia to St John’s, Newfoundland’s capital, have
the option of passing through it. Nevertheless, and despite progressive clearance of base
structures in some cases mandated by federal environmental remediation, the AMA
has an interest in tourism. With the collapse of the cod fishery, natural/cultural heritage
tourism has become a provincial imperative that no agency could disregard, particu-
larly when it commands one of Newfoundland’s transatlantic ‘stepping stone’ heritages
(Marconi, Alcock and Brown, and Gander Aviation being among them). It participates
in related Placentia developments and events but its strongest card is its zoning of the
Argentia site, with the creation of a ‘natural’-heritage Backland Trail through the scenic
hill  country  behind  the  harbour-side  industrial  lands,  which  also  serves  to  connect
surviving  outlying  defensive  installations  (bunkers,  radar  site)  using  base-associated
path names, and perhaps above all gives an appreciation of the historic significance of
the base and of Placentia Bay, itself as beautiful as any other in Newfoundland (see
Figures 2, 3 and 4).

Argentia: Backlands, with Trail Map at Starting Pavilion Showing Points of Scenic and Historic Interest (J. E. Tunbridge, 2001).
Argentia: Harbour and Former Town Site, with Placentia Bay Site of Atlantic Charter Beyond (Backlands Off to Right) (J. E. Tunbridge, 2000).

It has also funded, with provincial and federal help, a Museum of the Atlantic Allies
at the road entrance to the site. This records many of the associations that returning US
veterans might be expected to regard as their heritage, as well as the local impacts of the
base and the wartime/post-war military role of Argentia, which also serve other heri-
tage markets; it even promotes UN recognition of Placentia Bay as its birthplace. This
venture results from local activism in the Festival of Flags Committee (FFC),
 which
aspires to build a larger museum close to the ferry terminal, in a classic market-led
strategy of concentrating as much of the physical heritage resource as possible where
people could be induced by a ferry-wait to come and look at it. However, this project

28

Figure 3 Argentia: Backlands, with Trail Map at Starting Pavilion Showing Points of Scenic
and Historic Interest (J. E. Tunbridge, 2001).

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

240

J. E. Tunbridge

Figure 4 Argentia:  Harbour  and  Former  Town  Site,  with  Placentia  Bay  Site  of  Atlantic
Charter Beyond (Backlands Off to Right) (J. E. Tunbridge, 2000).

awaits  determination  of  land  needs  by  the  Voisey’s  Bay  nickel  refinery,  the  AMA’s
critical industrial centrepiece.

Predictably, though, there are local heritage interests that favour a resource-oriented
strategy of persuading both the AMA to preserve and facilitate access to the dwindling
in situ
 resources, and the transit travellers to seek them out across rough Newfoundland
terrain. This is the goal of the Placentia Historical Society (PHS); as part of a wider area-
based heritage-tourism product that it aspires to develop with the Heritage Foundation
of  Newfoundland  and  Labrador  and  Parks  Canada,  which  controls  local  national
historic sites. It cultivates positive relations with the AMA and FFC to maximise its
leverage over key issues. Recent preservation concerns have been the recreation hall,
replete with social memories for many local people, and two rare coastal guns remain-
ing 
 in their emplacements along a visitor-repellent path (see Figure 5)—unfor-
tunately  with  a  dump  for  refuse  from  base  clearance  operations  barely  out  of  sight
behind them! The AMA has no present plans for the guns, and vandalism of a bunker
has occurred on this site removed from community surveillance.

in situ

29

Argentia: Gun Emplacement of Rare Design, from Rear (J. E. Tunbridge, 2001).

There remains, however, a pre-base heritage of concern to many local people, some
of  whom  cannot  reconcile  themselves  to  the  legitimacy  of  the  ‘base  world’  which
replaced theirs; memories are long for many, and grievances persist over the trauma
of rapid eviction in the depths of a Newfoundland winter and perceived inadequacies
of compensation for the razing of their homes. The fact remains, however, that the
site of Argentia as a former fishing outpost has been entirely erased and could not be
resuscitated. Its heritage is preserved in nearby Freshwater, to which most residents
were relocated along with the bodies and gravestones from their cemetery; memen-
toes are displayed in its community centre and in a PHS historic house museum in

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

241

Figure 5 Argentia: Gun Emplacement of Rare Design, from Rear (J. E. Tunbridge, 2001).

Placentia. Such relocated heritage is, however, a two-edged sword that emphasises the
finality  of  separation  as  much  as  it  remembers  an  often-romanticised  lost  world;
ironically, this resembles the museums of the cities lost by the former German enemy
in 1945.

Bermuda

30

The  USA  had  sought  to  control  Bermuda  since  the  days  when  Washington  had
hoped  to  turn  it  into  ‘a  nest  of  hornets’  to  attack  British  commerce
  and  Britain
returned the compliment during the Civil War by means of the Royal Naval Dock-
yard. In a different political climate, the USA was granted facilities at the Dockyard
during  the  First  World  War  but  in  1940,  with  Bermuda  its  ‘front  door’  on  North
Atlantic  routes  requiring  both  naval  and  air  surveillance,  it  could  finally  justify  its
own bases. These were, contentiously, negotiated at the eastern extremity and inside
the western Great Sound near the Dockyard (see Figure 6); they represented the final
31
stage in a continuous heritage of fortification spanning most of Bermuda’s history.
While service uses changed over time, the former—Kindley Field—was primarily the
air base while the latter was the main naval base. Both, with smaller facilities island-
wide, were vacated only in 1995, although the airstrip had long been shared for civil
aviation;  Cold  War  roles  had  included  submarine  surveillance,  NASA  tracking,  air-
sea  rescue  and  hosting  dignitaries  during  Anglo-US  summit  meetings,  as  well  as
involvement in the Cuba and Grenada crises.
 The USA renounced its base-associ-
ated emergency right of seizure of Bermuda (which had applied to all eight colonies)
only in 2002.

32

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

242

J. E. Tunbridge

Figure 6 Bermuda: Former Base Lands in Redevelopment; Main Areas, 20 km Apart, are
Southside (Including Airport) and Morgan’s Point. NB: Royal Naval Dockyard Occupies
the Peninsula Northeast of Daniel’s Head (a Former Canadian Base) (Bermuda Land Devel-
opment Company Web site, 2003, with permission).

Bermuda: Former Base Lands in Redevelopment; Main Areas, 20 km Apart, are Southside (Including Airport) and Morgan’s Point. NB: Royal Naval Dockyard Occupies the Peninsula Northeast of Daniel’s Head (a Former Canadian Base) (Bermuda Land Development Company Web site, 2003, with permission).

The vacated properties, the extensive landfill of which created a larger civil space
than  ever  before,  were  entrusted  to  the  Bermuda  Land  Development  Company
(BLDC),  answerable  to  the  Bermuda  government,  which  retains  freehold.  Its  name
2
indicates its priority, in a territory with 1,200 people/km
; the bases are the last land
‘windfall’.  Southside  (the  east  renamed)  is  being  redeveloped  or  refurbished  for
commercial/industrial  activity  to  replace  the  employment  lost  as  a  result  of  base
closure, for housing and supporting facilities and for some government departments.
Tourism resources are also enhanced, in that multiple-use recreational space has been
recovered, comprising primarily beaches and adjacent natural areas in the east, with the
western waterfront—renamed Morgan’s Point—earmarked for the commercial devel-
opment  of  a  marina,  golf  course,  accommodation  and  supporting  amenities  when
environmental damage has been remedied.

33

34

Clearance for redevelopment is evidently emphasised at the expense of preserving
 The BLDC can in effect achieve a division of function with
built heritage resources.
the Royal Naval Dockyard, being freed to pursue other land-use priorities by virtue of
the latter’s success as a nearby heritage-tourism magnet. Such an implicit trade-off of
base  built-heritage  resources  would  not  please  all,  however.  Intervention  by  other
agencies  is  muted  by  the  reality  of  government  control;  however,  the  Bermuda
Maritime  Museum  hopes  to  preserve  the  ammunition  bunkers  and  the  Bermuda
National Trust has sought the preservation of pre-base heritage.
 For this, the BLDC
itself has restored local nomenclature and is reconnecting Southside with St David’s,
the traditional community that had been most disrupted by the base.

35

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

243

Figure  7 Bermuda:  Former  Base  Housing,  in  Local  Climatic  Variant,  Southside  (J.  E.
Tunbridge, 2000).

36

Built heritage on the base sites has been discussed and illustrated by Forbes, from a
military historian’s perspective interactively with US service veterans,
 though with
respect also to the surviving pre-base heritage of St David’s. He provides vivid detail of
the many heritage nuances communicated by former US personnel in relation to the
bases and Bermuda: manifold nostalgias, enduring personal ties, tourism returns, asso-
ciations  with  landmarks  and  pain  at  their  loss.  Notable  among  losses  was  Longbird
House, former residence of US commanders and distinguished visitors, demolished as
an aircraft navigational hazard. However, recreation facilities remain, the cinema still
functions and bears heritage resonance for veterans and locals, the base McDonald’s is
now a local restaurant, the commissary now a supermarket, the barracks now offices,
and other surviving structures are reused or may endure if they find pragmatic new uses
(see Figure 7). However, development delays, over remediation or leasing, give rise to
youth ‘hangout’ vandalism of buildings that remain unused (see postscript).

Bermuda: Former Base Housing, in Local Climatic Variant, Southside (J. E. Tunbridge, 2000).

Chaguaramas, Trinidad

Trinidad’s strategic importance was critical to both US defence and the wider Allied
war effort. It was a key source of oil and a conduit for bauxite supplies from British
Guiana; it was also a stepping-stone in ferrying war materiel across the narrow mid-
Atlantic to Africa, as well as a choke point for southerly enemy approaches to America’s
Caribbean  ‘back  yard’.  As  a  consequence,  its  surrounding  sea  was  among  the  most
contested, and remains the most concentrated marine graveyard of the Second World
War.
 We have seen that it was a prime and contentious base recipient; the many US
sites appropriated in support of its naval and two air bases even included much of the

37

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

244

J. E. Tunbridge

Figure 8 Trinidad: Base Locations; Chaguaramas Constitutes the Northwest Peninsula and
Islands, ca 15 km from Port-of-Spain (after Baptiste, 1988).

capital Port-of-Spain’s port facilities. Thus Trinidad and its bases represent a major
global wartime heritage resource (see Figure 8).

Trinidad: Base Locations; Chaguaramas Constitutes the Northwest Peninsula and Islands, ca 15 km from Port-of-Spain (after Baptiste, 1988).

Trinidad and Tobago was, however, the second most populous and economically the
strongest of all the Churchill–Roosevelt base colonies. With hindsight, it is not surpris-
ing that, with the advent of a firebrand leader in Eric Williams, it was quick to seek
independence and to regard the US bases, their positive benefits notwithstanding, as an
affront to post-colonial nationalism. The main target of protest was the Chaguaramas
naval base; apart from the affront and the need for land, with population growth, there
was a specific need for this site as the preferred location for the capital of the West
Indies Federation. Despite its evanescence, this focused world attention on the base
problem  by  1960,  as  independence  approached.  After  repeated  US–British–Trinida-
dian–West Indies conferences, and cost-aborted efforts to identify alternative sites in
Trinidad for the base, the US effectively withdrew from its facilities in the 1960s, in the
tenuous  hope  that  local  goodwill  in  the  intensifying  Cold  War  would  be  worth  the
sacrifice of its 99-year leases.

38

As a result, Chaguaramas has been available for reuse for over three decades, though
for  an  independent  Trinidad  and  Tobago  no  longer  needing  a  federal  capital.  Thus

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

245

Figure 9 Trinidad: Chaguaramas Peninsula, with its Sheltered Yachting Amenities (J. E.
Tunbridge, 2002).

39

reuse, mainly in the old base structures, was initially an 
 process. The national
military and coastguard occupy key sections, which limit continuous access, and thus
effective use, round the coastal road. Nevertheless, the lost recreational uses of calypso
legend have been reasserted, as local people have reclaimed most of their beaches; and
a major yacht maintenance and storage facility has developed in response to the hurri-
cane-free location, below latitude 11 degrees north (see Figure 9). Surviving base hous-
ing has also been occupied residentially.

ad hoc

Trinidad: Chaguaramas Peninsula, with its Sheltered Yachting Amenities (J. E. Tunbridge, 2002).

However,  in  1972  the  Chaguaramas  Development  Authority  (CDA)

  was  estab-
lished to achieve long-term reuse objectives parallel to its northern counterparts, like
them itself occupying former base facilities. Once again its mandate emphasises local
priorities, similar to both in industrial investment to replace lost employment and to
Bermuda  in  residential  development  to  alleviate  pressure  on  an  otherwise  densely
populated island. Existing recreational uses and events in this spectacular mountainous
peninsula are being further developed, however, and the principal investment focus is
on  marine  industry  and  leisure  amenities,  with  cruise-tourism  aspirations  and  at
present  a  marina/hotel,  restaurants  and  nightclubs.  The  US  golf  course  in  the  level
Tucker Valley has been refurbished; former US buildings house the national tourism
institute among other public agencies, and a hotel/convention centre serving interna-
tional  gatherings,  including  a  Miss  Universe  contest  (see  Figure  10).  Natural  and
cultural heritage, as in Argentia, is effectively zoned into the backland hills, valleys and
islands,  designated  a  National  Park,  with  guided  nature  trails  secondarily  including
pre-base relics of plantations and defended quarantine/prison islands, and guns, radar
and other base installations. In the core area, though, despite a plan vision to create a

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

246

J. E. Tunbridge

Figure 10 Trinidad: Chaguaramas, Showing Central Former Servicemen’s Facilities, Now
a Convention Centre (J. E. Tunbridge, 2002).

‘naval base theme’, the failure specifically to mark surviving buildings, cranes or under-
ground magazines is clearly apparent (2002).

40

Trinidad: Chaguaramas, Showing Central Former Servicemen’s Facilities, Now a Convention Centre (J. E. Tunbridge, 2002).

On the seafront, however, in rather discordant juxtaposition, is the Chaguaramas
Military  History  and  Aerospace  Museum.  This  formally  unassisted  institution  has
developed under the guidance of its President, Gaylord Kelshall, by a gradual accretion
of structures initially from accommodation modules donated by the offshore oil indus-
try, and of contents received from diverse donations and its own enterprise, including
underwater  archaeology.
  It  fulfils  the  role  of  a  base  museum  analogous  to  that  of
Argentia, and the CDA both recognises it as a growing local and overseas visitor (partic-
ularly veteran) attraction, and is implicitly relieved thereby from undue attention to
heritage. However, the Museum uses its location on ‘The Base’, as it is still known, to
serve a much broader national military-museum function, from early settlement and
colonial-power  conflict  through  the  overall  recent  wartime  and  base  history.  As  its
reputation  grows,  donations  increase;  the  US  Embassy,  for  which  it  represents  a
memory bank, has sent materials. It is in effect underwriting not only the CDA but the
government  in  filling  a  vacuum,  there  being  no  official  national  effort  to  present,
procure  or  even  protect  its  military  heritage;  diplomatic  informants  acknowledge
Kelshall  as  the  national  authority  in  all  military  heritage  matters.  This  scenario  is
distinctly similar to Malta, where the national government has a much clearer commit-
ment to heritage tourism but lacks a coherent policy on military heritage and refers to
the director of the Malta Heritage Trust as the resource person.
 Passionate individu-
als are often local heritage catalysts; it may be time to examine their national signifi-
cance in the heritage tourism of small nations that lack official means or motivation to
secure heritage resources on which their economy might ultimately depend.

41

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

247

The role of the USA in the recent history of Trinidad and Tobago remains under-
played, however, apparently a legacy of the Williams years of brittle relations. While
Chaguaramas,  like  Waller  Field,  has  entrance  markers  acknowledging  its  US  base
origins, it is interesting that the National Museum in Port-of-Spain makes no US refer-
ence (2002). When one considers that Carnival, far and away the focus of Trinidad’s
cultural tourism, is inseparable from calypso and the steel band, the development of
which is closely associated with the US presence and discarded materials,
 this seems
an  obvious  focus  for  future  heritage  development,  whether  for  tourism  or  national
identity purposes.

42

Conclusion: Base Conversion, Post-colonialism and Heritage

This paper began by demonstrating that the heritage case for former military bases even
of recent vintage can be made with considerable conviction. It later identified a series
of heritages evidently or logically associated with the recent bases discussed here, all of
which could have more or less relevance elsewhere.

Furthermore,  in  the  major  ‘ABC’  Churchill–Roosevelt  bases  some  recognition  of
heritage resources by agencies charged with their re-utilisation has been demonstrated.
Despite their courtesy, however, these agencies gave little or no response to repeated
requests from the author for elaboration of their heritage commitment. Reticence over
heritage is hardly surprising, however, when their principal mandate is regeneration of
lost employment and repossession of land resources, frequently involving the clearance
of existing structures that may be unsuitable, contaminated and anyway perceptually
uninteresting; although they also retain buildings or their foundations adaptable to the
imperative of clients’ needs. 
 zoning, whereby local/tourist recreational inter-
ests in natural or built heritage are deflected to backland areas, emphasising walks and
overviews from the vantage points used by military artefacts (some still present), is a
rational management strategy; it also minimises visitor contact with new uses of core
areas which may be almost as hazardous or security conscious as the former base activ-
ities.  Argentia  and Chaguaramas have surrounding hills, and Bermuda has beaches,
which  lend  themselves  to  this  deflection,  containing  outlying  military  relics  and/or
amenity value formerly used for recreation by base personnel themselves.

De facto

The  defence  of  heritage  artefacts  falls  largely  to  voluntary  organisations  so  moti-
vated,  however  which  are  locally  based  and/or  represent  those  veterans  who  were
formerly so, and which are often the brainchild of passionately committed individuals.
This is a familiar scenario in heritage conservation; here, however, their case may be
harder to make in view of the recentness of the heritage and the power of the mandate
given  to  management  authorities  whose  priorities  are  elsewhere.  As  a  consequence,
their relationship with them can be more than usually prickly, and it is interesting that
the  organisations  discussed  above  are  pursuing  implicit  strategies  of  collaboration,
diplomacy  or  guarded  co-existence  in  defence  of  key  elements  only  (with  mutually
discordant variants in Argentia).

The ‘ABC’ bases appear to be evolving towards a pattern of piecemeal heritage devel-
opment, mainly in museums and on hinterland trails where nature can be spiced with

 
 
 

 

 

248

J. E. Tunbridge

historical relics and viewpoints, but with little concern to retain core-area buildings or
to mark them in so far as they remain in use. There may also be commercial recre-
ational  amenities.  It  cannot  be  asserted,  however,  that  these  sites  will  become  very
promising  anchors  either  of  local  heritage  identity  or  of  heritage  tourism,  notwith-
standing their likely heritage meanings as outlined above. Perhaps their greatest heri-
tage-tourism appeal at present is for the niche market in quest of the simple fascination
of neglected fragments of the past.

What is conspicuously lacking among the various institutional players is any great
concern for, or even awareness of, the heritage of hemispheric and global significance
that links all these former bases. Heritage references are almost invariably specific to the
territories concerned, albeit highly articulate in their presentation of their own partic-
ular interfaces with the US presence. This arc of bases is the first geographical expres-
sion of the seismic shift in power relations in the North Atlantic, as a fading British
Empire fighting a global war alone yielded strategic stepping stones needed by a USA
on its path to superpower status. This shift, and the conduct of the Second World War
and Cold War which flowed from it, surely constitutes a profound geopolitical heritage
for which a future North Atlantic niche tourism market might be collectively culti-
vated, not only among the dwindling cohort of service veterans but among others who
wish  to  understand  the  evolution  of  the  present  world  order,  to  which  these  hemi-
spheric fragments endure in generally mute testimony. It must be noted, however, that
the dedicated heritage players have local mandates and expertise and have too many
local  battles  to  fight—including  the  ravages  of  time  and  vandals,  and  perhaps  the
encroachment of the bush—to compare notes (however beneficially) or develop their
collective potential.

The  post-colonial  reality  is,  of  course,  the  main  impediment  to  such  a  collective
focus. The end result of the imperial twilight reflected by the bases, and by the self-
determination principles of their contemporary Atlantic Charter, was the disintegra-
tion  of  the  very  political  order  on  which  their  group  coherence  depended.  Despite
Baptiste’s history noted here, the various successor states are evidently too preoccupied
with their local priorities to remember collective heritages, even where they might be
profitable.  Indeed,  even  locally  focused  geopolitical  heritages  could  be  better  devel-
oped; Argentia plays the Atlantic Charter card strongly, but Bermuda could perhaps
make more of its Cold War summit role and Chaguaramas could certainly make more
of its federation capital goal, its role in the national foundation story and its subsequent
role as the site of the West Indian CARICOM treaty. It is worth noting, however, that
the  predictable  post-colonial  dissonance  towards  the  heritage  of  former  controlling
powers is not borne out above, although we do not know the thoughts of individuals
along the continuum of time.

43

Thus the post-colonial perception of the resources of the past, the evolving interests
of heritage tourism and the post-Cold War reuse of relict military environments consti-
tute an intellectual triangle, within which the present research hopes to cross-fertilise
new insights in the field of memory and place identity. The perceptions of individu-
als—local and visiting—will of course need to be tested in order to advance the heritage
argument. Ongoing investigation will extend beyond this, however.

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

249

44

The heritage issue is much larger than the particular set of former bases discussed
 Apart from its foreign bases, the USA has of course maintained military instal-
above.
lations at home and in recent or continuing overseas possessions; also, related wartime
45
relics may now be accorded heritage status, as of the Japanese in the Marshall Islands.
US overseas bases are still being established as new threats are perceived, most recently
around the US–British adventure in Iraq in 2003; thus US base heritages are continu-
ously in the making. As American bases, among others, continue to litter the globe, it
is noteworthy that the US–British liaison begun by the Churchill–Roosevelt bases has
been a continuing thread to the present day. Ascension and Diego Garcia remain Brit-
ish possessions in US use, even though few, if any, local people remain to contemplate
their future heritage meaning.

Acknowledgements

Unreferenced assistance is gladly acknowledged to W. Brenton, Argentia Management
Authority; G. Chalker, Heritage Foundation of Newfoundland and Labrador; C. Earl,
Carleton colleague, for cartography, E. Joell, Bermuda Land Development Company
Ltd; M. Regis, Trinidad and Tobago High Commission, Ottawa; and to my Chimo, for
our many walks in his declining days that inspired and sustained this research.

Notes

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

[1] Clark and Pinder, ‘Naval Heritage and the Revitalisation Challenge’.
[2] Tunbridge, ‘Large Heritage Waterfronts on Small Tourist Islands’. See caption, figure 6.
[3] Pinder and Smith, ‘Heritage and Change on the Naval Waterfront’; Clark, ‘Vintage Ports or

Deserted Dockyards’.
Ibid., 875.

[4]
[5] Ashworth and Tunbridge, 
[6] Clark, ‘Vintage Ports or Deserted Dockyards’, 85; Pinder and Smith, 870.
[7] Vice-Admiral C. B. Ballard, ‘The Development of Malta as a First-class Naval Base since its

The Tourist-historic City

, 222.

Inclusion in the British Empire’.
The Cross and the Ensign

9

8

10

, chap. 6.

Ibid., chaps. 8–10; Smith, 

[8] Elliott, 
[9]
[10] Elliott, 
[11] Pinder and Smith, ‘Heritage and Change on the Naval Waterfront’, 885.
[12] Attard, 
[13] Churchill, 

The Cross and the Ensign

The Second World War

The Battle of Malta

Their Finest Hour

, chap.16.

Pedestal
.

, vol. II: 

, 53.

11

12

13

, chap. XX: ‘United States Destroy-

ers and West Indian Bases’; see also vol. III: 

The Grand Alliance
.

14

[14] Baptiste, 

War, Cooperation and Conflict

. He also discusses (Epilog) the pre-war US coveting of

these territories.
Ibid., chaps. 8, 9; Brereton, 

16

15

[15]
[16] Houlihan, Uprooted!
17[17] Buchanan, ‘Defence Outpost for North America; Brereton, A History of Modern Trinidad.
18[18] Houlihan,  Uprooted!,  chap.  10.  See  also  Canadian  National  Film  Board  production  Seven

A History of Modern Trinidad, 1783–1962

, 189ff.

Brides for Uncle Sam.

19[19] Elliott, The Cross and the Ensign; Ballard, ‘The Development of Malta as a First-class Naval
Base’; Whittingham, Bermuda; Calnan, ‘The Transformation of Dockyard’, The Bermudian,
January 2000, 44–46.

250

J. E. Tunbridge

20[20] Brereton, A History of Modern Trinidad; Palmer, ‘Black American Soldiers in Trinidad, 1942–44’.
21[21] Attard, The Battle of Malta, 19.
22[22] Government of Antigua, ‘We Too Rejoice: Antigua in Coronation Year’, 1953, commemora-
tive/promotional  document  held  in  Royal  Commonwealth  Society  Collection,  Cambridge
University Library.

23[23] Brereton, A History of Modern Trinidad.
24[24] Elliott, The Cross and the Ensign, chap.16.
25[25] www.heritage.nf.ca/society/stephenville (28 August 2002).
26[26] Lisa Perez, local activist, pers. comm., 2002.
27[27] Headquarters of the North Atlantic, www.argentia.nf.ca/headquarters.htm
28[28] www.alliesmuseum.8m.com
29[29] C. Cooney, President, Placentia Historical Society, pers. comm., 2001–2003.
30[30] Attributed to Washington by S. H. Lloyd, Sketches of Bermuda 218; it is also quoted by Whit-

tingham, Bermuda, 125.

31[31] K. A. Forbes, www.bermuda-online.org/milquit.htm (The Royal Gazette) (8 June 2003).
32[32] www.bldc.com (19 August 2002).
33[33]
34[34] www.bldc.com; Forbes, www.bermuda-online.org/milquit.htm; and pers. comm., 2003.
35[35] E. C. Harris, Director, Bermuda Maritime Museum, pers. comm., 2003; S. Conway, Director,

Ibid.

Bermuda National Trust, pers. comm., 2003.

36[36] Forbes, www.bermuda-online.org/milquit.htm
37[37] Baptiste, War, Cooperation and Conflict, chap.12; Kelshall, The U-boat War in the Caribbean.
38[38] Brereton, A History of Modern Trinidad.
39[39]

S.  Sharpe-Gomez,  Marketing  and  Product  Development,  Chaguaramas  Development
Authority, pers. comm., 2002–2003; www.chagdev.com (16 October 2003).

40[40] Pers. comm., 2002; www.trinbagoinfo.com/cmham (16 October 2003).
41[41] Mario Farrugia, Executive Director, Fondazzjoni Wirt Artna, pers. comm., 2003.
42[42] Brereton, A History of Modern Trinidad.
43[43] Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage.
44[44] Warson, ‘Canada’s Decommissioned Military Bases’, 4–9.
45[45] Royle, ‘Conservation and Heritage in the Face of Insular Urbanization’.

References

Ashworth, G. J., and J. E. Tunbridge. The Tourist-historic City: Retrospect and Prospect of Managing

the Heritage City. Oxford: Elsevier, 2000.

Attard, J. The Battle of Malta. London: William Kimber, 1980.
Ballard, C. B., Vice-Admiral, ‘The Development of Malta as a First-class Naval Base since its Inclu-
sion in the British Empire’. Journal of the Royal United Services Institution LXV (1920): 127–
40.

Baptiste, F. A. War, Cooperation and Conflict: The European Possessions in the Caribbean, 1939–1945.

New York: Greenwood Press, 1988.

Brereton, B. A History of Modern Trinidad, 1783–1962. London: Heinemann, 1981.
Buchanan, D. W. ‘Defence Outpost for North America—How Bermuda has Become the Crossroads

of the Atlantic’. Canadian Geographical Magazine XXIII, no. 3 (1941): 106–15.

Churchill, W. S. The Second World War. Vol. II: Their Finest Hour. London: Cassell, 1949.
Clark, C. ‘Vintage Ports or Deserted Dockyards: Differing Futures for Naval Heritage across Europe’.
Working Paper 57, University of the West of England – Bristol, Centre for Environment and
Planning, 2000.

Clark, C., and D. Pinder. ‘Naval Heritage and the Revitalisation Challenge: Lessons from the Vene-

tian Arsenale’. Ocean and Coastal Management 42 (1999): 933–56.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

251

Elliott,  P.  The  Cross  and  the  Ensign:  A  Naval  History  of  Malta,  1798–1979.  Cambridge:  Patrick

Stephens, 1980.

Houlihan, E. Uprooted! The Argentia Story. St John’s: Creative Publishers, 1992.
Kelshall, G. T. M. The U-boat War in the Caribbean. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1994.
Lloyd, S. H. Sketches of Bermuda. London: James Cochrane, 1835.
Palmer, A. ‘Black American Soldiers in Trinidad, 1942–44: Wartime Politics in a Colonial Society’.

Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History XIV, no. 1 (1985): 203–20.

Pinder D., and H. Smith. ‘Heritage and Change on the Naval Waterfront: Opportunity and Chal-

lenge’. Ocean and Coastal Management 42 (1999): 861–89.

Royle, S. ‘Conservation and Heritage in the Face of Insular Urbanization: The Marshall Islands and

Kiribati’. Built Environment 25, no. 3 (1999): 211–21.

Smith, P. C. Pedestal: The Convoy that Saved Malta. London: William Kimber, 1970.
Tunbridge,  J.  ‘Large  Heritage  Waterfronts  on  Small  Tourist  Islands:  The  Case  of  the  Royal  Naval

Dockyard, Bermuda’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 8, no. 1 (2002): 41–51.

Tunbridge J. E., and G. J. Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage: The Management of the Past as a Resource in

Conflict. Chichester: Wiley, 1996.

Warson, A. ‘Canada’s Decommissioned Military Bases’. Heritage (Heritage Canada Foundation) 7,

no. 1 (2004): 4–9.

Whittingham,  F.  Bermuda:  A  Colony,  a  Fortress  and  a  Prison.  London:  Longman,  Brown,  Green,

Longmans and Roberts, 1857.

Postscript

Fieldwork in 2004 confirmed Bermuda’s Southside US survivals as noted, plus a church
and  school  in  use.  Richard  Calderon  (Vice-President  of  Business  Development  and
Marketing)  and  Patricia  Colbert  of  BLDC  kindly  elaborated  on  further  restoration:
rehabilitation  projects  have  proven  too  expensive,  given  social  and  infrastructural
charges against required profits—‘we won’t go that route again’. However, officers’
houses  are  being  refurbished,  with  lightweight  Bermuda  lime-washed  cement  roofs
replacing the US materials of Figure 7. Morgan’s Point remains Bermuda’s chief polit-
ical impasse, between developers’ and social/environmental priorities. While the BLDC
proposes a museum, Edward Harris, Director of the Bermuda Maritime Museum at the
Royal Naval Dockyard, has already established a US bases exhibit in its restored and
market-accessible Commissioner’s House. His associate Don Grearson is researching
the bases’ legacy.


