–79

6

7

Dignity and voice in silence: contemporary female visual artists’ 
quiet empathy

Candela Delgado Marín

freelance researcher

ABSTRACT
Museum visitors engage in silent contemplation establishing a connection 
with artistic objects. I argue that visual art that reduces linguistic impositions 
and  discusses  silence  can  trigger  empathic  critique.  Focusing  on  the 
philosophy of silence, feminist approaches to visual arts and the study of 
collective memory in this form, I believe that female artists that work on 
silence overcome the paradox of talking about the absence of words by 
embracing the communicative power of these instances of quiescence. In 
order to access visibility in cultural memory, women have had to turn silence 
from imposed muteness into a discursive rebellion. Silence materialises in 
their work because the observer can perceive it. Through their senses, the 
museum visitor will recognise representations of silence and understand 
that, in these cases, these silences contain messages. Consequently, silence 
will break the modern tendency of indiscriminate chatter, in a space where 
aesthetics of contemplation allow empathy to be activated. To illustrate this, 
my article analyses the following visual artworks, giving an international 
dimension to the discussion, which emphasizes the universality of silence: 
Shirin  Neshat’s  short  film  Turbulent,  Jennie  C.  Jones’s  artwork  Shhh  #8, 
Caroline Halley’s photograph ‘The 5 Women’ and Doris Salcedo’s installation 
Plegaria Muda.

Silence has been mystified, associated with repression and equated to a void. Cheryl Glenn published 
a study of speech in 2004, where she states that silence has long been misunderstood: ‘silence has 
long been considered a lamentable essence of femininity, a trope for oppression, passivity, emptiness, 
stupidity, or obedience’ (2). Conversely, Glenn argues that silence is a powerful rhetorical device. 
Similarly, the present study considers silence as the absence of the spoken word, but not the absence 
of meaning, message, will or power. That is, silence in art can be understood as a space where other 
sounds, while human voices recede, may come to the surface and re-conquer a space that has been 
monopolised previously by speech. In this context, silence has been chosen, not imposed, and is a 
communicative tool. Female visual artists who employ silence as an inherent component of their 
work, as a message and as a channel to connect with the audience will be considered here. These artists 
make silence visible and, in this manner, their pieces activate a creative agency in the audience that 
links three vertices of a triangle: art – artist – spectator. The contexts to be studied in this article are 
distinct but three key elements are shared. Four contemporary and active artists will be considered: 
the Iranian Shirin Neshat; the Columbian Doris Salcedo; the African-American Jenni C. Jones; and 
the French Caroline Halley des Fontaines.

CONTACT  Candela delgado Marín 

  candela.dm@gmail.com 

  @CandeladelgMar

© 2017 Candela delgado Marín. Published with licence by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

68 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

The path followed by visitors in a museum, where people activate their receptive skills and ability 
to contemplate, can facilitate empathy. The German philosopher Robert Vischer coined the term 
Einfühlung in 1873, meaning ‘to feel one’s way into’. Vischer was referring to the emotional projection 
of the viewer’s subjectivity into the interpretation of an artistic object (Curran 2006, 39). The term was 
translated into English as ‘empathy’ by the British psychologist Edward Titchener in 1909, widening the 
study of the concept into communication and human relations. For Titchener, in order for someone to 
access the subjectivity of another person, there has to be a conscious effort; it is not always an instinctive 
reaction to mimic someone else’s emotion (Howe 2013). The study of empathy has developed since, 
but, in art, empathy can occur if three independent variables align: ‘the museum’s specific content, an 
atmosphere conducive to contemplation, and the visitor’s related frame of mind’ (Koster 2016, viii). 
When the artwork and the curatorial choices favour the activation of the visitor’s perceptive skills and 
emotions, that is ‘when a work of art is effective, [because] it draws the observer out into the world, 
while the observer draws the work back into his or her body’ (Corbett 2016, 20). In this exchange of 
meanings between the observer and the object, the museum can facilitate a space where visitors can 
attempt to understand the artist and/or the source of inspiration through an ‘imaginative and affective 
process’ (Cummings 2016, 30); the process of empathy.

When a work of art presents the audience with silence, visitors are allowed to move beyond the 
imposition and limitations of words. Nowadays, words, written and spoken, are invasive. Urban spaces 
in particular are filled with written messages, and people navigate streets surrounded by walls, screens 
and sounds that contain language. At the same time, every individual fights for space to create their 
unique meaning, their own ideas and interpretations of reality. Literary critic Stuart Sim states the 
following: ‘Creating noise is an inherently aggressive act that all too often signals a desire for domina-
tion over the other’ (2007, 167). Political and cultural colonialism is definitely not over in the present 
globalised world; it may sometimes be subtler, but ideological impositions are omnipresent: through 
media, advertisements and propaganda for example. Museums open the door to quietness, which is 
a threatened element of culture. In silence people establish associations based on their own experi-
ences. The encroachment of language ceases, and the spectator’s own thoughts and emotions emerge, 
gradually allowing for possible points of connection and identification with the artist, the messages 
elicited and the aesthetic product. This is when empathy can occur.

Thus, in this scenario, silence is charged with positive connotations and read here as voluntary 
mutism. The four artists that are going to be considered in this study have decided to use silence as 
a motif and the choice is essential to their message. These four women have contemplated citizens 
from different countries and cultures that have been deprived of their voices. Political, racial, religious 
or gender issues may have triggered the acts of oppression discussed in these artistic productions. 
The never-ending loop structure in which news of war, death and violence are nowadays broadcast 
in all forms of media can create in audiences a sense of detachment. Doris Salcedo, one of the artists 
under study here, explains that, for her, art can bring back humanity out of its ‘mass-absorption of its 
own utter brutality, which reduces the demise of an individual to their utmost insignificance through 
desecration’ (2015, 215). Every single life is sacred and deserves great respect; but in the mindless 
ingestion of terror through media, these lives, and every individual story of pain and resistance is lost 
in unstoppable discourse and endless texts, printed, visual or oral. Conversely, in the museum, the 
spectator is confronted with a singular message. The installation, painting or photography, for example, 
becomes the nucleus of a sensorial experience that, I argue for my case studies, cannot easily be ignored.
It is true that curators or artists cannot control the reaction of visitors but in collaboration with 
artists, curators can enable the activation of empathic critique. Walking into the room where art is 
strategically located, illuminated and introduced, the viewer is addressed by the artwork directly, and 
by seeing, the other senses are activated. The experience requires a deeper engagement than the passive 
act of watching television, for instance. In the museum, the visitor may walk out of a room and refuse 
to ponder the piece of art, simulating the act of changing TV channels; but the kinaesthetic experience 
that starts in the museum space has already involved the brain, emotions and body of the viewer. This 
would be the first step towards empathy. Linguist Steven Pinker explains that briefly adopting someone 

  

  69

else’s viewpoint does not guarantee understanding or investment in a stranger’s circumstance; never-
theless, this initial connection may lead to empathy, where a person may adopt the vantage point of 
the other. In this way, Pinker states, that person is reminded that ‘the other fellow has a first-person, 
present-tense, ongoing stream of consciousness that is very much like your own but not the same as 
your own’ (2001, 211). Therefore, in the process of identification that takes place in a museum, a social 
issue is saved from mass-produced broadcasting; that is, unlike the television viewer, the museum 
visitor is not seeing a distant and faceless problem. Once the visitor’s senses are involved and there is 
a physical object that represents the issue, the people suffering on the other side, represented by or 
encapsulated in the piece of art, become individuals. In that moment, a bond is established between 
equals: between the visitor and the individuals affected by the social issue portrayed by the artist.

English author Olivia Laing writes about the gentrification of emotions and how any form of 
uncontrolled emotion is nowadays generally avoided, numbing the human capacity to spontaneously 
feel either joy or pain. She has studied the role of art in overcoming loneliness1 and isolation, which 
are both relevant for my study as they can be incompatible with empathy and social connection: ‘So 
much of the pain of loneliness is to do with concealment, with feeling compelled to hide vulnerability, 
to tuck ugliness away, to cover up scars as if they are literally repulsive’ (2016, 279). By contrast, artists 
do not hide emotions. They build or capture all human experiences, including painful ones, and rep-
resent them avoiding explicitness so that the spectator invests their own vulnerability to come closer 
to a point of empathy. And because the artists in question here do not use language as a medium, 
their work is not prescriptive. Arguably more so than for other cultural forms, they leave room for 
the audience’s agency to fill in the gaps they have left unexplained.
However, a factor concerning education must be kept in mind:
There is no such word as picturacy in the English language because the ability to read pictures is commonly 
thought to be –so to speak –written into the eye at birth, a product of instinct rather than education (…) To 
begin to read, to begin to acquire literacy, is to begin developing one of the most fundamental assumptions about 
the difference between pictures and words: that words are arbitrary and pictures natural, that words represent 
things by convention alone while pictures represent them by natural resemblance (…) Jonathan Culler (…), 
firmly locates pictures outside the domain of semiotics –the science of signification –because, he says, semiotics 
cannot account for ‘natural resemblance’. (Heffernan 2006, 12)

Establishing as a starting point in my argument the fact that a piece of art is not a fully formed text, 
the role of the viewer is essential in the completion of the product, a product which is not static, final 
or dictatorial. A gallery or museum is a place of exchange and the interpretative process is proactive. 
The artist reflects on and provides a depiction of reality, and the audience not only consumes that 
artistic message, it establishes a conversation. But, in this study, this conversation is freed from words, 
and, more importantly, evolves around the importance of silence. Museum visitors are ‘prosumers’, 
as art would remain inert without their interpretation. Hence, this condition implies the existence 
of a specific code of interpretation. This code is not simple, and yet, it is intuitive because it is based 
on emotions. Children are taught to decode language but not necessarily how to experience art. This 
learning strategy becomes more complex when the artwork represents the absence of speech.

Hence, by confronting a project dealing with silence, the audience will have to accept that silence 
is a technique that can be learnt and that may aid them in discovering the hidden pentimenti, layers, 
in the work of art they are facing, the more elusive message integrated in the piece of art. The artists 
that will be considered here are not painters, but in the process of creating installations, taking pictures 
or making films, the ‘brush-strokes’ can still be perceived because these are the choices made by the 
artists. In this manner, the artist’s omissions are approached as the audience internalises visual art 
as ‘windows through which we see a reality that speaks for itself without words, a reality that speaks 
directly to the eye’ (Heffernan 2006, 16). The museum visitor will perceive the pentimenti, the creative 
steps followed by the artist, and can critically approach the artist’s intent, starting a dialogue with the 
artwork. In the process of acknowledging that language as the sole instrument to interpret the world 
presents severe limitations, the engaged onlooker will unveil an essential truth of art: storytelling is 
not exclusive to the printed page, nor to linguistic signs (that is, words). Hence, ‘[v] isual culture offers 

70 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

a unique possibility for moving beyond words and also close to the body, while inevitably within 
a sign system functioning as a kind of language’ (Kaplan 2009, 112). Consequently, for the sake of 
this discussion, silence will be understood as a communicative code with particular productive and 
interpretative idiosyncrasies and, as it is the case with verbal language, a physical nature to it. That is, 
it can be seen, and, more generally, sensed or experienced with the body, and, through emotions, it 
can activate empathic critique.

Sculptures, moving pictures or images can be created, firstly, without including words, and, sec-
ondly, leaving physical blank spaces that can be filled with the imaginative skills of the interpreter. 
This, on the one hand, provides the audience with a sense of ownership over the piece of art that, 
rather than attempting to conquer the will of the artist, brings the viewer closer to both the creator 
and the subject matter because the person in front of the piece of art has invested time and emotion 
in the interpretative process. This closeness can lead to empathy. And, on the other hand, it gives the 
artist the freedom to experiment with sources of inspiration, messages and materials that go beyond 
the limitations of language and more classic approaches to canonical forms of art.

I read the artists in question in this article as minimalist. The American conceptual artists Michael 
Craig-Martin explains in his book On Being an Artist that minimalism gives an openness to the cre-
ative mind, realising that works of art do not necessarily need to be intricate elaborations to be able 
to convey complex ideas. He provides the following definition:

Minimalism seeks the meaning of art in the immediate and personal experience of the viewer in the presence 
of a specific work. […] [It] presents the viewer with objects of charged neutrality: objects usually rectilinear, 
employing one or two materials, one or two colours, repeated identical units, factory-made or store-bought; 
objects that are without any hierarchy of interest, that directly engage with the space they occupy; objects that 
reveal everything about themselves, but little about the artist; objects whose subject is the viewer. […] Minimalist 
art makes a clear statement about the nature of reality. Its apparent simplicity is the result of rigorous focusing, 
the elimination of distraction. (Craig-Martin 2015, 83)

These will be some of the characteristics of the artworks under study here. To put it simply, they tend 
to reduce rather than add; or, in other words, they rather remain quiet and show, and then listen to the 
audience. In silences, the viewer asks questions. Where there are gaps, both physical and metaphorical, 
the spectator might ponder: why would he or she leave that space empty? The interrogation may lead 
to the realisation of the unfathomable, the unknowable and that which cannot be represented with 
the precision of a reflection in a mirror. Complex human emotions and social issues of distress can 
sometimes only be spoken about indirectly and with delicacy. This susceptibility favours an awareness 
of textures, shades or shapes that could have been missed in artwork fully articulated, straightforward, 
with no gaps and no consideration of the existences of silence.

Works of art that contain this sensitivity are likely to trigger a similar finely tuned perceptibility 
in the viewer: ‘[C] hoosing to be silent allows for the active construction of one’s perspective through 
considering others’ insights’ (Reda 2009, 161); that is, empathy requires two elements: silence and 
subsequent engagement on the part of the viewer. But one important factor to consider is if a museum 
or gallery should be a temple of quiet and a challenging space. Traditionally, these spaces have inhib-
ited conversation (Leinhardt and Knutson 2004). Conversely, new generations of curators, as former 
director of The Museum Association, Mark Taylor, explains on their website, want museums to be 
‘more like town halls, where debates happen, you can speak the unspeakable and there are things going 
on’ (Kendall 2013). Consequently, the future of museums seems to be pointing at creating spaces of 
interaction. Hence, minimalistic works that contain gaps as part of their artistic text would encourage 
these conversations or empathic interactions between the space, the visitor, the artists, the subject 
matters and the piece of art.

The artists to be here analysed discuss social issues, however, the artwork in itself is as important as 
the history, politics or conflict behind it, in terms of the emotional impact it can have on the museum 
visitor. In the case of minimalist artwork, the gaps left by the artist are spaces of free interpretation, 
which would likely be influence by the intent of the artist but not fully determined. This is another 
reason why minimalist art and artists that play with concepts of silence can facilitate the reinvention 

  

  71

of curatorial decisions and behavioural expectations in museums. Therefore, an artist’s work does 
not have to be ontologically secondary to what it resembles; thus, art can, to a certain extent, become 
independent from any historical, political or social preconceptions, helping the visitor’s mind open 
to emotional and empathic interpretation, free from learnt cultural and educational discourses. As 
a consequence, the silences discussed in these types of artwork and the gaps left by the artist cannot 
be fully explained by curators nor controlled by the artist. The art in a museum, then, will ultimately 
depend as well on the visitors’ interpretation and the conversations established with the piece in front 
of them. In this manner, museums can be reinterpreted as places where perception, ambivalence and 
sensitivity stand next to education, cultural canon and interpretative obedience (i.e. accepting the 
curatorial explanation as the ultimate meaning of the artwork and experiencing museums exclusively 
as places to be lectured by history). In fact,

the spectator engages a painting as an autonomous object; (…) [the] questions about the artist’s history, intent 
or message are entirely irrelevant. The transparence of an artistic object is the quality that allows it to be inde-
pendent of its maker or the circumstances of its making and to be perceived uniquely by each viewer. The entire 
qualification one must have for understanding art is responsiveness. (Luebbers 2009, 184)

As a result, empathy with the artistic creation will be enhanced and even liberated from the title and the 
curator’s words of interpretation. This statement, however, does not intend to dismiss in the slightest 
the relevance of the curatorial choices. As Jenny Kidd explains: ‘Institutions are responsible for the 
ways in which that object will be given meaning within the physical space of the museum’ (2014, 4). 
However, the initial text that the visitor encounters does not have to limit the range of interpretations 
and reactions when facing the artwork. Emotions are elusive and dependant on multiple factors that 
arise in the crossroads between the museum space, the art piece and the personal past and immediate 
experiences the visitor brings along. At this crossroads, the observant subject can choose to view art 
through the perspective selected by the curator, or ignore it to embrace their inferential agency. Either 
way, the museum or gallery has the potential to become a space where the artist’s effort to voice silence 
will be appreciated and, accordingly, what had previously been stifled is brought back to a position of 
remembrance, cultural memory and communal heritage. That is, through the materiality of silence –as 
the absence of speech becomes visible through the artwork– the essential message of the artist over-
comes linguistics and mainstream symbolic barriers. Madeleine Schechter explains how art can either 
be independent or contextualised, depending on the influence of institutional conventions. These are 
the conventions that may influence the viewer in perceiving an artefact as artwork (Schechter 2008). 
Working with these pieces of art that evolve around silence, artists attempt to escape formalisms, freeing 
both themselves and the viewer from conventions, which can be associated with fixed definitions of 
what art should look like or what communication should be.

In this process, any oppressive discourse of domination is called into question, and silence performs 
an insurrection, where the beholder is proactive against the relentless perceptual imperative, usually 
provoked by what Susan Sontag calls ‘the linguistic colonisation of the feelings’ (quoted in Kaplan 
2009, 119). In this rebellious action, a deeper connection is established with art, interacting with a 
mute presence. Consequently, as has been noted, this silence is never understood as emptiness, but 
rather as a chosen communicative tool. As such, silence can activate a greater fascination for everything 
that was consciously and unconsciously left unsaid by the artist. These silences left by the artists can, 
not only acutely portray the artistic rhythm of creation –the pentimenti mentioned before, but, also, 
point at the human boundaries when attempting to embrace a complete understanding of truth. 
That is, these works of art do not portray a version of reality with an authoritative tone; they present 
one of the many possible translations, so to speak, of a situation and the emotions associated with it. 
Consequently, art can turn into a humbling ubiety.

This phenomenon is particularly relevant in work by female artists, because women, at many points 
in history, have had to acquire a communicative system to be integrated in the existing discourses, 
where, traditionally, their voices have been marginalised or silenced. Therefore, they have built a 
channel to access cultural memory through silence. Paradoxically, the women artists to be considered 
here have regained possession of the previously imposed muteness, transforming it into a discursive 

72 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

rebellion of the no-longer social and cultural subaltern, who will be propelled, in this manner, into the 
podium of representation and visibility. Hence, silence in their works becomes a countertale, based 
on the principle of never overwhelming either the piece of art or the experience of the spectator with 
words. Conversely, the audience will be granted the chance of reflecting on art, aiming to interpret 
and to enrich its original indeterminacies. These women artists work with social groups that could be 
labelled as minorities: muslin women who wear hijabs, African-American citizens, female prisoners 
in India, and poverty-stricken youth in Colombia.

To illustrate this analysis of silence in a museum, my article analyzes the following works of the 
visual artists mentioned at the beginning of this article: Shirin Neshat’s short film Turbulent, Jennie 
C. Jones’s conceptual piece Shhh #8, Caroline Halley des Fontaines’s photograph ‘The 5 Women’ from 
her collection Time and Silence, and Doris Salcedo’s installation Plegaria Muda. Their relevance lies 
for me in the fact that, if humankind insists on living oblivious to the voices of minorities, like the 
ones these artists discuss, as illustrations of a wider range of socially engaged international artists 
employing silence in their productions, people’s wholesome perception of reality will be biased, blurred 
and incomplete: ‘Noise pollution results when man does not listen carefully. Noises are the sounds we 
have learnt to ignore’ (Schafer 1977, 77). Their art will point at silences that also have to be carefully 
listened to; these artists face the viewer with what may not always be on the pedestal of canonical art.
African-American visual artist Jennie C. Jones, born in Ohio in 1968, has dedicated her creativity 
to achieving a greater inclusion of African-American artists in the minimalist and modernist con-
temporary art scene. She works with the concepts of history of music, intermingled with history of 
art. Her pieces are very frequently deconstructions or rewritings of objects related to the creation or 
reproduction of music. Her pieces could be considered ‘readymade’ art, as she uses utensils and parts 
of electronic devices to redevelop their function and create new meaning. Her piece Shhh#8 was part 
of the exhibition Shift: Projects, Perspectives, Directions in The Studio Museum in Harlem, in May 2012. 
It is made of professional noise cancelling instrument cable, wire and felt.

The thin, black lines of knotted cable against the white wall depicts listening as a conceptual practice; 
the practice of silent listening in a circumscribed area. Equally, Jones integrates silence as a strong 
rhetorical construct for cultural minorities, within either male or white dominated spaces of argu-
mentation. Her art, hence, is special and reflects on sound through silence. Through her work, the 
abstract, the avant-garde jazz, modernism and institutional critique maintains a conversation (through 
a code of silence and sound) about the struggle between the canon, the classical models and innova-
tion and artistic alterations of pre-existing artefacts. The sonorous spaces that had been tyrannised 
by mainstream control are restored to the general public through minimal and delicate aesthetics, 
yet created out of sturdy materials. The subtle power of communicative silence opposes the solidity 
of the composing elements of her pieces: plastic, metal, masking tape, etc. Consequently, in unison, 
Jones fights against the colonisation of communication by majority discourses, as well as against the 
commodification of art by means of recycled elements that create a new syntax of beauty and meaning.
Through the audio equipment she plays with geometrics and the physicality of sounds. She empow-
ers the dismissed physical residues of music that have been forsaken and, thus, silenced, grants them a 
new voice of their own. Jones is also rescuing musical and oral heritage from the digital colonisation, 
bringing it back to its origins as analogue, where physical quantity and location were still essential. 
Hence, objectification is one of her sources of inspiration because the archaic sources that allowed for 
folklore to be divulgated return to the present. She has been influenced by American composer and 
music theorist John Cage and his work with silence. In 1952 Cage created the famous conceptual silent 
piece of music ‘4'33’, which is a three-movement musical piece, performed with the whole orchestra 
present, but the instruments produce no sound. In Jones, the viewer can perceive a reflection of the 
powerful imagery of music notations, that is, the graphic score, which was essential in Cage’s case as 
well, as the score represented the silent that could be heard and read. Jones has reinvented musical 
tunes of her own, defamiliarising original classics of Jazz music like Miles Davis’s ‘In a Silent Way’, 
slowing it down to the same duration as Cage’s piece. Her track softly plays in the background of 
the rooms where her pieces are exhibited, and the deconstructed piece of music contrasts with the 

  

  73

Jennie C. Jones. Shhh #8, 2012. Professional noise canceling instrument cable, wire, felt. approx. 64 x 8 inches (162.6 x 20.3 cm). © 
Jennie C. Jones, courtesy of Sikkema Jenkins & Co., new York.

entangled cables. In these rooms, the artist does not bring spoken words, just instrumental sounds 
and material symbols of silence.

Her creativity was originally triggered by a photograph of jazz saxophonist John Coltrane, standing 
in the spiral staircases in the Guggenheim Museum in 1969. The musician is portrayed in black and 
white, appearing small, yet insulated and foregrounded, in contrast with the famous white ramps or 
the New York museum, which Jones interpreted as the colonisation of white art. Coltrane is firmly 
pointing at his instrument, signalling the thin, but at the same time, strong voice of African-American 
art amidst the void of whiteness. Through Jennie C. Jones’s work, the museum or gallery visitor may 
experience a prosthetic nostalgia, a longing for a time and a culture that may not necessarily have been 
lived but, nevertheless, admired. In a review of Jones’s work for The New York Times, Ken Johnson 
states that the artist creates a ‘theatre of memory’ (2010). The stillness of her pieces perform in silence 
a history that reclaims a space in the canon: ‘By including the narratives of formerly marginalised or 
silent memory communities, new museum practices seek to democratise the communication between 
museum and public’ (Arnold-de Simine 2013, 2). Jones’s minimalistic creations, in particular Shhh #8, 
demand equity in museums. This piece of cable issues from the walls of the gallery, as the beginning 
is inserted on the vertical surface, but equally strengthens the space because the cable is plugged at its 

74 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

end back into the wall. My reading of this ‘in-and-out’ structure is that Jones wishes simultaneously 
to denounce and express respect for contemporary galleries. She challenges and praises, in silence, 
bringing heritage to the modern art space.

Jones does not only stimulate the sight of the visitor; she also activates the other senses and synaes-
thesia draws a pathway to the ear of the beholder, creating a wholesome experience. Shhh #8 shows 
cases or containers of sound (the cables and plugs) that no longer function, and have become carcasses 
of abandoned voices. The limitations of space created by material objects translate into the limits 
of sounds created by the spaces of silence. The piece also projects a knotted musical note, a gagged 
discourse that can no longer be played and, ergo, heard. From this perspective, technology does not 
strengthen the echo of the messages but rather chokes them. The caged sound waves are freed from 
their ineffective loudspeakers and repackaged and placed where they can be reheard, reconsidered 
and observed through a different prism in the space of a museum. The audience will perceive how 
sonic arts and the architecture of sounds, contemplated in silences, may trigger reveries about cultural 
resonance and social, racial and artistic reverberations that will no longer be ignored. The archiving of 
sounds is estranged to provide a space in this material and aural project for debates to which society 
and critics have been oblivious. The canvas of the museum will be turned into a stage to re-perform 
minority identities placed within empathy.

Changing  medium,  my  argument  focuses  now,  instead  of  on  conceptual  art,  on  photography. 
Caroline Halley des Fontaines was born in France in 1971. She studied Law and Human Rights and 
worked for several years as a human rights officer in different international organisations. Her pho-
tographic project Time and Space was exhibited in The Camera Work Gallery in Berlin in 2008. This 
collection of pictures was taken during her trips around India, Tibet, Nepal, Afghanistan, Cambodia, 
Kenya, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia and Egypt. I am going to concentrate on the photograph ‘The 5 Women’, 
which was taken in a women’s gaol in Jaipur, Rajasthan, Northern India.

Caroline Halley des Fontaines. ‘The Five Women’, 2008. Time and Silence. https://www.carolinehal-

leydesfontaines .com.© Caroline Halley des Fontaines.

Throughout the whole collection des Fontaines drives the audience away from an urban environ-
ment and into unknown places of silence where reflection may take place. This is done in order to 
reflect on the question of what has been lost and who has been forsaken in the road to modernity; as 
she mentions on her website the project attempts to honour vanishing cultures. She includes a poem of 

  

  75

her own in Time and Silence, which reflects on her encounters with these women: ‘The beautiful sound 
of our silent, still heart – keeps us as a whole from falling apart – […] how would you see silence if you 
could’ (2008, 1). Intercultural clashes increase due to linguistic barriers, misunderstood body language, 
and conflicting practices. In this scenario, silence and stillness are the only common ground available. 
In des Fontaines’s photographs, common features are bodies, veils, skin, eyes, hands, straight lines, con-
trasted spaces, shadows and the minimal presence of men and women against vast empty landscapes. 
As a consequence, the urban landscape is reconsidered through its destroyed aesthetics of decay and 
isolation, in scenarios of war aftermath, or, equally, through the urban echoes that have reached the 
rural and that become loud disharmonies as elements that do not collocate with the original collage. 
In ‘The 5 Women’, the empty wall is the embodiment of the imprisonment in this gaol for women.

The artist includes and provides a space of coexistence for the mundane and the sacred: the prison 
patio and the veil. The harmonious inhabitants are portrayed through softly directed lighting in black 
and white photographs. In this peculiar picture, five women are positioned in space, wearing veils and 
fully covered with the exception of part of their faces and small sections of their limbs. The body-veil 
binary creates a complex text in this photograph. The woman in the centre stares at the audience and 
is wearing black. She is taller than the other four and stands strong and firm in the centre of the image, 
challenging the audience with no fear to be perceived in her posture. The hijab is no impediment for 
her determination, which shows through her crossed arms, as if she were imposing her silent claim 
for visibility. Her body and garments turn into a banner exposed to the oppressor, which could be 
understood as male, religious or institutional. Des Fontaines leads the audience towards a reflection 
on silenced voices that become silent messengers, capable of voicing their silence. The photograph 
allows for the appropriation of silence and minimalism as communicative tools to loudly state identity 
and the right to not be forgotten.

The emphasis on the colour black may be read as the accumulation of layers of these silenced 
voices, needs and desires throughout history. The white bodies of the other women, on the contrary, 
could signify the clarity of hope and objectives to be achieved. The focus of the picture is low to give 
the impression that the women are occupying a small area of the portrayed space, above the massive 
cracked and dirty wall, which has been worn out by violence, tears, fights and protests. It is the infinite 
protest of cultures against the hindering of their voices. Finally, the fact that their shadows merge 
together gives the impression of union and communal effort. In this manner, they raise their voices 
into the eternity of cultural heritage.

The four artists of my study share a concern about fading legacies and cultural neglect. This is 
the main preoccupation of the installations of Colombian artist Doris Salcedo. She was born in 1948 
and has worked internationally. Plegaria Muda/ Mute Prayer was exhibited at the Moderna Museet 
Malmö in Sweden, in 2011. It was created after three years of research on the ghettoes of South East 
Los Angeles and the deaths of young people. However, it is also a direct answer to the repeated atroc-
ities committed by groups within the Colombian army between 2003 and 2009. Around 1,500 young 
men, from poor and marginalised neighbourhoods, were promised fake jobs. They were driven to 
hidden destinations and killed, dressed up in rebel uniforms and falsely presented as guerrillas or 
paramilitaries killed in combat, allowing these corrupt units to claim financial rewards offered by the 
government. Salcedo’s installation is composed of 162 units, made of wood, mineral compound, cement 
and grass with an internal irrigation system2. Each piece is created by placing one table inverted on 
top of another. Between the tables there is a layer of soil, and grass leaves shoot up, finding their way 
through the cracks in the wooden panels. These tables, though they could be considered ‘readymade 
art’, are all different; they are all marked and signify the identity of every victim, becoming ‘eloquent 
objects’ (Brinson 2015, 211). Each table demands quiet and careful attention, reminding the viewer 
not only of the number of deaths, but of the relevance of individuality.

The installation deals with the traumas of immigration, the frontier, segregation and social exclu-
sion. She creates a space where silence speaks about those who have been forgotten and about the 
relevance of memory. In that sense, the installation may be considered a sculpture of historical memory 
that articulates pain and turns the audience into a witness of this tragedy in a metaphoric dimension. 

76 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

The artificial and the organic (wood, soil and grass) are placed next to each other in order to create 
material transpositions of the action of men and, in this manner, she exposes her documentary. 
Trauma is rarely compatible with eloquent discourses, and so denouncing this injustice with language 
would have been artificial. The indirectness of Salcedo’s message makes it, paradoxically, impossible 
to ignore. The tables contain no explicit inscription but the simple combination of the brown of the 
wood, the black of the soil, the green of the grass shoots and the white of the walls is a loud physical 
and conceptual text that activates almost immediately the senses and emotions of the museum or 
gallery visitor. The angularity of the leg tables and tops, the sharp grass leaves, and the shapeless soil 
create a complex texture that easily engages people in a sensorial interpretative journey.

This cemetery of memory reconsiders the relevance of households through the recycling of redun-
dant furniture; that is, old tables that no longer dress up a home, and, in the integrated soil, and through 
these samples of commodities, tiny sprouts of life –the grass– find their way silently back into the 
visible. There is a clear contrast between the fragility and lack of order of the grass and the robust 
tables. However, the strength of the weaker component, the grass, is proved as it threads pain and 
memory through the strong and, apparently, impenetrable materiality of history and its records –in 
the form of these pairs of inverted tables–, reconsidering and rewriting the gap between the past and 
the present, the forgotten and the voice in the news. Broadcasted news programmes do not facilitate 
mourning, as they are impersonal pieces of information. Art, on the other hand, bonds the viewer 
and the souls behind the installations, the young men killed and the families that cry for them, in an 
empathic connection that challenges time, frontiers and cultural misunderstandings.

Salcedo uses materials that are already common universal signifiers, charged with symbolic mean-
ing. They pertain to routine human practices of everyday life, such as simple, unpretentious tables. 
She, however, combines them in a silent speech where they gain a different meaning, charging the 
objects, without the use of the written word, with the concept of legacy that is transferred through 
objects. The use of furniture common in the space of the home is a motif in her installations because 
through these symbols of the domestic she reflects on lineage and union. Repurposed chairs, ward-
robes or tables have passed through the hands of relatives, leaving traces of their heritage. The objects 
contain remnants of the past. In fact, in an interview granted to the San Francisco Museum of Art, 
Salcedo claims that memory is the essence of her work. She explains that memories of pain should 
not be forgotten and she tries to dignify the dead with beauty. In this manner, the audience is forced 
to behold the uncomfortable truths that have been silent in the mainstream discourses of history but, 
beholding the objects, Salcedo hopes that people will be connected through common pasts of pain, 
enhancing empathy in her installations (San Francisco Museum of Modern Art 2017).

In front of Salcedo’s artwork, the visitor does not need a bibliographical record of the tragedies of 
San Francisco or Bogotá. The artist studies human artefacts and redesigns them to turn them into a 
material archive of the past. The presence of soil between the tables can be read as a reconfiguration 
of the concept of cultural archaeology. She is, therefore, contributing to an educational project based 
on picturacy, and the reading of silence and familiar objects as new effective elements of cultural inter-
action. The Guggenheim Museum offers on their website a curatorial explanation of Plegaria Muda, 
suggesting that the shoots of grass can signify the resurgence of the souls of those killed, who were 
not given sepulchre as deserved. In this way, like an archaeologist, through her installations, Doris 
Salcedo makes sure that memory survives (Guggenheim Museum 2015).

The installation is presented as a place of burial, the tables being about the size of a human body. 
However, the soil and the fragile leaves of grass are not fully enclosed. Looking at each pair of tables 
from the side, the visitor can see the layer of earth, and the green shoots grow through thin fractures. 
Jill Bennett, in a study of empathy in contemporary art, claims that physical representations of memory 
as a surface are permeable (2005). Doris Salcedo explained in a talk given at The White Cube Gallery 
that people from deprived areas with no opportunities to access the mainstream and wellbeing of other 
social classes, suffer from ‘social death’, even before they are physically killed, because their voices have 
been stolen and despised. Besides, societies do not mourn criminals. But the artist wants their identities 
to prevail, penetrating through apparent indestructible social barriers, like the leaves of grass do as they 

  

  77

find their way through the cracks of the table. These individuals that she wants to commemorate may 
have been easily erased from their communities but Salcedo is fixing their identities in an alternative 
historical record, an artistic and silent one, where they cannot be forgotten.

Finally, I would like to comment on the short film Turbulent, created by Shirin Neshat born in 
1957. The film was made in 1998 as a part of a trilogy (Rapture and Fervour complete the series). In 
the actual space of a museum, two opposite walls simultaneously show two different movies. However, 
other exhibitions have used the technique of the dichotomy of a divided screen, signalling, clearly, 
the female and male sectors of Muslim culture and society. The origin of the project lies in a histori-
cal event: during the Islamic Revolution of 1979 women in Iran were forbidden from recording and 
performing music: ‘women vanished as singers. Their careers ended as they were chased into silence, 
exile, or both. Even their records and cassettes were destroyed’ (Milani 2001, 8). Neshat’s body of work 
focuses on contrasts: the male and female body, stillness and movement, silence and sound, circles 
and lines, multitudes and single bodies in vast landscapes. The veil and other influential traditions, 
such as calligraphy or music, help her give voice to the silenced.

In this video, Turbulent3, the audience first sees a man, actor Shoja Yousseffi Azari, who lip syncs 
with the voice of Iranian singer Shahram Nazeri, a song dating from the thirteenth century composed 
by the Sufi mystic Rumi. The man stands in a well-lit auditorium, with a white-dressed, attentive and 
respectful audience of men. He is in the centre of the stage and there is a stationary camera. The woman, 
on the contrary, is still in the same performative space but she is alone, in the darkness, and wearing a 
chador. The singer, Sussan Diyham, has a low-pitched and husky voice, which is, however, at the same 
time, soothing. Her song has no words and it is made up of mere rising and falling wails. The camera, 
in this case, circles around her and her performance, in contrast with that of the man, ends with no 
applause or ovation. The woman is breaking the rules of the classic patterns of music, of the fixed 
camera and the ban from performance. She is not tied by social restrictions, and more importantly, 
she is not tied by language. The silence of the vacant venue becomes her private microphone and the 
darkness gives her intimacy and freedom. Towards the end of the movie, the men in the other half of 
the screen observe her, mesmerised, but she ignores them.

While her laments get louder and more guttural, the audience in the museum or gallery sees the 
man, his audience, the woman and the empty chairs of her auditorium as one. In this way, the spa-
tially separated are conceptually and emotionally linked in this double screen format. The two movies 
become one, producing both a monologue and a dialogue through cinematography, photography 
and performance. The monologue is that of the artist with a message of defiance and bravery, and 
the dialogue is the one that takes place through empathy, where opposites come closer. Shirin Neshat 
explained in an interview with BOMB Magazine that for this short film she was inspired by a blind 
female singer she saw performing in the streets of Istanbul, Turkey (Danto), who made her think of 
the liberty granted to an artist oblivious to an invisible and silent audience.

Her robes do not present a stereotyped western version of Islamic female figures, but rather work 
with the unpredictability of the power and resilience of women. From the abstract essence of the 
woman’s song, her rewriting of folklore, Neshat transcends social specifics without the employment 
of language. Hence, such a culturally specific idea turns into global struggles of division, isolation 
and oppression, translatable to different countries, religions and languages, through the silences of 
the male audience, and the non-linguistic musical lament of the woman. In an interview with Shadi 
Shaybani in The Michigan Quarterly Review, Neshat states: ‘He exercises the present tense by reiterating 
the conventions of the past. The woman's song is unidentifiable, universal. She lives the present tense 
through the timelessness of the primitive and the spiritual’ (1999). The female singer’s argumentation 
is freed from words. Through her, cultures associated with war tragedies speak through art and, in this 
manner, their discourses are legitimised with silence, yet irrefutable conviction.

In conclusion, these four women subvert canonical styles, materials and inspiration to challenge 
and rewrite norm and constriction; and, hence, ‘by voicing the silent and the silenced, it [women’s 
art] seeks to propel them [those that have been silenced] into the space of representation that is also 
the space of remembrance’ (Plate 2011, 98). These four pieces rewrite spaces that had been previously 

78 

 

 C. DELGADO MARÍN

conquered, used, abused and emptied of voice. The artists provide loud-speakers that rearrange silences 
to create a powerful discourse that the beholder will find it difficult to ignore or gag. Women own 
silence to inscribe their rights, needs and desires in memory. The inscription becomes perceptible by 
giving visibility to silence. The physicality of their work plays with the binary of black and white, full 
and empty. This delineation that marks the contrasts creates a strong and reverberating, or perdurable, 
aesthetic impact on the viewer. This sensorial, intellectual and emotional influence activates in the 
visitor their own concepts and experiences of silence, contradictions and vulnerabilities, and, in this 
awareness, empathy can emerge. Once the bond has been established, and similitude between very 
distinct identities is acknowledged in the public space of a museum or gallery, the muted claims of 
the artists and their subjects will be forever part of the historical archives.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

 Prof. Sherry Turkle differentiates between ‘loneliness’ and ‘solitude’. The latter allows for self-reflection and 
intrapersonal growth, whereas a lonely person suffers the lack of social interaction (2015, 65). Therefore, solitude 
can help develop empathy, as the individual will learn to deal with emotions. However, a person distressed 
by isolation may not reflect on feelings and identity, hiding away from the difficulties this mature mental 
process entails. In a psychological study of empathy, Mohammadreza Hojat explains that recurrent interpersonal 
communication conduces to empathy because in sharing thoughts and sentiments (2016), people become aware 
of their common ground.
 Photographs of the installation can be seen in the following link: https://www3.mcachicago.org/2015/salcedo/
works/plegaria_muda/ (Salcedo 2008–2010)
 Captions from the video can be seen in the following link: https://www.gladstonegallery.com/artist/shirin-
neshat/work#&panel1-15 (Neshat 1998).

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Candela Delgado Marín is a doctor in American Literature, specializing in writers of the American South and alter-
native modes of communication in literature and art. She is a member of the Research Group of American Studies at 
the University of Seville and she is currently studying memory and female identities in American fiction, as well as 
pursuing her interest in second-language teaching methodologies. In September, she will start teaching English at the 
international school Abbey College in Cambridge. Having been a lecturer at the University of Seville, teaching under-
graduate and postgraduate courses on American literature, bilingualism and pedagogy, she moved to London five years 
ago to complete her dissertation research on the Kentucky writer Bobbie Ann Mason. She was a fellow of the Eccles 
Center for American Studies at the British Library. In London, she has taught English for academic purposes at the 
University of Surrey, and she has also delivered workshops on communicative strategies for international corporations. 
She has published articles and book chapters on topics ranging from Sandra Cisneros’s border identities, the north/
south American divide in literature, and American visual artist Tamar Stone and the representation of female bodies. 
She has also co-edited a volume on American cultural diversity published by Javier Coy Series.

References
Arnold-de Simine, Silke. 2013. Trauma, Empathy, Nostalgia. Houndsmill: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bennett, Jill. 2005. Empathic Vision: Affect, Vision, and Contemporary Art. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Brinson, Katherine. 2015. “The Muted Drum: Doris Salcedo’s Material Elegies.” In Doris Salcedo, edited by Julie Rodrigues 

Widholm and Madeleine Grynsztejn, 209–213. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Corbett, Rachel. 2016. You Must Change Your Life: The Story of Rainer Maria Rilke and Auguste Rodin. New York: W. 

W. Norton & Company.

Craig-Martin, Michael. 2015. On Being an Artist. London: Art Books Publishing.
Cummings, Lindsay B. 2016. Empathy as Dialogue in Theatre and Performance. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Curran, Kathleen. 2006. The Invention of the American Art Museum: From Craft to Kulturgeschichte, 1870–1930. Los 

Angeles, CA: The Getty Research Institute.

  

  79

Press.

Danto, Arthur C. 2000. “Shirin Neshat”. BOMB Magazine (Fall): 73. Accessed 7 July 2017. https://bombmagazine.org/

article/2332/shirin-neshat.

Glenn, Cheryl. 2004. Unspoken: A Rhetoric of Silence. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Guggenheim  Museum,  New  York.  2015.  “Doris  Salcedo  Multimedia  Guide”.  Accessed  7  July  2017.  https://www.

guggenheim.org/exhibition/doris-salcedo.

Halley des Fontaines, Caroline. 2008. Time and Silence. https://www.carolinehalleydesfontaines.com/time-and-silence.
Heffernan, James A. W. 2006. Cultivating Picturacy: Visual Arts and the Verbal Interventions. Waco: Bayler University 

Hojat, Mohammadreza. 2016. Empathy in Health Professions, Education and Patient Care. New York: Springer.
Howe, David. 2013. Enpathy: What is It and Why It Matters. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Johnson, Ken. 2010. “Jennie C. Jones: ‘Electric”’. The New York Times, July 30. Accessed 7 July 2017. https://www.nytimes.

com/2010/07/30/arts/design/30galleries-003.html?_r=2.

Kaplan, E. Ann. 2009. “Sontag, Modernity, and Cinema: Women and an Aesthetics of Silence, 1960–1980.” In The 
Scandal of Susan Sontag, edited by Barbara Ching and Jennifer A. Wagner-Lacular, 106–127. New York: Columbia 
University Press.

Kendall, Geraldine. 2013. “Interview with Mark Taylor”. Museums Association, January 9. Accessed 7 July 2017. https://

www.museumsassociation.org/news/09012013-mark-taylor-interview.

Kidd, Jenny. 2014. Museums in the New Mediascape: Transmedia, Participation, Ethics. London: Routledge.
Koster, Emlyn. 2016. “Foreword”. In Fostering Empathy through Museums, edited by Elif M. Gokcogden, viii–xii. Lanham: 

Rowman & Littlefield.

Laing, Olivia. 2016. The Lonely City: Adventures in the Art of Being Alone. Edinburgh: Canongate.
Leinhardt, Gaea, and Keren Knutson. 2004. Listening in on Museum Conversation. Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press.
Luebbers, Leslie. 2009. “A Way of Feeling is a Way of Seeing: Sontag and the Visual Arts.” In The Scandal of Susan Sontag, 

edited by Barbara Ching and Jennifer A. Wagner-Lacular, 171–187. New York: Columbia University Press.

Milani, Farzaneh. 2001. Shirin Neshat. Milan: Edizioni Charta.
Neshat, Shirin, dir. 1998. Turbulent. Gladstone Gallery. Accessed 7 July 2017. https://www.gladstonegallery.com/artist/

shirin-neshat/work#&panel1-15.

Pinker, Steven. 2001. The Better Angels of Our Nature: A History of Violence and Humanity. London: Penguin Books.
Plate, Liedeke. 2011. Transforming Memories in Contemporary Women’s Rewriting. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Reda, Mary M. 2009. Between Speaking and Silence: A Study of Quiet Students. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Salcedo, Doris. 2008–2010. Plegaria Muda, February 20, 2015. Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago. Accessed 7 July 

2017. https://mcachicago.org/Calendar/2015/02/Members-Preview-Doris-Salcedo.

Salcedo, Doris. 2015. “A Work in Mourning.” In Doris Salcedo, edited by Julie Rodrigues Widholm and Madeleine 

Grynsztejn, 215–217. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Salcedo, Doris. 21 May 2011–4 September 2011. “Doris Salcedo Discusses Her Installation Plegaria Muda at Moderna 
Museet, Malmö”. The White Cube Gallery. Accessed 7 July 2017. https://whitecube.com/channel/in_the_museum/
doris_salcedo_on_plegaria_muda_2011/.

San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. 2017. “Doris Salcedo: Memory as the Essence of Work”. Accessed 7 July 2017. 

https://www.sfmoma.org/watch/doris-salcedo-memory-as-the-essence-of-work/.

Schafer, R. Murray. 1977. Our Sonic Environment and the Soundscapes: The Tuning of the World. Rochester, MN: Destiny 

Schechter, Madeleine. 2008. Semiotics and Art Theory: Between Autonomism and Contextualism. Würzburg: Königshausen 

Shaybani, Shadi. 1999. “Women of Allah: A Conversation with Shirin Neshat.” Michigan Quarterly Review 27 (2). 

Accessed 7 July 2017. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.act2080.0038.207.

Sim, Stuart. 2007. Manifesto for Silence: Confronting the Politics and Culture of Noise. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 

Books.

& Neumann.

Press.

Turkle, Sherry. 2015. Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age. New York: Penguin Books.


