Whatever you say, say something: remembering for the future in 
Northern Ireland
Margo Shea*

Department of History, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_478085.sgm

(Received 19 October 2008; final version received 31 January 2010)

164-5000000July-September 2010
MargoShea
mmshea@history.umass.edu
10.1080/13527251003775638

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis

The  question  of  how  to  ‘deal’  with  the  past  in  post-conflict  Northern  Ireland
preoccupies  public  conversation  precisely  because  it  separates  a  violent  history
from  a  fragile  peace  and  an  uncertain  future.  After  a  brief  examination  of
contemporary  Northern  Ireland’s  culture  of  remembrance,  this  article  provides
some analysis of the potentials and dangers of efforts to confront the legacies of
the  Troubles.  I  argue  here  that  the  challenge  for  post-conflict  heritage  work  in
Northern Ireland lies in forging practices that permit and facilitate different ways
of  encountering  complex  and  contradictory  histories.  These  new  efforts  to
remember encourage citizens to incorporate disparate, often conflicting memories
into a patchwork of collected memory. Through a presentation of two case studies,
this article offers an analysis of this memory work in an effort to show that it is as
difficult  as  it  is  necessary.  By  forging  a  new  tradition  in  memory  work  that
transcends  the  long  history  of  dual  narratives  and  begins  to  make  space  for
broader, more complicated engagements with the past, citizens are building their
capacity to acknowledge, understand and respect difference. This opens up new
conceptions  of  heritage  that  accommodate  the  incalculable  complexity  that
accompanies reckoning with social and cultural inheritances. In settings in which
the past is negotiated by ordinary citizens, heritage simultaneously demands and
creates new spaces for public discourse.

In  contemporary  Northern  Ireland,  people  are  hopeful  that  the  40-year  period  of
protracted political conflict known as ‘the Troubles’ is over. Behind the numbers –
approximately 3700 dead, as many as 50,000 injured and millions of pounds worth of
damage – the repercussions of violence thread through the fabric of Northern society
(Fay et al. 1999). While citizens express the desire to move forward, it has become
clear that for many, creating a peaceful future demands looking back. The question of
how  to  ‘deal’  with  the  past  preoccupies  public  conversation  precisely  because  it
separates a violent history from a fragile peace and an uncertain future. Thus, heritage
has become just as significant for determining what lies ahead as it is for expressing
historical and cultural legacies.

The  relationships  between  heritage  and  public  healing  remain  murky,  however.
Building  on  the  understanding  that  narratives  of  remembrance  shape  and  define  a
sense  of  identity  for  national  communities  (Anderson  1983,  Halbwachs  1992,
Hobsbawm and Ranger 1992, Gillis 1994), the relations between history, memory and

*Email: mmshea@history.umass.edu

290

 M. Shea

identity in the Northern Ireland conflict have been extensively explored (Glassie 1982,
Whelan  1996,  I.  McBride  2001,  Foster  2001,  Kelleher  2004,  Beiner  2006).  Most
scholars agree that parallel histories encourage segregated identities. Thus, heritage in
Northern Ireland has been conceptualised problematically, as a set of cultural produc-
tions that articulate parallel, oppositional narratives about the past.

Working within this framework, many scholars of heritage have highlighted the
ways the past has been wielded to justify the present by those on either side of the
conflict  (McIntosh  1999,  Crooke  2005,  McCarthy  2005,  McDowell  2008).  This
discourse  lends  credence  to  the  assumption  that  heritage  and  memory  work  serve
primarily to calcify difference and to provide safe cocoons for separateness in North-
ern  Ireland,  nurturing  polarities  instead  of  facilitating  convergences.  Conceived  as
such,  heritage  is  often  understood  as  a  barrier,  blocking  the  emergence  of  a  post-
conflict public culture that makes room for difference. Jonathan McMaster (2008), of
the Irish School of Ecumenics, critiqued the role heritage has played in the conflict
when he queried: 

Must the remembering forever divide us? Must we live forever with the sectarianisation
of  memory,  the  exclusivity  of  commemoration?  Or  can  we  find  ways  of  inclusive
remembering, of entering into each other’s chosen traumas, of walking through history
together? … Can we move beyond our victor/victim categories, our zero-sum politics,
culture and religion, and experience liberation and healing from the burden of the past
into a different future, a shared future based on compassion, justice, equality, diversity,
interdependence and peace?

The  implication  that  different  versions  of  the  past  stand  in  the  way  of  equality,
compassion and a peace born out of justice is widely pervasive. So, too, is the sense
that the principal challenge for new traditions of remembrance involves establishing
shared interpretations of the past that can crowd out contradictions. However, as desir-
able as inclusive remembering seems, substituting a painful and controversial history
for a more palatable version will not build a peaceful post-conflict society. Before a
shared  historical  consciousness  can  emerge  in  Northern  Ireland,  citizens  must  first
share their historical consciousness, even if it is difficult.

In his writing on memory and the Holocaust, historian James Young (1994) argues
for  the  utility  of  eschewing  the  assumption  that  societies  or  social  groups  share  a
‘collective memory’ within which both the content and forms of remembrance adhere
to similar themes and find coherence through shared meaning. Young offers ‘collected
memory’  as  an  alternative,  suggesting  that  taking  disparate,  even  contradictory
remembrances and assigning them significance within a framework that does not deny
the validity of individual memories is a valuable, if arduous, endeavour. More than the
memories that emerge, it is the effort to examine pasts that are simultaneously shared
and fragmented that define and shape a society or nation.

The challenge for post-conflict heritage work in Northern Ireland lies in forging
practices that permit and facilitate different ways of encountering complex and contra-
dictory  histories.  As  Young’s  work  underscores,  it  is  the  effort  required  to  engage
difference  that  imbues  memory  work  with  public  and  civic  meaning.  In  settings  in
which  the  past  is  negotiated  by  ordinary  citizens,  heritage  simultaneously  demands
and creates new spaces for public discourse. As ‘a process in which identity and social
and cultural meaning, memories and experiences are mediated, evaluated and worked
out’ (Smith 2008, p. 165), the kinds of memory work I discuss here contribute to the
larger  process  of  conflict  transformation  by  creating  new  forms  of  public  life  in



 291

Northern Ireland. Remembering divided histories together both demands and develops
a set of civic skills necessary for an engaged public. By forging a new tradition in
memory work that transcends the long history of dual narratives and begins to make
space for broader, more complicated engagements with the past, citizens are building
their capacity to acknowledge, understand and respect difference.

After a brief examination of contemporary Northern Ireland’s culture of remem-
brance, this article provides some analysis of the potentials and dangers of efforts to
confront the legacies of the Troubles. Through a presentation of two case studies, it
offers an analysis of this memory work in an effort to show that it is as difficult as it
is necessary. The first study examines a public meeting in Derry, Northern Ireland,
organised by the Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past, the official statutory
body  charged  with  proposing  public  approaches  towards  facing  Northern  Ireland’s
divided histories. The second case study charts efforts to dialogue about the past at a
retreat  held  by  Towards  Understanding  and  Healing,  an  organisation  whose  work
moves  beyond  simply  acknowledging  divided  histories  and  endeavours  to  build  a
series of bridges across them.

Remembering for the future
Northern Ireland’s political climate has altered drastically in recent years. While the
1994 paramilitary ceasefire brought an end to much of the organised violence and the
1998 Belfast Agreement laid out plans for self-governance, change came grudgingly.
A non-starter for nearly a decade, the Northern Ireland Executive finally took control
of the devolved provincial government in May 2007, with two of the most polarised
and polarising public figures in Northern Ireland at the helm: the Democratic Unionist
Party’s  (DUP)  Reverend  Ian  Paisley  as  First  Minister  and  Sinn  Féin’s  Martin
McGuiness as Deputy First Minister. The DUP and Sinn Féin have long represented
the  ‘extreme’  ends  of  the  political  spectrum,  insistence  on  the  province’s  intrinsic
Britishness on the one hand and an assertion that Northern Ireland assume its rightful
place as part of the Irish Republic on the other. The 2007 elections saw representatives
from  these  parties  sweep  the  polls,  conclusively  overshadowing  more  moderate
candidates.

McGuinness,  former  senior  commander  of  the  Irish  Republican  Army  (IRA)  in
his hometown of Derry, and Paisley, who has dedicated his adult life to the dual goal
of  preserving  Protestantism  and  keeping  Ulster  British,  made  an  unlikely  team.
Many  people  in  Northern  Ireland  were  appalled  that  a  ‘former  terrorist’  and  a
‘professional bigot’ were heading up the government; moderates were affronted by
the whole prospect while everyone else found either one or the other offensive. The
fact remains that their leadership made it possible for many members of the elector-
ate to move forward by assuaging fears that their point of view might be sacrificed in
the name of progress or a flimsy peace. Paradoxically, shifting those formerly at the
margins  of  the  political  process  to  the  centre  created  the  best  hope  for  self-
government  and  long-term  power  sharing.  When  Reverend  Paisley  intoned,  ‘From
the depths of my heart I can say to you today: I believe Northern Ireland has come to
a time of peace, a time when hate will no longer rule’, it was as if a period of history
had ended (Lilleston 2007).

At the inauguration of the new government in Northern Ireland, then-British Prime
Minister Tony Blair acknowledged the potential for this new era: ‘Look back and we
see  centuries  marked  by  conflict,  hardship,  even  hatred  among  the  people  of  these

292

 M. Shea

islands.  Look  forward  and  we  see  the  chance  to  shake  off  those  heavy  chains  of
history’  (Bowcutt  2009).  Thus,  the  inauguration  of  the  Northern  Ireland  Executive
heralded not only an end to the Troubles but a symbolic beginning of post-conflict
society. This brought with it an intense desire to demarcate the present and future from
the past. After decades of being chastised for remembering too much, too often and
too passionately, the people of Northern Ireland are now being called to remember
differently,  more  hopefully,  to  unburden  themselves  of  ‘those  heavy  chains  of
history’. The question of how to remember, what to remember and what to forget has
dominated public conversation.

While many government officials, civic leaders, members of the clergy and repre-
sentatives of community groups believe that the divisions in Northern Irish society can
only  be  bridged  through  a  process  of  reckoning  openly  with  the  past,  there  is  no
tradition in Northern Ireland for direct and civil discussion about contested histories.
In fact, scholars have asserted that memory itself is becoming another battlefield. As
Lundy and McGovern point out (2008, p. 61), there has been a ‘stark divergence of
views between nationalist and unionist parties, victims’ groups and community repre-
sentatives  on  what  truth-telling  itself  could  or  should  mean’.  Marie  Breen  Smyth
(2005), a leader in peace and reconciliation work, has suggested that within Northern
Ireland’s  ‘culture  of  blame’,  motivations  for  memory  remain  mixed.  Just  as  people
look to remembrance as a way, in her words, ‘to mitigate loss, honour the dead, affirm
identity,  resolve  justice  issues  and  unfinished  business,  get  answers  to  unanswered
questions,  learn  the  lessons  of  the  past  and  achieve  new  understandings’,  they  also
find it useful as a way to shame enemies, assert moral superiority and justify future
behaviour.

Not  surprisingly,  some  have  suggested  that  by  burying  the  controversies  and
pain,  by  simply  ‘drawing  a  line  under  the  past’,  the  people  of  Northern  Ireland
might  put  an  end  to  their  long  history  of  discord  and  mutual  mistrust  (The  Union
Group 2006). In 2006, 24 members of the Ulster Unionist Party issued a statement
that concluded digging up the past would do more harm than burying it. As they put
it, ‘truth is subjective, as we all know, and there is a serious risk that enquiries seek-
ing forensic or objective truth would prove partial, inconclusive and unlikely to seri-
ously  address  the  hurts  in  society’.  Among  their  proposals  was  a  tree-planting  and
storytelling initiative that would take place in every village, town and city in North-
ern  Ireland.  These  discrete  projects  would  all  culminate  simultaneously,  ‘when
samples  of  recorded  personal  histories  would  be  symbolically  buried  in  a  time
capsule  underneath  the  trees  symbolising  new  life  and  hope  springing  from  the
earth’.

Symbolic burials and other tactics of evasion, like the ones proposed by the Union
Group,  have  a  long  history  in  Northern  Ireland.  Silence,  indirection  and  obliquity
were, according to many artists and scholars, hallmarks of the divided society. From
the time of the establishment of the Northern Irish state, the arts of avoidance prolif-
erated through a combination of separate cultural, political, educational and religious
institutions  and  a  shared  commitment  to  public  politeness.  At  the  outset  of  the
Troubles,  Seamus  Heaney  (1974)  described  the  way  long  understood  but  unspoken
fault lines had finally burst through the cultural seams of the late 1960s: 

Within the very watermark of their psyche, there is a sniff of the divisions … there is a
living rift and a set of rituals for keeping that rift hidden, but keeping it there also. In
each Protestant or Catholic head there is always this sense … and what has happened in
the last six years or so is that this thing has been projected into action.



 293

For close to 40 years, the Northern Irish conflict was expressed through violence
and the cultural forms that supported or acquiesced to violence. The emergent chal-
lenge for post-conflict society is to help citizens develop an arsenal of tools for open
and civil engagements with difference. Memory work, it is argued here, is one arena
through which these sorts of engagements take place; it is a particularly crucial arena
because the historical elements of the conflict remain salient. In the two case studies
that  follow,  this  article  details  some  of  the  challenges  of  public  remembering  and
provides  examples  of  ways  citizens  of  Northern  Ireland  are  endeavouring  to  make
space for difference.

Consultative group on dealing with the past
In  2007,  Northern  Ireland  Secretary  Peter  Hain  announced  the  establishment  of  a
consultative  group  charged  with  gathering  suggestions  from  people  in  Northern
Ireland, the political parties, community groups, advocacy associations and represen-
tatives  of  the  British  and  Irish  governments  about  ways  to  deal  with  the  past.  In  a
symbolic  statement  quoted  by  the  BBC  (2007),  Hain  took  pains  to  insist  that  the
troubled past is over, that the challenge now lay in remembering it as opposed to living
through it. He introduced the Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past as a venue
for  constructive  remembering,  saying  ‘This  …  provides  a  platform  for  people  to
express their own views on how to address the violent legacy of the Troubles which
impacted on so many across all sections of society’.

Co-chaired by Lord Robin Eames, the Anglican Archbishop of Armagh, and Denis
Bradley, a former priest who led the commission that engineered a complete overhaul
of the police service, the group included eight people from a variety of backgrounds
in Northern Ireland as well as two international advisors. In addition to meetings with
community  organisations,  victims’  groups  and  political  parties,  the  Consultative
Group hosted discussion forums open to all members of the public. The group’s remit
was to suggest the most effective framework for public remembrance.

In  January  2008,  the  Consultative  Group  held  open  public  meetings  in  seven
different locations in Northern Ireland. More than 100 people attended the meeting in
Derry.  Family  members  of  those  injured  and  killed  by  the  IRA  sat  alongside  those
whose relatives had been killed by British soldiers. There were an array of others as
well  –  politicians,  directors  of  community  organisations,  medical  service  providers
who confront the effects of trauma in working with their patients, clergymen, peace
and  reconciliation  workers,  students  and  journalists.  Throughout  the  course  of  the
evening,  some  of  those  who  spoke  said  that  they  had  no  affiliation  and  had  come
because they were interested. The meeting lasted several hours, and close to 30 people
spoke. Those who came reflected the messy, tense, painful challenge that confronts
people in Northern Ireland as they endeavour to face different pasts and an opaque
future.

Bradley began the meeting by outlining what he hoped the process of discussion
about the past might generate in terms of strategies for a peaceful future. His realism
was tempered by a grim optimism: 

We are not inexperienced enough or insensitive enough to believe we can take all the
hurt and make it better; that is not possible. What might be possible and what actually
we  are  being  encouraged  to  think  about  is  that  we  can  make  things  a  bit  better.  And
perhaps we could even think that some contribution that could be made out of the past

294

 M. Shea

that would deliver a better future, a future in which perhaps we would never fight again
with each other around political issues to the point where we killed or hurt or damaged
each other. And while it is a very big statement and in some contexts perhaps a slightly
dangerous statement to say we may reach a stage where we could say that it would never
or could never happen again, that may be terribly ambitious. But at least it may be that
to which we do aspire. (Denis Bradley 2008)

The  meeting  highlighted  the  rawness  of  emotion  surrounding  the  Troubles.  It
underscored the extent to which old accusations and assumptions are rehearsed and
flexibly refitted to new circumstances within this culture of contention. For many who
spoke out, anger, hurt and suspicion brought them to the meeting. At the same time
teenagers, clergymen, representatives of peace and reconciliation groups and others
introduced  new  perspectives  and  suggestions,  and  invited  others  to  examine  and
reflect on their behaviour and motivations for sharing their stories of the Troubles.

Several unionists spoke up early in the meeting, explaining that the idea that the
Troubles  might  be  retrospectively  labelled  a  ‘war’  was  abhorrent  to  them,  though
loyalist  and  republican  paramilitaries  have  asserted  since  the  late  1960s  that  it  was
indeed a war. Security forces and the British and Northern Irish governments insisted
that paramilitary activity represented a breakdown of law and order and they consid-
ered it criminal activity. One of the first speakers (Anon 2008) wanted the consultative
group to disband rather than entertain the idea that the Troubles constituted a war. His
brother had been a police officer and was shot and killed by the IRA 30 years ago.
That experience shaped his view of the future as well as the past: 

The idea of amnesty is utterly repugnant to the families of security forces; it is a denial
of justice. And let me tell you something – if we had been involved in a war by 1972 the
army would have had this sorted out once and forever and I hope you do not report this
as  your  recommendation  –  amnesty  for  murderers,  because  that’s  what  they  were  …
Murderers. We weren’t at war in this country. Get that notion out of your heads.

Thirty years after his brother was killed, this man’s loss continued to torment him: 

I have a visit tomorrow I am not looking forward to. It is to a historical enquiries team.
They have photographic images of what happened to my young brother thirty years ago,
the handiwork of the Provisional IRA. And I am not looking forward to that, in fact I am
shaking, my stomach is turning at the fact of what I might see tomorrow, the photos, the
reports.

Relatives of IRA members who were killed entered into the conversation, contest-
ing the accusation that their loved ones were murderers. One of the first was Danny
Bradley, the brother of Seamus Bradley, who was 19 when killed by British soldiers
during Operation Motorman, a military operation that brought thousands of soldiers
in armoured cars into the working class neighbourhoods of Derry in July, 1972. Danny
Bradley (2008) stated, ‘My brother was killed in Operation Motorman … he was shot
five  times.  Now,  he  believed  he  was  in  a  war  …  and  he  believed  in  what  he  was
fighting for’.

At the same time, Danny  Bradley  questioned the legitimacy of a truth-recovery
group that was organised and funded by the British government, expressing distrust
not  simply  in  the  process  but  in  any  legitimate  British  presence  in  Ireland.  He
expressed  the  ambivalence  felt  by  many  nationalists  and  republicans  in  Derry.  He
tacitly acknowledged that the IRA had committed horrendous acts, but said that there
were reasons people had joined the movement: young people had turned to violence



 295

in order to, in their eyes, protect their communities. He also publicly pointed out his
views on the culpability of the British army: 

My brother believed in what he was doing. Now, two wrongs don’t make a right … but
many of us feel that the British government had turned against the nationalist people. I
accept that my brother was shot dead. They threw him on the ground, I’ve seen them
photos and there were bullets in his back … And [still] we have to move forward…

Raymond McNutt, whose brother Colm was killed by a British soldier in Derry in
1977, picked up the language of the man who had castigated the IRA by equating their
‘handiwork’ with that of the British army: 

My brother was 18 years of age when he was shot dead. He was shot in the heart. That
was the handiwork of the SAS. (McNutt 2008)1

McNutt explained how he had become resigned to the hierarchy of victimhood that
refused  to  acknowledge  families  of  republicans.  Broad  sections  of  the  population
would never concede that his brother was a victim in the same way that those who
were killed by paramilitary forces were. Injustice had been done on both sides, and as
he saw it, justice seemed elusive: 

My family didn’t get the luxury of someone coming to the door, ‘Mrs. McNutt, do you
need to talk about it? Can we help you?’ Or anything like that. And the reality is that my
family didn’t get justice and we’re never going to get justice. And at the end of the day,
I don’t want justice. I can tell you the name of soldier who shot my brother. He was three
years  older  than  my  brother,  he  was  twenty-one.  It  took  us  six  months  to  get  [my
brother’s] clothes off the RUC and they had ripped ’em to shreds so we couldn’t see what
happened.

McNutt ended his comments by alluding to a hope for a redemptive future, a new plan
for Northern Ireland that might acknowledge the past by helping to heal those who
were hurting, and inspiring a younger generation to live peacefully together: 

I think we should move forward and deal with some of the people who are left. I grew
up with the Troubles and that’s all I’ve ever seen, but I have nieces and nephews now
and I want them to have something different…

Next, another man who did not identify himself (Anon 2008) except to name the
public housing estate he came from as Tullyally, a loyalist stronghold, voiced undi-
gested  anger  and  frustration.  It  wasn’t  clear  from  his  statement  what  he  wanted  to
recommend to the group. It was clear that he needed to be seen and heard: 

People are going on about Bloody Sunday and all this here, well what about Omagh,
what’ve you got to say to that? … And I seen a man, he was a Catholic, and the IRA
blew him up, they got the wrong house and they blew up one of their own. What’ve you
got to say about that? I support the army and I support the police and what have you got
to say about that? I’m a loyalist from Waterside and a few years ago I got a hammering
[from loyalists.] I gave the police names and the police never done nothing about it …
ack, I’m going home.

Denis Bradley tried to respond to the man, but his speech was a verbal explosion
and people in the room seemed uncertain of how to proceed. His comments were as
complicated  as  the  Troubles  themselves.  He  raised  the  painful  sceptres  of  both  the

296

 M. Shea

1998 bombing that killed 29 people in Omagh, carried out by a republican splinter
group,  and  1972’s  Bloody  Sunday,  at  which  British  soldiers  shot  and  killed  14
unarmed civilians. He tried to point out the hazards of the Troubles by referring to the
IRA botching a job and killing ‘one of their own’; then he flipped that around to imply
that those on his ‘own side’, loyalists, had beaten him, and he had never had the issue
resolved. His refrain, ‘What have you got to say to that?’ serves as the best indicator
of his challenge to the consultative group. How can the past be explained, after all, in
any satisfactory way? How can we come to terms with all of this? Part challenge, part
rebuke, his refrain suggested that nothing can really be said to soothe the wounds from
the past.

Soon after this, a student from Oakgrove Integrated College, the only secondary
school  in  Derry  designed  for  students  from  different  cultural  and  religious  back-
grounds, took the microphone to comment on the tenor of the discourse and debate
in  the  room.  She  said  that  she  had  come  to  listen  and  was  appalled  at  the  way
people  were  ‘passing  comments  and  interrupting’.  She  implored  everyone  try  to
listen  to  one  another’s  perspectives  and  experiences  and  queried,  ‘Isn’t  that  why
we  are  here?’  The  audience  burst  into  warm  and  enthusiastic  applause;  her
comment  was  a  salutary  reminder  that  for  those  who  had  not  lived  through  the
Troubles,  it  might  be  possible  to  listen  to  everyone.  Her  comment  implied  the
benefits  of  ending  not  just  the  cycle  of  violence  but  the  cycles  of  thought,  behav-
iour  and  interaction  that  had  made  violence  permissible  for  so  long.  The  response
from  the  room  to  the  young  woman’s  plaintive  request  that  participants  show  one
another respect suggested that the majority of people in attendance either aspired to
be  more  respectful  and  open,  or,  at  the  very  least,  heralded  such  behaviour  by
young people.

After several hours, the meeting came to a close. It may not have been cathartic
and certainly nothing had been resolved. Within the discourse, citizens expressed the
infamous  distrust,  intransigence  and  rapid-fire  tit-for-tat  accusations  alongside  a
genuine desire to break out of old patterns and come to some kind of peace with the
past. For many, it provided a public forum for raking through the residues of painful
pasts and a chance to give voice to versions of the familiar refrain, ‘What have you
got  to  say  about  that?’  At  the  same  time,  it  underscored  the  pervasiveness  of  pain.
Eames and Bradley (2008) later discussed the people who participated in the Consul-
tative Group’s process, ‘They came from all parts of our community – the hurt they
experienced was caused by republicans, loyalists and the state – yet their grief was the
same’.

As  a  forum  that  reassured  people  publicly  that  they  would  not  be  forgotten,
silenced or ignored, the meeting was significant. People had spoken and members of
the Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past had listened and tried to respond to
some of the audience’s most pressing concerns. Indeed, the most important contribu-
tion to a new kind of remembering occurred through the simple act of congregating.
Instead  of  battling  over  divisive  memories  through  newspapers,  moderated  radio
programmes or parallel heritage sites that articulate very different interpretations of
the past, the act of coming together in the same room forced stories to sit side by side,
albeit uncomfortably. Many attendees chose to speak with the Consultative Group in
private invitation-only settings where they were surrounded by those who shared simi-
lar perspectives. But in the open forum I have described above, segregated memories
shared a space. Even for those who told rehearsed stories about pain, loss and feelings
of injustice, their memories were de-centred.



 297

The meeting conveyed the powerful hold of the contentious past and fundamental
divisions in Northern Irish society, and offered a clear sense of the challenges to come
in building a democratic public. Meetings like this can fuel misunderstanding, distrust
and anger. The bombastic outbursts are painful and divisive; the tenor of discussion
often  defensive.  While  they  open  avenues  for  discourse,  they  also  run  the  risk  of
exacerbating antagonisms and reifying intransigent positions. The rancour, reflective
as it is of grief, frustration and fear about the future, provided an object lesson in the
work that still needs to be done.

At  the  same  time,  the  public  forum  offered  room  for  manoeuvre.  The  act  of
congregating, fractious though the results may be, help identify the issues that must
be addressed in order for people to heal. The presence of citizens less directly involved
in the conflict – either because of their age or their background – made a difference.
Their presence and willingness to listen lent civility to a fractious and highly charged
social  space.  While  accepting  responsibility  as  citizens  for  the  burdens  of  the  past,
they displayed an ability to take in conflicting memories. By modelling civic skills
like  active  listening;  displaying  respect  for  others  regardless  of  differences,  and
imagining a different, shared future, some participants offered a new kind of public
engagement in Northern Ireland.

Listening into the divide: towards healing and understanding
Recognising the need for safe spaces to talk about the past, Towards Understanding
and  Healing  (TUH)  is  one  of  several  organisations  in  Northern  Ireland  that  bring
together  people  who  have  been  affected  by  the  conflict.2  TUH’s  storytelling  and
dialogue retreats evolved out of An Crann: The Tree, an effort that began in the mid-
1990s to collect and house personal stories of the Troubles. As poet and playwright
Damian Gorman recounted, An Crann: The Tree served as a symbolic process as well
as physical repository, ‘to gather and house individual experiences, feelings, testimo-
nies from as a wide a range as possible … open to anyone who wants to record what
they have been feeling during this time in all of our lives’ (Bloomfield 1998, p. 20).
Organisers believed that the stories might stand together, and in their uncategorisable
complexity,  mean  more  cumulatively  than  they  did  on  their  own.  Oral  testimonies
were collected with the intent of someday opening ‘a living museum’ (Crooke 2005).
The project continued for over eight years and collected thousands of stories.

The work of An Crann: The Tree inspired a group of people working in organisa-
tions dedicated to community relations and peace/reconciliation to explore storytell-
ing as a means of coming to terms with the painful and complicated past in Northern
Ireland. Derry-based Towards Understanding and Healing was initially formed as a
working group in 1998. The group was influenced by emerging research on storytell-
ing and dialogue as a part of the healing process in divided societies. Their work has
been funded by European Union Peace II initiatives; EU cross-border grants, and the
Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust, an England-based foundation that supports social
change projects in Britain, Ireland and South Africa.

Its  first  storytelling  retreat  in  2000  established  the  model  for  the  group’s  work.
TUH invited veterans of the British army, family members of soldiers killed in North-
ern Ireland, people who had been victims of violence perpetuated by the state as well
as  by  paramilitary  groups,  former  members  of  the  paramilitaries,  members  of  the
public  and  representatives  from  conflicted  societies  around  the  world  to  come
together. They explained to potential participants that they would be spending three

298

 M. Shea

days with people they might consider enemies and that there would be clear guidelines
so that confidentiality would be maintained throughout the process.

Since  2000,  TUH  has  hosted  more  than  20  retreats,  creating  ‘safe  spaces’  for
people  with  divergent  backgrounds  to  come  together  to  share  their  stories  and
dialogue about issues relevant to all. Participants say over and over that the retreats
offer the chance to talk and listen to people they would never encounter in the course
of their daily lives. Participants continue to be invited to attend by TUH staff, board
members and former participants. Organisers believe that this model of recruiting best
reflects  the  patterns  of  social  networks  in  Northern  Ireland  and  reaches  those  who
might benefit most from the process.

Founding members and long-time peace activists Maureen Hetherington and Jim
O’Neill (2006) reflected on the significance of the storytelling and dialogue retreats
they have organised. If the conflict ‘ultimately closes us down and closes us down to
others and to other possibilities’, they believe their work created spaces where people
might open up: 

This project has allowed for the space for people to share their hurts and their pain and
to  listen,  many  for  the  first  time,  to  the  hurts  of  others.  Recognition  of  our  own  and
others’ hurts and walking in the others’ shoes have helped us re-humanize those we see
as the enemy. This project has gone some way in helping to hear the disparate narratives
and the complex story of our conflict.

In December 2007 I had the opportunity to attend a dialogue retreat organised by
TUH. Dialogue retreats differ in significant ways from the storytelling sessions that
TUH initially developed. In a storytelling session, each participant is offered the time
needed to tell their story. Only when a story is complete does the group listen to some-
one else’s story. Time is managed carefully in order to ensure that everyone gets the
opportunity to share. The TUH methodology ensures that individual stories are not
challenged,  but  rather  are  respected  and  validated  as  a  part  of  the  participants’
personal lived experience. While conversation takes place outside the formal sessions,
the storytelling process places the priority on narrating personal experience as a means
of developing healthy relationships.

Dialogue  sessions  target  those  who  have  already  engaged  in  storytelling.  They
developed in response to participants’ desires to deepen their dialogue and to converse
about sensitive issues in a safe and respectful environment. While some participants
have never been to a storytelling residential, most have. The dialogue retreat in which
I  participated  took  place  over  a  three-day  period  on  a  tiny  island  in  the  middle  of
Upper Lough Erne in County Fermanagh. Beyond having the physical and psychic
space to engage deeply, the retreat offered participants a chance to help create a space
of  engagement.  The  retreat  was  organised  around  several  large  sessions  and  four
smaller ‘dialogue sessions’, all of which were carefully facilitated by teams of trained
TUH volunteers from diverse religious and cultural backgrounds. The large sessions
included guest speaking by academics and artists, and small group work that ‘mixed
up’ participants who otherwise interacted formally throughout the residential retreat
with members of their pre-determined small groups.

Small group discussions began that first evening. We spent the first sessions building
trust and establishing norms and rules for conduct, key components for creating a shared
social space. One of the priorities of the gathering was to collectively establish the
conditions under which participants could disclose information safely – fundamental
parameters for collecting discordant memories. Before dialoguing, everyone present



 299

had a chance to tell something about themselves and to connect their stories to the
Troubles, establishing a basis for discussion.3

Those  around  the  table  reflected  the  many  faces  of  the  Northern  Irish  conflict:
there was a former Ulster Defence Association (UDA) member-turned-peace-worker,
a neighbourhood community organiser who had briefly been a member of the IRA,
and  a  British  veteran  who  had  served  two  tours  in  Northern  Ireland.  One  woman
present  had  hosted  a  foreign  exchange  student  who  was  severely  wounded  in  the
Omagh bombing. Another told the story of her father’s involvement in the IRA and
the effects his years in prison had had on her family, while yet another recounted her
own story of paradox and ambiguity. Her first husband was a member of the IRA; her
second husband is Protestant. She explained the difficulties she had negotiating the
conflict within the context of her relationships with her two children, one from each
marriage. Her daughter kept images of the IRA hunger strikers on her MySpace page.
Her son’s screen saver is the Red Hand of Ulster, a typical loyalist emblem.

Issues for dialogue were meant to emerge in neat categories from the combined
experience and wisdom of the group as it had been expressed through introductory
stories. Some of the issues that emerged were so complicated that to see them reduced
to ‘parenting’, ‘education’, and ‘positive aspects of the past’ seemed in some ways to
fossilise people’s lived experiences; this rendered the general topics less compelling
than the stories that came up in conversation. In the face of all this complexity, the
group generally focused attention on particular stories that seemed to exemplify key
issues. The dialogue was concrete; instead of discussing in generalities, people held
their experiences up for scrutiny.

Everyone  in  the  group  was  interested  in  the  British  veteran’s  narrative.  As  he
talked about the raids on Catholic houses in which he had participated, he spoke of the
internal dilemmas created when one had to obey superior officers who ordered him to
point his gun at women and children, to destroy their property and to cordon them into
small sections of their already-small houses without access to food or to the bathroom.
He emotionally conveyed his memory of one raid, and of watching a tiny girl cry. As
these  memories  have  resurfaced  after  decades  of  suppression,  he  stated  that  he  felt
guilt about some of his actions.

Participants listened closely to his story. While retreat centres, internet chat rooms
and group therapy sessions in Britain are devoted to helping soldiers deal with post-
traumatic stress, or what they call amongst themselves ‘mental shrapnel’, it is unusual
that  stories  of  their  experiences  in  Northern  Ireland  are  aired  and  heard  locally.
Treated  as  if  invisible  in  the  best  of  times,  soldiers’  lives  have  rarely  been  seen  as
three-dimensional. As John Lindsay (1998, p. 3) writes, ‘the convention … [was] to
pretend not to notice these armed men on the streets’. Ignored as a matter of course,
their lives back at home or their memories of the Troubles are only occasionally visi-
ble in Northern Ireland. For many at the retreat, the veteran’s story subtly changed the
way  they  viewed  his  role,  and,  by  extension,  the  position  of  British  soldiers  more
generally.  For  some,  witnessing  the  traumatising  effects  his  tours  had  had  on  the
veteran made it more difficult to tell their own story, in which the soldier traditionally
played the role of a dehumanised perpetrator of violence.

Likewise, within the context of British veterans’ memory work, the voices of those
who were affected by their presence and actions – surveillance, raids, physical abuse
or the threat of it, long interrogations at check points on particularly rainy days, body
searches  –  have  rarely  been  heard.  Many  in  the  room  had  their  own  memories  of
experiences with British soldiers – negative, scary, even traumatising. Their efforts to

300

 M. Shea

share  some  of  these  experiences  with  someone  who  had  been  ‘on  the  other  side’
complicated  all  participants’  memories.  Learning  what  similar  scenarios  were  like
from another’s perspective cast all tellers’ memories in a different light.

The stark juxtaposition of experience, particularly between the veteran and former
members of the IRA and their families, was compelling for all present. Animosities
rippled far beyond the people who experienced or witnessed any given event, operat-
ing as what Landsberg (2004) refers to as a ‘prosthetic memory’. At the TUH session,
building  understanding  and  moving  towards  healing  among  those  directly  affected
offered the possibility of lifting a broader cultural burden for all participants.

Post-conflict  public  discourse  in  Northern  Ireland  often  feels  scripted,  ‘reserve’
responses that seem stale and predictable. In the dialogue sessions, the scripts became
glaringly  incomplete:  the  space  demanded  improvisations.  In  acknowledging  one
another’s  stories,  participants  acknowledged  one  another’s  humanity  in  a  way  that
disallowed preconditioned responses. This in turn opened space up for less ‘defensive
storytelling’ (Senehi 2002). While binaries and differences abounded in participants’
recollections  of  the  past,  the  process  of  connecting  as  individuals  through  dialogue
offered a counterweight to old divisions. Through the process of engagement, active
listening and temporarily suspending the centrality of one’s own experience, a space
for  complex  public  conversation  took  shape.  This,  in  turn,  enabled  participants  to
voice memories that complicated hardened categories and clear boundaries.

Another moment of dialogue indicates the potential of memory work as scaffold-
ing for a more open public discourse. As part of his personal introduction during the
small group session, a Protestant man explained some of the events and experiences
that had led him to join a loyalist paramilitary organisation for a brief time. He spoke
of living in a flat with his wife and baby daughter on a main residential street only a
few  hundred  yards  from  the  dividing  line  between  neutral  city  centre  space  and  a
turbulent Catholic neighbourhood in the early 1970s. He explained how his heavily
pregnant wife was intimidated in the local shop after she bought some chocolate bars
for  soldiers  on  the  street.  He  also  recounted  how  members  of  the  IRA  detonated  a
bomb, one of many, on his street when his daughter was one month old. Fearing for
his family’s safety, the man took advantage of the Emergency Housing Act, which
relocated him and his family to a new housing development a few miles outside the
city.4  A  lifetime  resident  of  the  urban  core,  he  described  feeling  that  he  had  been
kicked out of his city. This sense of alienation and deep anger towards the IRA led
him to participate briefly in paramilitary efforts.

Another man who had been a member of the IRA responded to this story with one
of his own. He and his wife and baby daughter were also living in a flat on precisely
the same street at the time of the bombing: this was before he had joined the republi-
can movement. He described his daughter sleeping in a basinet in the kitchen at the
back  of  the  house,  when  friends  stopped  in.  He  and  his  wife  discussed  leaving  the
baby to sleep while they chatted over tea in the sitting room but then decided to bring
her with them. Only a few moments later, a bomb went off nearby, shattering glass
and splintering wood all over the kitchen. He explained that despite the close call and
the  potential  danger  to  his  family,  he  never  felt  any  anger  towards  the  republican
movement. When he later joined the IRA, he said it was because he believed that the
movement was helping to protect local people from the British armed forces and the
police.

There was no room in their dialogue for reconciliation between the two men and
that  wasn’t  even  necessary.  Neither  apologised  to  the  other  or  renounced  their



 301

behaviours  or  actions.  They  simply  created  a  space  for  their  different  stories  to
coexist. In doing so, they changed both stories. This dialogue was extremely signifi-
cant in terms of post-conflict remembrance work. The men spoke openly, sharing their
positions  even  though  they  knew  that  they  had  opposing  perspectives.  They  were
respectful of one another and of one another’s differences. There was no tidy conclu-
sion to their discussion; their stories had played out from those flats on a city street as
part of a much larger and infinitely more complex historical narrative. The reality is
that both stories were true, objectively and subjectively. Both families’ experiences of
the bomb were incontrovertibly authentic.

Allowing for two stories to be held up for scrutiny and reflection was powerful.
By presenting both stories simultaneously in all their incongruity, without trying to
rehabilitate them or create a happy ending, the participants edged closer to a complex
understanding of Northern Ireland’s past. Creating space for these stories to intermin-
gle,  even  for  a  short  time,  widened  the  public  domain  not  only  for  the  two  men
involved  but  for  everyone  listening  as  well.  In  a  culture  in  which  politeness  is
prioritised  and  disagreements  are  rarely  discussed  openly  between  individuals,  this
conversation was an anomaly and an opening.

In  this  way,  memory  work  in  the  TUH  context  departs  more  significantly  from
traditional  cultural  engagements  with  the  past  in  Northern  Ireland.  The  secluded
spaces of the retreats, careful recruitment of participants who might never meet in the
course of their ordinary lives, competent facilitation, shared creation of expectations
and norms and strict guidelines guarding confidentiality render the retreat an experi-
ence anomalous from day-to-day life. The act of telling one’s own story, of making
sense of one’s experience, in the company of diverse others who have committed to
listen openly without diminishing others’ experiences, establishes space for disparate
memories to co-exist (Hetherington and O’Neill 2006).

TUH  created  non-competitive  environments  of  memory,  where  participants  had
the opportunity to develop a complex ‘collected’ memory. Citizens had the opportu-
nity to reconsider their memories in relation to others’, subtly shifting their own narra-
tives of the past through the process of acknowledging the validity of very different
stories. This in turn opened up space for less defensive storytelling. While the retreat
did not eliminate binaries or differences in participants’ recollections of the past, its
focus  on  relationship-building  through  listening  and  sharing  ultimately  allowed
participants  to  articulate  memories  that  complicated  hardened  categories  and  clear
boundaries. In the TUH model, the storytellers are changing and being changed by the
discourses in which they are participating. In this space, it becomes possible to accom-
modate  oppositional  memories  without  vilifying  them.  This  reconstructs  the  past,
story by story.

Familiar performances of memory, like other forms of public engagement, have
traditionally swung between polarised axes: embittered articulations that divide on the
one hand, and an array of dense silences on the other. At the Towards Understanding
and Healing retreats, they are being replaced briefly with far more improvised, less
comfortable but ultimately more hopeful acts of remembrance. Listening openly and
‘agreeing to disagree’ about interpretations of the past forge a new tradition in public
engagements  with  the  past  and  with  public  culture  more  broadly  conceived.  The
process itself helps to build skills that enable people to encounter difference. Those
who gain the skills for remembering together bring away with them a set of tools for
engaging  difference  more  broadly.  A  more  complex  and  more  promising  public
sphere emerges through and within such a process.

302

 M. Shea

Conclusion
Lynn Davies (2004, p. 232) argues that the primary challenge for post-conflict societ-
ies ‘is not to replace dehumanisation or hatred with a vague and uncritical “tolerance”
of the other, but to enable a critical evaluation of actions rather than “peoples.” This
is  the  task  of  all  rebuilding  of  culture’.  In  post-conflict  heritage  work  in  Northern
Ireland,  the  challenge  lies  in  interpreting  past  events  openly  and  critically  without
laying blame or playing a zero-sum memory game that discounts others’ perspectives
in  order  to  validate  one’s  own.  Building  the  skills  to  amass  and  face  a  ‘collected
memory’ in turn helps to create spaces for an array of public engagements. Moving
away from segregated narratives about the past, memory work can no longer rely on
the mutual exclusivity that has often characterised and shaped it. The TUH retreats
and the Consultative Group’s public meetings both herald a kind of heritage work that
opens up possibilities for new kinds of public engagements with the past, as well as
with  the  present  and  the  future.  Instead  of  silencing  opponents,  or  simply  avoiding
differences, both efforts have attempted to make space for the ambiguities, paradoxes
and complexities of Northern Ireland’s conflicted and contentious past. Taking memo-
ries  out  of  isolation  has  brought  citizens  into  direct  contact  with  the  complexity  of
their  shared  history.  At  the  same  time,  these  efforts  have  created  spaces  for  public
skill-building that offers opportunities for citizens to participate more effectively in
shaping the future.

By creating spaces for a diverse set of narratives to be spoken and heard together,
the  kind  of  memory  work  described  here  contributes  in  the  construction  of  a  more
robust  public.  Within  this  framework,  heritage  can  be  understood  as  a  tool  for
reshaping post-conflict society in Northern Ireland, not simply as a weapon competing
interests unleash upon one another. Heritage ceases to be an impediment and becomes
a conduit for an engaged public at peace with its differences. In turn, the incalculable
complexity  that  accompanies  a  reckoning  with  political,  social  and  cultural  inherit-
ances leads way to a more diverse and engaged public heritage.

Notes
1. The SAS, or Special Air Services, is a special forces unit of the British Army. The SAS
entered Northern Ireland on undercover surveillance missions in 1973 and were officially
deployed there in 1975.

2. Other  centres  include  Glencree  Centre  for  Peace  and  Reconciliation  (http://www.glen-

cree.ie/) and The Corrymeela Community (http://www.corrymeela.org/).

3. All participants whose stories appear in this article have read and approved of the version

of events described herein.

4. New  housing  estates  built  and  occupied  during  the  early  years  of  the  Troubles  were
overwhelmingly segregated residential spaces. The estate to which the participant moved
was and remains home predominantly to those who identify as Protestants.

Notes on Contributor
Margo Shea has a PhD in History from the University of Massachusetts Amherst. She currently
splits her time between Montréal and western Massachusetts.

References
Anderson, B., 1983. Imagined communities: reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism.

New York: Verso.



 303

Anon, 2008. Unidentified speaker at the Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past public

meeting, recorded by Margo Shea, 15 January.

BBC, 2007. Group to deal with troubled past. BBC News, 22 June [online]. Available from:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/northern_ireland/6229190.stm [Accessed 16 February
2008].

Beiner, G., 2006. Remembering the year of the French: Irish folk history and social memory.

Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Bloomfield,  K.,  1998.  We  will  remember 

the  Northern  Ireland
Victims Commissioner, Sir Kenneth Bloomfield, KCB London: Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office, 20.

them:  Report  of 

Bowcutt, O., 2007. A laugh and a look into the future as old foes join forces at last to share
power at Stormont. The Guardian. 9 May [online]. Available from: http://www.guardian.
co.uk/politics/2007/may/09/uk.northernireland1 [Accessed 22 February 2008].

Bradley, Danny, 2008. Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past public meeting, recorded

Bradley, Denis, 2008. Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past public meeting, recorded

by Margo Shea, 15 January.

by Margo Shea, 15 January.

Crooke,  E.,  2005.  The  construction  of  community  identity  through  heritage  in  Northern
Ireland.  In:  M.  McCarthy,  ed.  Ireland’s  heritages:  critical  perspectives  on  memory  and
identity. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Davies, L., 2004. Building a civic culture post-conflict. London Review of Education, 2 (3),

229–244.

Eames,  R.  and  Bradley,  D.,  2008.  Full  text  of  speech  at  the  Innovation  Center,  Titanic
Quarter,  Belfast,  29  May  [online].  Available  from:  www.cain.ulst.ac.uk/victims/docs/
consultative_group/cgp_290508_speech.pdf [Accessed 21 January 2009].

Fay,  M.T.,  Morrissey,  M.,  Smyth,  M.,  1999.  Northern  Ireland’s  troubles:  the  human  cost.

Foster, R.F., 2001. The Irish story: telling tales and making it up in Ireland. Oxford: Oxford

Gillis, J., ed., 1994. Commemorations: the politics of national identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton

Glassie, H., 1982. Passing the time in Ballymenone. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania

London: Pluto Press.

University Press.

University Press.

Press.

Halbwachs, M., 1992. On collective memory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heaney, Seamus, 1974. RTE radio interview. The Arts Programme with Eavan Bolan, 9 July.

[online]. Available at http://www.rte.ie/laweb/ll/ll_t17g.html [Accessed 1 August 2009].

Hetherington,  M.  and  O’Neill,  J.,  2006.  It’s  magic!  Towards  understanding  and  healing.

Towards Understanding and Healing Newsletter, 2(2/3, Spring/Summer), 4–5.

Hobsbawm,  E.  and  Ranger,  T.,  1992.  The  invention  of  tradition.  Cambridge:  Cambridge

University Press.

Kelleher,  W.,  2004.  The  troubles  in  Ballybogoin:  memory  and  identity  in  Northern  Ireland.

Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Landsberg, A., 2004. Prosthetic memory: the transformation of American remembrance in the

age of mass culture. New York: Columbia University Press.

Lilleston, R., 2007. Are the troubles over in Northern Ireland? USA Today, 4 May.
Lindsay,  J.,  1998.  Brits  speak  out:  British  soldiers’  impressions  of  the  Northern  Ireland

conflict. Derry: Guildhall Press.

Lundy,  P.  and  McGovern,  M.,  2008.  A  Trojan  horse:  unionism,  trust  and  truth-telling  in

Northern Ireland. International Journal of Transitional Justice, 2, 42–62.

McBride,  I.,  ed.,  2001.  History  and  memory  in  modern  Ireland.  Cambridge:  Cambridge

University Press.

McCarthy,  M.,  2005.  Explorations  of  Ireland’s  heritages.  In:  M.  McCarthy,  ed.  Ireland’s

heritages: critical perspectives on memory and identity. Aldershot: Ashgate.

McDowell, S., 2008. Selling conflict heritage through tourism in peacetime Northern Ireland:
transforming  conflict  or  exacerbating  difference?  International  Journal  of  Heritage
Studies, 14 (5), 405–421.

McIntosh,  G.,  1999.  The  force  of  culture:  unionist  identities  in  twentieth-century  Ireland.

Cork: Cork University Press.

304

 M. Shea

McMaster, J., 2008. Commemoration for a new future: public address at the Irish School for
Ecumenics,  24  January  [online].  Available  from:  http://www.ecumenics.ie/content.
php?cid=819 [Accessed 13 February 2008].

McNutt, R., 2008. Consultative Group on Dealing with the Past public meeting, recorded by

Margo Shea, 15 January.

Senehi,  J.,  2002.  Constructive  storytelling:  a  peace  process.  Peace  and  Conflict  Studies:  A

Journal of the Network of Peace and Conflict Studies, 9 (2), 41–63.

Smith, L., 2008. Empty gestures: heritage and the politics of recognition. In: H. Silverman and

D.F. Ruggles, eds. Cultural heritage and human rights. New York: Springer.

Smyth, M.B., 2005. Presentation to the management committee of Towards Understanding and
Healing,  July  2005  [online].  Available  from:  http://www.thejunction-ni.org/Conference-
TUH.htm [Accessed 21 February 2007].

The Union Group, 2006. Drawing a line under the past, March 16, 2006 [online]. Available
http://www.uniongroup.org.uk/Documents/Drawing%20a%20line%20under%20

from: 
the%20Past.pdf [Accessed 18 February 2007].

Whelan, K., 1996. Tree of liberty: radicalism, Catholicism and construction of identity, 1760–

Young, J., 1994. The texture of memory: holocaust memorials and meaning. New Haven, CT:

1830. Cork: Cork University Press.

Yale University Press.


