International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Making a Liveable ‘Place’: Content Design in Virtual
Environments

Xiaolei Chen & Yehuda Kalay

To cite this article: Xiaolei Chen & Yehuda Kalay (2008) Making a Liveable ‘Place’: Content
Design in Virtual Environments, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14:3, 229-246, DOI:
10.1080/13527250801953710
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250801953710

Published online: 25 Apr 2008.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 508

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 14, No. 3, May 2008, pp. 229–246

Making a Liveable ‘Place’: Content 
Design in Virtual Environments
Xiaolei Chen & Yehuda Kalay

143000000May 2008
XiaoleiChen
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_295537.sgm
10.1080/13527250801953710
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

lilyxlchen@gmail.comThis paper argues that designers of virtual environments must not only design the context
of their worlds (as architects do) but also assume at least partial responsibility for designing
the content (as filmmakers do). The design of a virtual environment is, therefore, a unique
task that combines the traits of both architects and filmmakers, a fact that has often been
overlooked  by  designers  of  virtual  environments.  Only  by  taking  responsibility  for  both
context and content, and being cognisant of the affordances and limitations of the medium
used, can virtual environment designers create a sense of place, which will be comparable,
if different, to the sense of place engendered by physical environments.

Keywords: Content; Context; Place; Architecture; Film

Rethinking the Design of Virtual Environments

Virtual heritage reconstructions are becoming more prevalent, as modelling technolo-
gies and the Internet make their development easier and more accessible. Their design
must contend not only with the gathering of data and their faithful translation into 3D
models but also with a myriad of technical, cultural, ethical, and social issues: What to
depict? What not? When to depict it? According to whose interpretation? Who is the
audience  the  recreation  is  intended  to  serve?  Is  the  model  appropriate  for  this  age
group? How do we know? These issues and others have been the subject of numerous
conferences, papers, and books.1

This paper focuses on yet another issue, one that is often ignored, or is less recog-
nised, in the design of virtual heritage reconstructions. It is the issue of designing the
activities  that  visitors  to  the  virtual  reconstruction  will  engage  in.  We  refer  to  it  as
designing the content of the reconstruction, in addition to designing its context. This
issue  arises  because  the  new  representational  media  transform  a  cultural  heritage

Xiaolei Chen & Yehuda Kalay, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: lilyxlchen@gmail.com

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250801953710

230 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

reconstruction from a means of communication to an environment that affords a vari-
ety  of  online  activities.  As  such,  their  design  merits  a  closer  look  at  the  difference
between a digital model and virtual environment: a digital model depicts the build-
ing, the monuments and the artefacts of a cultural heritage site, and sometimes the
depiction  of  the  people  who  lived  and  worked  at  that  site.  A  virtual  environment
adds the ability to ‘visit’ the site in the form of an avatar—an embodied representa-
tion  of  the  visitor.  This  ability  transforms  the  model  from  an  abstraction  into  a
‘lived’ place. Our argument is that this important fact is not often recognised by the
designers  of  virtual  cultural  heritage  projects,  nor  do  they  have  the  competencies
needed to address the issue when it is recognised. By extension, this issue applies also
to other kinds of virtual environments—those that do not necessarily depict cultural
heritage.

The essential function of any environment is to offer both content (activity) and
context (physical and socio-cultural setting) for the embodiment of individuals who
engage in the activity. Such embodiment—that is, interacting with both the context
and the content—creates a sense of place.2 Therefore, any environmental design—both
physical and virtual—is a combination of both context/setting design, and content/
activity design.

Content, in particular, plays a key role in making a place, because places are settings
for complex and rich events since they provide a reason and a purpose for being there.3
A variety of events such as shopping, entertainment, learning and conferencing occur
in both physical and virtual environments, which activate otherwise ‘dead’ spaces and
turn lifeless settings into inviting places.

The role of content/activity in place making involves: 

● Motivating and enforcing the individual’s engagement with the environment, serving
as the reason and purpose for the individual’s being in the place and returning to the
place later. Visiting a museum, or a ball game, are examples of such events. Through
activities, especially some symbolic activities, people become intimately involved in
interactions with the world, not only physically but also socially and culturally. These
interactions ground the achievement of a profound place experience.

● Helping  to  establish  the  event  by  promoting  the  inherent  context  of  a  place  and
arousing a transactional context, thus playing a key role in ‘activating’ and ‘nurtur-
ing’ a sense of place. If the content (e.g. worship) conforms to the inherent context
of the environment (e.g. a church), it will resonate with individuals who participate
in this event and thus will significantly promote the sense of place (e.g. a sacred, ritu-
alistic  environment).  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  content  contradicts  the  inherent
context (e.g. playing a game of cards in the church’s sanctuary), the clash between
the content and the inherent or perceived context will cause a dissonance between
the occupants and the place, and thereby diminish their sense of place.

Therefore, activity is a significant component of an environment and is essential to the
achievement of a live environment.

Architects generally do not design content directly. Instead, they design a physical
setting (space) within given contexts (physical, cultural, social, legal, economic, etc.).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

231

The settings they design imply certain contents (activities) through spatial clues that
have  certain  physical  affordances,  sequences  of  traversal  and  aesthetic  moods.  For
example,  a  corridor  can  be  designed  to  afford  transition  from  space  to  space,  or  to
encourage  serendipitous  encounters  between  the  people  who  travel  through  it;  an
open space can be designed to attract passers-by and promote social gatherings, or to
be  formal  and  forbidding,  to  be  used  only  on  special,  official  occasions;  the  colour
scheme in a clinic can be designed to calm the patients, or to elicit activity. Architects
are  also  experienced  in  designing  assemblies  of  spaces  that  encourage  certain
sequences of events. For example, the spatial sequence of galleries in a museum plays
a  key  role  in  structuring  the  experience  of  visiting  the  exhibits.  Furthermore,  the
shape, size, colour, lighting and texture of a space strongly impacts the cultivation of
certain  moods  for  the  activity.  Therefore,  content,  in  physical  environments,  is
achieved through the design of the physical space, within a larger context that is typi-
cally  taken  to  be  outside  the  architect’s  responsibility.  Content  is  implied  or
suggested, rather than defined explicitly. Much like the larger context of the environ-
ment,  the  content  is  often  pre-defined  (such  as  by  the  client,  the  society,  the  legal
code, etc.).

In cinema and video games, on the other hand, the situation is reversed. Filmmakers
and game designers control not only the context but more importantly the actions and
scenarios (plots). The settings (the ‘stage’) are designed as corresponding backdrops
that  support  the  occurrence  and  development  of  those  activities.  Thus,  in  cinema,
activities play a dominant role, while settings are viewed only as a passive background,
serving the activity and changing dynamically with it. Therefore, unlike architects who
focus on the design of settings and spaces, filmmakers start from and concentrate on
storyboards: the direct creator of various activities and events.

The case of designing virtual environments, however, is different from both physical
architecture and filmmaking. Unlike physical environments, there is no pre-defined
‘larger’ context into which the designed environment must fit, nor does the designer
have full control over the activities of the inhabitants. The design of virtual environ-
ments resembles, metaphorically, landing on a vast, new, unoccupied continent. The
newcomers have no or very few pre-defined socio-cultural practices to follow,4 and do
not know what to do there or how to behave. They have much freedom to do as they
please. To achieve some sense of coherence (i.e. make a place that can support social
activities), virtual environment designers must not only design the context but also
assume at least partial responsibility for designing the content. Designing virtual envi-
ronments is, in this respect, closer to the activity of filmmakers than to the activity of
architects. Yet, unlike passive movie audiences, the users of virtual environments are
active participants in the action, much like the users of physical environments. Hence,
the design of a virtual environment is a unique task, which combines the traits of both
architecture  and  filmmaking,  a  fact  that  has  often  been  overlooked  by  designers  of
virtual environments.

Many virtual environment designers tend to spend much time on ‘environmental
design’, working as ‘digital’ architects on the creation of virtual ‘bricks and mortar’
settings, while ignoring the fact that in architecture there is usually clearly pre-defined

232 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

content whereas in a virtual environment there is none or very little. Therefore, their
efforts often result in many ‘dead’ containers, devoid of live content, as evident in many
deserted  digital  ‘worlds’.  Guided  by  this  working  philosophy,  a  virtual  heritage  site
devoid of content (i.e. activity) may have no significant difference from a lifeless phys-
ical model.

Where Does the Content Come From?

Since  in  virtual  environments  there  are  no  pre-defined  socio-cultural  practices  to
follow, the ‘content’ (i.e. the activity) must be invented, or artificially imported from
other, known socio-cultural contexts. That has been the case in Alpha World5 and in
SecondLife,6 which are virtual environments that resemble everyday physical contexts
in  most  respects:  they  are  filled  with  buildings,  trees  and  people  (or  rather  their
avatars), who are expected to behave as they would in similar physical settings.

Figure 1 Alpha World. (Pictures from www.activeworlds.com)
Figure 2 SecondLife. (Pictures from www.secondlife.com)

But  when  such  importation  is  used,  it  is  necessary  to  ask  whether  the  imports
really do match the new socio-cultural context and its new affordances for activities.
Alpha World’s and SecondLife’s virtual environments clearly do not represent such
combinations  because  the  activities  they  afford  are  vastly  different  from  those
afforded by the borrowed environments. Even virtual environments where the activi-
ties  are  more  abstract,  such  as  e-banking  and  e-learning,  are  sufficiently  dissimilar
from  their  physical-world  counterparts  to  require  rethinking  the  context/content
relationships.

Compared with those in physical environments (PE), the contents of virtual envi-
ronments  must  differentiate  themselves  from  their  physical  counterparts  in  several
ways.

Firstly, the contents in virtual environments must take the affordance and limitation
of this new medium into account. Although most of the contents in virtual environ-
ments  can  be  contextualised  to  their  physical  counterparts  (such  as  e-transaction
versus  physical  transaction;  online  forum  versus  physical  community),  they  are  not
exactly mirrored images of physical contents: in many cases, powered or constrained
by the new medium, people conduct the same activities in a different way in virtual
environments than in physical environments. Examples include immediate conversa-
tion  between  strangers  in  a  chatroom  or  virtual  worlds;  argumentation  in  a  direct,
harsh  style  without  euphemistic  periphrasis  in  online  forums;  online  dating  across
geographic  boundaries;  and  navigation  in  a  historical  site  along  both  spatial  and
temporal  paths.  These  variances,  caused  by  the  variance  between  the  new  and  old
medium  people  inhabit,  cause  the  emergence  of  many  new  social  situations  and
cultural phenomena, which necessarily give birth to new behavioural patterns and rules
to guide embodiment in the new environment. Thus content composition in virtual
environments is not the process of copying physical behaviours into a virtual environ-
ment, a process that was seen in the design of many virtual worlds, but rather the inven-
tion of new forms of behaviour generated by the interplay between expectations and
assumptions imported from the physical-social world and the alternation of the expec-
tations due to the new environment.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

233

Figure 1 Alpha World. (Pictures from www.activeworlds.com)

Secondly,  the  imports  or  composition  of  content  for  virtual  environments  must
conform to the larger social and cultural context within which its users actually reside,
and  from  which  they  derive  their  metaphors,  and  social  and  cultural  conventions.
A good example is the sequential characteristic of activities.

In  the  physical  world,  activities  and  events  are  generally  ordered  by  an  inherent,
chronological sequence, which date back to different origins. In some cases, an activity
has an inherent or default sequence as a result of socio-cultural customs. For example,
a  wedding  comprises  a  set  of  sequential  events:  initiating  music,  parade,  testimony,
ring-exchange  and  feast.  This  sequence  is  inherent  to  many  Western-style  weddings

234 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

Figure 2

SecondLife. (Pictures from www.secondlife.com)

because  it  is  ‘approved’  and  ‘maintained’  by  long-established  social  and  cultural
customs, and hence becomes a cultural default order in such activities. In the case of a
museum visit, however, the sequence is determined more by functional factors, such as
the spatial configuration of the building, the arrangement of collections, etc. Rather
than  being  cultivated  through  long-term  social  and  cultural  interactions  and  being
inherently rooted in the navigation activities, these sequences are defined more arbi-
trarily. As a result, when constraints are taken away, these types of sequences can be
shuffled and rearranged.

In virtual environments, owing to the shared author-right of an activity scenario,
users gain partial control of the scenario, and gain partial control of the development
of  the  activity:  the  new  medium  allows  the  scenario  to  be  ordered  according  to  the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

235

user’s needs, resulting in a customised sequence. Thus, in virtual environments, the
order of activities is no longer a fixed, pre-defined constant as in physical environments:
it has become a variable in the formula that people can play with.

The ‘shuffling’ or rearrangement of activities is more often seen in cases where the
inherent  sequence  is  imposed  arbitrarily  as  a  result  of  various  functional,  practical
reasons, such as in the case of a museum visit, in which it is very common for visitors
to customise the navigation sequence according to their preference. In contrast, in the
case of an online wedding,7 many of the original sequences are faithfully preserved,
although this preservation might be metaphorical, e.g. the new-couple parade might be
replaced by an animated parade walked by two roses or two cute puppies along a red
path. This fidelity shows that socio-culturally inherent sequences are deeply rooted in
people’s minds and play a hugely important role in facilitating perception and actions,
and that even when it is technically feasible to eliminate them it is not psychologically
appropriate to do so.

Therefore, as argued above, the sequential development of an activity is powered by
two  kinds  of  factors—physical,  functional  factors  and  socio-cultural  factors.  The
virtual environment, as a powerful digital medium, in many cases can release its users
from  the  constraints  of  the  first  kind,  but  it  remains  conservative  in  modifying  the
constraints of the second kind, because of the profound association formed through
long-standing interactions between people and the social, cultural environment within
which they grow and live. Therefore, the ways in which people behave in the virtual
world are often a complex and subtle reconfiguration of action in the physical world.
As a result, the imports or composition of content for the virtual world must take the
affordance and limitation of the medium used, and at the same time conform to the
larger  social  and  cultural  context  within  which  its  users  live,  and  from  which  they
borrow the social and cultural conventions.

Content Design—Learning from Filmmakers and Architects

Although many activities are initiated by the users of virtual environments, designers
of such environments have to take partial responsibility for content composition, e.g.
offer a framework for the occurrence of the activities, indicating paths/tracks for the
development of the activities, etc. In contrast to the design of context (the space and
the  objects  that  populate  it),  the  content  is  often  intentionally  designed  to  form  a
scenario or narrative: the arrangement of a sequence of activities. Because an activity
always occurs in a certain context, the scenario also defines a relationship between the
content  and  the  context.  For  instance,  a  cinematic  screenplay  usually  defines  actor/
event as well as the setting, including both the larger socio-cultural context and the
immediate physical setting, such as the room in which the event occurs.

Among  all  the  traditional  media  designers  (architecture,  cinema,  literature,  etc.),
filmmakers  are  most  proficient  in  content  design:  their  primary  task  is  to  design
‘content’ for a cinematic place. Thus they start from a storyboard and concentrate on
how a series of activities unfolds. Unlike architects, for whom the design of the physical
context is the primary concern, for filmmakers the activity has a dominant role in their

236 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

place making. Physical context—what they call ‘backdrop’ or ‘stage setting’—is viewed
only as a passive ‘shell’ of the activity.

The  absence  of  pre-defined  content,  as  discussed  above,  makes  the  design  of  the
virtual environment, in many cases, more akin to the activity of filmmakers than the
activity of architects. A game designer usually starts from a storyboard rather than from
a 3D model of the virtual world, and a Web designer usually starts with a user’s activity
scenario rather than with the design of the interface. However, virtual environment
designers differ from filmmakers and game/Web designers in that they take on only
partially the task of content design: instead of dictating a scenario for activities with a
linear, detailed storyboard, the virtual environment generally offers a framework for
the story to unfold and leaves plenty of room for its users to explore. The scenario of
the virtual environment turns out to be a scripted yet editable one that allows for more
interactivity than a cinematic scenario does.

On the other hand, unlike movie audiences who are usually involved in the cine-
matic place only passively, the users of virtual environments are active participants in
the action, like the users of physical environments. They navigate among sites, watch
scenes,  participate  in  activities,  talk  to  others,  etc.  They  take  active  roles  in  the
performance, and their perception changes along with their active ‘movement’ in the
space—an  experience  that  is  very  similar  to  architectural  experience.  Therefore,  a
virtual  scenario  might  exhibit  similarities  to  an  architectural  scenario,  to  some
degree.

Hence, the design of a virtual environment is a unique task, which combines the
traits  of  both  filmmakers  and  architects.  In  the  following  we  will  pursue  a  detailed
discussion about what could be learned from the two media indicated above.

Learning from the Filmmaker—Narrative Model and Presentation

In  traditional  Hollywood  cinema,  narrative  plays  a  dominant  role  in  place  making.
It integrates a series of settings and events into a framework in which a ‘place’ is born
and nurtured. It dominates the audience’s emotional interaction with the ‘place’.

How is narrative made in cinema?8
Firstly, there is a story for each film. A typical cinematic story usually has a few key
elements, such as a high concept (something in the story that catches the audience’s
attention, arouses tremendous public appeal and keeps the audience interested during
the flow of the story); a theme (which reveals what the narrative/story is really about,
such as the philosophical idea behind the story); a backstory (a story within the story,
for example to reveal the experiences of a character that occurred prior to the main
action, which contributes to the character’s motivations).

Secondly, the story unfolds. The process is called narrative making. This is where the
structure of the story, or its ‘formula’, help to guide the filmmaker through the process
of developing the story (e.g. three-act plot structure, a monomyth, etc.).

Thirdly, the story is told to the audience via the screenplay, which serves to visualise
the story and regulate what the audience actually sees on screen. The settings and events
are displayed through backdrop design, shooting skills (establishing shots, wide shots,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

237

etc.), and shot transitions (jump-cut, fade, dissolve, etc.). In addition to visual story-
telling, the film also incorporates a set of audio storytelling traditions, such as dialogue,
voiceover narration, music, sound effects, etc. These storytelling methods have been
demonstrated to be as important as the story itself: they can significantly change the
audience’s perception of the cinematic story.

Therefore, in cinema, narrative is not built through a singular framework. Rather,
the narrative model and the screenplay together achieve a narrative and present it to
the audience.

Learning from the Architect—Spatial Narrative: Integrating Space with Activity

Many people believe that there is no active narrative making and storytelling in archi-
tectural  design,  because  architects  do  not  design  ‘content/story’.  Indeed,  architects
generally take over a pre-defined content scenario from the clients, legal codes, estab-
lished  customs,  etc.  For  example,  the  ‘story’  of  a  school  may  be:  students  come  to
school, learn, exercise, play, etc. Teachers come to school, prepare for teaching, lecture,
meet,  grade  student  work,  etc.  The  architect  designs  a  set  of  associated  spaces  to
support these functions and the workflow of the occupants.

But architecture does include narratives within itself. The configuration of a series of
spaces  indicates  certain  narratives.  A  small  atrium  between  the  classrooms  and  the
teachers’ lounge may create opportunities for interactions between students and teach-
ers. A long corridor varying in direction and width may cause changing behavioural
patterns in walking-through activities. Moreover, different types of architecture may
differ  in  the  strength  of  the  narrative  they  offer.  A  museum  usually  has  a  stronger
narrative than a regular office building.

Thus, there exist latent ‘stories’ in architecture. If we compare an architectural story
with a cinematic story, we find the latter is more dramatic, full of high concept, hook,
conflicts, etc. An architectural story is more about a sequence of activities.

Moreover,  architects  do  perform  storytelling  activities:  their  storytelling  (screen-
play) is achieved through what they call ‘design’—the configuration of the forms and
spaces.  There  are  generally  two  attitudes  to  architectural  storytelling.  One  is  very
passive:  designers  make  settings  according  to  the  original  script.  For  instance,  they
design an office building according to functional requirements, work flows, etc. Some
architects try to be more active by superimposing their own scenarios on the original
scenario,  or  even  rewriting  the  original  scenario,  thereby  making  a  more  ‘dramatic’
spatial narrative. For instance, by adding a huge atrium to the hotel, Portman made a
significant change to the traditional hotel scenario: instead of staying in guest rooms,
people now spend much more time in the indoor open space for viewing and for social
interactions.  In  Villa  Savoye  (1928),  Le  Corbusier  composed  ‘a  true  architectural
promenade’  made  of  views  that  are  constantly  changing,  unexpected  and  at  times
surprising.9 In Parc De La Villette (1982), Bernard Tshumi constructed a ‘cinematic
promenade’  by  shaping  architectural  spaces  into  a  montage  of  spectacular  move-
ments.10 In these two examples, the architectural spaces are shaped into a particular
‘housescape’ or ‘parkscape’, a scenarised space, and the individual, as both a navigator

238 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

and a viewer of the space, experiences a particular spatial narrative composed by the
architect.

Figure 3 Portman’s atrium. (Pictures from http://homepage.newschool.edu/ ∼quigleyt/vcs/jameson/portman.gif)
Figure 4 Villa Savoye. (Picture from http://www.scottf.com/Europe99/citypics/villa)
Figure 5 Parc De La Villette. (Pictures from http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/IMG/gif/LF28_dossier3_0.gif and http://www.galinsky.com/buildings/villette/LAVILLETTE-A0049-1.jpg)

The architectural narrative is thus achieved through the creation of a narrative of
spaces.  Firstly,  space  becomes  the  main  actor/theme  in  the  architectural  narrative,
through  which  certain  activities  are  implied/suggested,  and  through  which  certain
emotions are aroused/suppressed. If we compare cinema to architecture, we may find
that  in  cinema  people  ‘consume  a  story’,  and  in  architecture  people  ‘consume  a
space’.

Secondly, space often works as clues for the evolvement of the narrative. An architect
may use certain configurations of spatial features (transition, lighting, shape, colour,
size, contrast, viewing arrangement, etc.) to foreshadow the events, to shift the focus of
attention,  to  suspend  disbelief,  or  to  create  surprise  at  certain  moments  during  the
users’ navigation process.

Adding narrative models into space configuration brings along different environ-
mental experiences. A strong architectural narrative, such as that in Portman’s Hyatt
hotels  and  Tshumi’s  Parc  De  La  Villette,  have  much  more  intensive  impacts  on
users’  activity  and  may  stamp  their  environmental  experience  with  an  outstanding

Figure  3 Portman’s  atrium.  (Pictures  from  http://homepage.newschool.edu/∼quigleyt/
vcs/jameson/portman.gif)

International Journal of Heritage Studies

239

Figure  4 Villa  Savoye.  (Pictures  from  http://www.abbs.com.cn/bbs/post/view?bid=18
&id=1080678&sty=1&tpg=12&age=-1)

‘narrative’ feature. A weak architectural narrative, on the other hand, generally leaves
users more freedom in their navigation: they do not adhere strongly to a narrative,
hence  may  interact  with  the  setting  in  more  flexible  ways.  Therefore,  the  role  of
narrative models in spatial navigation, which is often thought to be a ‘self-initialised/
self-organised’  activity,  is  to  impose  a  force  to  the  flow  of  navigation,  guiding  both
the  navigation  action  and  the  perception  and  emotion  along  a  designed  path,  and

240 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

Figure 5 Parc De La Villette. (Pictures from http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/IMG/gif/
LF28_dossier3_0.gif 
http://www.galinsky.com/buildings/villette/LAVILLETTE-
A0049-1.jpg)

and 

finally reach a destination where a ‘sense of place’ that is expected by the designer is
achieved.

Figure 6 Spatial navigation with and without the narrative model.

Narrative Making in Virtual Environments

Narratives differ significantly in different types of virtual environment. For instance, like
cinema, many games and entertainment virtual environments have a strong narrative,
which unfolds along with the users’ activities. However, many other virtual environ-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

241

Figure 6

Spatial navigation with and without the narrative model.

ments, such as some virtual reality environments, 3D online worlds, virtual cultural
heritage sites, and most of the frequently seen commercial and personal sites, do not
bear a strong, linearly unfolding narrative. Users of these virtual environments are more
like architectural users, spending most of their time exploring the environment.

It is not necessary to impose a dramatic narrative on all virtual environments, just as
an office building does not have to be designed like the Louvre museum which bears a
very strong narrative in its spatial configuration. However, a narrative can play a role
in  shaping  users’  place  experience:  it  offers  attraction,  intensifies  engagement  and
significantly colours the place experience. A trip to a place with unexpected, dramatic
events may cause a place to be memorable, in contrast to a smooth yet boring trip. If
virtual  environment  designers  could  apply  narrative  features  in  their  designs  to  a
certain degree (depending on needs), their products might become more attractive and
therefore more engaging to the users.

Use of the narrative model—from sequence to narrative.   Much  like  architects  have
been using cinematic narrative models in their works, intentionally applying a narra-
tive model into a virtual environment may significantly enhance a user’s engagement
and help create an impressive ‘place’ in his or her mind.

Below we propose a few examples of how to apply a narrative model in virtual envi-
ronments, including, in particular, virtual environments intended for the purpose of
communicating cultural heritage. We believe that the application of these features will
help to enhance the virtual user–environment interaction and benefit place making in
the virtual environment. 

● Hook/high concept: a hook is the core of a narrative. It keeps users/audience interested
in the story flow. All successful games have hooks, from treasure finding and monster
fighting, to dating. Many virtual environments, such as SecondLife, fail in that they
offer an environment with an arid narrative—no attractive hook/high concept at all.
Without a hook as a strong motivation for exploration, users quickly lose interest in
the environment. But such hooks can be applied to virtual environments. Examples

242 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

might involve inserting a myth-discovery story in a virtual heritage site for tourists,
offering a dating story in a virtual club for youngsters, introducing an atom-world
adventure in an e-chemistry classroom for students, etc.
Plot/story development: cinema has provided many strategies that we can borrow for
developing a story in virtual environments. For example, a virtual scientific adven-
ture  story  might  be  designed  with  the  three-step  narrative  structure:  exposition,
complication and resolution. A myth discovery in a virtual heritage site might be
designed in a structure resembling a monomyth which bears a specific story pattern.
Furthermore, we can use conflicts, suspension of disbelief, event-foreshadowing, etc. as
‘seasoning’ to the story and make it more attractive and engaging.

● Multi-thread narrative: a key difference between virtual environment and cinema is
that the narrative in virtual environment is non-linear: users share the authoring
rights  of  the  narrative  with  its  designers.  Indeed,  their  participation  in  narrative
making has given rise to a special product, a multi-thread narrative, which may make
it difficult to apply a linear narrative model (as it used to be in cinema) to virtual
environments. However, we could solve this problem by breaking the scenario into
a number of threads and then applying narrative models to each of the threads (if
there are a limited number of them), or to several main threads (if there are too
many). Furthermore, even if there are multiple possible narratives, a few of them
could be highlighted/emphasised, such as a guided tour, designed with an impres-
sive narrative model (e.g. with hooks, strong suspension of disbelief, etc.), compared
to a ‘free’ exploration of a cultural heritage site.
Presenting/visualising narrative: as we have discussed above, when referring to narra-
tive making in a medium, there is more than one track. A narrative model (story,
plot) and visualisation/presentation together achieve a narrative and present it to
the audience. Therefore, when talking about narrative making in virtual environ-
ments, we will also need to consider development on these tracks in parallel. As in
cinema in which there is a particular script for the screenplay of the story (backdrop/
stage  set  definition,  lighting,  shooting  strategies,  etc.),  it  is  necessary  to  have  a
scenario for visualising the story in virtual environments, because what the users
actually see on screen significantly impacts on their perception of the story. Imagine
if the lighting could change between different scenes and with different events (light-
ing  up  suddenly  when  reaching  a  new  site,  dimming  when  failures  occur);  if  the
camera’s  shooting  angle  and  distance  could  automatically  vary  with  events  (an
overall picture or a bird’s eye view is displayed when a user wonders where to go, an
immediate close-up pops up when a user finds his or her target …). These designed
features will significantly impact on the users’ perception and their following actions
hence impact on the flow of the story. Unfortunately, most of the current virtual
environments, even games that have strong narrative models, do not have a ‘visual-
isation script’ that is as exquisite as those in cinema.

Cinema choreographs the viewpoint of its audience with a variety of meaningful vocab-
ulary  in  camera  movement,  editing,  etc.  Slow  fading  has  a  different  value  from  a
straight cut; a panning shot and zooming shot reveal their target in different ways. The

●
●
International Journal of Heritage Studies

243
speed of mobile framing is motivated by different narrative needs.11 In virtual environ-
ments we can also expect many kinds of perceived and cognitive movements, and it is
possible to facilitate them with these narration techniques. For example, we can use
transitions  between  shots/sequences  to  organise  or  categorise  events  in  the  virtual
environment,  or  to  adjust  storytelling  pace/speed,  etc.;  we  can  use  an  animated
sequence of ‘see an object, wide shot (establishing shot)—capture the object’s detail,
mentally  zoom  in  to  a  close-up—capture  its  context  from  another  perspective,
mentally zoom out to medium/wide shot and pan to get a holistic view …’ to narrate an
encounter. Since the design is in harmony with the users’ perceptional process, it easily
ties the users into the narrative.

We can learn from the mutual interaction between screen space and off-screen space
in cinema. For instance, when an avatar on the screen looks to the left at an object that
is outside the screen space, curious at what attracts him or her, a user may ‘move’ left-
ward into the ‘off-screen space’ and find the target in his or her gaze. This scenario
matches the perceptual process of spectators and thus binds the screen reality with the
mental development into an ongoing, explorative narrative. By designing such plots,
we allow content to unfold in a more ‘narratised’ style.

Many virtual environments use a first-person view: a view through the user’s own
eyes that changes in real time with the user’s kinetic movement. This view makes it
difficult to pre-define a ‘screen script’ for the whole story flow in a virtual environment.
However,  we  can  provide  a  partial  definition,  i.e.  by  inserting  certain  pre-defined
scripts into the flow while still leaving much room for users. For instance, when a user
logs into a virtual environment, the first view that pops up can be an ‘establishing shot’
(a  frequently  adopted  cinematic  shot,  which  typically  occurs  at  the  beginning  or
resolution of the story); a wide panning shot might be supplied before s/he takes some
critical action, so that s/he gets an overall picture of the site; when s/he walks through
a dark corridor that is full of danger, a few trembling, dolly shots may be inserted into
a series of real-time first-person snapshots, along with intensive audio effects; a close-
up shot may pop up when s/he stands and looks at an object for a long time; a straight
cut can be used between immediate actions/scenes changes for rhythm tightening; and
a dissolve, cross-cut can be used when focus shifts, etc. Clever use of these screen presen-
tation techniques may significantly impact on the flow of the story and help narrate
the story.

However,  a  particularly  important  rule  is  that  the  scenario  definition  should  not
interrupt the story flow. We certainly do not want the import of these imposed features
to harm the interactive narrative making, which is finally completed by the user rather
than the designer. Therefore, the degree of interference/design is both an opportunity
and a challenge.

Furthermore, in virtual environments, a variety of storytelling traditions are folded
into the medium. It incorporates not only the visual storytelling tradition (which is
utilised  in  many  of  today’s  visual  media—including  film,  TV,  etc.)  but  also  other
storytelling  traditions,  such  as  music,  sound  effects,  voiceover  narration,  dialogue,
player-to-player chat and on-screen text dialogue. Therefore, we have a rich vocabulary
for displaying/presenting the story.

244 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

Integrating space with activity.   In cinema, spatial settings are viewed as passive back-
drops for stories. In contrast, space has a major role in architectural narrative making:
the story is formed/developed/received step by step, along with the unfolding of the
space. Virtual environments resemble architecture in that many of the virtual worlds
are spatial, and exploration of the spaces is sometimes one of the intentions of the users.
Therefore,  in  these  virtual  environments  the  narrative  making  cannot  be  separated
from the major element—space. Unlike cinema, in which space might be degraded or
even ignored in narrative making, space in virtual environments has to be seriously
incorporated into the narrative, as one of the major actors.

This fact has been recognised by most virtual environment designers. Unfortunately,
many of them go too far: they spend so much time on the creation of the digital setting,
working exactly as an architect, while ignoring the fact that in architecture there is a
pre-defined content while in virtual environments there is little of it. As a result, their
designs  cause  the  emergence  of  many  deserted  containers  without  live  content.
Another reason for the prevalence of ‘simulation’ in virtual environments is the literal
understanding of the context–content/space–behaviour relationship. There are many
behaviour patterns associated with a space, which have been part of our lives for a long
time and hence cannot be forgotten easily. Therefore, if a space (e.g. a classroom) is
recreated (even metaphorically) in a virtual environment, it is possible that the associ-
ated content and behaviour patterns (lecture/discussion/keeping silence) are recalled
so that similar ‘spatial patterns’ or ‘spatial narratives’ can be replayed in the virtual
environment. If this occurs, designers can easily predict the use of their product and
further  use  the  prediction  to  guide  the  design,  just  as  an  architect  does.  However,
applying spatial patterns in a virtual environment may be somewhat risky, as argued
above: the social and cultural conventions may change according to the affordances
and limitations of the new medium used. Therefore, such imports should be justified
carefully.

The rule here is to design the space into the narrative rather than view it either as a
backdrop for a narrative, as in cinema, or as the only dominant factor, as in architec-
ture. Thus, in contrast to a cinematic narrative and an architectural narrative, a virtual
environment narrative stands in between the two—it is indeed an integration of space
and activity. And virtual environment designers may relate context design to content
design much more closely than architects and filmmakers. As a result, the context and
content may respond to, or be interactive with, each other more actively in a virtual
environment than in either of the two other media. For example, space may be used as
a theme in the narrative. In architecture as well as in the virtual environment, space is
always a theme because both of the media are thought of as ‘built spaces’. Visitors tend
to understand the structures in terms of the intentionalities of an assumed designer.
Furthermore, for many virtual environments, spatial exploration is one of the themes
in their narrative. Adding a spatial adventure to the activities in a heritage site may
promote space to a key status in the narrative. In that case, the space becomes both an
actor and a carrier of the narrative; context and content become part of each other.

Space could be used as a clue for the evolvement of the narrative: to foreshadow
future events, to nurture a variety of emotions (surprise, pleasure, oppression, etc.)

International Journal of Heritage Studies

245

through the configuration of a series of spaces. For example, the openings on the wall
of a corridor allow the corridor walkers to view an event occurring in the yard to which
the corridor leads, hence ‘foreshadow’ the story/event that the user may soon encoun-
ter. The shape/colour/size of a space might serve as hints for the emotions aroused by
the events occurring within it.

Finally, we can foster the creation of a responsive space. In the virtual environment,
given  the  power  of  the  digital  medium,  context  could  be  more  interactive  with  the
content  than  in  the  physical  world.  The  space  might  respond  to  different  activities
actively, e.g. changing colours with the mood, changing sizes with the number of occu-
pants, changing shapes/textures with the themes, changing lighting as cues to following
events, etc.

Therefore, space, rather than an exquisite backdrop as seen in many of the current
spatialised  virtual  environments,  could  play  a  much  more  active  role  in  the  new
medium.

Conclusion

To summarise, virtual environment designers must take responsibility for both content
and context. By learning from cinema and architecture in content design, and being
cognisant of the affordances and limitations of the medium used, virtual environment
designers can create a more ‘live’ virtual world and hence turn a lifeless digital model
into a true ‘environment’ or a meaningful ‘place’, which will be comparable, if differ-
ent, to those that users have experienced in other media, such as in architecture and in
cinema.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Digital Design Group of the University of California
at Berkeley for providing enlightenment and critique during the working process of this
paper.

Notes

See, for example, Kalay et al., New Heritage.

1 [1]
2 [2] Many  researchers  from  different  disciplines  have  studied  place  and  sense  of  place,  such  as
Alexander et al., A Pattern Language; Altman and Wohlwill, Human Behavior and Environment;
Belk, Attachment to Possessions; Blumer, Symbolic Interactionism; Canter, The Psychology of Place;
Cooper Marcus, ‘Environmental Memories’; Dovey, ‘Putting Geometry in its Place’; Fishwick
and Vining, ‘Toward a Phenomenology of Recreation Place’; Harrison and Dourish, ‘Re-place-
ing Space’; Jackson, A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time; Mugerauer, Interpretations on Behalf of Place;
Norberg-Schulz, Genius Loci.

3 [3] Kalay and Marx, ‘Architecture and the Internet’, 230–40.
4 [4] There are different types of virtual environments. Some, such as video games, may be linked
to user expectations and hence have more rules to follow. However, many other virtual envi-
ronments, such as some virtual reality environments and 3D online worlds, do not have much

246 X. Chen & Y. Kalay

socio-cultural practice to follow. In this paper we discuss virtual environments in general but
with a focus on the latter. In contrast to physical environments, they are really ‘a vast, new,
unoccupied continent’.

5 [5] www.activeworlds.com [accessed 6 September 2007].
6 [6] www.secondlife.com [accessed 6 September 2007].
7 [7]

for 

See, 
[accessed 6 September 2007].

example,  http://www.secondlifeherald.com/slh/2006/01/infamous_sl_gan.html

8 [8] M.  Moreno,  Screenwriting  Basics  [accessed  15  September  2005],  available  from  http://

www.screenwriting.info.
9 [9] Bruno, Atlas of Emotion.
10[10]
11[11] Bordwell and Thompson, Film Art.

Ibid.

References

Alexander, C. S., M. Ishikawa, M. Silverstein, M. Jacobsen, I. Fiksdahl-King and S. Angel. A Pattern

Language. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.

Altman, I. and J. F. Wohlwill. Human Behavior and Environment. Vol. 1. New York: Plenum Press,

1976.

Belk, R. W. ‘Attachment to Possessions’. In Place Attachment, edited by I. Altman and S. M. Low.

New York: Plenum Press, 1992.

Blumer,  H.  Symbolic  Interactionism:  Perspective  and  Method.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice  Hall,

1969.

Bordwell, D. and K. Thompson, Film Art: An Introduction. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Bruno, G. Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art, Architecture, and Film. New York: Verso, 2002.
Canter, D. The Psychology of Place. London: Architecture Press, 1977.
Cooper Marcus, C. ‘Environmental Memories’. In Place Attachment, edited by I. Altman and S. M.

Low. New York: Plenum Press, 1992.

Dovey,  K.  ‘Putting  Geometry  in  its  Place:  Toward  a  Phenomenology  of  the  Design  Process’.  In
Dwelling,  Seeing  and  Designing:  Toward  a  Phenomenological  Ecology,  edited  by  D.  Seamon.
Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1993.

Fishwick, L. and J. Vining. ‘Toward a Phenomenology of Recreation Place’. Journal of Environmental

Psychology 12 (1992): 57–63.

Harrison,  S.  and  P.  Dourish.  ‘Re-place-ing  Space:  The  Roles  of  Place  and  Space  in  Collaborative
Systems’. In Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ‘96 Conference on Computer-supported Cooperative
Work. Cambridge, MA: ACM Press, 1996.

Jackson, J. B. A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984.
Kalay, Y., T. Kvan and J. Affleck, eds. New Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage. London and

New York: Routledge, 2007.

Kalay,  Y.  and  J.  Marx.  ‘Architecture  and  the  Internet:  Designing  Places  in  Cyberspace’.  ACADIA

(2001): 230–40.

Mugerauer,  R.  Interpretations  on  Behalf  of  Place:  Environmental  Displacements  and  Alternative

Responses. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1994.

Norberg-Schulz, C. Genius Loci. New York: Rizzoli, 1979.


