International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Celebrating Heritage and the Female Orphan
School

David Saltmarsh

To cite this article: David Saltmarsh (2006) Celebrating Heritage and the Female Orphan School,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 12:6, 536-550, DOI: 10.1080/13527250600940215
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250600940215

Published online: 24 Nov 2006.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 327

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 12, No. 6, November 2006, pp. 536–550

Celebrating Heritage and the Female 
Orphan School
David Saltmarsh

126000000November 2006
DavidSaltmarsh
David.Saltmarsh@mq.edu.au
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_193937.sgm
10.1080/13527250600940215
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2006Taylor & Francis

The Female Orphan School, completed in 1818, is now a part of the University of Western
Sydney, in New South Wales, Australia. This recently restored building has been referred
to as a rejuvenated heritage jewel and a forgotten heritage treasure, but which aspects of
heritage,  and  whose  heritage,  are  being  celebrated?  This  paper  investigates  the  Orphan
School’s discursive construction in historical documents and more recent media releases.
Using  a  theoretical  approach  informed  by  the  work  of  Michel  de  Certeau  and  Michel
Foucault, and drawing on the writings of various modern historical geographers, the paper
considers the ways in which understandings of the Institution and the building have been
created  and  argues  that  many  interesting  aspects  have  been  overlooked  in  an  effort  to
produce a heritage designed to appeal to a relatively privileged constituency.

Keywords: Heritage; Female Orphan School; King; Macquarie; Parramatta; Australia

In the grounds of the University of Western Sydney (UWS), New South Wales, stands
the Female Orphan School, the oldest three-storey building in Australia. The building,
completed in 1818, has been used as an orphanage and a psychiatric hospital. Listed
with the National Trust in 1975 and part of UWS since 1995, the building has been
proclaimed  a  heritage  icon.  Now  partially  restored,  the  Orphan  School  has  been
described by the UWS media unit and in the press as a ‘rejuvenated heritage jewel’, a
‘forgotten heritage treasure’ and ‘one of the nation’s most important heritage assets’. It
is also frequently included as a stopping point on heritage tours of the surrounding
Parramatta area. But in the promotion of this building, which aspects of heritage, and
whose heritage, are being celebrated? The name of the building suggests not only that
it was constructed as a gender-specific orphanage but also that it was intended to fulfil
an  educative  function.  However,  while  a  few  of  UWS’s  media  releases  mention  the

David Saltmarsh, Macquarie University. Correspondence to: David.Saltmarsh@mq.edu.au

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2006 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250600940215

International Journal of Heritage Studies

537

building  having  been  used  as  an  orphanage,  there  is  no  mention  of  its  educative
activities, an irony for a university keen to claim a link with an educational past.1 This
paper considers the ways in which understandings of the Institution and the building
have  been  created  in  various  discourses  and  argues  that  many  interesting  historical
aspects have been overlooked to produce a heritage designed to appeal to a relatively
privileged constituency.

The  Female  Orphan  School  building  stands  among  a  number  of  structures  also
known as the Rydalmere Hospital Precinct, a set of buildings constructed between 1813
and 1989. Together, these buildings provide excellent examples of Australian Colonial
Georgian,  Victorian  Regency,  Federation  Arts  and  Crafts,  and  Federation  Free
architectural styles, as well as providing evidence of earlier practices of education and
institutional care. The assessment of significance undertaken for the Orphan School to
be included on the NSW State Heritage Register noted that the building had outstand-
ing historical, aesthetic and social significance as well as research potential, rarity and
representativeness.2  That  it  remains  standing  may  be  an  indication  that  ‘the  will  to
conserve  was  the  obsession  of  a  passionate,  educated  and  generally  influential
minority’,3 though it is difficult to imagine this orphanage was revered for its social
significance in the late 19th century when it finally closed. It is more likely that changes
to  government  policy  for  the  education  and  care  of  destitute  children  created  the
opportunity  for  re-use,  and  responsibility  for  the  precinct  was  transferred  to  the
Department of Lunacy in 1888, thus continuing its use as an institutional site.

Heritage has been defined as 

that part of the past which we select in the present for contemporary purposes, be they
economic, cultural, political or social. The worth attributed to these artefacts rests less
in their intrinsic merit than in a complex array of contemporary values, demands and
even moralities.4

This definition connects the idea of heritage with the exercise of power to select what
will  be  preserved  and  which  values  will  be  commemorated.  It  also  raises  questions
about whose views are being excluded. If we can entertain the ideas of heritage and
inheritance  then  we  must  also  acknowledge  the  possibility  of  disinheritance  and
consider the way in which this occurs. My concern in this paper is to show how some
have been disinherited and marginalised through the writing of history and the claim-
ing  of  heritage.  Much  of  this  has  to  do  with  the  power  to  produce  discourses  that
enshrine particular ideological positions, and as Certeau has argued ‘[t]he will to define
history ideologically is the concern of the social elite’. In this regard Certeau has also
advised  that  ‘[d]iscourse  can  be  dissociated  today  neither  from  the  origins  of  its
production  nor  from  the  political,  economic,  or  religious  praxis  that  can  change
societies and at a given moment, make various kinds of scientific comprehension possi-
ble’.5 Therefore, to explore the history and heritage of the Female Orphan School it will
be necessary to review past and present discursive constructions of the Institution and
the building. This exploration first considers the creation of the Orphan School as an
institution of rescue and reform under Governor King, then the School as a means of
providing protection and progress in the colony under Governor Macquarie, during

538 D. Saltmarsh

which  time  the  building  was  constructed.  The  paper  will  then  consider  the  recent
partial  restoration  of  the  Orphan  School,  the  heritage  that  is  celebrated  and  other
heritage features that could be embraced.

Rescue and Reform

One  of  the  earliest  references  to  children  in  the  colony  of  New  South  Wales  was
included in a report on the condition of the Norfolk Island settlement by Lieutenant-
Governor King, dated 18 October 1796. The report concerns mainly matters of food
production, trade and the cost of running the settlement, but a census in the report
notes that out of the 887 people in the settlement 64 were children supported by their
parents  and  99  victualled  from  the  stores.  To  occupy  these  163  children,  King  had
established two schools and an institution ‘for the reception of such orphan female
children [as] have been lost or deserted by their parents—most of them are of such an
age as to require a strict hand and eye over them’.6 Childhood for the poor in the late
18th century was not a carefree time. Many children worked as early as seven years of
age and, according to government orders, could be punished as severely as adults. Girls
were likely to be sexually assaulted,7 and all were considered adult by the age of 14.

When  King  became  Governor  of  the  colony  in  1800  he  continued  to  express  a
concern for the welfare of the children of the colony. In a despatch to the Secretaries of
the Treasury he noted: 

Finding the greater part of the children in this colony so much abandoned to every
kind of wretchedness and vice, I perceived the absolute necessity of something being
attempted to withdraw them from the vicious examples of their abandoned parents.8

For their accommodation King planned to construct a ‘large building for the reception
and education of those children’, as he had done on Norfolk Island. Until this asylum
could  be  built  King  had  undertaken  to  purchase  a  ‘spacious  brick  dwelling-house’
formerly owned by Captain Kent who was returning to England. King hoped that his
taking ‘possession of this house for this humane and necessary purpose might excuse
any  impropriety  in  making  a  conditional  agreement  with  Captain  Kent’.  King  then
formed a committee of trustees (comprising chaplains, magistrates and military wives)
to  manage  the  affairs  of  the  Orphan  Institution.  The  trustees  were  informed  of  the
rationale for establishing the Institution,9 the reasons for the purchase of house, the
plans to extend this building and of King’s intention to construct a larger asylum at
Parramatta that would hold about 200 children, twice as many as could be accommo-
dated in Kent’s former house.

While King’s stated concern was for the welfare of the orphaned girls, his greater
concern was to introduce reforms through the creation of the Orphan Institution. It
should also be noted that while it was acknowledged that both boys and girls were in
need of accommodation and support, only girls were to be catered for. A large number
of the girls destined for the Institution were not orphaned, but would be removed from
their  parents,  or  taken  from  those  providing  care  if  this  were  deemed  necessary.
Establishing  an  asylum  allowed  King  to  ‘exile’  many  young  females,  depriving  the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

539

community of these members and creating the opportunity to reform and re-educate
the exiled individuals. Either way it was a demonstration of the Governor’s power. The
convicts,  already  exiled  from  their  places  of  birth  and  obliged  to  labour,  and  other
inhabitants of the colony, were being shown a form of disciplinary power that regularly
operated  from  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  in  the  ‘psychiatric  asylum,  the
penitentiary, the reformatory, the approved school and to some extent, the hospital’.10
This was disciplinary power in the guise of benevolence. However, this power would be
even more effectively exercised if the exiles were removed from view, and this was not
possible in a house in the centre of Sydney.

The Duke of Portland approved King’s plans for establishing an Orphan School but
warned that the institution should not be available to those families who could provide
support.11 However, King was determined to carry out his reforms, even against Port-
land’s wishes. In a despatch of March 1801 he argued ‘[i]n this plan I mean to perse-
vere, as the only means of obtaining any reform among the inhabitants of which this
colony is composed’.12 In an overview of the colony’s development, King commented
on  the  civil,  judicial  and  military  establishments,  the  settlers  (both  free  and  former
convicts), convicts and finally the children of the colony. Again, King lamented ‘the
sight of so many girls between the ages of eight and twelve, verging on that brink of ruin
and prostitution which several had fallen into’, reiterating his concerns, and the steps
he had taken to rescue ‘the elder girls from the snares laid for them, and which the
horrible example and treatment of many of their parents hurried them into’.13 But why
were the girls and their parents being demonised in this manner? Nash suggests that
19th-century discourses emphasised the need for civilisations to progress and that this
was hindered by femininity which was constructed as emblematic of pleasure, desire
and  irrationality.14  Therefore,  females,  girls  and  parents  (predominantly  mothers)
could be deemed an impediment to progress and this justified any reforms. Vocational
training for girls offered some possibility of reform as it would remove the likelihood
of indulging in idle pleasures and create useful skills for the developing colony. We
were  told  that  the  49  girls  in  the  Orphan  House  were  taught  needlework,  reading,
spinning and some were taught to write. This, it was hoped, would assist the girls to
become domestic workers or the wives of farmers.

Through the despatches from Governor King the Female Orphan School was discur-
sively constructed as an institution that would rescue destitute girls from vice and pros-
titution and thereby preserve their procreative capacity and enhance their prospects for
marriage. In these accounts girls were portrayed as dangerous, due to their potential to
distract,  and  mothers  as  negligent.  By  contrast,  men  were  effectively  excused  being
sexually predatory or unable to resist seduction. Presumably, if the orphan girls could
be contained, isolated and controlled then the colony would be better able to move on
from  its  convict  beginnings.  These  views  have  persisted  in  many  contemporary
accounts of the convict population and the role of the orphanage.15

The Female Orphan School symbolised to the population of the early 1800s discipli-
narity, in the guise of benevolence, operating in the colony and a reassertion of male
authority.  This  Institution  also  heralded  a  greater  involvement  of  the  state  in  the
provision of education and further possibilities for social reform. The churches were

540 D. Saltmarsh

the main providers of education for the ‘lower classes’ in Britain during this period, and
this  practice  was  continued  in  Australia.  However,  with  only  a  handful  of  clergy,  a
rapidly increasing number of children and a colony to establish, a few convicts were
assigned to teach in the early government-established schools. No education had previ-
ously been provided in British gaols or penal settlements. The convict teachers were
predominantly women as this provided a means of gainful employment.16 Education
in church and government schools was rudimentary and mainly concerned learning to
read the Bible and absorb the moral lessons contained in catechisms. The clergy and
others hoped that by adopting the ideas of John Locke and indoctrinating the ‘rising
generation’ via education the children of the colony might be turned into moral adults,
thereby escaping the inheritance of their ‘abandoned parents’. Thus, the social elites of
Church and state, through the surviving records of events, have also contributed to
discursive constructions of our understandings of the needs, circumstances and moral
climate of the colony at this time.

An Elegant and Commodious Plan

Samuel Marsden, the senior chaplain in the colony and treasurer of the committee, had
responsibility  for  supervising  the  construction  of  the  new  Female  Orphan  School
building at Parramatta. The committee minutes for 11 October 1800 recorded that a
building site had been approved and that the making of bricks had begun. The commit-
tee  also  sought  to  involve  philanthropists  in  England  noting,  with  respect  to  the
Orphan School, ‘the great benefits that society in general will derive from the rising
generation  of  this  colony  being  initiated  into  the  practice  of  morality  and  good
order’.17 In November 1807 Marsden wrote to Under-Secretary Cooke arguing the case
for an additional clergyman, for two schoolmasters and a married man and woman for
the  Female  Orphan  School  to  be  provided.18  However,  no  mention  was  made  of
progress on the building at Parramatta and this work did not really get underway until
after Governor Macquarie’s arrival in 1810.

The location for the new Orphan School was Arthur’s Hill and a building on this site
would be visible from the settlement at Parramatta, about one mile away, but away
from  roads.  In  this  place  the  female  inhabitants  of  the  School  would  be  away  from
undesirable influences and would be less likely to entice those who might potentially
corrupt them. This situation of the building also conformed to the late 18th-century
prescription recommended for the situating of a reform prison or an asylum. Andrew
Scull noted that, according to the Quakers advocating prison reform, such a building
‘should  not  be  cramped  among  other  buildings,  but  should  be  in  open  country—
perhaps on a rise to get the full force of the wind, and it should be close to a running
stream’.19 Though not a gaol, the site at Parramatta closely matched this description
and hence would have been considered to enhance the prospects for the reform of the
inhabitants.

Both the Governor and his wife were known to have had an interest in architecture.
The Governor had embarked on an extensive building and maintenance programme
soon  after  arriving  in  the  colony  and  Elizabeth  Macquarie  is  said  to  have  brought

International Journal of Heritage Studies

541
architectural  pattern  books  with  her  to  Australia.20  At  her  family  home  in  Appin,
western Scotland, Elizabeth Macquarie was said to have devoted some time to land-
scaping  and  creating  pathways.21  Her  interest  in  landscaping  is  consistent  with  the
reported practice of other 19th-century middle-class women, and an appreciation of
landscape was considered by many a prerequisite for acceptance in ‘polite society’.22 A
plan for the Orphan School building had been prepared by Barrallier, a surveyor, and
presented to the committee in 1800;23 though costed, this plan was never executed. The
design that was eventually constructed as the Female Orphan School at Parramatta,
however, is of considerable interest. The building is styled as a Georgian country house,
in  a  Palladian  design  with  a  three-storey  central  block  and  two  smaller  two-storey
sections to the sides. The two-storey sections are connected to the main block by corri-
dors or ‘hyphens’. In later correspondence with Commissioner Bigge, Marsden recalled
that the design for the Orphan School building had originated with the Governor and
Mrs Macquarie,24 and that it appeared to have been based on the plan of Elizabeth
Macquarie’s family home of ‘Airds’.

When  erected,  the  Orphan  School  building  would  have  appeared  large  in  scale,
imposing, and sophisticated, and to an extent still does. The sophistication is in the
subtle detail that suggests a high degree of craftsmanship. The quoins of the front face
are finished with blocks of stone that alternate between showing the short and the long
faces of the blocks. The storeys are differentiated by rows of contrasting bricks. The
building still commands a tranquil power, an air of wealth and an authority, partly due
to its situation but also due to its design that invokes the country manor of landed
gentry.  Macquarie  reported  to  Earl  Bathurst  in  December  1817  that  ‘A  New  female
Orphan School on a large elegant and Commodious Plan had lately been Erected and
Completed at Parramatta under the superintendence and direction of the Rev’d Mr
Marsden.’25 However, the grand appearance of the Orphan School building annoyed
Marsden, who was also frustrated with the influence that Mrs Macquarie exerted in the
committee. When Bigge was appointed to inquire into Macquarie’s stewardship of the
colony, Marsden complained in a letter that ‘the Female Orphan Institution should not
be like a Boarding School for Young Ladies who have Some Prospects in Life, but like
a  House  of  Industry’.26  Houses  of  Industry,  where  instruction  in  trades  and
occupations accompanied ‘vulgar learning’, had been advocated by Jeremy Bentham as
preferable to existing welfare institutions. The ideological position expressed in this
letter indicates a tension between the Church and state regarding the futures of the
orphan girls. The Church’s interest was in producing morality, promoting reform and
retaining  class  distinctions,  whereas  Macquarie  was  more  concerned  with  achieving
progress of a different sort.

Protection and Progress

The Orphan School building became a symbol of architectural excellence and was often
referred to as being handsome, elegant and commodious, not just by Macquarie but by
future Governors as well.27 The Macquaries were keen to create an impression of style
and elegance in the colony and even the orphans were considered worthy beneficiaries.

542 D. Saltmarsh

Figure 1
Joseph Lycett (ca 1775–1828), View of the Female Orphan School near Parra-
matta,  New  South  Wales,  ca  1825.  Aquatint,  hand  coloured;  plate  mark  23  ×  31.5  cm.
National Library of Australia, nla.pic-an7690892.

While the colony was established as a penitentiary, it also expanded British territory as
had been done in North America, Canada and other places. Macquarie was conscious
of the need to develop the agricultural and commercial potential of the colony as a
place  for  investment.  These  aims  were  furthered  by  pictorial  representations  of  the
colony in Britain. The aquatinted engraving, ‘View of the Female Orphan School’, by
Joseph Lycett was completed in 1825 on his return to England (see Figure 1). This and
other views were produced as a series for sale in 13 monthly parts. The views were also
published in a book entitled Views of Australia or New South Wales & Van Diemen’s
Land. Lycett was one of a number of artists commissioned by publishers to produce
illustrated books of scenery and life in the Australian colony. The picture of the Orphan
School  is  of  interest  because  in  the  collection  of  24  scenes,  including  landscapes,
settlements and residences of successful local identities, it is the only public building.
Australian art historian Bernard Smith has noted that artists accompanied voyages
of exploration in the late 18th century to sketch and paint flora and fauna for scientific
documentation  and  research.  These  pictures  inspired  curiosity  and  a  demand  for
images of exotic people, plants and animals. As the colony developed, interest shifted
from  the  exotic  and  unusual  to  an  interest  in  the  potential  commercial  benefits.
Increasing wealth in England had created a boom in the building of country houses and
with  it  a  demand  for  paintings  of  these  properties.  This  sensibility  extended  to  the
colony and, no doubt, some of Lycett’s Views were originally works commissioned by
the  owners  of  the  estates.  According  to  Smith28  this  shift  of  interest  from  exotic  to
commercial coincided with a transition from the topographical to Romantic painting
styles.  Country  houses  featured  in  both  these  styles  of  painting,  but  where  the

Joseph Lycett (ca 1775–1828), View of the Female Orphan School near Parramatta, New South Wales , ca 1825. Aquatint, hand coloured; plate mark 23  × 31.5 cm. National Library of Australia, nla.pic-an7690892.

Figure 1

International Journal of Heritage Studies

543

topographical draughtsman would pay great attention to the architectural features of
the building, the Romantic artist tended to give less picture space to the building and
emphasised  the  natural  features  of  the  landscape.  A  gendered  reading  of  the
landscape29  provides  additional  insights.  Nineteenth-century  discourses  considered
nature, and by implication rural landscapes, to be feminine. By contrast, buildings were
designated as being masculine, the rational response to the challenges and mastery of
an  unpredictable  environment.  Therefore,  it  can  be  said  that  Lycett’s  engraving
features a building, created by men, to accommodate vulnerable females and protect
them from the dangers of the outside world.

When  Lycett,  a  convict  employed  by  a  printer  and  sole  parent,  was  discovered
forging bank notes and sent to a place of secondary punishment, his daughter Mary
Ann was placed in the Female Orphan School. In the text accompanying the picture,
the  School  is  described  as  ‘this  most  useful  and  excellent  Institution’.30  Thus,  the
engraving  completed  after  his  return  to  England  may  have  been  created  to  express
gratitude for the Institution accepting his daughter. It may also have been drawn to
show  the  standard  of  architecture  in  the  colony.  Lycett  needed  to  interest  potential
purchasers of his work and would have been keen to impress the authorities in Britain.
The building is shown fronted by manicured lawns and backed by thick forest. The
trees are covered with dense foliage, rather than the more sparse grey-green leaves of
eucalypts.  People  are  shown  rowing  or  sailing  on  a  river  that  is  wide  and  flowing,
unlike  the  Parramatta  River  at  that  point.  The  building,  too,  is  inaccurately  drawn,
having  chimneys  where  there  are  none,  and  more  windows.  Lycett’s  accompanying
text articulates what may have been a popular discourse when he noted that ‘female
children are now constantly protected and sheltered from that state of want and woe
which  the  misfortunes  or  crimes  of  their  wretched  parents  had  entailed  upon  these
innocent and helpless orphans’. The view and the text conceivably encouraged readers
in England to view the progress of the colony favourably, both in architecture and in
its ability to reform, and inclined them to invest.

Elizabeth  Macquarie  did  not  limit  her  involvement  with  the  Orphan  School  to
designing  the  building.  She  was  actively  involved  in  the  School  as  Patroness,
committee member and Frequent Visitor to the School. In the latter role she moni-
tored  the  welfare  of  the  girls  and  observed  the  staff  at  work.  For  example,  in  one
letter to the committee Mrs Macquarie expressed her dissatisfaction with the appear-
ance  of  the  younger  children,  requested  that  the  cook  be  discharged  for  having  her
children  in  the  kitchen  with  her,  asked  that  gentlemen  be  prohibited  from  visiting
the Master and Matron of the school, and that the girls be prohibited from going to
Parramatta,  as  she  had  heard  they  had  been  doing.31  The  following  day,  14  August
1819,  Mrs  Macquarie  sent  another  letter  with  11  questions  regarding  the  quality  of
food at the Institution. It was also noted in the minutes of the meeting of 4 July 1820
that the Patroness and Vice Patroness had inspected the ‘domestic conveniences’ of
the School and from their visit had recommended that the Master and Matron move
out of their bedroom so that it could be used as a school room, that the children be
taught  to  knit  and  spin,  be  taught  to  hoe,  weed  and  sow  in  the  garden,  and  noted
that the children’s appearance had improved.32

544 D. Saltmarsh

With  the  School  now  established  in  purpose-built  premises  and  a  façade  that
suggested gentility, the work of reform could be extended. Foucault has suggested that
while exile was one means of exercising disciplinary power, ‘partitioning’ was another.
Partitioning was the practice of first confining people to an enclosed space that allowed
that individuals be ‘observed at every point … in which the slightest movements are
supervised,  in  which  all  events  are  recorded’.33  These  practices  were  not  conducted
only by a zealous Elizabeth Macquarie but set a pattern for scrutiny by members of later
committees too. The orphans and staff of the Institution were regularly inspected by
committee members. An account from 1826 details the way that medical checks and
examinations  of  the  premises  were  conducted.34  This  particular  inspection  recom-
mended that the behaviour of the orphan girls and the staff be regulated in additional
ways. Macquarie had drafted a set of rules and regulations for the School, including the
conditions to be met for admission and discharge. Girls were admitted between the
ages  of  five  and  eight,  and  could  remain  until  the  age  of  13  when  they  were  ‘to  be
apprenticed out as servants to families of good character’.35 The other way to leave the
orphanage was to be married, and ‘providing the said marriage be approved by the
committee’  the  girl  would  receive  the  gift  of  a  cow.  Consequently,  for  many  girls,
apprenticeship was the precursor to marriage.

During Macquarie’s administration a number of significant changes occurred to the
Female  Orphan  School,  most  notably  the  construction  of  the  building  which  still
stands. Under King, the School was an institution of rescue and reform. Macquarie
gave the School a permanent location with a façade of elegance, emblematic of progress
in the colony, and a demonstration of the protection that could be afforded the vulner-
able members of the colony. But these discursive constructions disguised the extensive
surveillance of the orphan girls and staff employed for their care and maintenance. As
Certeau has noted, space had been transformed ‘into an instrument that can be used to
discipline, to program, and to keep under observation any social group’.36 But elegance
was  not  to  be  confused  with  egalitarianism.  The  rules  for  the  administration  of  the
Orphan School specified that the girls should not be instructed in a way that would
allow  them  to  rise  above  their  ‘future  destinations  as  wives  or  servants  of  common
settlers, mechanics or labouring people’.37 This too could be seen as a contribution to
the progress of the colony by developing the skills of labouring people and by restrict-
ing thoughts of social mobility. By re-housing the orphan girls as he had, Macquarie
transformed  rescue  into  an  advertisement  for  the  commercial  possibilities  of  the
colony, while reasserting control over the social order.

From Orphan School to Heritage Precinct

The transformation of the Female Orphan School building continued from the mid-
19th  century  to  the  present  through  alteration  and  repair,  extension  and  changed
usage. In 1850 the School was renamed the Protestant Orphan School with the inclu-
sion of male orphans. Throughout the 1870s there was a shift in the thinking about how
best to care for orphans which resulted in a preference for ‘boarding out’ and a move
away from the ‘barracks’ system. Consequently, the facility was closed in 1887 due to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

545

changes  in  government  policy.  In  1891  NSW  Premier  Henry  Parkes  recreated  the
Orphan School as part of the site for the Rydalmere Hospital for the Insane, to alleviate
crowding at nearby Parramatta. Approaches to the care for the mentally ill were also
changing  from  incarceration  to  hospitalisation38  and  with  it  the  construction  of  a
number of wards designed by Government Architect Walter Liberty Vernon. In time
this  facility  was  renamed  the  Rydalmere  Psychiatric  Hospital,  eventually  closing  in
1987.

During its period of use as a mental health facility, the Orphan School was listed with
the National Trust in 1975. A Sydney newspaper with a large middle-income reader-
ship, the Sydney Morning Herald (SMH), embarked on a campaign to save the Orphan
School buildings by raising public awareness. The interest of the SMH is consistent
with the idea that ‘[h]eritage is largely consumed by the middle-classes’.39 The news-
paper alerted readers in May 1992 that, as with other deteriorating old structures, the
Female  Orphan  School  was  likely  to  be  demolished.40  The  recommendations  of  a
government  review  into  granting  heritage  status  averted  this  fate.  In  1995  UWS
purchased the site from the NSW government and sought funding for restoration. Not
until  December  1998,  when  the  funding  bid  was  successful,  did  the  main  Sydney
tabloid, The Daily Telegraph, join the campaign.41 Additional funding for restoration
was  announced  in  late  2001,  and  this  time  the  project  garnered  suburban  press
coverage.42 These articles generally provided a little of the history of the building and
outlined the timetable and cost of the restoration work to be done.

After the official opening of the restored building in October 2003, UWS historian
Carol  Liston  was  interviewed  by  a  variety  of  newspapers  including  the  Parramatta
Advertiser, the Blacktown Advocate and the SMH.43 In these reports of interview Liston
has  usually  been  quoted  as  suggesting  that  the  reason  Macquarie  had  located  the
Orphan School on Arthur’s Hill was to annoy John McArthur, a wealthy grazier whose
property was positioned on the opposite side of the Parramatta River. McArthur would
have been displeased to think that the orphan girls were able to look down on him, a
view  that  resonates  with  the  rhetorical  sentiment  of  middle-class  support  for  the
‘underdog’. However, little attention is given in these reports to other aspects of the
research being done on the Orphan School.

The  Australian  university  sector  expanded  considerably  after  1986  and  UWS  is
considered  one  of  the  ‘new  universities’.44  These  more  recently  created  universities
have not received extensive establishment grants, as did those established in previous
years, and in a system where universities are obliged to compete for students, enterpris-
ing tactics are often used. Like several other UWS campuses, the Parramatta campus is
located in a working-class, industrial area. Once the partially restored Orphan School
building  had  been  opened,  UWS  began  vigorously  to  promote  its  heritage  asset
through press releases written by its Media Unit. For example, as part of Seniors Week
in 2004, Sydney’s senior citizens were given an opportunity to view the Orphan School
building.45  Whatever  the  reason  for  choosing  this  group,  it  provided  UWS  with  an
opportunity to bring community members to the building. It also gave the chance for
UWS to present the story of its involvement in the refurbishment of the building. Here
we were told that the building had ‘undergone two years of painstaking restoration and

546 D. Saltmarsh

had now been transformed into a community space for heritage tours, art exhibitions
and cultural events’ and that this was a ‘rejuvenated heritage jewel’ now given ‘back to
the people’. These sentiments were repeated often in media releases. Interestingly, one
theme of discussion on heritage in Britain has concerned the potential for museums
and other exhibition spaces unintentionally to exclude community members.46 While
the plan to make the Orphan School available to the public via exhibitions, perfor-
mances and cultural events can be considered laudable, it is most likely that audiences
will be predominantly middle class.

In a further demonstration of interest in making the newly refurbished central block
of the Orphan School available to the community, the media exposure has enabled Liston
to invite members of the public to contribute to a research project by sharing their recol-
lections of the precinct. The preface to the invitation in the media release presented the
familiar discourse of the building’s history and UWS’s involvement with it. 

The  centrepiece  of  the  UWS  Parramatta  Campus,  the  oldest  three-storey  brick
building in Australia, and the nation’s oldest public building … began as a refuge for
orphaned girls in the colony … Having stood derelict for over 20 years … undergone
painstaking restoration.47

In various media releases Liston is also quoted as saying ‘[a]s its custodian, UWS has
given ownership of this rejuvenated heritage jewel back to the people so that an integral
part of our colonial past can live on for future generations to acknowledge, learn from
and enjoy’.48 Further to this, 

[o]ne of the most challenging but rewarding aspects of the restoration was encom-
passing each of the buildings different ‘lives’. Rather than restoring the building to its
original 1813 state, the architects left layers from different periods so that visitors can
get a real sense of the place in history.49

The building as understood through these recent discursive constructions is one of a
community asset reclaimed, restored and made available for public enjoyment. While
journalists cannot be expected to engage in detailed explications of historical signifi-
cance, a far richer account of the Orphan School heritage could be included in this
reporting.  Mention  is  rarely  made  of  commitments  to  educate  the  disadvantaged,
excellence in architecture or innovative approaches to institutional care. Instead, pref-
erence is given to the age and grandeur of the building, the costs of renovation and the
recreational possibilities. This limited emphasis potentially stands in the way of striking
a balance between the needs of a university to attract students, on the one hand, while
simultaneously endeavouring to foster local pride and engender community interest in
this particular heritage building.

Celebrating Heritage

The significance of the Female Orphan School, as with most historical artefacts, is discur-
sively formed. What we know of the institution is an understanding gained through anal-
ysis  of  artefacts,  recollections  and  surviving  documents.  According  to  Certeau,  ‘we
should recall that any reading of the past—however much it is controlled by the analysis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

547
of documents—is driven by a reading of current events’.50 This is true of our under-
standing of the Orphan School. Australian universities, under current arrangements, are
driven to compete for students, prestige and funds. In this regard UWS is deploying this
unique heritage asset in this competition. However, a far greater range of understandings
are available than those encouraged by the superficial analyses promoted by the media.
The Female Orphan School building and others on the UWS site provide excellent
examples  of  Australia’s  architectural  heritage.  The  Elizabeth  Macquarie-designed
Orphan  School  building  in  its  old  Georgian  Colonial  style  provides  evidence  of  the
earliest  buildings  of  the  Macquarie  era.  While  others,  like  the  Francis  Greenway-
designed  Hyde  Park  Barracks  (1814)  still  survive,  the  Orphan  School  is  a  bold
statement of the Governor’s intentions to protect, reform and instruct in style. The
School  also  reveals  the  Scottish  family  heritage  of  the  Governor  and  his  wife.  This
structure  stands  among  fine  examples  of  Victorian  Regency,  Federation  Arts  and
Crafts, and Federation Free architectural styles. As examples of nationalist sentiment
these building styles reflect a movement away from colonial rule and towards indepen-
dence. In regard to institutional care the buildings exemplify a shift from confinement
in barracks to community integration through boarding out for the orphans, and a
shift from incarceration to hospitalisation for the mentally ill.

The  aspects  of  heritage  promoted  in  UWS’s  media  releases  tend  to  be  those  that
would appeal to an educated, middle-class audience aspiring to go to university, or
considering sending their children to one. These aspects are durability, size of property
and tradition. The heritage that is effectively overlooked is that of the disadvantaged,
the marginalised and members of the working class. Curiously, members of the work-
ing  class  and  those  who  traditionally  would  not  have  gone  to  university  make  up  a
significant component of the Parramatta community and those who enrol at UWS. The
existence  of  the  School  is  evidence  of  Macquarie’s  commitment  to  the  welfare  and
education of some of the most vulnerable members of the colony. While the education
provided  did  not  seek  to  disrupt  the  social  hierarchy,  it  did  shelter  and  feed  the
orphans, equip them with basic literacy and numeracy and provide a range of voca-
tional  and  life  skills.  These  early  steps  to  provide  public  education,  along  with  the
advances in architecture and institutional care, could also be usefully celebrated.

Acknowledgements

An earlier version of this paper, entitled ‘Transforming the Female Orphan School’,
was presented at the Australian Association for Research in Education conference held
at UWS, Parramatta, in 2005. The author would like to thank those who commented
on  that  paper  and  in  particular  to  thank  two  anonymous  IJHS  reviewers  for  their
comments.

Notes

1 [1] Marise Payne, a locally based federal senator, suggested in a speech to parliament that UWS
had  the  ‘honour  of  the  nation’s  oldest  university  site’.  M.  Payne,  University  of  Western

548 D. Saltmarsh

Sydney—Senate  Debate  [cited  21  July  2003],  available  from  http://www.marisepayne.com/
speeches/sp980526.html

2 [2] These are six of the seven criteria used to determine whether an item can be listed on the NSW
State Heritage Register. NSW Heritage Office, Rydalmere Hospital Precinct [cited 19 January
2006], available from http://www.heritage.nsw.gov.au/07_subnav_01_2.cfm?itemid=5000658

3 [3] Graham et al., A Geography of Heritage, 14.
4 [4] Graham, ‘Heritage as Knowledge’, 1006.
5 [5] Certeau, The Writing of History, 29, 30.
6 [6] King, ‘Condition of Norfolk Island’.
7 [7] Fabian and Loh, Children in Australia; Holden, ‘First Children’.
8 [8] King, ‘Lieutenant-Governor King to Secretaries of the Treasury’.
9 [9] King, ‘Establishment of an Orphan Institution’.
10[10] Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 199.
11[11] Duke of Portland, ‘Portland to King’.
12[12] King, ‘King to Portland, 10 March 1801’.
13[13] King, ‘Present State of the Settlement’.
14[14] Nash, ‘Historical Geographies of Modernity’.
15[15]

See,  for  example,  the  chapter  entitled  ‘Education  for  the  Social  and  Moral  Problems  of  a
Convict Colony’ in the influential text by Barcan: A History of Australian Education.

16[16] Cleverley, The First Generation.
17[17] Orphan School Committee, ‘The Orphan Asylum’.
18[18] Marsden, ‘Marsden to Cooke’.
19[19]
20[20] Freeland, Architecture in Australia.
21[21] Ritchie, Lachlan Macquarie.
22[22] The  literature  on  the  gendered  aspects  of  landscape  is  extensive;  see  Rose,  Feminism  and

Scull, ‘A Convenient Place to Get Rid of Inconvenient People, 27.

Geography; Seymour, ‘Historical Geographies of Landscape’.

23[23] Orphan School Committee, ‘Orphan Institution Committee, 15 Sep 1800’.
24[24] Marsden, Letter, 15 March 1821.
25[25] Macquarie, ‘Macquarie to Bathurst’.
26[26] Marsden, Letter, 15 March 1821.
27[27]

See the list of buildings included in Macquarie, ‘Macquarie to Bathurst, Final Report’. See also
Bourke, ‘Bourke to Stanley’.
Smith, European Vision and the South Pacific 1768–1850; Smith, Place, Taste and Tradition.
Seymour, ‘Historical Geographies of Landscape’.

28[28]
29[29]
30[30] Lycett, Views of Australia, or New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land.
31[31] Orphan School Committee, ‘Minutes of the Committee’, Parramatta, 1819.
32[32] Orphan School Committee, ‘Minutes of the Committee’, Parramatta, 1820.
33[33] Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 197.
34[34] Orphan School Committee, ‘Minutes of the Committee, 16 Jan 1826’.
35[35] Orphan School Committee, ‘Rules and Regulations’.
36[36] Certeau, Heterologies, 186.
37[37] Orphan School Committee, ‘Rules and Regulations’.
38[38] NSW  Heritage  Office,  Rydalmere  Hospital  Precinct,  available  from  http://www.heri-

tage.nsw.gov.au/07_subnav_01_2.cfm?itemid=5000658

39[39] Graham et al., A Geography of Heritage, 42.
40[40] G. O’Brien, ‘Demolition a Taste of Things to Go’, Sydney Morning Herald, 9 May 1992.
41[41]

‘Building to be Saved’, Daily Telegraph, 18 December 1998; G. O’Brien, ‘Orphan Home Gets
Godfather’, Sydney Morning Herald, 18 December 1998.

42[42] G. O’Brien, ‘Public to Walk Rooms of Historic Orphan School’, Sydney Morning Herald, 27
December 2001; C. Hook, ‘Real Treasure on Our Doorstep’, Parramatta Advertiser, 16 October
2002; ‘$2m Restoration Plan’, Parramatta Advertiser, 9 January 2002.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

549

43[43]

‘Layers of History Open to the Public’, Blacktown Advocate, 3 December 2003; P. Durham,
‘Orphan School’s Secrets’, Parramatta Advertiser, 22 October 2003; S. Meacham, ‘Orphans in
Style’, Sydney Morning Herald, 16 January 2004.

44[44] Marginson and Considine, The Enterprising University.
45[45] A.  Whibley,  Sydney’s  Seniors  Invited  to  Explore  One  of  Our  City’s  Forgotten  Heritage  Icons
[cited  29  April  2005],  available  from  http://apps.uws.edu.au/media/news/index.phtml?act=
view&story_id=728

46[46] For a good account of this debate see Mason, ‘Conflict and Complement’.
47[47] A. Whibley, Do You Have a History with One of Our City’s Forgotten Heritage Icons? [cited 29
http://apps.uws.edu.au/media/news/index.phtml?act=

available 

from 

2005], 

April 
view&story_id=738

48[48] A. Whibley, Female Orphan School Opens its Doors to Celebrate Heritage Festival 2004 [cited 29
http://apps.uws.edu.au/media/news/index.phtml?act=

available 

from 

2005], 

April 
view&story_id=768

49[49] Whibley, Sydney’s Seniors Invited to Explore One of Our City’s Forgotten Heritage Icons.
50[50] Certeau, The Writing of History, 23.

References

Barcan, A. A History of Australian Education. Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Bourke, R. ‘Bourke to Stanley’. In Historical Records of Australia, Series 1. Governors’ Despatches to
and  from  England.  Vol.  17,  1833–June  1835.  Library  Committee  of  the  Commonwealth
Parliament, 1923: 224–33.

Certeau,  M.  de.  Heterologies:  Discourses  on  the  Other.  Translated  by  BrianMassumi.  Minneapolis:

University of Minnesota Press, 1986.

———. The Writing of History. Translated by T. Conley. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Cleverley, J. The First Generation: Schools and Society in Early Australia. Sydney: Sydney University

Press, 1971.

Fabian, S. and M. Loh. Children in Australia: An Outline History. Melbourne: Hyland House, 1980.
Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Translated by A. Sheridan. Ringwood,

Vic.: Penguin, 1979.

Freeland, J. M. Architecture in Australia. Melbourne: Pelican, 1972.
Graham, B. ‘Heritage as Knowledge: Capital or Culture?’ Urban Studies 39, nos. 5–6 (2002): 1003–17.
Graham,  B.,  G.  J.  Ashworth  and  J.  E.  Tunbridge.  A  Geography  of  Heritage:  Power,  Culture  and

Economy. London: Arnold, 2000.

Holden, R. ‘First Children: Pre-colonial and Colonial to circa 1849: Introduction’. In The Endless
Playground: Celebrating Australian Childhood edited by PaulCliff. Canberra: National Library
of Australia, 2000.

King,  P.  G.  ‘Condition  of  Norfolk  Island’.  In  Historical  Records  of  New  South  Wales.  Vol.  3,
Hunter 1796–1799, edited by F. M. Bladen. Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer, 1895:
145–61.

———.  ‘Establishment  of  an  Orphan  Institution’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  1.
Governors’  Despatches  to  and  from  England.  Vol.  2,  1797–1800,  edited  by  the  Reverend
Richard  Johnson  and  others.  Library  Committee  of  the  Commonwealth  Parliament,  1914:
534–35.

———. ‘Lieutenant-Governor King to Secretaries of the Treasury’. In Historical Records of Australia,
Series 1. Governors’ Despatches to and from England. Vol. 2, 1797–1800. Library Committee of
the Commonwealth Parliament, 1914: 524–26.

———.  ‘King  to  Portland,  10  March  1801’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  1.  Governors’
Despatches to and from England. Vol. 3, 1801–1802. Library Committee of the Commonwealth
Parliament, 1915: 11–13.

550 D. Saltmarsh

———.  ‘Present  State  of  the  Settlement’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  1.  Governors’
Despatches to and from England. Vol. 3, 1801–1802. Library Committee of the Commonwealth
Parliament, 1915: 416–25.

Lycett, J. Views of Australia, or New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. London: J. Souter, 1825.
Macquarie,  L.  ‘Macquarie  to  Bathurst’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  1.  Governors’
Despatches to and from England. Vol. 9, January 1816–December 1818. Library Committee of
the Commonwealth Parliament, 1916: 718–21.

———. ‘Macquarie to Bathurst, Final Report’. In Historical Records of Australia, Series 1. Governors’
Despatches to and from England. Vol. 10, January 1819–December 1822. Library Committee of
the Commonwealth Parliament, 1917: 671–91.

Marginson, S. and M. Considine. The Enterprising University: Power, Governance and Reinvention in

Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Marsden, S. ‘Marsden to Cooke’. In Historical Records of New South Wales. Vol. 6, King and Bligh
1806,  1807,  1808,  edited  by  F.  M.  Bladen.  Sydney:  William  Applegate  Gullick,  Government
Printer, 1898: 380–82.

Mason, R. ‘Conflict and Complement: An Explanation of the Discourses Informing the Concept of
the  Socially  Inclusive  Museum  in  Contemporary  Britain’.  International  Journal  of  Heritage
Studies 10, no. 1 (2004): 49–73.

Nash,  C.  ‘Historical  Geographies  of  Modernity’.  In  Modern  Historical  Geographies,  edited  by  B.

Graham and C. Nash. Harlow: Pearson, 2000: 13–40.

Orphan School Committee. ‘Rules and Regulations’. Parramatta, 1818.
———. ‘Minutes of the Committee’. Parramatta, 1819.
———. ‘Minutes of the Committee’. Parramatta, 1820: 46–48.
———. ‘The Orphan Asylum’. In Historical Records of New South Wales. Vol. 4, Hunter and King:
1800, 1801, 1802, edited by F. M. Bladen. Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer, 1896:
232–33.

———.  ‘Orphan  Institution  Committee,  15  Sep  1800’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  I.
Governors’  Despatches  to  and  from  England.  Vol.  2,  1797–1800.  Library  Committee  of  the
Commonwealth Parliament, 1914: 537–38.

———.  ‘Minutes  of  the  Committee,  16  Jan  1826’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia.  Series  1,
Governors’  Despatches  to  and  from  England.  Vol.  12,  June  1825–December  1826.  Sydney:
Library Committee of the Commonwealth Parliament, 1919: 162–64.

Portland,  Duke  of.  ‘Portland  to  King’.  In  Historical  Records  of  Australia,  Series  I.  Governors’
Despatches to and from England. Vol. 3, 1801–1802: Library Committee of the Commonwealth
Parliament, 1915: 100–1.

Ritchie, J. Lachlan Macquarie: A Biography. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1986.
Rose, G. Feminism and Geography: The Limits of Geographical Knowledge. Cambridge: Polity Press,

1993.

Scull, A. ‘A Convenient Place to Get Rid of Inconvenient People: The Victorian Lunatic Asylum’. In
Buildings and Society: Essays on the Social Development of the Built Environment, edited by A.
D. King. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980: 37–60.

Seymour, S. ‘Historical Geographies of Landscape’. In Modern Historical Geographies, edited by B.

Graham and C. Nash. Harlow: Pearson, 2000: 193–217.

Smith, B. European Vision and the South Pacific 1768–1850: A Study in the History of Art and Ideas.

London: Oxford University Press, 1960.

———. Place, Taste and Tradition: A Study of Australian Art since 1788. 2nd ed. London: Oxford

University Press, 1979.


