Hello Sailor! How maritime museums are addressing the
experience of gay seafarers

Anthony Tibbles*

National Museums Liverpool, UK
(Received 1 March 2011; ﬁnal version received 12 July 2011)

Traditionally, maritime historians and maritime museums have adopted a very
narrow view of seafarers’ lives and issues of social diversity have been little
explored. Whilst some research has been undertaken on women and ethnic
minorities in recent years, the experience of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen-
dered seafarers has received virtually no attention. This paper will consider how
museums have begun to address this issue and will look in detail at the special
exhibition, Hello Sailor!, organised by National Museums Liverpool in 2006.
Hello Sailor! was based on ground-breaking research about gay seafarers on
board British cruise liners in the mid-twentieth century, mainly gathered from
oral testimony. The paper will examine the content, development and impact of
the exhibition and will place it in a context of how maritime museums are
beginning to address questions of social diversity and to make themselves
accessible to a wider and more diverse audience. In particular, it explores the
difﬁculties faced by curators, including the paucity of documentary sources and
secondary literature, the limitations of existing museum networks and the almost
total absence of objects and other visual material with which to tell the story.

Introduction
Issues of social diversity amongst seafarers have not been well served by either
maritime historians or maritime museums. The roles of women at sea, of people
from ethnic minorities and those with disabilities have, with a few notable and
mainly recent exceptions, been little studied or covered within museum displays. In
particular, the experience of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered (LGBT) sea-
farers has all but been ignored (Stanley 2007).

This is not particularly surprising. Until very recently, homosexual activity has
been regarded as unacceptable by virtually all societies and was generally illegal.
At the very least, anyone demonstrating such behaviour has been ostracised and has
frequently been punished, often severely, and on occasions, with the ultimate sanc-
tion of death (Naphy 2002). Whilst this has meant that there is little documentary
evidence available to study LGBT experience, the prejudices of society have also
made study of this subject a taboo area. Indeed, museums have traditionally not
even considered including any reference to such behaviour
in their work or

*Email: tony@dubbing.demon.co.uk



161

displays. Yet in popular culture the sailor has often been seen as the stereotypical
homosexual. The image of the camp matelot, mincing down the street in his striped
jersey, arm in arm with a shipmate, has been familiar for more than a century, the
butt of comedians’ jokes and the subject of the saucy seaside postcard.

In the last couple of decades or so, there has been some change and the experi-
ences of LGBT seafarers have begun to receive some attention (Berube 1990, Burg
1984, Turley 1999). This paper will consider how museums have begun to address
this issue and will look in detail at the special exhibition, Hello Sailor!, organised
by National Museums Liverpool under my overall supervision in 2006. The exhibi-
tion was based on ground-breaking research by Baker and Stanley (2002) about gay
seafarers on board British cruise liners in the mid-twentieth century, mainly gath-
ered from oral testimony. The paper will examine the content, development and
impact of the exhibition, explore the issues facing the curators and place it in a con-
text of how maritime museums are beginning to make themselves accessible to a
wider and more diverse audience by addressing questions of social diversity.

Seafarers and diversity
People have been going to sea for millennia and seafaring is one of the oldest occu-
pations. For centuries it has been an almost universally male endeavour but in cer-
tain situations and for certain periods of time, we can identify a wider diversity of
people at sea than the stereotypical picture may at ﬁrst suggest. In some circum-
stances, this diversity is represented by individuals or small groups of people – for
instance, the wife of a sea captain joining a voyage or the exploits of one of the
notorious female pirates, such as Anne Bonney (Cordingly 2001). People with
physical disabilities also served as sea, often having been injured in one of the
many on-board accidents – the loss of a ﬁnger, or more seriously, the loss of a
limb. One rarely considers Britain’s most famous naval hero, Horatio Nelson, in this
context, but some of his most famous victories were achieved after he had lost both
an arm and an eye.

There are other examples of signiﬁcant concentrations of diversity at sea. Ethnic
minorities are just one. Most sailing and many powered vessels in the deep-sea
trades in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries had multinational crews and there
were high concentrations of particular ethnic groups in certain areas (Frost 1995,
Lane 1997). On nineteenth-century sailing ships, about 60% of the cooks were
African-Caribbean or African-American; in the inter-war years, up to a third of the
crew complement on steamers were Lascars, and women ﬁlled many of the ‘hotel’
and service positions on board passenger liners from the late nineteenth century
(Jessop 1988, Visram 2002). Another signiﬁcant minority presence was the number
of gays who worked as stewards on British liners during the period from the 1940s
through until the early 1980s, when crewing policies changed. Whilst the focus of
this paper is on this last, now quite visible group of gay seafarers, it is clearly an
exceptional and highly atypical example of LGBT behaviour and experience on
board ship but it opens a window, albeit brieﬂy, on a world that is otherwise very
difﬁcult to portray.

As has been noted above, virtually all seafarers were men. Whilst signiﬁcant
numbers clearly made it a job for life, the vast majority were young men without
the pressures of family commitments and often with a desire for adventure. Seafar-
ers were away from home for long periods, sometimes extending to years, and indi-

162

A. Tibbles

vidual voyages between ports often lasted weeks and frequently months. Sexual ten-
sions must have built up on board and arrival in port was eagerly awaited. Virtually
all ports had their ‘sailor town’ where, as Hugill (1967) shows, visiting seafarers
could assuage the privations they had suffered on board ship and indulge them-
selves, often to excess, whether in the bar or the brothel. The high incidence of
prostitution in ports is well documented and unsurprising. Even at times when the
restraints of society were more severe than now, it seems inconceivable that some
seafarers did not give in to their desires and indulge in some form of sexual activity
on board, either alone or with a fellow seafarer.

There are conﬂicting opinions between historians on this issue. One view asserts
that there is little evidence of homosexual behaviour because it was exceptional,
and that the few instances were covert and never spoken about or acknowledged.
Such activity was widely regarded as unacceptable and, on naval vessels in particu-
lar, was reported to the authorities and the perpetrators were severely punished.1
The lack of documentary evidence, as Rodger has argued (1986, pp. 80–81), sup-
ports the contention that it was not widespread.

There is an alternate view, with some evidence to support it, that sexual activity
between seafarers was relatively frequent and a blind eye was turned to such behav-
iour when it was not coercive and did not disrupt the normal working of the vessel.
This view maintains that it was inevitable and helped to diffuse pent-up sexual ten-
sion. One experienced American seafarer, when asked about it in 1853, commented,
‘What can a feller do? Three years at sea – and hardly any chance to have a
woman. I tell you . . . a feller must do so” (Burg 1994, p. 78).

Whilst we have some signiﬁcant evidence at particular times and in particular
places of sexual activity on board ships, we still only have a partial and incomplete
picture. There is insufﬁcient evidence to establish the frequency or scale of homo-
sexual activity in the wider maritime context. What is instructive from the case of
the post-war liner stewards is the scarcity of information about their sexuality from
other sources, ofﬁcial or otherwise. Without the oral testimony speciﬁcally collected
from the seafarers themselves, how easy would it be in 100 years’ time to docu-
ment their story? It would have remained another hidden history and the subject of
scepticism.

Museums and LGBT heritage
Questions of sexual orientation and diverse lifestyles have hardly been considered
by maritime museums, though in the wider museum context, the issue of sexuality
began to receive some attention internationally from the 1980s onwards. Perhaps
the earliest exhibition to take place was Becoming Visible: Lesbians and Male
Homosexuals – from Oppression to Liberation, held at the Constitutional Museum
of South Australia. This was the ﬁrst of a series of exhibitions, which up to 2005
numbered 27, covering a wider range of topics including the history of the LGBT
community in Western Australia and South Australia, gay and lesbian rights, the
Sydney Mardi Gras and an exhibition of lesbian stories (Gorman-Murray 2008).
Other early exhibitions were organised by American art museums responding to the
AIDS crisis and the work of LGBT artists. The focus was largely on artistic endeav-
our rather than wider issues of sexual orientation, but they opened up the discussion
and were followed by projects taking a wider perspective (Müller 2001).



163

The task of integrating the history and role of the LGBT community in the
everyday work of museums developed more slowly and patchily. One of the ﬁrst
museums to include a reference to the LGBT community with their regular work
programme was the United States Holocaust Museum, which opened in 1993
(Phillips 2008). Many other projects have followed, including more recently the
Oregon Historical Society’s Wedding Album project, launched in 2004, which col-
lects personal records relating to same-sex marriages (Clark and Wexler 2008), and
the Gay Ohio History Initiative, part of a wider multicultural collecting approach
undertaken by the Ohio Historical Society (Kuceyeski 2008).

In Britain, progress was much slower and it is only in just over the last decade that
museums have tackled any displays with an LGBT content. There is no direct evidence
that the infamous Section 28 (of the 1988 Local Government Act), which prevented
authorities from ‘promoting’ homosexuality, deterred museums from addressing
LGBT subjects. However, it created a very negative atmosphere in which public ofﬁ-
cials were extremely cautious. The ﬁrst major exhibition to address an LGBT theme,
Pride and Prejudice: Lesbian and Gay London, held at the Museum of London in
1999, recognised the fact that it faced possible prosecution, albeit at a time when a
new government had committed itself to the repeal of Section 28. And even in 2004,
the staging of Hidden Histories, an exhibition at Walsall of artwork by male same-gen-
der lovers, was subject to an unprecedented level of supervision by the local authority.
However, these exhibitions, and a handful of others, have been important in breaking
down barriers and offering encouragement to others (Sandell and Frost 2010).

The difﬁculty of addressing LGBT issues has been compounded by the lack of
any professional support or network within museums to share information or to pro-
vide guidance or support
in developing appropriate initiatives. Much pioneering
work has taken place in Australia, where Museums Australia, the professional orga-
nisation for museums, includes the Gay and Lesbian Alliance of Museums Australia
as one of its special-interest groups. In 1999 the Alliance issued some policy guide-
lines and it has encouraged greater representation of LGBT issues with Australian
museums (Gorman-Murray 2008). The only signiﬁcant attempt in the UK to pro-
vide a focus for such issues, the establishment of a campaigning group called Proud
Heritage, whilst partially successful in forging a proﬁle within the museum world,
failed to garner sufﬁcient wider support, not least amongst members of the LGBT
community itself. Whilst prejudice is still clearly an issue, one suspects that it is
often a lack of thought or awareness which is responsible – a recent call in the
Newsletter of the Society for Nautical Research (2009) for assistance on ‘the experi-
ences of naval wives and families at the time of the Falklands War’ sought to make
contact with ‘wives/mothers/girlfriends of naval personnel who served in the
Falklands’, omitting completely any possibility that any of the personnel may have
had an alternative relationship.

National Museums Liverpool and Proud Heritage were successful in obtaining a
grant from the Museums Libraries and Archives Council (MLAC) in 2006 to
explore the establishment of a subject specialist network for LGBT heritage within
museums. This allowed some preliminary work in identifying possible individuals
and museums with an interest in the subject to be undertaken and funded a small
but enthusiastic meeting of interested people in November 2006. A workshop on
LGBT heritage at the Museums Association Conference in the same year attracted
an audience of over 60 participants and was further evidence of interest. An appli-
cation to MLAC to develop the proposed network was not successful, however, and

164

A. Tibbles

the momentum for any coordinated activity seems to have been lost for the time
being.

One of the major problems for museums approaching this subject is the almost
total absence of objects to assist in telling the story. Traditionally museums have
not even considered this as an area of collecting and even if they had attempted to
do so, it would have been almost impossible to know where to begin. It is only just
over 40 years since homosexuality was decriminalised and for much of the inter-
vening period LGBT people have continued to be stigmatised and to suffer preju-
dice. Many older people still come from a generation which ﬁnds it difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to discuss such matters.

Few attempts have been made to engage with the LGBT community and, per-
haps surprisingly, there has been little demand from the gay community for repre-
sentation within museums. This may partly relate to a lack of conﬁdence amongst
LGBT populations and the lack of organisations within the community with an
interest in their heritage. It may also be that a community which has only had ofﬁ-
cial sanction for a matter of a few decades and which has yet to achieve the full
recognition and acceptance that it deserves, has yet to value its own history and
experience.

It is thus a matter of building a relationship and rapport with individuals to
establish sufﬁcient conﬁdence for them to feel comfortable about discussing such
issues and to consider bringing out personal items which might be of interest to a
museum. Even assuming that LGBT seafarers are prepared to discuss their life on
board, there is still an issue about what objects one can collect that would illumi-
nate their story. Clearly, it is possible to portray them as individuals like any other
seafarer through their discharge book, through photographs, letters and personal
possessions, but few objects speciﬁcally illustrate their sexuality or lifestyle. Even
for the group of stewards under consideration, much of the material is ephemeral
and many possible items such as costumes, posters, programmes and photographs
of the concerts and shows that they put on during the voyage have often not sur-
vived. Oral testimony is the most important and potent material than can be col-
lected and was at the heart of the exhibition and the research that underpinned it.

It is possible that museums have material within their existing collections which
might relate to the LGBT experience. Parallel projects – such as Revealing Histories
(2007), undertaken by eight museums in Greater Manchester to identify objects in
their collections that relate to the history of slavery – may be useful. They have
been successful in ﬁnding artefacts which were collected for completely different
reasons, whether historical or aesthetic, but which now help tell a story which was
almost certainly not envisaged by the original donors and collectors. The problem
with the LGBT experience, as previously noted, is its understandably covert nature,
which makes establishing such associations for objects extremely difﬁcult if not
impossible. It is thus unlikely that museums will ever be able to identify objects
that will help portray the historic LGBT experience with any degree of success.

One of the few major museums to begin the process of re-examining its
collections to illustrate cultural diversity has been the Museum of London, with its
Re-assessing What We Collect project (Museum of London 2005). The museum
identiﬁed LGBT London as a subject area and in early 2006, it organised Queer is
Here, an exhibition (summarised at Museum of London 2006) that looked back on
the previous 30 years through a gay-history timeline and focused on some of the
issues that affect LGBT communities in the capital today.



165

the vast majority have until

Maritime museums have particular problems in representing diversity and, with
some notable exceptions,
recently taken a very
conservative view of maritime affairs. Their approach has tended to reinforce the
male-orientated stereotype by concentrating almost exclusively on technological
issues, such as the taxonomy of ship types, the skills and tools of navigation or the
development of methods of propulsion. The result has been a series of displays of
such artefacts as ship models, navigational instruments, diagrams of engines and
stowage plans, which are very traditional, narrow and, frankly, monotonous. Apart
from portraying the exploits of some of our more famous naval heroes and explor-
ers, they have shown little interest in the day-to-day experience of the seafarer, par-
ticularly the ordinary seaman and his family.

This has begun to change in the last two or three decades and the newer genera-
tion of maritime museums has recognised the realities of the world; indeed, a signif-
icant number were set up as a direct response to the profound changes in maritime
affairs and the desire to preserve a fast-disappearing maritime heritage. The experi-
ence of other types of museums, such as open-air museums, has seen an emphasis
of portraying the lives of ordinary people and preserving rapidly dying skills by the
use of craft demonstrations, historical re-enactments and educational programmes.
The signiﬁcance of location and speciﬁc local traditions and ways of life have also
been very inﬂuential. Crucially, many of these museums have been part of regenera-
tion programmes that have a wider agenda, with overriding political, social and
commercial drivers and the consequent need to attract a large and diverse audience
(Tibbles forthcoming).

Consequently, the role and contribution of women has begun to be included,
and to a lesser extent the experience of people from ethnic minorities has been fea-
tured. Undoubtedly, the biggest breakthrough in recent years has been in relation to
the transatlantic slave trade, with major developments in Liverpool and Bristol and
a host of activities and events associated with the 2007 bicentenary of the abolition
of the slave trade (Anon 2007). There are still signiﬁcant omissions, with virtually
no reference to Lascars, Chinese seafarers, multinational crews, racism at sea or dis-
ability, either in special exhibitions or permanent displays. Moreover, there has been
nothing in any maritime museum to represent the LGBT experience.

The exhibition
The idea of producing an exhibition on gay seafarers at Merseyside Maritime
Museum arose directly out of the research for Hello Sailor! – A Hidden History of
Gay Life at Sea, written by Paul Baker and Jo Stanley and published in 2003. It
was clear from informal discussions during the writing of the book that the research
would provide excellent material from which to develop an exhibition. When the
book was published and the full range of the material available was clear, I asked
Jo Stanley to prepare a proposal for an exhibition. As well as being a dedicated
researcher, she had worked closely with museums for many years, notably with the
Women at Sea network, and understood the approach and the requirements neces-
sary to produce a successful exhibition. The proposal was considered within our
normal exhibition procedure and was enthusiastically endorsed.

The subject matter of the life of seamen on board cruise liners in the mid-
twentieth century was one that was central to the remit of the Merseyside Maritime
Museum and would ﬁt easily within the existing displays and provide a new and

166

A. Tibbles

unusual perspective on what is a popular but in some ways rather well-known topic.
The ﬁnal location of the exhibition in the Life at Sea gallery placed it adjacent to
displays of passenger travel and the life of seafarers in general. Importantly,
it
focused on an issue of diversity, previously unexplored either by the maritime
museum in Liverpool or indeed by any other maritime museum. National Museums
Liverpool has a commitment to addressing issues of diversity and already had a
considerable track record of exhibitions and projects which had dealt with a range
of subjects. The most important of these was undoubtedly the establishment of
Transatlantic Slavery: Against Human Dignity, a permanent gallery, opened in
1994, dedicated to exploring the history of the Atlantic Slave Trade (Tibbles 2005).
However, amongst other initiatives, it had also worked with the North West Disabil-
ity Forum, undertaken City Memories, a reminiscent project with elderly people,
received funding from the Paul Hamlyn Foundation for Celebrating Diversity, a
three-year project
taking collections into the community, and co-operated with
museums in Salford and Newcastle on a Department of Culture, Media and Sport
sponsored project, Engaging Refugees and Asylum Seekers (Anon 2004).

A small project team of curators, designers, technicians, and press, marketing
and exhibition ofﬁcers was established to develop the exhibition, and Jo Stanley
was invited to join the group. It was recognised that the nature of the exhibition
might be controversial and indeed difﬁcult for some visitors. Whilst we were not
prepared to compromise on the subject matter in any substantive way,
it was
decided at an early stage that it would be inappropriate and unnecessary to include
reference to explicit homosexual activity. The exhibition was about lifestyle and
whilst not avoiding issues of prejudice and the stresses and strains that gay seafarers
faced in their ordinary lives, it was agreed that the principal approach should be to
illustrate the sense of freedom, the campery and the fun that characterised the expe-
rience of the men who had contributed to the research. It was also important that
the exhibition should draw visitors in, should explain but not hector, and should be
enjoyable as an overall experience. A worthy but poorly visited exhibition would
not achieve the aim of illustrating the diversity of life at sea and helping to counter-
act prejudice.

One major issue, which unfortunately was never satisfactorily resolved, was that
the interviewees on whom the research was based all sailed from Southampton. As
a museum with a very important local and regional remit, we were keen to try to
include some local ﬂavour and represent
the experience of Liverpool seafarers.
Although the museum had links with the local seafaring community, this was not a
topic that had previously been broached and because we were dealing with an area
that was deeply personal, a degree of sensitivity was required. Attempts were made
to contact potential interviewees through local organisations and a more general
invitation was made through the local press. We emphasised that we would respect
any contributor’s privacy and we established a secure web and email contact.
Despite a number of appeals, we were unsuccessful in locating any Liverpool sea-
men who were prepared to talk about their gay experiences. In retrospect, it proba-
bly reﬂects the fact that the museum had never previously attempted to engage with
the local gay community and potential interviewees may have been wary about our
role and motives. It underlines the need for museums to maintain and develop the
widest possible networks, so that people have an established relationship with the
organisation and are not only familiar with it but develop a level of understanding
and trust. Although disappointing,
in the end

the lack of local

input did not



167

signiﬁcantly affect the exhibition or its appeal. It remains an issue in terms of the
permanent archive which the museum has established.

The main storyline was carried on a series of graphic panels (see Merseyside
Maritime Museum 2007 for an online version of the exhibition). Each of these pan-
els included a short section of text and up to half a dozen photographs and illustra-
tions. An introductory panel explained the phenomenon of gay life at sea, followed
by panels on the recognition of homosexual love and joining a gay community on
board and the acceptance of this diversity by the ship’s master and company. Fur-
ther panels explored the behind-the-scenes cabins and crew pub where gay lifestyle
was accepted; the camp behaviour of many cabin staff and their relationship with
the passengers as well as the crew shows, which were frequently the high point of
any voyage. Time in foreign ports often offered further opportunities and was the
subject of another panel. The exhibition concluded with panels on the experience of
returning home and the end of this period of ‘gay heaven’ at sea, brought about by
changes in stafﬁng, legislation and social attitudes.

A separate panel included an introduction to Polari, a special language based
mainly on slang words used by British gays from the 1900s to the 1970s on occa-
sions when they did not wish to be understood by those outside their circle. Expla-
nations of some of these words were included together with an audio extract from a
recording from the popular 1960s BBC radio programme Round the Horne, which
always included an item featuring Polari.

The exhibition relied heavily on the experiences of the interviewees who had
contributed to the original research. We adopted the approach taken in the book of
identifying those individuals who were happy to be featured by their real names
and using pseudonyms for others who did not wish to disclose any of their personal
details. This allowed us to include audio extracts from the oral history tapes that
had been recorded, so that visitors could listen to the experiences of seafarers in
their own words.

It was clear that the exhibition would not be able to include many three-dimen-
sional objects as part of the displays. As indicated in the discussion on artefacts
above, this was mainly because few items relate speciﬁcally to a seafarer’s sexuality
and much of what might have been included was of an ephemeral nature and had
just not survived. We were able to include a small number of items, such as concert
programmes and home-made posters for the on-board ‘cabaret’ shows. We were
partly able to overcome this restriction by including a reconstruction of a cabin,
appropriately dressed and ﬁtted out (Figure 1). Pin-ups of Paul Newman and Charl-
ton Heston posing shirtless hung alongside a postcard of the Queen and a photo-
graph of Judy Garland as Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz. An orange dress and a pair
of nylon stockings hung from the locker and other articles of clothing required for
an authentic drag appearance peeked from a drawer. A number of kitsch items cov-
ered the top of the bedside cabinet and the bed.

One of the key tasks for the project team was to communicate the sense of fun
and campery that was such an essential component of the exhibition. Titles of exhi-
bitions are crucial in attracting public attention but also in giving a strong marker
as to the content. In this case, it seemed almost self-evident to follow the main title
of the book, which was short, saucy but also informative. The choice of vivid pink,
long associated with the gay world, as the predominant exhibition colour helped to
emphasise this. The other key decision was to identify an image with which to pro-
mote the exhibition to the public. Again we were fortunate in having a very strong

168

A. Tibbles

Figure 1. Cabin reconstruction (photograph by the author).

front-runner, which was a photograph taken on board the Cunard liner Queen Mary
of a seaman dressed as ‘Miss Everton’ and supported by a group of his shipmates
(Figure 2). The photograph was taken on the occasion of a disastrous performance
by Everton Football Club, and as well as encapsulating all that the exhibition was
about, also brought in a strong Liverpool element.

The public response
As with any innovative activity which might challenge the views and expectations
of our visitors, we took steps to prepare people for the exhibition and also to pre-
pare our staff to be able to deal with comments and potential complaints that they
might receive. We did this principally by trying to make sure that advance publicity
and press coverage emphasised the approach that we were adopting in relation to
the exhibition. We briefed our staff and gave them appropriate guidance. We also
agreed that I, as head of the museum, would personally reply to any complaints or
comments on the exhibition, not only as a courtesy but also as an opportunity to
reiterate our approach and aims. In fact, the response to this particular exhibition
indicates that what the museum as an institution perceived as unusual and innova-
tive was far more acceptable to the public at large than we anticipated. Museums
rarely challenge public opinion; they generally follow and mirror it. By virtue of its
location in the centre of an existing gallery, it was not possible to identify the
number of visitors who speciﬁcally saw this exhibition. During the initial run
(September 2006–March 2007),
the museum as a whole received over 220,000
visitors and we conservatively estimated that about 25% would have seen Hello
Sailor!, perhaps 50,000 people in all. The overall impression from staff is that visi-
tors enjoyed the exhibition and found it interesting.



169

Figure 2. Postcard used to promote the Hello Sailor! exhibition at the Maritime Museum
of the Atlantic in Halifax, Nova Scotia (Ó Maritime Museum of the Atlantic).

We did receive a small number of written complaints, in fact less than 10 – one
or two I suspect from people who had not even seen the exhibition. They rarely
addressed issues directly raised by the exhibition but
focused on the views
anticipated by the writers. The main comments were that we were promoting homo-
sexuality, that the subject was not suitable for a family museum or that we were
impugning all seafarers as indulging in ‘unnatural behaviour’. One correspondent
addressed his comments entirely on the Royal Navy, which was not the subject of
the exhibition (where it was mentioned only once). Another cited his experience as
a seafarer on a tanker for 40 years who had never met a gay seafarer and thought
we were making it all up. By contrast we also received a number of supportive
comments, not only from gay seafarers and members of the LGBT community, but
also from people who were pleased to see us addressing an issue of contemporary
social relevance. One gay visitor wrote to say that it was the ﬁrst time he had felt
truly comfortable when visiting a museum.

170

A. Tibbles

We also trialled one or two events associated with the exhibition. The most
ambitious of these was a one-man dramatic performance featuring a gay sailor who
had just ﬁnished an on-board show in drag for his shipmates and who talked to the
audience as he slowly removed his stage costume and returned to his normal, work
attire. This gave an opportunity to chat about life on board for gay seafarers and to
talk about the differences from life ashore. The script was written by Jo Stanley
and lasted about 30 minutes. It was performed on gallery, adjacent to the exhibition
and formed a regular part of the museum’s public programme during the initial
duration of the show. It was well received by visitors and added a new dimension
to the exhibition.

It was always our intention to undertake some formal external evaluation of the
exhibition and towards the end of the initial run, we commissioned the Evaluation
Unit at the University of Liverpool to undertake such a survey. Visitor response to
the exhibition was explored by means of an exit questionnaire conducted on
selected days during March 2007. Although the visitor sample was small (89
visitors completed questionnaires), it was statistically acceptable.

The survey (Ball and Taylor 2007) showed that about 20% of visitors were vis-
iting on their own, about 50% in groups of two or three and the remainder as fam-
ily groups. Adult women outnumbered men 61% to 39%, and apart from the 17–22
group, which was smaller, the adults were fairly evenly spread in terms of age. The
normal proﬁle for the museum at this time showed a more even gender balance at
54/46 and a large number of over-60 visitors. Of the 46 respondents who were
prepared to reveal their sexuality, 85% were heterosexual, 10% were homosexual
and 5% bisexual or transgendered.

Nearly two-thirds of respondents had visited the maritime museum before, and
11% had already seen the Hello Sailor! exhibition. The number of visitors who had
previously visited the exhibition was unusually high for a temporary exhibition and
speciﬁc interest in the exhibition was further emphasised when a third of respon-
dents who replied to the question of why they had come to the museum that day
fell in the category ‘To see Hello Sailor!’. When asked their reason for visiting the
exhibition, over a third said they were just passing and did not come to speciﬁcally
see the exhibition. Just under another third came ‘to learn what it was like for the
gay community at sea’ or because they had a personal or professional interest in
the subject. The remaining third had diverse reasons,
including because they
‘thought it looked interesting’.

In terms of their response to the details of the exhibition, most thought it was
about the right size (61%) although 39% would have liked it to be larger. Nearly
90% thought there was enough information although 6% thought there was not
enough and 4% too much. A considerable majority thought the quality was very
high for both the exhibition (67%) and for the information (70%) and no one
thought it poor. Many respondents commented that they had learned something new
– ‘I had learned a lot about homosexuality from completing a psychology course. I
hadn’t been aware of the sense of belonging the men felt at sea, and the safe haven
that was created’; ‘I didn’t realise how much gay life there was on board, with
some men living two lives, going home to a heterosexual relationship.’

Of speciﬁc things that had impressed visitors, the reconstructed cabin was the
most memorable exhibit (30%), but the video (22%) and the audio items (16%)
were also popular. The cabin ‘drew people into the space’, was ‘better than a
picture’ and provided a clear ‘indication of what it was like on board’. As a result,



171

visitors gained a deeper appreciation of how sailors lived when at sea. Of the 20
comments received on aspects that were poor, nine felt it needed to be bigger with
more detailed information, three felt it was disjointed, three asked for a greater
representation of women, three said that it needed more objects and a more visual
approach, and two that it needed a stronger Liverpool focus.

In terms of the feelings the exhibition evoked, of the 54 people who com-
mented, 60% felt comfortable and were happy with the subject matter, 12% felt
uncomfortable, 5% were surprised, but no one was unhappy with the subject matter
and no one was angry. A few commented that it evoked sadness; one visitor felt
‘sadness at the problematic lives people had to lead because of their sexuality’.
Nearly 90% felt that the museum was an appropriate location for the exhibition –
‘It didn’t cross my mind that it could be inappropriate’ and ‘I think it is a great
place for this exhibition. It is a maritime museum, the right place to show another
side of life at sea.’ Others commented that it was the sort of issue the museum
should address – ‘I’m glad to see it here, glad to see the museum address this sort
of thing’, while another noted, ‘Slavery/racism/homosexuality need to be addressed,
and not kept “off limits”.’ Whilst several respondents thought that the exhibition
would have greater relevance for gay people, many also pointed out that it was of
interest to everyone – ‘Gay people would relate to it more. There are always exhibi-
tions on straight life. This is more representative, more diverse’ and ‘I am hetero-
sexual, and I am still really interested!’ Finally, the museum was encouraged to do
more on this topic – ‘It would be nice to see a permanent exhibition dealing with
the history of gay men and women on merchant and royal navy ships.’ Another sta-
ted, ‘An exhibition like this should tour other museums. It is not speciﬁc to Liver-
pool. In fact, there is not a lot about Liverpool. I have not seen an exhibition about
gay life before.’

These last two comments pick up on issues that had concerned the curatorial
team organising the exhibition. In fact, the exhibition was designed to tour from its
inception; that was one of the reasons that it was relatively compact and designed
in a modular way. After its Liverpool opening, the exhibition moved to the Mari-
time Museum in Southampton, where much of the research was carried out. It has
subsequently been shown at the Discovery Museum in Newcastle-upon-Tyne and at
The Tall Ship in Glasgow. Most recently, it has formed the basis of a new exhibi-
tion at the Maritime Museum of the Atlantic in Halifax, Canada, which then com-
pares the experiences of LGBT mariners in Canada. (See Maritime Museum of the
Atlantic 2011 for a summary of the exhibition.)

It is a perennial problem that museums cover speciﬁc topics in temporary exhi-
bitions, especially for anniversaries and celebrations, and then effectively abandon
the issue. This is widely recognised, and curators now take greater steps to address
this weakness. Following its tour, Hello Sailor! has been incorporated into the per-
manent displays. Similarly, much of the original research has been preserved by the
establishment of the Sailing Proud Archive (Merseyside Maritime Museum n.d.).
The recordings of seafarers have been transferred to archival standard formats and
transcripts are being prepared. One or two additional interviews have been under-
taken, and recordings made, to ﬁll in some of the gaps in the research, including
the representation of women and the Royal Navy.

172

A. Tibbles

Conclusion
Hello Sailor! has attracted signiﬁcant attention from the wider museum community
and has helped to stimulate debate and to provide encouragement for those under-
taking similar initiatives, such as the temporary exhibition Safe Haven, organised
by the Maritime Museum and Aquarium in Gothenburg in 2009 on gay seafarers
on the Swedish American Line, based on research by Nilson (2006).

However, in general, maritime museums still have a long way to go in fully rep-
resenting the true diversity of their subject matter and making it a seamless experi-
ence for the visitor. Hello Sailor! has shown that it is possible to represent the
LGBT experience of seafarers successfully and that many visitors welcome this.
Whilst it will never be possible to capture and present the full extent and nature of
the LGBT experience at sea, it is possible to reﬂect important aspects within the
displays and activities of the museum. In time, this will help in providing visitors
with a richer and more accurate representation of life at sea.

Notes on contributor
Anthony Tibbles, MA FRHistS, is the former Director of the Merseyside Maritime Museum,
Liverpool and Emeritus Keeper of Slavery History for National Museums Liverpool. He has
written and lectured extensively on the interpretation of transatlantic slavery and the role of
museums in promoting diversity.

Note
1. Recent work by Dr Laura Rowe of Exeter University, as yet unpublished, has uncovered
a signiﬁcant number of courts martial for buggery in the British Royal Navy in the years
around the First World War.

References
Anon., 2004. Annual Review April 2003–March 2004. Liverpool: National Museums

Liverpool.

Anon., 2007. Bicentenary of

the abolition of

the Slave Trade Act, 1807–2007. London:

Department for Communities and Local Government Publications.

Baker, P. and Stanley, J., 2002. Hello Sailor! The hidden history of gay life at sea. London:

Pearson Educational.

Ball, L. and Taylor, I., 2007. National Museums Liverpool – “Hello Sailor!” – an evaluation

report. Liverpool Evaluation Unit, University of Liverpool.

Berube, A., 1990. Coming out under ﬁre: the history of gay men and women in World War

Two. New York: Free Press.

Burg, B.R., 1984. Sodomy and the pirate tradition: English sea rovers in the seventeenth

century Caribbean. New York: New York University Press.

Burg, B.R., 1994. An American seafarer in age of sail: the erotic diaries of Philip C. Van

Buskirk. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Clark, A.W. and Wexler, G., 2008. Queer collecting: Oregon’s wedding album. Where is

Queer? (Special issue) Museums and Social Issues, 3 (1), 115–123.

Cordingly, D., 2001. Heroines and harlots: women at sea in the great age of sail. London:

Macmillan.

Frost, D., ed., 1995. Ethnic labour and British imperial trade: a history of ethnic seafarers

in the United Kingdom. London: Cass.

Gorman-Murray, A., 2008. So, where is queer? A critical geography of queer exhibitions in

Australia. Where is Queer? (Special issue) Museums and Social Issues, 3 (1), 67–80.

Hugill, S., 1967. Sailortown. London: Routledge.
Jessop, V., 1988. Titanic survivor: the memoirs of Violet Jessop, stewardess. Stroud: Sutton.



173

Kuceyeski, S., 2008. The Gay Ohio History initiative as a model for collecting institutions.

Where is Queer? (Special issue) Museums and Social Issues, 3 (1), 125–132.

Lane, T., 1997. Liverpool, city of the sea. 2nd revised ed. Liverpool: Liverpool University

Press.

Local Government Act, 1988. London.
Maritime Museum of the Atlantic, 2011. Hello Sailor! exhibit [online]. Available from:
http://museum.gov.ns.ca/mmanew/en/home/whattoseedo/hellosailor.aspx [Accessed 7 July
2011].

Merseyside Maritime Museum, 2007. Hello Sailor! Gay life on the ocean wave [online]. Avail-
able from: http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/maritime/exhibitions/gaylife/ [Accessed 7
July 2011].

Merseyside Maritime Museum, n.d. Maritime archives and library: sailing proud [online]. Avail-
able from: http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/maritime/archive/sailingproud/ [Accessed 7
July 2011].

Müller, K., 2001. Invisible visitors: museums and the gay and lesbian community. Museum

News, Sept./Oct.

Museum of London, 2005. Re-assessing what we collect: the LGBT community in London
[online]. Available from: http://www.museumoﬂondon.org.uk/Collections-Research/Research/
Your-Research/RWWC/Themes/1161/ [Accessed 7 July 2011].

Museum of London, 2006. Queer is Here [online]. Available from: http://www.museumof-

london.org.uk/Explore-online/Past/QueerIsHere.htm [Accessed 7 July 2011].

Naphy, W.G., 2006. Born to be gay: a history of homosexuality. Stroud: Tempus.
Newsletter of the Society for Nautical Research, 2009, no. 76 (Nov.), p. 15.
Nilsson, A., 2006. Såna’ på Amerikabåtarna. Stockholm: Normal.
Phillips, E.J., 2008. Nazi persecution of homosexuals: the curator’s view. Where is Queer?

(Special issue) Museums and Social Issues, 3 (1), 105–114.

Revealing Histories, 2007 [online]. Available from: http://www.revealinghistories.org.uk/

Rodger, N.A.M., 1986. The wooden world: anatomy of

the Georgian Navy. London:

home.html [Accessed 7 July 2011].

HarperCollins.

Sandell, R. and Frost, S., 2010. A persistent prejudice. In: Fiona Cameron and Lynda Kelly,
eds. Hot topics: public culture and museums. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars, 150–174.
Stanley, J., 2007. Homosexuality amongst sailors. In: J.B. Hattendorf, ed. The Oxford ency-

clopedia of maritime history. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Vol. 2. 148–150.

Tibbles, A., 2005. Interpreting transatlantic slavery: the role of museums. In: A. Tibbles, ed.
Transatlantic slavery: against human dignity. 2nd ed. Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press.

Tibbles, A., forthcoming. Do maritime museums have a future? Papers from Rethinking the

Maritime Museum, Aabenraa, DK and Flensburg, DE, 20–23 May 2009.

Turley, H., 1999. Rum, sodomy and the lash: sexuality and masculine identity. New York:

New York University Press.

Visram, R., 2002. Asians in Britain: 400 years of history. London: Pluto.


