International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

East Rennell World Heritage Site:
misunderstandings, inconsistencies and
opportunities in the implementation of the World
Heritage Convention in the Pacific Islands

Anita Smith

To cite this article: Anita Smith (2011) East Rennell World Heritage Site: misunderstandings,
inconsistencies and opportunities in the implementation of the World Heritage Convention
in the Pacific Islands, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 17:6, 592-607, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2011.618253
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.618253

Published online: 08 Dec 2011.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 465

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 17, No. 6, November 2011, 592–607

East Rennell World Heritage Site: misunderstandings,
inconsistencies and opportunities in the implementation of the
World Heritage Convention in the Paciﬁc Islands
Anita Smith*

Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, School of Historical and European Studies,
La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia
(Received 30 June 2010; ﬁnal version received 11 April 2011)

Continuing traditional land tenure and resource use pattern the landscapes and
seascapes of the Paciﬁc Islands, and the rights of customary land owners are
enshrined in the constitutions of many Paciﬁc Island states. The implications of
this for heritage conservation programs implemented by national governments
under international Conventions and Agreements are explored through a case
study of East Rennell World Heritage site, the ﬁrst site to be inscribed based on
natural criteria under customary ownership and management. Dissatisfaction
with World Heritage listing expressed by the community of East Rennell is
argued to reﬂect inconsistencies in the requirements for inscription of the prop-
erty and a tension between the conservation and ‘beauty pageant’ functions of
the World Heritage List.

Keywords: Solomon Islands; World Heritage; community

Introduction
In agreeing to have their land nominated to the World Heritage List, the customary
owners of East Rennell in the Solomon Islands considered that they were entering a
contract for which they expected returns to support their livelihoods. The beneﬁts
they anticipated have not come to pass, leaving the community dissatisﬁed with the
World Heritage process. This in turn has become a lens through which many of the
community’s grievances, including poor transport and communication, and lack of
economic opportunity, are now articulated. ‘We let them have East Rennell and
now they give us nothing back’ (Paramount Chief N. Hu’aitebai Nikamatu’a,
Tebaitahe Village, personal communication, 10 Feb 2010). It is not uncommon that
beneﬁts from World Heritage listing fall short of or differ from local community
expectations, but in the case of East Rennell this holds particular resonance, the
inscription of the property having been a landmark in the history of the World
Heritage Convention. East Rennell was the ﬁrst World Heritage property nominated
by a Paciﬁc Island nation and the ﬁrst site anywhere to be inscribed based on natu-
ral criteria under customary ownership and management. The decision of the World
Heritage Committee to inscribe East Rennell initiated revisions to the Operational

*Email: anita.smith@latrobe.edu.au

ISSN 1352-7258 print/ISSN 1470-3610 online
© 2011 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.618253
http://www.tandfonline.com

International Journal of Heritage Studies

593

Guidelines to recognise traditional
embedded management practices in the protection of natural values.

land tenure and the strength of culturally

I suggest

Although inscribed as a natural site, East Rennell is an anthropogenic landscape
in which the organisation, vitality and resilience of ecosystems and those of human
communities are mutually linked (Mafﬁ 2010, p. 4). This relationship was recogni-
sed in the governance and management of the property but not in the outstanding
universal values for which the site was inscribed on the World Heritage List. In this
paper
that community frustration with the World Heritage process
expressed during recent consultations on East Rennell reﬂects the need for custom-
ary land tenure and resource use to be recognised not as elements to be considered
in protecting biodiversity, but as expressions of Rennellese culture and history,
which pattern and maintain the cultural landscape. More broadly, the conﬂation of
local issues around sustainable livelihoods with the World Heritage status of the
island stems at least in part from the dual and sometimes contradictory role of the
World Heritage List as a ‘beauty pageant’ for the global community and as a
mechanism for the protection of heritage values.

East Rennell World Heritage site
The long, narrow Rennell Island is the largest raised coral island in the world, lying
approximately 180km to the south-west of the southern portion of the archipelago
that makes up the Solomon Islands. Rennell and neighbouring Bellona Island, 22.5
km to the north-east, are the most geographically remote of the Solomons, a factor
in limiting sustained contact with Europeans until the mid-twentieth century. Much
of the island is forested and land suitable for subsistence gardening is found
primarily in the centre of the island, in the depression of the lagoon of the former

Figure 1. Map showing East Rennell World Heritage Site and the location of Rennell
Island in the Western Paciﬁc Ocean (Map: Ming Wei, Archaeology, La Trobe University,
2010).

594

A. Smith

atoll. The eastern half of Rennell Island is East Rennell World Heritage Site
(Figure 1), dominated by Lake Tegano, the largest enclosed body of water in the
insular Paciﬁc. The lake occupies just over half of the 370 sq. km of the World
Heritage property, leaving only a narrow strip of forest and gardens around the lake
perimeter (Figure 2). Wildlife includes 11 species of bats, one of which is endemic,
and 43 bird species, four of which are endemic. An endemic banded sea snake lives
in Lake Tegano. The invertebrate life is rich, with 27 species of land snails and 731
the Solomon Islands 1997). East Rennell was
insect species (Government of
inscribed on the World Heritage List
in 1998 under Natural Criterion ii (now
Criterion ix). The formal justiﬁcation for inscription states:

East Rennell, as a stepping stone in the migration and evolution of species in the Wes-
tern Paciﬁc, is an important site for the science of island biogeography. Combined
with the strong climate effects of frequent cyclones, East Rennell is a true natural lab-
oratory for scientiﬁc study. (http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/854)

Within the World Heritage property, around 700 customary landowners reside in
four villages along the south-west shore of Lake Tegano (Figure 3). Traditional
agriculture, ﬁshing and hunting continue to underpin the economy and local people
rely on forest products for most construction materials. The traditional land tenure
system divides the land into tribal areas (Kakaiangá), each under the authority of
one of the island’s chiefs (Hakahua). Resource use is mediated through this tradi-
tional land tenure system and cultural protocol (Birket-Smith 1956, Elbert and Mon-
berg 1965). Lake Tegano is regarded as common property. The customary owners
of Rennell and Bellona Islands are Polynesian communities, who know their islands
these ‘Polynesian
as Munggava and Mungiki,
Outliers’ in Island Melanesia tell of ancestors who settled the islands from the west,
perhaps from ‘Uvea (Wallis Island) in West Polynesia and/or Ouvéa in the Loyalty
Islands around 600 years ago (Elbert and Monberg 1965).

respectively. Oral histories of

Figure 2. Lake Tegano, East Rennell World Heritage Site (Photo A. Smith, Feb 2010).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

595

Figure 3. Niupani Village, East Rennell (Photo A. Smith, Feb 2010).

The nomination dossier for East Rennell (Government of the Solomon Islands
1997) was submitted to the World Heritage Centre in 1997 with the endorsement of
the Paramount Chief of East Rennell and the Council of Chiefs. The dossier details
the natural values for which the claim for outstanding universal value was success-
fully argued, evidence largely derived from a series of scientiﬁc expeditions in the
mid-twentieth century (Wolff 1958). The dossier includes a brief description of the
history, traditions and customs of the Rennellese but not the traditional system of
land tenure or the traditional uses of natural resources.

At

the time of nomination,

the East Rennellese were enthusiastic about

the
potential World Heritage listing because they considered it a form of recognition of
their cultural identity and because the anticipated small-scale eco-tourism would
provide sustainable economic development opportunities for the community follow-
ing inscription (Government of the Solomon Islands 1997, p. 39). The nomination
was developed by a UNESCO Paciﬁc World Heritage Ofﬁcer and a range of
associated initiatives were implemented on East Rennell with assistance from the
New Zealand Government. These included an ecotourism plan, an outline for a
resource management plan and community ecotourism and small business develop-
ment projects. Cash grants from the New Zealand Government had been provided
to selected people to establish small family guesthouses for the anticipated inﬂux of
tourists, and a bakery and beekeeping business had also been established.

Almost

immediately following the successful nomination of East Rennell

in
1998, the Solomon Islands went through a prolonged period of civil unrest and
political instability from 1998 to 2005, during which the national government effec-
tively ceased to function. The civil unrest impacted on all government process, on
ﬁnancial resources, infrastructure, education and curtailed the movement and activi-
ties of people in the Solomon Islands (Bennett 2002). There was no national agency
to support activities on East Rennell or report
to World Heritage Centre and
Committee on progress being made in protection of the property. There was an
almost total lack of communication between the Government of Solomon Islands

596

A. Smith

and the customary owners on East Rennell between 1998 and 2004. Air and sea
transport to the island ceased for long periods of time, food, petrol or other supplies
were intermittent, not a single tourist reached the island. The initiatives of the New
Zealand Government were suspended in 2000 and by 2006 when an IUCN/UNE-
SCO delegation visited the island,1 the businesses established during the nomination
process had failed (Tabbasum and Dingwall n.d.).

The impact that the civil unrest would have for the people of East Rennell and
their expectations of improved livelihoods following inscription of their land on the
World Heritage List could not have been predicted in 1997. However, notwithstand-
ing the hardships that the unrest brought to the Solomon Islands, I suggest that the
frustration and confusion expressed by the East Rennell community in relation to
World Heritage is the outcome not primarily of
the
implementation of the World Heritage Convention in the Solomon Islands.

the civil strife but of

Study methods
At the request of the East Rennell World Heritage Association Committee (now the
Lake Tegano World Heritage Site Association) and the UNESCO National Commis-
sion of the Solomon Islands and with funding from the Australian Department of
Environment Water Heritage and the Arts, I visited the Solomon Islands in February
2010, spending eight days on East Rennell between 8 and 16 February 2010. The
purpose of the visit was to identify community and institutional support for devel-
opment of a project to map the cultural values of East Rennell to inform the East
Rennell World Heritage Site Management Plan and create a community repository
to protect this knowledge. On East Rennell formal meetings were held with the
Lake Tegano World Heritage Site Association and village meetings took place in all
four villages (Tebaitahe, Niupani, Tegano and Hutuna). Informal conversations took
place with individual members of
the
Council of Chiefs, women and young people. Discussions included the community
perceptions of the World Heritage process, beneﬁts and impacts of the World
Heritage inscription, the priorities for the community and their wishes in regard to
protection of their cultural heritage.

including members of

the community,

In Honiara I met with representatives of the UNESCO National Commission for
the Solomon Islands, the Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Meteorology
and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism to discuss the aims of the visit to East
Rennell, the legal protection and institutional processes for management of East
Rennell and the implementation of the World Heritage Convention in the Solomon
Islands.

What is the point of World Heritage?
The people of East Rennell have agreed that recording of their cultural values is a
key priority for the community. Many wish to see the East Rennell World Heritage
site re-nominated on cultural values while others see the recording of their culture
as necessary to stem the loss of traditional cultural knowledge as young people
leave the island and old people pass away. ‘Every year we lose more of the old
people who remember the traditional ways’ (R. Pugeika, personal communication,
Niupani Village, 8 Feb 2010).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

597

During my discussions with the community of East Rennell I was repeatedly
asked, ‘What is the point of World Heritage?’ The World Heritage listing of East
Rennell is a source of great pride for the community but, despite this, many people
expressed great disappointment with ‘UNESCO and World Heritage’. There is a
general perception that in agreeing to have East Rennell nominated to the World
Heritage List the community has given their island to the international community
for which they are entitled to expect something in return, particularly economic
beneﬁts, which have not materialised. Associated with this is considerable mistrust
and anger directed at the Solomon Islands Government and the Rennell-Bellona
Provincial Government, which the community feel are not providing them with the
support and infrastructure to which they consider their World Heritage status entitles
them.

There are many issues intertwined within the community’s dissatisfaction and
many of these are unrelated to the World Heritage status of the island. Certainly, as
is discussed below, expectations of ﬁnancial returns were raised at
the time of
nomination but the extent to which local grievances continue to be an outcome of
this is unclear. What is clear is that the community lacks information about UNE-
SCO, the World Heritage programme in general, the criteria on which the island
was inscribed and the implications of inscription for themselves,
the national
government and the international community. Within the community there is
considerable misinformation about World Heritage, the effects of which have been
compounded by the isolation of the community and their need for assistance.

Most importantly, there is a widespread misconception that Rennellese culture
was included in the values of the World Heritage inscription. On hearing that this is
not
the case, many people were confused as to how this could happen and
expressed concern that their land could be listed ‘without them’. Although there
have been a number of World Heritage education programmes on East Rennell2 and
several representatives of the community have attended workshops as part of the
UNESCO World Heritage Paciﬁc 2009 Programme,3 the great majority of people
expressed confusion about what UNESCO is, how the World Heritage system oper-
ates, and the relationship of UNESCO to governments and international non-gov-
ernmental organisations. There appears to be little knowledge of the roles and
obligations of the Solomon Islands Government as the State Party to the Conven-
tion, or the requirements for monitoring and reporting on the state of conservation
of World Heritage properties. Considerable frustration was also voiced in relation to
international and non-government initiatives around World Heritage governance and
management on East Rennell, particularly because people feel the money provided
for these programmes would be better spent addressing the core needs of the com-
munity for sustainable livelihoods. Many people said that this was the primary rea-
son that they had supported the World Heritage nomination of East Rennell.

Communication and transport linking East Rennell with the outside world is
limited and unreliable. There is no standard telephone service on East Rennell and
only a single satellite telephone which is not currently operational. Internet access
became available in 2008 with the construction of a satellite dish and ‘café’ in the
school, as elsewhere in the Solomon Islands under a European Union initiative.
This operated until an equipment fault halted access in September 2009, and awaits
repair by the Solomon Island Government.

A single rough four-wheel-drive track connects East Rennell with the airﬁeld in
West Rennell and it is not uncommon for the 50km journey to take up to 6 hours.

598

A. Smith

There are few vehicles on the island, a vehicle arriving in East Rennell perhaps
once a week. Petrol, when available, is very expensive. Flights from Honiara, the
capital of the Solomon Islands, to Rennell are scheduled two to three times per
week but departures are unreliable and often over-booked. Only a handful of tour-
ists ﬁnd their way to East Rennell each year. There are few opportunities to have
access to cash. Relatives in Honiara and elsewhere provide a potential source of
cash, especially through sale of handicrafts produced on East Rennell, although the
transport of handicrafts to Honiara is often difﬁcult.

Increasing food insecurity on East Rennell is exacerbated by this isolation. Over
the last decade or more the level of Lake Tegano has been rising, and the adjacent
land has become waterlogged. The variety of taro that has been the traditional sta-
ple for the community will no longer grow in these areas and a variety of swamp
taro introduced to the island to replace this staple takes far longer to mature than
the traditional variety. In the past people of East Rennell have eaten and traded ﬁsh
from Lake Tegano, primarily Tilapia mozambica, introduced in the 1950s as a sup-
plementary protein source (Government of the Solomon Islands 1997, p. 27), but
the Tilapia are declining in number and size. Many people in East Rennell now rely
on rice as their staple food, although they lack cash to purchase it and the supply
by boat is not reliable.

These livelihood issues dominated all meetings with the community on East
Rennell. The need for a sustainable food source and improved transport and com-
munication are core to the future well-being of the East Rennellese, as they are to
many other Solomon Islands communities and developing nations in general. These
issues are not, however, a consequence of the World Heritage listing, nor is
improvement in living conditions an automatic or guaranteed outcome of inscrip-
tion. On the other hand, there is a very real and justiﬁable expectation that the com-
munity, as customary owners of a World Heritage property, are properly informed
about the outstanding universal values for which their land is internationally recog-
nised, and what this means for them as custodians and managers of those values. In
turn, they may make informed decisions about the most appropriate mechanisms by
which they can seek to have their needs for sustainable livelihoods addressed.

The inscription of East Rennell on natural values
When East Rennell was inscribed on the World Heritage List, for the ﬁrst time in
the context of the Convention traditional, indigenous land use and management was
deemed adequate protection for properties inscribed under natural criteria. Given
this, is not surprising that many of the community feel confused that East Rennell
is not internationally recognised for its cultural values.

From the time of inscription in 1998 the potential for a re-nomination of East
Rennell as a cultural
landscape has been suggested (UNESCO 1999) to better
reﬂect the historical and continuing interrelationship of the customary owners and
their environment that created and patterned the landscape. It is unclear whether a
cultural landscape approach was considered during development of the nomination.
The cultural
landscape category was included in the Operational Guidelines for
Implementation of the World Heritage Convention in 1992 (UNESCO 1992, para-
graphs 35–42). It was designed as a mechanism to capture the interaction of people
and place, and the cultural practices that underpin, reﬂect and are reﬂected by the
landscape in the outstanding universal value of a property. In other words, it desig-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

599

nated ‘not just a combination of features but an interplay between cultural and natu-
ral inﬂuences’ (Fowler 2003, p. 15). The Operational Guidelines were also modiﬁed
to permit the inscription of cultural sites managed according to traditional practices
(UNESCO 1994, paragraph 24(b)(ii)). The cultural landscapes category provided a
much-needed bridge between cultural and natural heritage conservation through
which it became possible ‘to recognise the links between biological and cultural
diversity. It overcomes the artiﬁcial barrier between culture and nature introduced
by the conventional categories of World Heritage Sites’ (Bridgewater et al. 2007,
p. 410). When the nomination for East Rennell was submitted in 1997, the living
indigenous cultural landscapes of Uluru-Kata Tjuta in Australia (1994) and Tongar-
iro National Park in Aotearoa/New Zealand (1993) had been successfully nomi-
nated, and offered clear precedents within the Asia-Paciﬁc region. However, both
differed markedly from East Rennell in having ﬁrst been inscribed on the World
Heritage List on natural criteria, and in being national parks managed by govern-
ment agencies in association with the customary owners. Unlike East Rennell, both
had established management plans and legal protection, and were able to muster
substantial resources in the development of the nomination and implantation of the
management plan.

The nomination of East Rennell on natural criteria alone may also have been
due to an earlier decision of the World Heritage Committee (UNESCO 1988, para-
graph 7) not to accept nominations for cultural sites that had not been included on
the Tentative List of properties that a State Party intended to nominate in the next
decade. The Tentative List is a requirement of the World Heritage Committee, but
in 1997 the Solomon Islands had not yet created their List, potentially preventing a
cultural landscape nomination being accepted. Paradoxically, this Committee deci-
sion was taken to limit the nominations of cultural site types already well repre-
sented on the World Heritage List, as part of the effort to increase the number of
properties from under-represented regions including the Paciﬁc Islands.

For the East Rennellese, the inscription of East Rennell on natural values alone
does not recognise their role as custodians of the property and its biodiversity. Con-
tributing to the confusion this has caused, the natural values nomination triggered
management requirements under the Operational Guidelines that have led to man-
agement of the site being framed according to international standards rather than
the customary practices of the Rennellese.

Whose customary management?
The Committee decision to inscribe East Rennell based on the customary ownership
and protection did not comply with the Operational Guidelines for Implementation
of the World Heritage Convention. In 1998 these stated that properties inscribed
under natural criteria ‘should have adequate long-term legislative, regulatory or
institutional protection’ and a management plan or detail of progress toward its
completion (UNESCO 1997, paragraph 44(b) (vi) and (v)). The Solomon Islands
had no national
legislation to provide legal protection for a World Heritage
property, although the rights of customary owners and customary law are
acknowledged in the Constitution of
the Solomon Islands and the Customs
Recognition Act (1995). At the time of inscription, ‘Resource Management Objec-
tives and Guidelines’ were being developed for East Rennell with assistance from
the New Zealand Government, but a Management Plan had not been completed.

600

A. Smith

Given this, although the Committee considered customary protection sufﬁcient,
on the recommendation of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
(IUCN 1998, p. 81)4
it also requested that non-customary mechanisms of
protection, namely a Resource Management Plan and a National World Heritage
Protection Bill, be prepared by the Solomon Islands Government (UNESCO 1999,
pp. 25–26). This required the people of East Rennell and the Solomon Islands
Government, as signatories to the Convention, not only to protect the values of the
property through customary law and practices but also through legal protection and
a management plan. These latter would document customary protection in such a
way as to demonstrate comparability with established best practice in the interna-
tional conservation community. This reﬂects what Mafﬁ (2010, p. 18) describes as
the ‘misconceived expectation’ that for human behaviours to lead to sustainable use
of the environment and biodiversity, they be guided by explicit theories comparable
to those underlying ﬁelds of academic science such as conservation biology.

In 1997, when the nomination for East Rennell was ﬁnalised, the only precedent
in the World Heritage system for describing traditional management systems for the
protection of natural values were properties inscribed under the then recently cre-
ated category of cultural landscape. By 1997, three cultural landscapes reﬂecting
the continuing or living traditions of a cultural community had been inscribed on
the World Heritage List – Tongariro National Park, Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park
(discussed above) and the Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras. Although cus-
tomary ownership underpinned management of Tongariro and Uluru-Kata Tjuta,
both had previously been designated national parks, managed jointly with national
government agencies. Customary ownership and continuing use also underpinned
management of the Rice Terraces, but this agricultural landscape presented very dif-
ferent management needs to that of the natural values of East Rennell.

Not surprisingly, when a UNESCO/IUCN mission visited the Solomon Islands
and East Rennell for the ﬁrst time in 2005 following the cessation of civil unrest,
they found no progress in the development of either a resource management plan or
National World Heritage legislation. They did however note that the intrinsic con-
servation values of the site were not unduly threatened (UNESCO 2005), pointing
again to the effectiveness of traditional management practices. Following repeated
requests from the World Heritage Committee, the ‘East Rennell World Heritage Site
Management Plan’ was ﬁnally completed by an international consultant in 2007
(East Rennell World Heritage Trust Board 2007). The plan, prepared through a par-
ticipatory process with the Rennellese community, establishes an East Rennell
World Heritage Trust Board (now known as the Lake Tegano World Heritage Site
Association) as the community-based organisation tasked with administration and
management of the site. The plan is comprehensive in providing management
objectives to protect the biodiversity of East Rennell, describing the natural values
of the island, legal status and practical management actions in response to environ-
mental problems such waste disposal and over-harvesting of coconut crab. The
management plan does not, however, provide a framework for customary protection
and management of the site. It does not document the system of customary land
tenure that governs use of the landscape and its resources, traditional knowledge of
the environment or traditional use of resources, stating only that ‘documentation of
past traditional management practices for Rennell is needed to provide an appropri-
ate blend of traditional practices and contemporary community-based management
practices’ (East Rennell World Heritage Trust Board 2007, p. 16).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

601

Through the Lake Tegano World Heritage Site Association the management plan
establishes a western democratic system of governance for the site. This is neither a
traditional structure nor does it operate through customary law, and the relationship
of this new structure to the traditional authority, the East Rennell Council of Chiefs,
remains unclear. This is fundamental to future management of the property as it is
the Council of Chiefs that is the decision-making authority in relation to land and
resource disputes. Democratic systems such as this provide a governance structure
that is recognisable and acceptable to the international community. While it appears
to have support from the local community, it seems at odds with the customary sys-
tem of land tenure recognised in the inscription.

There is little community interest in or awareness of the management plan. Like
the nomination dossier,
the management plan is written in English, apparently
without translation into Rennellese or Solomon Islands Pidgin. Rennellese is the
ﬁrst language of Rennell Island and, although tinged with Solomon Island Pidgin
and some English terms, Rennellese is the language almost exclusively spoken on
the island. To date there has also been no summary of the World Heritage Conven-
tion or key passages in the Operational Guidelines available in Rennellese. This
contributes to and perpetuates misunderstandings and misinformation in the East
Rennell community, who are entitled to have a clear understanding of the World
Heritage system, of why their land has been included on the World Heritage List,
and the obligations that may arise from this. More importantly, Rennellese concepts
of traditional land tenure and resource use are culturally speciﬁc and articulated
through language. As Harmon (1996) and others have argued, small human popula-
tions develop specialised knowledge of
time, which is
encoded and transmitted through their language. Language, culture and environment
develop in association, not
in isolation from each other (Blythe and McKenna
Brown 2004, Harmon and Loh 2004).

their ecosystems over

The linguistic diversity of the Solomon Islands and Melanesia in general reﬂects
the region (Laycock 2001, Donohue and
the very rich cultural diversity of
Musgrave 2007) but
in the creation of nation states and their agencies and
processes, the use of national non-local languages automatically imposes limits on
access to knowledge, potentially excluding those without good command of that
language from participation. On Rennell this goes to the heart of the management
of the World Heritage Property. People with strong English language skills are more
likely to be elected to the Board, and the community is reliant on these individuals
to pass on knowledge of the issues, concepts and opportunities around World Heri-
tage. Basic literacy on the island is relatively good but few have sufﬁcient skills in
English to translate and interpret documents such as the management plan, limiting
direct access to this knowledge primarily to those in the community who have had
education and/or employment outside the community.

Documentation, in Rennellese, of traditional land tenure, customary law and tra-
ditional resource use to provide a ‘customary management plan’ would provide a
much- needed link between the community, the Solomon Islands Government and
the World Heritage Committee. One risk of documenting a complex and continually
negotiated system of land tenure and traditional authority is the potential to render
them static and binding when they enter the World Heritage processes, constraining
communities in a simplistic or invented concept of culture and tradition.

Rennell’s history of interventions from outsiders during the colonial era is
instructive both as a general caution against potential neo-colonialism of conserva-

602

A. Smith

tion efforts but also for understanding the, at best, ambivalent relationship of the
community to the national government in Honiara. By the 1930s Rennell was one
of only a handful of places in the Paciﬁc that had not been converted to Christian-
ity, and missionaries were increasingly hungry to establish themselves on the island.
Debate raged in the British administration of the Solomon Islands Protectorate
around whether Rennell Island should be ‘closed’ to outsiders to protect its ‘pris-
tine’ culture (Hilliard 1973). The isolation of the island was considered to have led
to a unique people having evolved there. Increasing interaction was seen as likely
to introduce diseases and corrupt the culture, which should be preserved as an
example unchanged by Christianity (Lambert 1942). The Rennellese were not con-
sulted as to their interests. While they did not want any outsiders living on the
island, they welcomed any visitors because they provided the opportunity to learn
English so that the community could negotiate with traders and other ships that
came to the island outside the gaze of the administration (Kuschel 1988, p. 199).
Rennell was ofﬁcially closed for several periods before the islanders converted to
Christianity en masse in 1938. The present Elders on East Rennell grew up in the
shadow of
frustration and
scepticism in regard to the government and outsiders in general stems from their
historical experience.

intervention. Their current

this period of colonial

Lack of capacity for World Heritage
Although the capacity of the Solomon Islands Government in all areas has been
severely impeded by the years of civil unrest, prior to 2000 government resources
were also very limited. The country did not have the institutional capacity and human
resources to undertake World Heritage programmes without international assistance.
Between 1989 and 1997 the Aotearoa/New Zealand Government provided support to
the Solomon Islands Government to assist it in becoming a State Party to the World
Heritage Convention. This support included a study of potential World Heritage sites
in the Solomon Islands in the late 1980s, which appears to have provided the basis
for East Rennell to be the country’s ﬁrst (and still only) World Heritage nomination.
The nomination was prepared by a New Zealand consultant for the New Zealand
Ofﬁcial Development Assistance Programme with support of the Solomon Islands
Department of Culture, Tourism and Aviation.

The Aotearoa/New Zealand support enabled the development of a World
Heritage nomination for the Solomon Islands that would not otherwise have been
possible, but the underlying capacity of the Solomon Islands Government to protect
its natural and cultural heritage was negligible. When East Rennell was nominated
in 1997 there was no legal protection of either cultural or natural heritage in the
Solomon Islands with the exception of the Protection of Wrecks and War Relics Act
1973 [1980]. Aside from a register of archaeological sties held in the National
Museum in Honiara there were no processes in place within the national or provin-
cial governments for the recording, assessment or management of heritage sites. To
date, there are still no heritage inventories or equivalent to provide a baseline for
systematic selection of places for a Tentative List of potential World Heritage
properties according to values, management issues, resources and community needs.
A lack of capacity and resources for protection and conservation of heritage at
the national level strongly suggests that a State Party may face issues in fulﬁlling
its obligations under the World Heritage Convention, and highlights the need for

International Journal of Heritage Studies

603

ongoing technical and ﬁnancial support from the World Heritage Committee. The
inscription of East Rennell immediately created uncertainty around the capacity of
the Solomon Islands Government to protect the outstanding universal values of the
property. Following collapse of the government in 2000,
there was no national
agency responsible for reporting to the World Heritage Committee, leading to a
breakdown in communication, not only with the customary owners of East Rennell
but also with the World Heritage Centre, that persisted until 2004. As a conse-
quence, a report on progress towards development the World Heritage Protection
Bill and the management plan for East Rennell required by the Committee was not
received. This initiated an ongoing cycle of requests for progress reports from the
World Heritage Committee without any compliance by the State Party, the Solomon
Islands Government (UNESCO 2009, 2010). Legislation to protect World Heritage
properties was only recently passed by the Government of the Solomon Islands in
2011 (J. Tahinao, personal communication, Samoa, 4 September 2011). A Tentative
List for the Solomon Islands was submitted to the World Heritage Committee in
2008. It contains two listings: ‘Marovo – Tetapare Complex’, a mixed site with
both cultural and natural values, although the cultural values are not described; and
the ‘Tropical Rainforest Heritage of the Solomon Islands’, a natural site. Interna-
tional non-governmental conservation organisations, including the World Wildlife
Fund for Nature and Conservation International, have played a central role in pro-
moting the natural values of both sites and the need for their protection. The lack
of human and ﬁnancial resources in the Solomon Islands Department of Culture has
so far prevented the potential World Heritage (or national) signiﬁcance of cultural
sites in the Solomon Islands from being assessed. An application for preparatory
assistance from the World Heritage Fund to begin this task is being considered by
the Department of Culture (J. Tahinao, personal communication, 17 Feb 2010).

While it can be argued that national government capacity was not essential to
the protection of the World Heritage values of East Rennell (and this has been dem-
onstrated by effective local management throughout the period of civil unrest and
beyond), community management set outside a supportive political, regulatory and
economic framework is not a sustainable conservation solution (O’Riordan 2007).
There is a great need for improved transport and communication on East Rennell to
sustain livelihoods in the community. Many other communities in the Solomon
Islands face similar issues and many have seen logging of their forests as a means
to improve their situations (Hviding 2006). Sustainable management of East
Rennell’s ‘natural’ values will be dependent upon locally controlled sustainable
development. In entering a relationship with the international community through
World Heritage,
this would be the
outcome.

the people of East Rennell believed that

Discussion
The history of the inscription of East Rennell and the dissatisfaction with World
Heritage currently felt by the Rennellese community provide a salient lesson in the
challenges faced by many of the Paciﬁc Island states in implementing the World
Heritage Convention. The World Heritage programme in the Solomon Islands was
initiated in the context of the ‘Global Strategy for a Representative and Credible
World Heritage List’,
launched by the World Heritage Committee in 1994 in
response to perceived imbalances in the List in cultural site types and regional

604

A. Smith

representation (UNESCO 1994). The Strategy, which in 1996 was broadened to
include natural heritage (UNESCO 1996), sought to ensure a more balanced and
representative World Heritage List by encouraging countries to become States Par-
ties to the Convention, to prepare tentative lists and nominations of properties from
categories and regions currently not well represented on the World Heritage List
(Rössler 2002, p. 12). The Paciﬁc Islands were identiﬁed as being the region most
under-represented, with not a single property from an independent Paciﬁc Island
nation having been inscribed on the List. The inscription of East Rennell in 1998
was a ﬁrst for the Solomon Islands and a potential ﬂagship for World Heritage in
the region, but it was driven by non-local interests in the absence of State Party
capacity to implement the Convention without ongoing external support.

Since 1998, the World Heritage Centre and donor countries have continued to
provide substantial assistance to governments in the region to become States Parties
to the Convention and to develop tentative lists and nominations. This was forma-
lised in 2002 as the Paciﬁc World Heritage 2009 Programme (UNESCO n.d.).
Throughout the programme, representatives of the Paciﬁc Island states consistently
argued that the World Heritage Committee must recognise the unique character of
is the inseparable relationship between Paciﬁc
the region’s heritage. Paramount
Island people and their environments: ‘Protection of our heritage must be based on
respect for and understanding and maintenance of the traditional cultural practices,
indigenous knowledge and systems of land and sea tenure in the Paciﬁc’ (UNESCO
2007, p. 8).

The success of this programme has been measured in the now near-universal
Paciﬁc membership in the Convention, and the inscription of multiple sites in the
region. These include the Kuk Early Agricultural site in Papua New Guinea (2006),
Chief Roi Mata’s Domain, Vanuatu (2006) and Bikini Atoll, Marshall Islands
(2010) on cultural criteria, and Phoenix Islands Protected Area, Kiribati (2010) on
natural criteria. While this has to an extent satisﬁed the Committee’s aims for a rep-
resentative World Heritage List, the programme itself has not led to a substantial
improvement in the institutional capacity of Paciﬁc Island governments to protect
and manage their heritage or to support customary owners to do so.

In industrialised countries the nomination of properties to the World Heritage
List takes place in the context of well-established systems for the protection and
management of heritage places, as for example Tongariro National Park, Aotearoa/
New Zealand and Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park, Australia, discussed above. In
the Paciﬁc Island nations this process has been somewhat inverted, with the World
Heritage programme seeking to increase the representation of the region on the
World Heritage List in the absence of existing national frameworks for heritage pro-
tection and management, under the assumption that the programme would lead to
greater awareness of and programmes for heritage protection. In these developing
nations where human, ﬁnancial and technical resources are limited, heritage conser-
vation continues to be a low priority for governments. This is not to say that there
has been no improvement in the protection and management of cultural and natural
heritage in the region. In biodiversity and eco-systems management in particular
there have been highly successful community initiatives supported by the South
Paciﬁc Regional Environment Programme and various international non-governmen-
tal organisations (see for example Govan et al. 2009). Despite this, heritage conser-
vation and the people of the region in general face many challenges, including
rapid population growth, inadequate and poorly integrated systems of governance,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

605

and lack of government resources and capacity for regulatory functions. All these
create increased pressure on natural resources, leading to erosion of biodiversity
and livelihoods, and even conﬂict (Govan et al. 2009, p. 21). In this context, the
World Heritage programme and the obligations that nomination and inscription of
properties creates for State Parties and communities stretch already too limited
resources and capacities.

Conclusion
For the East Rennellese, the decision to have their land recognised through a World
Heritage nomination was not based in the need for protection of their island and its
biodiversity, but on the economic opportunities they believed it would bring them
to support community livelihoods, especially through tourism. It was the ‘beauty
pageant’ potential of the World Heritage list that appealed to the East Rennellese,
who sought to tie international conservation objectives to the economic needs of the
local community. This strategy has to date not produced the anticipated beneﬁts for
the community. The values for which East Rennell was inscribed on the World Her-
itage List are for the moment protected, but the viability of the community in future
is uncertain. Substantial improvements in food security, transport and communica-
tion are unlikely any time soon.

Members of the community of East Rennell wish to develop a project

to
record their biocultural values,
including land tenure, environmental knowledge,
traditional resource use, crafts, songs and dance. Some in the community see the
beneﬁt of this as providing information for re-nomination of East Rennell on cul-
tural criteria, as a cultural landscape. This, they feel, would bring the international
recognition of their culture and greater international assistance in improving liveli-
hoods and food security on the island. Notwithstanding the issues around reaching
a threshold of outstanding universal value on cultural criteria and the impact of
the rising lake level on traditional cultural practices around land use, it seems unli-
kely that the limited capacity of the Solomon Islands Government would permit
re-nomination in the near future. More crucial for many East Rennellese is the
recording of their cultural practices and creation of a community-based repository
to protect and conserve their traditional knowledge and cultural identity. Paradoxi-
cally, the heritage that the community perceives to be most in need of protection
is not that currently recognised in the World Heritage nomination. It is intrinsically
linked, however: the values and practices that have patterned the landscape of East
Rennell are those that have traditionally protected the island’s recognised outstand-
ing universal values.

Notes on contributor
Anita Smith lectures in archaeology and heritage studies at La Trobe University was is a
member of Australia’s delegation to the UNESCO World Heritage Committee from 2008 –
2011. She works closely with Paciﬁc Island communities to build capacity in heritage
management in association with the UNESCO Paciﬁc World Heritage Programme.

Notes
1. The World Heritage Committee requested that a representative of the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and of the UNESCO World Heritage Centre visit

606

A. Smith

East Rennell in 2005 to assess the state of conservation on the island following civil
unrest from 2000–2005.

2. Volunteers with Live and Learn Environmental Education and Australian Volunteers
International on East Rennell undertook training in community-based natural resource
management in August 2009.

3. The World Heritage Paciﬁc 2009 Programme was supported by the World Heritage Com-
mittee from 2005–2009, to provide assistance to the Paciﬁc Island states to build capac-
ity for World Heritage in the region.

4. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) is the advisory body to
the World Heritage Committee on natural values and sites. IUCN assesses all nomina-
tions on natural criteria and makes recommendations to the World Heritage Committee.

References
Bennett, J., 2002. Roots of conﬂict in Solomon Islands. Though much is taken, much abides:
legacies of tradition and colonialism. Discussion paper, State Society and Governance in
Melanesia Program. Canberra, Australian National University.

Birket-Smith, K., 1956. An ethnological sketch of Rennell Island: a Polynesian outlier in

Melanesia. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.

Blythe, J. and McKenna Brown, R., eds., 2004. Maintaining the links. Language, Identity
and the land. Proceedings of the 7th Conference of the Foundation of Endangered Lan-
guages, Boome, Australia. Bath, UK: Foundation for Endangered Languages.

Bridgewater, P., Arico, S., and Scott, J., 2007. Biological diversity and cultural diversity: the
heritage of nature and culture through the looking glass of multilateral agreements. Inter-
national Journal of Heritage Studies, 13 (4), 405–419.

Donohue, M. and Musgrave, S., 2007. Typology and the linguistic macro-history of Island

Melanesia. Oceanic Linguistics, 46, 348–387.

East Rennell World Heritage Trust Board, 2007. East Rennell World Heritage Site Manage-

ment Plan. Solomon Islands: East Rennell World Heritage Trust Board.

Elbert, S. and Monberg, T., 1965. From the two canoes. Oral traditions of Rennell and Bel-
lona Islands. Language and culture of Rennell and Bellona Islands. Vol. I. Honolulu and
Copenhagen: The Danish National Museum in Cooperation with the University of
Hawaii Press.

Fowler, P., 2003. World Heritage Cultural Landscapes 1992–2002. World Heritage Papers

No. 6. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre.

Government of the Solomon Islands, 1997. Nomination of East Rennell, Solomon Islands for
inclusion in the World Heritage List of Natural Sites. Honiara: Government of the
Solomon Islands.

Govan, H., et al., 2009. Status and potential of locally-managed marine areas in the South
Paciﬁc: meeting nature conservation and sustainable livelihood targets through wide-
spread implementation of LMMAs. Suva: SPREP/WWF/WorldFish-Reefbase/CRISP

Harmon, D., 1996. Losing species, losing languages: connections between biological and

linguistic diversity. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 15, 89–108.

Harmon, D. and Loh, J., 2004. The IBCD: a measure of the world’s bio-cultural diversity. In:
G. Borrini-Feyerabend, et al., eds. Sharing power: earning-by-doing in co-management
of natural resources throughout the world. Cenesta, Tehran: IIED and IUCN/CEESP/
CMWC, 271–280.

Hilliard, D., 1973. The battle for Rennell Island: a study in missionary politics. In: G. Wood,
and P. O’Connor, eds. W.P. Morrell: a tribute. Essays in modern and early modern
history. Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 105–128.

Hviding, E., 2006. Knowing and managing biodiversity in the Paciﬁc Islands: challenges of
environmentalism in Marovo Lagoon. International Social Studies Journal, 187, 69–85.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 1998. Documentation on World

Heritage Properties (Natural). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

Kuschel, R., 1988. Early contacts between Bellona and Rennell Islands and the outside

world. Journal of Paciﬁc History, 23 (2), 191–200.

Lambert, S.M., 1942. A doctor in paradise. Melbourne: Specialty Press.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

607

Laycock, D.C., 2001. Linguistic diversity in Melanesia: a tentative explanation. In: A. Fill
and P. Mühlhäusler, eds. The ecolinguistics reader: language, ecology and environment.
London: Continuum, 167–174.

Mafﬁ, L., 2010. Why is a biocultural approach relevant for sustaining life in nature and cul-
ture? In: L. Mafﬁ and E. Woodley, eds. Biocultural diversity conservation: a global
sourcebook. London: Earthscan, 13–23.

O’Riordan, T., 2007. Faces of the sustainability transition. In: J. Pretty, et al., eds. Sage

handbook of environment and society. London: Sage, 325–335.

Rössler, M., 2002, Linking nature and culture: World Heritage Cultural Landscapes. In: Cul-
tural landscapes: the challenges of conservation. World Heritage Papers No. 7. Paris:
UNESCO World Heritage Centre.

Tabbasum, A. and Dingwall, P., n.d. Report on the Mission to East Rennell World Heritage
Property and Marovo Lagoon, Solomon Islands. 30 March – 10 April, 2006. Unpub-
lished report, UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Paris.

UNESCO, n.d. World Heritage Centre activities – Paciﬁc 2009 Programme [online]. Avail-

able from: http://whc.unesco.org/en/paciﬁc2009 [Accessed 8 June 2011].

UNESCO, 1988. Guidelines for the implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Revised December 1988.

UNESCO, 1992. Guidelines for the implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Revised March, 1992.

UNESCO, 1994. Report of the expert meeting on the ‘global strategy’ and thematic studies
for a representative World Heritage List (UNESCO Headquarters, 20–22 June). Paris:
UNESCO, WHC.94/CONF.003/INF.06

UNESCO, 1995. The state of conservation of World Heritage cultural and natural properties.

Paris: UNESCO, WHC-05/29.COM/7B.Rev

UNESCO, 1996. Progress report on the global strategy and thematic studies: global strategy

for natural heritage. Paris: UNESCO WHC- 20COM IX.C.8–15.

UNESCO, 1997. Guidelines for the implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Revised February 1997.

UNESCO, 1999. Report of the 22nd session of the World Heritage Committee, Tokyo. Paris:

UNESCO, WHC-98/CONF.203/18

UNESCO, 2005. State of Conservation Reports of Properties inscribed on the World Heri-
tage List. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre Document WHC-05/29.COM/7B.Rev.
UNESCO, 2007. Appeal to the World Heritage Committee from Paciﬁc Island State Parties
[online]. (Document: WHC07-31com-11ce[1] Annex 1). Available from: http://whc.une-
sco.org/en/sessions/31COM/documents/. [Accessed 8 June 2011]

UNESCO, 2008. Guidelines for the implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Revised January 2008.

UNESCO, 2009. State of conservation of World Heritage properties inscribed on the World

Heritage List. Paris: UNESCO, WHC-33COM 7B.19

UNESCO, 2010. State of conservation of World Heritage properties inscribed on the World

Heritage List. Paris: UNESCO, WHC-34 COM 7B.17

Wolff, T., ed., 1958. The natural history of Rennell Island, British Solomon Islands: scien-
tiﬁc results of the Danish Rennell Expedition, 1951, and the British Museum (Natural
History) Expedition, 1953. Copenhagen: Danish Science Press.


