International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Exhibiting enterprise: how New Zealand museums
generate revenue

Claire Massey & Kate Lewis

To cite this article: Claire Massey & Kate Lewis (2003) Exhibiting enterprise: how New Zealand
museums generate revenue, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 9:4, 325-339, DOI:
10.1080/1352725022000155063
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725022000155063

Published online: 24 Jun 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 181

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies,
Vol. 9, No. 4, 2003, pp. 325–339

Exhibiting Enterprise: how New Zealand
museums generate revenue
Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Abstract
Museums in New Zealand are not a homogeneous group in terms of their level of income-
generating activity or the nature of those activities. The gap of knowledge consequent on this
situation  led  to  the  National  Services  unit  of  the  Museum  of  New  Zealand Te  Papa
Tongarewa, commissioning primary research into the revenue-generation activities of the
sector. This paper presents the results of that research, specifically the data gathered through
a questionnaire. The results provide a profile of respondents in relation to their operating
contexts, the sources of financial and non-financial support they received (from the local
community, local authorities and central government), and the types of income-generating
activities  they  undertook. The  results  contribute  to  a  better  understanding  of  both  how
organisations within the sector generate income (from traditional sources and new, more
innovative activities) and what factors influence their ability to do so.

Key Words: New Zealand; Revenue Generation; Museums; Funding

Over  the  last  ten  years  the  situation  for  New  Zealand  museums1 has  changed
markedly. The economic reforms of the 1980s have created an environment where
the  skills  of  businesses  are  increasingly  seen  as  valuable,  and  organisations  of  all
types and across all sectors are being encouraged to be efficient, to exercise ‘good
management’, and to be ‘business-like’.

For  some,  these  phrases  have  negative  connotations,  suggesting  that  the
organisations  within  the  sector  need  to  become  business  entities  if  they  are  to
survive. For others the terminology is merely unfamiliar, and the lessons that can be
learned  from  the  commercial  sector  have  been  adopted  with  enthusiasm.  But
irrespective  of  their  attitude,  all  those  involved  in  the  sector,  in  New  Zealand  as
elsewhere, have been faced with huge changes in their own organisations as well as

1. In the New Zealand context the use of the term ‘museum’ implies the inclusion of art galleries
also.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/03/040325-15 © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725022000155063

those that they deal with;2,3 voluntary organisations, funding bodies, government
agencies and local authorities have all adopted a new way of thinking.

This has created challenges for the managers of the museums that make up the
sector, and there have been successes and failures, as some have adapted to the new
environment more easily than others. One of the most difficult issues has been the
change in the behaviours of many funding bodies; in the new environment these
organisations  have  become  increasingly  focused  on  results,  and  in  many  cases
funding has become linked to the delivery of particular services and outcomes. The
‘purchasing  model’  has  become  a  familiar  phrase  to  many  of  those  dealing  with
central- and local-government funding agencies, and revenue-generating activities
are  seen  to  be  appropriate  ‘competitive  responses’  by  many  in  the  sector  to  an
environment that increasingly emphasises the value of combining skills of enterprise
with those of service delivery.4

At  the  same  time  many  organisations  have  experienced  a  decline  in  financial
support from traditional sources. The economic and political fluctuations that have
affected New Zealand for the last fifteen years have resulted in a situation where
museums  are  vulnerable  to  changes  in  attitudes  towards  activities  that  have  the
potential to be viewed as discretionary or non-core by some funding agencies. This
has  forced  many  museums  to  seek  alternative  sources  of  funding  from  ‘non-
traditional’ sources.5 This in turn has the potential to impact on the interrelation-
ships between funding sources (e.g. the increasing and/or changing levels of local
authority  and  private  support  have  the  potential  to  influence  levels  of  central
government funding).6

Some organisations have coped with these two factors (an increasing awareness of
the lessons of the business sector and an increasingly difficult funding environment)
by  becoming  more  enterprising.  In  the  context  of  the  museum  sector  this
enterprising nature is illustrated by many of the initiatives that organisations have
devised to develop visitor numbers and secure a firm financial base. The situation
has  also  resulted  in  a  focus  on  what  could  loosely  be  described  as  ‘cultural
economics’ in museums (rather than a specific emphasis on entrepreneurship).7,8

2. M. Abraham, D. Griffin & J. Crawford, ‘Organisation change and management decision in
museums’, Management decision, Vol. 37, No. 10, 1999, pp. 736–751.

3. T.R Hiller, ‘Coming changes in public arts’, Futurist, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2001, pp. 46–51.

4. S. Tufts & S. Milne, ‘Museums: a supply side perspective’, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 26, No.
3, 1999, pp. 613–631.

5. S. Perrin, ‘Arts nouveau’, Financial Management (CIMA), September 2000, pp. 18–21.

6. P.N. Hughes & W.A. Luksetich, ‘The relationship among funding sources for art and history
museums’, Nonprofit Management & Leadership, Vol. 10, No. 1, 1999, pp. 21–37.

7. P. Johnson & B. Thomas, ‘Museums: an economic perspective’, in S. Pearce (ed.) Museum
economics and the community, London: The Athlone Press, 1991, pp. 5–39.

8. B. Frey, ‘Cultural economics and museum behaviour’, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 4,
No. 3, 1994, pp. 325–335.

326

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Indeed, one perception is that the museums that have ‘entrepreneurial verve’ and
engage in a wide range of revenue-generating activities are in the minority, and that
the gap between best-practice revenue generation and the average museum’s efforts
is large (and not necessarily correlated with the size of the institution).9

So, whilst the phenomenon of museums undertaking income-generating activities
is not new (e.g. cafeterias and gift stores have been common both in New Zealand
and internationally for many years), its importance has taken on a new and more
critical role.10,11 However, the extent to which individual museums and art galleries
have developed these activities varies greatly, and until now little was known about
the scale and content of these activities in New Zealand museums.

The dearth of information about the issue is not confined to the New Zealand
context.  In  response  to  the  knowledge  gap,  the  UK  Museums  &  Galleries
Commission  published  a  report  on  the  income-generating  activities  of  UK
museums and art galleries in 1999.12 The authors commented that the rationale for
undertaking activities that generate income varies; organisations are seldom driven
by revenue objectives alone. In most cases, the activities also serve objectives which
are  central  to  or  which  support  the  museum’s  primary  role  and  function. This
includes  providing  visitors  with  added  services  (such  as  catering),  extending
educational outreach, disseminating scholarship and cultivating stakeholders whose
support  is  central  to  the  museum’s  continued  existence. The  point  is  made  that
where once the revenue generated from these sources was a welcome by-product of
other core activities, museums and art galleries in the UK are increasingly taking a
commercial approach to income generation and making this a primary objective of
the organisation.

The  UK  experience  suggests  that  this  approach  is  not  without  its  challenges;
generating revenue in museums can take many forms, and there are often complex
issues that need to be considered before an assessment of the value of introducing
new activities is even possible. For example, an organisation that is going to attempt
to generate revenue from non-traditional sources needs to have effective governance
and a legal structure that does not hamper the organisation’s plans. It may also have
to consider complex commercial issues, access individuals with skills and experience
in  undertaking  activities  of  this  sort,  and  be  successful  in  convincing  the  various
stakeholder groups that the plans are worth supporting.13

9. AEA Consulting, Creative industry: generating income for museums and galleries, London: Museums &
Galleries Commission, 1999.

10. J. Wong, ‘Galleries see museum gift shops as allies in art world’, Art Business News, Vol. 29, No. 3,
2002, pp. 10, 81–82.

11. N. Kotler & P. Kotler, Museum strategy and marketing: designing mission, building audiences,
generating revenue and resources, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998.

12. AEA Consulting, op. cit. (note 9).

13. P. Wireman, Partnerships for prosperity: museums and economic development, Washington, DC:
American Association of Museums, 1997.

Exhibiting Enterprise

327

Identifying factors such as these is important for those interested in developing the
capacity of those organisations that appear at first sight to be less enterprising than
others. It seems especially important to examine the factors that might signal whether
an  organisation  might  attempt  to  generate  income  outside  the  usual  sources  of
funding. The UK work provided a useful framework of the factors that appear to
influence the establishment of income-generating activities. It suggests that the ability
of a museum to undertake revenue-generating activities is partly dependent on the
organisation’s core assets and/or core activities (i.e. collections, location, building/
sites,  professional  skills,  programme  of  activities).  Other  work  has  proposed  the
notion that those museums that are quasi-independent, or fully independent, and
that have ‘budget sovereignty’ are able to be more enterprising.14

Method
One unit of the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa (Te Papa) is National
Services. Its role is to work with other museums, Iwi,15 and related organisations
throughout  New  Zealand  to  enhance  the  museum  services  offered  within  New
Zealand  communities.  Te  Papa  National  Services  partnership  projects  are  in
identified strategic priority areas for sector development, and between 2000/2001
and 2002/2003, one of these has been ‘revenue generation’. In 2001, on advice from
the Revenue Generation Initiatives Sector Reference Group, the National Services
General Manager sought expressions of interest from researchers able to undertake
primary research on the wide variety of organisations that comprise the sector.

The New Zealand Centre for Small and Medium Enterprise Research at Massey
University  was  contracted  to  research  the  sources  of  revenue  for  New  Zealand
museums and art galleries. In consultation with National Services the researchers
designed a questionnaire that was pre-tested with the Sector Reference Group. The
modified questionnaire was then mailed to the 620 organisations on the Te Papa
National Services database. This database includes a wide range of organisations;
besides  galleries  and  museums  there  are  government  agencies,  church  groups,
embassies, historic places and archives.16 In the absence of any other statistics on
New Zealand museums this database provides the most reliable picture of the sector
in terms of numbers and employees. In one of the last significant surveys on the
sector (in 1997), it was estimated that these organisations employed some 1,700
paid staff (in terms of full-time equivalents17), a significant increase over the 880
employed in 1993/1994.18

14. B. Frey, op. cit. (note 8).

15. Iwi refers to Maori tribal groupings.

16. A separate database exists of Iwi-based organisations known to National Services but these
organisations were not surveyed at this time.

17. National Services, Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Museums’ training framework:
building a stronger museum sector, Wellington, NZ, 1997.

18. P. Donnelly, New Zealand museums 1990–1994: facts and trends, Wellington, NZ: Creative NZ, 1994.

328

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Results
The questionnaire was divided into three main sections, and the results from the
180 organisations that responded (a 29% response rate) are presented in this article
using those same headings: a summary profile of respondents (in terms of location,
staff, admission, visitors, opening hours, legal status, museum type and budget); the
resourcing  of  museums  (in  terms  of  the  three  main  sources:  local  authorities,
community and government) and inhibiting or enhancing factors; and additional
revenue-generating  activities  undertaken  by  museums  (i.e.  those  that  augment
traditional streams of revenue).

Profile of the Respondents
The organisations that responded were spread throughout the country, with both
rural and urban museums represented. The dominant legal status of the respondent
organisations  was  Incorporated  Society19 (39%),  but  forty-nine  respondent
museums  (27%)  operate  as  Charitable Trusts.  Only  6%  of  respondents  (twelve
museums)  are  run  as  private  operations  (this  group  included  some  of  the  most
significant, as well as those with some of the smallest budgets). In terms of a total
operating  budget  for  the  last  financial  year,  nineteen  organisations  (11%)  had  a
budget in excess of NZ$1 million (ca A500,000). The majority (127, or 71%) had
an operating budget of NZ$100,000 or less (ca A50,000).

On the basis of this information we assigned the respondents to a number of ‘size’
categories.  Although  somewhat  unrefined  and  arbitrary,  the  practice  of  grouping
organisations  in  terms  of  size  (whether  by  numbers  of  employees  or  budget)  is
common. Given the focus of this project (on income generation) and the difficulty of
using ‘employee numbers’ to indicate size in a sector which is heavily dependent on
volunteers, the researchers decided to use size of budget as a proxy for size overall
(rather  than  numbers  employed).  On  this  basis  the  researchers  identified  large
museums as those with budgets of NZ$1 million or more,20 medium-sized museums
as having a budget of between NZ$100,000 and NZ$1 million, and small as having a
budget  of  between  NZ$5,000  and  NZ$100,000  (those  with  budgets  of  less  than
NZ$5,000 were classified as micro). On this basis, there were nineteen large museum
respondents, twenty-one medium, fifty-six small and seventy-one micro (see table 1).
Almost half of the responding organisations (48%) had no paid employees. Of
those that did employ paid staff, fifty-three (29%) employed between one and five
individuals  only.  However,  these  staff  were  not  necessarily  full-time;  indeed,  the
responses  suggest  that  part-time  work  was  the  norm.  By  contrast  with  the  small

19. Incorporated societies are registered under either the Incorporated Societies Act 1908 or the
Charitable Trusts Act 1957. On incorporation an entity becomes a legal entity separate from its
members and has perpetual succession. In contrast to a Charitable Trust, an Incorporated Society
must file an annual financial statement with the Registrar of Incorporated Societies. M. von
Dadelszen, Law of societies in New Zealand: unincorporated, incorporated and charitable, Wellington, NZ:
Butterworth, 2000.

20. NZ$2 is equal to approximately US$1 or A1.

Exhibiting Enterprise

329

Table 1. Grouping the respondents by size of budget

Category

Micro
Small
Medium
Large
Not known

Total

Budget
(NZ$)

Frequency

Percentage

of total

0–5,000

5,001–100,000
100,001–999,999
1 million and over

71
56
21
19
13

180

39
31
12
11
7

100

number of organisations that employed paid staff (and the even smaller number that
employed more than ten), a large number of respondents indicated that volunteers
are  an  important  people  resource.  While  some  twenty-six  (14%)  did  not  use
volunteers at all, most (141, or 78%) did and eight (4%) had more than 100 people
donating  their  labour. This  is  congruent  with  some  sector  statistics,  namely  that
New  Zealand  museums  are  relying  on  increasing  numbers  of  volunteers  to  help
sustain them (e.g. in 1993/1994 the sector had approximately 2,390 volunteers21
and by 1997 that figure had increased to 4,500).22

Almost  half  the  respondents  opened  every  day  (often  with  the  exception  of
Christmas  Day  or  Good  Friday).  More  than  half  (54%)  of  the  respondent
organisations had a general admission charge but there was no apparent pattern to
this. Some of the museums with the largest budgets, the most staff and a high number
of visitors did not charge admission, while some at the other end of the scale did. The
majority of respondents (61%) had fewer than 5,000 visitors. Nine museums were
visited by approximately 100,000 people per year, and only four museums drew in
more than 500,000 visitors per year (one of which was Te Papa itself).

This profile data confirmed how diverse the museum sector is in New Zealand.
It comprises organisations that differ from each other in the way they operate, the
amount of money they have to spend, the number of visitors they attract and the
number of staff they employ. As the answers to the next sections of the questionnaire
show,  the  respondents  are  also  quite  different  in  the  way  they  resource  their
museums.

How New Zealand Museums are Resourced
As noted above, one of the major changes for the sector over the last decade or so
has been the diversification of funding sources. However, most museums are still

21. Donnelly, op. cit. (note 18).

22. National Services, Museum of New Zealand, op. cit. (note 17).

330

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

funded  primarily  by  local  authorities,  their  local  communities  and  central
government. These three categories were used to collect information about funding,
to develop an understanding of what these funds enable the organisation to do and
to assess the role of supplementary funds sought from other sources.

Museums and local authority support. Local authorities are very important to the
existence  of  New  Zealand  museums.  However,  the  relationship  between  local
authority funders and museums is changing substantially because of the impact of
local government reform, and over recent years it has become clear that the museum
sector cannot now expect to receive the financial support it once did. This is in part
because  of  the  additional  requirements  being  imposed  by  government  legislation
and  the  general  tightening  of  accountability,  which  has  meant  that  ever-stronger
constraints  are  being  placed  upon  local  authority  expenditure.23 This  has  been
exacerbated by the growing dissatisfaction with the performance of local authorities
that has been voiced, especially by commercial ratepayers.

Despite this situation, local authorities still assist museums in a diverse number of
ways. Methods include ongoing funding, special grants, capital funding and being
supportive ‘in kind’, that is, providing or subsidising facilities, maintaining buildings
and gardens, giving rate exemptions or support with administrative work.

Table  2  shows  that  the  majority  (115)  of  respondents  received  some  form  of
support from their local authority (note that the frequencies in the table are greater
than 180, as some respondents indicated more than one type of support). Of those
museums  that  received  some  form  of  local  authority  assistance,  sixty  were
supported  in  kind  by  their  local  authorities,  while  fifty-eight  museums  received
‘operational  funding’. The  term  operational  funding  was  used  by  many  of  the
museums  to  include  such  things  as  paying  staff,  rent,  electricity,  upkeep  and
maintenance and other running costs. However, there was some variation in the way
the term was applied—it was clear that some respondents used the term when they
were in fact describing capital funding.

Factors  that  respondents  said  helped  develop  and  maintain  local  authority
support  were  grouped  mainly  around  developing  and  maintaining  lines  of
communication,  and  the  local  authority  understanding  the  museum’s  needs.
Museums suggested that having a mayor or councillors who were sympathetic to the
needs  and  benefits  of  their  cause  enhanced  support  from  their  local  authority.
Another strategy used by museums was to have a member or members of the local
authority on the board of the museum. This is consistent with research that suggests
that local authorities sometimes view museums as ‘non-essential goods’.24 To this
end, it has fallen on museums to communicate the benefits to the community of
their particular museum.

23. S. Gale, ‘Museums and the community’, in A framework for funding and performance measurement
of museums in New Zealand, Wellington, NZ: Museum Directors Federation, 1995.

24. S. Davis, By popular demand: a strategic analysis of the market potential for museums and art galleries
in the UK, Lincolnshire, UK: Museums & Galleries Commission, 1994.

Exhibiting Enterprise

331

Table 2. Type of local authority support

Type of support

Frequency

Supportive in kind
Funded operations
Funded special events only
Capital funding
No funding or NA
No response

60
58
18
12
45
20

Thirteen museums believed having experienced staff members/volunteers was an
important factor in achieving local authority support. These experienced people are
able  to  communicate  orally  (and  in  writing)  how  the  museum  can  enhance  and
contribute economically to the area or community. A further thirteen museums also
commented  on  the  significance  of  the  museum  location.  Location  most  often
referred to the significance in terms of the international and New Zealand tourist
network.  However,  in  some  cases,  location  in  the  town  or  city  was  stated  as  an
important factor in facilitating local authority support. For instance, if a museum
was  located  in  the  heart  of  a  commercial  area  their  significance  was  seen  as  an
important contribution to the local economy by enhancing the diversity of the area
and drawing in potential customers to the commercial area.

In  terms  of  factors  that  hindered  museums  obtaining  local  authority  support,
thirty-nine  museums  recorded  that  it  was  the  reluctance  of  local  authorities  to
support the local arts and culture (and the consequent reduction of funding) that
was  a  significant  hindering  factor.  Competition  for  local  authority  resources  was
noted  by  twenty-three  museums,  which  is  likely  to  be  due  to  a  political  and
economic  climate  whereby  local  authorities  must  justify  and  account  for  their
spending in a more stringent way, both to ratepayers and to central government.
Another issue is that some local authority areas, especially the smaller ones, have
fewer resources than others, yet they may face many pressing social issues that draw
resources away from museum funding.

Eighty-two museums indicated that local authority support was used primarily
for operational expenses. Far fewer museums (twenty-four) used the support for the
expansion and improvement of their museums, or to create new exhibits or develop
conservation projects (twenty-two). Few respondents (fourteen) said that support
from the local authority enabled them to employ professional staff.

Museums and community support. The results suggested that community support
for museums is vitally important to their existence. As table 3 shows, the support
from  the  community  comes  from  many  different  sources,  including  volunteers,
members of museum societies, Friends’ groups, and the community in general. Two

332

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Table 3. Sources of community support

Sources

Frequency

Community and charitable trusts
Community groups
Volunteers
General community support
Museum members
Friends’ organisation
Sponsors
Patrons
No funding or NA
No response

68
55
46
39
30
26
6
4
19
27

very important sources in financial terms are community groups (such as local trade
associations) and the charities associated with liquor-licensing trusts.

The most common form of support offered by the community is through donations
of  time,  money  and  exhibits. This  was  noted  by  115  of  the  museums  surveyed.
Seventy-eight museums received support in the form of monetary grants.

The  data  showed  that  the  level  of  community  support  a  museum  received  is
dependent on the degree of community enthusiasm for the museum (sixty-one) and
the  profile  the  museum  has  developed  in  the  community  (fifty-nine).  From  the
respondents’  perspectives,  the  best  way  to  facilitate  community  support  was  to
develop good links within the community. In order to do this, some museums ran
fundraising events and undertook local heritage works and community projects (this
is  in  addition  to  providing  a  good  public  service).  Having  supportive  volunteers,
members, and Friends’ organisations was noted by thirty-one museums as a factor
in helping develop community support.

Respondents could less easily identify factors that have hindered the provision of
community  support.  However,  those  museums  that  did  respond  put  a  lack  of
community support down to the size, economic status and general apathy of the
community. Low-income and small communities were less able to support museums
financially and non-financial support often relied on an overstretched few.

Community support enabled museums to undertake two activities in almost equal
proportions: meet operating expenses (seventy-six) and create and conserve exhibits
(seventy). To a lesser degree community support helped with museum expansion and
improvement  projects,  although  paying  for  professional  services  and  employing
professional staff were less likely to be enabled through community support.

Museums  and  central  government  support. Central  government  comprises  many
organisations  that  support  museums.  As  table  4  demonstrates,  seventy-one

Exhibiting Enterprise

333

Table  4.  Central  government  organisations

that support museums

Organisation

Frequency

Lottery Commission
Creative NZ
Ministry of Educationa
Historic Places Trust
Department of Conservation
Ministry for Culture & Heritage
National Services
No funding and NA
No response

71
18
17
6
3
2
2
45
10

Note:
aLearning Experiences outside the
Classroom.

museums said that they had received grants from the Lottery Grants Board, making
it the most common central government organisation to support museums.

The lack of support or information and the difficult and lengthy application forms
and processes were the most commonly cited factors hindering museums receiving
central government support. Twenty-six museums did report that developing good
lines of communication with central government funding bodies was an important
factor in the grant application process. To a much lesser degree, some museums said
that  the  significance  of  their  collection,  building  or  site  was  the  key  factor  in
receiving  funding,  and  several  said  that  having  a  museum  member  with  relevant
experience in grant applications was a key factor.

The most common usage of central government funding was for the creation and
conservation of exhibits (forty-three). A slightly lower number of museums (thirty-
eight) used the funds to expand and improve museums. Thirty-two museums said
that central government funding assisted with operational expenses, while seventeen
museums used funds to employ professional staff members. However, these findings
are  tempered  by  the  fact  that  seven  museums  responded  ‘no  funding’  or  ‘not
applicable’ and eighty-eight were not able to respond to the question.

Income-generating Activities Undertaken by New Zealand
Museums
The  next  section  of  the  questionnaire  asked  the  respondents  to  describe  the
activities that they undertook to generate income in addition to the sources already
identified  in  the  questionnaire’s  earlier  sections.  The  majority  of  respondents
indicated that they carried out one or more activities (155 respondents), and, as
table 5 indicates, admission and/or door donations were the most common source

334

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Table 5. Income-generating activities

Activity

Frequency

Admission charges and/or door donations
Retail shop, including sale of local crafts
Professional services
Renting out space
Fundraising events
Sponsorship
Membership fees
Catering service
Publishing books/educational resources
National organisation funding
Travelling exhibitions
Capital revenue generation
Consultancy services
Private funding
Investigating now
Hiring out exhibitions
Donations of exhibits
No funding and NA
No response

108
89
76
48
45
26
24
22
17
9
8
6
5
3
2
2
1
7
16

of museum income generation with 108 responses. Income from retail shops and
the commissions from the sale of local arts and crafts was the next most common
revenue-generating  activity  (eighty-nine).  The  next  biggest  money  maker  was
income raised from the professional services offered by museums (seventy-six). This
included fees charged for research, including family history research and reproduc-
ing photos, professional guided tours, as well as general photocopying. Renting out
museum space was also a common activity, with forty-eight museums recording that
they rented out the museum’s space or grounds for special events such as meetings,
conferences and weddings.

Activity  patterns. Another  way  of  looking  at  the  data  in  table  5  was  to  look  for
‘common  patterns’  (i.e.  clusters  of  activity  that  more  than  one  organisation
undertook).  The  clearest  example  of  this  was  the  pattern  of  activity  that  was
exhibited  by  eighteen  respondents.  All  of  these  organisations  charge  general
admission,  offer  professional  services,  rent  out  space  and  also  generate  revenue
through either catering or other retail. This was the only single grouping that stood
out so clearly, but it offered the researchers a way of organising the data in terms of
‘number of activities’. This is the focus of table 6, in which the 180 respondents were
grouped according to the number of revenue-generating activities they carry out.

Exhibiting Enterprise

335

Table 6. Grouping respondents by number of revenue-generating activities

Activities

Frequency

Charge admission and undertake five or more income-generating activities
or do not charge admission and undertake four or more activities (eighteen
of these charge admission, offer professional services, rent out space and
do catering and/or retail)

Charge admission and undertake four income-generating activities or do
not charge admission and undertake three or more activities

Charge admission and undertake three income-generating activities or do
not charge admission and undertake two or more activities

Charge admission and undertake one or two income-generating activities
or do not charge admission and undertake one or more activities

None or only charge admission

No response

Total

28

14

28

75

19

16

180

Table 7. Grouping respondents by revenue-generating profile

Activities

Level of
activity

Frequency

Charge admission and undertake five or more income-generating
activities or do not charge admission and undertake four or more
activities (eighteen of these charge admission, offer professional
services, rent out space, do catering and/or retail)

High

Charge admission and undertake four income-generating activities
or do not charge admission and undertake three or more activities

Medium

Charge admission and undertake three income-generating
activities or do not charge admission and undertake two or more
activities

Charge admission and undertake one or two income-generating
activities or do not charge admission and undertake one or more
activities

No activity or only charge admission

Low

Some

None

No response

Total

28

14

28

75

19

16

180

336

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

Table 8. Grouping respondents by level of revenue activity and size

Level of activity

Micro

Small

Medium

Large

Not known

Total

High
Medium
Low
Some
None
No response
Totals

2
2
8
36
14
10
72

8
7
10
22
5
3
55

7
1
6
7
0
0
21

10
4
3
2
0
0
19

1
0
1
8
0
3
13

28
14
28
75
19
16
180

As table 6 shows, when counting the number of activities, ‘charging admission’
was  included  in  the  total,  and  given  that  this  was  such  a  common  practice  (and
possibly  is  one  of  the  easiest  revenue-generating  activities  to  implement),  the
researchers made the decision also to establish categories that neutralised the effect
of this activity (i.e. place emphasis on the revenue-generating activity carried out
beyond standard admission charges). These data demonstrate that museums in New
Zealand are not a homogeneous group in terms of their level of income-generating
activity; some are very active whilst others are not. It was therefore useful to class
the respondents in terms of their ‘level’ of revenue-generating activity based on the
totals displayed in table 6, the results of which are displayed in table 7.

The  researchers  went  on  to  examine  these  data  further  and,  as  table  8  shows,
broke down the ‘levels’ of revenue-generating activity according to museum size. As
noted above, for the purposes of this research all respondents were allocated to size
categories on the basis of the size of their budget.

A  particularly  interesting  group  is  that  of  the  eighteen  museums  that  charge
admission, offer professional services, rent out space and do catering and/or retail.
As already noted, this was the single most identifiable pattern of activity, and the
scale and scope of the activities suggests that it might be more common amongst
organisations that are well resourced. On this basis the researchers expected it to
have been more frequent amongst the larger organisations. However, this was not
entirely the case; while eight of the organisations in this group were large, three were
medium, five small and one micro (for one the budget was not known). Work in an
international  context  has  also  reported  that  smaller  museums  can  be  equally
innovative, if not more, than larger museums.25

As  with  the  previous  sections  of  the  questionnaire,  respondents  were  asked  to
identify  factors  that  had  affected  their  ability  to  generate  additional  income. The
factors that were identified were spread over three main areas—thirty-two museums

25. Tufts & Milne, op. cit. (note 4).

Exhibiting Enterprise

337

said that the help received from volunteers and supportive Friends’ organisations
was  an  important  factor  in  assisting  income  generations,  twenty-seven  museums
said that their location, either in relation to an urban area or to a tourist network,
was a contributing factor; and twenty-three museums said that their reputation was
an important factor in developing successful incomes. Fifteen museums said that
having a supportive council and community was an assistance, while twelve said that
forming  partnerships  with  other  organisations  was  a  help  (examples  included
sharing  facilities  and  leasing  the  cafeteria  to  an  outside  agency).  Only  eleven
museums said that advertising or promotion of the museum was an important factor
in income generation.

Of the factors that hindered museum income generation, nineteen museums said
that  it  was  lack  of  experience  and  time  constraints  that  were  important.  Sixteen
museums recorded the poor location of the museum as a hindrance, that is, not being
on a tourist route or being in a non-central location in the area. Fourteen museums
saw a lack of staff as a serious difficulty, fourteen museums said competition from
other  leisure  activities  was  a  factor  hindering  their  income  generation.  Seven
museums said that the local people did not like having to pay admission to a museum,
while six said it was poor local authority support and six said it was a lack of adequate
facilities at their museums which put them at a disadvantage.

In  most  instances  income  generation  helped  the  respondents  with  operational
funding.  Funding  museum  expansion  and  improvement  and  funding  for  the
creation and conservation of exhibits were both cited only by a few respondents.
This contrasts strongly with the responses to the same question in relation to local
authority and community support.

Conclusions
This study shows that a degree of revenue-generating activity is common in New
Zealand museums, with 155 of the respondents to this survey undertaking some
form  of  income-generating  activity  on  their  own  initiative.  Sometimes  these
museums had been forced into generating additional revenue through activities that
take advantage of their particular assets. For example, many respondents signalled
that  they  had  been  directed  by  their  main  funding  agency  (usually  the  local
authority) to generate a fixed percentage of operating funds from outside sources.
But this was not the only picture presented—a significant proportion of those that
replied were voluntarily active in generating revenue, and interested in developing
their capabilities in this field. For them, revenue-generating initiatives were positive.
These organisations use the income generated by these activities to supplement the
funds provided by other sources such as local authorities, community organisations
and central government agencies. A surprising finding was that museums used these
additional  funds  for  operational purposes,  suggesting  that  their  ability  to  operate
normally without this revenue would be otherwise constrained.

The  findings  also  suggest  that  the  museums  that  responded  to  this  survey
acknowledged the necessity of these additional revenue-generating activities—as a
fact  of  life  in  an  environment  where  funding  for  art  and  heritage  is  becoming

338

Claire Massey and Kate Lewis

increasingly  competitive.  In  the  new  era,  where  the  budgets  of  central  and  local
governments  are  stretched  by  new  demands,  rising  costs  and  limited  means  of
supporting existing institutions, museums have taken action. They have begun to
generate  revenue  using  their  own  resources,  and  although  this  research  did  not
attempt to assess whether this activity is more common now than at any time during
the  past,  the  researchers  would  postulate  that  this  is  the  case.  Museums  are
increasingly  generating  extra  revenue  and  it  is  clear  that  they  are  developing
expertise in selecting activities that achieve their desired objectives.

The  researchers  suggest  that  this  developing  expertise  is  demonstrated  by  the
number of organisations that undertake one or more income-generating activities: it
is  likely  that  in  the  twenty-eight  organisations  where  four  or  more  activities  are
undertaken, there is a developing knowledge base on activities that work and those
that  do  not.  However,  this  expertise  is  not  necessarily  comparable  with  that
expected  outside  the  museum  sector.  Nor  is  experience  in  income  generation
necessarily regarded as an essential capability within the sector, particularly in the
context  of  traditional  notions  of  museum  professionals  as  possessing  primarily
curatorial skills. Yet the new environment for museums has provided opportunities
for some New Zealand museums to develop and grow income-generating activities,
while retaining their focus on collection development and display. The means for
this  appears  to  be  the  result  of  a  number  of  interrelated  factors;  including  the
changing environment for museums, which may have actually created openings for
individuals to enter the sector who have other skills, such as those more commonly
found in commercial organisations. The importance of these individuals is not as yet
entirely clear, but it may be that they are at least one element of the ‘magic factor’
in some organisations, which makes them successful in generating revenue. Further
work  needs  to  be  carried  out  on  this  topic,  so  that  others  can  learn  from  these
‘exhibitions of enterprise’.

Acknowledgements
The  authors  acknowledge  the  input  of  Dr  Jennie  Harr´e  Hindmarsh  (General
Manager National Services, Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa) to the
empirical research that underpins this article. See  < www.nationalservices.tepapa-
.govt.nz >  for further information on National Services.

Exhibiting Enterprise

339


