International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

In the Shadows of Monuments: the British League
for the Reconstruction of the Devastated Areas of
France

Brian S. Osborne

To cite this article: Brian S. Osborne (2001) In the Shadows of Monuments: the British League for
the Reconstruction of the Devastated Areas of France, International Journal of Heritage Studies,
7:1, 59-82, DOI: 10.1080/13527250118973
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250118973

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 141

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 59± 82

In the Shadows of Monuments: the
British League for the Reconstruction of
the Devastated Areas of France
Brian S. Osborne

Abstract
Armed  conflict  destroys  people and property but, for obvious reasons, human losses  have
received  most  attention,  as  have  the  ways  in  which  we  have  commemorated  them. The
affect  of  the  destruction  of  the  lived-in  landscape  and  people’s  loss  of  their  vernacular
material worlds has been neglected. Yet artefacts and their associations are constitutive of
place.  Not  only  are  they  the  material  product  of  any  community’s  collective  activities
over time, they become important reference  points in everyday life and mnemonic devices
for  contextualising  the  past  and  future.  They  serve  to  imbue  localities  with  symbolic
meanings. These `landmarks’   and `lieux  de  mÂemoire’   effect  a  rendezvous  in  place  and
time  of  the  lived-in  world  with  the  collective  memory.  Moreover,  their  sudden  loss  can
constitute  a  collective  trauma  for  a  community.  This  was  certainly  the  world  of  the
French  civilian  population  displaced  from  their  homes  by  the  events  of  the  Great War.
One  of  the  projects  attempting  to  transform  the  `shadowed  ground’   into  a  place  of
human  congress  and  community  was  the  British  League  for  the  Reconstruction  of  the
Devastated Areas  of  France.

Key  words:  Commemoration; France; UK; War  Memorial

A Concern for the Vernacular
It  may  be  a  truism  to  observe  that  `armed  conflict  . . .  destroys  people  and
property.’ 1 For  obvious  reasons,  the  emotive  significance  of  human  losses  has
received  much  attention,  as  have  the  ways  in  which  we  have  memorialised,

1. J. Toman, The protection  of cultural  property in the event  of armed conflict, Aldershot: Dartmouth,
1996, p. 3.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/01/010059-24   2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250120043357

commemorated, and  performed the  remembrance of  war.2 But  the  effect  of  the
destruction of  the  inhabited  landscape has  not  received similar attention.3 To  be
sure, the  protection of  valued `cultural property’   during conflict  has  long been a
matter of concern, but the significance of people’s loss of their vernacular material
worlds has been neglected.

Yet, `artefacts matter . . . the power of objects as well as the power of place, cannot
be denied’ .4 Indeed, artefacts and their associations are constitutive of place. Taken
together,  not  only  are  they  the  material  product  of  any  community’s  collective
activities  over time,  they  become important reference points  in everyday life and
mnemonic devices for contextualising the past and future. The expected presence of
familiar things in particular places, the ascription of names to places, the tying of
narratives  to  places,  all  serve  to  imbue  localities  with  symbolic  meanings. These
`landmarks’   and  lieux  de  mÂemoire effect  a  rendezvousÐ
of  the
lived-in  world  with  the  collective  memory.5 Moreover,  their  sudden  loss  can
constitute a collective trauma for a community in which the borders and boundaries
between order and chaos, between the sacred and the profane, between good and
evil,  between  life  and  death,  become  fragile.  People,  both  individually  and

in  place  and  timeÐ

2. Perhaps the best overview is A. King, Memorials of the Great War in Britain, Oxford: Berg, 1998;
but see also C. Moriarty, `The absent dead and figurative First World War memorials’, Transactions  of
the Ancient  Monuments  Society, Vol. 39, 1995, pp.  7± 40, and also her `Review article: the material
culture of Great War remembrance’ , Journal of Contemporary  History, 1999, Vol. 34, No. 4, pp.
633± 662. For particular studies see H. Clout, Memoires de pierre: les monuments  aux morts de la premier
guerre mondiale dans le Pas-de-Calais, Calais: Archives departmentales du Pas-de-Calais, 1992; A.
Gaffney, Aftermath: remembering the Great War in Wales, Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1998; M.
Heffernan, `For ever England: the Western Front and the politics of remembrance in Britain’,
Ecumene, 1995, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp.  293± 324; K.S. Inglis, `The homecoming:  the war memorial
movement in Cambridge, England’ , Journal of Contemporary  History, Vol. 27, 1992, pp.  583± 605, and
also his Sacred places: war memorials in the Australian landscape, Melbourne: Melbourne University
Press, 1998; N. Johnson, `Cast in stone: monuments, geography,  and nationalism’ , Environment  and
Planning  D: Society  and Space, Vol. 13, 1995, pp.  51± 65; J. Pierce, `Constructing memory: the Vimy
Memorial’, Canadian Military History, Vol. 1, Nos 1 & 2, 1992, pp.  1± 3; D.J.  Sherman, The
construction  of memory in interwar France, Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1999; R. Shipley, To
mark our place: a history of Canadian war memorials, Toronto: New Canada Publications, 1987.

3. The exception is the excellent work by J.D.  Porteous, who has played around with the best terms
for `place-destruction’  and `place annihilation’  that have resulted from a variety of ecological,
political, and economic forces: topocide, topothanasia,  lococide. See his Planned  to death: the
annihilation  of a place called Hodendyk e, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1989, pp.  227± 230.

4. J. Winter & E. Sivan (eds) War and remembrance in the twentieth  centur y, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999, pp.  37± 38.

5. For more on this discussion of the symbolic content on places derived from the work of Simmel &
Halbwachs see B. Werlen, Society,  action  and space: an alternative human geography, London:
Routledge, 1993, pp.  174± 181. For `landmarks’  see M. Halbwachs, The collective  memory, New York:
Harper & Row, 1980; for `lieux de mÂemoire’  see P. Nora (ed.), Realms of memory: the construction  of
the French past. Vol. 1, Conflicts and divisions; Vol. 2, Traditions; Vol. 3, Symbols, New York: Columbia
University Press, 1992.

60

Brian S. Osborne

collectively, see themselves as moving into uncharted territory. The central hopes
and aspirations of personal lives are temporarily put on hold and replaced by the
darkest of fears and anxieties. Symbolically, ordinary time has stopped; the sun does
not shine, the birds do not sing, and the flowers do not bloom.6

Such places become the `shadowed ground’  of landscapes of violence and tragedy
that may be variously sanctified, designated as such for posterity, rectified to former
conditions, or obliterated from sight in an attempt at preventing remembrance.7

This  was  certainly the  world of  the  French civilian  population displaced  from
their  homes  by  the  events  of  the  Great War.8 One of  the  projects  attempting  to
transform the `shadowed ground’  into a place of human congress and community
was the British League for the Reconstruction of the Devastated Areas of France.

Constructing Normalcy
For  Pierre  Nora,  the  general  category  of  `the  land’   is  one  of  the  `models’   that
`underpin social structures and shape collective representations’  of France. It is one
of the `sites’  that constitute French identity and is one of `the most venerable, the
most vivid, and the most decisive models in the shaping of peasant France’ .9 This
is the `farmland Ð
the peasants’  land, the land that every year is sliced into furrows
by plowshares and discs, the land that lies beneath the carpet of pasture and rows
of vines’.10 And this was the land that became the theatre of the conflict in the Great
War, the locus of death and destruction. Certainly, millions of combatants had died
but there were other victims too. Millions of non-combatants had also been killed or
displaced, their  homes  and  livelihoods destroyed.  Further, the  conflict had  been
remarkable for its concentration and fixity in place. Along a 500 km front running
from  Belgium,  across  France,  to  Switzerland,  and  never  more  than  a  score  of
kilometres wide, the conflict had been conducted on a scale and intensity previously
unknown in the annals of warfare. The consequence was that the battlefields of the
Great War devastated a bucolic landscape and a rural society. A dystopian warscape

6. A.G. Neal, National trauma and collective  memory: major events  in the American Century, Armonk,
NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1998, p.  5.

7. K.E. Foote,  Shadowed  ground: America’s landscapes  of violence  and tragedy, Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1997, pp.  7± 8.

like my Uncle Tom of the 5th Battalion,  the Welch RegimentÐ

8. Throughout,  I use the Pre-Second-World-War term, Great War because for so many who
experienced itÐ
always referred to it. Not surprisingly, how we remember this critical conflict has received
considerable attention. P. Fussell, The Great War and modern memory, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1975; G.L. Mosse, Fallen  soldiers: reshaping the memory of the world wars, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1990; T. Wilson, The myriad faces of war, Cambridge: Polity Press, 1986; J. Winter,
Sites of memory, sites of mourning: the Great War in European cultural  history, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1995. The best analysis for Canada is J. Vance, Death so noble: memory, meaning, and
the First World War, Vancouver: University of British Columbia  Press, 1997.

that is how they

9. P.  Nora (ed.) op.  cit., Vol. II (note 5), p.  ix.

10. A. FrÂemont, `The land’ , in ibid. p. 4.

In the Shadows of Monuments

61

replaced the former towns, villages, and rural communities. A landscape of weeds,
trenches, barbed wire, shell-holes, concrete bunkers, replaced rurality and urbanity.
There were whole districts where no trees remained, no birds sang, and the `[t]he
very topsoil was destroyed’ .1 1

Indeed, the warscapes of the Great War came to be entrenched in the collective
memory through the introspective assessments in literature, art, drama, and film.
The visual renderings of the warscapes were particularly evocative as the genre of
military art shifted from imagery dominated by heroic historical realism to a more
impressionistic gaze concerned with the existential verities of the inhabited place of
war  (see  figure  1).1 2 Not  surprisingly,  some  of  these  artists  were  also  adept  at
painting word-pictures. A Canadian artist, David Milne, reflected on the dystopian
world that shocked the senses:

The earth has  been torn up and torn up and torn up again and from it at every step
rifles and bayonets and twisted iron posts and wire projected. Shell hole merged with or
overlapped shell hole, and everywhere was a litter of shell fragments, cartridges, shell
cases and dud shells big and little, web equipment, helmets, German and British and
even in some places French, water bottles of three nations, boots and uniforms, the
boots often with socks and feet in them. Some shell holes even on top of the ridge had
water in them and, over all, the sweet sickish, but not offensive, smell of death.1 3

This was a landscape in which all the familiar visual prompts of order and human
habitation were eliminated: `I suppose I needn’t mention that there are no fences or
hedges, no trees either . . . not one tree stump or bush, no pile of bricks or stones

11. H. Clout, After the ruins: restoring the countryside  of northern France after the Great War, Exeter:
Exeter University Press, 1996, p.  40.

12. Some of what follows is derived from my work on the art produced for the Canadian War
Memorial Fund  project. This was organised in 1916 by Sir Max Aitken (later Lord Beaverbrook) as
an initiative of his Canadian War Records Office in London which was established to document and
proselytise Canada’s contributions. For more on the CWMF and the work of the independent Mary
Riter Hamilton see my `Warscapes, landscapes, inscapes: France, war, and Canadian national
identity’, in I. Black & R. Butlin (eds) Place, culture,  and identity, St Foy: Laval University Press,
(forthcoming 2001). See also J. Adell, `British First World War art and the Group of Seven: the
relationship between the war art of A.Y. Jackson and Paul Nash and its influence on the art of
Lawren Harris’ , MA Research Essay, Carleton University, Ottawa, 1984; S. Butlin, `Landscape as
memorial: A.Y. Jackson and the landscape of the Western Front, 1917± 1918’, Canadian Military
History, Vol. 5, No.  2, 1996, pp.  62± 70; F.K. Stanzel, ` ª In Flanders fields the poppies blowº : Canada
and the Great War’ , in P. Easingwood, K. Gross & L. Hunter (eds) Difference and community:
Canadian and European cultural  perspectives, Amsterdam: Rodopi,  1994, pp.  213± 226; M. Tippett, Art
at the service of war, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984; M. Tippett, `British and Canadian
art and  the Great War’ , in F.K. Stanzel & M. Loschnigg (eds) Intimate enemies: English and German
literary reactions  to the Great War 1914± 1918, Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 1993; A.E. Davis & S.M.
Mckinnon, No  man’s land:  the battlefield paintings  of Mary Riter Hamilton, 1919± 1922, Winnipeg:
University of Winnipeg, 1992.

13. D.P. Silcox, Painting  place: the life and work of David B. Milne, Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1996, p. 103.

62

Brian S. Osborne

that might indicate that there had once been a farm house, no trace of squares on
the  plain  to  indicate  that  there  had  once  been  fields.’ 14 Only  Mr  Punch  could
manage to render the destruction in terms of British Tommy humour! (see figure 2).
Hugh Clout has produced a more precise, yet no less evocative,  evaluation of the
destruction. 15 The task  of  reconstructing France’s  rÂegions  dÂevastÂees was  immense;
the war had affected some 3.3 million ha throughout two-thirds of the communes,
cantons,  and  arrondissements of  ten  dÂepartements (Pas-de-Calais,  Somme,  Nord,
Oise, Aisne, Ardennes, Marne, Meuse, Meurthe-et-Moselle, Vosges). Prior to the
commencement of  hostilities,  this  region  had  been  home  to  4.8  million people.
Although a  region of  cities, factories, and mines, 96%  of  the  war  zone had been
devoted to farming and forestry, with two-thirds of the area being arable. After four
years of virtually static conflict, the scale of the devastation called for nothing short
of a massive campaign for the revival of a destroyed rural society.16 Again, objective
statistics prompt a vivid picture: 333 million cubic metres of trenches to be filled;
barbed wire covered 375 million square metres of land; over 800,000 dwellings were
destroyed  or  damaged,  as  were  17,466  schools,  mairies,  and  churches;  1,954
settlements  were  either  obliterated  or  badly  damaged.  The  population  of  the
immediate war zone had decreased by 57%, while that of the ten dÂepartements had
fallen by 44% to 3.6 million.

This was the world that had prompted Varley to comment on the consequences of

the destruction of other people’s lived-in worlds:

Some day the people will return to their village which is not; they will look for their
little church which is not; and they will go to the cemetery and look for their own dear
dead, and even they are notÐ
in a land pounded and churned and poisoned, that was
once fertile and rich with golden grain and good things for the welfare of the race.1 7

And return they did. George Clausen’s Returning to the reconquered land encapsulates
the savage  despair accompanied by stolid determination of those reoccupying the
rÂegions  dÂevastÂees after  the  war.  Similarly,  Mary  Riter  Hamilton,  a  war  artist  who
painted during the immediate aftermath of the conflict, recorded the beginnings of
the post-war reconstruction and the establishment of rural society. She captured the
first  phases  of  the  recovery  and  the  beginning of  new  life  in  such works  as  First
celebration at Zillebeke after the war, The first boat to arrive at Arras after the Armistice,
and The new home.18

14. Ibid., p.  112.

15. Clout, op. cit. (note 11). See also his `La reconstruction de la campagne au nord de la France,
1918± 1930’, Herodote, 1994, pp. 74± 75, 111± 126; `Rural revival in the Pas-de-Calais after the Great War’ ,
in J.-R. Pitte (ed.) Geographie historique et culturelle de l’Europe, Paris: Presses de l’Universite de
Paris± Sorbonne, 1995; `Restoring the ruins: the social context of reconstruction in the countryside of
northern France in the aftermath of the Great War’ , Landscape Research, Vol. 21, No. 3, 1996, pp. 213± 230.

16. The following account of reconstruction is derived from Clout, op. cit. (note 11).

17. C. Varley, F.H. Varley, a centennial  exhibition, Ottawa: National Museums of Canada, 1981, p.  42.

18. Davis & Mckinnon, op. cit. (note 12), pp.  22± 24.

In the Shadows of Monuments

63

Figure 1. F. H. Varley, For What?, Oil on canvas, 1918, 148 ´ 184 cm, By permission of Canadian

War Museum, Ottawa.

Figure  2. `The Optimist’  Supplement to Punch, 24th November,  1920.

Indeed, the rebuilding had not waited upon the Armistice of 1918. It went ahead
from the very commencement of hostilities and continued whenever and wherever
possible throughout the war. Perhaps the most enduring image is that of harvesters
wearing gas-masks and being subject to gunfire! Immediately the guns had stopped
firing and the armies had withdrawn from the trenches, nature began to recapture
the land, waters, and skies. So did the displaced people. They too were agents of
recovery as they attempted to restore their lands and communities to their pre-war
form and their  lives  to  the  routine of  their rural lives.  Soon after Armistice Day,
1919,  the  military  columns  leaving  the  former  combat  zone  must  have  passed
clutches of civilians moving in the opposite direction. For the jubilant soldiers, their

64

Brian S. Osborne

Figure  3.  `Returning  Exiles,  devastated  areas,  Northern  France’   From  a  British  League

publication.

war  was  over  and  they  were  returning  home.  For  the  civilians,  they  too  were
returning home, but their struggle was just beginning (see figure 3).

From the first days of the war, government recognised it would have a role to play
in  the  tremendous task  of  reconstruction, culminating  in  the  dommages  de  guerre
legislation of 17 April 1919.19 While towns and cities received primary attention,
post-war rural reconstruction was soon recognised as an opportunity to redress such
deficiencies in rural living conditions as quality of housing, hygiene, water supply,
the  structure of  settlements, and the  remembrement of  dispersed landholdings. Of
some  significance to  the  matter  of  the  aesthetics  of  the  reconstruction, issues of
architectural  style  and  building  matters  were  not  neglected.  While  modernists
favoured  new  styles  and  materials,  tradition  prevailed  and  the  views  of  those
favouring local continuities persisted. For Paul LÂeon, `housing, like flora or fauna,
is  a  geographical  element  that  is  linked  closely  to  the  nature  of  the  terrain,  to
climatic conditions, to landownership, and to the nature of farming’ ; LÂeandre Vaillat
argued for housing and communities that were `adapted to climate, customs, local
resources and landscape’   and he  proposed the  telling question, `It  already exists:
why  invent  another?’ 20 From  the  perspective  of  many  dwellers  of  the  rÂegions
dÂevastÂees, the restoration of the familiar material world, even it was an old one, was
the prime requisite for a  return to  normalcy. As with  architecture and settlement
form, so with custom, the pre-eminent desire was to restore the past.

By 1922, much progress had been made.21The population of the war zone had been
restored to 88.6% of pre-war levels. Some 2.7 million ha of land had been put back
into production. The remaining black spot was in the area of rebuilding; by 1922,

19. Clout, op. cit. (note 11), pp.  184± 201.

20. Quoted in Clout, op.  cit. (note 11), pp.  193± 194.

21. During these early years, volunteer organisations such as British and American Quaker groups
and the ComitÂe AmÂericaine pour les RÂegions DÂevastÂees (CARD), a women’s volunteer group, were
effective in providing aid to the population  and restoring some of the communities until they
withdrew in 1924. This is the period in which the British League functioned.

In the Shadows of Monuments

65

reconstruction had been completed in only 737 of the 2,874 damaged settlements,
and only 5,524  houses had been rebuilt. Over 2 million of the sinistrÂes (displaced
people) continued to be housed in temporary or repaired shelter. Those who had
returned to their devastated farms and fields commenced the arduous and hazardous
task of cultivating the land and the elimination of signs of war from the landscape.
Ironically, their contribution to the memorialisation of war was to be a tribute to the
tenacity of the mundane world of community, production, and ties to place.

To be sure, the restored landscape would be punctuated by grand, national and
regional monuments to the dead, and every city,  town, and village  had their own
tribute  to  their  own  heroes.22 But  the  greatest  monument  was  the  people’s
reassertion of a living, rural landscape and community. Both war memorials and the
restored  landscape  were  visual  prompts  to  post-war  attitudes.  War  monuments
focused the  commemoration of  wartime martial heroism and sacrifice on precise
points  in  the  landscape. The  restored countryside  became  a  diffused panoramic
statement  of  the  reassertion of  civil  order  and  normality  by  the  replacement  of
warscapes  by  the  vernacular  artefacts  of  domesticity  and  communityÐ
and  the
obliteration of the memory of war.

The British League
This  was  the  context  in  which  the  British League  for  the  Reconstruction of  the
Devastated  Areas  of  France  functioned.23 It  was  a  post-Great-War  initiative  of
commemoration that focused not on the glorification of victory but on reconstitut-
ing a society. Moreover, the British League transcended what Mosse has called the
contemporary `civic religion of nationalism’  so evident in so many of the post-war
commemorative  initiatives.24 Rather,  it  was  an  exercise  in  extra-national  civic
responsibility Ð
if not the more politically contentious internationalist ideology that
was so prevalent among more radical reactions to the Great War.25

The Idea: a `debt of honour’
In 1919, M. Marcel Braibant, Conseiller General of the Ardennes, visited London
to co-ordinate individual efforts `to help devastated France’ .26 Founded under the
terms  of  the War  Charities  Act  of  1916,  the  ensuing promotional  literature  and

22. D.J.  Sherman, op.  cit. (note 2).

23. In the following discussion of the activities of the British League, reference will be made to some
fifty or more `pairings’ . For the purposes of this paper, particular reference will be made to a detailed
case study of one `adoption’ : Bexhill, East Sussex, and Bayencourt, Somme,  derived from the records
of the Town Clerk of Bexhill Borough, `Adoption  by the town of the village of Bayencourt, Somme’ ,
East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

24. Mosse, op. cit. (note 8),  p. 101.

25. For more on the currents of civic responsibility and moral obligation  see King, op.  cit. (note 2),
pp.  194± 215.

26. Imperial War Museum, British League Pamphlet,  ca 1920.

66

Brian S. Osborne

speeches made clear the British League’s central premise: `The French devastated
areas were devastated in the defence of Britain as well as of France’ , and `English
Towns saved from destruction themselves, have an obligation of honour to assist the
French War areas.’ 27 As one `notable civic personage’  put it, it was a matter of British
`justice’ , a `sense of fair play’ , a `debt of honour’  that had to be paid: `Those areas
suffered the  long-drawn-out agonies  of  the  war  so that  our cities,  villages,  fields,
should be safe and untouched. If the French had not been content to undergo that
devastation, our country would have been over-run.’ 28 It was also recognised that
not all the damage  could be  attributed to `the  malice of the enemy’ , but resulted
from French and British activities, albeit `with a defensive purpose’ . Nevertheless,
the point was made that, `It was the shells of the Alliance that  destroyed many  a
French villageÐ
a harsh need of war, the stern fulfilment of which saved areas in
England from being devastated.’

The British League was formally inaugurated at London’s Mansion House on 30
June 1920  (see figure 4).29 The  speakers give  voice  to  the  emotions and reasons
underpinning the British League. The Lady Mayoress declared that, `sentiment was a
very beautiful thing’  but she liked `the practical side’  of the British League, arguing
that  she  had  `a  high  opinion  of  the  French  people,  whose  industry  she  greatly
admired’ . Lady Bathurst continued the refrain, referring to the `terrible scenes of
devastation in some of the battle areas . . . as if some great cataclysm of nature had
overwhelmed the land’ , asking her audience to imagine being driven from their homes
and to return to find them in ruins, and closed with the injunction that as the people of
England had suffered so little `they must do something to help those Allies who had
suffered so much’ . Lord Denbigh, President of the Association of Great Britain and
France, reported on his recent visit to France when, for four days, he had not seen `a
single town or village which was not either badly damaged or had hardly a single
habitable house’  and that `[s]ome villages had totally disappeared’  (see figure 5). But
in advocating aid, Lord Durham knew he had to overcome the historical antipathies
held by `cantankerous people’   who were `far  too  prone to  criticize a  man  simply
because he was a foreigner’ . And then there was the larger issue of geopolitics, foreign
policy, and an exalted mission of international moral responsibility:

The two countries ha[ve] to live side by side as friends in the future. We ha[ve] to put
aside niggling jealousies and realize that in Eastern Europe there [are] vast populations
which [are] behind us in civilization. France and the British Isles ha[ve] to stand
together as a great western bulwark in the cause of peace and civilization. Nothing
[will] do more to promote good feeling between the two countries and show the French

27. Ibid.

28. Ibid.

29. The Times, 1 July 1920. Present were the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress, Lord and Lady
Bathurst, Lord Denbigh,  Lord Burnham,  Lady Dundas, the Lord Mayor of Sheffield, and mayors of
other metropolitan boroughs  and provincial cities. A French delegation representing the Association
of France and  Great Britain included M. Crozier, M. de Bretteville, M. Marcel Braibant,  and M.
Henri Lamba.

In the Shadows of Monuments

67

Figure 4. Brochure, `British League of Help’ .

people that we really [appreciate] what they had been through than the British League
of Help. [Cheers.]

Moreover, such initiatives could not be  left  to  the `cold formality’   of `elderly and
weary’   bureaucrats  and  politicians `who  saw  men  and  manners  from  the  closed
windows of motor-cars and estimated human relations from a map and statistics’
and who lacked the `living touch’ . The rest of the assembled dignitaries echoed these
sentiments  enthusiastically.30 Duty,  charity,  and  idealism  were  unabashedly
advanced as the rationale for this remarkable venture.

The Organisation: `God parents’  and `God children’
Transcending national self-interest and local concerns, therefore, the British League
was  a  unique post-war  exercise that  attempted  to  sustain  the  wartime  bonds  by
affording practical assistance to particular French cities, towns, and villages.3 1 The

30. Another initiative was to seek ten purchasers of bronze replicas of a statue by Michel de
Tarnowsky, `The triumph of humanity’ . It represented the Spirit of Progress emerging out of a
battlefield scene `which conveys the impression of the desolate wilderness into which part of France
was converted’.

31. A similar venture was the `Garden League for Devastated France’ , which was also concerned with
nurturing the entente  cordiale. Founded in 1920 to assist `the repatriated peasants in Northern
France’ , by 1925 the Garden League had donated over 1,200 garden tools, large quantities of
vegetable seeds, medicinal and other plants, and over 1,000 fruit trees. They also encouraged the
development of school-gardens to `establish a feeling of love for Great Britain in the youth of France’ ,
The Times, 16 February 1925.

68

Brian S. Osborne

Figure 5. Map of the Devastated Areas of France. From a British League publication.

intention was not to raise funds to rebuild `shattered French towns’ ; that was to be
achieved by reparations imposed upon Germany. Rather, British cities and towns
were  invited  to  `adopt’   some  French  centre  in  a  `god  parent’   and  `god  child’
relationship.3 2

An executive committee was formed from three Anglo-French organisations: the
Anglo-French  Society;  the  Association  of  Great  Britain  and  France;  the  entente
cordiale.  A  central  committee,  based  in  London’s  Scala  House,  organised `adop-
tions’  of French communities by British and colonial cities, towns, and villages. A

32. Imperial War Museum, British League Pamphlet,  ca 1920.

In the Shadows of Monuments

69

liaison office was established to assist local committees in providing assistance such
as temporary shelter, clothing, money, food, seeds, agricultural equipment. Goods
were  to  be  conveyed  by  the  Walford  LinesÐ
a  shipping  company  offering
preferential rates to the British League.

Precise  instructions were  given  on  the  best  course  of  action  for  initiating  the
twinning  process. Ideally,  the  project  should be  led  by  the  local  mayor.  Next,  a
committee should be struck to organise a public meeting and, if special assistance
was needed `to stimulate popular sympathy’ , the central committee would arrange
for the visit of `a  competent lecturer, who, with the aid of  photographic slides or
cinematograph films, will give a convincing demonstration of the state of ruin and
of desolation it is the League’s object to remedy’ .33 The central committee would
also assist in finding a twin town in `a particular French war area’  where the host
community had left `many of its gallant sons dead on the field of action’ .3 4 Finally,
considerable emphasis was placed upon exchange visits between the civic heads of
the twinned communities, visa and transport facilities being arranged by the French
Embassy and the  British  League. Thus, in  September 1921,  a  party  of  fifty  lord
mayors, provosts, and mayors from England, Scotland, and Wales was escorted to
France by the British League in an attempt to boost the adoption process.35 Such
delegations had often returned:

imbued with greater enthusiasm to help the stricken peoples. They are now in a
position to bear witness to the wonderful way in which the renewed inhabitants are
striving against terrible odds to begin life over again,  insisting on living in the ruins, in
spite of inadequate shelter.3 6

Finding a Partner: `establishing a personal  bond’
The British League focused these efforts on the seven departÂements most affected by
the  war:  Pas  de  Calais;  Somme; Oise; Nord; Aisne; Ardennes; Meuse.37 By  July
1922,  seventy-eight  British  and  colonial  communities  had  adopted  ninety-nine
French  communities  (see  figures  6,  7).38 Manchester  made  a  commitment  to

33. British League Pamphlet, `For France; sympathy  and assistance; Work of the British League; A
Debt of Honour’ , East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

34. As the first report of the British League noted, `[a]doptions of towns and villages are made, as a
rule by British towns whose local battalions were associated with them during the War, for where they
fought,  they died, and their graves . . . are carefully tended by French peasants to-day’. See Imperial
War Museum, British League Pamphlet,  ca 1920.

35. The Times, 12 September 1921.

36. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, Scriven to the Mayor of Bexhill,  21 September 1920.

37. An interesting Imperial War Museum initiative proposed by one, Charles Fuller, on 20 April 1921
suggested the production of a Roll of Honour of all towns and villages adopted by the British League.
Plaques were to display pictures as a photographic  record of `British towns which have adopted
French towns and villages’. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

38. The Times, 14 July 1922. French communities outside the combat zone that had  not been affected
by  the war adopted a hundred more.

70

Brian S. Osborne

Figure 6. The British `Parent’ Communities.

Figure 7. The French `Daughter’  Communities.

raising £50,000 for the rebuilding of MeziÁeres; Newcastle-on-Tyne raised £20,000
for the rehabilitation of Arras; Sheffield adopted Bapaume, Serre, Puisieux (all in
Pas de Calais); Winchester adopted Auchonvilliers, Beaumont-Hamel, Englebelmer
(all in Somme); the City of London adopted Verdun (see figure 8).39 Bexhill, East
Sussex, adopted Bayencourt, a small village in the Somme.

39. British League, op.  cit. (note 33). It should be noted that four `colonial’  places participated in the
British League: Montreal, Melbourne, Sydney, Mauritius.

In the Shadows of Monuments

71

Figure 8. `London  adopts Verdun’   Punch,  22nd December 1920.

In all of these pairings, the emotive human connectionÐ

even moral blackmailÐ

was to the fore. Thus, on 15 September 1920, the Earl of Derby, writing from the
British Embassy in Paris, pressed the Mayor of Bexhill to take some action `before
the winter is upon us’ :

The inhabitants of many of the devastated towns are now waiting with an almost
pathetic expectancy the response of the appeal made by the League, and it would be a
reflection upon the honour of the British nation if disappointment were added to the
already heavy burden borne by these heroic people, over whose homeland the full tide
of war has swept and in whose keeping we have left the bodies of our gallant dead.4 0

Within a  week, the  British League  wrote again,  urging the  mayor  to  undertake a
visit  to  the  devastated  regions.  But  the  good  mayor  and  council  of  Bexhill
continued to temporise on the matter, advancing a long list of rationalisations for

40. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

72

Brian S. Osborne

not joining the League: the approach of the end of the mayor’s term; the poverty
of  the  community; the `prior claim’   of  funding for the  local hospital. The British
League  replied  with  a  salvo  of  names  of  British  communities  who  had  already
established  linksÐ Sandwich,  Evesham,  Cirencester,  Llandudno,  LeominsterÐ
and asked for `the name of some battalion associated with Bexhill’  to identify `the
particulars of a village  associated with that Battalion’ .41 Faced with this relentless
pressure, in December 1920,  Bexhill finally  committed itself to `accept  responsi-
bility’   for  the  village  of  Bayencourt.4 2 The  British  League  was  relieved:

We  do  not  expect  much from  any  town,  however  large  or however small,  but  we do
hope that  in  the  course of  time nearly  every  town  in  Great  Britain will help  the
Devastated Areas  of  France in  some  way,  and  Bexhill  is  already  showing  an  excellent
example  to  more  wealthy  towns  on  the  South  Coast  of  England.4 3

The  1920  Christmas Day  edition of  the  Bexhill  Chronicle reported on the  town’s
`golden  opportunity  of  helping  cement  Anglo-French  friendship’   by  extending
`the  hand  of  comradeship, sympathy  and  practical  help  to  her  French sisters, in
the hour of their extremity’ .44 Located 30 km from Arras, Bayencourt was a small
hamlet of  120  inhabitants, fewer than 80  of whom had  returned after the war. It
was  said to be `in  the  very  heart of  the  war  zone’ ,  a  term that  would conjure up
in the minds of  ex-servicemen `visions of  wrecked homesteads, devastated  farms,
shell-pitted  cornfields,  and  empty  pasture  land’ .  Further,  some  thirty  local
Sussex soldiers were buried in  the  cemetery.  On  28  January  1921,  Mayor James
Gibb  wrote  to  the  Mayor  of  Bayencourt,  extending  `cordial  greetings  to  the
inhabitants  of  your  village’   and  advising  him  that  `we  regard  it  as  a  privilege  to
have  been  selected  to  take  some  special  interest  in  the  welfare  of  your
people’.45

Organising  the Aid: `what  will  you  do  for  France?’
Despite the rhetoric, in many communities that had been committed to assist the
recovery  of  a  French  community,  the  entreaties  of  the  British  League  fell  upon
somewhat  jaded,  even  unsympathetic,  ears.  There  were  so  many  meritorious
causes  crying  out  for  public  support.  Even  if  moved  to  participate,  how  should
the  monies be  raised, and,  once raised, what  would be an  appropriate  contribu-
tion  to  meet  the  particular  needs  of  the  devastated  communities? Nevertheless,

41. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, Gilmer to Mayor James Gibb, 18 November 1920.

42. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, Bexhill Town Clerk to British League, 8 December 1920.

43. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, Gilmer to Bexhill Town Clerk, 9 December 1920.

44. Bexhill Chronicle, 25 December 1920.

45. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

In the Shadows of Monuments

73

by  the  close  of  1921,  some  £77,135  had  been  raised  by  public  subscription in
forty-two  British  and  colonial `god-parent’   communitiesÐ Newcastle  and  Maur-
itius  alone  contributing  £20,000  and  £12,500,  respectively.  Again,  Bexhill’s
experience serves as  an  exemplar of  the  British League’s  strategies.

Soon  after  the  declaration  of  support  for  Bayencourt,  Bexhill  Council  had
formed a committee charged with the responsibility of raising money on behalf of
`Our  ProtegÂe’ .46 Faced  with  an  initial  lack  of  local  interest,  the  mayoress,  Mrs
James  Gibb,  moved  into  action.47 She  sponsored  a  predictable  set  of  money-
raising  strategies:  a  mile  of  pennies;  a  children’s  fancy-dress  dance;  a  tennis
tournament;  lantern  slides  of  Bayencourt;  raffles;  tombolas;  golf  parties; `Books
of  Seals,  similar  to  those  in  use  for  St  Dunstan’s’ ;  a  list  of  clergyÐ
`of  all
Denominations’ Ð

to  be  approached.48

Of  course,  a  specially  produced  pamphlet  entitled,  `Our  corner  of  France’ ,

pulled out  all  the  patriotic  and emotional stops in  support of  Bayencourt:

so  cruelly interrupted. The  peasants  driven  into  the  towns are  now
rank

France drenched in  blood,  and devastated  beyond  all  conception by  a  foe,  that  made
war  upon  civilians  as  well  as  soldiers,  is  struggling  to  resume  its  peaceful
occupationsÐ
finding their  way  back to  the  places  where  their  villages  once stood.  RuinsÐ
grassÐ
alone  await  them. Still  it  was  once their  home,
and  with  their  wives  and  little children they  are  struggling  to  begin  life  again  in  the
place  they  love  so  well.  Living  in  hutsÐ without comforts  or  conveniencesÐ
exposed
to  every  kind  of  hardshipÐ
bravely  facing  the  weary  task  that  lies  before  them.4 9

looking  in  anguish  at  their  ruined homesteads,  they  are

fields ploughed  with  shellsÐ

With  the  problem defined, the  appeal  turned to  the  good people of  Bexhill:

our  children are  being  reared  in  comfortÐ

We  want  to help  them.  Our  homes  were  sparedÐ our  fields  will  soon  be  rich  in
cropsÐ
yes,  even in  luxury,  and  Bexhill,  in
gratitude,  has  promised  to  take  one  little spot  in  France,  named Bayencourt, beneath
its  care.  Our Sussex  regiments  know  it  well,  for  they  were  encamped near  there,  and
to  make  this  village  once more  a  home  is  to  be  our  pride.  Bexhill  never  fails  to  help,
when  help  is  sorely  needed, and  with  perfect  confidence we  ask  you  to  show  the  same
generous  spirit  that  earned the  town  so  good  a  name  in  days  now  happily  gone  by.

One, Kate  Rawlins,  penned a  stirring multi-versed poem, `What  will  you  do  for
France?’ , the first verse of which queried,

46. Bexhill Chronicle, 15 January 1921.

47. Bexhill Chronicle, 19 February 1921.

48. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

49. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26.

74

Brian S. Osborne

The flow’rs of France have perish’d
Neath war’s destroying fire;
The shrines a nation cherish’d
Are trampled in the mire.
England, your shrines stand ever
Safe from the foeman’s lance.
Saved by her strong endeavourÐ
What will you do for France?

With the flow of funds stimulated by such emotive appeals, attention was directed
to  the  special needs of  the  adopted  communities.50 According to  British  League
sources, Bayencourt’s  principal need was  for agricultural implements.51 Informa-
tion  was  also  forthcoming  directly  from  France.  Early  in  1921,  the  mayor  of
Bayencourt wrote  to  the  Mayor  of  Bexhill.5 2 First,  attention  was  directed to  the
bonding ritual, with emotive references to  past  sacrifices: `We have  witnessed the
bravery of British troops & their contempt for danger. We have seen them shed their
blood &  defy death  &  we  shall never  forget  that  it  was  done in defence of  right,
liberty & to save us from slavery.’  But then the good mayor turned to more practical
matters:  `May  I  be  allowed  to  say  that  we  are  especially  in  need  of  clothes  &
agricultural implements; we would be particularly grateful for a thrashing machine
which could be used in turn by the inhabitants.’ 53 On 15 March 1921, another letter
from  Bayencourt’s  mayor  provided  an  informal  census  and  measure  of  the  aid
needed:

any garment they may like to send will be most welcome & appreciated . . . we would
be very thankful for cotton material which could be used for making sheets (the latter
being totally lacking) and even sheets in a slightly worn-out condition would give great
pleasure. Shoes are also very badly needed & old children’s coats would add greatly to
the comfort of our children who are going to school.5 4

50. A Colonel Powney had traversed north-eastern France on behalf of the League and had reported
on the extent of the devastated areas and the area’s immediate needs: the battlefield area extended
over 9.8 million acres; 4,000 towns and villages,  20,500 factories, and 75% of the mines were
destroyed; 50% of the male population  between the ages of 19 and 32 was killed.

51. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, J. Scriven, British League for Help, 13 October 1920.

52. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, 7 February 1921.

53. On being requested to provide photographs  of Bayencourt, the mayor repliedÐ perhaps
somewhat shamefacedlyÐ
knowledge none have been taken, either before or after the war.’

`I am sorry to say I am unable to send you photos of our village . . . to my

54. The good mayor also provided an informal census of dependants: forty-five women; ten babies
under two years of age; twenty children five to seven years old; nineteen children seven to thirteen
years old; and thirteen children over fourteen years old.

In the Shadows of Monuments

75

While the dire need of the community was to the fore in all of this, it was not allowed
to  detract from a  sensitivity to  the  children’s reaction to  foreign aid. Rather than
providing British clothing, it was recommended that money be sent out to allow the
purchase of suitable clothing as, `French children are dressed quite differently from
our own, and they would probably be chaffed a good deal if what they wore did not
coincide with the prevailing fashion in Bayencourt.’ 5 5

The first allocation of aid was on its way to Bayencourt by March 1921.  Mayor
Gibbs sent Fr 2,810 to the local curÂe as `the first practical evidence of the concern
and  interest  of  my  people  in  the  people  of  Bayencourt’ .56 But  there  were
restrictions:

It is our wish that the help now sent may be applied to the material and secular needs
of the people of Bayencourt rather than for spiritual and church purposes. We hope at
some later date to make you some special grant for purposes more particularly
associated with your charge.

Another Fr 2,820  were sent to the Mayor of Bayencourt to be dispensed by him.
By  May  1921,  the  Bexhill  committee had  raised over  £445.  At  this  point,  the
mayor declared that `they had enough’ , that the British League initiative had been
`a  splendid  success’ ,  and  closed  the  fund.57 Reverend  E.  Mortlack,  the  church
representative on the committee advocated that any surplus monies be expended on
`what  be  nearest  and  dearest  to  the  hearts  of  the  people’ .  To  determine  that
benevolent purpose, the mayor and a delegation of nine members of the community
visited Bayencourt. This proved  to  be  a  momentous occasion with  long-standing
implications.58 The Bexhill group was  addressed by Bayencourt’s school-children
who declared that `we will never forgive Germany. . . . With you, we will ever curse
the race that has inculcated a doctrine of violence and falsehood.’  The committee
also  toured  the  surrounding  countryside  and  reported  on  the  progress  of
`reconstitution and reconstruction’ : the `charming’  and `industrious’  people `have
cleared  their  fields  from  the  debris  of  war,  and  already  the  whole  area  is  under
cultivation, and yielding what promises to be a very fine harvest’ .

On  their  return,  the  delegation  recommended  to  the  `Final  Meeting  of  the
Bayencourt Fund Committee’  how best to spend the monies raised.59 Noting that
this drought-prone district depended on ponds, wells, and horse troughs that  had
been destroyed in the war, it was concluded that Bexhill should direct its attention
to improving the village’s water supply. Accordingly, it was decided to erect a `wind

55. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, Carter to Mayor Bowry,  21 March 1921.

56. East Sussex Record Office, DR/B39/26, letters from Mayor of Bexhill to the maire and curÂe of
Bayencourt, 21 March 1921.

57. Bexhill Chronicle, 21 May 1921.

58. Bexhill Chronicle, 18 June 1921.

59. Bexhill Chronicle, 9 July 1921

76

Brian S. Osborne

pump’   over  the  village  well  which  would  draw  a  constant  supply  of  water  to  be
distributed throughout the village by pipes. It was estimated that the total  cost of
such a project would be £600, with Bexhill’s £400 being topped up by £200 from
the  French government. Not  only  would this  constitute `an  important feature of
village life’ , it would also be `a permanent monument to Bexhill’ .

Closure  and Aftermath: `a real sound pukka job’
For  many  of  the  `paired’   communities,  the  fulfilment  of  the  promised  financial
commitment marked the end of their connection. Thus, in October 1924, somewhat
regretfully, London’s committee wound up its programme of aid for its godchild,
Verdun.60 The reasons were clear; the `old appeal’  had petered out and the times
were `inopportune for making a further appeal’ . But the committee looked back on
its  accomplishments with some pride; Verdun had been provided with substantial
public works in the form of a boulevard and a waterworks, both of which were said
to be of `substantial help to the amenities of the town’ ; and it was hoped that `the
kindly feelings which had been established between the City of London and Verdun
would remain’ . Too often, however, no official trace remains of the effort or of the
intended bonding of the communities. But, in some cases, the connection evolved
into something more than the transfer of funds and the mailing of bales of clothing.
Certainly, this was true of the Bexhill-Bayencourt link.

Early in 1923,  an article entitled, `Remember our protegÂe’  suggested naming a
Bexhill street after Bayencourt, the organisation of an exchange of parties of school-
children,  and  a  display  of  photographs  of  the  church  and  street  scenes  in
Bayencourt. 61 A year later, Bexhill was reminded of its `outstanding obligation’  to
`our adopted daughter . . . located in that storied tract of land that Rupert Brooke
has  fitly  claimed to  be ª forever Englandº ’ .6 2 Simply  put,  the  completion of  the
construction of the `aerometer and a water column’  faced a shortfall of some £160
(FF 12,000). While no request had been received from Bayencourt, it was expected
that `all loyal Bexhillians will consider it a privilege to carry the work through in its
entirety’ .  Again,  recourse  was  had  to  all  the  well-worn  patriotic  and  emotional
prompts:

Other Bexhillians, remembering those who died, took over the shattered ruins and the
poor withered fields as a sacred trust, proudly adopting the little French village as a
daughter of the noble English town, that the heroism of two great nations might be
commemorated and that something might be done to lighten the heavy load of the
innocent peasants of Bayencourt who had suffered in incredible ways.

The article went on to argue that past actions had already assured that `the ª Entente
Cordialeº  is cemented for ever as far as Bayencourt is concerned’ , and that if only

60. The Times, 9 October 1924.

61. Bexhill Chronicle, 27 January 1923.

62. Bexhill Chronicle, 26 April 1924.

In the Shadows of Monuments

77

there  were  other  such `unions  of  heart’   between  British  and  French  towns  and
villages then the current `European tangle’  might be resolved.

On  1  June  1924,  Bayencourt  celebrated  a  double  commemoration  to  which
Bexhill’s  mayor,  E.W.  Bowry,  and  a  delegation  of  four  other  worthies  had  been
invited. On that day, Bexhill’s gift of a village water-system was inaugurated, and a
monument unveiled that had been `erected at the expense of the Commune to the
memory  of  our  French  dead’ .63 The  event  received  full  coverage  in  Bexhill’s
newspaper under the headline, `Cementing the entente’ .64

The symbolism of the event was played to the hilt. The lion’s share of the final cost
of  FF  53,000  for  the  aerometer,  water  column, and  six  pumps  and  three  cattle
troughs had been provided by the citizens of Bexhill (FF 22,000), the balance being
divided  between  the  French  government  (FF  19,000)  and  the  citizens  of
Bayencourt  (FF  12,000). The  Mayor  of  Bexhill  presented  a  cheque  for  the  last
instalment, a brass plaque, with the inscription `Gift from the Town of Bexhill’ , was
unveiled,  a  band  struck  up  `God  Save  the  King’   and  `La  Marseillaise’ ,  and  the
Union Flag and the Tricoleur were paraded through the streets by an escort of poilus
and costumed children (see figure 9). In a self-conscious expression of the prosaic

Figure 9. The public celebration at B ayencourt.

63. East Sussex Record Office, Louis Danicourt, President of the Association, Mayor of Bayencourt,
Syndicate for the Water Supply,  to Mayor of Bexhill,  24 March 1924.

64. Bexhill Chronicle, 7 June 1924.

78

Brian S. Osborne

and the mythic, a photograph was taken with the new water system over-shadowing
the village’s new memorial to its dead.

Commenting on the water system, Bexhill’s Mayor Bowry noted, `The pressure is
powerful and entirely satisfactory. I can truthfully say that it is a real sound pukka
job.’  The same could have been said of Bexhill’s approach to its part in the British
League’s  original  mission: it  had  been `entirely  satisfactory’   and  a  `a  real  sound
pukka job.’

Conclusion
Like other British, French, and American charity  initiatives,65 the British League
functioned in the first years of the reconstitution of the rÂegions dÂevastÂees and most of
its activities had run down by the mid-1920s. Indeed, by 1931, much progress had
been made. Some 305.3  million cubic metres of  trenches had  been filled;  345.9
million square metres of barbed wire and 21.2 million tonnes of shells removed; 3.4
million hectares of land cleared; 834,516 dwellings and farm buildings and 20,563
public buildings had been repaired or reconstructed; 61,382 km of roads had been
repaired; 6.5 million people had picked up their former lives in the ten dÂepartements.
The  reconstitution  of  the  rÂegions  dÂevastÂees was  virtually  complete.  All  but  188
villages had been reconstructed; the number of buildings was only 3.7% below pre-
war  levels;  the  population  was  only  0.5%  lower  than  1911  levels.  And  with  the
reconstruction, the landscape of war was erased and replaced by the landscape of
rural production. By 1930, Vera Brittain commented on the transformation:

Nature herself conspires with time to cheat our recollections; grass has grown over the
shell holes at Ypres, and the cultivated meadows of industrious peasants have replaced
the hut-scarred fields of Etaples and Camiers where once I nursed the wounded in the
great retreat of 1918.6 6

As Clout puts it, the construction of a visible pays rouge of recovery contrasted with
the fenced-off `red zones’  of unreclaimable lands:

In the early 1930s the impact of the Great War remained visible in many landscapes of
the northern departments, but more in terms of the red tiles and new bricks of
reconstructed dwellings, of the new woodlands planted in the unreclaimable `red zone’
around Verdun, and of the bright stones on war memorials and national cemeteries,
than in the direct material manifestations of combat.6 7

While  the  optimistic  rhetoric  of  the  British  League  much  exceeded  the  actual
outcome, it  too had  played  a  role  in  this  remarkable process of  recovery.  Of  the

65. Clout, op. cit. (note 11), pp.  71± 84.

66. Quoted in Mosse, op. cit. (note 8), p. 112.

67. Clout, op. cit. (note 11), p.  228.

In the Shadows of Monuments

79

hundred or so communities throughout the rÂegions dÂevastÂees of France aided by the
British  League,  some  projects  failed,  others  were  mere  modest  gestures,  while
others  were  ambitious  exercises  in  philanthropy  and  material  aid.  And  many
communities did not participate.68

At the very outset, the British League’s Lord Denbigh had referred to antipathies
to `foreigners’  and niggling jealousies between Britain and France.69 In Lewes, the
mooting of a British League connection prompted much discussion, it being noted
that `on the whole, opinion seems to incline to the view that Lewes has quite enough
on  hand  at  the  moment’ ,  reference being  made to  ongoing  support of `Save  the
Children  Fund’ ,  contributions to  the  Red  Cross  aid  project,  and  the  local  war
memorial.7 0 Bradford’s  proposal  to  lend  £5,000  to  Bailleul  and  Nieppe  was
approved 55 to 13 after the Socialists had moved an amendment that funds should
be directed to `the devastation in Ireland’ .71

Others were opposed because of matters of diplomacy. Thus, Alderman George
Holman, while not wanting `to wade into the deep waters of international relations’ ,
nevertheless referred to the `the delicate situation between ourselves and our French
Allies’ , and argued `to  delay the suggestion for a time until the Entente is a  little
stronger  again’ .  Similarly,  internal  correspondence  between  Earl  Curzon  of
Keddleston at the Foreign Office in Whitehall and the British Ambassador in Paris,
the Lord Hardinge of Penshurst, renders similar unease about, if not hostility to, the
British League. In a draft memorandum, Curzon declared:

I am all against this `Adoption’  business on the ground that `charity should begin at
home’  and that I do not believe the French towns, which are adopted, are in the least
grateful for it. Probably in some cases the local authorities take all the credit to
themselves and the townspeople themselves do not even know that help is being sent to
them by some English town.7 2

While  this  testy  response  was  undoubtedly  an  overstatement,  it  does  serve  to
demonstrate the gap between the high principled rhetoric of the supporters of the
British League and some of its opponents.

In the final analysis, such philanthropic initiatives as the British League, however
well intentioned they may have been, were sidelined to the realm of grand idealistic

68. My ongoing  research into the British League is particularly interested in determining the activities
of the various paired communitiesÐ
as well as those who rejected the idea. Also, it will be interesting
to determine whether any of the communities involved maintained their connections after the British
League was discontinued. Indeed, if they are at all part of the collective memory of the British and
French communities involved.

69. The Times, 1 July 1920.

70. Sussex County  Herald, Lewes Edition, 21 August 1920.

71. The Times, 15 June 1921.

72. PRO, Foreign Office, 371/6999, `Request for ª adoptionº  of French village’.

80

Brian S. Osborne

Figure  10  The  watersystem  and  war  memorial.  Monuments  to  war  and  peace,  Bayencourt,

June 2000.

gestures as the full weight of government programmes of reconstruction swung into
action. Nevertheless, the British League for the Reconstruction of the Devastated
Areas of France was diagnostic of a particular juncture in British-French relations.
For  its  advocates,  the  intention  was  to  nurture the  spirit  of  the  wartime  entente
cordiale and  to  demonstrate  compassion  for  those  in  France  who  had  suffered.
Money, material goods, visits by delegations of politicians and school-children were
all intended to further these philanthropic ends.73

The final legacy of the British League is an array of gestures, material projects,
and  commemorative  plaques  scattered  across  the  terrain  of  the  former  rÂegions
dÂevastÂees of the Great War in France. Whether there is any remembrance of them in
the  psychic  landscapes  of  the  two  nations  is  another  matter.  Certainly,  the  link
between  Bexhill,  East  Sussex,  and  Bayencourt,  Somme,  is  sustained  by  the
continued  presence  of  the  British  League-funded  water  system  that  serves  as  a
symbolic backdrop to the community’s war memorial (see figure 10). And, in 1984,
a simple plaque was installed on the water-tower: `In Friendship from Bexhill-on-
Sea, England, 1921± 1984.’

73. The Times of 22 May 1923 reported that the British League had sponsored the visit of 350 British
schoolboys on a `pilgrimage  to the battlefields and to the villages of the Somme and the Pas de Calais
which have been ª adoptedº  by the British towns from which they came.’

In the Shadows of Monuments

81

Acknowledgements
This paper has benefited from the financial assistance afforded by a grant from the
School  of  Graduate  Studies  at  Queen’s  University,  the  Research  Committee  of
Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and the SSHRC. Thanks also to Dr Paul Dickson
for  references to  the  Sussex  County  Herald,  and  the  staff  of  the  East  Sussex and
Hampshire record offices.

82

Brian S. Osborne


