International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Simulating fisherfolk and performing heritage
through ritual, history, and nostalgia

Luciana Lang

To cite this article: Luciana Lang (2017) Simulating fisherfolk and performing heritage through
ritual, history, and nostalgia, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 23:7, 628-642, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2016.1277777
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1277777

Published online: 01 Feb 2017.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 263

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2017
Vol. 23, no. 7, 628–642
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1277777

Simulating fisherfolk and performing heritage through ritual, 
history, and nostalgia

Luciana Lang

department of Social anthropology, university of Manchester, Manchester, uK

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 12 august 2016 
accepted 26 december 2016

KEYWORDS
nostalgia; heritage; ritual; 
order; morality; chronotope

ABSTRACT
Drawing  on  its  reputation  as  the  first  official  fishing  colony  in  Brazil,  a 
community in the periphery of Rio de Janeiro hosts some unique rituals, 
such as the annual Catholic procession on St. Peter’s day and the anniversary 
of the colony’s foundation with the presence of the Navy band. After a big 
fire destroyed most of the mangrove surrounding the colony in 1975, people 
strived to create spaces of order to offset what was perceived as a loss of the 
familiar. By forging a conception of the mangrove as heritage and enacting 
selected  replays  of  the  past,  residents  succeed  in  granting  legitimacy  to 
what  would  otherwise  be  a  simulacrum  of  a  fishing  colony.  According 
to  residents,  the  rituals  are  performed  in  order ‘not  to  let  the  colony’s 
identity die’, and to preserve the most important ‘heritage’ in the colony, 
the mangrove. This paper focuses on people’s readings of history and on 
the local versions of how the mangrove was sculpted over time. It explores 
people’s nostalgic perception of land and community after the mangrove 
became  environmentally  precarious  and  started  being  administered  by 
the municipal Department of Environment. Nostalgia mediates the tension 
between tradition and progress, refashioning the mangrove as a moral agent 
and re-negotiating the paradoxical outcomes of development.

The storytelling that thrives for a long time in the milieu of work – the rural, the maritime and the urban- is 
itself an artisan form of communication, as it were, it does not aim to convey the pure essence of the thing, like 
information or a report. It sinks the thing into the life of the storyteller, in order to bring it out of him again. Thus 
traces of the storyteller cling to the story the way the handprints of the potter cling to the clay vessel.

Walter Benjamin (1970, 91, 92)

People have to learn not to destroy the heritage that gave identity to this place.

Zé Luiz, referring to the mangrove.

Introduction
This paper explores distinct responses to changes in everyday life in a fishing community in the urban 
periphery of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to unveil how the role of nostalgia colours people’s perceptions of 
the ensuing transformations. Drawing on its reputation as the first official fishing colony in the country, 
this community displays some unique rituals such as the annual Catholic procession on St. Peter’s day, 
patron saint of the fishers, and the anniversary of the colony’s foundation with the presence of the 

CONTACT  luciana lang 

  luciana.lang@manchester.ac.uk

© 2017 luciana lang. Published with licence by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  629

Navy brass band. By evoking past events and the fishing tradition, these annual performances of the 
colony’s heritage rekindle the sense of belonging to this particular place, bridging present and past. 
Seeing time and space as intrinsically connected, this paper starts with a historical account of the area 
going back to its firs indigenous inhabitants. It then goes on to explore notions of nostalgia and the 
concept of chronotope to shed light on how people perceive developments in the colony and its sur-
rounding mangrove, under two seemingly different forms of state control: the Navy and the Municipal 
Department of Environment. The unravelling of people’s life histories will reveal local transformations 
from their specific vantage points: the first waves of migration, economic activities, the construction 
of bridges, and finally the environmental depletion through intensive development and demographic 
expansion, which directly affected the mangrove. By drawing on the concept of heritage both as an 
analytical and ethnographic category (Gonçalves 2009; Velho 2013; Oliveira 2013), this paper explores 
how the particular landscape around the colony was sculpted and transformed through the affective 
perceptions of those who inhabit it. It will conclude by looking at how the rituals grant legitimacy to 
what would otherwise be a simulacrum1 of a fishing colony, arguing that nostalgia both mediates the 
tension between tradition and progress, and fuels the performance of heritage.

Although populated by fishers since the beginning of the twentieth century, it was just after the 
First World War that the Colonia Almirante Gomes Pereira, better known as Z-10, was founded as 
part of a governmental initiative to promote sanitation and education along the Brazilian coast . The 
commission that departed from Rio de Janeiro in 1920 also aimed at strengthening the bonds with 
local fishers, seen as the ideal coast guards to protect the national borders against unwanted visitors, 
and the colony, was strategically located on Guanabara Bay. For decades the nation served as a frame 
for imagining and reproducing community life, underpinned by a system of favour exchanges between 
the fishers and their families, and the Navy (Figure 1). Time’s arrow was pointing towards the future 
with the nation being constructed to the detriment of natural landscapes. But when in 1975 the Iranian 
ship Tarik, then under contract by the national oil company Petrobrás, spilt six thousand tonnes of oil 
into Guanabara Bay, a big fire destroyed all the vegetation of the mangrove surrounding the colony.
This fire, still alive in the memories of older residents, prompted Zé Luiz, the son of a fisherman, to 
start a movement to save the mangrove. His fight was long and persistent, and in 1993 the mangrove 

Figure 1. a fisherman repairs a fishing net (photograph by the author).

630 

 

 L. LANG

was granted the status of protected area by means of a municipal decree. This meant that besides the 
historical capital of being the first fishing colony in the country, the community now boasted another 
form of capital, attracting the attention of biologists and environmentalists. Its new title, APARU (Area 
of Environmental Protection and Urban Regeneration) do Jequiá (name of the river that flows into 
the mangrove), also meant a change in governance and unexpected outcomes. The responsibility for 
the colony went from the Navy to the City Council/Department of the Environment, a less authori-
tarian form of rule functioning under the aegis of the first democratic constitution in Brazil, the 1988 
Constitution. The fire, I suggest, stands for the ‘ethical moment’ in Jarrett Zigon’s sense of the term: 
an event that upsets the normal unfolding of everyday life causing individuals ‘to reflect upon the 
appropriate ethical response’ (Zigon 2008, 165), while prompting them to re-create ‘spaces of order’ 
(Benda-Beckman and Pirie 2011, 2).

But responses were both reflective and reflexive. Once the mangrove was turned into a preserved 
area by the municipal Decree 12,250/93 and the administration of the area went to the City Council/
Secretary of the Environment, there was no longer a strict control over construction and vertical and 
‘disordered growth’, a pejorative expression commonly associated with favelas, took off. Some resi-
dents felt liberated by the newly granted freedom and immersed themselves in house improvements 
and extensions. In 2001, eight years after the mangrove had been turned into an APARU, the Rio 
Comunidade Colônia Z10, a project by the City Council of Rio de Janeiro, started construction work in 
the community to provide paving, draining and sanitation, including the installation of 1,971 metres 
of pipeline for sewage and rain water. This involved an influx of migrant workers from the north who, 
perceiving the community as an ideal place to settle down as opposed to the more violent and urban-
ised areas elsewhere in the city, started to offer the residents free house improvements in exchange 
for part of the land, or for the second or third floors they would build on top of the existing houses.
To get a sense of people’s perception about those changes, the mangrove, and the movement to 
protect it, I conducted around 120 interviews, including 32 life stories, and participated in around 60 
meetings related to environmental issues over one year of fieldwork. I first visited Z-10 in 2006, five 
years before my fieldwork, with SOLTEC, a centre that promotes solidarity economy through partici-
patory projects in communities in urban peripheries, based within the engineering department at the 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, to conduct a research on the process of memory construction 
by residents there. We were welcomed by key actors at Z-10 and were introduced to the impressive 
collection of documents about the colony’s history that had been compiled by Zé Luiz, who invited 
us to return a few days later for the celebration of the colony’s anniversary.

The Navy brass band arrived punctually at 10 in the morning and promptly started playing a 
military march, which was followed by a speech by a Navy representative before raising the colony’s 
and the Brazilian flag. The ceremony felt awkwardly formal for such an early hour and given that the 
ritual was taking place next to a dusty football pitch. Given that there were very few fishers at the 
ceremony and that most of those present were now wage-labourers, I was curious to find signs of a 
collective fishing identity in the community, I asked Zé Luiz’s permission to show a couple of films 
during the party to be held after the ceremony. I selected two films with the fishing theme: Barravento 
(1962) by the Brazilian director Glauber Rocha, and La Terra Trema (1948), an Italian film by Luchino 
Visconti. I assumed that the films would not be watched, seeing that they were slow-paced and lacked 
the action and colour of contemporary filmmaking, so my plan was to let the films roll as a backdrop 
to the party. But upon noticing a row of children sitting on chairs facing the screen and enthralled 
by the black and white scenes of fishermen pulling their nets, I realised I had been deceived by my 
pre-conceptions. The way those two-dimensional representations of fishermen’s bodies, nets, boats, 
sea and fish captivated the children was for me a clear evidence of a collective experience of affect in 
the Deleuzian sense of experiencing intensity through bodily actions (Deleuze and Guattari 1987). 
However different the colony was now from the community of thirty years ago, the affect transpiring 
in those metonymic references to the fishing activity was somehow speaking to the children. That 
scene, still in my memory as I write, prompted my first research question during fieldwork: what was 
keeping those metonymic associations alive when there were hardly any fish left in the sea?

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  631

Figure 2. road leading to the colony’s bridge, circa 1920 (with permission, from Zé luiz’s photo collection).

Historical imagination and the chronotope
Those who were raised in the colony often refer to the past with nostalgia, as a time when houses and 
fences were made of wood, everyone was related, the waters were clean and full of shellfish, St. Peter’s 
Procession had virgins carrying the patron saint, doors could be left open, and most houses had some 
land for growing fruit and vegetables. People also say that, though poor, they could rely on the man-
grove and on the sea, enjoying the freedoms of self-employment and the benefits of community life 
(Figure 2). These readings could be interpreted as the marks of ‘structural nostalgia’ which opposes a 
past of ‘social balance, reciprocity, moral parity, observance of self-enforcing rules’ (Herzfeld 1990, 307) 
to the daily sight of rubbish waiting to be collected and untreated sewage flowing into the mangrove, 
not to mention the remains of oil from three big spills over the years. If culture can be seen as ‘the 
organisation of the current situation in the terms of a past’ (Sahlins 1985, 155), people’s perception of 
the colony today is constantly being articulated in historical terms as though place and time formed 
one indivisible whole. Oswaldo works in the environmental unit at the Navy quarters situated next to 
the colony. I asked him why he was interested in the mangrove:

Have you ever been to a place where you thought ‘I know this place’? It’s because in past lives you went there. 
The mangrove reminds me of a place I used to go when I was a kid; my friends and I would run along the river 
and collect palm nuts [piaba], and we would swim in the river, and walk through the thicket. Everything we do 
is related to things that you came across in your life, which is why you do things in the future that are totally 
related to the past. It’s really amazing. It’s as if you were transported to that place.

Here the concept of chronotope (Bakhtin 1981) to refer to a setting as a spatio-temporal whole, or a 
time-space unit, is useful to understand how time and place can be perceived as being interchangeable 
with each other. Doreen Massey suggests that globalisation reinforces the primacy of time over space, 
of history over geography, reifying a single narrative proposition, and undermining multiplicities 
(Massey 2005). To resist this trend she suggests the suspension of the distinction between time and 
space, as found in old maps of the sixteenth century, when such representations told stories creating 
a time-space unit, not unlike a chronotope. Bakhtin describes the idyllic chronotope as ‘an organic 
fastening-down, a grafting of life and its events to a place, to a familiar territory with all its nooks and 

632 

 

 L. LANG

crannies, its familiar mountains, valleys, fields, rivers and forests, and one’s own home’(Bakhtin 1981, 
225). The stars in the sky represent the chronotope par excellence: we perceive the configuration of stars 
existing now, but in actual fact those stars are no longer there. Our senses also function like chrono-
topes, a smell may call into play a moment of the past which will form a unit of affect, as a sentiment 
embedded in the bodily experience of place at a given moment. Often when I asked someone to explain 
why the mangrove was important to them, they would reply with the initial ‘When I was a kid, I used 
to … ’, because the mangrove, for those who live by it, does not stand outside personal life stories, nor 
outside history for that matter, but encompasses the spatio-temporal whole contained in their lives.
To illustrate this, upon seeing an old picture of St. Peter’s procession during the photo-elicitation 
sessions I held, people would start telling me of how they saved all year round to buy new shoes and 
clothes for the day. Then, the conversation would invariably drift away from the context of the image 
to recall other people or events, past or present, or to reminisce about the high tide spoilling their 
shoes and invading certain areas, now safely concreted. One single photograph could evoke distinct 
moments of the person’s life, or elucidate the changing features in the landscape, such as bridges, gates 
and fences; hinged on unchanging markers, such as the daily tidal cycles (Figure 3).

I came across many good storytellers at Z-10 who connected place and time inspired by past events 
that were inseparable from their surrounding landscape. One of those gifted weavers of narratives 
was Gilberto who, according to Zé Luiz, is the most knowledgeable person on the local history of 
Governor’s Island, where Z-10 is situated. Gilberto, a history teacher and regular visitor to Z-10, told 
me that a community of Temiminós, called Corouque, or Kurú-kié (Ipanema 1991; Léry 2009[1578]; 
Amador 2013) supposedly lived in the area where Z-10 is located before the arrival of the Portuguese, 
more than five hundred years ago. Paranapuã, a combination of the terms paranã, meaning sea, and 

Figure 3. from the 1950s, this photograph of St Peter’s Procession shows followers coming out of Z-10 by the exit at the right-hand 
corner (with permission, from Zé luiz’s photo collection).

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  633

apuã, meaning hill, was the name given to the island where the colony is located by the Temiminós, 
its indigenous inhabitants. The following is a summary of the story he tells children who come to his 
story-telling workshops at the local library nearby:

When the Portuguese first arrived here, the island was populated by the indigenous ethnic group of Temiminós, 
also dubbed Maracajás, meaning wild cats, because of their supposed treacherous nature. The Tupinambás, the 
indigenous group who inhabited the mainland of Rio, used to have a peaceful relationship with the Temiminós, 
but  on  one  occasion,  the  Tupinambás  got  drunk  on  Tauí  [a  beverage  made  with  manioc]  and  attacked  a 
group of Temiminós, who escaped to Espírito Santo further north. There, the latter allied themselves with the 
Portuguese and returned with a vengeance. On finding out that the Portuguese were coming to Guanabara Bay, 
the Tupinambás formed the confederation of the Tamoios and started to build small fortresses around the bay.2 
Some would claim that the War of the Tamoios was the first popular uprising in the newly found land of Brazil, 
a revolt against slavery, in defence of land and of the rights of men. The Temiminós defeated the Tamoios and its 
leader, Araribóia, later received a Portuguese name, Martim Afonso, as gratitude for his help in the Portuguese 
victory over Guanabara Bay. He wore European clothes, befriended the Jesuits and the general governor, but to 
his distress, he was told to leave Paranapuã, and was given land in Niterói instead. The governor wanted Ilha for 
himself, hence its name henceforth: Governor’s Island.

These local legends inform people’s understanding of the colony and of the mangrove. When people 
started to fill parts of the mangrove with soil in the 1970s to allow for house expansion, something in 
the region of 80 funerary urns of indigenous origin were found and thrown away, lest the authorities 
should find out about them and stop people constructing on what could be deemed national heritage 
area. In the vast pantheon of spirits in Umbanda, an Afro-Brazilian religion with many followers in the 
colony, there is an entity that actually carries the name of Araribóia. Given that most of the Umbanda 
centres at Z-10 belonged to members of fishing families who originally came from the municipality 
of Niterói where the infamous hero went after his eviction from Ilha in the 1500s, it is not surprising 
that Araribóia, recognised by some historians as being a representative of an indigenous elite in the 
Portuguese America (Duarte 2011), would be in people’s imagination. In fact, the cosmogony of 
Umbanda is constantly being informed by place and history, and references to both surface in unex-
pected ways as in the following comment by a spiritual medium at the Umbanda centre in the colony:

The part of the mangrove where the Navy is located was a cemetery, and I believe that the spiritual origins of 
Z-10 come from that place. My parents used to say that they could hear the noise of chains inside the Navy 
grounds. Here was also a centre of war, so there are many wandering spirits that find in this place the means of 
transportation to the other side.
The cemetery mentioned by Tania was supposedly built for the slaves of São Sebastião Farm. This 
farm, which had been one of the most prosperous of Ilha in the production of gravel, shellfish, and 
lime from shells, fell prey to a plague that wiped out its slave population. It was subsequently sold to 
the Navy3 in 1871 to house a School for Sailors and later became the Navy Radio Transmitter head-
quarters, next door to the colony’s entrance. Another spiritual medium explained to me how Umbanda 
entities that inhabited particular environments in the past ‘updated’ their respective time-space units 
to include contemporary features:

The characteristic of Omulu [an Afro-Brazilian entity] is the cemetery and the beach, and the biggest cemetery 
in the world is the sea. The sea receives everything: the ships, the dirt, and the people who drowned.
In the examples above the cemetery establishes a continuity not only over time, between the dead 
and the living, the spiritual and the material world, but also over space, with the metonymic associ-
ations of Omulu extending from the graveyard to the sea. Interestingly, the current webpage of the 
State Department of the Environment supports the above view of the sea as a cemetery: one of the 
priority items in its agenda, as part of a massive governmental investment, is to clean ship carcasses 
from the bottom of Guanabara Bay4 in time for the 2016 Olympics in Rio.

Nostalgia
Svetlana Boym points out that if four centuries ago nostalgia was seen as a passing ailment, which 
could be remedied with opium, leeches, or a trip to the Swiss Alps, by the twentieth first century, it 

634 

 

 L. LANG

came to be seen as incurable. The futuristic utopia of the twentieth century was replaced by a nostalgia 
contaminated with utopian feelings (Boym 2001), and longing for nostos, the Greek word for home-
coming in Homer’s epic Odyssey, and place-based narratives came to feature in a variety of works about 
the environment (Pálsson 1996; Gupta and Ferguson 1992; Jameson 1991; Olick and Robbins 1998; 
Palmer 2011). Jeremy Davies observed that the sustainability paradigm transformed ‘nostalgia from a 
life-threatening illness into a global ethical programme’ (Davies 2010, 267) turning the environmental 
crisis into the cultural malaise of the twenty-first century.

‘Saudade,’ the Brazilian translation of ‘longing’, connotes a romantic looking back at something 
that appears irretrievable, and was often present in the accounts by older residents reminiscing over 
the fishing activity that characterised the local moral economy in their youth. The first fishermen who 
came to Z-10 built their wooden houses on stilts in the water-logged area next to the Jequiá Canal. 
Norma, the granddaughter of a fisherman, Hipólito Nascimento, who gave the name to one of the 
streets at Z-10, was born in 1932 in the colony:

My father was a fisherman, and fished shrimps with a fishing net, but later he went to work for Shell [the Dutch 
oil company]. Luiz Victorino, Alexandre Rosa and Hipólito Nascimento, my grandfather, were the first fishermen 
to settle here and form families. The streets here have names of residents. I miss my colony. My grandfather 
came here when the Navy gave the land to the fishermen. Our way of life and work was collecting shellfish; we 
survived and were happy that way. The river had crystal clear water and was full of little fish and crabs. Our 
mum would boil salted water in a pan so it would be ready for us to put in the crabs as we arrived back from the 
mangrove. By the front door there were three different sizes of fishing nets, one for my sister and me, one for 
my mum, and one for my dad. We used to collect shellfish and sell fishing nets; with the money, my mum would 
buy what we needed. When the tide was high, we would swim, there wasn’t all this mud. We would get crabs 
when it rained. They would come out of their holes and we would get them with a fork-like hook; the bucket 
would be full to the brim with shrimps. Half of our garden was a vegetable patch, and in the middle of it there 
was a well. The water from it was rather salty, but good enough to water the plants. There was no sewage system, 
but each person had his own pit. The water was not polluted. I used to love it before; the Navy didn’t let people 
build brick houses, but now everybody can do what they like, if you have a plot of land of three feet, you can sell 
it and ask to keep the upstairs. Before, if you fell ill, people helped you, this used to be a community. Everybody 
knew each other. If you arrived at the bridge and asked for me, people would bring you here. Now all you see is 
people from the north-east.
Georgina was born in 1936 in Praia da Rosa, but used to come to the beach at Z-10 to get clams 

and shellfish. Then she got married to a local fisherman and moved there:

The mangrove was the best beach in Zumbi. I moved here when I was 16. There used to be carnival balls in the 
colony’s headquarters and they even had a queen. When the tide was empty we would cross over right there; there 
wasn’t a bridge then. The way to the colony was through the Navy. It was wonderful, one house here, another 
over there. There were only fishermen here, almost everyone was family: my cousins, my nephews and nieces. 
When the tide was full the water would come all the way here to the middle of the streets. The houses were made 
of wood and it was much nicer; there were fences instead of walls. The plots of land extended from one street to 
the next. I had 12 children, but only 9 survived childhood. My husband started fishing when he was sixteen, and 
my father-in-law used to live in Piratininga, in Niterói, and was a fisherman too. Now there is too much mud for 
shellfish to survive, before, it was just white sand. Now it’s no good anymore, too many houses, pollution, there 
is no shellfish, no beach where we can swim.
Bethania, was born in the colony in 1947, and is the granddaughter of Alexandre Rosa, a fisherman 
who gave the name to another street at Z-10. She is always doing voluntary work at the church and 
is one of the main organisers of St. Peter’s celebrations and procession. Over the years, she has had 
many jobs: cleaning, ironing clothes, and looking after elderly people:

When I was a child, there were only few houses here, there was no electricity and we used to sleep outdoors in 
the street. We would stay in the field [the area which today is a football pitch] till late. There wasn’t a church 
then. The gardens were really big, we had sugar cane, and there wasn’t running water in the houses or walls 
between them. At this time of the day, we would go for a swim in the mangrove, young mothers would go there 
with their children and would sit by the mangrove shore. At high tide the water would flood everything. Things 
were very different then.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  635

Figure 4. Paintings by Seu Jordão showing the different style bridges at Z-10 (photograph by the author).

In the three accounts above the mangrove appears as a necessary part of everyday life, even though 
I made a point of not asking about the mangrove, and the daily tidal rhythm sets the temporal framing 
against which events are narrated.

The bridges

After the bridge in Ilha was built, everything became this mess – Georgina
The bridge Georgina refers to connects Ilha (the bigger island on the other side of the mangrove) 
to the mainland of Rio and was built in 1949. But if in her view it brought disorder, it also promoted 
improvements, such as clean water, electricity supply, sewage systems and paving of roads. Less con-
troversial is the bridge that connects Ilha to the islet where Z-10 is located. Seu Jordão, born in 1929 
and one of the oldest residents in the colony, told me that his memories motivated him to draw the 
different versions of the bridge that connects the colony to the rest of Ilha (Figure 4):

In those days the Jequiá river wasn’t polluted. During high tide, I would go out of my front door and swim, right 
here. All of this would flood. My brother and I were born and raised here. My father was a fisherman, Antonio 
Luiz Vitorino, and so was my grandfather, one of the founders of the colony. The Admiral Gomes Pereira gave this 
place to the fishermen. We would row to Caju, then get the trawler from there and go to Ilha Grande, Cabo Frio, 
Angra dos Reis, with 20 people aboard. We would fish all night: cavalinha, sardinha, anchova, terere [names of 
local fish] and we would tell other fishermen about the places where there was plenty of fish; there was solidarity 
then. There are only few fishermen left now, but I earned a living as a fisherman for many years. In 1961, I got a 
job with the Navy and later retired with a pension from them.

Caetano was born in 1924, and is said to be the oldest fisherman in the colony:

I learned to fish with my dad in Maricá [near Niterói], where I was born. We had four horses and so many goats 
that they would die of old age. The does would lie down on the ground so that my brother and I could feed on 
their teats. We were brought up on goat’s milk, people say it’s good for your health, and I never go to the doctor’s 
or drink any water. We sold fish, and if the customer didn’t have any money we would swap for other things, 
like potatoes, bananas, oranges, then we would exchange that with the fishermen for more fish, and that way we 
managed to get by. One day I came here and talked to the Navy person in charge and he allowed me to build a 
wooden house. I made one right at the top by the mangrove, and brought my family here. All the houses were 

636 

 

 L. LANG

made of wood. Then this place started to develop, and develop and develop. Some people tried to install a dope 
selling point (boca de fumo), but I and some others stopped it, and we went to complain to the commander at the 
military post. Some years ago, people started selling laje [a concrete slab that allows a person to build a second 
floor in the house] and everything became a mess (bagunça).

In the life histories narrated by Norma, Georgina, Bethania, Seu Jordão, and Caetano, there is a clear 
longing for a place, notably a community whose life and activities was intertwined with the flooded 
plains they inhabited. A few points in common can be drawn from the accounts above: colony and 
mangrove constitute one place; everyone was family; there was space between houses and land to 
plant; fish was abundant; fishing was the main work activity; waters were clean; there was order as 
opposed to bagunça, or mess.

The bridges, the one from the colony to the mainland of Ilha, and the one that connects Ilha to 
Rio, not only serve as temporal references, as seen from the image that decorates Seu Jordão’s walls 
and from Georgina’s account, but also as topographical markers. The nostalgic accounts about the 
past way of life nurture people’s ethical sensibilities towards the mangrove: it is the memory of the 
clean waters that make them judge those who pollute the mangrove; it is the fact that they swam in 
its waters by just walking out of the house that makes them think of home and mangrove as one and 
the same thing. This memorisation of the mangrove reveals a tension between a past way of life and 
progress as the mangrove changed over time.

From nature to environment: home, land and the protected (and protective) 
mangrove
At the time of the Navy, there used to be a sergeant who would go round the colony to survey the houses 
to see if there was any work needed. There are many accounts of how people had to smuggle bricks in 
tiny boats in the middle of the night to build an extra room in the house, and as the social landscape 
changed and the population of fishermen became smaller, people would lie to the authorities in the 
Navy about the numbers of fishermen. After all, the Navy was under no obligation to grant ordinary 
workers access to land since their pact was with the fisherman. Each house had a document with the 
respective ground plan at the back, called a House Registry Form (Ficha Cadastro de Benfeitoria), and 
any house extension or sub-division of plots had to be authorised by the Navy. That said, outsiders 
were allowed in through marriage. As families grew, fishermen would split land between siblings to 
create more space for their growing families. For example, Norma lives next door to Margarida, her 
sister-in-law, on the same plot of land that once belonged to her father. The land was divided between 
the four children, and then subdivided between the grandchildren, who went to occupy the second 
floors. So, Margarida’s house is where the garden used to be three generations ago, and Norma’s house 
now accounts for one third of the original house. Other interviewees described similar arrangements:

This plot of land belonged to my father. It went from here to that road there. When he died my brother and I 
divided it between ourselves. – Seu Jordão

I had all my 12 kids at home in my mother in law’s house. Now the plot has been divided up, and there are lots 
of families living here. – Georgina

My father bought the house at the front here. When I got married he gave me the back of the house, and when 
my daughter got married, I gave part of it to her and the upstairs to my son. But no one owns the plot of land 
here, no one has the deeds for their houses. – Bethania

My father had a big plot of land that was given to him by his mother’s father; later the land was divided between 
myself and my brother and sisters. My sister built a house, and then sold it, she now lives out of the colony. It is 
my father’s house but the deeds are with the Navy. – Neco, a fisherman.
The stories above describe re-arrangements of houses and plots of land, illustrating the recurring 
observation by older residents that ‘aqui todo mundo era familia’, ‘here we were all family’. Regina is 
Norma’s niece. She lives with her aunt next to Margarida’s house, who is also her aunt. She worked for 
a long time as a secretary for the colony’s association and for the Residents’ Association:

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  637

When the Navy passed on the area, the colony had around 135 properties registered. The original documents are 
inside a file at the Navy, and there are photocopies of them in the Fishing Colony’s Association. I asked authori-
zation from the captain to photocopy everything because I got scared. Many times the form would arrive at the 
Navy with a fake name, and without a copy of the originals it would be impossible to trace the rightful owners. 
But if people were granted the ownership of their houses they wouldn’t really like it because nobody wants to 
pay taxes. This is a piece of paradise, but it doesn’t exist. One day, a woman came into the Association and asked 
me to give her a document proving the house was hers, threatening to sue me if I didn’t give it to her. So I told 
her to first prove that the colony really exists. – Regina

The comment by Regina that ‘the colony doesn’t exist’ infers the sense of precariousness and insecurity 
with regards to house ownership and permanence of the community on the land that was donated to 
the fishermen in 1938. The issue of land is important here, for when the navy ceased to have control 
over construction, there was a commodification of housing with the land gaining value. Furthermore, 
it could be argued that once the mangrove acquired the protected area status it also became commod-
ified. If in the past people had to lie about the numbers of fishermen living at Z-10 in order to keep 
the land, after the passage of the colony to the city council, a corollary of the mangrove being turned 
into an area of environmental protection, people not only started to build almost indiscriminately, 
but to also sell houses. The debate over how many floors can be built is a controversial one since, 
according to some, buildings could potentially collapse because the colony is situated on marshland. 
The argument that three floors and above could compromise the long-standing permanence of a house 
not only jeopardises its real-estate potential, but also places the mangrove as the material justification 
against the dramatic vertical growth of recent years:

How can people build three floors on a swamp? This area has been filled with soil; can you see how dangerous 
it is? – Bethania

In the past, people would go from one place to the other in the colony on a canoe, they have now filled the 
marshes with soil for houses to be built. Those two and three storey houses put the whole area of the colony at 
risk – Jorge, the environmental guard.

As observed by Bethania, the mangrove constitutes risk, after all it is a water-logged area and people 
are building on potentially shifting ground. The norms by which people define these ethics of exist-
ence, in this case clearly embedded in custom and in the Navy’s authoritarian rule, may defy other 
arrangements based on economic rationality alone. I was curious to know what the Navy made of 
the current scenario and decided to ask Oswaldo about the passing of control to the City Council:
The government had cut down resources for the military forces. It was becoming harder for us to supervise the 
colony. Now, I am responsible for the Navy’s urban and heritage patrimony, because of the old buildings here, 
and for the mangrove area, because of its environmental status.

Regina offers a different version:

The Navy didn’t want the responsibility anymore. There was a time in the past when the Navy wanted this space, 
but they couldn’t have it because they had donated the area to the fishermen in 1938, so they put a fence between 
us, and later a wall. Every so often they would do a survey to check the number of fishermen. They couldn’t kick 
us out because the fishermen protected the country during the war; it’s an exchange of favors, but they have no 
obligations towards people who are not fishers. It’s not about a law, it’s about values. So, we were told to lie about 
the number of fishermen. This place is becoming a favela now. It has been like this ever since the Navy passed 
the colony to the City Council in 1993.

To find out how children perceived the mangrove and the colony, I ran a mapping workshop at CEA 
(Centre for Environmental Education) with nine children aged between 7 and 13. We started by look-
ing at Google maps, where Z-10 appeared under the ‘favela’ denomination. A spontaneous discussion 
then started between the children about how appropriate its favela status was:

Patricia (11 years old): The colony is like a favela because here there are gossipers and barraqueiros [term used 
for people who argue in public].

Luana (10 years old): But Boogy Woogie [another favela nearby] is much worse, and Dendê [another favela] is 
even worse.

Ronaldo (12 years old): No, this isn’t a favela, it is a good community; there is a park with swings and slides.

638 

 

 L. LANG

Pablo (12 years old): This is a community. Community has families, favelas don’t. Here in the colony, people have 
to switch off their music at 10 at night. In favelas, music goes on till the next morning.
Tomas (13 years old): This isn’t a favela because there are no guns. People are workers here. There’s no milícia.5 
There are only families here.

While the landscape consists of houses and purpose-built public spaces, the colony was depicted in 
the children’s drawings as a place contained within three major boundaries: the Navy, the bridge that 
connects it to the rest of the island, and the mangrove. The bridge appears in all the drawings as the 
main access route, while the mangrove, blurring into the sea, grants contour to the colony. Whether 
as a green smudge of colour at the margin or as a background for other human-made features, the 
mangrove is drawn as a borderline. This marginal and yet ubiquitous presence of the mangrove is 
partly explained by the way it disappears with the high tide to soon reappear again. But most impor-
tantly, the contention over whether Z-10 is a favela reflects a relevant paradox: although this is a 
poor community, Z-10 is surprisingly crime-free. This characteristic has made Z-10 one of the most 
expensive districts in Ilha, even though all properties are passed to the buyer without proper deeds, 
and what one buys is the ‘right of donation’. Visitors to Z-10 are constantly reminded how different 
this community is to nearby favelas and that it is free of violence, the main reason why houses at Z-10 
are a desirable commodity. Residents constantly remark on the issue of security, often explained by 
the presence of the Navy next door, its fishing history, and the mangrove. Thus, the mangrove, while 
remaining marginal, is seen as a protective boundary, and by extension, as an ethical agent that boosts 
prices of properties. The rationale is elucidated in Margarida’s comment:

There is no crime here because it’s difficult for people to escape. There’s only one access, the bridge; the Navy is 
on one side and the mangrove at the other. And no one dares to escape over the mangrove. – Margarida

What I describe as the passage from nature to environment, in other words, when the mangrove started 
to be managed by the council department of environment, an outcome of the movement triggered 
by the fire in 1975, has implications for land ownership since it marks the end of a number of restric-
tions that had been imposed by the Navy. This change is governance is often seen as the culprit for 
the increase in pollution and crescimento desordenado, or ‘disordered growth’, commonly associated 
with favelas. In that context, the mangrove assumes the role of a moral agent since people see it as a 
protective barrier against drug trafficking and crime, thus making Z-10 a highly desirable residential 
area, despite the fact that many see it as a favela. Furthermore, this unique characteristic in the context 
of a city with a reputation for violence pushes prices up of real estate in the colony, further enhancing 
the importance of the mangrove as a protective border.

Ritual and memory: simulating fisherfolk
For Hobsbawn, invented traditions are ‘a set of practices, normally governed by overtly or tacitly 
accepted rules and of a ritual or symbolic nature, which seek to inculcate certain values and norms of 
behaviour by repetition, which automatically implies continuity with the past’(1983, 1). After making 
the news in the 1990s by casting the mangrove as the main protagonist of the local environmental 
movement, Zé Luiz started to celebrate the colony’s anniversary in order to keep the fishing memory 
alive. For him ‘heritage’, or patrimônio in Portuguese, translates into the ordered and predictable world 
of the colony’s fishing past, an understanding that chimes with the definition of heritage as ‘historical 
constructions’ (Gonçalves 2009). Many in the community refer to Zé Luiz as the official guardian of the 
colony’s memory, and years ago, he retrieved from the trash old records of the colony’s history. He is 
also the official fogueteiro, the person who lets off fireworks during St. Peter’s procession. Both rituals, 
and I describe them as rituals due to their solemn nature and regular occurrence, are grounded on 
the fishing tradition of the colony and are performed outdoors against the backdrop of the mangrove, 
but whereas St. Peter’s procession has been performed for decades, the anniversary celebration was 
started by Zé Luiz in 1999, five years after the creation of the APARU.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  639

Figure 5. from 2012, this photo shows the fishermen carrying St. Peter on a boat processing around the colony (photograph by 
the author).

As with all ‘invented traditions’ (Hobsbawn 1983), agents are vital to keep memories alive and 
many in the colony dedicate a great deal of their time to organising St. Peter’s procession. According 
to common belief, Saint Peter is the saint that has the key to the sky and consequently to weather con-
ditions; he is the patron saint of the fishing activity, hence the sale on procession day of keys made of 
wax. The static image of St. Peter on his boat stands for the mythical cosmology that rules the fishing 
activity and the colony’s fishing past, not least for the role he plays in the Catholic pantheon as one of 
the twelve apostles, himself a fisherman. St. Peter also resonates with ‘collective representation of an 
Edenic order’ (Herzfeld 1990, 305) associated with the nostalgic descriptions of the colony in the life 
histories above, along with respective relations of kinship and reciprocity.

The procession happens over two days, on the first, people follow the procession within the limits of 
the colony, and on the second day, the procession crosses the bridge and goes round the next district 
before heading back over the bridge (Figure 5). Most of the followers are women, but the boat with 
St. Peter is always carried by fishermen. On both days, the colony grounds are the central arena for 
the festivities, with the mangrove as the borderline containing the imagined community. As for the 
anniversary, after the mangrove started being administered by the Department of Environment, the 
colony’s foundation had to be performed as heritage as a reminder of those socio-political relations 
it held with the Navy, namely, an authoritarian and centralised form of rule, which ceased to exist 
under the environmental governance of the City Council. By raising the Brazilian and the colony’s 
flag on the anniversary of the colony’s foundation on November 20th and whenever a fisherman dies, 
the myth of origin of this community’s is re-enacted, thus rekindling people’s sense of belonging, 
however simulated this may be.

640 

 

 L. LANG

According to Zé Luiz, those rituals are performed ‘not to let the colony’s identity die’, and, in his 
words, ‘to preserve the most important heritage in the colony, the mangrove’. Despite the very differ-
ent contexts, the work put into the anniversary celebrations and processions by church goers and by 
Zé Luiz resonate with Roger Keesing’s description of the efforts by Malaitans in Papua New Guinea 
of ‘strengthening out’ custom. Keesing observes how, by writing down custom just like the colonial 
powers did with law, the Malaitans created culture, albeit from selected customs: ‘Prior to colonial 
rule, Malaitans had ancestors and their rule: but they did not – could not – have kastom’ (Keesing 
1994, 45). In that context, a counter-structure emerges that nonetheless mimics the dominant para-
digm, in order to make acts of resistance and local demands assume legitimation. Just as resistance 
to colonialism mirrors the colonial structure in the context of Papua New Guinea, the attempts to 
keep the colony’s autonomy and existence as a fishing colony, also uses the familiar Navy instruments 
such as the flags and the formality of a brass band combined with a speech by community leaders and 
Navy representatives. In an example of what has been described as ‘romantic nationalism’ (Bear 2007, 
37), personal and collective pursuit of origins is in conversation with the genealogy of the nation. In 
other words, these two rituals enable the symbolic construction of community (MacDonald 2011; 
Anderson 1983) while highlighting the role of the mangrove as a vessel containing the many episodes 
of local history, some of them older than the colony itself. In the process, the mangrove is performed 
as heritage, patrimônio, granting permanence, albeit in a metonymic fashion, to a fishing tradition 
that has almost completely disappeared. A relationship with the past is thus produced and understood 
within a temporal and spatial framework in this heritageisation process (Harvey 2001; Smith 2006).

Conclusion
The accounts above reveal a multi-faceted mangrove that changed over the years; a mangrove which 
is/was many things: a canal into the sea, a home for spirits, a place to fish, to swim, to anchor a boat, 
a link into a past way of life, a real estate risk, or a protective border. The mangrove appears as a living 
process, constantly being sculpted both actually, through man-made actions, and potentially, in people’s 
imaginary. In the process, those storytellers enact the mangrove as nature, for they are referring to a 
particular mangrove with specific ‘natural’ characteristics; and as culture, the clay vessel in Benjamin’s 
excerpt that opens this paper, filled to the brim with histories, stories, and accidents of development. 
The changing mangrove mirrors changes around it: some things have been subtracted from it, such as 
shellfish, but many things have been added: more mud, more people, more floors, and more pollution. 
Some perceptions clash: the mangrove is a shifting ground, but it serves as a protective boundary; the 
Navy is no longer in charge, but its physical presence is still by the colony’s entrance; the colony is a 
favela, but there is no crime.

We can also observe from the narratives an emphasis on what is described as ‘the fishers’ morality’ 
associated with hard work, knowledge of their surroundings, good relationship with the Navy, and 
respect for St. Peter, all characteristics that converse with the mangrove as a topographic boundary. 
The interesting point to observe here, is that, as the mangrove ceased to be economically valuable, in 
the sense that it stopped providing shellfish, it gained capital as protected area. Later, as urbanisation 
intensified, the mangrove acquired yet another value, one based on its function as a boundary against 
undesirable elements. Even though the mangrove is not an object in circulation, it has exchange value 
insofar as its existence is factored in economic exchanges, such as real estate.

The accounts of the elderly informants shed light on how the conditions of both the mangrove and 
the sea affected the working conditions, pointing to more than ‘structural nostalgia’ at play. The marks 
of reciprocity and self-enforcing rules coincide with a less polluted landscape and more autonomous 
labour practices. Those were the days when fishermen, though poor, enjoyed the freedoms of self-em-
ployment, when they could choose who they were going to fish with, and how long they would be 
away from home. Work was at the core of their relationship with the mangrove, fostering productivity 
in the community, and within the boundaries of the mangrove, families had their homes, their means 
of production, their vegetable patch, and water to keep the plants alive.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  641

The livelihoods of the fishers and of the mangrove are always entangled, as if they were parts of 
a whole with semi-autonomous existences. The two annual celebrations that stand for the founding 
myths of the colony are examples of that, and even though the mangrove does not appear in the annual 
ceremonies in an explicit manner, it is the necessary backdrop for those practices, and the condition 
of possibility for the tradition those rituals symbolise. Thus, for Zé Luiz the mangrove is both nature 
and culture, it encompasses history and a bio-system, and those rituals enact an amalgam of the two, 
which in his words is heritage. In sum, the performance of what is described by Zé Luiz as the ‘fishing 
identity’ is socially effective. By foregrounding the event that marked the foundation of the colony, Zé 
Luiz is mirroring the national project that spawned the colony, enacting the fishing past, and keeping 
the connection between the Navy and the fishing colony, between the nation and his beloved mangrove. 
Here, poetics and politics act as bookends that hold together the enormous arc of understandings, 
affects and praxis related to fishing and a mangrove in the context of the colony Z-10.

Additional notes
Interviews were conducted with residents and workers in Z-10, a fishing colony in Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, between July 2011 and August 2012. I have used people’s real names when I was specially 
requested to do so and pseudonyms otherwise. All photographs were taken by the author, except for 
two photographs in public domain.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 

 Originally used for a map that simulates a territory, a concept as opposed to the real thing, the idea of simulacrum 
was used by Baudrillard (1994) to refer to the generation of the hyperreal, a double no longer connected to reality.
 The occupation of Rio de Janeiro was crucial to the Portuguese, and by dominating the Guanabara Bay they 
were protecting it from both the Tamoios and the French.
 The plan was to build a home for Navy officers injured in the Paraguay War, but the initial project was replaced 
by the Sailors’ School, which later gave place to the Radio Transmission Station and Liquid Fuel Warehouse, 
still there today.
 http://www.rio.rj.gov.br/web/smac (accessed on 15/11/2012).
 Originally meaning militia it came to signify, in the context of favelas in Brazil, groups of armed citizens who 
take responsibility over the protection of a community.

Acknowledgements
I have a heart-felt gratitude for all the people in the colony who generously shared with me their views on culture, nature, 
and the mangrove, including fishermen, local environmentalists, City Council employees, and Umbanda followers. I am 
also grateful to Professor Peter Wade, who provided critical feedback on earlier versions of this paper.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Luciana Lang is an anthropologist working in the broad area of socio-ecological anthropology in urban contexts. I 
am particularly interested in human-disturbed environments, in homespun alternatives to cope with socio-economic 
effects of increasingly precarious scenarios, and in community use and management of the commons. My doctoral 
research explored the relationship between an urban fishing community and a mangrove in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and 
the socio-economic impact of the change in relations as other actors became entangled in that assemblage, such as 
plastic, raw sewage, bacteria, oil, new legislations and institutions. It is this dialogue between urban communities, the 
environment and policy-makers that informs my research today. In addition to ethnographic methods, I also resort to 
map-making techniques, oral histories and photo-elicitation to tap into people’s struggles and adaptations to post-in-
dustrial landscapes.

642 

 

 L. LANG

References
Amador, Elmo da Silva. 2013. Baía de Guanabara – Ocupação Histórica E Avaliação Ambiental. Rio de Janeiro: Interciencia.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Bakhtin, M. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Bear, Laura. 2007. “Ruins and Ghosts: The Domestic Uncanny and the Materialization of Anglo-Indian Genealogies in 

Kharagpur.” In Ghosts of Memory, edited by Janet Carsten, 36–57. Oxford: Blackwell.

Benda-Beckmann, Keebet von, and Pirie Fernanda. 2011. Order and Disorder: Anthropological Perspectives. New ed. 

New York, NY: Berghahn.

Benjamin, Walter. 1970. “The Storyteller.” In Illuminations, edited by Hannah Arendt, 83–110. London: Cape.
Boym, Svetlana. 2001. The Future of Nostalgia. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Davies, Jeremy. 2010. “Sustainable Nostalgia.” Memory Studies 3 (3): 262–268.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. 1987. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University 

of Minnesota Press.

Duarte, Marcello Felipe. 2011. “De Arariboia a Martim Afonso: A Metamorfose Indígena Pela Guerra Nas Águas Da 

Guanabara.” Revista Navigator. http://www.revistanavigator.com.br/navig14/art/N14_art1.pdf.

Gonçalves, José Reginaldo Santos. 2009. “O Patrimônio Como Categoria de Pensamento.” In Memória E Patrimônio: 
Ensaios Contemporâneos [Memory and Heritage: Contemporary Essays], edited by Regina Abreu and Mário Chagas, 
25–33. Rio de Janeiro: Lamparina.

Gupta, Akhil, and James Ferguson. 1992. “Beyond ‘Culture’: Space, Identity, and the Politics of Difference.” Cultural 

Anthropology 7 (1): 6–23.

Harvey, David. 2001. “Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents: Temporality, Meaning and the Scope of Heritage Studies.” 

International Journal of Heritage Studies 7 (4): 319–338.

Herzfeld, Michael. 1990. “Pride and Perjury: Time and the Oath in the Mountain Villages of Crete.” Man 25 (2): 305–322.
Hobsbawn, Eric. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ipanema, Cybelle de. 1991. História Da Ilha Do Governador. Rio de Janeiro: Livraria e Editora Marcello de Ipanema.
Jameson, Fredric. 1991. Postmodernism, Or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London: Verso.
Keesing, Roger. 1994. “Colonial and Counter-Colonial Discourse in Melanesia.” Critique of Anthropology 14 (1): 41–58.
Léry, Jean de. 2009 [1578]. História de Uma Viagem Feita À Terra Do Brasil, Também Chamada América. Coleção 

Franceses No Brasil, v. 3. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação Darcy Ribeiro, Editora Batel.

Macdonald,  Sharon.  2011.  “Ex-siting  and  Insighting:  Ethnographic  Engagements  with  Place  and  Community.”  In 
Epistemische Orte: Gemeinde und Region als Forschungsformate, edited by Gisela Welz, Tonia Davidovic-Walther, 
and Anke Weber, 29–43. Frankfurt: Institut für Kulturantropolgie und Europaeische Ethnologie.

Massey, Doreen B. 2005. For Space. London: Sage.
Olick, Jeffrey K., and Robbins Joyce. 1998. “Social Memory Studies: From ‘Collective Memory’ to the Historical Sociology 

of Mnemonic Practices.” Annual Review of Sociology 24: 105–140.

Oliveira, Emanoel Magno Atanásio. 2013. “Resenha: O Patrimônio como Categoria do Pensamento, de José Reginaldo 

Santos.” Revista Diálogos 1: 287–291.

14 (3): 345–359.

Palmer, Clare. 2011. “Place-historical Narratives: Road – Or Roadblock – To Sustainability?” Ethics, Policy & Environment 

Pálsson, Gísli. 1996. “Human-environmental Relations: Orientalism, Paternalism and Communalism.” In Nature and 

Society: Anthropological Perspectives, edited by Phillipe Descola and Gísli Pálsson, 63–81. London: Routledge.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1985. Islands of History. London: The University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Laurajane. 2006. Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Velho, Gilberto. 2013. “Anthropology and Cultural Heritage.” Vibrant 10 (1): 145–150.
Zigon, Jarrett. 2008. Morality: An Anthropological Perspective. Oxford: Berg.


