International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Natural World Heritage: A New Approach to
Integrate Research and Management

Jean‐Claude Lefeuvre

To cite this article: Jean‐Claude Lefeuvre (2007) Natural World Heritage: A New Approach to
Integrate Research and Management, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 13:4-5, 350-364,
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701351015
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250701351015

Published online: 03 Jul 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 251

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 13, No. 4–5, July–September 2007, pp. 350–364

Natural World Heritage: A New 
Approach to Integrate Research and 
Management
Jean-Claude Lefeuvre

134-5000000July-September 2007
Jean-ClaudeLefeuvre
jeanclaudelefeuvre@wanadoo.fr
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_234993.sgm
10.1080/13527250701351015
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2007Taylor & Francis

For more than 12,000 years, humans have modified, changed, and even destroyed many
natural ecosystems in a large part of Europe, especially forest ecosystems. This evolution
resulted in a European territory characterised by diversified rural landscapes where we can
generally distinguish three complementary parts including cultivated space, pastoral space
and forest space. These systems connecting natural, modified ecosystems with agro-systems
could  have  an  interesting  biological  diversity.  Since  the  middle  of  the  20th  century,  the
modernisation of agriculture, and the extension of single crop and industrial breeding have
completely  changed  this  vision  again.  According  to  the  evolution  that  we  imposed  on
nature,  the  disappearance  or  the  regression  of  certain  species,  the  invasion  by  foreign
species,  we  can  discuss  our  strategy  to  preserve  the  future  of  the  natural  patrimony,
biodiversity, the ecosystem’s functioning and services. Using the Mont-Saint-Michel bay
case  study  and  the  National  Park  of  Banc  d’Arguin  registered  on  the  UNESCO  World
Heritage  List,  we  try  to  show  that  long-term  multidisciplinary  research  is  necessary  to
provide  new  knowledge  and  we  propose  a  new  system  of  management  for  complex
ecosystems with users, stakeholders and elected members.

Keywords: Global Change; European Landscape; Biodiversity Loss; Ecosystem Services; 
New Conservation Approach

Evolution of Natural and Modified Systems

The Quaternary era was marked by an ever-changing climate, characterised by strong
variations in temperature; glaciations alternated with interglacial periods for at least 1

Jean-Claude  Lefeuvre,  Muséum  National  d’Histoire  Naturelle,  Paris.  Correspondence  to:  jeanclaudelefeu-
vre@wanadoo.fr

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701351015

International Journal of Heritage Studies

351

million  years.  In  parallel,  the  sea  level  varied  considerably.  The  amplitude  of  these
changes of level could exceed 120 m. In this context our species, Homo sapiens, knew
how to conquer new territories and how to continue its evolution. On this subject de
Lumley has written: ‘endowed with extraordinary capacities of adaptation, the Human
being will develop his civilisations in all latitudes, in all climates, in all landscapes and
will  survive  in  extreme  conditions.  When  his  environmental  factors  become  most
difficult his cultural leaps will be the largest.’1 In fact, it was in the middle of the Ice Age,
more  than  35,000  years  ago,  that  parietal  art  developed,  leaving  us  caves  decorated
with admirable  representations  of  vertebrate  species,  both  as  hunted  animal  and
troublesome predator.

Actually, it is from this time and until approximately 9,000 years ago that one can
witness  a  genuine  first  great  revolution  which  makes  inseparable  the  expression  of
cultural phenomena marking embryonic civilisations and new ways of living in ecosys-
tems increasingly modified by human activities and subjected to human needs. This
revolution resulted in the transition from a nomadic to a sedentary lifestyle, with the
construction of huts made from branches erected above bases of gathered stones (the
first villages), and worship of the dead. Later, in the context of climatic change and in
an area marked by an abundance of natural resources, plants and animals available for
gathering and hunting, came the beginning of selective intervention in the ecosystem
with the grading of coarse grain cereals, flour making and bread baking. This was in the
Middle East, part of which was to be called the ‘fertile crescent’. These changes were a
prelude to the birth of agriculture, with the selection of wild fig trees, mutant, sterile
11,400 years ago in the Jordan valley,2 followed by the cultivation of cereals and the
domestication of wild ungulates, accompanied by the building of the first villages with
dwellings and terracotta silos.

The Neolithic revolution was launched. It was to extend on both sides of the Medi-
terranean Sea and all over Europe in less than 5,000 years.3 Little by little the natural
ecosystems were profoundly modified throughout Europe for agricultural needs as well
as for stone from the Earth’s crust for use in the building of permanent habitats. One
can  say  that  from  this  period  onwards,  all  human  construction,  all  the  monuments
which  attest  to  our  cultural  evolution,  fit  into  nature  as  adapted  by  human  beings,
directed towards the production of human well-being and services. Admittedly, when
we refer to one of the civilisations which marked the history of humanity—that of the
Egyptians—we can still say that nature spoke to the Egyptians, creators of an excep-
tional monumental art, amazing frescos and bas-reliefs4 on which nature is present
everywhere, in particular in the form of an enduring reference to two plants from the
wetlands, the papyrus, king of the North, and the lotus, the plant of rebirth. And what
can we say about the representations of flights of ducks, Egyptian geese or fish captured
with a net, if not that ‘the universal message of the civilisation built by Egypt lies in the
respect shown for the world and the forces which govern it’,5 like the sun god Râ repre-
sented by a man with a falcon head surmounted with a solar disc or in the form of a
crowned beetle. The gods of Egypt claim to be part of various wild species of fauna,
crocodile,  wild  dog,  falcon,  lioness.  But  in  parallel,  the  reference  to  wild  nature  is
altered by the reference to nature as modified for the breeding needs of the ram in

352

J. C. Lefeuvre

particular and also of the crowned cow Hator which holds an important place in the
Egyptian polytheist religion. One should not forget either that the wetlands lining the
sacred River Nile were controlled and modified to become cultivated fields using the
annual floods which permeated Egyptian life.

The extension of the ‘Neolithic revolution’ all across Europe and the growth in the
number of human beings on European territory in various civilisations—from the East
(e.g. Celts) or South (Roman Empire)—were accompanied by one period of regression
or extraordinary degradation of the natural ecosystems, the forest in particular, which
was  to  continue  for  centuries.  Cereals  need  open  spaces,  requiring  the  creation  of
glades by clearing. In addition to the development of agriculture, the proto-industry of
iron or glass, the transformation of limestone into lime, the requirements of structural
timber for the cities or the shipbuilding industry, the demand for charcoal in the cities,
all contributed to the regression of forests. Thus, in France, the surface covered by the
forest decreased from 44 million ha in 5,000 BP to 7.7 million ha just before the French
Revolution in 1789. In parallel, what was left of the forest was subjected to the right of
pasturage, acorn gleaning or to the felling of trees selected according to need (oak for
the saw log, shipbuilding or tannin, beech for clogs and the wood craft industry) and
where structure depended on its use (from clusters with large trees for the saw log to
clumps used for firewood). All these spaces could no longer be compared to natural
environments after so many human interventions. Little by little the large herbivores
such as aurochs, bison and the large predator populations (bear, lynx, wolf) decreased.
This  evolution  was  carried  out  in  spurts  as  a  result  of  invasions,  wars,  epidemics,
famines and climatic changes (e.g. the ‘little ice age’) with an alternation of fallow lands
(e.g. during the One Hundred Years War) and clearing lands.

According  to  de  Ravignan  et  al.  this  evolution  resulted  in  a  European  territory
characterised by rural landscapes where three generally complementary parts could be
distinguished: a cultivated space or ager, a pastoral space or saltus and a forest space or
silva.6 It is the layout of the ager that determines the dominating aspect of the rural
landscape. This is much diversified, as much at the European level as on French terri-
tory: from the Beauceron open field to the Breton bocage or the Cevennes terrace fields
(see  Figure  1).  Agricultural  systems  based  on  mixed  farming  and  mixed  breeding,
adapted to the soil and the climate, strongly influenced the functioning of these various
landscapes to which flora and wild faunas adapted, as described in Clavreul (see Figure
2).7  Some  of  these  systems  became  highly  artificial,  such  as  the  bocages  with  their
agricultural parcels surrounded by ditches and slopes covered with quickset hedges and
periodically pollarded trees (generally every nine years). These systems could have a
more important biological diversity than the systems qualified as ‘natural’ and located
next to them.8 The modernisation of agriculture characterised by the ‘improvement’ of
plants  and  domestic  animals,  increasing  mechanisation,  the  use  of  chemicals
(fertilisers, pesticides, etc.), the extension of single-crop farming and single breeding,
industrial breeding, etc. completely changed this vision again. The plant and animal
species  had  difficulty  in  adapting  to  these  new  conditions.  This  is  demonstrated  in
Clavreul’s study (see Figure 2) of the various landscapes in the same territory which
result  from  such  a  change,9  and  is  what  Binder  (see  Figure  3)  also  confirms.10  The

International Journal of Heritage Studies

353

Figure  1 Rural  landscapes  in  Europe  at  the  middle  of  the  twentieth  century.  (From
Brunet in De Ravignan et al., 1990).

Figure 1 Rural landscapes in Europe at the middle of the twentieth century. (From Brunet in De Ravignan  et al., 1990)
Figure 2 Richness ofbirds (grey bar) and carabid beetles (black bar) Communities in various rural landscapes. (From Clavreul, 1984.)
Figure 3 Changes in rural landscape from mixed farming (A) to single crop farming (open field) (B)). (From Binder, 1986.)
Figure 4 Change in abundance of common birds in France (95 species) during 1988–2004 period, in rural landscapes, forests and urban areas. The French wild bird indicator is based on the population trends of wild breeding birds. (From Couvet et al., 2004.)

evolution of bird settlements in various types of habitats (see Figure 4) reinforces the
idea that the transformation of agricultural territory negatively impacts biodiversity.11
Thus,  humans  transformed  not  only  most  European  territory  in  3,000  years  of
history by substituting modified agro-systems for the land’s natural ecosystems or by
abandoning some of these modified ecosystems after use, but also by controlling the
rivers  with  dykes,  and  transforming  the  functioning  of  the  aquatic,  continental  or
marine  systems  by  unfavourable  nutrient  enrichments  (eutrophication)  as  with,  for
example, the compounds derived from inorganic or chemical synthesis. We thus now
live in an eminently changing environment that contrasts strongly with the supposedly
immutable, timeless character of many monuments registered on the World Heritage
List. Admittedly, these cultural traces of various civilisations which mark the human
history of our planet have suffered enough from human activities. Indeed, Fabre shows
that the bridge-aqueduct of Gard (registered in 1989) built by the Romans to supply
water to the town of Nimes and which remarkably has resisted the ravages of time and
floods, has suffered from loss of material (stones were removed for Lidenon Castle and
for  the  church  of  St-Bonnet-du-Gard).12  The  left  bank  abutment  was  cut  down  by
130 m from its original height and the bridge-aqueduct also lost its breast wall. Another
example is Angkor, the monumental and archaeological site of Kampuchea, revealed to
the world in 1860, left in a state of abandon, and often plundered from 1972, before its
registration  as  a  World  Heritage  Site  in  1992,  and  which  now  requires  important
restoration work. We also know that the air pollution that we generate harms the orig-
inal stonework of some of these precious monuments. It has been possible, however, to
find the quarry which provided the original stones and carry out repairs in order to
preserve these outstanding elements of human history for future generations. But with
the  evolution  that  we  have  imposed  on  nature,  the  disappearance  or  regression  of

354

J. C. Lefeuvre

Figure 2 Richness of birds (grey bar) and carabid beetles (black bar) communities in vari-
ous rural landscapes. (From Clavreul, 1984.)

certain species, the invasion by foreign species, and the modification of ecosystems as
a result of our activities, what strategy can we develop to preserve the future of the
‘natural  monuments’  in  accordance  with  Alexander  Von  Humboldt’s  meaning,
knowing that the ‘bricks of life’, the species, are irreplaceable, at least on a temporal
scale, for thousands of human generations?

Mont Saint-Michel and its Bay: A Standard of Association between Nature and 
Culture

The first French site registered on the UNESCO World Heritage List for both cultural
and natural reasons, Mont Saint-Michel and its bay do indeed seem to lend themselves
to a comparative analysis between what is done to protect a prestigious monument

International Journal of Heritage Studies

355

Figure  3 Changes  in  rural  landscape  from  mixed  farming  (A)  to  single  crop  farming
(open field) (B). (From Binder, 1986.)

anchored firmly to a rock, the Mont Tombe, known worldwide, visited annually by
more than 3 million visitors, and what could be done to preserve the casket of this
jewel (the bay) sometimes referred to as the Wonder of the Occident.13 The mount
was  a  monastery  from  966;  then  in  1790  it  lost  its  abbey  status  to  become  a  state
prison, a status which it held until 1863. In 1867, monks returned to the monastery
and  in  1872,  with  the  appointment  of  the  architect  Corroyer,  thoughts  turned  to
repairing  the  damage  caused  to  the  buildings;  at  last  the  time  for  restoration  had
started. The spire surmounting the abbey church was built and then capped with Saint

356

J. C. Lefeuvre

Figure 4 Change in abundance of common birds in France (95 species) during 1988–
2004, in rural landscapes, forests and urban areas. The French wild bird indicator is based
on the population trends of wild breeding birds. (From Couvet et al., 2004.)

Michel’s statue (by Frémiet, 1897). The restoration work currently continues in the
context of a major project to re-establish a maritime character around Mont-Saint-
Michel. This development started in February 2006 and serves to remind us that the
bay has been subjected to changes since its origin. In fact, it represents a remarkable
model  of  a  littoral  area,  originating  at  the  time  of  the  Flandrian  transgression  and
largely reorganised by human intervention over a period of about 15 centuries. Mont-
Saint-Michel bay is nearly 50,000 ha in extent, distributed between a maritime domain
(approximately 30,000 ha of which more than two-thirds are above normal tides), old
and recent polders (15,000 ha), and valleys and continental wetlands (approximately
3,000 ha). Its entire catchment area approaches 3,250 km2. It is a beautiful example of
the transformation wrought by nature over the centuries. Indeed, in this bay, formed
6,000 years ago in its current configuration, under the action of a ‘natural’ rise of sea
level, due to the climatic re-warming following the last glaciations (and which created
the English Channel, after a sea-level rise of more than 120 m), the first sedimentary
settlements  that  clogged  the  bottom  of  the  bay  were  already  being  more  or  less
modified, from 3,000 years ago, by the arrival of terrestrial elements coming from the
first clearings. Then, one part of the saltmarshes was cut off from the sea by a shelly
reef, the ‘natural’ increase of which could have been accentuated by the shells’ use for

International Journal of Heritage Studies

357

food, of which the oysters (Ostrea) abundant in the bay form a large part. Certainly,
from the 11th century onwards this shelly reef was used as a support for a dyke built by
the dukes of Brittany. It was completed more than two centuries later, isolating the
first  polders  of  the  bay,  known  as  ‘Marais  de  Dol’.  These  12,000  ha  of  saltmarshes
dominated by halophilous plants were thus to be transformed into soils for crops and
breeding and were quickly dominated by terrestrial plants. On the other hand, those
parts that were difficult to drain were to be populated by wetland plants characteristic
of freshwater environments.14

After the attempts to settle the polders between Mont-Saint-Michel and the main-
land had failed (the Quinette de la Hogue concession), the French state was to concede
a vast territory on both sides of Mont-Saint-Michel to the Dutch company Mosselman
& Donon. This company, after the Couesnon canalisation in 1856, accomplished the
settlement of polders in the western part while gradually isolating, by 1935, 2,200 ha of
arable land by successive dams. These became known as the ‘recent polders’. Only a few
polders were to be set up in the eastern part, and the Roche Torin dyke, planned to
connect  this  locality  to  Mont-Saint-Michel,  was  never  to  be  finished  due  to  storm
damage and the movements of the Rivers Sée and Sélune. All these developments, the
construction  of  a  dyke-causeway  and  a  relatively  recent  estuary  dam  on  Couesnon,
seem to be responsible for most of the sediment concentrates now in the estuary part
of  the  bay,  near  Mont-Saint-Michel.  These  sedimentary  settlements,  which  in  some
places can reach over 3 cm per year, allow the progression of saltmarshes in front of the
seawall, at a rate of up to 20 ha per year. Today, these saltmarshes occupy almost 4,000
ha and are among the widest along Europe’s west coast.15

Thus, since this bay has existed, it has been physically and biologically transformed
for  the  needs  of  humans.  Since  the  Bronze  Age,  the  fish  of  the  bay  were  exploited
with fixed fisheries of which most were of a V-shaped timber construction (racks). On
the Norman coast, some fisheries built with low stone walls still remain. Shrimps are
specifically  captured  by  means  of  tésures  (numerous  fixed  nets  laid  out  together  in
order to block the way of fish and crustaceans) or through the use of haveneaux (bag
nets with a shaft), with typical local fishing tools called dranet in Brittany and bichette
by the Normans. The gathering of molluscs was also an important activity in the bay,
for example the collecting of cockles and the dredging of oysters through the use of
large sailing boats (bisquines). These traditional activities have now made way for fish-
eries which have significantly transformed the landscape of the bay with oyster tables
and mussel beds (which have just obtained an AOC).16 Hunting has always been estab-
lished in the bay. First practised at dawn or at dusk (à la passée or à la botte), then also
during the night since 1947–1948, with the construction of ponds and huts (gabions)
on the saltmarshes. In addition, the saltmarshes have been exploited by sheep since the
Middle  Ages.  Grazing  modifies  the  marsh’s  natural  vegetation  by  privileging  ‘sheep
grass’ (puccinellia) which forms genuine short lawns. These sheep, which are famous
for their gustatory quality, are now known by the name of the area which they trans-
formed—the salt grasslands (les prés salés).

Thus for 3,000 years, but particularly since the year 709, the date of the first Christian
constructions dedicated to Saint Michel, and all along the rising of ‘le phare de la Chré-

358

J. C. Lefeuvre

tienté’, the bay has changed, either because of the exploitation of its natural riches or by
developments in the littoral zone, mostly related to the reclamation of land from the
sea. This evolution was accentuated during the 19th and 20th centuries as a result of the
demands of agriculture and of tourism, with the number of visitors continually increas-
ing. The exploited nature of this area did not affect the UNESCO decisions. Indeed, in
spite of, or because of, these changes, the bay shelters an exceptional natural heritage:17 

(a) It has the largest saltmarshes (4,000 ha) and is the richest in floristic species of the

French Atlantic coasts.

(b) For migratory birds, it is an area of international importance for wintering, more
especially for Anatidae and waders. In the event of a cold snap, the bay is used as a
climatic  refuge,  being  able  to  accommodate  exceptional  numbers  on  such
occasions (widgeons especially). For them, as for the Brent geese, the saltmarshes
play an essential role as a nursery.

(c) The bay is also an important nursery for many fish species: sole, plaice, ray, bass,

mullet.

(d) The bay shelters the largest ‘deposit’ of polychaete worm (hermelles) reefs of all the
European  coasts.  These  reefs  are  built  by  the  polychaete  annelid  Sabellaria
alveolata,  and  the  individuals  form  colonies  made  from  agglomerated  tubes  of
sand and shelly remains.

(e) The  bay  regularly  accommodates  several  species  of  marine  mammals  but  two
species are present all year round: the large dolphin and the seal calf-sailor (the
latter registered as an endangered species).

(f) The Rivers Sée, Sélune and Couesnon are classified rivers for migratory fish (eel,
salmon, sea trout, shad and lamprey). The River Sée has the best salmon popula-
tions and, more generally, has high-quality pisci-cultural stocks, as opposed to the
Couesnon where the quality of the water has been degraded.

Biodiversity—Hidden Values

For the visitor who contemplates the bay from the top of the Wonder, the ‘casket’ is
always beautiful and everything appears fixed. The landscapes of polders, the result of
the keen fight to conquer new territories of the sea, the sumptuous surfaces of salt-
marshes, the mud flats which extend as far as the eye can see, and even the alignment
of the mussel beds (mussel-breeding stakes) which, like ‘Buren’s columns’ in Paris’s
Palais Royal, look like an architect’s desire to magnify the decoration, all participate in
a construction of space that can only make the architectural beauty of Mont-Saint-
Michel itself more sublime. Yet so many changes have occurred in less than a century.
The  recent  polders  whose  wet  grasslands  constituted  one  of  the  greatest  wintering
places for white-fronted geese in France, have lost 99% of their meadow surface in the
last 30 years, and have also lost their water fowl. But the most important feature of this
bay is the major transformation undergone by the saltmarshes and in particular the
progressive loss of their functions. It is important to emphasise this last aspect as it is
too often ignored by the public and the users of these quasi-natural areas. The Millen-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

359

nium Ecosystem Assessment (2005) describes the functions and services provided by
the ecosystems. This also arose as a result of the international ‘Biodiversity: Science and
Governance’ conference held in Paris (January 2005) which, in the Paris Declaration,
insists that ‘biodiversity provides goods that have a direct use-value such as food, wood,
textiles,  pharmaceuticals  …  It  supports  and  enhances  the  ecosystem  services  upon
which human societies often indirectly depend.’18

The direct use-value is easiest to identify even if its importance is largely underesti-
mated in our society. Indeed, if the question ‘What are the saltmarshes used for?’ was
asked of the many visitors to the Mount, the answer which one would obtain immedi-
ately would be the same as the local farmers who use the marshes to graze their many
herds of sheep, the famous ‘prés salés’ of Mont-St-Michel bay. The stockbreeders could
refine the response by specifying that in some places they also use them to make hay or
to graze cattle and even horses. Grazing fundamentally modifies the vegetation cover
of the saltmarshes, which it transforms into relatively short vegetation, dominated by
graminaes, the puccinellia. This latter plant constitutes the principal food source for
wintering  widgeons,  one  of  the  species  targeted  by  hunters.  Another  wintering
Anatidae, the Brent goose, which is, by contrast, a protected species, is also dependent
on the marshes with puccinellia, though it prefers the zones grazed by bovines which
leave  slightly  longer  vegetation  compared  to  sheep.  It  is  understood  that  farmers,
hunters  and  nature  conservators,  because  they  appreciate  the  value  of  what  these
ecosystems can offer, are involved in keeping these marshes transformed by grazing.
Unfortunately, overgrazing greatly reduces what the ecosystem can offer because of its
effect of extending the area covered by grass that is too short to accommodate geese and
widgeon, and even sheep, in their search for food.

On  the  other  hand,  the  interest  in  ‘natural’  saltmarshes  is  not  obvious.  Those  in
Europe  are  characterised  by  vegetative  cover  that  depends  on  the  duration  of  tidal
flooding. It is thus possible to distinguish a pioneer zone, a low marsh, a middle, and a
high marsh, each zone being characterised by dominant plants. One of the pioneering
species is salicornia which is used now more and more as pickles in human food. As one
moves towards the mainland, one finds the puccinellia, characteristic of the low marsh
(the juvenile part of the marsh), the extension of which is of interest when supported
by ‘engineer organisms’ (i.e. sheep). The middle saltmarshes are occupied extensively
by a very common species widespread from the saltmarshes of Hyères to the bay of
Somme,  the  obiones  (Halimione  portulacoïdes).  This  middle  marsh  with  Atriplex
portulacoïdes appears to be generally of little interest to the users of the bay. The high
part is occupied by red fescue and sea couch grass (Elymus athericus); it corresponds to
the  ‘mature’  marsh,  the  oldest  in  the  process  of  terrestrialisation.  Ten  years  of
ecological research have shown that the middle marshes, so forsaken, are far from being
unimportant if one is interested in the ecological services they are able to fulfil.19 First,
the  obiones  (Halimione  portulacoïdes)  the  dominant  species  of  the  zone,  are  very
productive; more than 20 tonnes on average of dry organic matter per hectare and per
year  up  to  a  maximum  production  of  36  tonnes,  without  ploughing,  fertilisers  or
pesticides—whereas  a  cereal  crop  needs  140–180  kg  of  nitrogen  per  hectare  for  a
production of 10–13 tonnes of dry matter.

360

J. C. Lefeuvre

Most of the organic matter produced by the obiones (Halimione portulacoïdes) is
decomposed on the spot (at an equal speed to that in wet tropical forests) thanks in
particular to the work of a small shellfish ‘chopper’ (of type Orchestia) and to bacteria,
some of which cause the mineralisation of organic matter. This results in the production
of organic matter as dissolved and fine particles as well as nutrients (nitrogen and phos-
phorus) which, exported to the marine environment, serve to enrich the mud flats close
to the saltmarshes. This enrichment makes it possible to understand the output of these
mud flats in terms of benthic micro-algae, the diatoms. Carried inland again by the
flood at the time of the rising tides, these diatoms, alive or dead, and the organic micro-
detritus (coming notably from the saltmarshes) make it possible partly to explain why
Mont-Saint-Michel bay is able to produce an average of 10,000 tonnes of marketed
mussels per year (the primary French centre for mussel beds) and 4,000–6,000 tonnes
of oysters—without counting the production of invertebrates, some of which are eaten
by migratory birds, in particular the waders. If one more closely observes the function-
ing of these ‘natural’ saltmarshes, flooded as they are by less than 40% of the tides each
year, one realises that they are visited during the immersion (which lasts less than one
hour per tide) by fish like the mullet and the one-year-old juvenile sea bass. Many of
these fish arrive with an empty gut. The mullet gorge themselves on diatoms which they
take to the bottom of the ‘criches’ (a local name given to the tidal channels which drain
the saltmarshes). The young bass can return with stomachs filled with Orchestia which
has a very active role in the decomposition of the obiones (Halimione portulacoïdes), as
mentioned above. The capture of these small shellfish can account for up to 90% of the
growth of the bass during their first year of life.

The grazed marshes, by comparison, lose a large part of their ecological function.
Indeed they produce less than 5 tonnes of dry matter per hectare per year, which repre-
sents an important reduction compared to the middle marsh production. So, by compar-
ison, this represents a decrease of exported organic material and nutriments to coastal
marine  water.  Consequently  they  shelter  only  one  reduced  population  of  Orchestia,
which is detrimental to the juvenile sea bass population. These few examples are enough
to explain why Eugene Odum, a renowned specialist in ecology, often used to say ‘the
saltmarshes are the richness of the sea’ to convince developers to stop transforming the
saltmarshes of the east coast of the USA into arable land through draining. They also
make it possible to understand that while farmers, hunters and all those who perceive
directly, visually, can see the ‘services’ provided by the grazed saltmarshes, the fishermen
and the shell-fish breeders cannot realise, through lack of knowledge, that the success
of  their  production,  and  their  incomes,  can  partly  be  dependent  on  these  ordinary
marshes which thus far have been perceived as an embarrassment rather than an asset.
The co-existence of areas of easily recognised usage value and areas providing ecological
services may appear simple now that these areas have been identified by researchers.

The situation is quite different with the new threat to the functioning of the salt-
marshes. For about 15 years they have been invaded by sea couch grass, a characteristic
species of the high marshes which now extends to the low marshes, progressing at a rate
of 3.9 ha per year. This invasion calls into question both the functioning of the grazed
zones  (the  plant  is  not  eaten  by  the  sheep  or  the  phytophagous  birds20)  and  the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

361

functioning of the natural zones—despite high production, the grass produces organic
matter that is ‘resistant’ to decomposition because of its high lignin content,21 which
results in little exportable matter but, on the contrary, in the storage of organic matter
and the deposition of sediment, leading to a levelling of the ground supporting the
perennial  installation  of  this  graminae.  It  is  also  more  unfavourable  to  the  nursery
function for the young bass.22 Grazing by sheep after crushing the vegetation seems
able to contain this invasion locally23 but the high cost of such operations, experimen-
tal at the moment on a game reserve, makes the general introduction of this system of
control impossible for an area of more than 1,000 ha. To stop this type of invasion, it
is necessary to attack the principal cause, known to be due to the increase in the nitrate
and nitrate compound content in the water of the rivers (the Couesnon in particular)
and  in  the  groundwater.  The  nitrate  compounds  are  used  by  grass  to  synthesise
osmoticum, which allows it to resist salt stress and to progress towards zones more and
more  frequently  flooded  by  tide.24  Indicative  of  a  true  eutrophication,  due  to  the
modernisation of agriculture, the development of the single corn crop and industrial
breeding,  the  invasion  by  grass  can  no  longer  be  controlled  except  in  the  restricted
circle surrounding Mont-Saint-Michel and its bay, but it must bring to mind a new
vision of what could become the agricultural production in the bay area with the resto-
ration of the degraded catchment area—the disappearance of the bocage and wetlands.
In contrast to what might be believed, such an ambition is not a utopia. The major
development  works  undertaken  since  the  beginning  of  2006  to  give,  once  again,  a
maritime character to Mont-Saint-Michel have helped the dialogue between Breton
and Norman people and accelerated various initiatives, including those from the Civil
Service  and  from  elected  representatives,  who  consider  that  the  future  of  the  bay
depends  mainly  on  relevant  thinking  about  Catchment  Area  Management.  These
different viewpoints, this co-involvement of the Civil Service, NGOs and ecosystem
users, basing their opinions on the long-term research required for the evolution of the
ecosystem, appear to be the first step towards what might be called ‘the new governance
of  the  ecosystems  for  the  conservation  of  their  biodiversity,  their  functions  and
services’.

The case of the Banc d’Arguin National Park, in Mauritania, perfectly illustrates the
interest in such thought processes. This park, created in 1976 at the request of such
scientists  as  Theodore  Monod,  and  the  French  Foreign  Ministry,  fascinated  as  they
were by the ornithological richness of the place, gained World Heritage List status in
1989.  It  covers  an  area  of  12,000  ha,  of  which  6,500  correspond  to  coastal  shallow
waters. This area was used as a background for the famous Radeau de la Méduse by
Géricault. This marine space is the Imraguen’s territory, yellow-mullet shore-fisher-
men, in partnership with ‘driver’ dolphins. Over-fishing for mullet outside the park
and the demand for shark fins led to a difficult situation in the park; the pressure of
fishing exerted on the selachians not being easily conceivable in a protected area. The
International  Foundation  of  the  Banc  d’Arguin  established  lasting  relations  at  the
higher level of the Mauritanian state while showing that the Banc d’Arguin was not only
a wintering zone for European birds but also the largest nursery on Africa’s west coast,
and  one  essential  to  the  survival  of  fishing  for  all  the  nations  of  this  west  coast  (a

362

J. C. Lefeuvre

priceless service rendered by this ecosystem’s complexity). The Foundation also gained
the Imraguen’s confidence by giving them the means (thanks to Breton carpenters) of
restoring their boats, the lanches (sailing boats given by Canarian fishermen), and for
building some new ones within a co-operative framework encompassing all the fishing
villages. The conditions for a permanent debate about the management of the natural
wealth of the park were created, which resulted in the recognition, by law, of the excep-
tional status of this park which depends directly on the General Secretary of the Mauri-
tanian government, on the Imraguen becoming park ‘wardens’ and taking part in the
fight against poaching, and by the organisation of an annual forum joining together the
Civil Service, elected representatives, village chiefs and the inhabitants of the park, all
of whom are concerned with the management of resources. New rules of management
were defined based on the publication of the research results. Thus, in the area of fish-
ing activity, after having set up a one-month biological rest period followed by tempo-
rary restrictions on the use of nets for ray and shark, the Imraguen people proposed the
closure of shark fishing in 2004, followed in 2005 by the destruction by burning (after
receiving grants) of the welded nylon mesh net. The Imraguen people are currently
focusing instead on angling, which is much more selective and guarantees quality prod-
ucts.

The results of this type of governorship, though certainly time consuming, are suffi-
ciently  convincing  to  be  used  as  an  example  of  the  setting  up  of  new  methods  of
management  for  protected  natural  spaces,  in  particular  those  that  form  part  of  the
World Heritage. It is time to think that nature, which across the world shows some
evident signs ‘of breathlessness’, also deserves some major development if future gener-
ations are to be able to benefit from the free services that it so liberally dispenses to
humanity. But we must not delude ourselves. Nothing can be done without long-term
research, taking into account the permanent evaluation of the changes affecting the
ecosystems and their consequences, along with analysis of the services provided and of
the consequences of management measures taken to preserve natural resources. This is
the  price  we  must  pay  to  prepare  a  better  future  for  later  generations,  those  in  the
developing countries included.

Translation: Annie Chapon
Comments and corrections: Micheàl O’Curraoin (Ireland).

Notes

1 [1] De Lumley, L’Homme premier, 11.
2 [2] Kislev  and  Hartmann,  ‘Early  Domesticated  Fig  in  the  Jordan  Valley’,  1372–1374;  Cauvin,

Naissances des divinité, 77–88; Vigne, Les Origines de la culture, 12–15.

3 [3] Mazurié de Keroualin, Genèse et diffusion de l’agriculture en Europe, 160.
4 [4] Desroches-Noblecourt, Lorsque la nature parlait aux Egyptiens, 44–45.
5 [5]
6 [6] De Ravignan et al., L’Atlas de la France verte, 36.
7 [7] D. Clavreul, ‘Contribution à l’étude des interrelations paysages/peuplements faunistiques en

Ibid, 10.

région de grande culture’, thèse de doctorat de 3ème cycle, Université Rennes 1, 1984, 283.

8

International Journal of Heritage Studies

363

[8] Lefeuvre et al., ‘Rapport de synthèse du chapitre IV’, 315.
9 [9] D. Clavreul, ‘Contribution à l’étude des interrelations paysages/peuplements faunistiques en

région de grande culture’, thèse de doctorat de 3ème cycle, Université Rennes 1, 1984, 283.

10[10] Binder, ‘Ouvrages hydrauliques et entretien des cours d’eau’, 106.
11[11] Couvet et al., ‘Les Indicateurs de biodiversité’, 45.
12[12] Fabre, Le Pont du Gard, 71.
13[13] This  qualifier  actually  indicates  the  Gothic  part  of  the  abbey,  finished  in  the  14th  century,
which is only one element of a unit which was built since the end of the 9th century. Between
fires and rebuilding, between wars and times of peace, by successive stacking of buildings of
which the oldest preserved is the admirable church of Notre-Dane Sous Terre dating from the
10th century, sumptuous buildings were to be established to crown the rock. Mount-Saint-
Michel, however, is also a village and a fortress whose ramparts rest directly on the marine
sediments, the tangue.
It is to be noted that if this situation is related to human activities, a retrospective analysis of
the bay sedimentation shows that with each negative fluctuation of marine water level, the salt-
marshes were ‘naturally’ replaced by peat bogs and freshwater marsh plants, with any organic
matter produced being hidden under the marine sediment during the resumption of the trans-
gression. It is this ‘laminated’ system which, as a result of carbon dating of the peat, facilitated
the provision of a chronology of all the events which characterise the history of this bay.

14[14]

15[15] Lefeuvre et al., ‘European Salt Marshes Diversity and Functioning’, I–X.
16[16] Appellation d’origine contrôlée.
17[17] Lefeuvre, ‘La Baie du Mont saint Michel et ses bassins versants’, 1–47.
18[18] The Paris Declaration on Biodiversity (pp. 304–6) is contained in the acts of the Conférence
Internationale ‘Biodiversité Science et Gouvernance’, 2005, edited by the Muséum National
d’Histoire Naturelle for members of the Institut Français de la Biodiversité. Volume 316 pp. +
CD.

19[19] Lefeuvre et al., ‘European Salt Marshes Diversity and Functioning’, 147–161.
20[20]

Schricke,  Les  Aménagements  de  la  réserve  maritime  de  chasse  maritime  de  la  baie  du  Mt  St
Michel, 60–64.

21[21] L.  Valéry,  ‘Approche  systémique  de  l’impact  d’une  espèce  invasive:  le  cas  d’une  espèce
indigène  dans  un  milieu  en  voie  d’eutrophisation’.  Thèse  Muséum  National  d’histoire
Naturelle, 2006, 276.

22[22] Lafaille et al, ‘Does the Invasive Plant Elymus athericus Modify Fish Diet in Tidal Salt Marshes?’,

23[23]

739–746.
Schricke,  Les  Aménagements  de  la  réserve  maritime  de  chasse  maritime  de  la  baie  du  Mt  St
Michel, 60–64.

24[24] Leport et al., ‘Biochemical Traits Related to the Adaptation to Salinity of Elytrigia pycnantha’,

31–38.

References

Binder, W. ‘Ouvrages hydrauliques et entretien des cours d’eau: l’expérience bavaroise.’ In Milieux
naturels: illustrations de quelques réussites, edited by C. Henry and J. C. Toutain. Paris: CNRS,
1986.

Cauvin, J. Naissances des divinité: naissance de l’agriculture. Paris: CNRS, 1997.
Couvet, D., F. Jiguet, R. Julliard and H. Levrel. ‘Les Indicateurs de biodiversité’. In Biodiversité et
changements  globaux,  edited  by  R.  Barbault  and  B.  Chevassus-au-Louis.  Adpf.  Paris:  MAE,
2004.

De Lumley, H. L’Homme premier: préhistoire, évolution, culture. Paris: Odile Jacob, 1991.
De Ravignan, F., P. Roux, P. Brunet, C. Gay and A. Brun. L’Atlas de la France verte. Paris: Jean-Pierre

de Monza, 1990.

364

J. C. Lefeuvre

Desroches-Noblecourt, C. Lorsque la nature parlait aux Egyptiens. Paris: Philippe Rey, 2003.
Fabre, G. Le Pont du Gard: l’aqueduc antique de Nîmes. Barbetane: Equinoxe, 2001.
Kislev, M. E. and A. Hartmann. ‘Early Domesticated Fig in the Jordan Valley’. Science 312 (2006):

1372–74.

Lafaille, P., J. Pétillon, E. Parlier, L. Valéry, F. Ysnel, A. Radureau, E. Feunteun and J. C. Lefeuvre.
‘Does the Invasive Plant Elymus athericus Modify Fish Diet in Tidal Salt Marshes?’ Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science 65 (2005): 739–46.

Lefeuvre, J. C. ‘La Baie du Mont saint Michel et ses bassins versants: un modèle d’anthroposystèmes’.
In  130e  congrès.  Dol  2003.  Vol.  CXII.  Bannalec:  Association  Bretonne  et  union  Régionaliste
Bretonne, 2004.

Lefeuvre,  J.  C.,  V.  Bouchard,  E.  Feunteun,  S.  Grare,  P.  Lafaille  and  A.  Radureau.  ‘European  Salt
Marshes Diversity and Functioning: The Case Study of the Mont Saint-Michel Bay, France.’
Wetlands Ecology and Management 8 (2000): 147–61.

Lefeuvre,  J.  C.,  J.  Missonnier  and  Y.  Robert.  ‘Rapport  de  synthèse  du  chapitre  IV:  caractérisation
zoologique’ [Ecologie animale]. In Les Bocages: histoire, écologie, économie. C.R. Table Ronde
CNRS: aspects physiques, biologiques et humains des écosystèmes bocagers des régions tempérées
humides. Rennes, 5–7 July. Orne: Edition E. D. I. F. A. T.–O. P. I. D. A., Echauffour, 1976.

Leport, L., J. Baudry, A. Radureau and A. Bouchereau. ‘Biochemical Traits Related to the Adaptation
to Salinity of Elytrigia pycnantha, an Invasive Plant of the Mont-Saint-Michel Bay’. Cahiers de
Biologie Marine 47 (2006): 31–38.

Mazurié de Keroualin, K. Genèse et diffusion de l’agriculture en Europe. Paris: Errance, 2003.
Schricke, V. Les Aménagements de la réserve maritime de chasse maritime de la baie du Mt St Michel:
bilan du suivi ornithologique et botanique. Rapport scient. Off. Nat. De la Chasse et de la Faune
Sauv., 2004.

Vigne, J. D. Les Origines de la culture: les débuts de l’élevage. Paris: Le Pommier, 2004.


