A Framework for Sustainable Heritage 
Management: A Study of UK Industrial 
Heritage Sites
Chris Landorf

156000000November 2009
ChrisLandorf
c.landorf@uq.edu.au
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_421252.sgm
10.1080/13527250903210795

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2009Taylor & Francis

In  2002,  the  World  Heritage  Committee  declared  heritage  to  be  ‘an  instrument  for  the
sustainable development of all societies’. The term ‘sustainable development’, however, is
inscribed  with  a  complex  economic,  environmental  and  social  agenda  that  challenges
contemporary World Heritage management practice. This paper draws on a content anal-
ysis of six industrial UK World Heritage Site management plans. The analysis focuses on
the extent that each plan integrates four key sustainability dimensions. Findings indicate
that the planning frameworks and collaboration processes in operation at each site ensure
conservation of the historical physical fabric but limit the development of a sustainable
local cultural economy. A sustainable heritage management framework is presented based
on the adoption of a long-term strategic orientation and extensive local community partic-
ipation in decision making. The framework is relevant to other complex heritage sites such
as historic towns and cultural landscapes.

Introduction

The scope of cultural heritage has broadened significantly since the adoption of the
World Heritage Convention by UNESCO in 1972. From initial concern with historic
monuments  and  sites,  the  World  Heritage  List  now  includes  historic  town  centres,
industrial landscapes and sites linked to intangible heritage. While establishing heritage
value is a highly contested and contextualised issue, debate about the impact of the
frameworks  used  to  manage  World  Heritage  Sites  is  limited.1  This  is  particularly

Chris Landorf, The University of Queensland, Australia. Correspondence to: c.landorf@uq.edu.au



495

evident in relation to complex heritage sites such as industrial landscapes where the
management of heritage value is often in conflict with contemporary community life.2
With recent references to the ‘significant contribution’ that the World Heritage system
makes to sustainable development, this focus may be about to change.3

Sustainable development, however, is also a complex and contested issue. Although
there have been several decades of discussion and debate, there is no universally agreed
definition and practical implementation strategies remain elusive. The purpose of this
paper therefore, is to examine the relationship between the frameworks used to manage
complex heritage sites and the emerging sustainable development paradigm. An initial
review  of  the  conceptual  dimensions  of  sustainable  development  identifies  two  key
principles—the use of a long-term and holistic planning process, and the active partic-
ipation  of  multiple  stakeholders  in  that  planning  process.  These  insights  are  then
applied in an examination of the heritage management frameworks in operation at six
industrial World Heritage Sites in the United Kingdom.

The paper argues that, where heritage objectives are determined by formal collabo-
rative  partnerships,  community  participation  in  the  decision-making  process  is
limited. This ensures transmission of the physical fabric to future generations but limits
the development of a sustainable local cultural economy.4 The paper concludes with a
framework for sustainable heritage management that extends McCann’s guidelines for
social problem-solving.5

Conceptualising Sustainable Development as a Social Problem

The most widely used definition of sustainable development was proposed in 1987 by
the  World  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development  (WCED).  Defined  as
‘development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs’, the definition is founded on a state of
equilibrium across three interdependent dimensions—economic, environmental and
social.6  However,  despite  widespread  consensus  about  the  objective  of  sustainable
development, the concept remains contentious.

At the forefront of the criticism is that the literature on the subject is characterised
by numerous definitions.7 The term is used in diverse fields and contexts resulting in
different  interpretations,  each  reflecting  specific  interests  and  prejudices.8  Many  of
the  definitions  are  additionally  criticised  for  using  vague  and  ambiguous  language.
Such  discursive  ambiguity  further  limits  common  agreement  on  what  sustainable
development is and opens the interpretation process up to political manipulation by
competing  stakeholders.9  A  third  criticism  is  that  this  politicisation  impacts  on
achieving an equitable balance across the economic, environmental and social dimen-
sions  of  sustainable  development.  The  concept  of  equitable  development  is  at  the
heart of the WCED definition and it remains one of the most contentious issues in the
sustainable development agenda.10 The final criticism relates to the shear complexity
of  achieving  a  balance  across  the  three  sustainability  dimensions.  While  there  are
established  and  comparable  economic  and  environmental  performance  measures,
there  are  no  such  measures  for  social  sustainability.11  Even  where  appropriate

496 C. Landorf

measures  exist,  they  are  inherently  difficult  to  balance  for  the  reasons  identified  by
Williams: 

Sustainable development implies an understanding of highly connected and interde-
pendent  social,  economic,  environmental  and  political  systems;  it  is  grounded  in
multi-organisational  and  stakeholder  environments;  it  is  framed  within  a  web  of
administrative,  statutory  and  legal  requirements;  and  it  is  difficult  to  disentangle
problem structures and their root causes, and the attribute outcomes to specific policy
interventions.12

McCann’s definition of a social problem offers a useful framework for conceptualising
sustainable development.13 Firstly, McCann suggests that the dynamic and unbounded
nature of social problems limits the development of a shared understanding of their
causes and effects. In the case of sustainable development, there is no universally agreed
definition and the lack of established performance measures means the three dimen-
sions are often given different priorities and rarely integrated into a whole. Secondly,
the resources needed to affect a social problem are diffused, which means any change
will  need  to  be  undertaken  incrementally  and  through  negotiation  with  multiple
actors.  Some  of  the  major  issues  affecting  sustainable  development,  such  as  intra-
generational  equity,  require  systematic,  long-term  and  globally  integrated  change.
McCann’s final point is that social problems lack a clearly defined authority so new
institutional  arrangements  are  needed  to  coordinate  any  intervention.  Sustainable
development presents a good example of this condition. Issues such as climate change
and environmental degradation require entirely new public, private and third sector
approaches to governance, management and collaboration.

Identifying the Principles of Sustainable Development

Despite the contentious conceptual nature of sustainable development, two key prin-
ciples  are  consistently  evident  in  the  literature—the  use  of  a  long-term  and  holistic
planning process, and the participation and empowerment of multiple stakeholders.
The validity of these two concepts as contributors to sustainable development can be
shown when tested against McCann’s conceptualisation of a social problem.

Firstly,  in  relation  to  social  problems  being  unbounded  and  dynamic,  a  holistic
planning process provides the necessary methodological framework to define a social
problem  and  establish  legitimate  stakeholders.  A  long-term  and  holistic  planning
process is further suited to dynamic environments because both the future impact of
decisions and multiple situational influences need to be considered. Secondly, in rela-
tion to the diffuse resources needed to affect social problems, stakeholder participation
offers a mechanism to gain a holistic understanding of a social problem and to negoti-
ate  a  collective  future  vision.  The  empowerment  of  stakeholders  is  also  integral  to
attaining a commitment to long-term incremental change. Finally, in relation to the
lack of a clearly defined authority, collaborative partnerships in theory offer the neces-
sary cross-institutional authority to coordinate any intervention.

Specific support can be found for strategic planning as a long-term and holistic plan-
ning  process.  Simpson  suggests  strategic  planning  ‘implies  a  long-term  perspective,



497

requires consideration of multiple situational influences, is … goal oriented, and can
accommodate  a  wide  variety  of  conflicting  perspectives’.14  This  embodies  many  of
the WCED  principles  of  sustainable  development.  Further  support  is  provided  by
Williams, who argues that a strong strategic planning process establishes the necessary
accountability and evaluation frameworks for sustainable development.15 Finally, the
circular model of cause and effect adopted in strategic planning promotes the holistic
and future oriented approach required for intra- and inter-generational equity.16

As  an  idealistic  concept,  the  meaningful  engagement  of  multiple  stakeholders
throughout the decision-making process is also widely accepted as pivotal in achieving
a collective sense of responsibility for the sustainable development of a resource. In
relation to heritage, this issue has been investigated by numerous authors. Aas et al., for
example, investigated community participation in tourism development at the World
Heritage Site of Luang Prabang in Laos.17 A key recommendation of the study was the
need  to  improve  stakeholder  negotiation  capabilities.  However  well-meaning,  this
continues to underpin the role of the expert in unlocking ‘valid’ collaboration practice,
subconsciously reinforcing a culturally dominant perspective of collaboration.18

A further example is Nasser’s study of the conflict between tourism, conservation and
sustainable development.19 The study found support in the literature for long-term
planning  and  community  participation  but  it  fails  to  confirm  this  with  empirical
evidence. Wilson and Boyle examined inter-organisational collaboration at 12 World
Heritage Sites in the United Kingdom.20 Though limited in scope, their findings suggest
collaboration is under-utilised in the management process. While these authors provide
useful insights, they do not explicitly consider the relationship between heritage and
sustainable development.

Heritage and Sustainable Development: Conflict or Compatibility

While there has been significant academic interest in the sustainability of tourism at
heritage  sites,21  debate  about  sustainable  development  per  se  is  a  relatively  new
phenomenon.  The  genesis  of  this  has  been  the  recent  recognition  of  sustainable
development  as  an  underlying  precept  of  the  World  Heritage  system.  In  2002,  the
Budapest  Declaration  on  World  Heritage  (the  ‘Budapest  Declaration’)  made  refer-
ence  to  World  Heritage  ‘as  an  instrument  for  the  sustainable  development  of  all
societies’.22 Further references were made to ensure that World Heritage properties
contribute  ‘to  the  social  and  economic  development  and  the  quality  of  life  of  our
communities’,  and  to  ensuring  ‘the  active  involvement  of  our  local  communities  at
all  levels  in  the  identification,  protection  and  management  of  our  World  Heritage
properties’.23

The Budapest Declaration was followed by the conference Linking Universal Values
and Local Values: Managing a Sustainable Future for World Heritage (the ‘Amsterdam
Conference’). The Conference Conclusions and Recommendations: 

Acknowledged  that  World  Heritage  properties  are  dynamic  entities  where  cultural
and social values evolve. They should not be frozen in time for purposes of conserva-
tion.  Indeed,  the  continuity  between  the  past  and  future  should  be  integrated  in

498 C. Landorf

management  systems  accommodating  the  possibility  for  sustainable  change,  thus
ensuring that the evolution of the local value of the place is not impaired.24

The  recommendations  go  on  to  recognise  the  need  for  local  participation  in  the
inscription  and  management  of  World  Heritage  properties,  suggest  an  increase  in
capacity-building and capacity exchange, and acknowledge the role of partnerships in
sustainable heritage management. The Amsterdam Conference represents a significant
commitment  to  the  concept  of  sustainable  development  on  the  part  of  the  World
Heritage community. However, it does so from a discursive position that fails to pene-
trate  the  pervading  values  and  systems  that  continue  to  dominate  heritage  practice.
Despite  commitment  to  the  concept,  neither  the  Budapest  Declaration  nor  the
Amsterdam Conference provides a definition of sustainable development or strategies
for its implementation. It would be expected that such a definition and implementa-
tion guidance would be found in the Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of
the  World  Heritage  Convention  (the  ‘Guidelines’).  The  first  reference  to  stakeholder
participation in the decision-making process at World Heritage sites came in the 1996
revision of the Guidelines. The use of the term ‘essential’ at this point is categorical and
authoritative: 

Article 14
Participation of local people in the nomination process is essential to make them feel
a shared responsibility with the State Party in the maintenance of the site.25

This  remained  unchanged  in  three  subsequent  revisions.  In  2005,  Article  14  was
amended  and  became  Article  12,  but  essentially  the  same  wording  was  included  as
Article 123: 

Article 12
States Parties to the Convention are encouraged to ensure the participation of a wide
variety of stakeholders, including site managers, local and regional governments, local
communities,  non-government  organisations  (NGOs)  and  other  interested  parties
and  partners  in  the  identification,  nomination  and  protection  of  World  Heritage
Properties.26

Article 123
Participation of local people in the nomination process is essential to enable them to
have a shared responsibility with the State Party in the maintenance of the property.27

While subtle, the use of the term ‘enable’ rather than ‘make’ in Article 123 indicates a
shift toward a more participatory tone in the Guidelines. At the same time, moving the
stronger term ‘essential’ to Article 123 and including the less categorical term ‘encour-
aged’ in Article 12 indicates some difficulty with the acceptance of the principle amongst
States Parties to the Convention. In addition to ten new references to ‘stakeholders’, the
2005 revision of the Guidelines contains the first reference to sustainable development: 

Article 6
Since  the  adoption  of  the  Convention  in  1972,  the  international  community  has
embraced the concept of ‘sustainable development’. The protection and conservation
of  the  natural  and  cultural  heritage  are  a  significant  contribution  to  sustainable
development.28



499

Like key World Heritage concepts such as ‘authenticity’, ‘integrity’ and ‘cultural signif-
icance’, however, the term ‘sustainable development’ remains vague and undefined.
This lack of specificity is further evident in references to ‘adequate long-term legisla-
tive,  regulatory,  institutional  and/or  traditional  protection  and  management’,29
‘participatory’  management  planning30  that  may  vary  according  to  diverse  ‘cultural
perspectives’,31 and a management system that includes ‘a cycle of planning, imple-
mentation, monitoring, evaluation and feedback’.32

The essential conflict in these revisions toward greater community participation and
sustainable  development  lies  in  the  connection  between  authenticity,  outstanding
universal value, and the tangible manifestation of that value. This connection is one of
the  pervading  principles  of  Western  heritage  practice.  What  this  means  is  that  any
development  that  affects  the  tangible  characteristics  of  a  site  is  generally  viewed  as
having a negative impact on heritage value. As Sullivan notes, such a focus on tangible
values ‘can inadvertently mummify or destroy aspects of value by disregarding the less
tangible and subtler elements of continuity’.33 For complex heritage sites where value
is linked as much to living cultural heritage as it is to the physical fabric accommodat-
ing it, this is of particular concern.

This problem is exacerbated by the use of language that reinforces expert authority
over community participation. Article 119 in the 2005 Guidelines, for example, applies
the less categorical term ‘may’ to ongoing use. This implies a level of discretion on the
part of those with authority while use of the term ‘must’ in relation to protection of
outstanding universal value is categorical: 

Article 119
World Heritage properties may support a variety of ongoing and proposed uses that
are ecologically and culturally sustainable. The State Party and partners must ensure
that such sustainable use does not adversely impact the outstanding universal value,
integrity and/or authenticity of the property.34

The power of public authorities over development is further framed in the statutory
instruments used by each State Party to protect and manage a World Heritage site.
While reference is given to ‘traditional measures’ for the first time in 2005, there is still
an underlying assumption that any development will be controlled by some form of
statutory authority. There is also no requirement to detail the measures in place for
community consultation and participation: 

Article 132
Protection: Section 5 (of the nomination) shall include the list of the legislative, regu-
latory, contractual, planning, institutional, and/or traditional measures most relevant
to the protection of the property.35

The  question  this  raises  therefore  is  that,  given  the  widespread  acceptance  of  the
sustainability  concept  in  the  academic  literature  and  increasingly  in  heritage
discourse,  are  the  principles  of  sustainable  development  being  adopted  in  the  day-
to-day  management  of  heritage  sites.  The  need  for  a  study  that  offered  some
insights  into  this  issue  was  evident.  As  the  variables  acting  on  the  management
process  are  complex  and  difficult  to  isolate,  a  focussed  study  was  called  for  that

500 C. Landorf

would  provide  the  foundation  for  a  more  extensive  multi-dimensional  study  in  the
future.

Methodology

Evidence for the remainder of the paper comes from a qualitative content analysis of
six World Heritage Site management plans. Management plans were adopted as the
source  of  evidence  because  they  are  the  primary  instrument  guiding  the  ongoing
protection, conservation and presentation of a site. Progress against the goals estab-
lished  in  a  management  plan  also  forms  the  basis  of  national  and  World  Heritage
reporting requirements. Rodwell additionally points out that, as ‘promotional docu-
ments’ written with the purpose of achieving and sustaining World Heritage status,
management plans have a high international profile.36 For these reasons, Wilson and
Boyle consider a site’s management plan to be ‘the most important strategic framework
for integrative site management’.37 In the light of this and evolving World Heritage
expectations,  it  might  be  expected  that  the  principles  of  sustainable  development
would therefore be evident in any World Heritage Site management plan.

As  the  research  utilised  text  based  sources  and  existing  theory  in  relation  to  the
principles of sustainability had been identified, a three stage qualitative and directed
content analysis approach was employed.38 In the first stage, a review of the literature
identified  two  key  principles  of  sustainable  development—a  long-term  and  holistic
planning process and the participation and empowerment of multiple stakeholders in
that process. The literature also revealed increasing acceptance of sustainable develop-
ment in heritage discourse. This was contrasted however, with embedded management
practice that favoured the preservation of tangible physical values over the continuity
of intangible cultural values.

The second stage identified the sample to be analysed. World Heritage sites were
selected because, firstly, the inscription process is subject to independent evaluation
against internationally agreed criteria, and, secondly, sites are assumed to represent the
benchmark of heritage management practice. Industrial sites were identified as a repre-
sentational sub-category of the World Heritage List. Of the 41 industrial sites on the
List  in  2008,  36  sites  whose  significance  related  to  modern  industrialisation  were
selected to further limit the sample and enhance cross-site comparison. Of the 36 sites,
six fell  under a  consistent  legal framework  and had operational management plans.
They also shared common management issues associated with their regional locations
and  complex  site  characteristics  including  diverse  heritage  ‘attractions’,  extensive
industrial  scales,  indistinct  boundaries,  limited  perceived  aesthetic  value,  complex
ownership issues, and demands on contemporary use that did not necessarily relate to
the heritage values placed on the site. The selected sites, shown in Figure 1, were the
Blaenavon  Industrial  Landscape,  Cornwall  and  West  Devon  Mining  Landscape,
Derwent Valley Mills, Ironbridge Gorge, New Lanark and Saltaire.

Figure 1 Map Showing the Six Industrial World Heritage Sites Used in the Study.

The third coding stage started with an initial document familiarisation. Each plan
was  then  analysed  using  a  simplified  coding  instrument  initially  constructed  by
Simpson and later adapted by Ruhanen. Simpson’s instrument was developed to assess



501

Figure 1 Map Showing the Six Industrial World Heritage Sites Used in the Study.

the extent that the principles of sustainable development had been integrated into 19
New  Zealand  tourism  management  plans.39  The  instrument  had  been  subject  to
considerable efforts to reduce bias in its construction, including the use of an expert
panel of independent assessors and statistical analysis to verify reliability and validity.
The final instrument comprised 51 coding items across four dimensions derived from
the literature. A modified 46 coding item version of this instrument was adopted by
Ruhanen who argued that the quantitative origins of Simpson’s instrument made it
appropriate  for  her  sole  assessor  analysis  of  30  Australian  tourism  management
plans.40

Ruhanen’s  coding  instrument  was  adopted  for  this  study  with  modifications  to
incorporate differences in the research scope. The four dimensions were retained but
the number of coding items was reduced to 34. Coding items were phrased to require
systematic evaluations of fact and care was taken to define any subjective concepts prior
to analysis. For this reason, a forced evident/not evident coding response was adopted
rather than the three-point scale adopted by Ruhanen which allowed for a ‘somewhat
evident’ finding. The coding instrument is shown in Table 1.

The situation analysis dimension was designed to determine whether the external
and internal influences on each site were identified as a starting point in the planning
process. In relation to a social problem, this dimension responds to the need to define
a problem and establish a holistic understanding of the situational influences affecting
a problem domain. The strategic orientation dimension was used to determine whether
the  planning  process  was  long-term  and  holistic.  A  strategic  orientation  provides  a
framework  to  assess  the  dynamic  nature  of  a  problem  domain  and  bring  together

502 C. Landorf

Table 1 World Heritage Site Management Plan Coding Instrument

Coding Dimensions

Coding Items

Situation Analysis

Strategic Orientation

Community Values and 
Attitudes

Stakeholder Participation

Is the capacity of tourism infrastructure identified?

Is a range of strategic alternatives identified and evaluated?

Is the integration with other planning processes identified?

1. Are the tangible heritage characteristics described?
2. Are the intangible heritage characteristics are described?
3. Are the land use and ownership patterns identified?
4. Are the demographic characteristics identified?
5. Are the economic characteristics identified?
6. Are the economic benefits of heritage identified?
7. Are the heritage tourism activities identified?
8.
9. Are visitor numbers, length of stay and value identified?
10.
11. Does the time dimension reflect a long-term orientation?
12. Are broad-based economic goals identified?
13. Are broad-based environmental goals identified?
14. Are broad-based social/community goals identified?
15. Are broad-based heritage development goals identified?
16.
17. Are objectives developed that support goals?
18. Are objectives based on supply capability?
19. Do objectives target equitable economic distribution?
20. Are objectives quantifiable and measurable?
21. Are local values, attitudes and characteristics identified?
22. Are critical issues for residents identified?
23. Are community attitudes to heritage assessed?
24.
25. Does the vision align with community values and attitudes?
26.
Is the relationship between stakeholders addressed?
27. Do government agencies participate in the process?
28. Do government agencies influence strategic directions?
29. Do non-government agencies participate in the process?
30. Do non-government agencies influence strategic directions?
31. Do businesses and residents participate in the process?
32. Do businesses and residents influence strategic directions?
33. Do relevant visitor groups participate in the process?
34. Do relevant visitor groups influence strategic directions?

Is the quality of life in the local community assessed?

diffuse  resources  to  tackle  the  problem  in  the  most  effective  way.  The  stakeholder
values dimension was used to establish whether stakeholder values, needs and expecta-
tions had been integrated into a strategic vision for each site. This is a key step in estab-
lishing  who  the  legitimate  stakeholders  are  and  integral  to  building  a  holistic
understanding of situational influences. The final stakeholder participation dimension
was used to determine the breadth and depth of stakeholder engagement in the deci-
sion-making process. Stakeholder participation is critical to establishing a collective
vision for the future of a problem domain. Stakeholder empowerment through this
process is needed if long-term incremental change is to be effected. The relationship
between  the  coding  dimensions  and  McCann’s  social  problem-solving  process  is
shown in Figure 2, with McCann’s three stage process extended to include a fourth
implementation stage.



503

Figure  2 Comparing  McCann’s  Social  Problem-Solving  Process  and  the  Sustainable
Heritage Management Process.

Figure 2Comparing McCann’s Social Problem-Solving Process and the Sustainable Heritage Management Process

Findings

The  initial  document  familiarisation  revealed  that  for  all  six  sites,  inscription  on
the World  Heritage  List  resulted  from  significant  historical  links  to  the  Industrial
Revolution and extensive surviving physical evidence. Enthusiastic local advocacy was
a further contributing factor. The sites were all managed through multi-organisational
partnerships supported by a full-time site coordinator. Three of the site coordinators
were  from  a  town  planning/architecture  background  and  three  from  a  heritage
management background. None of the plans detailed how partnership membership
was determined and limited information was provided in relation to the plan prepara-
tion and community consultation process. The plans generally followed the three-part
structure and linear planning process proposed by Feilden and Jokilehto, namely, site
description, site evaluation and objectives, and site management.41 All sites were rela-
tively isolated from other major tourist attractions and of arguably low experiential
value.42 Despite this, an emphasis on heritage-led economic regeneration and tourism
was evident in all six management plans.

The situation analysis included ten coding items. A situation analysis, in the form of
extensive historical backgrounds, inventories and maps, was evident in all six plans.
Natural features were detailed where they were integral to World Heritage Site signifi-
cance. All plans identified site-specific factors such as visitor management and funding
as key management issues. Two mentioned the economic benefits of heritage and one
considered the capacity of local infrastructure. Critically, none of the plans provided
local  economic,  demographic  or  visitor  data,  considered  the  impact  of  broader
national or international trends, or provided a mechanism for regular ongoing evalua-
tion of these dynamic external factors. Each site therefore, remained relatively isolated
from its surrounding context and focused on site-specific conservation issues. Figure 3
illustrates the extent that a situation analysis was evident or not evident in each plan.

Figure 2 Situation Analysis Evaluation, n = 6.

The  strategic  orientation  dimension  included  ten  coding  items.  A  linear  planning
process  was  evident  in  all  six  plans.  A  vision,  objectives  and  actions  plan  had  been

504 C. Landorf

Figure 3

Situation Analysis Evaluation, n = 6.

Figure 3 Strategic Orientation Evaluation, n = 6.

derived from an initial site evaluation and some form of stakeholder consultation. There
was no evidence that a range of strategic alternatives had been evaluated and only two
plans defined broadly based and equitable objectives. The need to develop adequate
indicators to monitor progress is mentioned as a key management issue but quantifiable
measures for less tangible issues such as social well-being are notable omissions. Figure
4 illustrates the extent that a strategic orientation was evident or not evident in each plan.
The stakeholder values dimension included five assessment items. None of the plans
adequately assessed local quality of life or community attitudes to heritage. While all
six  plans  included  some  form  of  stakeholder  consultation,  only  one  included  local
community workshops in the planning process. The other five plans were prepared in
draft by the major landowner groups and relevant government and non-government
agencies before general public consultation was sought. Figure 5 illustrates the extent
that stakeholder values were evident or not evident in each plan.

Figure 4 Stakeholder Values Evaluation, n = 6.

Figure 4

Strategic Orientation Evaluation, n = 6.



505

Figure 5

Stakeholder Values Evaluation, n = 6.

The stakeholder participation dimension included nine coding items. All six plans
detailed  a  partnership  structure  between  key  stakeholders.  Four  plans  described  the
consultation process. Two plans were prepared as a consultation draft by the partner-
ship group before wider public consultation was sought. One plan conducted work-
shops  with  the  local  community  but  there  was  no  evidence  that  this  would  be  an
ongoing process. A fourth plan stated only that the plan was produced in consultation
with  key  partnership  stakeholders.  Figure  6  illustrates  the  extent  that  stakeholder
participation was evident or not evident in each plan.

Figure 5 Stakeholder Participation Evaluation,  n = 6.

Figure 6

Stakeholder Participation Evaluation, n = 6.

Discussion

As the results have shown, the World Heritage Site management plans analysed in this
study generally did not meet the criteria for the integration of sustainability principles
into the planning process. Four primary weaknesses were identified. Firstly, an extensive

506 C. Landorf

situation analysis is a foundation for holistic and long-term decision making. Despite
an awareness of heritage-specific situational factors, there is no evidence in any of the
plans of a broader engagement with economic and social issues or trends. This reduces
the capacity to respond quickly and effectively to changes that might impact on World
Heritage Sites. Such a narrow focus also limits the benefits that might otherwise flow to
the broader community.

Secondly,  assessing  a  range  of  strategic  alternatives  and  developing  an  equitable
balance  of  economic,  environmental  and  social  objectives  is  critical  to  longer-term
sustainability. All six plans followed an established linear process of setting objectives
and developing action plans to meet those objectives. However, social objectives and
quantifiable measures for the less tangible values associated with each site were notable
omissions.

Thirdly,  a  community-led  vision  that  incorporates  local  values  and  attitudes
contributes to a collective sense of responsibility for a site and enhances connections
between  a  local  community  and  their  heritage.  There  is  minimal  evidence  that  the
development of a community vision is addressed in any of the plans. As a result of the
internalised strategic focus, there is an assumption that critical issues for the World
Heritage Site are the same for the local community.

Finally, the capacity for all stakeholders to contribute to the management of a heri-
tage  resource  is  fundamental  to  empowering  local  communities  and  enhancing  the
equitable distribution of the benefits of that resource. It is clear that there is a commit-
ment  to  stakeholder  collaboration  across  all  six  sites.  However,  the  focus  is  on  the
development of formal partnership relationships between key government and non-
government organisations, rather than collaboration with informal community groups
and individual citizens. Draft management plans provided for public comment limit
community participation to the level of tokenistic consultation or placation at best.
This  approach  emphasises  one-way  communication  and  limits  the  power  to  judge
the legitimacy of concerns and issues to those with expert knowledge. The elements
identified above have been integrated into a comparative framework for sustainable
heritage management shown in Table 3.

Conclusion

This paper set out to explore the extent that the desired principles of sustainable devel-
opment  had  been  incorporated  into  six  World  Heritage  Site  management  plans.  In
doing so, a consensus about the fundamental objective of sustainable development was
revealed but little agreement on implementation strategies. Even so, the literature did
indicate consistent support for the use of a long-term and holistic planning framework,
and the active participation of a wide range of stakeholders in any sustainable develop-
ment process. Similar acceptance of the principles of sustainable development could be
found  in  recent  heritage  discourse,  but  fundamental  contradictions  were  evident  in
relation to the application of sustainable development at World Heritage sites.

The study is limited in that it is based on a single source of data. It is not possible,
for example,  to  determine  how  meaningful  and  effective  the  ongoing  stakeholder

Table 3 A Comparative Framework for Sustainable Heritage Management

Dimension

Traditional Heritage Management

Sustainable Heritage Management



507

1. Situation 

Analysis

2. Strategic 

Orientation

3. Stakeholder 

Values

4. Stakeholder 
Participation

● Analysis based on issues of 
immediate concern for the 
conservation of heritage value.
Specialised skills and technical 
expertise dominate.

● Analysis based on broad trends and 

issues that impact on the 
sustainable use of a heritage site.

● Amateur skills and volunteer 

capabilities encouraged.

Segmented and isolated planning 
process.
Focus on linear, short-term 
heritage-related goals.
Strategy based on assessment of risk 
to heritage value.

● Holistic and integrated planning 

process.
Focus on causal, long-term 
sustainability vision.
Strategic options generated and 
priorities negotiated.

● Quantitative measures of heritage 

● Qualitative and quantitative 

specific outcomes.

● Responsibility for implementation 

based on position or expertise.
Segmented review process.

sustainability measures.

● Responsibility for implementation 
based on multi-dimensional value.

● Holistic review process.

● Partnership member values isolated 
at the start of the planning process.

● Vision relates to conserving 

heritage value.

● Partnership and community values 

isolated at the start of the 
nomination process.

● Vision relates to continuity of 

● Decisions made by partnership 

community value.

members.

● High degree of grassroots influence 

on decisions.

Formal partnership structure with 
influence limited to key agencies.
● Hierarchical authority based on 

position or expertise.
Formalised rules and decision-
making processes.

● Decisions are reactive.
● Unilateral communication.
● Benefits flow to heritage site.

● Voluntary partnership structure 
with extensive fluid membership.

● Delegated authority based on 

negotiation and contextual need.

● Minimal rules, contingent 
decision-making processes.

● Decisions are proactive.

Iterative communication.

● Benefits flow to local community.

collaboration process is at each site from management plans alone. Nor is it possible to
determine with certainty whether the intentions stated in the management plans are
being  implemented  in  reality.  However,  similar  approaches  have  been  adopted  in
several other studies so it is argued that management plans do form a reliable founda-
tion for determining the strategic and collaborative approach adopted at each site.

A further four key weaknesses are identified by this study: a limited engagement with
broader  local,  national  and  global  trends;  narrow  definition  of  objectives  and  weak
development  of  performance  indicators;  inadequate  integration  of  local  values  and
attitudes;  and  stakeholder  collaboration  limited  to  major  government  and  non-
government agencies. A framework for sustainable heritage management is proposed
to address these weaknesses. The framework incorporates the conventional approach
to strategic planning found in organisational theory. This approach is integrated with

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
508 C. Landorf

a collaborative decision-making structure, which extends and refines the framework
put forward by McCann. The framework is relevant to managers of complex heritage
sites such as historical towns and cultural landscapes.

A significant finding of this research is the limited capacity for each management
plan to develop as a dynamic document, evolving in response to internal and external
forces and changing collaborative arrangements. It would be expected that an annual
evaluation and review would be incorporated into the planning cycle, and be a require-
ment of any national reporting process. The capacity for each partnership to evolve in
terms of membership and structure might also be expected. A further issue raised by
the research is that greater attention needs to be given to decision-making processes.
While establishing lines of communication is relatively simple, it does not guarantee
equitable or broad participation in the decision-making process.

Finally, the research indicates that the focus of the World Heritage Site management
process is restricted to a relatively narrow view of heritage value and conservation prac-
tice. This view does not align with the evident evolution of World Heritage discourse,
particularly in relation to the concept of authenticity and limits of acceptable change
that support a continued relationship between local communities and their heritage.
Finally, it should be noted that the application of the framework for sustainable heri-
tage management presented in Table 3 is reliant on heritage managers having comple-
mentary conservation, management and negotiation skills, in addition to access to the
data to support the decision-making process.

Notes

Scott, ‘The Cultural Economy of Cities’, 325.

Sullivan, ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices’, 49.

1 [1]
2 [2] Furtado, ‘Monitoring World Heritage’, 43; Rodwell, ‘The World Heritage Convention’, 43.
3 [3] UNESCO, Operational Guidelines (2005), Article 6; UNESCO, Budapest Declaration, Article 1.
4 [4]
5 [5] McCann, ‘Design Guidelines for Social Problem-Solving’.
6 [6] WCED, Our Common Future, 43.
7 [7] Williams, ‘The Governance of Sustainable Development in Wales’, 254.
8 [8]
9 [9] Littig and Grießler, ‘Social Sustainability’, 67
10[10] Hunter, ‘Sustainable Tourism as an Adaptive Paradigm’, 854; Mowforth and Munt, Tourism

Sharpley, ‘Tourism and Sustainable Development’, 2.

and Sustainability, 12.

Simpson, ‘Strategic Planning and Community Involvement’, 12.

11[11] Littig and Grießler, ‘Social Sustainability’, 67.
12[12] Williams, ‘The Governance of Sustainable Development in Wales’, 255.
13[13] McCann, ‘Design Guidelines for Social Problem-Solving’.
14[14]
15[15] Williams, ‘The Governance of Sustainable Development in Wales’, 263.
16[16]
17[17] Aas et al., ‘Stakeholder Collaboration and Heritage Management’, 44.
18[18] Waterton et al., ‘The Utility of Discourse Analysis to Heritage Studies’, 339.
19[19] Nasser, ‘Planning for Urban Heritage Places’.
20[20] Wilson and Boyle, ‘Interorganisational Collaboration at UK World Heritage Sites’, 520.
21[21]

Simpson, ‘Strategic Planning and Community Involvement’, 11.

See,  for  example,  Firat  and  Dholakia,  Consuming  People;  Garrod  and  Fyall,  ‘Managing
Heritage  Tourism’;  Lowenthal,  The  Heritage  Crusade  and  the  Spoils  of  History;  Pederson,

Managing  Tourism  at  World  Heritage  Sites;  Selin,  ‘Developing  a  Typology  of  Sustainable
Tourism Partnerships’.



509

Ibid., Article 3(c).

Ibid., Article 123.
Ibid., Article 6.
Ibid., Article 97.
Ibid., Article 108.
Ibid., Article 110.
Ibid., Article 111.
Sullivan, ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices’, 50.

22[22] UNESCO, Budapest Declaration, Article 1.
23[23]
24[24] de Merode et al., World Heritage Papers 13, 167.
25[25] UNESCO, Operational Guidelines (1996), Article 14.
26[26] UNESCO, Operational Guidelines (2005), Article 12.
27[27]
28[28]
29[29]
30[30]
31[31]
32[32]
33[33]
34[34] UNESCO, Operational Guidelines (2005), Article 119.
35[35]
36[36] Rodwell, ‘The World Heritage Convention’, 54.
37[37] Wilson and Boyle, ‘Interorganisational Collaboration at UK World Heritage Sites’, 505.
38[38] Hsieh and Shannon, ‘Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis’, 1283.
39[39]
40[40] Ruhanen, ‘Strategic Planning for Local Tourism Destinations’, 243.
41[41] Feilden and Jokilehto, Management Guidelines for World Cultural Heritage Sites.
42[42] McKercher and Ho, ‘Assessing the Tourism Potential’, 478.

Simpson, ‘Strategic Planning and Community Involvement’.

Ibid., Article 132.

References

Aas, C., A. Ladkin, and J. Fletcher. ‘Stakeholder Collaboration and Heritage Management’. Annals of

Tourism Research 32, no. 1 (2005): 28–48.

de Merode, E., R. Smeets, and C. Westrik, eds. World Heritage Papers 13. Linking Universal and Local
Values:  Managing  a  Sustainable  Future  for  World  Heritage.  Paris:  UNESCO  World  Heritage
Centre, 2004.

Feilden,  B.  and  J.  Jokilehto.  Management  Guidelines  for  World  Cultural  Heritage  Sites.  Rome:

ICCROM, 1998.

Firat, A. F. and N. Dholakia. Consuming People: From Political Economy to Theatres of Consumption.

London: Routledge, 1998.

Furtado, F. ‘Monitoring World Heritage’. City and Time 1, no. 2 (2004): 43–6.
Garrod, B. and A. Fyall. ‘Managing Heritage Tourism’. Annals of Tourism Research 27, no. 3 (2000):

682–708.

Hsieh,  H.-F.  and  S.  E.  Shannon.  ‘Three  Approaches  to  Qualitative  Content  Analysis’.  Qualitative

Health Research 15, no. 9 (2005): 1277–88.

Hunter,  C.  ‘Sustainable  Tourism  as  an  Adaptive  Paradigm’.  Annals  of  Tourism  Research  24,  no.  4

(1997): 850–67.

Littig,  B.  and  E.  Grießler.  ‘Social  Sustainability:  A  Catchword  between  Political  Pragmatism  and

Social Theory’. International Journal of Sustainable Development 8, no. 1/2 (2006): 65–79.

Lowenthal,  D.  The  Heritage  Crusade  and  the  Spoils  of  History.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University

Press, 1998.

McCann,  J.  E.  ‘Design  Guidelines  for  Social  Problem-Solving’.  The  Journal  of  Applied  Behavioral

Science 19, no. 2 (1983): 177–92.

McKercher, B. and P. S. Y. Ho. ‘Assessing the Tourism Potential of Smaller Cultural and Heritage

Attractions’. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 14, no. 5 (2006): 473–88.

510 C. Landorf

Mowforth, M. and I. Munt. Tourism and Sustainability: New Tourism in the Third World. London:

Routledge, 1998.

Nasser, N. ‘Planning for Urban Heritage Places: Reconciling Conservation, Tourism and Sustainable

Development’. Journal of Planning Literature 17, no. 4 (2003): 467–79.

Pederson, A. Managing Tourism at World Heritage Sites. UNESCO: World Heritage Centre, 2002.
Rodwell, D. ‘The World Heritage Convention and the Exemplary Management of Complex Heritage

Sites’. Journal of Architectural Conservation 8, no. 3 (2002): 1–21.

Ruhanen,  L.  ‘Strategic  Planning  for  Local  Tourism  Destinations:  An  Analysis  of  Tourism  Plans’.

Tourism and Hospitality Planning and Development 1, no. 3 (2004): 239–53.

Scott, A. J. ‘The Cultural Economy of Cities’. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research

21, no. 2 (1997): 323–39.

Selin, S. ‘Developing a Typology of Sustainable Tourism Partnerships’. Journal of Sustainable Tourism

7, no. 3&4 (1999): 260–73.

Sharpley, R. ‘Tourism and Sustainable Development: Exploring the Theoretical Divide’. Journal of

Sustainable Tourism 8, no. 1 (2000): 1–19.

Simpson, K. ‘Strategic Planning and Community Involvement as Contributors to Sustainable Tourism

Development’, Current Issues in Tourism 4, no. 1 (2001): 3–41.

Sullivan, S. ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices in the World Heritage System’. In World
Heritage  Papers  13.  Linking  Universal  and  Local  Values:  Managing  a  Sustainable  Future  for
World Heritage, edited by E. de Merode, R. Smeets, and C. Westrik. Paris: UNESCO World
Heritage Centre, 2004.

UNESCO.  Operational  Guidelines  for  the  Implementation  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention.  Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 1996.

———. Budapest Declaration on World Heritage. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2002.
———.  Operational  Guidelines  for  the  Implementation  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention.  Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2005.

Waterton, E., L. Smith, and G. Campbell. ‘The Utility of Discourse Analysis to Heritage Studies: The
Burra Charter and Social Inclusion’.  12, no. 4 (2006):
339–55.

Williams, P. ‘The Governance of Sustainable Development in Wales’. Local Environment 11, no. 3

(2006): 253–67.

Wilson, L. and E. Boyle. ‘Interorganisational Collaboration at UK World Heritage Sites’. Leadership

and Organizational Development Journal 27, no. 6 (2006): 501–23.

WCED. Our Common Future. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.


