International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Heritage Interpretation and Politics in Kfar Etzion,
Israel

John Lehr & Yossi Katz

To cite this article: John Lehr & Yossi Katz (2003) Heritage Interpretation and Politics
in Kfar Etzion, Israel, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 9:3, 215-228, DOI:
10.1080/13527250304771
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250304771

Published online: 09 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 150

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies,
Vol. 9, No. 3, 2003, pp. 215–228

Heritage Interpretation and Politics in
Kfar Etzion, Israel
John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

Abstract
Kfar Etzion is a Kibbutz first established in Palestine in the 1930s. At the end of the British
Mandate, in 1948, it became a de facto Israeli military outpost that controlled access to
Jerusalem from the south. Kfar Etzion fell to Arab forces in 1948 and the area became
Jordanian territory until 1967 when Israeli forces occupied the West Bank. Kfar Etzion was
re-established  in  the  same  year.  Kfar  Etzion  now  interprets  its  history  through  a
sophisticated  multilingual  audio-visual  presentation  offered  in  a  museum  built  over  a
former bunker where Jewish defenders were killed. This presentation is analysed to illustrate
the ways in which an historical narrative is constructed for interpretive purposes and to
show that Bloc and Israeli perspectives are conflated for political purposes. The battle for the
Bloc continues through the interpretation of heritage.

Key Words: Israel; Heritage Interpretation; West Bank; Palestine; Dissonance

I can think of no battle in the annals of the Israel Defence Forces which was more
magnificent, more tragic or more heroic than the struggle for Gush Etzion . . . If a
Jewish Jerusalem exists today, Israel owes its gratitude first and foremost to the
defenders of the Etzion Bloc.

David Ben Gurion

Israel is contested territory. To Jews, Christians and Moslems it is a holy place. To
Jews  it  is  the  land  given  to  them  by  God,  the  setting  for  the  events  of  the  Old
Testament, and the ancestral homeland from which they were dispersed for almost
two millennia. For Christians, it is the setting for most of the events in the New
Testament and the place where they believe that Christ was born, lived, died, and
rose again. To the Moslems it is the land of the Patriarchs. Jerusalem was the city to
which Islam looked in its nascent years. Today the El Aksa Mosque, built on the site
of the Jewish second Temple, is Islam’s third most holy site, the point of departure
for the prophet Mohammed on his night journey. Probably no other land holds so
much meaning for so many people. Questions of identity, nationality and territorial
control are inflamed by religious passions, making this one of the most disputed
regions in the world, if not the most hotly contested region.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/03/030215-14 © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725032000111188

Figure 1. The Etzion Bloc in 1947.

The Etzion Bloc (Gush Etzion) is a small, but significant, part of this land. In the
Judaean Mountains, it is an area with a complex history that lies about 23 km south
of  Jerusalem,  between  Bethlehem  and  Hebron,  in  the  occupied  territories  of  the
West Bank (see figure 1). Since the beginning of the 19th century this region has
fallen  under  the  control  of  various  administrations.  Until  1917  it  was  Ottoman
territory; from then until 1948 the British administered the area under a League of
Nations Mandate until the area passed into Jordanian control during the Israel War
of Independence in 1948 when it was seized by Jordanian forces. In 1967 Israeli
forces took the West Bank and the Gush Etzion came under Israeli control.

Today, in the midst of the long-running conflict and several failed attempts to
secure lasting peace in the region through a resolution of the ‘Palestinian question’,
the future status of the Etzion Bloc is contested. Will it become a part of Israel under
the  terms  of  a  final  peace  treaty  or  will  Israel  retreat  to  its  pre-1967  boundaries
leaving  the  Bloc’s  Jewish  settlements  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Palestinian
authority? Within the Bloc, heritage interpretation plays an important role in the
struggle to ensure that this area remains under Israeli control. This paper examines

216

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

how and why heritage is interpreted within the Etzion Bloc at the Heritage Centre
at Kibbutz Kfar Etzion.

A Brief History of the Etzion Bloc
The Gush Etzion lies in the heart of the Hebron Mountains, at over 900 m above sea
level. Arab villages surround it. The area is agriculturally poor and lacks adequate
water resources. Not surprisingly, agriculture is restricted to viticulture, olives and
a  few  other  orchard  crops  tolerant  of  the  climate  and  soil.  This  paucity  of
agricultural resources led Arab owners to offer large tracts of land for sale at the end
of the 19th century.1

During the British Mandate period (1917–1948) Zionist organisations made a
number of attempts to settle the area. The first two attempts at settlement failed, the
third  was  successful  and  lasted  until  1948  when  the  area  was  conquered  by  the
Jordanian army. Before 1948, the Etzion Bloc was one of very few areas on the West
Bank where Jews bought land and settled.

Jewish  settlement  in  the  Etzion  Bloc  began  in  1926  when  a  group  of  religious
Zionist Jews from Jerusalem purchased approximately 1,000 dunams,2 intending to
establish a Moshava C, an agricultural village C in the area. Their choice of location
was determined by various traditions that held that the Messiah would appear in the
area at the millennium. Their settlement, named Migdal Eder, was abandoned in
1929 because of economic difficulties and widespread Arab riots against isolated
Jewish settlements.3

In 1933 another attempt was made to settle in the same area, this time by the El
Ha’har  Corporation,  which  wanted  to  develop  an  orchard-based  agricultural
operation to take advantage of its proximity to Jerusalem and the area’s particularly
pleasant  summer  climate.  El  Ha’har  purchased  the  Migdal  Eder  and  some
additional adjacent land.4 At the same time, some individual Jews, attracted by low
land prices, proximity to Jerusalem and the potential for sales to middle-class Jewish
immigrants, purchased land in the area. By the mid-1930s there were approximately
8,000 dunams owned by Jews in the heart of the Hebron Mountains, the largest
concentration of Jewish-owned land in the area now known as the West Bank.

Between 1934 and 1935 El Ha’har established Kfar Etzion (Etzion village) in this
area. It soon ran into financial difficulties and was compelled to sell most of its land.

1. D. Grossman, ‘Fluctuations in Arab settlement in the Hebron Mountains as background for Jewish
land purchase’, in R. Kark (ed.) Redemption of the land of Eretz-Israel: ideology and practice, Jerusalem:
Yad Izhak Ben-Zvi, 1990, pp. 218–244 (in Hebrew).

2. 1 dunam equals 1,000 m2.

3. Y. Ben-Yakov, ‘Migdal Eder’, in M. Naor (ed.) Eidan 7, Jerusalem: Izhak Ben-Zvi, 1983 (in
Hebrew).

4. Z. Ilan, ‘The partners of Holzman’, in M. Naor (ed.) Eidan 7, Jerusalem: Izhak Ben Zvi, pp.
62–74.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

217

Eventually, after unrest in the area, the Jewish National Fund (JNF) acquired its
land. The  JNF,  which  had  abstained  from  land  purchase  in  the  area  during  the
1920s and 1930s because of the scarcity of water and arable land, bought the land
in 1940. They undertook this because the British ‘Land Act’ of 1940, forbade or
limited Jewish land purchase in 95 per cent of Palestine. In the Hebron region and
in the Etzion Bloc, land purchase was completely forbidden. The JNF refused to
accept  this  law,  and  reacted  by  concentrating  its  land  acquisitions  in  those  areas
affected by the Act. Indeed, after 1940 the main consideration in the JNF’s land
purchase in the Gush Etzion, as elsewhere, was political, and was not governed by
agricultural considerations. Strategic considerations also influenced acquisition of
land  around  Jerusalem  since  it  was  believed  that  control  of  Jerusalem  would  be
dependent on control of the surrounding area.

Four  settlements,  all  kibbutzim,  were  founded  during  1943–1947  on  newly
purchased land (see figure 1).5 The kibbutz form of settlement was chosen because
the kibbutz was based on full cooperation and peopled by relatively young pioneers,
and would be best able to cope with the daunting social and physical obstacles of the
area.6

Three of the kibbutzim belonged to the ‘religious kibbutz’ movement, which is
part of the Zionist religious movement. The fourth kibbutz, the last to be established
(in  1947),  belonged  to  the  Ha’shomer  Ha’tzair  movement,  a  pioneer  secular
organisation.7 Kibbutz Kfar Etzion was established in April 1943. A year and a half
later Massuot Yitzhak, a second religious kibbutz, was founded less than 2 km to the
north. A third, Ein Zurim, was founded in October 1946, a few kilometres east of
Massuot Yitzhak,  completing  religious  settlement  in  the  area.  In  February  1947,
Ha’shomer Ha’tzair founded the fourth—and last—settlement, Revadim, near Ein
Zurim.8

Living  conditions  were  hard.  Settlers  depended  on  water,  food,  and  other
necessities trucked from Jerusalem.9 The members of Kfar Etzion, the first kibbutz
in the area, who initially objected to settling there, soon developed an emotional tie
to the place.10

5. Y. Katz, Between Jerusalem and Hebron: Jewish settlement in the Hebron Mountains and the Etzion Bloc
in the pre-state period, Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan University Press, 1998; Ben-Yakov, The Etzion Bloc: fifty
years of struggle and creation, Allon Shevut: Yad Shapiro, 1983, pp. 37–126 (in Hebrew).

6. J. Weitz, Our settlement activities in a period of storm and stress, 1936–47, Jerusalem: Sifriat Poalim,
1947, p. 188; Katz, 1998, op. cit., pp. 269–271.

7. W. Pinkerfield, ‘Revadim in the Etzion Bloc’, in M. Noar (ed.) Eidan 7, Jerusalem: Izhak Ben-Zvi,
1986, pp. 111–120 (in Hebrew).

8. Jewish National Fund, Jewish villages in Israel, Jerusalem: Jewish National Fund, 1949, p. 153.

9. Katz, 1998, op. cit.

10. Bulletin of the Secretariat, 17 September 1944, Kibbutz Kfar Etzion, Kfar Etzion Archives (in
Hebrew).

218

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

The Fall of the Bloc in 1948
Although  the  Bloc’s  settlements  were  placed  amidst  Arab  villages,  nothing
disturbed  the  routine  of  the  settlements  until  1947. After  the  29  November  UN
decision decreeing the partition of Palestine and the establishment of the State of
Israel,  the  security  situation  immediately  deteriorated.  The  following  day  Arab
irregulars attacked the Etzion Bloc settlements, since the Bloc was not included in
the  UN’s  proposed  borders  of  the  new  Jewish  state.  Bloc  settlements  ceased
agricultural work and became de facto military posts, and all mothers and children
were  evacuated  to  Jerusalem.  Arab  forces  controlled  the  road  to  Jerusalem  so
transporting food, water and equipment to the Bloc was hazardous. A convoy that
broke  through  to  the  Bloc  in  December  1947  was  attacked  and  lost  ten  men.
Shortly  afterwards,  in  mid-January,  a  platoon  of  35  reinforcements  was  annihi-
lated attempting to break through from Jerusalem. In March a convoy succeeded
in  arriving  from  Jerusalem  but  it  was  also  attacked  on  its  return.  Fourteen  were
killed  and  forty  wounded.11

Arab  attacks  intensified  as  the  end  of  the  British  Mandate  in  Palestine  drew
closer. The leaders of Palestine’s Jewish community expressed great concern about
the future of Jerusalem, the Jewish community’s capital and a powerful symbol for
the Jewish people as a whole. The Jewish supreme military command made every
effort to defend it. The Etzion Bloc settlements controlled access to Jerusalem from
the  south  and  prevented  Arab  forces  concentrated  in  Hebron  from  advancing
northwards. Arab forces made strenuous efforts to eliminate the obstacle of the Bloc
settlements. The most intense attacks were on Kfar Etzion, where the main posts
blocking Jerusalem-bound Arab forces were located.

Two  severe  Arab  attacks  brought  about  the  Bloc  settlements’  surrender.  One
occurred at the beginning of May with twelve fatalities; the second, supported by
armoured  vehicles,  occurred  ten  days  later.  During  this  attack  and  the  following
battles  dozens  of  people  were  killed,  mostly  from  Kfar  Etzion.  The  Bloc
capitulated on orders of the Jewish military command. According to the accounts
of four Jewish survivors, the remaining defenders of Kfar Etzion were massacred
after their surrender. These four, and other defenders elsewhere in the Bloc who
survived the battle, were taken prisoner. In total, about 250 people, mostly from
Kfar  Etzion,  were  killed  during  the  struggle  for  the  Bloc.  Most  fell  on  the  final
day  of  the  battle.  Immediately  following  the  surrender  on  13  May  the  Bloc
settlements were looted and burned.12 On 14 May, David Ben Gurion proclaimed
the  State  of  Israel.

Immediately  after  the  Bloc’s  surrender  it  became  a  symbol  to  Israelis.  Israeli
historians  Natanal  Lorch,  and  Itzchak  Levy,  in  their  studies  of  the  War  of
Independence,  both  stress  the  strategic  significance  of  Kfar  Etzion’s  role  to  the

11. D. Knohl, Siege in the hills of Hebron, New York: Thomas Yoseloff, 1958, pp. 99–146; Ben-Yakov,
1983, op. cit., pp. 129–322 (note 3).

12. Knohl, 1958, op. cit., pp. 147–361.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

219

defence  of  Jerusalem  by  blocking  the  city’s  southern  approaches  to  Arab
forces.13 David  Ben  Gurion  also  left  no  doubt  that  he  considered  Kfar  Etzion’s
resistance  to  be  crucial  to  the  defence  of  the  city.14 During  the  final  days
of  the  battle  for  Kfar  Etzion  he  wrote,  ‘The  entire  Jewish  settlement  [in  Israel]
and  its  leaders  admire  your  battle  against  many  Arabs.  This  battle  and  your
previous  battles  add  not  only  honour  to  you  but  they  also  helped  directly  and
indirectly  to  save  Jerusalem.’15 On  a  national  level,  the  loss  of  about  250
defenders,  5%  of  all  the  Jewish  casualties  in  the  1948  war,  and  the  high  losses
experienced  by  one  small  area  in  a  very  short  period,  was  a  real  shock  to  the
Jewish  community  in  Israel. When  coupled  with  Kfar  Etzion’s  association  with
the  defence  of  Jerusalem,  the  most  powerful  symbol  of  all  to  Jews  everywhere,
Kfar  Etzion  was  assured  of  a  prominent  position  within  Israel’s  national
mythology.

The Resettlement of Kfar Etzion
The Six-day War in the summer of 1967 and the resulting military occupation of the
West Bank permitted the Jewish resettlement of the Etzion Bloc. It was the first area
to be re-occupied by Jewish settlers because of the symbolism associated with the
events  of  1948,  and  because  the  children  of  the  defenders  had  maintained  their
social cohesion and insisted on a symbolic reconstruction of the kibbutz that their
fathers had built and defended.16

Kibbutz  Kfar  Etzion  was  re-established  in  September  1967. With  Rosh  Zurim
and  Migdal  Oz,  a  Bloc  of  three  religious  kibbutzim  was  created.  The  Jewish
population  of  the  Bloc  was  built  up  by  establishing  additional  settlements  in  the
area. Members of the Etzion Bloc survivors of 1948 and the Etzion Bloc Association
demanded that settlement be permitted to form a live memorial to the events and
fallen of 1948. Their political objective was to settle the area as heavily as possible
in  order  to  prevent  another  retreat  from  the  area. Thus  they  demanded  that  the
government  and  the  settlement  department  of  Jewish  Agency  formulate  a
comprehensive regional settlement plan which would also incorporate settlements
with  an  urban  character,  since  agricultural  settlements  are  limited  in  population
capacity,  especially  those  in  the  Etzion  Bloc  with  its  severely  limited  agricultural

13. Itzchak Levy, Jerusalem in the War of Independence, Tel Aviv: Marachot, 1986, pp. 107–117; N.
Lorch, The history of the Independence War, Ramat-Gan: Masada Press, 1966, pp. 151–155 (in
Hebrew).

14. David Ben-Gurion, The War of Independence—Ben-Gurion Diary, Tel-Aviv: Ministry of Defence,
1982, pp. 411–416.

15. Ibid., p. 413.

16. Y. Katz & J. Lehr, ‘Symbolism and landscape: the Etzion Bloc in the Judean mountains’, Middle
Eastern Studies, Vol. 31, No. 4, 1995, pp. 730–743.

220

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

Figure 2. The landscape of the Etzion Bloc in 2000. The houses in the middle distance are part of the

Israeli settlement of Efrat. [Photo: John C. Lehr.]

resources (see figure 2).17 A resultant regional plan called for the establishment of
a number of other urban centres in the Bloc. Today, the regional centre of Allon
Shevut and the town of Efrat complement other smaller centres such as Neve Daniel
and Kibbutz Rosh Zurim and, together with the earlier kibbutzim, constitute a Bloc
settlement of several thousand people (see figure 3).

Heritage Interpretation
The history of the Bloc is interpreted in the Kfar Etzion Heritage Centre opened
initially as a museum and memorial to those who were killed defending the Bloc in
1948  (see  figure  4).  Since  1985  a  multi-media  recorded  presentation  lasting
approximately  twenty-five  minutes  has  interpreted  the  history  of  the  Bloc  in  an
auditorium  accommodating  100  people.  As  organised  groups  constitute  the
majority  of  visitors,  separate  performances  are  presented  in  Hebrew,  English,
German,  French,  Spanish  and  Russian,  according  to  the  audience.18 Attendees

17. M. Moshkovitch, ‘Response to the “Community Settlement” subject’, Gushpanka, No. 27,
August 1990, pp. 3–14; Hatzofeh, 29 September 1967; Kfar Etzion Archives, file 22, M. Moshkovitch
to R.Waitz, 16 June 1967; and Allon Shevut file chronology.

18. S. Anichai, Director, Gush Etzion Museum, Kfar Etzion, Israel, pers. comm., 4 December 2000
and 19 February 2003.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

221

Figure 3. The Etzion Bloc in 2000.

range from eight-year-old schoolchildren to soldiers and groups of retired Israelis
and  foreign  tourists.  Until  the  deterioration  of  Israeli–Palestinian  relations  in
September 2000 and the renewal of the intifada, audiences were about 52,000 per
year, but a decline in the security situation has dramatically reduced attendance to
about 11,000 per year since then.19Very few Arabs visit the museum. Those who did
visit  came  in  a  professional  capacity  as  a  part  of  a  training  course  for  tour
guides.20

The  programme  places  the  initial  settlement  of  Kfar  Etzion  and  the  adjacent
kibbutzim  in  a  Zionist  historical  context.21 It  reviews  the  events  that  triggered
migration to Palestine during the League of Nations Mandate Period, stressing the

19. Ibid.

20. Ibid., 19 February 2003.

21. The description is based on several viewings of the presentation in Hebrew and English between
1990 and 2000.

222

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

Figure 4. The Kfar Etzion Museum, 2001. [Photo: Yossi Katz.]

post-holocaust  surge  in  immigration  and  the  heroic  character  of  the  mid-20th-
century  pioneering  endeavours  of  the  religious  Jews  who  volunteered  to  build  a
Jewish  community  in  a  harsh  and  challenging  environment.  In  a  series  of
monochrome  images,  the  kibbutzniks  of  the  Bloc  are  shown  engaged  in  heavy
manual labour, clearing land of rocks, and erecting buildings. Kibbutznik leisure
hours  are  depicted  as  times  of  good  fellowship  filled  with  cultural  and  religious
activities. The programme describes how the pioneers of the Etzion Bloc assumed
a  military  role  as  the  British  Mandate  drew  to  a  close  and  relations  with  the
surrounding  Arab  communities  deteriorated.  The  theme  of  sacrifice  and  the
vocabulary of pioneer heroism stand out. At first the defenders sacrificed an easy life
to pioneer in the Judaean Hills, later they sacrificed family life as their wives and
children were evacuated to the safety of Jerusalem, finally they sacrificed their lives
fighting  to  defend  the  Bloc  and  to  prevent  enemy  forces,  including  the  elite
Jordanian  Legion,  from  advancing  towards  Jerusalem  from  the  south.  The
interpretive programme climaxes with a young nurse’s voice telling how at the fall
of Kfar Etzion a Jordanian Legionnaire placed a grenade in her hand and ordered
her  to  throw  it  into  the  bunker  where  the  Israeli  wounded  were  gathered.  She
refused. The Legionnaire then threw the grenade into the bunker killing all those
within. At this point the auditorium lights are brought up, the floor opens to reveal
the ruins of the bunker with artificial smoke [from the grenade] curling up into the
theatre. The audience is then invited to leave their seats and approach the mouth of
the bunker and look inside to see the shrapnel-damaged interior.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

223

With the audience now standing around the mouth of the still-smoking bunker
the programme continues, relating the re-occupation of the Bloc after the Six-day
War of 1967. The rebuilding of the Bloc and the re-establishment of Jewish religious
and cultural life is described and depicted in colour video images. The imagery of
this section of the presentation is regularly updated to reflect changes in the growth
of the Bloc. Children figure prominently in the images of community life. Jewish
family,  community  and  religious  values  are  portrayed  as  inextricably  linked  to
progress and enlightenment. The programme concludes with the unspoken message
that the present Jewish communities built and being built within the Bloc are living
memorials to the sacrifices made by those who died defending the Bloc in 1948. It
is a moving story, skilfully narrated and carefully crafted to present the conflict and
the  issues  in  direct,  unambiguous  terms,  from  the  perspective  of  the  Bloc’s
occupants, where Israeli and Bloc interests are conflated.

Construction of Heritage
It is not the intention here to enter into debate about the veracity of claims made by
Jews  or  Arabs  regarding  the  contested  history  of  the  Etzion  Bloc  but  only  to
demonstrate how the construction of heritage is bound with political and national
agendas and myths. The recording and interpretation of history are always set in
political  and  ethnocentric  frameworks;  hence,  events  that  at  the  time  were
uncertain,  confused,  and  even  chaotic,  with  hindsight  are  structured  into
comprehensible narratives.22 These narratives, of course, spring from, and merge
with, the broader discourses set by the political agenda.

The interpretation of the heritage of the Etzion Bloc through Kfar Etzion’s audio-
visual presentation offers no allusion to any alternative interpretation of events. That
an Arab perspective might be able to offer insights into the history of the Bloc is
seemingly dismissed on the tacit assumption that the truth is apparent. The message
is Zionist, a clearly focused narration of how a peaceful but beleaguered community
fell after a heroic defence, sacrificing itself for broader strategic goals vital to the
survival of the embryonic Jewish state.

Clearly  the  fall  of  the  Bloc  was  a  cataclysmic  event  in  Israeli  history  and  the
mythology surrounding it are part and parcel of the Israeli iconography of war. Yet
in  the  Arab  record  of  1948–1949  the  fall  of  the  Bloc  barely  merits  a  passing
mention. General Sir John Glubb, commander of the Jordanian Arab Legion, the
unit, which according to the presentation, spearheaded the final attack on the Bloc,
noted that in the years prior to the attack ‘[t]hese colonies had been so aggressive
that they deliberately compelled Arab retaliation’, but relegated the battle for the
Bloc to a single paragraph.23

22. B. Graham, G.J. Ashworth & J.E. Tunbridge, A geography of heritage: power, culture and economy,
London: Arnold, 2000, p. 93.

23. J. Glubb, A soldier with the Arabs, London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1957, p. 78.

224

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

Arab accounts, by omission, deny the strategic importance of the Bloc. Whereas
the Israeli interpretation claims that the Arab Legion was involved from 4 May until
the final assault on 13 May, other histories suggest that no foreign armies entered
Palestine  until  15  May,  after  the  expiration  of  the  British  Mandate,  making  the
Legion’s  participation  in  the  attack  problematic.24 Whether  or  not  the  Legion
participated in the attack matters not to the construction of Kfar Etzion’s heritage.
The recollection of survivors is that it did, and this validates the Jewish mythology
of  the  area  by  positioning  the  battle  as  a  David  and  Goliath  struggle  between
outnumbered  civilian  soldiers  of  the  Bloc  and  the  professional  soldiers  of  the
Jordanian army. Furthermore, from an Israeli perspective, the battle’s place in the
mythology of the creation of Israel is reified by according it a strategic significance
ignored  or  downplayed  in Arab  sources. The  fall  of  the  Bloc  certainly  generated
considerable emotion and rhetoric within the Jewish community. When David Ben
Gurion, in a speech to the Knesset immediately after the Bloc’s fall, publicly tied the
battle  to  the  defence  of  Jerusalem,  he  placed  the  role  of  the  Bloc  firmly  in  the
mythology of Israel’s struggle for national survival.25

In the recollections of the survivors of the battle of the Etzion Bloc the role of the
Arab  Legion  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  issues.  Survivors  are  adamant  that  the
Legion  played  a  significant  part  in  the  attack  and  the  consistency  of  their
recollections suggests that a variety of Arab units, including mobs of Arab villagers,
ill-disciplined local militias, Jordanian regular forces and perhaps the Arab Legion
were all involved. Confusion was rampant and it would not be surprising if during
the heat of battle the survivors may have been unsure whether their captors were
soldiers  of  the  Jordanian  Legion  or  not.  Knohl  cites  survivors’  accounts  which
attribute both correct and brutal behaviour to their captors:

After the surrender [of Massuot Yitzhak] thousands of Arabs were prowling around the
fence . . . [They] came closer but nevertheless kept at a respectful distance. All of them
were armed, carrying rifles on their shoulders, but they observed the cease-fire
conditions and did not shoot.26

At  Kfar  Etzion,  fifteen  Jewish  captives  were  allegedly  cut  down  by  machine-gun
fire.27 Even here the attackers’ behaviour was mixed:

When we came to the wood the Legionaries tried to attack me . . . Suddenly I heard
two volleys from a sub-machine gun. The Arabs fell to the ground, covered in blood.

24. M. Gilbert, The Arab–Israeli conflict: its history in maps, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1984, p.
45.

25. Y. Katz & J. Lehr, ‘Symbolism and landscape: the Etzion Bloc in the Judean mountains’, Middle
Eastern Studies, Vol. 31, No. 4, 1995, p. 734.

26. Knohl, op. cit., pp. 334–348 (note 11).

27. Knohl, p. 334; M. Gilbert, Jewish history atlas, Jerusalem: Steinmatzky, 1986, p. 105.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

225

It was an officer of the Legion who had saved me . . . I saw many wounded—some in
their last agony—both Jews and Arabs, in the farmyard. Anyone showing any sign of
life, the officer shot and killed.28

By  the  same  account,  the  same  Jordanian  officer  placed  a  grenade  in  the  Israeli
survivor’s  hand  and  invited  her  to  throw  it  into  the  bunker  where  the  Jewish
wounded were lying. By another account, the bunker’s occupants were still resisting
when grenades were thrown in, killing all inside.29 Jewish captives from other parts
of  the  Bloc  related  that  the  Legion  transported  them  to  Bethlehem  by  truck,
sometimes  shooting  into  the  crowds  of  hostile Arabs  that  posed  a  threat  to  their
safety, but such events were passed over in the presentation in favour of the more
dramatic and emotionally powerful aspects of the final minutes at Kfar Etzion.30
The account of the fall of the Etzion Bloc offered in the multi-media presentation
is focused narrowly on events in Kfar Etzion. The auditorium is located there and
there the most emotionally moving events and greatest Israeli losses occurred. In
focusing on Kfar Etzion and the events which took place around the bunker, the
behaviour  of  the  Arab  attackers  is  placed  in  the  most  unfavourable  light—the
museum brochure uses the powerful word Massacre to describe the fate of the last
defenders—and  the  themes  of  sacrifice  and  heroism  can  best  be  illustrated  and
developed.31 Furthermore, there is no need to enter into details of the surrender of
other Bloc redoubts where Arab officers and troops behaved correctly, protecting
Jewish captives from the wrath of Arab mobs.

Conclusion
Heritage  interpretation  is  never  neutral,  and  seldom,  if  ever,  is  it  objective. The
presentation of the story of the Etzion Bloc at Kfar Etzion’s heritage centre reflects
the political views and objectives of the Jewish community in the Bloc as it interprets
the  history  of  the  area  and  commemorates  the  sacrifices  of  those  who  fell  in  the
defence of the Bloc. As much is said by omission as by what is included within the
audio-visual  presentation.  Heritage  here  has  many  functions,  one  of  which  is
political. Its agenda here is both commemorative and educational, but its underlying
goal  is  to  affirm  the  legitimacy  of  the  Jewish  community  established  after  1967.
Although the programme strives to achieve an air of impartiality in its narration and
studiously  avoids  pejorative  references  to  Arabs,  it  still  succeeds  in  casting  the
conflict as a struggle between contrasting value systems, a conflict between self and
other, reason against ignorance and, by implication, good against evil.

28. Knohl, op. cit., p. 335 (note 11).

29. Ibid., p. 338.

30. Ibid., p. 353.

31. The Bunker at Gush Etzion, n.d. (1999?). Multilingual brochure of the Gush Etzion Museum,
Kfar Etzion.

226

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz

Given  the  current  climate  of Arab–Israeli  relations  in  Israel  and  the  occupied
territories it seems unlikely that within the foreseeable future the central themes of
the  interpretation  at  Kfar  Etzion  will  be  modified  to  accommodate  alternative
viewpoints  that  stress  accommodation  rather  than  confrontation.  Although  the
Etzion Bloc is fairly compact, Arab communities surround it. Communications with
Israel are precarious when tensions are high. The long-term viability of the Bloc is
questionable if the area continues to be an area of active conflict.

Heritage interpretation can become an agent of peace if it is a vehicle carrying
messages of accommodation that stress the mutual interests of the Palestinian and
Israeli  communities.  In  Jerusalem,  the  ‘Museum  on  the  Seam’,  located  on  the
1947–1967  line  that  divided  the  city,  attempts ‘to  deal  with  themes  of  dialogue,
understanding  and  co-existence’.32 The  museum  formerly  commemorated  the
conflict between Israel and Jordan but realigned its interpretation when the peace
process was underway in 1999–2000. Now it aims to promote active and thinking
citizenship about issues on the public agenda through programmes offered in seven
languages:  Hebrew,  English,  Arabic,  French,  German,  Spanish  and  Russian.  It
promotes  respect  for  ‘the  other’,  reverence  of  liberty,  and  ‘regard  for  a  civilized
polemic,  and  an  exclusion  of  violence  as  an  option  for  solving  social,  political,
religious and ethnic conflict’.33

Whether  it  would  be  possible  to  introduce  a  similar  model  to  Kfar  Etzion’s
interpretation  of  its  past  is  doubtful.  Given  the  area’s  uncertain  future  and  the
volatility of Palestinian–Israeli relations since the stalling of the peace process and
the resumption of the intifada in 2000, implementation of an alternative interpretive
message, similar to that of the Museum on the Seam, would be a bold political step
for  a  community  that  sees  its  survival  in  peril.  Nevertheless,  a  programme  that
stressed  common  interests,  advocated  mutual  respect  and  celebrated  acts  of
cooperation  between  Arab  and  Jew  could  provide  a  framework  for  a  dialogue
between Arab and Jewish communities in the area.

There are some formidable barriers. In the current political climate it is doubtful
that  the  local Arab  community  would  feel  inclined  to  visit  an  interpretive  centre
located within a Jewish settlement. Whether the Bloc’s largely religious and strongly
Zionist  community  would  support  a  shift  away  from  commemoration  towards
conciliation is equally uncertain. According to Kfar Etzion’s museum director, the
presence in the Bloc of second, third and fourth generations of families that lost
members  in  the  1947  conflict  would  make  a  shift  in  the  museum’s  interpretive
message  highly  unlikely,  even  in  a  ‘peace  situation’.34 Interpretive  change  must
come from within the Bloc and reflect a broad shift in political attitudes. It cannot
be imposed by outside agencies.

32. Raphie Etgar (ed.) Museum on the Seam, Jerusalem: Keterpress Enterprises, n.d. (2002?)], p. 3.

33. Ibid.

34. Pers. comm., Sandy Amichai, 17 February 2003.

Heritage Interpretation and Politics

227

In this still hotly contested area, interpretation of heritage is a powerful political
instrument, reaching beyond the limits of the Bloc to the larger Israeli public, and
the Jewish community in the Diaspora. In a metaphorical sense the battle for Kfar
Etzion continues. Through conflation of Bloc perspectives with those of all Jewish
Israelis, the settler community of Kfar Etzion presents its case in terms of national
survival. The Bloc perspective is offered as a national view. It is thus not only a call
for  solidarity  within  the  Bloc  but  also  a  battle  for  the  support  of  the  wider
community outside.

228

John C. Lehr and Yossi Katz


