The Threat of Obsolescence to Police
Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’
Robert Ian Chaplin

Abstract
Historically,  many  police  headquarters  were  built  in  precincts  to  serve  the  needs  of
communities around the centre of a city, town, even village. These properties have become
threatened with obsolescence as their precincts or ‘beats’ have altered through demographic
change and urban development. Threats can be identified in the forms of functional and
image obsolescence1 and are most evident in postcolonial territories where the notion of image
obsolescence is particularly contentious. In the light of the ICOMOS 2001–2002 report on
Shared Colonial Heritage, this paper presents examples of some heritage properties under
threat in Asia. An argument is put forward for the preservation of such properties to retain
their historical contribution to the cultural identity of their communities. While some may be
preserved as museums and become tourist attractions, others may continue to meet the need
for  security  in  historic  neighbourhoods  that  have  increasing  levels  of  criminal  activity
targeting tourists. Ongoing empirical studies of postcolonial initiatives described in this paper
will also constitute a paradigm for research on the threat of obsolescence to properties and sites
in those countries from which the colonial policing heritage emanated.

Key Words:  Policing;  Colonial  Heritage;  Obsolescence;  Colonial  Police;  Police
Stations; Macao

Historical Development of Policing and Precincts
The Latin language, a legacy inherited by the subjects of the Roman colonial empire,
bequeathed the word ‘politia’ which meant ‘civil administration’, closely related to
the  Greek  word ‘polis’  or ‘city’.  Etymologically  and  historically,  therefore,  police
meant a force for controlling the administration of a city. The French later coined the
word  ‘police’  which  the  English  adopted  and  continued  to  use  to  mean  ‘civil
administration’;  since  the  task  of  maintaining  an  orderly  community,  protecting
property,  and  dealing  with  lawbreakers  was  regarded  as  a  matter  for  citizens
themselves.  In  England  in  AD 1285,  for  example,  the  Statute  of Winchester  was
enacted which established a form of criminal justice system for which most of the

1. S. Tiesdall et al., Revitalizing historic urban quarters, Oxford: Architectural Press, 1996, p. 15.

responsibility for law enforcement remained with the people themselves. Among the
terms used in the statute we find: ‘watch and ward’; ‘hue and cry’; ‘parish constable’.
The former required all men in a given town to serve on the night watch performing
the onerous duty of patrolling the streets from dusk until dawn to ensure that all local
people were indoors and quiet and that ‘no strangers were roaming around’.2 They
also maintained street lamps, cleared garbage from streets, put out fires, and enforced
criminal law. These activities of the watch were supervised from the office of the parish
constable and it was a crime not to assist him in his civic responsibility.

The concept of the watch can also be traced back to the cities and towns of the
Imperial Roman Empire where residents would group together and form a watch,
particularly at night, at the town borders or gates to ensure that outsiders did not
attack  and  plunder  within.  Also  copied  from  colonial  Rome  was  the  post  of
magistrate—appointed  by  the  citizens  to  adjudicate  cases  brought  by  private
citizens—who  arrested  offenders  and  punished  them.  In  17th-century  England,
the  magistrate  operated  under  the  authority  of  the  office  of  the  justice  of  the
peace, a post dating back to the 14th century, who supervised the shire-reeve, or
sheriff, in non-urban areas, and the parish constable in urban areas. To assist the
constable, the post of Beadle also came into being. His job, too, mainly involved
patrolling the streets of city or town to remove vagrants. At this time, the English
policing  system  also  used  a  form  of  individual,  private  police  known  as  ‘thief-
takers’ who were paid by the king for every criminal they arrested—much like the
role of the bounty hunter of the American Wild West. The major role of the thief-
takers  was  to  patrol  the  highways  searching  for  notorious  highwaymen  such  as
Jack  Shepherd  and  Dick Turpin  who  terrorised  coachmen  and  their  customers
travelling through the English countryside. The highwayman might be thought of
today as pursuing a niche market in criminal activity—tourists and the businesses
that  catered  to  the  travel  trade—targeting  coach  companies,  proprietors  of  inns,
and baggage handlers. In fact many of the thief-takers were criminals themselves
or  confidence  tricksters.  A  favourite  ruse  was  to  seduce  young  people  into
committing  crimes  and  then  have  the  other  thief-takers  arrest  the  youths  during
the  offences. The  two  thief-takers  would  then  split  the  fee.

From his house in Bow Street, the 18th-century novelist Henry Fielding set up
his  headquarters  with  the  purpose  of  apprehending  robbers  and  burglars  on  the
Westminster  beat.  He  undertook  the  task  of  providing  pawnshops  with  lists  and
descriptions  of  recently  stolen  property  and  asked  them  to  notify  him  if  such
property  was  brought  into  their  pawnshops:

All  persons  who  shall  for  the  future  suffer  by  robber,  burglars,  etc.,  are  desired
immediately  to  bring  or  send  the  best  description  they  can  of  such  robbers,  etc.,  with
the  time  and  place  and  circumstances  of  the  fact,  to  Henry  Fielding  Esq.,  at  his
house  in  Bow  Street.3

2. J.S. Dempsey, An introduction to policing, 2nd edn, Belmont, CA: West/Wadsworth, 1999.

3. Pringle, Hue and cry, p. 81 in ibid. p. 4.

118

Robert Ian Chaplin

Fielding  went  on  to  establish  the  Bow  Street  Runners,  a  policing  unit  that  was
financed by the government. From public funds, he also established a civilian horse
patrol of eight men whose duty was to arrest robbers and footpads on the London
streets. In 1798, a London magistrate, Patrick Colquhoun, emulated the policing
concept  of  the  Bow  Street  Runners  and  established  a  small,  publicly  financed
special  river  or  marine  police  force  to  patrol  the  Thames.  His  operation  was
considered to have been the first civil police headquarters in England; however, the
work of Sir Robert Peel is best known for its contribution to the formation of a large,
organised, civil police department. Based on the ideas of Colquhoun, Peel drafted
a ‘police bill’: The Act for Improving the Police in and near the Metropolis (The
Metropolitan Police Act), which parliament passed in 1829. This act established the
first large-scale, uniformed, organised, paid, civil police force in London.

Further  research  on  the  history  of  the  development  of  policing  and  the
establishment  of  police  headquarters  in  London  and  throughout  Britain  will
undoubtedly be enlightened and facilitated by the opening of the new Metropolitan
Policing Museum in London, within the restored and converted property in Bow
Street.

The  Metropolitan  Police  Authority  has  leased  the  former  Bow  Street  Police
Station to a private consortium in order that it can house ‘The Beat’—a title chosen
for the museum to reflect the variety and uncertainty of police work. The designers
of the project feel that London’s extraordinary success as a city for tourists is rooted
in the stability provided by sound policing. It is estimated that in a typical year, 28
million  tourists  come  to  London,  and The  Beat  hopes  to  attract  1%  of  them.
Foreign tourists will have a rare insight into the culture and history of London and
should leave with a good understanding of the advantages of the British approach to
policing.4

The  tender  for  the  conversion  of  the  former  Bow  Street  Police  Station  was
awarded to Salmon Harvester Properties Ltd who worked on the project with the
Bow Street Partners—responsible for the design of the museum interior with its
interactive features. In the early stages, the project was stalled by Westminster City
Council’s sub-committee, which wanted the conversion design altered to reduce the
adverse  effect  of  the  proposed  rear  extension  on  the  existing  building  and  the
Covent  Garden  Conservation Area. The  developers  were  concerned  that  the  cut
back in the size of the extension would reduce the size of the museum.

The new plans provide a formative lesson in the kind of balancing act between
conservation  objectives  and  urban  planning,  especially  with  the  commensurate
effects upon building and conversion costs. In this case, considerable investment
needed to be made in the old buildings and offsite works. On a salutary note, despite
disappointment over the delay due to the Westminster City Council’s decision, the
process  was  a  formative  lesson  in  achieving  a  high  level  of  understanding  and

4. Metropolitan Policing Museum, London,
< www.sburford/pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/thebeat/faq.html > , 7 September 2002.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

119

cooperation  between  heritage  conservation  interests.  Unfortunately,  this  mutual
respect  and  understanding  may  not  be  found  in  many  postcolonial  developing
countries  where  the  built  heritage  legacy  is  under  the  increasing  threat  of
obsolescence.

Threats to Colonial Heritage Buildings
This paper is based on ongoing research to investigate the threat of obsolescence to
the form and function of old police headquarters and stations, mainly to determine
whether  these  buildings  should  be  preserved  as  heritage  properties—especially
those identifiable as a legacy of colonial occupation. Concerns for the protection
and  preservation  of  the  Shared  Colonial  Heritage  have  been  expressed  by  the
ICOMOS International Committee on Shared Colonial Heritage in the ICOMOS
Heritage at risk 2001–2002 report.5

Briefly documenting the Committee’s concerns, the report by Graham Brooks of
Australia  ICOMOS  defines  the  nature  of  the  Shared  Colonial  Heritage  as
representing  the  architecture,  urban  planning  and  infrastructure  introduced  by
various  European  colonial  regimes  throughout  the  world—especially  during  the
period between the later 15th century and the Second World War. Brooks reminds
us  that  colonial  regimes  typically  erected  buildings  and  other  infrastructure  that
enabled  them  to  control  and  manage  indigenous  populations  and  to  exploit  the
resources  of  the  colony  for  the  benefit  of  the  homeland.  Buildings  typically
included:  churches;  administrative,  judicial,  and  education  buildings;  defensive
works; housing; prisons; communication infrastructure such as roads and railways;
trading facilities such as ports and warehouses; and agricultural, manufacturing, or
extractive  industrial  facilities.  These  properties  were  constructed  under  the
supervision of architects, engineers and planners who had established themselves in
colonial  outposts  and  developed  bodies  of  work  that  became  particular  to  the
locality and the time, extending the architectural, planning or design traditions of
the homeland.

In  many  territories,  local  craftsmen  and  women  were  employed  in  the
construction and decoration of buildings erected by colonial regimes. Local artistic
and  craft  traditions  were  often  added  to  the  buildings  or  intertwined  into  the
decoration.

In the Committee’s report, Brooks details the major threats affecting the Shared
Colonial Heritage after the break up of most of the established colonial regimes. Of
particular relevance to the examples cited in this paper are the following:

(1) Emerging  nationalism  and  the  need  to  establish  an  independent  identity  has
often encouraged former colonies to reach back to their indigenous traditions at
the expense of the remaining colonial-period architecture and infrastructure.

5. Graham Brooks, Heritage at risk 2001–2002, Report prepared for ICOMOS International
Committee on Shared Colonial Heritage, ICOMOS,  < www.international
icomos.org/risk/2001/intro.htm > , 10 September 2002.

120

Robert Ian Chaplin

(2) Economic  pressures  for  social  and  urban  development  often  lead  to  the
destruction of colonial-period buildings that are not of sufficient scale to match
the demands of an emerging urban conglomeration. The development of high-
rise  urban  buildings  often  causes  the  destruction  of  traditional  urban
settlements.

(3) Urban development programmes or responses to increasing levels of traffic in
towns  can  lead  to  the  demolition  of  colonial-period  buildings  to  ease
development pressures.

(4) The typical pressures of modernisation, slum clearance and the desire to match
Western urban development or architectural imagery can generate redevelop-
ment pressures on older buildings.

These threats to the legacy of colonial properties are, of course, identifiable in many
postcolonial  contexts  and  the  research  priorities  cited  in  this  paper,  focusing  on
threats to police headquarters and stations in selected cities in Asia, could be the
subject for heritage studies elsewhere in the region and other countries.

Functional and Image Obsolescence
Various types of obsolescence may impinge on the survival of heritage properties
and  sites,  but  the  major  threat  occurs  when  there  is  diminished  utility  for  the
building. Functional obsolescence is the diminished utility of the building’s fabric
for the function for which is was designed, or currently used, with regard to the
contemporary standards or requirements of the occupier or potential occupiers. In
terms of the fabric itself, this can refer to the lack of facilities such as central heating,
air-conditioning, lifts or modern communications.6

Ashworth & Tunbridge7 have pointed out that modern services need to conform
to contemporary standards of lighting, heating, plumbing etc. in accordance with
legally  enforceable  or  socially  acceptable  codes  of  working  and  living  conditions,
including health and safety standards, which would invariably be expensive to install
in the fabric of an old building. Apart from the basic conditions, there is a whole
range of communication technologies and office management practices which could
be  too  expensive  or  impractical  to  incorporate  into  the  existing  internal  space
divisions  of  older  buildings  not  originally  designed  for  them. The  provision  of
computerised services is one aspect of this.8

Functional  obsolescence  is  related  closely  to  the  concept  of  legal  and  official
obsolescence  that  occurs,  for  example,  when  a  public  agency  determines  certain
minimum standards of functionality. The introduction of new standards of health
and safety, fire or building controls can render the building obsolete. In addition, a

6. Tiesdall et al., op. cit. (note 1).

7. G.J. Ashworth & J.E. Tunbridge, The tourist historic-city: retrospect and prospect of managing the
heritage city, London: Pergamon, 2000, pp. 108–109.

8. See examples in Dempsey, op. cit. (note 2), Ch. 14: ‘Technology in policing’, pp. 333–359.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

121

building  may  become  legally  obsolete  because  the  zoning  ordinance  for  the  area
permits  a  larger  building  on  the  site.  This  can  be  reinforced  by  institutional
unwillingness to provide insurance or funding for the rehabilitation or maintenance
within the earmarked zone.9

Schuster10 contends that the regulatory process is contaminated, particularly in
the Third World, when the fear of having the property listed as a heritage property,
subject to government regulations, causes people to hide special properties or raze
buildings.  Transitional  and  developing  economies  may  attach  undue  symbolic
importance  to  new  things,  even  if  in  cultural  terms  they  are  inferior—replacing
natural materials with concrete, for example.

Strike,11 discussing architectural symbolism, argues that the type of construction,
its structural system, its details and its materials all contribute to the way it is read.
He  describes  solid  stone  as  evoking  a  sense  of  permanence,  hard-edged  regular
brickwork  associated  with  industry  and  precision,  white-glazed  brickwork  with
hygiene.  In  this  paper  on  colonial  police  stations,  there  is  evidence  that  such
materials  have  been  used  to  personify  the  symbols  of  security,  stability,  and
continuity for the community.

The  notion  of  obsolescence  in  urban  planning  and  architectural  symbolism  in
postcolonial countries is a contentious issue for which more empirical research is
urgently  needed.  J.M.  Fitch  observed  that  early  European  conquerors  of  Asia,
Africa and the Americas brought with them their own vocabulary of architectural
forms. He argues that these precedent lifestyles, which have evolved over centuries
or millennia of experimentation, often offer much higher levels of environmental
response  than  their  modern  replacements:  ‘this  will  be  stunningly  apparent  to
anyone who compares the overall amenity of the colonial centres of Quito or Lima
with that of the new urban sprawl which surrounds them’.12 Ironically, the imported
skyscraper,  mall,  the  flyway,  merely  because  they  are  symbols  of  the  developed
(imperial) world, tend to discredit and then replace the older-established forms and
concepts.

Less tangible than functional obsolescence is the notion of image obsolescence,
which in simple terms may be no more than a product of the public’s perception of
a  building  or  area’s  image.  As  the  natural,  economic,  and  social  environment
changes, the historic fabric becomes less attractive or suitable to a new generation.
In some societies, old buildings and sites may have the connotations of fabric decay,

9. Tiesdall et al., op. cit. (note 1).

10. J.M. Schuster, ‘Choosing the right tool(s) for the task’, in J.M. Schuster, J. de Monchaux & C.A.
Riley (eds) Preserving the built heritage: tools for implementation, London: Oxford University Press of
New England, 1997, p. 137.

11. J. Strike, Architecture in conservation: managing development at historic sites, London and New York:
Routledge, 1994, p. 26.

12. J.M. Fitch, Historic preservation: curatorial management of the built world, Charlottesville and
London: University Press of Virginia, 1995, pp. 7–8.

122

Robert Ian Chaplin

depreciation of property value, substandard facilities, and elitist enclaves, while in
others  old  buildings  are  desirable  because  of  their  association  with  the  values  of
stability, tradition and wisdom that they embody. However, in postcolonial societies
these  values,  however  strongly  held  by  the  indigenous  community,  may  be
attributed to the alien regime that occupied such buildings and sites. It is the claim
to,  and  imposition  of,  these  values,  rather  than  the  values  themselves,  which
postcolonial  societies  seek  to  repudiate  and  challenge.  In Asian  communities  the
notion of image or ‘face’ is a powerful determinant of the negotiating process, and
this applies to the communication of values, visions and planning criteria by parties
concerned with the conflicting issues of urban regeneration and renewal.

In  the Asian  context,  Singapore  could  provide  a  model  for  many  postcolonial
territories  that  recognise  both  the  economic  and  cultural  assets  of  postcolonial
heritage, while being cognisant of the value judgements involved. On 23 July 2002,
the Singapore Minister of State for National Development, Dr Vivian Balakrishnan,
launched  the  Urban  Redevelopment Authority’s  (URA)  Public  Consultation  and
Exhibition on Parks and Waterbodies and Identity Plans. Central to this plan is the
conviction  that  planning  can  contribute  to  the  sense  of  identity  in  Singapore.
Identity  is  perceived  as  going  beyond  conservation,  beyond  the  hardware  that
encompasses the charm of various places, the things that make them appealing to
Singaporeans, giving a sense of belonging, rootedness and identity. This enlightened
perspective has emerged from the decision taken in the 1980s to halt the destruction
of heritage properties, sites, and whole districts in postcolonial Singapore. This was
manifested  in  policy  in  1984,  when  a  Tourism  Task  Force  was  deployed  to
investigate causes behind the sudden drop in tourist arrivals for the year 1983. It
was their conclusion that this was due, in part, to the devastating effects of urban
renewal on large parts of the old city of Singapore, with many old buildings and
districts falling victim to the driving force of wholesale redevelopment.13

Joan Henderson, in a comparative study of Singapore and Hong Kong’s heritage
attractions and tourism development, alludes to the profound political and social
implications arising from pressing questions of national and cultural identity and
government authority. She argues that, in Hong Kong, heritage properties and sites
are  a  channel  for  delivering  political  and  socio-cultural  messages  about  formal
conceptions  of  identity  and  heritage  to  residents  and  external  publics  as  well  as
tourists: ‘There is some tension between the tourism industry and government as
the colonial imprint is what distinguishes Hong Kong from other Chinese cities and
therefore a resource to be highlighted.’14 In Singapore, heritage and its conservation

13. See Heng Chye Kiang, Acting Head of the Department of Architecture, National University of
Singapore, ‘From architectural heritage to identity in Singapore’, paper presented at the International
Conference on ‘The Conservation of Urban Heritage’, 10–12 September 2002, Macau: Macau
S.A.R. Government, pp. 117–130.

14. J.C. Henderson, ‘Heritage attractions and tourism development in Asia: a comparative study of
Hong Kong and Singapore’, International Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 4, 2002, pp. 337–344.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

123

have assumed a high relevance, with sites perceived as constituting a narrative of
nationalism, unity, and multiracialism. Colonial buildings are seen as symbols of
patriotism rather than imperial domination. Henderson warns, however, against the
overemphasis on international-style newly built attractions and a loss of perceived
and actual distinctiveness, and emphasises the need to achieve a balance between
the aspects of cultural heritage, traditions, the built environment, and modernisa-
tion, as the race towards globalisation may overwhelm these aspects.

It is important, however, that research on globalisation of heritage conservation
and tourism development analyses the data on bottom-up local considerations such
as those followed in Singapore, which have given rise to unique outcomes in the
form  of  specialised  heritage  themes. With  its  unique  colonial  legacy,  the  varied
motives served by heritage enhancement and the diverse urban landscapes that have
emerged in Singapore provide a paradigm for further research on the global–local
nexus  in  urban  heritage  tourism.  Since  the  1980s,  the  Urban  Redevelopment
Authority of Singapore has limited its role to the initial stages of urban development
rather than the actual process of conservation. The public sector’s involvement is
now confined to masterplan design, policy guidelines and infrastructural/environ-
mental upgrading.15 This means that the private sector will need to play a formative
role in determining land-use mixes, undertaking conservation, and taking a lead in
creating  enterprises  based  on  conservation  initiatives. Agreement  will  need  to  be
reached  by  all  stakeholders  involved  on  the  nature  of  the  threat  posed  by
obsolescence in an increasingly globalised environment.

Colonial Police Precincts and Headquarters: the threat of
obsolescence
In his introduction to Part II of an edited book containing cases documenting the
disappearing urban heritage in Asian cities, William Logan observes that ‘Coloniza-
tion was one of the great waves of globalization’ and that the impact of colonisation
on  the  colonial  territories  and  their  peoples  has  long  been  the  subject  of  debate
among scholars.16 Titled ‘Reacting to the Colonial’, Part II makes use of four case
studies  to  examine  the  issues  affecting  postcolonial  societies  in  transition—
particularly the reactions which Asian societies have had to the colonial impact on
their urban environments. Not mentioned in this chapter or the rest of the book, is
the impact of colonial policing on the urban environment and the establishments
that still survive as subjects for further debate on conservation. It is hoped the case
studies abridged for this paper may make a further contribution to the research field
explored  in  the  book.  The  following  descriptions  and  analysis  refer  mainly  to
heritage  conservation  in  former  Portuguese  colonies  as  part  of  a  more  compre-
hensive research project on the Luso-Legacy in Asia.

15. T.C. Chang, S. Milne, D. Fallon & C. Pohlman, ‘Urban heritage tourism: the global–local nexus,
Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 23, No. 2, 1996, pp. 284–305.

16. W.S. Logan (ed.), The disappearing ‘Asian’ city: protecting Asia’s urban heritage in a globalizing world,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, pp. 71–74.

124

Robert Ian Chaplin

The Portuguese colonial-built heritage legacy in Macau, a former territory on the
Pearl River Estuary of the South China Coast, after a period of extensive restoration
prior to the handover of the territory to the sovereignty of the People’s Republic of
China,  is,  at  the  time  of  writing,  threatened  by  statements  that  the  120  listed
buildings,  monuments  and  sites  in  Macau  are  undergoing  an  environmental
reassessment  of  their  cultural  significance:  ‘Subtle  hints  by  the  Macau  Cultural
Institute that some protected buildings might not be worth conserving have come
under fire from preservationists.’17 The decision whether some buildings might be
taken off the protected list will ultimately be made by the government’s Secretariat
for  Social  Affairs  and  Culture  which  oversees  the  Macau  Cultural  Institute.
Affecting this decision are demands from the local Chinese community that greater
emphasis  should  be  placed  on  Macau’s  ‘inseparable  links’  with  the  motherland.
Meanwhile, the local Portuguese community claims that its cultural legacy is subject
to official neglect. Because of the language barrier, and despite four centuries of
relatively peaceful co-existence, interaction between Macau’s Chinese majority and
the Portuguese minority culture is limited.

Despite these threats, it is conceivable that the police precincts and headquarters,
which are an integral part of the Portuguese built-heritage colonial legacy in Macau,

Figure 1. Macau Marine Police Headquarters (Quartel dos Mouros). [Author’s photograph.]

17. Harald Bruning, ‘Cultural watchdog body torn by dual heritage’, South China Morning Post, 24
March 2001.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

125

may  gain  a  reprieve  owing  to  their  tangible  and  intangible  contribution  to  the
community’s welfare. None has been extensively and expensively restored or been
converted to other uses, as has been the case with some other properties. Apart from
the removal of the Portuguese insignia and other vestiges of the colonial policing
administration, the exterior architectural features remain intact, though there have
been some modifications to interiors to combat functional obsolescence.

The most impressive property is the Marine Police Headquarters, known as the
Quartel  dos  Mouros  because  of  its  Moorish  design  (see  figure  1). The  original
construction  has  been  altered  since  its  inauguration  in  1874,  but  the  triangular
archways and minarets have been retained as the most distinctive features. It once
served  as  a  barracks,  but  today  houses  only  the  offices  of  the  Marine  Police,  a
restaurant frequented by the local Portuguese community, and a small museum. It
is located near the Inner Harbour, close to the site where the first Portuguese sailors
made contact with the Chinese seafaring community of Macau—celebrated in the
form of the A-Ma Temple, a cultural property and site revered by locals and tourists
from China. Across from the Temple is the Macau Maritime Museum housed in a
purpose-built two-storey facility. This new building seems to support the contention
of  the  previous  administration  that  the  Marine  Police  Headquarters  should
continue to preserve its function as well as its form and not be converted for use as
a museum.

On  a  site  overlooking  the  Outer  Harbour,  is  a  complex  housing  the  Macau
Security  Forces  in  the  S˜ao  Francisco  Barracks  (see  figures  2  and  3),  which  also
continues  mostly  to  serve  its  original  function. While  not  promoted  as  a  tourist
attraction, it is a landmark that intrigues most visitors. A small museum on the first
floor is open to the public, but very little interpretation is available. Located below
the Barracks on the busy main street is the impressive Military Club, which has been
extensively restored, with only the façade retaining its original form.

Two examples of police headquarters and precincts serving the local community
are shown in figures 4 and 5. The first houses the offices of the Traffic Police, while
the second is a smaller station adjoining a small square, the Largo S˜ao Augustinho,
around which are located colonial heritage properties including the Church of St
Augustine and the Dom Pedro Theatre, a colonial property unique in Asia. This
elegant  and  peaceful  environment  is  reflected  in  the  relatively  minor  criminal
offences dealt with by the headquarters in this precinct. The Macau Traffic Police
Headquarters  is  reminiscent  of  its  architectural  counterpart  in  Panjim,  Goa,
India.

Goa’s colonial heritage is well known for its cathedrals, churches, monasteries,
and Portuguese ecclesiastical properties occupying the magnificent World Heritage
Site at Old Goa (Velha Goa). Less well known is the fact that materials retrieved
from  buildings  and  churches  ordered  to  be  demolished  at  Old  Goa  in  1811,
following the abandoning of the site owing to the recurrent incidences of plague and
tropical  diseases  which  struck  down  the  inhabitants,  were  used  to  construct  the
Police Headquarters in Nova Goa or Panjim (now known as Panaji). During the
governance of D. Manuel de Portugal e Castro, the 51st Viceroy from 1827 to 1835,

126

Robert Ian Chaplin

Figures  2–3.  Macau  Security  Forces  Headquarters  (S˜ao  Francisco  Barracks).  [Author’s

photographs.]

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

127

Figure 4. Macau Traffic Police Headquarters. [Author’s photograph.]

Figure 5.  Police Station on Largo S˜ao Augustinho. [Author’s photograph.]

128

Robert Ian Chaplin

huge laterite blocks were transferred from Old Goa to the site of the new city by ox-
carts. On this site, the entire sprawling complex on the Praça das Sete Janelas (the
Square  of  the  Seven  Windows)  was  constructed  to  house  the  important  State
Departments,  including  the  police. The  original  Police  Headquarters  had  been
located  at  the  building  on  the  site  of  the  present  General  Post  Office,  itself
constructed to house a tobacco trading depot, situated on the historical Largo do
Estanço or ‘Tobacco Square’. The present magnificently restored colonial property
is located along the former Rua de Malaca, now called Dr Pissurlencar Road, on the
western wing of the Largo Afonso de Albuquerque, now called Azad Maidan. It is
flanked by an important city landmark, the Menezes Braganz˜ao Institute (formerly
the  Instituto Vasco  da  Gama)  and  by  the  Government  Printing  Press  (Imprensa
Nacional). Until the late 1960s, the building had features that easily distinguished
it from the building of the Printing Press and the Institute Vasco da Gama in that the
main entrance had a high-roofed first floor which was covered about one quarter of
its entire frontal length, the rest being ground floor only. The building’s floor space
was extended in order to meet the needs of the new Police Administration; it was
given a top floor so as to come to a perfect line with the two buildings along its sides.
Its elegant and imposing entrance has been modified and the old colonial police
insignias have been removed. A resounding symbol of the past, a bell cast in 1837
at  the  Royal  Navy  Arsenal,  has  survived  intact  and  still  bears  the  inscription
commemorating that it was finished for the Marine Police Headquarters in the year
1837.18

The restoration of the Goa Police Headquarters was sponsored by the Fundaç˜ao
Oriente,  a  Portugal-based  cultural  institution  dedicated  to  the  preservation  of
buildings and monuments of historical and architectural significance. The initiative
came  from  the  local  State Authorities,  the  Goa  Police,  and  is  appreciated  for  its
contribution  to  fostering  the  cultural  partnership  between  India  and  Portugal  as
well as preventing the functional and image obsolescence of a facility at the centre
of the community in Panaji.

British colonial heritage is still evident in many properties and sites in East and
Southeast Asia, but compared with Portuguese patrimony in neighbouring Macau,
Hong Kong’s colonial legacy has been almost eradicated except for a few buildings
and  sites  currently  under  threat.  One  such  example  is  the  Marine  Police
Headquarters, located on a prime site in the Tsim Sha Tsui district of Kowloon, and
recently the subject of proposals for commercial development. After more than five
years of standing vacant, the image of this hilltop compound, a national monument
and tourist attraction, is being resurrected by the Hong Kong Tourism Commission,
which hopes the property and site will be restored and converted for use by locals
and tourists. The main building dates from 1884 and includes stables and a signal
tower. In a government planning study, it is envisaged that the tunnels dug by the
Japanese during the Second World War in the grounds of the compound could be
reopened  as  an  attraction,  and  the  historic  time-signal  system  reactivated.  Other

18. ‘Goa Police Headquarters goes back in time’, pamphlet, Panaji, Goa: Fundaç˜ao Oriente.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

129

proposals from the business community involve turning the main building into a
vibrant market, open day and night with restaurants, art galleries, and a boutique
hotel  of  up  to  100  rooms  on  the  site.  Historians,  meanwhile,  argue  that  the  site
should become a home for the Hong Kong Police Museum, at present located in a
property on Coombe Road on the Peak. This existing museum presents a history of
the Hong Kong Police Force through historical photographs, archives, equipment,
and other artefacts. A Narcotics Gallery highlights the drug problem in Hong Kong,
while  the  local  triad  societies’  infamous  deeds  and  rituals  are  given  space  in  the
Triad Societies Gallery.

The  site  on  which  the  Marine  Police  Headquarters  is  located  is  significant
because it showcases one of the few original colonial buildings left standing in Tsim
Sha Tsui that performed its original function until its closure. However, its potential
value as a tourist attraction was questioned recently by the Chairman of the Travel
Industry Council who remarked: ‘To me it’s an ordinary building, not much for me
to sell to the Chinese tourists.’19

Police  precincts  and  properties  in  Hong  Kong  present  an  anomaly  for  the
postcolonial  Hong  Kong  government  of  this  designated  Special  Administrative
Region  of  China.  Government  properties  still  fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Government Property Agent (GPA), which determines the use of these buildings
except in the case of police stations, which effectively administer themselves. In the
case  of  the  properties  built  during  the  colonial  administration,  the  GPA’s
involvement is primarily to ensure that the needs of government property users are
met within the building, i.e. that functional obsolescence is not a threat. If the needs
are not met, then the GPA will assist the government property user to find more
adequate  accommodation  within  the  available  supply  of  government-owned
buildings.  In  reality,  any  government-owned  buildings  that  are  not  occupied  are
usually  in  poor  condition  and,  therefore,  not  attractive  to  parties  looking  for
alternative updated premises.20 For the Hong Kong Police, the choice seems to be
between functional restructuring (encouraging and enabling operations to function
more  efficiently  within  the  existing  building)  or  functional  regeneration  (finding
new  uses  or  activities  to  displace  existing  functions  utilising  previously  vacant
space).  However,  these  options  are  affected  by  locational  obsolescence—the
diminishing supply of services and activities in the locale for which the building was
constructed.  In  Hong  Kong,  new  districts  and  communities  are  continually
emerging  through  burgeoning  property  development  with  requirements  for
essential services such as policing and with modern materials and facilities a public
priority. However, as Chu & Uebegang point out in their report on Saving Hong
Kong’s cultural heritage, this process may be detrimental to the future of a building
as both a community resource and a tourism product:

19. V. Button, ‘Prime heritage site may be a tourist attraction’, South China Morning Post, 9
September 2001.

20. Tiesdall et al., op. cit. (note 1), p. 203.

130

Robert Ian Chaplin

It is tempting to conserve ‘showcase’ sights for easy tourist consumption but ultimately,
this may attract only tourists looking for quick and easy sightseeing. This sort of
practice, while appealing in its simplicity, runs the risk of not attracting repeat visitors,
paling in comparison with more holistic cultural experiences in competing destination,
and most importantly doing a substantial disservice to the long term members of Hong
Kong society.21

Joan Henderson, in her research on heritage, identity, and tourism in Hong Kong
identifies  some  of  the  tensions  that  affect  the  further  promotion  of  heritage
conservation:

Hong Kong’s history, and especially the colonial legacy, is an area of contested
meanings that affects its presentation as a tourist attraction, as well as manner of
reception; these tensions may be aggravated as a result of recent plans that envisage
further promotion of heritage.22

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  identity  of  the  precinct  which  the  Marine  Police
Headquarters once served, has become disconnected from its community roots and
functions. The prospect of locational and image obsolescence are factors which may
inevitably lead to the demise of this property and site if some form of consensus
cannot be reached on its future.

Conclusions: on the Heritage Beat
This paper has raised some issues relating to the threat of obsolescence to historic
colonial properties and sites used by police forces, some of which continue to meet
the needs of communities in postcolonial societies. It is argued here that these issues
are pertinent to cities and towns in both developing and developed countries, where
protection and security for residents and agents of cultural and heritage tourism are
becoming increasingly economic, social, and political concerns.

In an article titled ‘Crime fears as five police stations shut up each month’, the
Observer reported that five stations in the UK have been closed every month since
the Labour government came to power, and in 2001 there were 198 fewer police
stations  than  there  were  in  1997.23 The  UK  Police  Federation,  which  represents
beat officers, commented that the rate of closure was no longer sustainable and had
contributed to the rising levels of violent crime and mugging. According to Norman
Brennan, national director of the Victims of Crime Trust, a police officer on the beat
is becoming increasingly hard to locate:

21. C. Chu & K. Uebegang, Saving Hong Kong’s cultural heritage, Civic Exchange, February 2002, p.
13, see:  < www.civic-exchange.org > .

22. J. Henderson, ‘Heritage, identity and tourism in Hong Kong’, International Journal of Heritage
Studies, Vol. 7, No. 3, September 2001, pp. 219–237.

23. Martin Bright, ‘Crime fears as five police stations shut each month’, Observer, 25 March 2001.

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

131

It is bad enough that members of the public no longer see a police officer on the beat.
But is appalling that they can turn up at a police station after being mugged and find
the doors closed, or at best a phone linked to a police station several miles away.

Campaigners for the retention of police stations within the community believe that
figures for the country’s lost police stations should be even higher because the Home
Office tally is a net total, arrived at when newly built stations are taken into account.
Critics  say  these  are  rarely  the  traditional  high  street  cop  shops,  but  highly
automated command centres requiring lower manpower.

The Staffordshire Police Force (SPF) is one example of an appreciation of the
problem  of  lack  of  on-site  support  for  communities.  The  SPF  has  devised  a
Community  Relations  Strategy  with  the  intention  of  overcoming  the  problems
facing  many  similar  communities  worldwide,  especially  those  affected  by  racial
tensions.  Following  a  reorganisation  in  1999,  the  SPF  has  become  more  locally
based, adopting a problem-solving style of policing that allows officers on the beat
to deal more closely with local problems. They aim to work with other agencies to
support people at risk within the community and improve the use of police services
by those groups which have traditionally been ‘excluded from protection’.24

Unfortunately,  as  more  and  more  police  stations  disappear  from  ‘downtown’
areas, even those located in precincts gentrified for cultural and heritage tourism,
the  incidence  of  groups  ‘excluded  from  protection’  will  increase. These  include
tourists expecting such an environment to be safe and welcoming. Visitors to the
Spanish capital, Madrid, for example need to be forewarned of the dangers of going
out on the tourist beat (day or night) and becoming victims of street muggings and
assault. Unlike Bangkok, Thailand, with its visible Tourist Police, finding a Guardia
or police station to report a mugging in Madrid is as challenging as recovering the
stolen wallet. If the old buildings which house Madrid’s police had the same profile
as some of the other tourism landmarks in the city centre, perhaps more attention
would be given to protecting both visitors and local residents. In this respect, much
can  be  learned  from  policing  in  postcolonial  Macau,  where  the  stations  and
headquarters are part of the heritage fabric, and in effect are reminiscent of districts
or neighbourhoods in now crime-prone Lisbon.

At a conference held on urban regeneration, held in the World Heritage City of
Segovia from 3 to 5 July 2001, in a paper titled, ‘Perennial old-city paradigms’, R.
Samuels  referred  to  complementary  evidence  from  research  on  mixed-tenure
residential domains, conducted on university campuses and on inner-city housing
estates, the findings of which indicate that fear of crime and harassment has led to
citizens modifying their behaviour to the extent that they avoid going out at night.
In fact 16% of those surveyed from the housing estates are reluctant to go out at all.
These findings suggest that the all-important sense of community appropriation is
lost when a sufficient number of residents recoil from using the built environment
after dark. Samuel concludes that it is the responsibility of environmental designers

24.  < www.staffordshire.police.uk > , accessed 11 September 2002.

132

Robert Ian Chaplin

to  help  ensure  that  the  built  environment  can  be  used  without  trepidation  at  all
times of day and night. ‘Unfortunately architects do not imagine the buildings they
design, nor urban designers the settings they approve, as changing their “person-
ality” at night.’25

In North America, heritage conservationists in cities such as Vancouver, Canada,
have conducted timely research on the problems of obsolescence, advocating the
adaptive  re-use  of  properties  under  threat.  Harold  Kalman,  Principal  of  Com-
monwealth Historic Resource Management, sums up this threat and the lessons to
be learned from Vancouver:

New investment will likely bring about a rise in land values, increases in densities, and
changes in land use. Some buildings with traditional functions will no longer be
considered sufficiently productive to justify remaining on their appreciated land.
Long-term changes to society and economics will make certain traditional uses
unnecessary. As a result, many old buildings will become redundant, underused, or
unused. This in turn will lead to considerable pressure for their redevelopment. This is
an unhappy scenario for those of us who support cultural heritage preservation.26

In light of the above case, Canadian heritage conservationists should be encouraged
by the support given by the public through such initiatives as the one undertaken by
a retired Canadian policeman, Anthony Saldutto, who paints watercolour illustra-
tions of old police headquarters and precincts in downtown Toronto.27 Saldutto has
been commissioned by the Metropolitan Toronto Police Services Board, and many
of  his  paintings  have  been  sold  as  limited  editions  to  fund  various  charitable
organisations.

The  photographs  accompanying  this  paper  provide  further  illustration  of  the
aesthetic appeal of police headquarters and precincts on the heritage beat in Macau.
They also continue to be subjects for artistic representation of the culture of this
unique  postcolonial  city  and  its  attractive,  but  disappearing,  environment.  Many
protection zones include police headquarters in precincts which continue to serve as
functioning  elements  of  the  regenerated  urban  fabric  as  well  as  tangible  and
supporting elements of the heritage fabric. More research, however, is needed on
the  feasibility  of  continued  effective  use  of  these  buildings,  and  the  community’s
perceptions  of  the  value  of  preserving  and  showcasing  the  contested  colonial
legacy.

25. R. Samuels, ‘Perennial old city paradigms’, in C.A. Brebbia, J.F. Martin-Duque & L.C. Wadhwa
(eds) The sustainable city II: urban regeneration and sustainability, Advances in Architecture Series, Vol.
14, Southampton, Boston: WIT Press, 2002, pp. 692–701.

26. H. Kalman, ‘Adaptive re-use: learning from Vancouver’, in The conservation of urban heritage,
Proceedings of an International Conference held in Macau, 10–12 September 2002, Macau: Macau
Cultural Institute, 2002, pp. 148–158.

27.  < www.salduttowatercolours.on.ca > .

Obsolescence of Police Precincts on the Heritage ‘Beat’

133


