International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Agreeing to Differ? English and German
conservation practices as alternative models for
European notions of the built past

John V. N. Soane

To cite this article: John V. N. Soane (2002) Agreeing to Differ? English and German conservation
practices as alternative models for European notions of the built past, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 8:3, 267-281, DOI: 10.1080/1352725022000018949
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725022000018949

Published online: 09 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 188

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies,
Vol. 8, No. 3, 2002, pp. 267–281

Agreeing to Differ? English and German
conservation practices as alternative
models for European notions of the built
past
John V.N. Soane

Abstract
Over the past 150 years, different perceptions concerning the cultural influence that historic
buildings should exert on modern life have evolved within the British Isles and Continental
(especially  Central)  Europe.  Despite  a  conservation  revival,  together  with  the  declining
influence  of  International  Modernism  by  the  1970s,  in  facilitating  the  reduction  of
conceptual  differences  within state  conservation  agencies  throughout Europe,  subsequent
events did not allow this process to go much further. The political changes in Central Europe
following the end of the Cold War and the subsequent restructuring of the world economy
helped to re-emphasise the basic problem. That is, the extent to which the material remains
of  the  past  should  be  considered  more  as  reactive  cultural  icons  or  more  as  proactive
normative elements  within the European civic  tradition. An  examination of  the general
operating philosophies of state conservation agencies in England and Germany can give a
plausible insight into how differing values placed on the past and contemporary significance
of  historic  buildings  can  be directly  related  to  the  level  of  vernacular continuity  deemed
appropriate  within  different  European  regions. The  question  is  also  raised  whether  the
convergence of similar urban lifestyles  across the European Continent will enable historic
material remains to become either integrated and moral realities or hermetic and virtual
realities within the broader framework of European civic life.

Key  Words:  Buildings;  Architectural  conservation;  Urban  heritage;  Germany
Conservation policy; Monuments

Existing Assumptions
According  to  well-developed  lines  of  argument  within  the  field  of  Monument
Conservation,1 an acceptance of the intrinsic value and contextual presentation of

1. G. Ashworth & P. Larkham, Building a new heritage, London: Routledge, 1994, pp. 13–30.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/02/030267-15 © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725022000018949

the  built remains of  past  eras in  Europe is a  relatively  modern development and
closely  related to  the  need to  achieve  a  more coherent sense of  national  identity
during the period of industrialisation in the 19th and 20th centuries.

Surviving historic ensembles have  been seen increasingly, to  a  greater  or lesser
extent,  as  distinctive  cultural  objects,  which  are  capable  of  being  utilised  at
different  administrative  levels  to  supply  an  easily  identifiable  ‘sense  of  place’  to
populations  within  rapidly  changing  urban  surroundings. In  order to  facilitate  a
proper  sense  of  social  and  spatial  understanding of  surviving  historical  environ-
ments, these sites have been transformed during the last half century into cultural
resources. They  have  become  increasingly  valued  as  heritage  products  for  the
general edification and ultimate economic advantage,  as much for local people as
for  the  international,  heritage  and  tourist  industry.  Whilst  acknowledging  the
relative  importance  of  this  general  trend,  a  principal  aim  of  this  paper  is  to
demonstrate  that  apparently  similar  manifestations  of  historic  monument  pre-
sentation  are  likely  to  conceal  considerable  differences  in  the  cultural  role  of
material  remains  from  the  past  among  different  European  regions.  Certainly,  in
recent  studies  that  have  been  carried  out  into  the  organisation  and  structure  of
heritage  facilities,  the  presentation  of  the  resources  and  their  associated  service
facilities  can  be  generally  related  to  the  cultural  and  domestic  priorities  of
particular visitor categories. But these didactic relationships all too often disguise
the  wider and deeper philosophical influences that  lie behind the  presentation of
historic  monuments  both  as  part  of  the  existing  urban  townscape  and  as
individual structures.

Throughout  Europe,  behind  the  seemingly  general  circumstances  which  have
given  a  more prosperous and better educated, ageing population both more time
and  capacity  to  take  a  sustained and  individual  interest  in  the  expressions of  its
historic past, there remain varying  degrees of  emphasis put on the  physiognomic
significance and visual perception of the built objects that are displayed. Although
no  two  countries  can  ever  be  taken  as  fully  representing  two  strongly  opposed
cultural traditions, the basic divide in modern conservation practices can be most
clearly observed in a comparison between general tendencies in Great Britain and
Germany. This divide is in the extent to which the contemplation and interpretation
of  the  built  past  is  considered  a  relevant  and  integrated  element  within  the
contemporary  lifestyle  of  the  country or  whether  the  significance  of  ‘heritage’  is
considered as  being  something  quite  distinct  from  the  normal  experience of  the
modern world.

Whether the  presentation of  the  material past  is considered more or less as  an
integrated educational process or as an aspect of leisure and entertainment activity
can have a very considerable effect as to how historic buildings in particular settings
are  adapted  for  presentation  to  the  general  public. This  has  been  a  controlling
influence,  not  only  as  to  how  much  or  how  little  the  character  of  a  particular
townscape may be especially affected by the impact of heritage tourism alone, but
also on the relative level of architectural synthesis that is tolerated between historical
and modern building in general terms. The more an holistic approach is adopted to

268

John V. N. Soane

Figure 1. The slow attrition of the medieval city centre by Victorian development; Smithy Door by the
Royal Exchange, Manchester. [Ill. 205 in J. Dyos & H. Wolff (eds), The Victorian city, London:

Routledge,  1973.]

explain the cultural importance of an evolved townscape for the equal edification of
inhabitant  and  visitor  alike,  the  more  it  can  be  directly  related  to  the  degree  of
general civic significance that continues to be read into the historical interpretation
of these areas.

In effect, differing approaches to contemporary monument protection in Europe
still  relate to  the  nature, extent  and length  of  time  that  evolved  social structures
within  particular  European regions have  been  separated  from  their  evolved  built
surroundings. Industrialisation had a considerable impact on how people saw the
structures  of  an  earlier  world  gone  beyond  recall.  Thus  during  the  early
industrialisation of  Great Britain after  about  1780,  the  long, slow but inexorable
creation of totally new socio-spatial living experiences ensured a more radical break
from  the  past  than  the  more  abrupt  confrontation  of  a  more  developed  form  of
industrialisation with  less  degraded, but  still  viable,  historic  urban  environments
experienced in the Germany of a century later.

Agreeing to Differ?

269

Figure  2. The  Burgplatz,  Brunswick;  the  late  19th-century  reconstructed  square,  including  two
repositioned medieval merchants’ houses, 1904. [Ill. P.29 in H. Hamner-Schenk & D. Lange, Alte

Stadt, moderne Zeiten, Braunschweig: Landesmureum, 1985.]

Differing Conservation Philosophies
How pre-industrial, rural and urban life in different parts of Europe came to terms
with the technological and ideological changes imposed by the modern industrial
world has had a continuing impact on the way the aesthetic and functional relevance
of historic monuments would be valued, presented and eventually integrated into
the world of the 20th century. The question that conservationists have been asking
ever since the Industrial Era is how, in an age of greatly increased urban scale and
pluralistic complexity, can surviving historic buildings be reinterpreted so that their
artistic  and practical  worth can be fully appreciated by  every  element of modern
society? The  extent  to  which  historic  monuments become  little  more  than  relics
within  the  existing  social  and  economic  milieu or,  conversely,  are  constantly
reinterpreted as vital cultural links between past and present, can be directly related
to  the  way  that  the  evolved  cultural  traditions  of  particular  countries  have  been
preserved or destroyed by the realities of radical social change.

In Great Britain, the fractious religious, political and economic changes that had
convulsed  the  country  since  the  16th  century,  in  conjunction  with  the  relative
paucity of historic buildings that survived the Industrial Revolution, ensured that by
the late 19th century there was little continuity between historic and contemporary

270

John V. N. Soane

environments.  Moreover,  the  fiscal,  as  against  the  cultural,  value  of  standing
property  always  took  precedence. By  contrast  within  the  German  world, despite
numerous wars and other severe political and economic pressures, the survival of
many autonomous princely states until 1871 enabled them to withstand better the
pressures  of  industrialisation.  Not  only  was  there  official  support  for  their
vernacular cultural tradition, there also existed a strong belief that their survival as
viable communities depended on the close identification between their populations
and their built surroundings.

Under  these  circumstances,  leading  conservation  theorists  in  Central  Europe
such as Alois Riegl, the Director of the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna during
the 1890s, were of the opinion that every sector of modern urban society was linked,
both aesthetically and historically, to the finite remains of the past. Thus, not only
were  the  artistic  characteristics  of  historic  buildings  essential  elements  in  the
gradual  cultural  evolution  of  particular  regions,  but  also  that  the  existing  social
worth of their everyday function was an essential support for local civic tradition.2
By contrast, the pioneer British conservationist William Morris believed in ancient
buildings  as  monuments  to  a  bygone  art,  that  modern  art  cannot  meddle  with
without destroying.3 He emphasised, therefore, the absolute primacy of preserving,
without  any  alteration  whatsoever,  every  distinctive  characteristic  of  an  historic
monument—even at the expense of denying any further practical use to the building
in question. Irrespective of any wider cultural role they might still have possessed,
these structures were visitors from the past and not welcome within the community
of present-day society.

Wider Implications of Different Conservation Approaches
These  divergent  theoretical  justifications  for  different  forms  of  monument
conservation in Britain and Germany were to open a debate concerning the way the
historical material remains of vernacular cultures should be related to, and displayed
within,  the  new  townscapes  of  mature  industrialisation.  Bearing  in  mind  the
considerable difference in architectural scale and social usage of buildings from the
pre-industrial era in comparison with  the  contemporary built environment, some
conservationists have  wondered whether any  kind of synthesis is ever likely to  be
possible between the aesthetic craft traditions of older European civic cultures and
the  homogenising commercialism of  globalisation. A  clear  choice must  be  made,
either to  present historic  monuments as ‘unconventional’ cultural entities (which
implies no physiological distinction between the past and present relevance of the
vernacular inheritance of particular towns and cities) or to work on the assumption
that  industrial/post-industrial  urbanisation  poses  a  considerable  threat  to  the
general significance of the European civic tradition.

2. A. Riegl, ‘The modern cult of monuments: its character and its origin’, Oppositions, No. 25, 1982,
pp. 1–51.

3. A. Wright, William Morris today, Catalogue, Guildford: University of Surrey, 1984, p. 155.

Agreeing to Differ?

271

With  hindsight,  these  different  approaches  to  urban  conservation  were  to
encapsulate either a reactive acquiescence or a  proactive resistance to the  general
social and spatial forces of dynamic urban change that would convulse the European
continent during the 20th century. During the inter-war years, the long-term impact
of  the  great  economic depression of  the  later  1920s  and  1930s  in  preventing  an
excessive level of urban redevelopment in the majority of urban areas across Europe,
reduced the  need for structured responses to  the  threatened  loss  of  considerable
pieces  of  vernacular  architecture.  Germany,  after  1919,  witnessed  two  rapidly
growing schools of thought—those of Conservation and Modernism. Indeed, it was
an intense dislike of the latter that helped contribute to the eventual rise of the Nazi
Party.  The  spirited  defence  of  renovated  historic  urban  areas  by  German
conservationists,  in  the  face  of  the  unrelenting Modernist town  planning  of  the
Bauhaus  School,  demonstrates  how  strongly  contested  were  two  fundamentally
conflicting views over questions arising as to the improvement, or to the complete
rebuilding,  of  decayed  city  quarters  during  these  two  decades.  In  Britain,  co-
ordinated conservation policies still remained largely ineffective.

During  the  Second World War  the  catastrophic  destruction  of  the  integrated
mixture of old and new buildings within European cities, and with it the demise of
a coherent sense of civic pride, was the event which would eventually provoke into
greater prominence the dormant philosophical differences in the perception of the
built  heritage  that  had  evolved  across  the  European  continent  over  fifty  years
before.

Post-war  Convergence and Divergence in Conservation Policies
For about two decades after 1945, the collapse of civic self-confidence, combined
with  a  pressing need for  basic  reconstruction and  the  overwhelming impact  of  a
reforming political ethos across the  Continent, both  East  and West, allowed only
limited contributions to newly emerging post-war urban environments by European
conservation agencies. In Western Europe the general ethos of historic conservation
was  associated  with  what  were  considered  to  be  defunct  conservative  political
attitudes,  whilst  in  communist  Eastern  Europe,  as  for  example  in  Saxony,
conservators  were  considered  to  be  enemies  of  the  state  and  were  required  to
undergo political re-education. However, by the late 1960s the full implications of
both the aesthetic and social degradation of many towns and cities affected by the
bureaucratic imposition of Modernist town planning principles were the cause not
only of widespread protests by amenity societies in several West European countries,
but also of the revival of long-suppressed national and vernacular perceptions as to
how  the  surviving  material  remains  of  past  eras  should  be  best  related  to  the
contemporary urban environment. In the West, the  high-rise tower  block  was  no
longer seen as the best expression of the capitalist free market and in the East as the
acme of the socialist millennium.

At  the  beginning  there  were  common  complaints  both  in  Britain  and
West  Germany  (and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  East  Germany)  against  the  purblind
attitude of planning officials who appeared to be guided entirely by socio-material

272

John V. N. Soane

Figure 3. The repudiation of evolved townscapes in favour of the new Modernist orthodoxy  across
Europe  during  the  post-war  era. Werner  D¨urth,  Niels  Gutschow; Tra¨umer  in Tr¨ummen  p.  302.

Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag, 1993.

considerations based  on  the  principle  of  the  rigid  zoning  of  central  urban  areas.
However,  by  means  of  well-publicised,  comprehensive  renovation  schemes  as  at
York and Chester, the need to enhance historic townscapes was officially recognised
in  Great  Britain  by  new  planning  legislation  between  1967  to  1974  that  greatly
increased the protection of architecturally significant built ensembles.

In West  Germany,  as  a  result  of  the  highly  successful European Architectural
Heritage Year in 1975, the previous importance that  conservationists had enjoyed
in the planning of large cities earlier in the century was not only restored, but the
already  wide  powers  that  existed  for  historic  monument  protection  were  con-
siderably  extended. The  successful  rehabilitation  of  secondary,  artisan  areas  of
decayed  historic  quarters  as  at  Mainz  and  Augsburg  are  but  two  of  the  many
examples  of  publicly  supported  improvements  that  were  begun  during  the
1970s.

But these apparent similarities of approach begged the fundamental question that
remains  at  the  heart  of  the  basic  differences  in  the  conservation  of  historic
monuments  in  Great  Britain  and  Germany. This  concerns  the  extent  to  which,
under differing political and social conditions, the surviving historical infrastructure
of any city should be perceived in absolute terms according to unvarying cultural

Agreeing to Differ?

273

values. Thus the regional state conservation services in Central Europe, along with
an increasing proportion of the population at large, looked upon the collapse of the
building  boom  in  1973  not  only  as  a  heaven-sent  opportunity  permanently  to
enhance the  aesthetic  relevance of  historic monuments within mainstream urban
lifestyles, but in addition, by the general reinstatement of multi-functional streets,
traditional squares and the  better provision of  cheaper (often restored) houses in
town  centres,  to  increase  the  social,  as  against  the  economic,  worth  of  old-
established townscapes. However, in Great Britain, and to a lesser extent in France,
the full impact of renovation schemes in historic cities was constrained by a greater
emphasis on the improved fiscal value of restored buildings than on their potential
for social improvement. Aesthetic considerations alone were still considered more
important  than  the  wider  communal  advantages  of  successful  neighbourhood
recreation.  Consequently,  since  housing  under  these  conditions  was  often  too
expensive for many home seekers, ‘gentrification’ by younger members of the post-
war middle class became the more common condition of these restored areas.

Yet by the 1980s, with the growing influence of conservation, combined with the
use of reintroduced vernacular design in the major new building projects, a coming
together of the theoretical differences in the perception of historic monuments in
Britain and in Germany seemed plausible. Could the cultural and material values of
every element in modern townscapes become integrated? When the townscape of a
particular  place  could  comprise,  in  varying  proportions,  restored  buildings,
reproductions of  destroyed  structures  or  modern buildings  in  vaguely  historicist
design, what  then is the  true calling of  historic conservation?  Is it  to  preserve an
integrated sense of visual and functional continuity or is it mainly to ensure a more
robust  counter-action  against  the  overarching  and  neutralising  influences of  the
coming urban world?

The division between these two opposed conceptions, which still, by and large,
correspond with the philosophical variance on conservation practice as evolved in
Germany  and  Great  Britain  before  1945,  was  now  to  be  widened  by  the
contradictory influences of two very important events.

The end of the Cold War in 1989–1990 and the concurrent restructuring of the
European economy made possible, on the one hand, a revival of vernacular pride in
countries  within  East  Central  Europe  whose  national  identity  had  long  been
suppressed by communist rule and, on the other, an unprecedented expansion of
the economic and social pressures of world free-market capitalism. There was now
relatively  less  chance  of  ensuring  that  historic  monuments  should  henceforth
become the common cultural heritage of all the inhabitants of advanced pluralistic
societies,  if  newly  energised  and  competing  international  and  regional  pressures
would  be  striving  for  fundamentally  different  concepts  of  a  ‘sense  of  place’.  A
restless  urban  milieu which  is  shaped  to  a  much  greater  extent  by  the  spatial
requirements and profit margins of the international business corporation is more
likely  to  be  at  odds with  an  urban  environment in  which  a  deliberate attempt  is
sought  to  synthesise old  and  new  built  forms  in  order  to  create  a  more  socially
restrained, visually harmonious arena for modern civic life.

274

John V. N. Soane

Figure  4. Towards  an  eventual  architectural  synthesis  for  link  buildings  within  restored  historical
areas  of  European  cities.  Examples  from  Central  Augsburg  (St  Ulrich)  and  central  Bristol  (St
Augustine).  [Bericht des Baureferates, 1984, Sanierung  in Augsburg;  p. 247, J.  Punter, Design

control in Bristol, Bristol: Radcliffe Press, 1990.]

It  is  not  that  in  Great  Britain  historic  conservation  is  necessarily  seen  as  a
subsidiary  adjunct  to  future  urban  development,  nor  that  in  Germany  a  greater
respect  for  the  integrated  remains  of  the  past  is  deliberately  used  to  hinder  the
redevelopment of existing urban areas. Rather, the competing claims of the money
market and a presentation of  a more considered sense of the past  continue to  be
animated  in  particular  ways  according  to  very  deeply  held  cultural instincts and
historical  experiences. The  more  culturally  fragmented  but  more  centrally  based
administrative  structure of  British  society,  in  which  general  economic considera-
tions are of relatively greater importance than evolved regional values, has ensured
that  historic  monuments will  continue  to  play  a  more  restricted  role  in  modern
urban life. In addition, since protected buildings are more likely to be regarded for
their  aesthetic  significance  than  for  their  cultural  and  social  value,  toleration  of
unsympathetic contemporary designs adjacent to older buildings is sometimes more
acceptable  in Britain than  in other parts  of  Continental Europe. In Germany, by
contrast, in view of the scale of the destruction during the 20th century suffered by
a country where strong civic traditions have always been considered more important
than a more unified political structure, the renaissance of urban conservation in the
1970s  sought to restore, according to Werner Durth,4 the  distinctive character of
particular urban environments. He was  of  the opinion that,  irrespective of  purely
visual and economic considerations, every town was considered to be an individual

4. W. Durth, Die Inzenierung der Altagswelt; Bau Welt Fundament, Berlin: Band 47, 1977.

Agreeing to Differ?

275

and unfathomable entity and consequently the overall form, shape and scale of each
and every townscape should at the very least be given equal precedence with more
precise functional requirements.

But the evolution across Europe over the last twenty years of a more finely tuned
perception of  the  advantages  of  historic  monument conservation could not  have
come about in the way it did if the philosophical justification for the preservation of
the material remains of the past, formulated during the 19th century, had not been
much strengthened by the scale of the political, economic and military changes that
have visited the Continent between 1914 and 1991.

The German Experience
In  Germany,  as  the  ideological  animosities  of  the  immediate  post-war  period
declined, conservators have increasingly been regarded not just as custodians of the
built past,  but as  kinds of  transparent  referees between planners and developers.
Their duties have been not only to improve the design of new building projects, but
also  to  humanise, as  far  as  possible,  by  the  incorporation of  surviving  historical
buildings into urban development projects, the longer-term political and economic
implications  of  the  new  townscape  thus  created.  Both West  and  East  Germany
shared, under different political circumstances, similar experiences in this respect.
Since protected monuments now play an increasingly important part in the planned
evolution  of  the  built  environment  throughout  Central  Europe,  the  reasons  for
preserving any particular structure, be it aesthetic, cultural, historical or vernacular,
have become far better defined.

Furthermore, a  stronger justification  for  a  more proactive  rehabilitation  policy
can  be  directly  related  to  the  paradoxical  situation  regarding  the  condition  of
evolved townscapes in different parts of Germany between about 1945 and 1990.
Whereas in West Germany the comprehensive rebuilding schemes of the post-war
years,  initiated  as  a  result  of  very  severe  wartime  bomb  damage,  made  the
conservation of the remaining historic monuments all the more important, in East
Germany, although many restorable buildings were lost to socialist renewal projects,
a general lack of resources led to the survival of a much greater number of historic
structures.  Under  such  circumstances  the  need  for  a  far  more  comprehensive
rehabilitation—at  times  leading  to  the  complete  re-creation  of  neglected  or
vanished  buildings  of  multifarious  architectural  and  cultural  significance—has
become a most important element in the rebuilding of German city communities
over the last fifty years.

In  East  Germany,  after  nearly  sixty  years  of  totalitarian  dictatorship,  it  was
conceded in 1995 at the Potsdam meeting of the German Committee of ICOMOS
that archaeologically authentic reconstruction based on sufficient original evidence
was both an admissible and justified element in historic monument conservation.
The complete reconstruction and incorporation of outstanding urban ensembles as,
for example in Dresden, healed the deep emotional loss suffered by the inhabitants
in  the  association  of  certain  key  pieces  of  townscape  with  particular  collective

276

John V. N. Soane

Figure  5. The  reconstruction  of  the medieval R¨omerplatz,  Frankfurt—the  east side, 1981–1983.

[Fotohek GmbH, Kaiser-Friedrich Ring 81, Wiesbaden 6200.]

experience, local knowledge and physiological attitudes in respect to the past and to
the changing political and social realities of the present.5

The  exceptional  ordeal of  Germany  during the  20th  century  may  certainly  be
seen to be largely responsible for this extensive redefinition of the general aims of
regional conservation agencies in recent years. Indeed a much-enhanced emphasis
on authenticity  in respect of  the  visual and functional presentation of  historically
significant  buildings goes  to  the  heart  of  the  international  debate  on  monument
conservation, between what might be called the still quasi-antiquarian traditions of
Great  Britain  and  the  more  integrated  relationship  between  historic  monuments
and contemporary urban life in Central Europe. For it is in the extent to which the
material remains of past eras within particular European countries are accepted by
their populations as still relevant to existing cultural values that directly influences
the  level  of  inclusiveness at  which  historic  buildings are related  to  contemporary
lifestyles within the wider urban world.

A  high  level  of  civic  identity  and  informed  opinion  entails  a  greater  desire  to
restore fully the architectural and spatial integrity of historic ensembles, which have
been destroyed, topographically degraded or insensitively altered. Such scrupulous
attention  to  detail  will  normally  ensure  a  better  general  appreciation  of  those
structures previously neglected. A lower level of informed, and involved, interest will

5. C. Marquart, Denkmalpflege im Vereinigten  Deutschland, Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlag-Austalt, 1977,
pp. 13–22.

Agreeing to Differ?

277

result  in  a  lesser  need  for  such  comprehensive restoration. The  general  cultural
significance of protected monuments will still be appreciated but they will be less
complete—even  partly  ruined—and  be  viewed  in  a  social  climate  in  which  the
material remains of the past in relation to the contemporary world are held to some
degree  at  arm’s  length.  And  this  is  something  well  represented within  the  more
centralised experience of the English conservation tradition.

The English Experience
Unlike the devolved German conservation services, English Heritage is a national
agency.  Moreover,  because  England  is  so  much  larger  than  the  other,  smaller
countries that make up the British Isles, a greater emphasis on the interpretation of
historical remains according to the English national consciousness tends to occur.
And this can reflect priorities that may not always be an accurate reflection of overall
cultural prevalence throughout Great Britain.

At  the  opposite  extreme  to  the  more  academically  orientated  conservation
tradition  in  Germany,  a  more  robust  and  pragmatic  approach  to  the  historical
evolution of the built environment within English conservation circles has resulted
in  a  more  precise,  even  constrained, presentation  and  interpretation  of  the  built
past.  Indeed, it  can be argued  that  in its  unwavering  aim to  keep at  a  respectful
distance any essential connection which historic material remains may still hold for
the population at large, English Heritage creates, by default, a degree of vernacular
amnesia  regarding  the  wider  import  of  English  cultural achievements  within  the
general evolution of the European cultural tradition.

Consequently, by emphasising that historic buildings are the common patrimony
of the entire country and not of a particular region, a plurality of interpretations of
protected places (mainly related to specific people and events) is encouraged. This
action  neutralises  the  deeper,  more  physiological  meanings  that  these  same
reminders of the past would still generally hold for the inhabitants of large areas of
Continental Europe.

However, since the  principal ethos of English conservation agencies is that  the
material  remains  of  the  past  can  in  no  way  be  related  to  any  particular  set  of
unchanging national cultural values, it follows that in Great Britain the connection
between  historic  buildings  and  people  can  be  more  easily  adapted  to  everyday
exigencies. This is the origin of the recent new initiative by the British government
whereby a whole raft of national, regional and local state agencies, including English
Heritage but also private trusts, have set in motion the comprehensive regeneration
of run-down historic buildings as the lynch-pin of the general social and economic
revival of entire urban areas. In these schemes, rehabilitated townscapes become the
stable background for the sustainable promotion of new commercial, educational,
cultural and heritage/tourist facilities.

However,  outside  specifically  defined  regeneration  areas,  English  Heritage  is
likely to continue its normal policy of preservation and not (except in a few cases for
structural reasons) embark on the extensive rehabilitation of a considerable number

278

John V. N. Soane

Figure 6. The Merchant’s House, St Andrew’s Street, Plymouth—restored within new surroundings,
1977.  [Devon’s  heritage  buildings  and  landscape,  Exeter:  Devon  County  Council,  Planning

Department, County Hall, 1982.]

of  neglected  historic  structures  in  the  near  future.  It  is  still  an  open  question,
therefore, whether economic priorities alone will enable these admirable improve-
ment schemes to be equated eventually with related endeavours in Central Europe,
where  the  unalloyed integration  of  restored and reconstructed, historic buildings
into the existing contemporary environment is the very basis of the continuing raison
d’ˆetre of nearly every urban place.

General Conclusions
The  different  emphasis  placed  on  the  presentation of  historic  buildings, both  as
individual entities and as ensembles, in contemporary English and German urban
society  is  testimony  to  how  separate  cultural  traditions  create  very  different
perceptions  of  continuity  through  which  the  material  evidence  of  the  past  is
surveyed.  Despite  idealised  visions  of  environmental  perfection  held  by  a
considerable  proportion  of  modern  Europeans,  it  is  the  level  of  instinctive
outpouring of communal identity that will determine both the degree of emotional
reverence for historic monuments and the form and scope of state intervention in
upholding  these  beliefs.  Moreover,  with  the  emergence  of  a  more  unified  set  of
aesthetic  and  social  criteria  for  the  establishment  of  a  better  integrated  urban

Agreeing to Differ?

279

lifestyle within a newly united Europe, the extent to which the homogenising mores
of  the  global  economy are  either  successfully related  to  the  older, evolved urban
tradition or become a dominant element over considerable areas of the European
Continent  will  depend  to  a  very  considerable  degree  on  a  continuing,  viable
relationship  between  proactive  conservation  and  the  successful  integration  of
restored buildings and townscapes into the overall structure of modern urban life.
For with every step towards the further enhancement of the political and material
stabilisation of  the  developed world, the  greater  will be the  need for countries in
Europe  to  choose  which  parts  of  their  built  heritage  are  essential  to  ensure  the
cultural continuity of their people.

Therefore, despite considerable historical differences in the social perception and
conservation of the accumulated material remains of civic cultures in different parts
of Europe, the dissonant converging pressures of Heimat versus Globalisation will
eventually  ensure  that  the  more  innovative  use  of  historic  urban  centres  will
increasingly  depend  not  just  on  a  widening  understanding  of  the  multifarious
advantages of restored buildings, but also on more flexible and pragmatic initiatives
in achieving these aims.

It was the general view of many delegates attending Denkmal 2000, the European
Fair for the Preservation of Historic Buildings and Urban Renewal at Leipzig, that
an enduring belief in the absolute cultural value of historic structures would not be
weakened if increasing use were made of appropriate forms of private entrepreneur-
ship  in  assisting  their  restoration  and  reuse.  At  the  other  extreme  it  was  also
accepted  that  the  purely  economic  advantages  of  functioning  historic  buildings
could  be  given  an  enhanced  cultural  and  social  value  if  they  were  restored
increasingly  to  the  highest  possible  standards  according  to  conservation  best
practice.  Consequently,  if  and  when  a  more  balanced  understanding  of  the
relevance of the extant material remains of past eras within modern urbanisation in
Europe during the early 21st century takes place, certain common developments are
likely to unfold.

The enhancement of more converging conservation practices should improve the
general level of educated interest about historic structures, and so make the peoples
of  Europe  more  conscious  and  appreciative  of  their  past  heritage.  A  more
enlightened  level  of  co-operation  between  developers,  planners,  conservationists
and  inhabitants  should  therefore  enable  a  more  precise  understanding  to  be
achieved in the attainment of a more widely acceptable sense of place. Finally, with
the narrowing of the parameters of social integration in urban environments across
Europe, it will become ever more necessary that the visual and functional basis of
revived community values be perpetuated by the greater introduction of concepts of
integrated design as a policy objective in itself.

When this reality comes about, the long ideological battle of the 20th century, in
which  increasing divergences between the  form and function of  the  accumulated
urban structure of countless European towns and cities had become so disastrously
associated  with  the  efficacy  of  particular  social  and  economic  philosophies,  will
become a thing of the past.

280

John V. N. Soane

Further Reading
German
Bubner, B. (1997) Einf¨uhrung in die Denkmaplflege I (unpublished), Wiesbaden.
Durth, W. (1977) Die Inzenierung der Altagswelt; Bau Welt Fundament, Berlin: Band 47.
Durth,  W.  (1992)  Deutsche  Architektur:  biographische  verflechtungen  1900–1970,  Munich:  Deutsche

Tashasverlag Munich.

Huse, N. (1996) Denkmalpflege: Deutsche Texte aus drei Jahrhunderten, Munich.
Kiesow, G. (1995) Einf ¨uhrung in die Denkmalpflege, Darmstadt: Winenschaftlishe Buchgesellschaft.
Lipp,  W.  (1993)  Denkmal—Werte—Gesellschaft:  zur  Pluralitat  des  Denkmalbegriffs,  Frankfurt  and

Berlin.

Marquart,  C.  (ed.)  (1997)  Denkmalpflege  im  Vereinigten  Deutschland,  Stuttgart:  Deutsche  Verlags-

Anstalt.

Shirmbeck, E. (ed.) (1994) Zukunft der Gegenwart, Stuttgart.
Traeger,  J.  (1994)  ‘Zehn  Thesen  zum  Wideraufbau  zerstorter  Architektur’,  Bauwelt,  No.  8,  pp.

352–354.

English
Appleyard, D. (1979) The conservation of European cities, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ashworth, G. & Larkham, P. (1994) Building a new heritage, London: Routledge.
Ashworth, G. & Tunbridge, J. (1990) The tourist-historic city, London: Belhaven.
Brisbane, M. & Wood, J. (1996) A future for our past, London: English Heritage.
Cossons, N. (2000) Power of place, London: English Heritage.
Larkham, P. (1996) Conservation and the city, London: Routledge.
Riegl, A. (1982) ‘The modern cult of monuments: its character and its origin’, Oppositions, No. 25, pp.

1–51.

Thomas, M. (1998) ‘Conservation of the urban: issues and politics’, Working Paper No. 168, School of

Planning, Oxford Brookes University, 1998.

Wright, A.  (1984) In William Morris today, Catalogue,  Guildford: University of Surrey, 1984, esp. pp.

43–60.

Agreeing to Differ?

281


