`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of
Time’: custom versus tradition in
environmental heritage research and
interpretation
Kenneth Robert Olwig

Abstract
Our  environmental  heritage  is  often  interpreted  as  reflecting  a  fall  from  grace  in  which
modern society is seen to destroy tradition through an increasingly unnatural relationship
to its environment. At the same time, modern science promotes itself as providing a means
to  restore  that  natural  environment.  There  is  an  apparent  contradiction  between  a
modernity  that  is  seen  as  being  capable  of  destroying  society’s  natural  environmental
heritage  and,  at  the  same  time,  is  seen  as  also  providing  the  curative  to  save  it. This
apparent contradiction, it is argued here, represents two sides of the same narrative coin,
going back to the Bible and the Greek and Roman classics. This article proposes that by an
examination of the distinction between unchanging tradition and custom, as the source of
ever-changing  practices,  rooted  in  a  vital  sense  of  the  past,  it  is  possible  to  re-conceive
heritage interpretation, presentation and preservation in more dynamic terms.

Key Words: Environmental Heritage; Paradise; Tradition; Custom; Declensionist
Narratives; Progress; Norway

The Environmental Heritage Research and Interpretation
Complex
The idea of the `Military Industrial Complex’ is probably known to most, even if
they  do  not  know  the  origin  of  the  expression.1 It  refers  to  a  symbiotic  relation
between  the  military  and  industry.  Another  such  complex  might  be  the  relation
between environmental research and heritage interpretation. This complex can be
illustrated by  the personal  experience  of  making a  joint  interdisciplinary research
grant  proposal  for  a  project  to  study  the  management  and  ecology  of  mountain-
meadow grazing lands. Several colleagues, from the natural sciences, kept slipping

1. The term is from a speech written by Malcolm Moos (now a former president of the University of
Minnesota) for a presidential speech by Dwight D. Eisenhower.

phrases  into  the  application  that  referred  to  how,  until  very  recent  times,  these
meadowlands  had  for  centuries,  if  not  millennia,  represented  a  stable  biodiverse
environment,  managed  by  an  equally  stable  traditional  society.  Now,  however,
modern  industrial  agriculture  was  suddenly  bringing  a  heritage  of  ancient,
ecologically balanced farming practices to a bitter end. This abrupt change of affairs
was, fortunately, recent enough that with the application of our scientific wisdom,
and  a  large amount  of research funding,  something might be done  to salvage the
situation.  The  application  was  to  a  state  funding  body  heavily  involved  in  the
preservation  and  interpretation  of  landscape  heritage.  This  exemplifies  how  a
particular  narrative,  expressing  a  particular  interpretation  of  the  historical  and
ecological heritage of a particular environment can influence both the formulation
of  a  research  project  and  its  chances  of  funding.  This  classical  `declensionist’
narrative,  which  interprets  environmental  history  in  terms  of  a  modern  fall  from
landscape  grace,  resounds  with  much  that  is  received  wisdom  amongst  scientific
researchers and heritage interpreters, but in what sense is it `true’?2

Out of Time, Out of Mind
The way in which differing narratives result in differing interpretations of the same
environmental heritage can be illustrated by a recent exchange between landscape
researchers at a conference. The first narrative was produced by a group of cultural
ecologists, the second by a bio-geographer with strong historical interests. The first
paper contained the following lines:

In earlier times the agrarian landscape in this place was characterised by its small-scale
pattern of variation, a mosaic of small tilled fields and hay meadows, pastures, wooded
hay meadows, pollarded and coppiced woodlands and summer farms, resulting in a
great diversity of plant communities and ecological processes. Agriculture influenced
competition and favoured biological diversity since many species found niches in the
agricultural landscapes that resulted from the farmer’s efforts to produce sufficient food
and fodder. In other cases, domestic animals favoured certain wild plants by eliminating
their competitors. As long as agriculture was mainly conducted on the basis of local
conditions and without major inputs of outside resources, its impact on the
environment was moderate, the effect was stable and the semi-natural vegetation types
were maintained through generations.3

This  received  wisdom  sounded  both  agreeable  and  unproblematic  until  the  bio-
geographer got up and spoiled things by pointing out that the local peasants, driven by

2. On `declensionist’ narratives see C. Merchant, `Reinventing Eden: Western culture as a recovery
narrative’, in W. Cronon (ed.) Uncommon ground: towards reinventing  nature, New York: W.W. Norton,
1995, pp. 132± 159.

3. The account of our grant application, and the critique of the paper referred to here, has been
slightly fictionalised. There is no reason to pillory particular colleagues for exemplifying a mode of
thought which is endemic, in my experience, amongst heritage researchers and interpreters.

340

Kenneth Robert Olwig

borderline  starvation  conditions,  historically  had  been  forced  to  employ  bone
crushingly laborious methods that extracted every possible nutrient from the soil,
even to the point of wasting the soil down to the bedrock. Bare bedrock was not, he
pointed out, notable for its biodiversity (whatever biodiversity, a notoriously difficult
concept to define, might be). The regeneration of these soils, furthermore, would take
millennia.  Finally,  he  noted  that  the  environment  had  probably  never  been  as
biodiverse as it was now as a consequence of its abandonment and its subsequent re-
growth.  This  physical  geographer’s  line  of  argument  might  have  been  pursued
further,  as  cultural  geographers  are  wont  to  do,  by  pointing  out  that  the  rural
economy of even remote areas has almost never, in historical times, simply been a
product of local conditions. The difficulties of generating a subsistence from the soil
have nearly always been compounded by the need to extract a surplus, whether simply
to acquire needed goods through exchange or, for example, to pay taxes or the interest
on a loan. This need to extract a surplus has added to the human burden upon the
environment that has created the highly unstable ecosystems that scientists are now
labouring to preserve as a form of `semi-natural’ heritage.

These conflicting narratives lead to larger questions concerning why it is that we
tend to interpret our heritage in terms of an opposition between a natural, stable,
harmonious and unchanging traditional society and a modern society which brings
flux and disharmony, also to nature. Why do we think this way? The English literary
critic and writer on culture Raymond Williams has sought to answer this question.
Williams once observed that a recent book on rural England had proclaimed that `a
whole culture that had preserved its continuity from earliest times had now received
its quietus’. But then, looking back further in time, he saw that this culture should
actually  already  have  died  in  1932,  judging  from  a  book  from  that  year  on  the
disappearance of `the organic community’ of `old England’: `its destruction is very
recent  indeed’.  But  this  prediction,  it  turned  out,  was  based  on  books  which
appeared between 1907 and 1923 proclaiming that now the rural England `is dying
out’ . . . . Williams goes on to write that `if we mount a kind of historical escalator
and begin to move back in time, we see that this ª nowº  is everywhere’. Williams’s
escalator takes him from Thomas Hardy, to Richard Jefferies, to George Eliot, to
Thomas Bewick, John Clare, Goldsmith, Thomas More, Langland, and so on, each
of  whom  saw  the  disappearance  of  the  last  remnants  of  a  contiguous  stable,
tradition-bound, rural age. In mock desperation Williams asks:

Or shall we find the timeless rhythm in Domesday, when four out of five were villeins,
bordars [sic], cotters or slaves? Or in a free Saxon world before the Norman rape and
Yoke? In a Celtic world before the Saxons came up the rivers? In an Iberian world
before the Celts came with their gilded barbarism? Where indeed shall we reach before
the escalator stops?

One answer, of course, is Eden.4

4. R. Williams, `Literature and rural society’ , The Listener, November 16, 1967, pp. 630± 632.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

341

Williams satirises here the exaggeration of historical continuityÐ
counterpoised to
commensurably abrupt  contemporary changesÐ which characterises not  only  the
perception of the pastoral upland grazing lands of north-western Europe, but much
discourse on environmental heritage interpretation and preservation more generally.
This pattern of thought can also be found, I would add, in Wordsworth’s mourning
the entry of the railway to the Lake District because it would bring both change and
tourists. The tourists, on the other hand, were attracted to the area by their reading
of Wordsworth’s  A  guide  to  the  district  of  the  Lakes,  with  its  presentation  of  the
district’s heritage  as  a once `perfect  republic  of  shepherds’.5 In the  end, Williams
argues,  this  line  of  reasoning  goes  back  to  the  biblical  Garden  of  Eden  and  the
classical myth of the pastoral golden age.

Most of those who write about the paradise myth see it as an expression of desire
for  a  lost  rural  idyll, which  is  identifiable  with  childhood. The  universality  of  the
experience of childhood can thus explain the universality of this myth. In childhood
time seems to stand still and the world is ordered by an external authority, but in
adulthood  we  must  labour  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow  to  maintain  the  stability
necessary  to  survivalÐ not  least  the  survival  of  our  own  children. The  historical
process  of  society’s  increasing  urbanisation  also  means  that  childhood  is  often
identified  with  a  rural  background  (or  at  least  visits  to  rural  family  or  summer
homes), whereas adulthood is identified with the urban. This personal experience of
a lost childhood, as strengthened by pervasive myths, is reinforced by the apparent
tendency of `traditional rural society’  to appeal to the `time out of mind’ values of
custom.  This  sort  of  explanation  means  that  our  tendency  to  dichotomise  our
heritage  into  a  timeless,  natural,  traditional  rural  society,  and  a  modern  urban
society of flux and disharmony, basically represents a nostalgia for a lost personal
and historical past. This approach to the paradise myth, however, characteristically
overlooks the opposite side of the coin, which is just as central to this myth as the
idea of loss. This is the idea of development and progress through the transcendence
of a necessary loss of innocence.

Paradise and Progress
The biblical Garden of Eden and the classical myth of a pastoral golden age both
tend  to  be  cast  as  timeless  natural  utopias  that  are  run  according  to  the  equally
timeless natural  laws  of  a  godhead who  oversees  the world of humankind. In the
ancient  classicsÐ
as  in  the  versions  presented  by  the  Greek  philosopher  Plato  or
those  of  the  Roman  poet VirgilÐ when  the  godhead  of  the  golden  age  ceases  to
regulate the world according to godly laws, humankind, of necessity, must gradually
rediscover these laws, and learn to use them to re-create a world organised like it
once was under the godhead. Paradise is thus both a lost age and a natural utopian
model  which  society  seeks  to  regain  by  developing  its  own  human  resources  in

5. W. Wordsworth, A guide to the district of the Lakes in the North of England, New York: Greenwood
Press, 1968 (orig. 1810).

342

Kenneth Robert Olwig

imitation  of  the  gods. The  loss  of  the  godhead’s  natural  golden  age  is  thus  the
dialectical prerequisite for Promethean human progress towards a utopian future of
its own creation, and by its own hard labour.

Virgil (70± 19 BC) is often seen to be the source of many of our ideas regarding the
sad loss of an idyllic pastoral golden age. This significance is due to the enormous
influence  of  his  collection  of  pastoral  lyrics,  the  Eclogues,  which  synthesises  both
Greek and Roman myth and literature. The pastoral idyll, however, represents only
one aspect of Virgil. The Eclogues are, in fact, brought to an end when one of the
pan-piping  shepherds,  lazing  under  a  shady  tree,  gets  tired  of  his  ennui and
admonishes the shepherds `let us rise, it is late, and shade is harmful to crops’.6 He
seems hereby  to be  arguing  that  society  needs to get  on  with  human  progress by
moving from the laziness of golden age pastoralism to the hard work of cultivation,
the subject of Virgil’s next book, the Georgics. After the end of the pastoral golden
age,  according  to Virgil,  the  godhead  `suffered  not  his  realm  to  ª slumber  neath
inveterate slothº ’ , as had been the case previously. Now the godhead `spurred the
wits  of  men  by  cares’  in  order `to  make  men  prove  and  hammer  out  by  practice
divers arts’ . He then describes humankind `now slowly learning how to plough and
sow, now striking from flint vein the lurking fire’. Gradually, in this way, humankind
learns  the  science  of  metallurgy,  shipbuilding  and  navigation  and  eventually,  as
described in Virgil’s epic Aeneid, creates the vast city and empire of Rome. Each step
in human progress leads, however, to new setbacks and cares, as when, for example,
cultivation is countered by invasions of weeds, pests and disease, spurring mankind
on  to  ever  greater  effort.7 As  in  the  Judeo-Christian  story  of Adam  and  Eve,  the
founders  of  humankind,  the  loss  of  paradise  is  related  to  the  gain  of  human
knowledge, symbolised by the eating of the apple of the tree of knowledge. It is this
ingestion  of  knowledge  which  forces  humanity  to  leave  its  childhood  paradise
garden and live, henceforth, by the sweat of its adult brows.

My diversion into the ancient classics, and the Bible, may seem to have taken us
very far from the grant application mentioned at the outset, but, actually, it brings
us  back  to  it.  For  if  one  re-examines  what  we  were  doing,  one  will  see  that  the
application contained both sides of the paradise myth. On the one hand, we were
bemoaning  the  loss  a  form  of  human  community  in  which  people  lived  in  stable
harmony with their environment, guided by Nature’s laws. But since this loss, given
the  exigencies  of  progressive  modern  society,  is  final,  we  therefore  promise  the
research  grant  gods  that  we  will  henceforth  work  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow  and
develop new scientific ways to restore the natural harmonies which contemporary
society has destroyed. Our science, of course, is no longer at the stage of `striking

6. Virgil, Eclogues X 74± 77: quoted and interpreted in M.C.J. Putnam, Virgil’s pastoral art, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1970, pp. 386± 394.

7. K.R. Olwig, Nature’s ideological landscape: a literary and geographic perspective on its development and
preservation on Denmark’s Jutland Heath, London: Allen & Unwin, 1984, pp. 1± 10; Virgil, Eclogues  and
Georgics, London: Dent, 1946, pp. 69± 71.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

343

from flint vein the lurking fire’ . Now we’re striking lurking information from cyber
space. And  we  no  longer  tell `the  number  of  the  stars’ ,  in  the  manner  of  ancient
mariners, now we read satellite images in order to learn the sat of the land. In our
project,  furthermore,  we  have  promised  not  just  to  disseminate  our  results  to
scientific specialists, but to interpret and present our study of this vital heritage to
the general public. Though our methods are as modern and effective as can be, there
is a real risk that our interpretive framework belongs to the realm of `mind out of
time’  myth. But this is clearly a myth with a solid track record.

The  myth  of  a  lost,  natural,  golden  childhood  of  humankind,  which  must  be
replaced  by  reflective  adults,  working  to  achieve  god-like  knowledge  and  reason,
provides  the  background  for  Plato’s  influential  Republic,  in  which  a  board  of
philosophers is set to run the ideal post pre-lapsarian utopia of the future. Plato, of
course, was a philosopher himself, and his interpretation of the heritage of humanity
certainly  did  not  hurt  his  profession’s  employment  opportunities.  Francis  Bacon
modernised  this  idea  in  his Atlantis in  which  a  board  of  scientists  gets  the  job  of
advising  the  leadership  of  the  ideal  future  utopia,  thus  creating  the  ideational
foundation  for  modern  applied  scientific  research  centres.  Bacon,  the  chancellor
and legal advisor to a would-be benevolent despot, was, of course, himself a person
with  scientific  pretensions.  His  utopia  would  have  been  an  ideal  setting  for  the
ambitious Bacon, who would have naturally become an advisor on both natural and
human law. Karl Marx, one of the founders of the modern idea of modernity, for
whom Bacon’s idea of science was an inspiration, gave the idea of learning from the
lost  idyllic  childhood  of  humanity,  while  simultaneously  transcending  it,  a
particularly poignant form:

A man cannot become a child again, or he becomes childish. But does he not find joy
in the child’s naivetÂe, and must he himself not strive to reproduce its truths at a higher
stage? . . . Why should not the historic childhood of humanity, at its most beautiful
unfolding, as a stage never to return, exercise an eternal charm?8

These  observations  raise  the  question  of  whether  this  myth  is  so  rooted  in  our
experience  of  a  lost  childhood,  and  in  our  conception  of  science  and  social
development,  that  it  has  become  second  nature.  I  think  there  is  good  reason  to
question  this  mode  of  thought  as  creating  a  mental  trap  from  which,  once  one
accepts its premises, it is almost impossible to escape.

The Paradise/Progress Trap
The paradise myth has two enticing, but ultimately questionable, dimensions. It is
built, firstly, on the surprisingly pervasive assumption that there is a natural parallel
between  the  childhood  and  youth  of  society  and  the  childhood  and  youth  of  the
individual. And, secondly, it is built on the related assumption that in the natural

8. K. Marx, Grundrisse, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973, pp. 110± 111.

344

Kenneth Robert Olwig

state of childhood, or of primitive existence, we behave spontaneously according to
natural  principles.  In  the  state  of  adulthood,  and  social  maturity,  we  must
consciously  learn  the  natural  laws  that  once  governed  our  behaviour  without
reflection. Thus, though the childhood idyll might continue to inspire us, we must
leave  this  Eden  and,  as  adults,  shoulder  the  responsibility  of  reasoning  out  the
eternal laws once taken for granted in a more natural, but juvenile, past.

This paper began by relating a personal experience of writing a grant application
in  which  we  depicted  a  timeless  traditional  society  in  stable  harmony  with  its
environment which is suddenly overwhelmed by a progressively changing modern
society.  In  examining  the  genesis of this idea, I have suggested that tradition and
modernity define each other, that they  are  two  sides of the  same  dialectical coin,
with  deep  roots  in  our  culture.  By  defining  traditional  society  both  as  idyllic,
unchanging and harmonious, and as the sadly outmoded and passive prisoner of a
lost time, the way is paved for the purveyors of change to promote new and modern
rationalities  and  sciences  by  which to organise the world and  achieve power. The
minds of traditional people are essentially defined as being out of time, and this is
why traditional society is always seen to be running out of time, and on the verge of
extinction.  This  idea,  however,  contains  something  of  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy
because it means that by destroying traditional society one proves that it is not viable
and that it, therefore, necessarily must be replaced by a modern society, which is
defined as being the opposite of traditional society.9The point is made even stronger
if one is able to preserve remnants of this traditional society as musealised heritage,
in order to illustrate the nostalgic contrast to the modern in all its inevitability. The
`paradise/progress’ dialectic is thus a kind of trap, the premises of which it is difficult
to escape. But a possible way out will be explored in the following section.

Escaping the Heritage Paradise/Progress  Dialectic
One  reason  why  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  timeless  traditional  societies  seems
plausible is that tradition is confused with custom, and custom plays a concrete role
in the legal workings of many societies deemed to be traditional. Custom, however,
is  not  timeless  and  unchanging,  and  it  belongs  by  no  means  to  a  fossilised  past.
Custom is, in fact, the foundation for much, though not all, law in contemporary
Western society. This is particularly the case in most of the countries, including the
United States, which have inherited the traditions of English Common Law. There
is  nothing  backward  about  custom  as  a  legal  tradition,  quite  the  opposite.10
Custom-based  principles  of  law,  as  the  distinguished  Huguenot  jurist  Francois

9. K.R. Olwig, `Landscape, place and the state of progress’, in R.D. Sack (ed.) Progress: geographical
essays, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.

10. Francis Bacon, as Chancellor and legal advisor to a royal court with absolute despotic ambitions,
hated customary and common law, and hence parliament, but he lost out, in fact, to parliament, and
I personally doubt that England would have become more modern and progressive under Bacon’s
council of ruling scientists, than it did under parliament.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

345

Hotman already recognised in the 16th century, were in fact more up to date than
the  kind  of  eternal  `natural’   principles  which  are  characteristic  of,  for  example,
Roman  law,  as  well  as  such  natural  sciences  as  physics  or  astronomy.11 These
principles, because they do not change, are in the long run inappropriate for human
societies,  which  are  always  changing.  Laws  based  upon  timeless  principles  of  the
sort which were seen to govern both the stars and the earth, and which thereby also
seemed appropriate to the governance of the eternal city, are sadly out of date a few
centuries  later,  as  Hotman  noted.  Customary  law,  on  the  other  hand,  is  always
updating itself, though it appears to be rooted in the heritage of the past.

The historian Eric Hobsbawn has explained the logic of custom by comparing it

with a motor:

`Custom’  in traditional societies has the double function of motor and fly-wheel. It does
not preclude innovation and change up to a point, though evidently the requirement
that it must appear compatible or even identical with precedent imposes substantial
limitations on it. What it does is to give any desired change (or resistance to innovation)
the sanction of precedent, social continuity and natural law as expressed in history.12

The  remembrance  of  custom  is  fundamentally  flexible.  `The  human  memory’,
according to the historian Marc Bloch, `is a marvellous instrument of elimination
and transformationÐ
especially what we call collective memory’ .13 Custom gives a
community possession of its past because it is based upon the idea of `time out of
mind’  which,  in  practice,  means  that  aspects  of  the  past  can  be  conveniently
forgotten and reinterpreted according to the contemporary situation. Tradition, by
contrast, creates a situation in which people become, as it were, possessed by a given
past.14 Eric  Hobsbawn  argues  that  tradition  `must  be  distinguished  clearly  from
ª customº  which dominates so-called ª traditionalº  societies’:

The object and characteristic of `traditions,’  including invented ones, is invariance. . . .
`Custom’  cannot afford to be invariant, because even in `traditional’ societies life is not
so. Customary or common law still shows this combination of flexibility in substance
and formal adherence to precedent. The difference between `tradition’ and `custom’ in
our sense is indeed well illustrated here. `Custom’  is what judges do; `tradition’ (in this
instance invented tradition) is the wig, robe and other formal paraphernalia and

11. J.G.A. Pocock, The ancient  constitution  and the feudal law, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1957; F. Hotman, Francogallia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972 (orig. 1573).

12. E. Hobsbawn, `Introduction’ , in T. Ranger & E. Hobsbawn (eds) The invention  of tradition,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983, pp. 1± 14 (pp. 2± 4).

13. M. Bloch, Feudal Society, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961 (orig. 1940), p. 114; see
also D. Lowenthal, The past is a foreign countr y, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, pp.
206± 210.

14. D. Lowenthal, Possessed by the  past. The heritage crusade and the spoils of history, New York: The
Free Press, 1996.

346

Kenneth Robert Olwig

ritualised practices surrounding their substantial action. . . . Inventing traditions, it is
assumed here, is essentially a process of formalisation and ritualisation, characterised by
reference to the past, if only by imposing repetition.15

Custom, thus, is reinvented as tradition when it is reified as costume.

A  recent  newspaper  article  exemplifies  how  the  principle  of  custom works  in  a
modern  contemporary  society.  A  number  of  the  thirteen  English  colonies  that
eventually  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  USA  have  traditionally  based  the  rights  of
owners  of  beach-front  property  upon  special  colonial  laws  dating  back  to  1647.
These ordinances gave the owners control of the beach beyond the high water mark,
out  to  a  maximum  distance  of  1,650  feet  into  the  sea.  Based  on  these  statutes
present-day property owners have been increasingly exercising what they see as their
right  to  exclude  bathers  from  the  beach.  Fowlers  (hunters),  fishermen  and
navigators,  however,  did  have  rights  of  access  to  this  area  under  colonial  legal
practice. The  New  Jersey  Supreme  Court  used  this  precedence  when  it  recently
ended  the  monopolisation  of  the  beaches  by  private  landowners. Today’s  beach
bathing,  in  the  court’s  opinion,  is  the  modern  recreational  equivalent  of  such
popular  colonial  pursuits  as  fowling.  As  one  source  is  quoted  as  saying:  `The
Supreme Court decided what they [the promulgators of colonial law] really meant
was  to  incorporate  change, and  that  to  include  recreation  and  sunbathing was  in
keeping with that intent.’ 16 So what we see here is the application of a time-out-of-
mind  principle  to  a  thoroughly  modern  activity.  These  same  issues,  this  paper
argues,  are  also  highly  applicable  to  the  way  we  think  about  heritage
interpretation.

Petrified Golden Age Heritage and the Midas Touch
If  we  see  upland  pastoralists  as  managing  their  land  according  to  unchanging
traditions, then any change in the pattern of land use will appear to signal the abrupt
end of a hallowed way of life and its corresponding environment. This is the sort of
thinking  which  was  leading  us,  in  our  grant  application,  to  fall  into  what  I  have
called the paradise/progress trap. Using this mode of thought we would inevitably
wind up painting an idyllic picture of past land-use practices, which could never be
compatible  with  the  exigencies  of  modern  society.  Actually,  of  course,  we  were
dealing  with  forms  of  customary  land  use  that  had  always  undergone  a  constant
process  of  modification  and  adaptation,  in  relation  to  changing  economic  and
environmental  exigencies.  This  land  use  was  not  always  in  harmony  with  the
environment. Sometimes, as the bio-geographer pointed out above, it wore the land
down  to  the  bare  bedrock.  But  the  people  using  the  land  by  and  large  survived
because they were able to learn from, and adapt to, changing circumstances.

15. Hobsbawm, pp. 2± 4.

16. D. Fraser, `Day at the beach: access still a thorny issue’ , Sunday Cape Cod Times, July 4, 1999,
pp. 1, 6, 7.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

347

Figure  1.  The  Norwegian  heritage  authority’s  strict  emphasis  on  the  preservation  of  authentic
tradition tends to create an either/or situation in which some buildings are frozen in time and others
are allowed to go to ruin. Even the original interior paint from this house has been preserved, at great
expense,  in  this  building  from  the Trondelag  district  of  mid-Norway. This  fastidiousness  was  not
always the case. The  farm  dates from  the 1400s and the building  was no  doubt  old  enough  to  be
worthy of protection when it was taken apart, bit by bit, and moved to its present site, where it was,

no doubt, given a new paint job in 1857. Photo by author.

The  interpretation  of  upland  land  use  is  tied  to  the  larger  agrarian  heritage.
Several of my students recently made a brief study in an area noted for its heritage
of preserved traditional Norwegian farms.17 Preservation, here, did not focus on the
changing  relationship  between  the  farm  buildings  and  the  complex  pattern  of
upland  and  lowland  farming,  but  rather  upon  the  physical  appearance  of  the
architecture  in  the  lowland  farm  base.  Selected  farms,  which  were  known  to  be
many centuries old, had been placed under strict preservation orders by the state.
This  preservation  severely  limited  the  owners’  right  to  make  any  changes  in  the
buildings, even within the living quarters of the family. Special permission was thus
required  even  to  change  the  type  or  the  colour  of  the  paint  in  the  living  room.
Preservation,  by  and  large,  sought  to  preserve  these  buildings  according  to  a
standard  imagined  to  be  characteristic  of  a  stable  traditional  culture  such  as  was
known largely from 19th-century sources. These buildings thus became petrified as

17. Betten et al., Kulturminner i Hegra-verdier og visjoner ved vern. Feltkurs i Stjù rdal kommune, Geo
200, Trondheim, Norway: NTNU, 1999.

348

Kenneth Robert Olwig

timeless  tradition  in  a  form  that  never,  historically,  would  have  looked  like  this,
because they would always have been undergoing a process of change. This kind of
preservation  naturally  also  leads  to  a  form  of  heritage  interpretation  and
presentation that eulogises an equally timeless traditional society, which is seen to
inhabit such houses.

The transformation of living and changing farmsteads into a petrified, idealised
golden  age tradition can have  the  Midas effect of creating valuable properties  for
people who can afford to, and desire to, possess such cultural capital.18 These are
the sorts of financially endowed people, with independent incomes, for whom, for
example, old farm tools are valuable antiques, and the ownership of an authentic
old  traditional  farm  gives  social  status. This  form  of  preservation  can  lead  to  the
meticulous  care  of  particular  properties,  while  forcing  other  potential  owners
(generally  those  who  must  make  their  living  strictly  from  agriculture)  out  of  the
market.

The burden placed by heritage preservation upon the farmer can have an effect
on  the  overall  use  of  the  farm.  Resources  that  might  have  been  devoted  to  the
tending of a marginal upland meadow, for example, might instead be devoted to the
laborious  maintenance  of  de-modernised  buildings. The  fact that  the  agricultural
economy  is  inherently  weak  in  areas  with  physically  difficult  farming  conditions,
such  as  mountain  Norway,  means  that  the  disposition  of  scarce  resources  is
important to economic survival. Ideally, the state should be supplying these farmers
with the necessary funds to offset the exorbitant cost of maintaining these buildings,
but in practice no government can afford such an expense and most of the farmers
complained that these funds were not forthcoming. The end result of this kind of
heritage  preservation,  and  its  attendant  form  of  interpretation,  is  an  untenable
situation in which a few farms are preserved in mint condition, while the remaining
either fall into disrepair or, by default, are not maintained according to regulations.
But  is  there  an  alternative  to  a  situation  in  which  buildings  seem  to  be  either
preserved according to strict regulations, or despoiled with modern additions that
seem to show no continuity with the original structure? A greater sensitivity to the
actual workings of custom might offer a solution that, though it will not appeal to
purist preservationists, might have a chance of working. This can be exemplified by
recent experience from the Faeroe Islands.

Faeroe `Pastoral’
During a recent visit to the Faeroe Islands a young shepherd and his sheep dog took
me, as part of a group of landscape researchers, on a walk that ended at a cliff with
a drop so precipitous that I was afraid even to look over the edge. The day before,

18. In the myth of King Midas the king achieves his wish of having everything he touches turned to
gold, only to discover that this means that everything he touches becomes useless and inedible. The
term cultural capital is generally associated with the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, who argues
that culture can also be used as a form of capital within given social groups. P. Bourdieu, Distinction:
a social critique of the judgment of taste, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

349

Figure  2. This  farm,  which is thought  to  be from  the  1600s, is gradually  falling  to  ruin,  in  part
because the cost of bringing it up to strict preservationist standards would be prohibitive for working
farmers. The photo is from the student report by Betten et al. (see note 17), Kulturminner i Hegra-
verdier  og  visjoner  ved  vern.  Feltkurs  i  Stjù rdal  kommune,  Geo  200, Trondheim,  Norway:

NTNU.

we learned, this shepherd had crawled over the edge, with a sheep on his back, and
shimmied down a rope in order to put the animal out to summer pasture on the rich,
sea bird fertilised, grass on a ledge below. He had done this six times. Those of my
colleagues who were not afraid to look over the edge informed me that there were
indeed  six  sheep  down  there. The  sight  of  these  pastures,  tended  according  to
centuries-old principles, and the presence of the shepherd, who shared the land with
eight others from the village, made me feel as if I had walked into the pages of the
National Geographic, or perhaps even stumbled upon a scene from Virgil’s pastorals.
Then I made  the  mistake of  asking the young  shepherd  if he was  able to  make  a
living from farming. Oh no! he exclaimed, almost nobody can make a living from
farming on the Faeroes. On asking what he did to earn his keep, he explained that
he  was  the  manager  of  the  village  bank.  He  added  that  he  would  probably  be
skippering his father’s factory trawler if it were not for the fact that the ocean made
him seasick.

This  fellow’s  story  destroyed  my  illusion  of  the  young  shepherd  as  the  son  of
nature, and the Faeroes as an idyllic, timeless, traditional society, surviving far away
from modern society in the North Atlantic. Yet this knowledge helped explain other
things, such as the line of fencing, and the rather nondescript concrete block barn,

350

Kenneth Robert Olwig

Figure 3. The situation on the Faeroe Islands is very different from Norway. From a distance many

of the villages seem to be lost in the ancient mists of tradition. Photo by author.

which  seemed  out  of  place. This  was  clearly  still  a  working  landscape  and  not  a
museum piece. The young man may have earned his income from a bank, but he
was  still  participating  in  productive  farming  practices,  organised  according  to
customary principles, which, by and large, maintained the historical continuity and
biological  values  of  the  cultural  landscape.  The  market  value  of  the  lamb  and
mutton  produced  could  not recompense  for  the  time expended producing  it, but
home-grown and cured meat remained a priceless delicacy in Faeroese culture, the
sort of thing which makes the ideal gift. Even the process of working together to care
for the sheep and tend the pastures  played an  important role in cementing  social
relationships in the villageÐ
thus reminding one that the word fellowship originally
appears to have derived from a word meaning a club or association (the low in fellow
deriving from lag meaning association) for managing sheep (fe ).19 The term Faeroe
Islands, in fact, would be a misnomer without the sheep, since Faeroe means `sheep’
(fae ) `island’  (oe). Though  this  particular  contemporary  sheep-raising  association
still collectively managed an undivided section of pasture affiliated with their farm
lots, they had decided to fence their parcel from that of adjacent farmer collectivities
in  order  to  save  labour.  Custom  was  hereby  being  transformed  to  suit  changing
circumstances, but the cultural landscape was still productive, and the Faeroes were
still very much sheep islands.

19. Oxford English Dictionar y, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971, fellowship.

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

351

Figure 4. If one comes closer, however, one discovers that many buildings are constructed of poured
concrete, or have corrugated iron siding. Such materials are anathema to strict preservationists, but
they are inexpensive and robust, and the buildings (for the most part) retain their customary form.

Photo by author.

In travelling around the Faeroes, despite the occasional presence of rather ugly
modern  structures,  many  buildings  looked  as  if  they  had  been built  according  to
ageless  tradition.  Some,  indeed,  were  ancient  structures  that  had  been  preserved
according to official regulations. Often, however, when one came closer to one of
these `traditional’  buildings, they proved to be of recent origin, and had been built
of decidedly untraditional materials, such as reinforced concrete or corrugated iron.
The  shape  and  form  was  `right’ ,  but  the  material  was  `wrong’,  though  it  was
practical and inexpensive. What we were seeing here was an architectural example
of structures constructed according to customary principles. The origin of the forms
was time out of mind, but the materials had been brought up to date.

The  Faeroese  case  exemplifies  how  environmental  heritage  can  be  maintained
within a living modern society, without subjecting that environment to `the Midas
touch’. Once one becomes familiar with the Faeroese landscape one even learns to
appreciate the somewhat indiscreet charms of even the brightly painted corrugated
iron siding, which can also be found elsewhere on the islands of the North Atlantic.

Conclusion
The example of places like the Faeroe Islands, where the force of custom is strong,
and  the  promoters  of  tradition  have  yet  to  gain  the  upper  hand,  can  provide

352

Kenneth Robert Olwig

Figure  5. The customary  practice of sheep raising, which gave its name  to  the Faeroe Islands and
shaped  its  landscape,  is  no  longer  of  such  predominant  economic  importance  to  the  economy.  It
continues, however, to serve an important social role, bringing Faeroe Islanders home from jobs as far
away  as  Denmark. This  building,  though  of  poured  concrete,  nevertheless blends in  with familiar
elements  of  the  Faeroes’  landscape  such  as  the  rambling  stone  wall  and  the  sheep.  Photo  by

author.

inspiration for different ways of researching, interpreting and presenting heritage. If
we are able to think about heritage as something that is constantly being created,
through a process based on principles of custom, which are both time-out-of-mind
and  up  to  date,  perhaps  then  we  can  escape  the  trap  of  the  paradise/progress
dialectic. This trap leads to the dichotomy between timeless traditional societies and
modern, rootless, changing societies. To escape this trap is not easy, however, owing
to the unexamined epistemological foundations that underlie much of our work as
researchers  and  interpreters.  The  very  separation  between  research  and  inter-
pretation, and  between the different disciplines of the natural, cultural and social
sciences,  blinds  us  to  the  ways  in  which  scientific  research,  itself,  is  driven  by
interpretive narratives.

Part of what makes the concept of nature and the natural so complex is that the
term  simultaneously  refers  both  to  certain  material  phenomena  and  to  the  laws
which, behind the scenes, generate and shape those phenomena. Science tends to
seek unchanging laws, in the spirit of Bacon, and governmental agencies, again in
the spirit of Bacon, are attracted to those who can provide them with what appear
to  be  scientific  certainties. The  divide in  modern  education  between  the  sciences
and the humanities also means that few are capable of comprehending the ways in

`Time Out of Mind’ ± `Mind Out of Time’

353

which age-old narratives, and age-old conceptions of law, continue to infuse the way
we  think  about  our  environmental  heritage.  The  more  ignorant  we  are  of  our
cultural heritage, the more likely we are to be blind to the way such narratives, and
such notions of law, influence our interpretation of our environmental heritage. Our
environment,  as  students  of  the  humanities  and  the  social  sciences  have  become
increasingly  aware,  has  been  shaped  by  human  beings  whose  environmental
perceptions  have,  in  turn,  been  shaped  by  centuries  of  custom.  Unless  one
understands the workings of custom one will never be able effectively to interpret
the human environment, or effectively influence its future development.

The trap of the paradise/progress dialectic forces researchers and interpreters to
dichotomise the world in terms of either unchanging custom, or the juggernaut of
the  rampant  change  governed  by  progress.  Escaping  this  trap  should  help  us  to
develop  approaches  to  heritage  that  can  increase  the  understanding  of  how  the
principles of custom might work to create environments that both preserve a sense
of historical continuity and remain economically and socially viable. Unfortunately,
however,  this  trap  is  not  simply  the  figment  of  the  individual  researcher  or
interpreters’ imagination, it is built into the way our society structures education,
research  and  interpretation.  Unless  we  work  to  deconstruct  the  `research  and
heritage interpretation complex’ itself, our disciplinary development will continue
to be governed by the `paradise/progress’ dialectic.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Anders Lundberg, University of Bergen, Norway, for useful
commentary. I would also like to thank the students who produced the field report
verdier og visjoner ved vern (see note 17), for their inspiration
Kulturminner i HegraÐ
(and for the use of some of their photographs). They are: Jorunn Elin Olden, Elin
Gjevre,  Marte  Sletten,  Heidi  Grethe  Betten,  Astrid  Tveteraas,  Susan  Helena
rjansen, Torgeir  Haavik,  Marit  Skanche  Langen,  Ine  Cecilie  Mork Olsen,  Lene

Marie Grennes, Helene Kvarberg Tolstad and Heidi Grethe.

354

Kenneth Robert Olwig

é

