Representing heritage and loss on the Brittany coast: sites, things
and absence

Maura Coughlin*

Department of Literary and Cultural Studies, Bryant University, Smithﬁeld, RI 02917, USA
(Received 6 January 2010; ﬁnal version received 14 August 2010)

This is an essay about the interplay of objects, art and visual culture in several
community museums and historical sites dedicated to local social history in
coastal Brittany. There,
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
Breton maritime culture invented a range of compensatory ritual objects, sites
and practices to account for loss of life at sea. The presentation of this material
culture of mourning in small museums, regional museums and ecomuseums on
the Breton North Coast and the islands of Sein and Ouessant are examined in
this essay. These material objects once bore material witness to crucial moments
in the life of the family and today serve to represent the community’s collective
memories and to narrate the community’s heritage to the outside world. In sev-
eral cases examined in this essay, literary representations, art and visual culture
are compared to heritage sites and museums. Methodologies are drawn from
social art history, studies of tourism and collecting, museum studies, material
culture studies and feminist interests in the politics of the everyday.

According to historian Françoise Péron (2000), the notion of a formalised French
maritime heritage is a recent invention of the late twentieth century. Up until the
1960s, she contends, the modern French nationalist myth conceived of the nature of
France as primarily rural and agricultural: a cultivated land without wilderness.
However, over the course of the past three centuries, the coast has been imagined,
inhabited, used and described in ever-changing ways. The sea and shore, prior to
the eighteenth century, best exempliﬁed a notion of an unruly, primeval place. In
the late eighteenth century, a theologically informed view of the seacoast as wild,
dangerous and monstrous fades, and is replaced by the Grand Tour aesthetic of sub-
lime beauty. As the late nineteenth-century notion of the seaside holiday encouraged
a newfound appreciation of the beach and of sea bathing, the nation’s edges became
increasingly desired spaces, constantly reinvented through visual and literary repre-
sentations. Yet the emerging modern attitudes referenced in this brief overview (sur-
veyed in Alain Corbin’s social history La territoire du vide (trans. Lure of the Sea,
1994) are primarily those of visitors to the coast, rather than its residents. Cultural
geographer Allan Pred (1984, p. 279) encourages us to think of the idea of place
‘as a process whereby the reproduction of social and cultural forms, the formation

*Email: mcoughli@bryant.edu

370

M. Coughlin

of biographies, and the transformation of nature ceaselessly become one another’
and where place is not only what is observed but also what continuously takes
place. Thus a landscape is something always in process and always historically con-
tingent. This essay considers ways in which recently institutionalised collections
displaying the maritime heritage of coastal Brittany frame this past and construct
meanings of place in an active and ongoing process of representation for both resi-
dents of and visitors to the region. In addition to formal museum collections, related
sites of memory and other forms of visual culture in Brittany are discussed in terms
of the ways in which they invite the viewer to re-imagine the maritime past of this
place and suggest present orientations as well. Research into the local, cultural
meanings of place and commemoration has been motivated by my interest, as an
art historian, in artists working on the Brittany coast in the late nineteenth century
and, in particular, the work of Charles Cottet and his exploration of dark themes of
death and mourning in Brittany. This essay responds to the work of art historian
Nina Lübbren, who notes that ‘a small but growing number of art historians has
begun to reconstruct the complex ways that geographical locations intersected with
the production of cultural representations, particularly in late nineteenth-century
France’ (p. 115). My interest
images, collected
objects and historical sites in coastal Brittany collectively contribute to sense of
place of the region; thus my examples are examined in dialogue (in the construction
and representation of place) rather than as relatively ‘authentic’ indexes of historical
experience.

is in the ways in which visual

Travel narratives of backward Brittany
From the mediaeval period to the French Revolution, the Breton peninsula had
shifting allegiances to the rest of France. With sea on three sides and marshland to
the east, it was geographically isolated from the continent. Bretons had great mobil-
ity along the coast and over the sea, however, and their culture has shared many
aspects of language, folklore and popular religious practices with Celtic countries of
the Atlantic seaboard that were networked by water travel (Cunliffe 2001, p. 567).
In ethnographic collections of folklore gathered in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries such as Paul Sébillot’s Contes des paysans et des pêcheurs
(Tales of peasants and ﬁshermen) (1881) and Le folk-lore des pêcheurs, (Fisher
folklore) (1901) the oral cultures and everyday experiences of coastal Bretons are
depicted as analogous to other Celtic ﬁshing communities. The common Celtic cul-
ture of ﬁsher folk of the Atlantic repeats in the collections of folklorists well
through the mid-twentieth century (Anson 1965).

French writers visiting coastal Brittany in the eighteenth century often depict it
as a wasted, impoverished or exotic place (Salomé 2003). As an interest in Celtic
culture grew with the foundation of the Académie Celtique in Paris in 1804, the
ethnographic project began of collecting the ‘vanishing’ superstitions and folklore
of Celtic Brittany (Ozouf 1981, Gerson 1996). One of the earliest travel writers to
explore Brittany was the Académie’s founder, Jacques Cambry (1799) who was
charged with drawing up an inventory of monuments that had survived revolution-
ary iconoclasm, (Corbin 1994). Cambry’s itinerary is the kind of story that ‘trans-
forms places into spaces or spaces into places’ (Decerteau 1988, p. 118). His
representation of sublime Brittany is reiterated by many artists, writers and photog-
raphers throughout the nineteenth century who imbue their images of the Brittany



371

coast with mythic resonances, viewing the people as primitive guardians of legends
and reservoirs of lost Celtic and Druidic culture.

Many artists employed a type of ‘documentary romanticism’ in depictions of
everyday coastal life in the seasonal artists’ communities at Pont-Aven, Concarneau,
Douarnenez, Perros-Guirec, etc. giving their intended viewers a sense of authentic
‘privileged access’ to ancient ways of life surviving in the modern world (Lübbren,
40). Similarly, travel writers repeatedly describe attitudes and practices of the locals
that exemplify Brittany’s fossilised backwardness and obstinate resistance to moder-
nity (Corbin 1994). Over the course of the nineteenth century, narratives of travels
in Brittany gradually come to value, then later celebrate the region as a repository
of ancient culture and vestigial ritual lost to metropolitan France (Bertho-Lavenir
1980). At the most extreme edges of Brittany seemed to be the most ‘pure’ or con-
centrated repositories of human culture, languages and even animal species that had
died out elsewhere: these were the Breton islands of Sein, Ouessant, Molène, Groix,
Batz and Belle-Isle: places that had been described since the late eighteenth century
as remote, wild and mysterious sites of ritual. As this formerly marginal edge of the
French nation became central to an understanding of national heritage, and in turn
became a desired space, its past was reinvented in the process of being preserved.1
Folklore scholar Pertti Anttonen shows that the concept of modernity has often
been constructed through representations of cultural difference (2005, p. 27), and
that

in folkloristic discourse, tradition has not meant indigenous practices to be continued,
preserved or revitalised, but
the concept has stood for representations of
national antiquity that were to be valorised and nostalgized but also to be left behind
in order to have them speak for a national capacity for historical progress toward state-
hood and modernity. (2005, p. 177)

instead,

Thus, in Anttonen’s words, these travel accounts of ‘vanishing folk traditions have
served the production of modernity’ (2005, p. 26). Can regional tradition also serve
the production of identity of a modern place without always constructing value-
laden, binary differences between the past and present?

Sites of death, mourning and memory in Brittany
A folkloric association of the sea with death and loss is established in nineteenth-
century visual and literary culture and is maintained as a historical attitude that
speaks of place and memory in many preserved sites along the Brittany coast. The
retention of Celtic death practices and superstitions in coastal Brittany was given its
fullest elaboration in the collections of folklore, travelogues and ﬁction published
by Breton scholar Anatole Le Braz. His popular text Legende de la mort chez les
Bretons Armoricains (Death legends in coastal Brittany, 1893) details Bretons’ per-
sistent faith in death omens and superstitious demons. The dangerous and doomed
lives of Breton ﬁshermen from the North Coast area (Côtes d’Armor) surrounding
Paimpol who ﬁshed the long cod season on the banks of Iceland or Newfoundland
for the better part of a year were romanticised in the novels Mon frère Yves, (My
Brother Yves, 1883) and Pêcheur d’Islande (Iceland Fisherman) (1886) by Pierre
Loti. Although they are clearly marked by romantic and symbolist tastes of their
day, the texts of both Le Braz and Loti are repeatedly invoked as contextual, histor-
ical explanations of historical sites, material culture and collections of regionally

372

M. Coughlin

speciﬁc art in museums and historical sites in Brittany. As has been extensively
studied, Loti’s romance of the life of the sea had a wide appeal for visual artists in
the 1880s and 90s (Soth).

Material memorials and lost bodies
The village of Ploubazlanec on the North Coast was made famous as the setting for
Loti’s Iceland Fisherman. In this sad tale of frustrated love and loss, the young
ﬁsherman Yann, like so many of his family, is fated a watery death as his new
bride, Gaud, almost hopelessly awaits his return, looking to sea from a high point
in the town where stands a stone monument known as the ‘Widow’s Cross’.
Because so many from this village died at sea and their bodies never returned to
the home soil, mourners lacked both the emotional closure of proven death as well
as the physical body as a ritual focus. Consequently, the cemetery in Ploubazlanec
has a famous wall of the disappeared at sea to which were afﬁxed home-made
cenotaphs and plaques, standing in for those the ground is missing (Figure 1).
Images of pious Breton widows attending to graves, throwing wreaths into the sea
or grieving at this wall on Toussaint (All Saints’ Day, 1 November), appear with
frequency in ﬁn de siècle French paintings and prints as well as the illustrated Pari-
sian papers Le Monde Illustré (1885) L’Illustration (1891) and Le petit journal
(1911, 1924) (Figure 1). The festooned wall in Ploubazlanec also appears repeatedly
in other forms of popular imagery such as postcards and in travel literature of the
early twentieth century. In 1939, the graveyard wall was rebuilt and the home-made
memorials to the lost at sea were moved into the nearby eighteenth-century chapel

Figure 1. Wall of the Disappeared at Sea, Ploubazlanec in L’Illustration, (n. 2540) 31
October 1891. Author’s collection.



373

of Notre Dame de Perros-Hamon where they can be found under the sheltered
porch: a space somewhat like an open-air chapel. The touching and fragile nine-
teenth-century wooden cenotaphs follow no particular, prescribed form, but many
offer a prayer and detail the place and approximate date of death as well as the age
of the deceased (Figure 2). As Loti’s character Gaud remarks, the family names
repeat for several generations, and spaces have been left for those the sea will claim
(Viaud (pseud. Loti) 1886, p. 82). The original plaques have been replaced them on
the stone wall by durable marble slabs and simple, painted wooden plaques.

Today, as one approaches the wall from the cemetery’s entrance, a polished
granite slab afﬁxed to the wall tells of the lost at sea. Imbedded in its surface are
two reproduced postcards: one, from the early twentieth century, depicts an woman
cloaked in widow’s weeds and another kneeling before a plaque on the wall prior
to its rebuilding, the other image depicts ‘La Glycine’, the last cod boat to depart
for Iceland in the 1930s. A visit to the site is framed by these representations that
are further echoed in the small, nearby community museum, Mémoire d’Islande
(Remembering Iceland), that was founded in 1994 in the former house of a ﬁsher-
man, François Le Buhan, who had made three long trips to Iceland. The collection
displays such objects as costume, letters, model boats, navigation gear and photo-
graphs given from family collections of the immediate community. On its website,
the commune of Ploubazlanec (2010) presents itself as if an open-air museum,
inviting the visitor to view the collection in Mémoire d’Islande as the focal point of
a route that includes the Wall of the Disappeared, the Perros-Hamon chapel, the

Figure 2. Original wooden cenotaphs originally found on the Wall of the Disappeared at
Sea. Photographed by the author in the porch of the church of Perros-Hamon, Ploubazlanec,
May 2008.

374

M. Coughlin

nineteenth-century chapel of the Trinity (with an imposing altar to the Our Lady of
the Shipwrecked) and the Widow’s Cross that marks a dramatic vantage point for
looking to sea. Almost all of these sites are mentioned in Loti’s novel and many of
the village streets have been renamed to even more tightly bind the place to its lit-
erary representation. As Lübbren explains (in the context of the artists’ colony)

[b]y a process involving over-simpliﬁcation, stereotyping, labelling and activating prej-
these conceptions crystallise into symbolic formations … [c]ollectively, a
udices,
group of place-images makes up a place myth: a set of widely held and distributed
core-images toward which individuals orientate their experiences. Place-myths are
powerful motors of meaning, and they stubbornly continue to govern what people
think of a place even when it no longer conforms to the images. (p. 116)

The summer homes and manicured lawns of this seaside town speak to new uses of
this landscape as valued vacation real estate in a region that re-enacts the Iceland
ﬁshermen’s pardon as pure tourist spectacle.

Maritime memory and the ecomuseum
Although Mémoire d’Islande in Ploubazlanec does not have the ofﬁcial designation
of ecomuseum, the way in which it functions as part of a broader constellation of
sites relates to this museological concept that originated in the post-1968 cultural
turn of ‘new museology’. The ecomuseum was developed in France with the goal
of opening up natural, living cultural heritage to a broader spectrum of society
(Davis 1999, p. 54). In 1971, Hugues de Varine coined the term ‘ecomuseum’,
(écomusée) referencing an environmental concept of ‘écologie’. As a democratising
approach to cultural heritage, the ecomuseum was proposed as an inclusive alterna-
tive to state run, bureaucratic, centralised, professionally curated and often elitist
institutions (Stone and Planel 1999). In one of its most radical formulations,
Québécois Museum administrator René Rivard in 1984 characterises these relation-
ships: ‘traditional museum (= building + collections + experts + public) to the ecomu-
seum (= territory + heritage + memory + population)’ (Rivard cited in Davis 2005,
p. 371). In an inﬂuential manuscript often cited in later texts on the ecomuseum,
Rivard makes a radical call for ‘repersonalising’ the local with a museum of living,
collective memory (rather than the ‘temporal vector’ of the valourised past) that in
its more extreme assertions has ‘no need for specialization, historians, folklorists or
nostalgic or callous tourists’ (1984, pp. 45–46).

As it was theorised,

the ecomuseum had a somewhat utopian scope: broad
enough to encompass a natural and cultural landscape, local heritage, dialects and
sense of place along with the objects, archives and images that might be contained
in a building (Davis 2005). It was to provide

a mirror in which a population could seek to recognise itself and to explore its rela-
tionship to the physical environment as well as to previous generations; also an image
offered to visitors to promote a sympathetic understanding of the work, customs and
peculiarities of a population. (Poulot 1994, p. 66)

An ecomuseum’s success was to depend upon community agreement, support and
involvement;
it promised to give back to the community by retaining local
character, fostering sustainable businesses, promoting festivals and thereby aiding
the economic regeneration of rural areas, in part through cultural tourism.



375

What differentiates the ecomuseum from sites of staged heritage tourism (like
the Iceland Fishermen’s pardon) is that the ecomuseum’s focus must be determined
by its local population rather than being imposed from the outside (Davis 1999,
p. 69). Because ‘the complexity of place and what it represents to individuals and
communities’ are elusive qualities that cannot be contained by a traditional museum
that can only collect and display ‘fragments’, an understanding of place must come
from a dialogue between collections of material culture and the environment that
surrounds it (Davis 2005, p. 368). The ecomuseum is thus a way of interpreting,
producing, performing and maintaining a sense of place or locality; as geographer
‘localities are
Doreen Massey explains, our contemporary understanding of
produced by the intersection of global and local processes – social relations that
operate at a range of spatial scales’ (Massey cited in McDowell 1999, p. 4). Davis
(2005, p. 366), writing on the social meanings of the term ‘environment’ in the
context of the ecomuseum, notes that features of place such as worked landscapes,
material culture and local ways of life are ‘cultural touchstones’ that evoke the sig-
niﬁcance of place when valued in protected sites and museums.

The ﬁrst ofﬁcial ecomuseums were connected to the establishment of the Parc
Naturel Régional d’Armorique in Finistère (Western Brittany), and one of these was
the Ecomusée de l’Ile de Ouessant that eventually included two houses, a light-
house and a windmill. Many ecomuseums, likewise, encourage the visitor to make
contact with various ‘antennae’ sites in the landscape that
inform an intangible
sense of place that
the museum aims to conserve and promote (Davis 2005,
p. 368). La Maison du Niou Uhella (which later became the centrepiece of the Eco-
musée de l’Ile d’Ouessant), has been called the ‘premier ecomuseum of France’
(Davis 2005, p. 368). It was opened in July 1968, prior to the invention of the cate-
gory, in the tiny hamlet of Niou Uhella on Ouessant. It is a slate-roofed stone cot-
tage, in which compartmentalised spaces of two rooms served as kitchen, dining
room and bedroom. Its design is typical of house styles c. 1900 (at about this time
of relative prosperity many families replaced thatch roofs with slate) (Péron 1994,
p. 32). Connected to the house is a small museum displaying in glass cases objects
and costumes from the history of the island. The trim, walls and furniture are
painted white and bright blue – a colour with Marianic overtones favoured at about
this time. As Péron (1997, p. 200) notes, the interior is arranged like a boat but
ornamented like a chapel; small passages of living space weave through the box-
beds, armoires and enclosed hearth. Over head are suspended colourful reﬂective
glass balls (Péron 1994). The hearth is surrounded by pious images such as statu-
ettes and popular Epinal and chromolithographic prints (Simon 1997, p. 265).

As suggested by the Niou reconstruction, elaborate domestic altars in coastal
homes were the meeting place of private loss and global travel (Simon 1997). Here,
on the open dish racks on the walls, marriage globes and devotional statues are
sandwiched in between dinner plates and exotic colonial souvenirs brought back
from men’s travels at sea (Péron 1994, p. 208). The minimal ‘male’ intervention in
the interior of the home is telling of the general absence of men from everyday life
on the island; men and boys shipped out frequently for voyages of six or seven
years. The reconstructed décor and layout of the domestic space is a bit more
stripped-down, clean and prosperous looking than a widely read travel account writ-
ten in 1895 would have us believe: the narrator, Victor Eugène Ardouin-Dumazet,
describes a typical Ouessantine cottage as having granite mortarless walls, a straw
roof, a beaten earth ﬂoor, only a few kitchen utensils, a meagre ﬁre made of gorse

376

M. Coughlin

twigs and dried cow droppings, very little light, and close, humid smells that came
from one enclosed bed shared by the entire family (1895, p. 287).

Presenting the custom and costume of mourning
The compact interior space of a very similar Ouessantine cottage is the setting of a
series of dark paintings by Charles Cottet from 1897 depicting a dead child on
Ouessant (Figure 3) (several from this series can be seen in the Quimper museum
of art). On one of his many visits to this island, Cottet witnessed a moving home
wake in which a child was laid out on the family’s one table, dressed in a christen-
ing gown and surrounded by candles, marriage globes and paper ﬂowers. As was
the practice in much of Brittany, the walls were covered with white linens to purify
the domestic space and to transform the mundane function of the dining table to the
corpse’s ritual space of presentation (Badone 1989, p. 62). In all versions of the
image, Cottet shows us an unsettling convergence of the living and dead, as women
gather by the side of the child who is presented as if an uncannily beautiful still life
(Coughlin, 2009). The abrupt contrast between this traditional material approach to

Figure 3. Charles Cottet, Wake of a Dead Child on Ouessant (1897) Quimper Museum of
Fine Arts, photographed by author, July 2010.



377

death and a modern alienation from death’s physicality was as evident when the
painting was ﬁrst shown in Paris as it is now when viewed in the Quimper museum
(Coughlin 2009).

The speciﬁc material practices of the islanders in the home wake that Cottet rep-
resents are echoed in the small displays of objects and images representing every-
day life in the ecomuseum on Ouessant. The collection highlights gradual changes
in costume from the early nineteenth to mid-twentieth century. As in other local col-
lections of material culture such as the Musée Bigouden in Pont l’Abbé, the Musée
du patrimoine in Pont-Croix, or the Musée d’art et d’histoire des Côtes-d’Armor in
Saint-Brieuc (North Coast museum of art and history) the Maison Niou Uhella on
Ouessant displays costume, such as widows’ capes and bonnets from the region in
order to represent the nineteenth- and early twentieth-century culture of death and
mourning in coastal communities.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Ouessantines
adopted the mourning customs of mainland Finistère in which a heavy black wool-
len cloak, fastened with a silver clasp at the neck, was worn to the wake, the fun-
eral and high mass for several Sundays following the death of a close relative
(Coughlin 2009). These same cloaks are so often represented in popular imagery
and paintings (by Cottet, Richon-Brunet and others) that describe women’s culture
of mourning and memory on the Brittany coast.

Similarly, on the island of Sein, women’s mourning costume is often described
in visual and literary representations of everyday life on the island. After several
devastating cholera epidemics from the mid-nineteenth century onward, the women

Figure 4. Widows on graves in the churchyard of the Isle of Sein from the album of
images shot by “Lemoine” for Anatole Le Braz, 1893. (By permission of the CRBC-UBO
Brest).

378

M. Coughlin

of Sein adapted their daily costume to reﬂect their almost constant state of mourn-
ing the departed. Their black coiffe or ‘jibilinenn’ had two side ﬂaps that when
folded down indicated one was in mourning. Elderly women often left them this
way for good (Tanguy 1999, p. 22) and after the epidemic of 1886, most women
wore this mourning coiffe as everyday costume. When LeBraz visited Sein in 1893,
accompanied by a photographer, he returned with several striking images of the
island’s widows (Figure 4). He most likely had a very prominent Salon painting on
his mind: Emile Renouf’s massive canvas, The Widow of the Isle de Sein (1880)
that had established the theme of Sein as an island of tragic widows. The women
of coastal Brittany led everyday lives extremely tied to a local sense of place: rarely
leaving their home villages except for religious festivals or necessary expeditions to
a nearby market. In the costume displays of regional museums of everyday life such
the Musée du Patrimoine in Pont Croix, the local and material speciﬁcity of mourn-
ing costume has come to stand for this past way of life.

Maritime memory and popular imagery
Popular imagery that decorated the walls of cottages such as Uhella Niou also speaks
of past relationships of place and environment that depended upon gender difference
and the mobility or ﬁxity that everyday life of Breton coastal culture assigned to
gender. For example, the popular print, Nôtre Dame de Grace was produced by a
major publishing house in Normandy and was widely reproduced and sold at mari-
time pardons (discussed below) (Musée De La Marine 1981) (Figure 5). Mary here
is presented as patron saint of both sailors and travellers: she stands upon a ﬂying
galleon: the famous ship of Don Juan of Austria, Christian vanquisher of the Turkish
ﬂeet in 1571. Included are allegories of Europe and a ‘savage’ America and a second
boat, with a cruciﬁed Christ on its mast, making another spiritual voyage. The jour-
ney at sea is conﬂated with the journey of life; the travels of a sailor encompass the
local and global, the historical and colonial. A fusion of tradition and modernity,
sequential narrative and allegory, these souvenir prints, when viewed in the space of
the home potentially generated a range of narratives for their everyday viewers. And
these travel narratives were undoubtedly shaped by gender; for families in coastal
villages were seasonally divided: able-bodied men and boys shipped out for months
– if not years – at a time. Women’s lives were as intensely rooted to the local, as the
men’s were nomadic, ﬂuid and global. The popular imagery of many other mass-
produced prints ﬁlled the imaginations of children and women who stayed behind
with tales of the high seas and distant lands (Mollat 2006, p. 31).

The material culture of maritime memory
Breton men’s experience of place and environment is often represented in local col-
lections and other historical sites through the image of the ship. In a large-scale
painting of 1898 in the Quimper Fine Arts museum, The Ex-Voto (Figure 6), Henri-
Paul Royer depicts a shipwreck survivor who has made a barefoot pilgrimage
(accompanied by his wife and children) to give a votive ship in offering of thanks
to the statue of the Virgin and child in the Chapel of Saint-Tugen, near the port
town of Audierne. Chapels all along the coast have such votive boats suspended
from their rafters, as in the Chapel of Notre-Dame de Rocamadour in Camaret,
whose wooden roof resembles the interior of a ship’s hull.2 Many coastal Breton
towns have chapels devoted to Mary, Virgin of the sea, and Saint Anne, who were



379

Figure 5. Popular print
titled Notre-Dame de Grâce, étoile de la mer, protectrice des
matelots, et des passagers (Our Lady of Grace, Star of the Sea, Protector of Sailors and
Travellers). 1831–1835. Printed by Alphonse Picard, Caen (Normandy) 81.4 x 54.1 cm.
Photo: Jean-Gilles Berizzi. Photo Credit : Réunion des Musées Nationaux / Art Resource,
NY, Musée des Civilisations de l’Europe et de la Méditerranée, Paris, France.

both thought to be protectors of ﬁshermen. Sailors typically made pilgrimages to
these sites for religious pardons before long voyages, or marched in penance and
thanks after a safe return because of

a vow made during a storm at sea, or other occasions of danger, to make a pilgrimage
to one of her shrines if they are saved. Very often the voeu included going barefoot
and bare-headed, dressed only in shirt and trousers, and fasting on bread and water.
(Anson 1965, p. 69)

380

M. Coughlin

Figure 6. Henri Royer, The Ex-Voto, 1898 Quimper Fine Arts museum, photographed by
the author, July 2010.

Pilgrimages such as this could be taken on singly, but maritime pardons were
large-scale events that
increasingly came to be seen as spectacles of heritage,
rather than expressions of piety and thanksgiving for safe returns. Votive boats
were paraded through the streets of a port town during sailors’ and ﬁshermen’s
pardons and blessings of the ﬂeet and are often represented in paintings and
popular imagery of Breton festive religious culture. In Paimpol, a winter pardon
dedicated to cod ﬁshermen departing for the Iceland sea began in 1855 but, due
in part to the popularity of Pierre Loti’s melodramatic novel, it became a secular
in 1904. As the cod ﬁsheries died out, so did many
summer heritage festival
pardons for those departing for the Icelandic and Newfoundland banks – how-
the Newfoundland ﬁsherman’s pardon was reborn in a new location as a
ever,
spectacular summer heritage festival in St. Malo in 1926 (Lacombe 2001, Young
2007).



381

In Modernity at Sea: Melville, Marx, Conrad in Crisis, literary critic Cesare
Casarino examines modern narratives of the ocean voyage using Michel Foucault’s
notion of the boat as a heterotopic space:

the boat is a ﬂoating piece of space, a place without a place, that exists by itself, that
is closed in on itself and at the same time is given over to the inﬁnity of the sea and
that, from port to port, from tack to tack, from brothel to brothel and it goes as far as
the colonies in search of the most precious treasures they conceal in their gardens.
(Foucault 1967 cited in Casarino 2002, p. 13)

Breton sailors’ work for the merchant marine and in the global commerce of marine
ﬁsheries meant that they inhabited such indeﬁnable, ﬂuid, heterotopic spaces in
sharp contrast to the rooted sense of place experienced by their wives, mothers and
sisters on the Brittany coast. The votive boat, displayed as an icon of maritime heri-
tage, whether in a regional or local museum or in a chapel, is one aspect of material
culture that can speak for the lives of those who travel on the sea and their experi-
ences of uncertainty and loss (rather than romanticised lives of freedom and adven-
ture).

An ofﬁcial tourism website for the Cotes d’Armor (2010) promotes a heritage
tour of ‘chemins marins’ or ‘sailors’ paths’: a route of devotional sites for ﬁshermen
along the Brittany coast. Each section of the guide to this tour (downloadable as
pdf) opens with a quotation from Loti’s Iceland ﬁshermen (further bolstering its sta-
tus in crystallising the ‘place myth’) and offers lists of chapels, crosses, sculptures,
cemeteries, benedictions, ex-votos made at sea in bottles, painted on panels, in
stained glass windows, etc. that trace material signs of the maritime past along the
Brittany coast. To give just a few more examples of the ways in which tourists are
encouraged to view Breton port towns as open-air museums of maritime heritage,
Concarneau in Finistère has a mediaeval, walled ville close in the centre of its har-
bour that had been devoted to shipbuilding, but now contains a ﬂoating museum of
ﬁshing and services that cater to tourists. Each August, one of the oldest folklore
festivals in Brittany, the Fête des ﬁlets bleus (Festival of the blue nets) in Concar-
neau attracts thousands of costumed participants and many more tourists. The festi-
val was created in 1905 to respond to the Sardine Famine of 1902–1905: when the
sardines (a single species upon which depended a large canning industry) changed
migration patterns for several seasons, they were said to have abandoned Brittany.
The result was wide-scale misery and impoverishment along the coast. Since 1993,
the port
town of Douarnenez (also in Finistère) has declared itself an open-air
museum of maritime heritage. Its Port musée on the waterfront features representa-
tive ﬁshing boats from a range of northern European cultures, and at its centre is
the Musée du bateau that houses smaller ﬁshing boats and provides extensive infor-
mation on their construction and use. Over two decades of maritime festivals in
Douarnenez have drawn thousands of traditional sailing vessels to the port (Mollat
2006, p. 44).

Conclusion
Outsider modes of representing maritime culture in Brittany, such as Salon paint-
ings, picture postcards and nineteenth-century travel accounts, provided formats for
their makers and authors to expound upon their ﬁrst-hand experiences and to repre-
sent their own modernity and worldliness in opposition to that of the locals (Gerson

382

M. Coughlin

1996). In these accounts or ‘place myths’, local traditions are often posited as either
rigid and unchanging or as in decline after the shock of modernity has inﬁltrated a
former state of stasis. However, the conservation of traditional practices as well as
material, visual and oral cultures in the ecomuseum and at other heritage sites, can
afford to the local residents ways of both expressing their own everyday experi-
ences of place and remembering the past. These cultural reservoirs may enable resi-
dents of and visitors
to coastal Brittany to understand and imagine their
relationships to place and environment and, in turn, to formulate new responses to
contemporary challenges. As coastlines are increasingly being lost to new environ-
mental pressures, these sites and the ecological histories they offer seem ever more
fragile points of contact with a former sense of place. As we reanimate sites and
collections along the Brittany coast with our presences, responses and subjective
associations, its sense of place remains in process.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks for research assistance in Brittany to Marie-Rose Prigent at the Centre de
Recherche Bretonne et Celtique in Brest, Laurence Imbernon at the Musée des Beaux Arts
in Rennes, André Cariou at the Musée des Beaux Arts, Quimper and Caroline Boyle-Turner
in Pont Aven.

Notes on contributor
Maura Coughlin is an art historian of nineteenth-century France, whose recent research is
informed by material culture studies, cultural geography and site-speciﬁc contemporary art.
Social concerns of ecology, memory, mourning and touristic desire intersect with
representations and experiences of landscape in the visual culture of death and memory in
Brittany. This article is drawn from a larger project, ‘The visual culture of loss and
recuperation in Brittany, 1880–1914’.

Notes
1.

Islands like Ouessant had long been thought of as strategic gateway to France and its
coastal waters: invasions, occupations and Irish missionaries had all entered this way
(Mollat, 2006, p. 37).

2. François Chappé notes that ‘the ex-voto is perhaps the most characteristic example of
the impossibility of separating spiritual life from its related material objects. The most
immaterial aspect of maritime culture, thriving on legends, traditions, superstitions and
sayings, was created on boats and quaysides. It was then committed to book, posters
and charts, before being transmitted orally in specialized places such as sailors’ bars. No
approach to religious culture for example is possible unless one traces its transmission
via statues, altars, churches, chapels, processional routes or stained-glass windows. With-
out denying the existence of differing approaches to maritime heritage, it is important to
underline the fundamental human unity of the heritage process. If this process places the
emphasis entirely on artefacts, the latter can be ‘understood’ only if one knows of the
human cultural context in which they were made; if the process centers on cultural prac-
tices, the latter are in turn only comprehensible in relation to those artifacts which are
an essential part of them and in relation to places in which they occurred’ (Chappé
2000, p. 110).

References
Anson, P., 1965. Fisher folk-lore; old customs, taboos and superstitions among ﬁsher folk,
especially in Brittany and Normandy and on the east coast of Scotland. London: Faith
Press.



383

Anttonen, P., 2005. Tradition through modernity: Postmodernism and the nation-state in
folklore scholarship. Studia Fennica Folkloristica, 15. Helsinki: Finnish Literature
Society.

Ardouin-Dumazet, V., 1895. Voyage en France. Paris: Berger-Levrault.
Badone, E., 1989. The appointed hour: death, worldview, and social change in Brittany.

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Bertho-Lavenir, C., 1980. L’Invention de la Bretagne: Genèse sociale d’un stéréotype. Actes

de la recherche en sciences sociales, 35, 45–62.

Cambry, J., 1799. Voyage dans le Finistère ou état de ce département en 1794 et 1795.

Casarino, C., 2002. Modernity at sea: Melville, Marx, Conrad in crisis. Minneapolis, MN:

Paris: Cercle-social.

University of Minnesota Press.

Chappé, F., 2000. Heritage and history: rocking the boat. In: Sarah Blowen, Marion Demos-
sier, and Jeanine Picard, eds. Recollections of France: memories, identities and heritage
in contemporary France. New York, NY: Berghahn.

Corbin, A., 1994. Le territoire du vide, tr. The lure of the sea: the discovery of the seaside
in the western world, 1750–1840. trans. Jocelyn Phelps. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.

Côtes d’Armor, 2010. Chemins Marins, Salle de Presse [online]. Available from: http://www.

cotesdarmor.com/fr/espace-pro-salledepresse.php [Accessed 12 Jan 2010].

Coughlin, M., 2009. Crosses, cloaks and globes: women’s material culture of mourning on
the Brittany coast. In: Daly Goggin Maureen and Fowkes Tobin Beth, eds. Women and
things: gendered material practices, 1750–1950. Hants and Burlington, VT: Ashgate,
281–297.

Cunliffe, B., 2001. Facing the Ocean: the Atlantic and its peoples 8000 BC–AD 1500.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Davis, P., 1999. Ecomuseums: a sense of place. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Davis, P., 2005. Places, ‘cultural touchstones’ and the ecomuseum. In: G. Corsane, ed. Heri-

tage, museums and galleries: an introductory reader. London: Routledge.

Decerteau, M., 1988. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley, CA: University of California

Gerson, S., 1996. Parisian litterateurs, provincial journeys and national unity in France. Past

& present, 151 (May), 141–73.

Lacombe, P., 2001. The Breton body in culture and religion. Culture, sport, society, 4 (3),

Press.

27–48.

Le Braz, A., 1893. Legende de la mort chez les Bretons Armoricains. Paris: Champion.
McDowell, L., 1999. Gender,

identity and place. understanding feminist geographies.

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Mollat du Jourdin, M., 2006. France, the Coast and the Sea. In: Pierre Nora, ed. Rethinking
France. Les lieux de mémoire. Vol. 2. Space. Trans. David P. Jordan. Chicago and
London: The University of Chicago Press.

Ozouf, M., 1981. L’invention de l’ethnographie française : le questionnaire de l’Académie

celtique. Annales, 36 (2), 210–231.

Péron, F., 1994. Ouessant. Rennes: Ouest-France.
Péron, F., 1997. Ouessant, l’île sentinelle: vie et traditions d’une Île Bretonne. Douarnenez:

Le Chasse-Marée.

Péron, F., 2000. Construction of a Breton maritime heritage: processes and signiﬁcation. In:
Sarah Blowen, Marion Demossier, and Jeanine Picard, eds. Recollections of France.
memories, identities and heritage in contemporary France. New York, NY: Berghahn.

Ploubazlanec site ofﬁciel de la commune, Le patrimoine [online]. Available from: http://
www.ploubazlanec.fr/index.php?page=decouverte&sousMenu=patrimoine [Accessed 10
Jan 2010].

Poulot, D., 1994. Identity as self-discovery: the ecomuseum in France. In: Daniel J. Sherman
and Irit Rogoff, eds. Museum culture: histories, discourses, spectacles. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 66–84.

Pred, A., 1984. Place as historically contingent process: structuration and the time-geography
of becoming places. Annals of the association of American geographers, 74 (2), 279–
297.

384

M. Coughlin

Rieth, E. and Milon, A., 1981. Ex-voto marins dans le monde: de l’antiquité à nos jours :

[exposition], Musée de la marine, Palais de Chaillot, Paris, 1981. Paris: Le Musée.

Rivard, R., 1984. Opening up the museum, or, towards a new museology: ecomuseums and

’Open’ Museums. Quebec: Self-published Manuscript.

Salomé, K., 2003. Les îles bretonnes: une image en construction (1750–1914). Rennes:

Presses Universitaires de France.

Sébillot, P., 1881. Contes des paysans et des pêcheurs. Paris: G. Gharpentier.
Sébillot, P., 1901. Le folk-lore des pêcheurs. Paris: J. Maisonneuve.
Simon, J.F., 1997. La cheminée dans la maison bretonne. In: Gaël Milin and Patrick Galliou,
eds. Hauts lieux du sacré en Bretagne. Brest: Centre de Recherche Bretonne et Celtique,
257–270.

Stone, P. and Planel, P., 1999. The constructed past: experimental archaeology, education,

and the public. London: Routledge.

Tanguy, A., 1999. L’île de Sein en 1900: Les textes inédits d’Anatole Le Braz. Armen, 107,

20–29.

Viaud, J. (pseud. Pierre Loti), 1883. Mon frère Yves. Paris: Calmann Lévy.
Viaud, J. (pseud. Pierre Loti), 1886. An Iceland ﬁsherman: a story of love on land and sea.
(Pêcheur d’Islande 1886), trans. from the French by Clara Cadiot. New York, NY: Wm.
E. Gallsberger.

Young, P., 2007. Of pardons, loss and longing: tourism and cultural value in Brittany, 1900–

1930. French historical studies, 30, 237–267.


