International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Tourism and the management of cultural
resources in the Pays Dogon, Mali

Myra Shackley

To cite this article: Myra Shackley (1997) Tourism and the management of cultural
resources in the Pays Dogon, Mali, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 3:1, 17-27, DOI:
10.1080/13527259708722184
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259708722184

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 224

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Tourism and the Management of
Cultural Resources in the Pays
Dogon, Mali
Myra  Shackley

Abstract
The Pays  Dogon, designated a joint Natural/Cultural World Heritage Site in  1989,  is
Mali's  leading tourist  attraction  receiving 6,000  visitors  per  year  with  an annual
growth  of 10%  which may increase when a new access road is constructed.  Tourism is
the  major  source  of  income for  the  Dogon who  have  lived  in  picturesque villages
clinging to  the  sides of the  600m  cliffs of  the  Bandiagara escarpment since the  15th
century. The Dogon are best known to Europeans for  their masked dances and powerful
woodcarvings, much prized  by  collectors. Loss of  cultural property  by  illicit trading
combined with  alteration  of  the  traditional masked dances for  visitor  preference is
contributing to  cultural change within Dogon communities. The harmony and  cohesion
which enabled the Dogon to  resist the colonial power  is  being threatened by  a  new set
of historical constructs and priorities indicating that Dogon culture is more fragile when
confronted with  the 20th  century.

Keywords

Mali
Dogon
West  Africa
World  Heritage
Cultural  tourism
Art  theft

Mali,  a  desert  country  on  the  edge of the  Sahel  in  West  Africa,  has  an  area of
1.25  million  sq km  and  a population  of around  8.4  million. This is composed of
eight major  ethnic groups dominated by the Bambara  and the Fulani. with lesser
numbers of Marka, Songhai, Malinke, Senoufo and Tuareg. The Dogon are one of
the smallest  of the major  ethnic groups but their country,  the Pays Dogon of the
Bandiagara  escarpment  (Figure  1) is Mali's leading tourist  attraction. The Dogon
are  best  known 
their  masked  dances  and  powerful
woodcarvings.  both  of  which  have  helped  the  development  of  their  tourism
industry.  However,  illegal  sale  of  Dogon  artwork,  alteration  of  masked  dance
rituals for  visitor preference  and  the loss, by attrition,  of Dogon  mythologies  has
imperilled  the survival of aspects of Dogon traditional  culture.

to  Europeans  for 

The tourism  product  of Mali is entirely  geared  towards  cultural  and  heritage
tourism  focused  around  the  ancient  World  Heritage  sites  of  Timbuktu  and
Djenne.  In  the  Bandiagara  escarpment,  cultural  tourism  combines  with  ethnic
tourism  since the visitor  may  experience,  and be a temporary  element of,  Dogon
culture  as  well  as  having  the  opportunity  to  buy  a  permanent  fragment  of  it.
Indisputably  the  opening  of  new  areas  to  visitors  has  sometimes  acted  as  a
catalyst  for  an  escalation  of art  thefts  as  well  as  cultural  attrition  as  antiquities
are  sold  both  to  dealers  and  tourists.1  Facilitating  access  to remote  areas  allows
dealers  to  see  new  and  previously  unknown  material  as  well  as  to  establish
trading  relations  with  local people. Authentic  antiques  are  sometimes treated by
the  tourist  as  a non-renewable  resource  worthy  of investment  and  their  relative
commodity  value  is  informed  by  the  politics  of  connoisseurship.2  The  sale  of

1. M. Shackley.  The
land of Lo: the first eight
months of tourism'
Tourism  Management.
vol.15, no.l.  1993.
pp.17-26: M. Shackley.
'Lo revisited: the next  18
months'  Tourism
Management,  vol.16.
no.2.  1995. pp.150-151:
M. Shackley. Too Much
Room at the Inn?'
Annals  of Tourism
Research, vol.23, no.2.
1996. pp.449-463.

2. T. Kaiser. 'Dealing for
dollars: the antiquities
market'.  Journal of Field
Archaeology, vol.17.
1990. pp.205-210.

IJHS 3  (1)  17-27 © Intellect  Ltd  1997

17

3.  U. Eco. 'Fakes  and
Forgeries'  pp. 172-204  In
The Limits of
Interpretation.
Bloomington:  Indiana
University  Press.  1990:
M. Jones,  (ed)  Fake? The
Art  of Deception.
Berkeley: University  of
California  Press.  1990.

4.  V.P. Lyndel & P.J.
O'Keefe. Legislative
Measures and National
Regulations to fight
against the Illicit Traffic of
Cultural Resources. Paris:
UNESCO.  1983: P.J.
O'Keefe.  Feasibility of an
international code of ethics
for  dealers in cultural
property for  the purpose of
more effective control of
illicit traffic in cultural
property,  a report for
UNESCO. Paris:  Unesco
Report  CIT/94/WS/11.
1994.

5.  P. Messenger.  The
Ethics of Collecting
Cultural Property. Whose
Culture? Whose Property?
Albuquerque:  University
of New  Mexico  Press.
1989.
6.  World  Tourism
Organisation.  Yearbook  of
Tourism Statistics.
Madrid:  World  Tourism
Organisation  (47th
edition).  1995.
7.  World  Tourism
Organisation.  Tourism
Market Trends -  Africa
1994.  Madrid:  World
Tourism  Organisation.
1995.

is  a  first  step,  followed  by 

already-excavated  artefacts 
the  robbing  of
archaeological sites and the illegal sale of artefacts. All these processes have been
• at  work  in  the  Pays  Dogon,  as has  the  next  stage,  namely  the  manufacture  of
fakes  as  the  supply  of  originals  decreases.  However,  although  tourism  both  in
Mali and  elsewhere is heavily implicated  in the selling and  replication  of ancient
artefacts  it  has  also had  a  more positive effect  by  stimulating  the  production of
art  using  traditional  materials  and  motifs.3- Although  large  scale  tourism  to  the
Pays  Dogon  is  a  relatively  recent  phenomenon  artwork  has  been  systematically
removed  by both  scholars  and  tourists  since  the  1900s,  with  the  illicit  trade  in
artwork souvenirs legitimised by the fact that national institutions were doing the
same  thing  as  individual  travellers  but  on  a  far  larger  scale.  Although  the
UNESCO  convention  of  1970  4  helped  to  prevent  such  sale  and  export  of
antiquities it is a problem that legislation  alone cannot  address.5

Tourism in  West Africa
West  Africa  receives  a  very  small  proportion  of the  world's  international  tourist
arrivals  and  remains  unimportant  on  the  continent  compared  with  the  fast
growth  of  tourism  to  South  Africa.  Global trends  indicate  an  overall  growth  of
4.5%  per  annum  between  1990-19956  but  tourism  to  the  Pays  Dogon  has
grown  at  nearly  twice  that  volume.  West Africa's  share  of  the  African  arrivals
market has actually declined from  12% in  1985 to 8% in  1994 although receipts
have  remained  stable  at  11%  (Table  1).  Within  West  Africa  the  principal
destinations  are  Ghana,  Cote d'lvoire,  Nigeria  and  Senegal  which  comprise 57%
of total  arrivals,  and in  recent  years the fastest  growth  in  arrivals has been seen
in  Ghana  and  Benin. Most of these  arrivals  are  visitors  from  neighbouring  west
African  countries  primarily  motivated  by  business,  political  or  administrative
reasons  or  visiting  friends  and  relations.  Although  European  visitors  are
numerically  insignificant  compared  with  local  cross-border  activities  (380,000
arrivals in  1995), they represent the biggest source of tourism revenues.

Reasons  for  the  relative  unpopularity  of  West  Africa  as  an  international
tourism  destination  include  the  lack  of  either  a  modern  infrastructure  or
observable wildlife,  although some countries  (notable  Senegal  and  Gambia) have
overcome  these  problems  and  developed  a  'winter  sun'  tourism  product.  Most
leisure  tourists  to  West  Africa  are  attracted  to  its  cultural  heritage  and
contemporary  people  rather  than  to  the  variety  of  landscapes  or  wildlife.  The
tourism  patterns  which  have  developed  are  closely  related  to  colonial  histories
with  Togo,  Mali  and  Cote  d'lvoire  being  especially  attractive,  for  example,  to
French  visitors.  The  low  incomes  of  the  Sahel  countries  (Mali,  Niger,' Burkina
Faso)  have  handicapped  their  tourism  development  potential;  many  of the  best
hotels  are  foreign-owned  (with  subsequent  economic  leakage)  and  surface
transport  is  geared  to  the  needs  of  agriculture  and  trade,  rather  than  tourism.
Tour  companies  turn  these negatives  to  advantages by  promoting  the  region  as
unspoilt,  where  the  visitor  will encounter  few  other  tourists  and  has  a  genuine
opportunity  to  interact  with  local  communities.  However,  despite  its  bright
markets, handicrafts,  music and folklore. West Africa  is among the least travelled
areas  of  the  world  with  any  future  development  hampered  by  a  lack  of
connectivity, political unrest and an increasing fear  of AIDS. 7

18

Myra Shackley

OTfcm

r

Figure 1.  Map of Mali

8.  M.  Shackley.  Wildlife
Tourism.  London:
Routledge,  1996.

in 

to  Mali 

trading  cities 

Islamic  world, 

history,  which 

Tourism in Mali:
Cultural  History
international
The  majority  of 
are
leisure  visitors 
motivated  by  an  interest  in  its
cultural 
has
resulted  in  something  of  a  'milk
round'  where  visitors  combine
excursions  to  the  World  Heritage
Sites  of Timbuktu,  Djenne  and  the
Pays  Dogon  (figure  1). The  former
two  sites  were  prosperous  and
cultured 
the
mediaeval 
their
wealth  based  primarily  on  their
position  as  nodes  on  the  trans-
Saharan  gold  and  salt  caravan
routes.  Indeed,  Timbuktu  was  one
of  the  most  famous  centres  of
Islamic 
the  entire
Muslim  world  during  the  15th
century  although  today  it  is  a
dusty  mess of low, brick buildings,
dependent  upon  tourism.  A  long
series of powerful  empires grew up and collapsed in West Africa  between the  9 th
and  16th  centuries,  terminated  both  by  an  invasion  from  the  north  and  the
breaking  of  the  Islamic  trade  monopoly  by  European  maritime  powers.  The
empire of Mali with its capital  at Niani was at  its height in under the  fabulously
wealthy emperor Mansa Musa in the early  14th century. Towards the end of the
19th  century  Mali became  a  French  colony,  not  achieving  independence  until
1960. A subsequent period of mismanagement followed  and since 1968  Mali has
been  ruled  by  a  military  regime.  The  country  suffered  badly  from  the  Sahel
droughts of the  1970s which turned  enormous areas of what had been marginal
grazing  into  desert  with  massive  losses of crops  and  livestock. Further  problems
from  drought  recurred  in  1984-1985  with  longstanding  effects,  producing
desperate poverty which  has  led to an  interest  in  tourism  as  an  image-improver
and  foreign  currency  earner.  Today,  the  average  annual  income  in  Mali  is
estimated  8 to  be  US$300,  about  the  cost  of two  night's  accommodation  in  an
international  hotel in Bamako.

learning 

in 

Tourism  management
Mali has only  0.1% of the meagre African  share of world tourism  and  even  this
has  halved  over the  last three years due mainly  to perceived  political instability.
In  1994  Mali  received  approximately  25,000  visitors,  a  slight  improvement  on
the previous year (Table 1) but major  changes are unlikely unless issues of safety,
infrastructure  development and tourism education  and training  are addressed.

Tourism and  Culture Resources  in the Pays Dogon, Mali

19

Table 1 International  tourist Arrivals in Mali
Source: World Tourism Organisation 1995
Arrivals  (000s)

Country 

1990 

1991 

1992 

1993 

1994

Mali
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Cote d'lvoire
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo

44
110
74
4
196
100
146
100
1
190
246
98
103

38
117
80
20
217
66
172
28
16
214
234
96
65

38
130
92
19
200
64
213
33
13
237
246
89
49

24
140
111
27
230
90
257
93
11
192
168
91
24

25
14
115
32

82
248
94
12
193
171
•  90
44

International tourism is worth about US$11 million per year to Mali, a figure
which  has remained  constant  for the last  three  years  but dropped from US$46
million in 1991. Each tourist contributes  about US$440 per visit, a reflection on
the  relatively  high  costs  of a  visit,  especially  in  accommodation  and transport.
This, together  with the nature of Mali's tourism product, has implications for the
trade  in antiquities  since it indicates  that  visitors  are not only  motivated  by an
interest  in  cultural  heritage  but  also  likely  to have  relatively  high  disposable
incomes. Tourism represents around 0.4% of GNP and 14% of commercial service
exports.  In  1993 Mali's  25,000  international  arrivals  included  13.000  from
Africa,  3,000  from  the Americas,  1,000 from East  Asia  and the Pacific  region
and  around  10,000 visitors from Europe or elsewhere.

The  last  five  years  has witnessed  a  steady  improvement  in  the level and
efficiency  of the tourism  bureaucracy  in  Mali,  which  is now considerably  less
intimidating  for the visitor. Until  1993 tourism  was ruthlessly  organised  by the
sinister-sounding  SMERT  (Societe  Malienne  d'Exploitation  des  Resources
Touristiques)  which  was 25% state  owned  and  based  in  Bamako.  Since the
abolition  of SMERT there  is no further  need  for tourist  cards  and photography
permits  although  stringent  visa  requirements  and frequent police checks  act as
barriers to tourism  growth.

The Pays Dogon
The Dogon are probably the most interesting of Mali's diverse ethnic groups and
certainly  among the best known  to outsiders. Some  70 000 Dogon live in more
than  500 villages  focused  around  the imposing  Bandiagara  escarpment  75 km
east of Mopti (figure 2). This dramatic feature, some 200 kms long, runs roughly
parallel to the river Niger and shelters the Dogon villages which  appear to cling
to  the  sides  of  its  sheer  500-600m  high  cliffs.  Dutch  archaeological  work
indicates  that the Bandiagara  area was initially occupied  by the Toloy culture in
the  3rd century BC. followed  by the Tellem in the 11th century  AD. The Tellem

20 

Myra Shackley

Figure 2. Bandiagara
escarpment. Pays Dogon.

9. M. Griaule, Masques
Vogons, Paris: Institut de
Ethnologie.  1938.

to 

in 

reach 

explorer 

people used caves for both granaries and
burial  purposes,  a practice  continued by
the  Dogon  who  arrived 
the
Bandiagara  area  during 
the  15th
century  and had completed  the eviction
of the Tellem within  200 years. The  first
European 
the
Bandiagara  was  the  German  Heinrich
Barth  in  1857, en  route  to  Timbuktu
some  250 kilometres  to the north, but
not  till  50  years  later  did  European
explorers  and  anthropologists 
first
establish contact with the Dogon. French
control, established in Mali in 1893, was
greatly  resented  by  the  Dogon  who
defeated the colonial armies in a series of
battles  and skirmishes  between  1896 and 1922. Despite  eventual  subjugation,
the  Dogon  remain  fiercely  independent,  retaining  their  own  calendar  based
around  a five-day week,  as well  as their  own language  and culture.  The Pays
Dogon  is often  regarded  by its inhabitants,  with  some justification,  as separate
from the rest of Mali.

Dogon  villages  consist  of a  maze  of sandy  coloured  stone  houses  with  flat
roofs  which  merge  imperceptibly  into  the stone  of the escarpment,  punctuated
by the cone-shaped thatched roofs of the square, tower granaries and divided by
small  winding  lanes. The granaries  are closed  by small,  carved,  wooden  doors
protected  by  complex  locks,  both  items  which  feature  prominently  in  the
antiquities  markets.  The  Dogon  make  a  precarious  living  from  subsistence
agriculture  growing  millet,  rice and sorghum  on tiny  plots with  poor  arid  soil,
drought and complex landholding regulations. Onions and artefacts are the only
cash  crops,  making  the  Dogon  Interest  In  tourism  very  understandable. All
aspects  of Dogon  life  have  cosmological  significance.  Each  village,  as well as
each  individual  family  house, is laid out in the shape of the human  body. The
village  centre  contains  a  togu  or  men's  shelter  supported  by  woodcarvings
representing  Dogon  ancestors, sometimes deliberately defaced to prevent  theft or
sale.  All art  and ritual  have  strong  association  with  death  and  spirits,  with
houses,  statues,  stools,  locks  and other  artefacts  carrying  symbolic meaning in
their  design.

Dogon  Culture
Western  anthropologists  became  interested  in  Dogon  culture  following  the
pioneering  work of the French  ethnographer  Marcel  Griaule who studied Dogon
society  from  1930 to 1950.9  Partly  because  of their  geographical  isolation and
partly  their fierce independence the Dogbn have retained old beliefs and practices
longer  than  many  African  people  and most  remain  animists.  However,  this is
beginning  to change  as a  result  both  of incoming  tourism  and the effect  of the
demonstration  of  new  customs  and  culture  imported  by  returning  migrant
workers. Even  today not all villages have  equal  contact  with  the outside world,
and many Dogon do not speak French (the language of Mali). Dogon villagers are

Tourism and Cultura  Resources in the Pays Dogon, Mali

21

10. J. Laude,  African Art
of the Dogon. New York:
Viking Press. 1973.

11. M. Huet.  The Dance.
Art  and Ritual  of Africa,
London: Collins. 1978.

12. M. Shackley.  'Visitor
management  and the
monastic  festivals  of the
Himalayas'
pp.409-423  In M.
Robinson. N. Evans & P.
Callaghan  (eds)  Culture
as a Tourist Product.
Newcastle: University of
Northumbrla. 1996.

bound  together into a complex network  of lineage heads  and  clan matrices  with
only Dogon blacksmiths living outside this kinship network.

Dogon art, particularly statues and woodcarvings. is unique and much sought
after  by collectors who offer huge prices, especially for grave goods and  statuettes
from  the  Tellem  burial  caves  which  are  being  robbed  by  the  Dogon  as  the
number  of saleable Dogon carvings diminishes. The Dogon seem to feel that  it is
perfectly  legitimate to sell Tellem culture but  are also quite happy  at selling their
own. Since most of the Tellem artefacts come from mortuary  caves in the vertical
cliffs  collusion between  dealer  and  local people is required,  and  a  network  of art
thefts  and exports has developed. Tellem wooden headrests are the oldest wooden
artefacts  in sub-saharan  Africa  and, together with their finger bells, ceramic pots,
statuettes  and  parts  of old  musical  instruments  can  command  high  prices  since
they  are  irreplaceable.  Most  of  the finer pieces  have  already  gone,  with  Dogon
craftsmen  churning out replicas, particularly of small wooden Tellem statues. It is
now  impossible  to  find  extant  artwork  from  the  Tellem  period  or  the  Tellem-
Dogon transition,  although  a few early  Dogon pieces are reputedly  still  available
for fabulous prices. The current location of the Tellem and Dogon pieces after  sale
is, of course, generally  unknown.10

The Dogon are also well known for their masked, dance rituals which are held
at various traditional intervals to accompany festivals  such as the Sigui (every  60
years),  the  Dama  (every  few  years)  and  annual  harvest  festivals.11  New,
abbreviated  versions of these festivals  have been developed  for  tourists for  which
the visitor pays both in cash and in kind by providing beer for the troupe. Dances
for tourists are only loosely based on the originals with greater floor time given to
the  more  elaborate  masks  and  dramatic  choreography  with  the  true  meaning of
the  dance  often  blurred,  especially  for  the  younger  dancers. Today,  only  a  small
number  of  Dogon,  usually  hogons (medicine  men)  have  accurate  and  deep
knowledge of the meaning of their art and rituals. Such dance performances  have
begun  to  act  as major  motivators  of tourism with  some  travel  companies  timing
visits to the Pays Dogon to coincide with the early June dance festivals held before
the planting  season. However,  this can  be difficult  as the  dances do not occur  at
easily  determined  dates  and  can  occasionally  be  abandoned  altogether.
Disappointed  tourists have therefore  been reduced  to bribing the Dogon with beer
to  produce  an  instant  ritual  with  photo-opportunities.  This  takes  place  at  those
villages which  are most often  visited by tourists, such  as Sanga  (Figure  3) where
dances are regularly staged for tourists in a routine and half-hearted  manner.

Dance  performances  may  be  part  of  a  wide  variety  of  ceremonies  involving
dance,  costume,  masking  and  music.  The  impact  of  such  performances  on  the
tourist is limited by the transience  of the  cultural contact,  a well as by problems
of language  and prior cultural  information.12  In order to be effective  the  cultural
statements must be simple, often  necessitating the abbreviation  of a  performance,
with  the  result  that  the  shortened  version  is unable  to  transmit  the  message of
the original.

The visual  message received by the tourist  is also being  received  by the host
community  and  being  utilised  as  a  means  to  form  their  own  culture;.  Any
alteration of ritual in order to please guests, therefore  alters the cultural legacy of
the  hosts  by  modifying  the  transmission  of  a  shared  aesthetic  and  collective
identity.  Such  dance  festivals  create  significant  landmark  dates  for  local  people

22

Myra  Shackley

and  give  a  time  structure  to  the
group,  as  well  as  performing  other
functions 
providing
opportunities  for  resource  exchange
and  excess resource consumption.

such 

as 

of 

expressive 

All  the  Dogon  dance  festivals
involve 
the  wearing  of  complex
costumes  and  masks,  of which  about
80  different  types  are  known.  Masks
are 
exclusive
in  black  Africa,  with
associations 
masked  dancing  providing  a 
link
between  the  secluded  masked  society
and  society  at  large.13 Dogon  dancers
are male, members of a dance society,
who  start  with  simple  masks  and
progress  to  increasingly  difficult  roles
such  as  that  played  by  the  wearer  of  the  tree  mask.  This  mask  is four  metres
high and very heavy, controlled by clamps between the teeth and requiring great
strength  to  move  through  slow  ritual  sweeps.  The  mask  in  black  Africa  is  a
character in motion, and the masked societies (awa) of the Dogon play a vital role
in  preserving  their  elaborate  mythology.  Funeral  rites,  for  example,  include
elaborate  public  dances  accompanied  by  a  secret  language  especially  associated
with  dancers  who  drive  the  spirit  of  the  dead  person  from  their  house.  The
modifications  of  such  performances  for  tourists  impinge  on  the  Dogon  cultural
legacy, already being altered by the removal of so much  original  art work which
contained  within  it  representation  of  the  animist  pantheon  and  Dogon
mythological  beliefs.14

Dogon culture is being further  altered by the phenomenon  of migrant  labour.
Many young Dogon men travel hundreds  of kilometres to find work  as a way of
coping  with  the  effects  of  persistent  drought.  Over  the  past  30  years  the
population  of urban  centres in  the Sahel has  grown  between  two and five times
faster  than  the  rural  areas.  Dogon  men  return  from  work  in  Bamako
accompanied  by  new  clothes  and  traditions.  Even  religion  alters  -  with  many
returning  migrants  having  converted  to Islam.  Migrant  workers contribute  food
and  cash  remittances  to supplement village incomes but  their  absence  generates
a  number  of  social  changes.  Agriculture  and  family  life  revolve  increasingly
around  women and the elderly while decision-making  is even more concentrated
round  the  elders  in  the  absence  of  younger  men.  The  positive  benefits  of
migration  include  the  formation  of  pressure  groups  for  activities  such  as.the
construction  of new wells, schools and a clinic while negative results include the
introduction  of AIDS.

Tourism in the Pays Dogon
Tourism is the major  source of income to the Pays Dogon which can  reasonably
claim  to  be  Mali's premier  tourist  attraction,  considerably  more  accessible  than
Timbuktu.  The  picturesque  Dogon  villages  are  not  all  equally  accessible  to
tourists  with  some  receiving  virtually  no  visitors  and  others,  such  as  Sangha,

Tourism and  Cultura  Resources  in the  Pays Dogon, Mali

23

Figure 2.  A  Dogon  village,
showing granaries with
conical roofs  {photo. Rose
Beddington

13.  CM.  Hall  & B.
Weiler,  Special Interest
Tourism,  London:
Belhaven  Press.  1992.

14.  M.  Griaule  & G.
Dleterlen,  The Dogon In
African  Worlds series,  ed.
CD.  Forte.  Oxford:
Oxford  University  Press.
1954:  D.  Paulme.
Organisation Sociale des
Dogons, Paris: Les
editions  Donet-
Montchrestien.  1940.

15. S. Sidlbe, 'Fighting
pillage: national  efforts
and  international
cooperation', pp.25-34 In
H. Leyten (ed) illicit
Traffic in Cultural
Property.  Royal Tropical
Institute. The
Netherlands. 1994.

having  a  well  developed  tourist  industry.  All  visitors  to  the  Pays  Dogon  must
travel on  foot  and stay in Dogon houses, providing a unique opportunity  to view
African  village  life  at  first  hand.  Dogon  tourism  used  to  be  controlled  from
SMERT offices  in  Mopti, Bandiagara  and  Sangha  with  visitors virtually  forced  to
take  organised  tours,  but  this  practice  has  gradually  atrophied.  The  Dogon
themselves  estimate  that  they  see  around  5,000-6,000  tourists  each  year,  with
an  annual increase of 10%. However, if Mali continues to be relatively stable, the
continuing  construction  of a new road to the foot  of the Bandiagara  escarpment
(figure  2)  will  facilitate  access  and  certainly  result  in  increased  numbers  of
visitors.  At  present  most  visitors  go  to  one  of  the  villages  at  the  top  of  the
escarpment  and then  descend the clUTs, generally  walking along the base for  3-5
days. Vehicular  access could change this pattern  and  allow more  visitors to  the
Dogon staying for a shorter time.

The  Dogon  tourist  market  is  dominated  by five European  adventure  travel
companies  who  bring  in  a  number  of  groups  each  year,  of  varied  size.  Some
overseas  visitors  come  with  their  own  guide  and  vehicle,  generally  hired  in
Bamako,  and  a  few  backpackers  utilise  local  transport  but  these  are  a  small
minority.  Payments  to police in  feeder  villages  are  common.  There  are  some  56
professional  guides  to  the  Pays  Dogon  but  not  all  are  Dogon  and  most  are self-
nominated  and  self-trained.  Some  still  work  within  the  remnants  of  the  public
sector  (and  since  1993  must  pay  for  a  permit  to  do  so)  while  others  work
privately  by  arrangement  with  specific  parties.  Tourism  does  not  benefit  all
villages equally, since the tour group will stay at one house, sometimes equipped
as a mini inn, which is relatively clean, used to visitors and whose occupants are
usually  related  to  the  guide.  No  fees  are  charged  for  photography  permits  but
some  villages  charge  a  small  entrance  fee  and  each  group  usually  pays  CFA
10,000  to take water from a well. Tourism is unnervingly  well organised and in
some ways reminiscent  of trekking  tourism  in  Nepal. The writer  estimated  that
the  average daily cost of visiting  the Pays Dogon is around  £10, including  food,
guides, porters, water  and camping  accommodation.  The average trip lasts  three
days though  some visitors stay much longer. This suggests that  tourism is worth
at  least  £150,000  to  the  Dogon,  not  counting  economic  multipliers.  Other
benefits  of tourism include gifts to the Dogon (containers, clothing, pens, sticking
plasters) and the many services provided by visitors such  as the provision of lifts,
medical help and postage of letters and parcels. A symbiotic relationship between
hosts and guests has grown up with the Dogon regarding visitors and the income
that  they  bring  as a  regular part  of their  lives. It  is now reasonable  to view  the
Pays Dogon as a living, and interactive, open-air museum.

The financial benefits  of tourism  to individuals  can  be substantial.  The basic
income  of a  guide  is around  CFA 10.000  (£12.50)  for  a  party  of variable size,
with  a  good  guide  able  to  command  higher  fees  and  tips  and  work  for  seven
months  of the year.  Dogon tourism  is seasonal with  two high  seasons, between
July and  September (when rain  on the  escarpment  causes spectacular  waterfalls)
and  also  between  December  and  February  while  the  weather  is  a  little  cooler.
During  these periods around  thirty visitors may be staying in  the Pays Dogon  at
any one time. Tourists are regarded  as legitimate targets for money, being  fleeced
by  everyone  from  small  children  selling  drawings  or  homemade  catapults  to
elders selling permissions to visit out-of-the-way  spots or to have access to water.

24

Myra  Shackley

experimental 

in  1907  when 

Culture Resource  Management
the  Malian  government
In  1993 
established 
cultural
missions,  at  Timbuktu,  Djenne  and
Bandiagara  to  try  and  persuade  local
populations  to  protect  their  heritage
but  this  has  been  very  unsuccessful.15
Everything  in  the Dogon  country  is for
sale  (old  tools,  carvings,  masks  and
even  the doors off houses) for  amounts
that  may equal several years salary for
the  average  Dogon.  (Figure  4).  The
interest  of  the  west  in  Dogon  material
began 
the  first
photographs  of  masked  dances  were
published, creating great interest among anthropologists. The removal of artefacts
from Mali  to  museums  and  scholarly  collections  during  the  early  years  of  this
century was thought  to be reasonable, with no-one considering that the material
could  be  of  interest  to  local  people.  Unlike  today  there  was  seldom  a financial
motive. Examples of Dogon sculpture, including masks and figures of animals and
human  figures  from  iron,  bronze  or  carved  wood  appeared  in  the  galleries of
Europe  and  America  at  about  the  same time, and  were much  admired  for  their
powerful,  simple forms. The work of Picasso and others accustomed western eyes
to  African  shapes.  The  high  prices  which  dealers  were  able  to  charge  for  such
artefacts  (far  higher  than  those  paid  by  dealers  to  the  Dogon)  stimulated  the
market  to  a  frenzy  of  looting  which  has  continued  almost  unchecked  until  the
present  day,  when  the  supply  of  original  Dogon  materials  has  almost  run  out.
The  level  of  pillage  from  archaeological  sites  in  Mali  has  reached  crisis
proportions, jeopardising the country's cultural  heritage. In  1993, in response to
a  request from the  government  of Mali the  USA Imposed  emergency  restrictions
on  the  import  of  archaeological  material  from  the  Niger  river  valley.16  An
illustrative typological list of archaeological materials made before  1742 AD from
the  Niger  river  valley  and  Bandiagara  escarpment  was  drawn  up  so  that  such
material  could  not  be  imported  into  the  USA without  documentation  certifying
that  it  had  left  Mali  legally.  However,  this  has  had  little  effect.  Developing
countries  such  as  Mali  have  a  vicious  circle  of  artwork  theft  and  tourism
development  which  negates  the  effect  of legislation  to  protect  cultural  heritage.
Few visitors, and  low admissions charges to poorly-run  national  museums mean
that  inadequate  finance  is  available  to  protect  cultural  heritage.  International
traders take advantage of this finding a ready market for  antiquities among both
tourists and the art  market.17

Conclusions
The effect  of tourism  on Dogon culture should be viewed in the context of global
concerns  about  the  survival  of  cultural  heritage  and  the  ownership  of  cultural
patrimony.  Most of the problems connected  with  the pillage of Dogon antiquities
are  posed  by  the  international  art  market  selling  mainly  to  institutions  and

Tourism  and  Cultura  Resources in  the Pays Dogon, Mali

25

Figure 4.  Artwork for  sale
to visitors, including a
carved granary door.

16.  Federal  Archaeology,
'Mali  gets  a  Hand'.
Federal Archaeology
Report, Winter  1993.
Washington: US
National  Parks  Service,
p . l l.

17.  M. Dembele  & J.D.
van  der  Waals,  'Looting
the  antiquities  of Mall'.
Antiquity,  vol.65,  1991.
pp.904-905.

18.  D.  Evans-Pritchard.
'Ancient  Art  In  Modern
Context',  Annals of
Tourism Research, vol.20,
1993. pp.9-31.

19. B. Trigger.
'Alternative
Archaeologies:
nationalist  colonialist,
imperialist'. Man, vol.19,
1984. pp.335-370.

20. P. Boniface,
Managing Quality Cultural
Tourism,  London:
Routledge. 1995: F.M.
Fladmark  (ed)  Cultural
Tourism, London:
Donhead.  1994.

21.  M. Shackley. 'When
Is the Past? Authenticity
and  the commoditization
of heritage'.  Tourism
Management, vol.15,
no.5.  1994. pp.172-173.

22. A. Walle, 'Tourism
and Traditional People:
forging  equitable
strategies'. Journal of
Travel Research. Winter
1993. pp.14-19: B.
Simpson, 'Tourism  and
Tradition: from healing
to heritage'. Annals of
Tourism Research, vol.20,
1993. pp.164-181.

connoisseurs  but 
tourism  has  become  a  major  factor.  Antiquities  are,
theoretically,  objects  produced  in  an  unreclaimable  past  with  tribal  arts  rarely
classified  as  antiquities  for  that  reason  since  even  if  very  old  they  represent  a
living  not  a  dead  culture.18  For  the  visitor  a  piece  of  ethnic  art  collected  in  a
journey  evokes  a  cultural  otherness  emphasising  the  cultural  and  temporal
distance  between  host  and  guest,  as  well  as  evoking  the  nature  of  the  visitor
experience. However,  as Trigger  19  emphasised,  this cultural  gap means  that  the
object may be seen merely as a curiosity or a commodity rather than  an essential
building brick of social identity. Since a tourist visit is essentially intangible  20  the
purchase  of  a  souvenir  or  artwork  imparts  tangibility  to  the  process  as  well  as
enabling the visitor to feel that  he has obtained  possession  of a  small part  of the
cultural  heritage of his hosts. The more distant  that  culture is from  his own  the
more necessary such a purchase seems to become. Many visitors to Mali are from
European  backgrounds  whose  grounding  in  the  civilisations  of  west  Africa  is
likely to be shaky.  Mali offers  little in  the  way of tourist  facilities  and  part  of its
attraction  is the perceived  authenticity  of its tourist  destinations  and  the  chance
of  seeing  authentic  African  culture.21  A  souvenir  of  that  culture  is  imperative.
Fortunately  for  the visitor,  much  of the  cultural  heritage  of Mali (woodcarvings,
terracotta,  metalwork)  is  readily  portable,  being  solid,  easy  to  pack  but  quite
hard-wearing.

Although  collecting  has  always  been  a  motivation  for  travel  (whether
collecting  antiquities,  souvenirs  or  photographs)  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish
between  travellers  who  collects  opportunistically  when  they  see  something  that
attracts  them  and  the  serious collector  or  dealer  who  has  a  clear  sense of what
they  want  and  the  value  of  the  object.  The  relationship  between  tourism' and
antiques  collection  can  be traced  back to  pre-classical times. However,  it is only
since tourism  became  a  highly popular  activity  during  the  past  thirty  years and
the numbers of tourists with relatively large disposable incomes and the ability to
reach  hitherto  inaccessible  destinations  increased,  that  the  role  of  tourist  as
collector has become prominent. There are many criticisms of the ways in which
tourists  think  that  they  can  acquire  and  understand  the  past  through  retail
transactions. The purchase of a real antiquity  gives the purchaser control over a
small piece  of the  past,  rather  than  a  distant  contact.  The very  phrase  'cultural
property', universally  used to refer  to  antiquities, indicates  that  objects  are to be
treated as commodities.

Many  traditional  artisan  groups  (including  Dogon  carvers)  who  copy
antiquities  for  sale  to  visitors  see  this  activity  as  an  acceptable  perpetuation  of
their ancient culture, combined with the chance to make some money. Moreover,
there  is  a  very  grey  area  between  what  is  an  antiquity  and  what  is  a
reproduction  and the critical sense of time may not be present in the host  culture
which sees the difference  as essentially financial rather than  temporal. This being
so,  it  is just  as legitimate  for  the  Dogon  to  sell  a  good  reproduction  which  will
perform  the  same  function  of  allowing  the  visitor  to  purchase  a  solid  piece of
traditional  culture.  A great  deal  of work  has  been  done  on  the  anthropology of
tourist  art,  the  impact  of  tourism  on  art  and  the  commodification  of  culture.22
Many  people,  including  the  writer,  question  the  assumption  that  a  visitor  may
ever have an  authentic  cultural  experience. Making objects  look  older than  they
are is a response to tourists' preferences  suggesting that  a visible sense of history

26

Myra  Shackley

23.  M. Sagoff,  The
Aesthetic  Status  of
Forgeries',  Journal of
Aesthetics and  Art
Criticism,  vol.35. 1976.
pp.169-180.

24. J. Pronk. 'Fighting
poverty Is important for
the safeguarding of
cultural heritage', pp.9-
14 In H. Leyten (ed)
Illicit Traffic in Cultural
Property, Royal Tropical
Institute. The
Netherlands. 1994.

is significant  for  the tourist. A fake is merely an  object  for which  a false  identity
has  been  claimed  and  this  is  a  concept  which  may  be  foreign  to  the  artisan.23
Since there is only a finite supply of Dogon art, the making and selling of replicas
is  surely  to  be  encouraged,  unless  it  takes  the  form  of  deliberate  deception.
Fortunately,  Dogon  replicas  are  close  copies  of  the  originals  (albeit  with  a
different  patina  and  often  executed  with  less  skill)  and  airport  art  has  yet  to
arrive  in  the  Bandiagara  escarpment.  In  the  Dogon  country  the  distinction
between  original  and  reproduction,  ancient  and  modern  is  quite  clear  from  the
asking  price  since  the  Dogon  seem .to  have  considerable  faith  in  the  financial
abilities  of  the  buyer.  Some  villagers  claim  that  very  few  genuine  antiquities
remain  with most already having gone to dealers.

The  escalation  of  art  pillage  in  the  Pays  Dogon  is  thought  by  Malian
archaeologists  to  be  directly  related  both  to  deteriorating  living  conditions  after
the droughts of  1974 and to increased  visitor numbers stimulating  awareness of
Dogon art. This is directly.related to deteriorating living conditions after  droughts
since  1974  plus  the  growth  of  the  gallery  market.  Dogon  antiquities  are  sold
during  weekly markets in Djenne and Mopti and sponsored pillage takes place by
groups  of Dogon,  recruited  and  employed by dealers. Some antique dealers cater
especially  for  tourists,  many  with  replicas  in  the  front  of the  shop  and  original
material  hidden  and  available  only  at  a  very  high  price.  Poverty  creates
opportunities  for  illicit traders  to buy  art  at  low prices24  and  in  the Pays Dogon
culture is not only threatened by the theft  of art treasures but also by the way in
which development interaction  and co-operation take place. The Dogon are being
robbed of their cultural heritage, albeit with their active collaboration,  and losing
their collective memory since the existential foundation  of culture is lost if people
have to live with a partially-recorded past underpinning the cultural dynamics of
the  present.  Among  the  Dogon  a  profound  concern  for  family  means  that
individuals  can  trace  their  relationship  to  virtually  every  other  person  in  the
village. Full village membership  allows  access  to village lands passed  down by a
traditional  landholding  system,  with  infield  plots  managed  as  communal
resources  held in trust by certain  seniors. The complex Dogon rules for  access to
land make for harmony and cohesion, one of the key factors which have enabled
them  to  survive  so long  in  such  a  harsh  environment.  Contemporary  pressures
have  produced  a  different  set  of  historical  constructs  and  priorities.  However,
local  people  need  to  decide  what  elements  of  culture  are  important  to  them,  as
cultural  identity  is not  static  and  the  contemporary  culture  of the  Dogon  is just
as  valid  as  that  of  the  17th  century.  Despite  having  successfully  resisted  the
pressures of 19th-century  colonialism for so long it may be that Dogon culture is
more  fragile  when  confronted  with  the  commercial  realities  of  the  late  20th
century.  What  is  needed  is  a  strong  international  educational  effort  directly
affecting  all the players in this regrettable situation, including the Dogon.

Tourism  and  Cultura  Resources  in the Pays  Dogon, Mali

27


