International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Climate Change: How Should the World Heritage
Convention Respond?

Greg Terrill

To cite this article: Greg Terrill (2008) Climate Change: How Should the World Heritage
Convention Respond?, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14:5, 388-404, DOI:
10.1080/13527250802284388
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250802284388

Published online: 28 Aug 2008.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 620

Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 14, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 388–404

Climate Change: How Should the 
World Heritage Convention Respond?
Greg Terrill

145000000September 2008
GregTerrill
Greg.Terrill@deh.gov.au
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_328605.sgm
10.1080/13527250802284388
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

The World Heritage Convention has been considering how best to respond to the impacts
of climate change. This poses a number of challenges, aside from the complexities of climate
change  itself.  The  Convention  is  not  accustomed  to  addressing  broad,  interdisciplinary
matters  beyond  World  Heritage;  it  has  not  historically  had  strong  links  with  other
conventions  outside  UNESCO;  it  has  relatively  few  resources;  and  climate  change  will
result  in  escalating  change,  whereas  the  World  Heritage  Convention  is  based  upon  a
presumption of relative stability and manageable change. Responding to climate change in
the longer term will require a clear definition of the role of the World Heritage Convention
in this area, and new types of expertise within the Convention process. This article reviews
these and other issues to chart a forward path.

Keywords: World Heritage; Climate Change; International Convention

Introduction

In August 2002 Europe experienced massive flooding in which over 100 people died,
thousands  were  displaced,  and  the  damage  cost  some  €15  billion.  Perhaps  a  dozen
World Heritage Sites were affected.1 Re-insurer SwissRe considers it to be one of the
world’s larger insurance events.2

Whether or not it caused this particular disaster—attribution for such specific events
is not possible—projections indicate that climate change will increase the frequency of
extreme weather.3 Heritage, both cultural and natural, is being and will increasingly be
affected by climate change. Not all of the impacts will be negative, but many will need
active management at World Heritage Sites.

Greg Terrill, Canberra. Correspondence to: gterrill@yahoo.com
The views in this article are those of the author alone, and in no way are to be taken as related to the Australian
government.

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250802284388

International Journal of Heritage Studies

389

This  article  focuses  on  the  challenges  facing  the  World  Heritage  Convention  in
addressing  climate  change.  The  focus  here  is  at  the  international  institutional  level;
the  analysis  is  one  of  political  science  and  international  affairs,  not  climate  change
science  or  site-level  management.  The  reasons  for  this  are  twofold.  Firstly,  the
international  institutional  issues  are  the  subject  of  recent  debate  within  the  World
Heritage Convention. Secondly, amid the wealth of information on World Heritage
and on climate change there is little, if any, literature on how at the international level
the two issues might interact.

The World Heritage Convention

UNESCO  adopted  the  World  Heritage  Convention  in  1972.  It  has  near  universal
membership.4  Few  other  treaties  have  managed  so  successfully  to  create  order  and
value that prior to their existence did not exist. World Heritage is a highly sought-after
designation which can bring material rewards; it is not uncommon to read of concerns
that the designation can lead to places being ‘loved to death’.5

The Convention’s supreme governing body, the General Assembly, meets during the
biennial  sessions  of  UNESCO’s  General  Conference.  Between  General  Assemblies,
decisions under the Convention are made by an annual meeting of the 21-member
World Heritage Committee (WHC). Committee meetings generally attract some 700
or so participants, mainly governmental and non-governmental heritage experts.

The Convention aims to achieve the preservation and transmission of heritage to
future generations.6 It has several basic tools. The WHC decides whether to list a place
as World Heritage—based upon whether a place has ‘outstanding universal value’, a
term that has been explored in the literature and elaborated through case law.7 Expert
non-governmental advisory bodies provide independent advice to help evaluate and
monitor places. An ‘in Danger’ list records places ‘threatened by serious and specific
dangers’; places under threat may receive assistance from a World Heritage Fund which
distributes around US$4 million annually—an amount that could readily be spent at
any one of the 30 or so places on the in Danger list at any one time. Places may also be
deleted from the list.

The  Convention’s  provisions  are  elaborated  in  Operational  Guidelines,  which
detail regular periodic reporting processes, supplemented by reactive monitoring to
investigate specific issues. The Guidelines also outline how to prepare nominations,
alter site boundaries, and other operational issues.

In the past 35 years, 878 sites have been inscribed on the World Heritage List.8 Thirty
properties currently sit on the ‘in Danger’ list, and a number have been rehabilitated
from  there.  A  global  strategy,  agreed  in  1994,  came  into  force  in  2000.  Analysis
underpinning  the  global  strategy  had  identified  that  there  was  a  preponderance  of
European Christian monuments; that there were insufficient natural sites; and that the
Pacific, with only a couple of sites out of the hundreds across the world, was greatly
underrepresented.9  Since  then  the  nomination  process  has  until  recently  limited
cultural nominations to one per country per year; natural nominations are a greater
proportion of all nominations; as of January 2008 only two Pacific countries were not

390 G. Terrill

members of the Convention; and in 2006–2007 a number of nominations from the
Pacific were in preparation or submitted.

Other challenges remain. The Committee at its last meeting took one site off the list,
but the situation there was desperate and there is cause to use this tool more generally.
‘In Danger’ listing, while meant to facilitate assistance, has generally become seen as a
black mark and so is sometimes resisted. The financial basis of the Convention is weak;
the  secretariat  remains  relatively  small,  although  it  has  grown;  and  concerns  persist
about the efficiency of management and administrative processes. The advisory bodies,
particularly  ICOMOS,  struggle  to  find  adequate  resources  and  can  be  subject  to
considerable political pressures. The combination of a weak resource base and major
pressures  to  manage  means  that  the  World  Heritage  process  needs  carefully  to
prioritise where resources are placed.

Finally, the World Heritage process has to date been relatively self-contained, with
little need for interaction with other processes beyond UNESCO. It now faces significant
challenges defining its role in relation to the large and complex international processes
addressing climate change.

The Climate Change Process

The  centre  of  UN  activities  on  climate  change  is  the  United  Nations  Framework
Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). Adopted in 1992, the FCCC is two decades
younger than the World Heritage Convention. In 1997 it was elaborated through the
Kyoto  Protocol.  The  body  of  rule  making  under  the  FCCC  and  its  Protocol  is
considerable and growing. Remarkably, there is universal country membership of the
FCCC.10  Thousands  of  people  attend  the  annual  Conference  of  the  Parties,  with
businesses, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), media and others active in side
events and in the corridors. Annual meetings are akin to trade fairs.

The  FCCC  is  an  autonomous  convention  under  the  UN  system,  with  its  own
governing  conference  that  does  not  report  to  a  higher  authority.  There  are  many
other  complementary  international  bodies  and  processes,  often  themselves  large  in
size, to address science, to address related environmental and economic activities, and
also to pursue smaller and more specialised questions.

There  are  many  estimates  of  the  economic  scale  of  climate  change  impacts.  One
recent and prominent report made a ‘central estimate’ of 11% of global GDP, with a
range of 5–20% of loss of annual consumption, if there is no action to reduce emis-
sions.11 Other  indicators  convey  the  scale  of  actions  required  to  respond  to  climate
change. The EU’s emissions trading scheme currently covers over 12,000 installations,
and  sees  trades  of  1–3,000,000  units  of  carbon  dioxide  equivalent  daily.  It  is  to  be
expanded in 2008. The Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism anticipates
production of more than 2,600,000,000 units of carbon dioxide equivalent through to
2012.12  These  instruments  are  beginning  to  have  a  pervasive  effect  upon  national
economies.

As  with  economics,  so  with  climate  change  science:  there  are  many  sources  of
information. Many of the major scientific journals regularly carry articles, and the issue

International Journal of Heritage Studies

391

is often widely reported in the press. Because of the complexity of this information,
both to explain any particular physical process (ice melt, cloud formation, etc.) as well
as links between them and the overall climate, together with the need to understand the
importance  of  different  perspectives,  the  international  community  established  the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), to provide ‘an objective source
of information about climate change’.13 The IPCC’s role is periodically to assess on a
transparent  basis  the  latest  scientific,  technical  and  socio-economic  literature.  The
IPCC  reports  represent  the  scientific  consensus  on  climate  change,  rather  than  the
latest developments (peer reviewed or otherwise). Accordingly, it is the IPCC reports—
rather than any particular publication or article—upon which the understanding of
climate change in this paper is based.

Because climate change has consequences for much of the world’s economy, society
and environment, a web of links has formed between the FCCC and other international
conventions.  Some  of  these  are  formal:  the  references  or  guidance  from  the  FCCC
process to the IPCC and to the Global Environment Facility; the consideration by other
conventions of FCCC decisions; inputs made by a number of conventions to the FCCC;
and interactions between secretariats.14 Others are less formal, and include websites
designed  to  cross-reference  decisions  made  by  different  conventions,  as  well  as
countries sending delegates to both the FCCC and meetings of related conventions.15
There are also business, environmental and other NGOs active in the area.

Some links have evolved readily, others have taken time. Despite high hopes, over
the  past  decade  or  more  several  conventions  have  discovered  that  their  own
programmes are marginal in the context of the multiple large agendas characterising
international climate change responses. For some conventions, climate change matters
more  to  them  than  vice  versa.  Climate  change  is,  for  example,  more  important  for
desertification, biodiversity or migratory species than are these three issues for climate
change.  But  in  various  forms—  mitigation  or  reduction  of  emissions,  adaptation,
scientific research and more—addressing climate change will involve many conven-
tions contributing specialist expertise.

The Relationship between World Heritage and Climate Change

Natural cycles of climate change have always affected some World Heritage properties.
Geological sites such as the Dorset and East Devon Coast in the UK bear witness to the
alteration  in  the  Earth’s  climate  over  millennia.  Even  some  older  cultural  sites  bear
witness—L’Anse aux Meadows in Canada, for example, was the site of Viking contact
with  North  America  before  a  cooler  period  in  the  northern  hemisphere  hampered
ocean  travel.16  Human-induced  climate  change  is  a  more  recent  development,
although it too has impacted upon specific World Heritage Sites. Governments have
taken a number of specific actions in response—the Great Barrier Reef management
authority, for example, has a number of widely praised actions underway to increase
resilience in the face of climate change.17

The interaction between climate change and World Heritage is two way. The fact
that climate change will impact upon World Heritage is clear. In turn, World Heritage

392 G. Terrill

Sites can help illuminate the effects of climate change. World Heritage Sites may also
be among the priority areas for focusing upon adaptation to climate change. While the
issues are linked, neither is exhaustive of areas of interest for the other. There are issues
for World Heritage beyond climate change, and for climate change there are challenges
beyond World Heritage—not least, reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

In considering interactions at a convention level, it is clear that climate change and
World Heritage are not equal partners. The former—whether measured by resources
inside and outside the convention processes; level of interest from diverse constituencies;
span of negotiations; volume of rule making; or attendance at events—dwarfs the latter.
Nationally, the story is comparable. Climate change is often front-page news across
the globe—a 2006 report on the costs of climate change generated enormous media
coverage  worldwide.18  The  issue  regularly  commands  political  attention,  even  if
perhaps  more  in  Europe  and  Japan  than  the  USA,  and  perhaps  more  in  developed
countries than in developing countries. The resources devoted to the two issues within
countries are likewise weighted in favour of climate change. This disparity, founded
upon  an  underlying  difference  in  importance,  is  fundamental  to  understanding  the
relationship between the World Heritage and climate change Conventions.

Bringing the Two Conventions Together—Actions to Date

The WHC has only recently concerned itself with climate change. The issue was first
discussed  in  earnest  in  2005  with  the  presentation  by  several  non-governmental
environmental  organisations  of  petitions  concerning  the  impact  of  climate  change
upon four World Heritage properties.19

From this initial concern, the response has been relatively rapid. The petitions were
discussed at the Committee meeting to which they were presented, and the Committee
called for a meeting of experts to develop a response.20 The strategy that resulted was
an initial and ambitious attempt to address the problem, even if it left issues to be elab-
orated.21

Perhaps  in  recognition  of  these  further  steps,  when  it  endorsed  the  report  the
Committee  also  called  for  a  policy  document  on  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on
World  Heritage  properties.  The  resulting  document  was  adopted  by  the  General
Assembly to the World Heritage Convention in late 2007. It includes considerations of: 

(a) synergies between conventions;
(b) identification of future research needs;
(c) legal questions on the role of the World Heritage Convention with regard to suit-

able responses to Climate Change;

(d) linkages to other UN and international bodies dealing with the issues of climate

change;

(e) alternative  mechanisms,  other  than  the  List  of  World  Heritage  ‘in  Danger’,  to

address concerns of international implication, such as climatic change.22

The  document  is  clearly  a  considerable  advance  in  a  short  time  in  responding  to
complex questions. But the task of defining the role of the WHC in relation to climate
change continues. On role definition alone, further work will also be needed to clarify

International Journal of Heritage Studies

393

how the WHC might actually interact with the FCCC and other international climate
change processes; link World Heritage and climate change at the domestic level; and
prioritise  climate  change  in  relation  to  other  threats  to  properties.  With  scarce
resources, the latter question is particularly important. There are further questions, not
least at the level of responding to the actual impacts of climate change.

Issues Involved in Moving to an Integrated Approach

The  five  issues  that  the  policy  document  covers  are  important.  They  and  other  key
matters are considered below. The policy document, like the strategy before it, is the
start of a process to define how the Convention should relate to international climate
change activities. If the pattern followed by other environmental conventions is any
guide, further iterative thinking will be needed in coming years.

International Governance

Perhaps the first challenge relates to the nature of the international system. National
governments have a single head, and cabinets are relatively efficient mechanisms to
achieve policy consistency. The UN system has neither of these advantages. The Secretary
General may appoint the heads of UN internal departments, and also external funds and
programmes  (e.g.  the  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees,  the  UN  Development
Program), but they report to their own boards. Specialised agencies (e.g. the World Trade
Organisation, the International Monetary Fund) are autonomous.23 Rare is the national
government that, by design, does not control the entities that constitute it.

The  FCCC  and  the  WHC  are  separately  established,  and  report  to  no  superior
international body—although the WHC is ambiguously nested within the UNESCO
system,  and  the  head  of  its  secretariat  is  appointed  by  the  Director  General  of
UNESCO. They share no single authority that can make decisions about their work,
and have no cabinet through which to coordinate. Coordination and linkage are not,
therefore, straightforward. It is further complicated by the non-congruent intersection
of climate change with World Heritage—as outlined above, neither is an easy category
for the other to embrace directly.

How, then, should coordination and linkage occur? There is a seductive idea that if
only  international  coordination  were  well  established,  then  all  other  linkages  might
follow. International coordination can help, and its absence can hinder, but it is not
the full answer. International secretariats commonly have one person to cover many
countries.  The  secretariat  to  the  World  Heritage  Convention  does  not  even  have  a
full-time  officer  to  cover  an  area  covering  one-third  of  the  world’s  surface,  the
Pacific—and  this  when  the  Pacific  is  a  current  priority  for  action.  International
organisations are ultimately directed by their member states; effective coordination at
the international level requires coherent national policy making, and then multilateral
agreement.

There is no substitute for national coordination. The national level is where the bulk
of decisions are made affecting resource allocation for both World Heritage and for

394 G. Terrill

climate change, and where the main practical actions need to occur. There is a role for
both Conventions to reinforce national-level interaction, although there are clear limits
as to how far any encouragement can go. Facilitating coordination within countries is
messy, as it involves complex domestic details that vary between countries and over
time. In many countries, climate change comes under the environment ministry, and
World Heritage under the cultural ministry, and coordination between the two is not
always strong. The coordination context for Tuvalu, a least-developed country which
is vulnerable to climate change and has been active in the FCCC, but which has not
ratified the World Heritage Convention, is very different from a developed country such
as New Zealand that can coordinate well internally across these and other conventions.
The World Heritage Convention can ensure that its national-level focal point contacts
are clearly identified and kept up to date. It can encourage the FCCC to do the same.
Both Conventions could encourage mutual contact at the national level. In addition,
the  World  Heritage  Convention  could  establish  regular  contact  with  the  FCCC  at
secretariat level, and perhaps attend key FCCC meetings. This type of interaction can
be useful, but is more likely to enhance knowledge than bring change. The Conventions
could  also  encourage  opportunities  for  experts  on  the  two  issues  to  come  together
internationally,  within  budgetary  and  other  constraints.  As  international  meetings
involve expensive travel, relatively few can attend, so they can directly inform fewer
people than meetings within each country where the majority of people typically work
in the same city.

Overall,  the  World  Heritage  Convention  is  considerably  smaller  than  the  climate
change process, and has fewer pressures bearing upon it. World Heritage should expect
to work harder to fit into the climate change process, rather than the reverse.

World Heritage: Preservation and Change

The World Heritage Convention envisages the gradual alteration of sites. Natural sites
cannot be separated from evolution; both natural and cultural sites face challenges from
growing human impacts. The Convention’s mechanisms are directed at keeping change
within limits that do not compromise the outstanding universal values of places. But,
over the longer term, climate change will threaten the outstanding universal values of
many places. This will require the Convention to ask questions and mobilise mechanisms
that it has largely avoided.

The discussion on climate change within the Convention will need to identify how
much  climate  change  can  be  tolerated  before  unacceptable  impacts  on  outstanding
universal values occur. It may also pose issues about the adequacy of site boundaries
and how the Convention might accommodate change to boundaries. These are general
issues that are applicable beyond climate change. But if climate change provides an
impetus  to  work  through  these  issues,  that  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  Convention.
Whilst climate change is already affecting World Heritage Sites, the effects are generally
not yet large, and if the need is pressing it is not because climate change is about to
require, for example, any sites to be de-listed. Climate change projections are often cast
over  a  100-year  timeframe,  and  impacts  become  more  marked  as  this  period

International Journal of Heritage Studies

395

progresses. During the next few years climate change will be an increasingly important
prospective threat to the values of World Heritage Sites. Other issues will continue to
require more immediate responses, even though climate change cannot be ignored.

For the credibility of World Heritage, as much as for planning responses to climate
change,  the  operation  of  the  more  difficult  parts  of  the  Convention  needs  to  be
addressed. Setting criteria for determining loss of outstanding universal value would
assist  thinking  about  relative  priorities  for  policy  attention—for  example,  between
climate  change  and  other  more  familiar  issues.  Agreed  benchmarks  can  help  with
making decisions in situations where it is currently too difficult to do so. Only one site
has  been  de-listed,  and  the  mechanism  requires  further  consideration.  Clear
frameworks can help avoid procedural complications when difficult decisions loom.

These problems are not new, but to date the threats to sites from conflict, develop-
ment or tourism have been seen as particular to a site. If climate change provides the
impetus to address the underlying questions, then the Convention will be the stronger
as a result.

How Does Climate Change Relate to Existing Threats to World Heritage?

As a group, World Heritage properties face many threats. Almost all of the 30 places
currently on the list of World Heritage in Danger are included as a result of threats
such as war or civil unrest, and development activities. Many are cultural sites faced
with poor management, challenges from development, or worse. The Bamiyan Valley,
Afghanistan, has suffered from abandonment, military action and deliberate dynamit-
ing.  Current  dangers  include  risk  of  imminent  collapse  of  remaining  fragments,
further  deterioration  of  murals,  looting  and  illicit  excavation.  Parts  of  the  site  are
inaccessible  because  of  the  presence  of  anti-personnel  mines.  Another  site,  the
Galapagos  Islands,  a  natural  site  in  Ecuador,  faces  a  different  range  of  problems:
increased tourism; assault of park staff; risk of entry of alien species combined with a
decline in the number of quarantine agents and phytosanitary inspectors; large-scale
illegal logging; and illegal fishing.24

Urgent  responses  are  needed  to  address  these  threats.  By  comparison,  climate
change is currently a less immediate challenge, even where it does threaten sites. The
Kathmandu valley, Nepal, faces threats from human activities as well as climate change.
One of the reasons for the inscription of the property on the ‘in Danger’ list in 2003 was
that  rapid  urban  development  had  led  to  large-scale  demolition  of  traditional
buildings. Six of the seven monument zones had been partially or significantly lost.
Over  the  past  few  years,  further  decline  has  been  halted,  and  in  2007  the  site  was
removed  from  the  ‘in  Danger’  list.  While  there  are  significant  concerns  about  the
impact of the melting of glaciers in the Himalayas above the Kathmandu valley, which
in time have the potential for widespread impacts, it remains that development effects
have in recent years had a much greater and faster impact than climate change will have
for decades to come.

More such cases could be cited. Many sites face pressures that threaten their values
at an intensity and on a timescale that dwarfs the current threat from climate change.

396 G. Terrill

Where climate change differs is that over the long term it will impact most if not all
properties,  and  with  increasing  consequences  as  time  progresses.  It  will  exacerbate
some existing problems, and introduce others. Unlike existing threats, it promises to
affect virtually all properties in some way, although these effects will vary in timing,
nature and intensity between properties. In some cases the impact might be gradual—
sea level rise, for example, will be slow if inexorable. In other cases damage may be
sudden and unexpected, as from storms outside the range of previously experienced
events. Beyond the immediate physical effects, climate change will affect societies in
ways  that  are  not  easy  to  foretell;  population  movements  and  other  social  and
economic changes emerge less readily from computer models than do, for example,
temperature rises. It threatens over the longer term to become the greatest problem
facing World Heritage.

There is, accordingly, no single World Heritage response to the impacts of climate
change. This is as true at the level of individual properties as it is at the national and
international level. At the same time, climate change is not currently the most significant
threat. Currently, the direct threats to properties come from more familiar sources. This
is likely to continue for some time, and the scale of the response to the impacts of climate
change needs to be balanced with the limited resources available.

Is ‘World Heritage’ a Useful Unity for Climate Change Response Measures?

A second challenge arises less from the nature of climate change, and more from the
nature  of  World  Heritage.  From  glacial  parks  to  historic  monuments  to  marine
environments, and more, the 878 places are united not by physical characteristics but
by the judgement that each place possesses ‘outstanding universal value’.

Because  of  its  heterogeneity,  World  Heritage  is  not  always  a  useful  category  for
action. From a perspective centred on climate change, World Heritage is likely to be a
sub-set  spanning  several  categories.  World  Heritage  is  most  relevant  to  work  on
impacts, vulnerability and adaptation rather than, for example, emissions mitigation,
carbon credit trading, or emissions monitoring and reporting.

World Heritage is one among a number of mechanisms for designating protected
areas  (there  are  many  others,  including  the  Ramsar  Convention  on  Wetlands  and
UNESCO’s  Man  and  the  Biosphere  programme),  or  particular  sub-set  issues  (e.g.
biodiversity or desertification). Work on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation under
the  FCCC  needs  to  provide  tools  to  help  each  of  these  mechanisms  act  on  climate
change most effectively. But this work should focus upon types of impact, not on the
legal instruments that divide categories that face similar impacts. For example, FCCC
work  on  impacts,  vulnerability  and  adaptation  would  sensibly  focus  upon  different
ecosystems, rather than on the regimes that protect them or the environmental treaties
that  govern  them.  Two  very  similar  ecosystems  may  have  different  protected  area
designations for reasons that have little to do with climate change. Canada’s Waterton
Biosphere Reserve overlaps the World Heritage listed Waterton Glacier International
Peace Park that straddles the US–Canadian border. It does not make sense to consider
these differently simply on account of their different protected area designations.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

397

Would it be sensible, though, to make more explicit reference to World Heritage
within the climate change context? If World Heritage is intended as an analytic category,
the answer is ‘No’. The answer may be ‘Yes’ in some other respects. For example, World
Heritage places are often iconic, and draw attention to issues in ways that less remarkable
places or processes do not.

Using World Heritage as an illustrative example need not mean engaging in a crude
form  of  environmental  crusading.  The  World  Heritage  Convention  has  to  steer  a
difficult course here. It is clear that some organisations wish to use the iconic status of
World  Heritage  Sites  to  push  for  further  international  action  on  greenhouse  gas
emissions mitigation.25 Many governments are unlikely to agree to this. Ultimately,
one international convention lobbying for stronger action by another amounts—at the
domestic  level—to  little  more  than  governments  lobbying  themselves.  Rather,  the
World  Heritage  Convention  could  make  the  case,  to  the  FCCC  and  elsewhere,  that
when  the  climate  change  process  uses  examples  to  highlight  the  impacts  of  climate
change, some of these examples might feature World Heritage Areas.

Any  literature  about  climate  change  that  is  generated  by  the  World  Heritage
Convention  must  be  carefully  calibrated.  While  the  Convention  can  illustrate  the
impacts of climate change upon World Heritage, it must avoid being seen as an interest
group and taking sides on debates that properly occur under other conventions. On
grounds of expertise alone, the World Heritage Convention is well advised to avoid
moving  from  describing  problems  and  possible  adaptation  responses  at  World
Heritage Sites to advocating particular mitigation levels or approaches.

Expertise

Climate  change  is  complex,  both  scientifically  and  in  terms  of  the  international
processes.  There  is  considerable  expertise  globally.  But  internationally  there  is  very
little expertise in the intersection of climate change and World Heritage at the level of
international processes. There have been two meetings to date on climate change and
World Heritage. The first occurred in March 2006, attracting around 50 participants.
Most  attendees  were  from  the  World  Heritage  community;  a  few  invited  experts
brought specific climate change expertise.26 This latter expertise was predominantly in
climate  science,  leavened  with  some  exposure  to  the  FCCC  and  other  international
climate  change  processes.  The  second  meeting,  in  February  2007,  had  a  lower
representation of participants with knowledge of climate change science or interna-
tional processes.27

This mix of expertise indicates that participants in such meetings need to improve
their knowledge of climate change, and their contact with climate change colleagues
domestically.  This  need  not  be  a  fundamental  problem,  but  rather  a  matter  of
orientation. As the World Heritage process progressively refines its role in responding
to the impacts of climate change, the ever-greater clarity will simplify the acquisition of
specific knowledge.

Fortunately, adapting to climate change may not be as complex as understanding it.
A well-managed site should be able to plan for a range of anticipated threats without

398 G. Terrill

necessarily  understanding  all  aspects  of  these  threats.  By  analogy,  it  may  not  be
necessary for Macchu Piccu to understand Peru’s international tourist market for the
site managers to be able to implement management strategies that limit the impacts of
rapidly increasing tourism.

Research

Much  of  the  considerable  literature  on  the  impacts  of  climate  change  is  of  general
relevance.28 Projections of altered rainfall or wind patterns are as applicable to agri-
cultural  practices  or  wind  energy  installations  as  they  are  to  World  Heritage  Site
management. Adaptation to climate change is also underpinned by a sizeable litera-
ture, much of it also relevant to World Heritage.29

The paucity of cross-over expertise means that it is not straightforward for the World
Heritage community to absorb this literature. The challenge for World Heritage is to
identify what research already exists and where this leaves gaps; to articulate interests
and priorities to fill these gaps; and to bring these directions to the attention of the
research community. This process has begun, although efforts are hampered by the
challenge of absorbing the voluminous climate change literature. The most obvious
gap, already identified, is that there has been relatively little examination of the impacts
of  climate  change  upon  built  heritage.30  There  has  also  been  little  consideration  of
impacts upon indigenous heritage.

At  the  multilateral  level,  the  IPCC  is  the  key  climate  change  science  body,  but  it
assesses  rather  than  conducts  research.  In  2007  it  concluded  a  six-year  assessment
programme, and new assessment processes that may be relevant to World Heritage may
not take place for several years. The largest climate change research programmes are
funded by the EU (by individual countries and by the Union), Japan and the USA; the
US budget alone amounted to just under US$2 billion in 2004.31 Research bodies are
generally established to respond to domestic priorities, so maximum impact will be
achieved if individual countries promote World Heritage as a priority research area.
Much of the effort to meet World Heritage research needs must occur nationally, where
the influence of the World Heritage Convention is limited. Most climate change research
will continue to address topics other than World Heritage specifically—but much will
remain of direct relevance to World Heritage. Processes under the Convention can bring
countries  together  to  identify  collective  World  Heritage  research  priorities,  as  has
already started to happen, and the Convention bodies can make representations about
these  priorities.  As  is  broadly  recognised,  the  Convention  itself  is  not  equipped  to
undertake research.

Uncertainty in Projections of Climate Change

Adapting to climate change is, as the IPCC has described, a process of ‘decision making
under uncertainty’.32 This can be frustrating. If it was known where in the range of
1.1–6.4 degrees Celsius the temperature was likely to rise, we would be better able to
calibrate  the  strength  of  response.  Likewise,  the  difference  between  18  and  59  cm

399
matters  when  low  level  areas  consider  responses  to  sea-level  rise.33  Certainty  assists
planning,  and  so  does  detailed  information  at  a  local  level.  Neither  is  currently
available; certainty is perhaps inherently not able to be delivered.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

The secondary and tertiary effects of climate change will similarly continue to be
imprecisely specified. How species and ecosystems will adapt to altered climates can be
estimated, but lack of detailed knowledge about precise responses is compounded by
the range of possible climate scenarios. The response of social and economic systems is
equally  complex.  Even  as  some  aspects  can  be  anticipated—people  will  move  from
flooded deltas—others, such as how much societies will in the future choose to spend
on World Heritage under threat, are not.

Uncertainty  about  the  future  will  continue,  even  as  more  efforts  are  devoted  to
trying to reduce it. This produces a burden on the nature of response measures. They
need to cope with a range of likely impacts, and to be readily updated as knowledge
increases.  Responses  by  the  WHC  to  the  impacts  of  climate  change  should  avoid
locking in expensive options, and avoid foreclosing alternative pathways that might be
followed in the future.

Mitigation

There have been calls for the World Heritage Convention to take action in relation to
the mitigation, or limitation, of greenhouse gas emissions.34 As the strategy adopted by
the Committee in 2006 recognised, the FCCC is the UN instrument through which
mitigation strategies are addressed.35

As  World  Heritage  Sites  produce  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  so  there  may  be
possibilities to reduce them. But the possibilities are unlikely to be significant. World
Heritage  Sites  are  small  in  proportion  to  the  overall  land  area  of  the  world
(emissions from World Heritage Marine Sites can be discounted as being essentially
trivial),  and  in  terms  of  world  economic  activity.  They  are  rarely  the  location  for

Table 1 Major sources of global emissions

Sector

Electricity and heat
Manufacture and construction
Transport
Other fuel use
Fugitive emissions
Industrial processes
Land-use change and forestry
Agriculture
Waste

Percentage global emissions

25
11
12
9
4
3
19
14
4

Note: totals in the table have been rounded to the nearest percentage.
Source: World Resources Institute, Climate Indicators and Analysis Tool, GHG Emissions by Sector in 
2000 (excludes land-use change), available from http://cait.wri.org/

400 G. Terrill

activities  that  produce  significant  emissions  (see  Table  1  for  the  major  sources  of
global emissions).

Where World Heritage Sites do undertake activities that produce emissions, there
may  be  some  scope  for  efficiencies—better  insulation  of  buildings,  more  efficient
appliances,  and  so  forth.  These  steps  should  be  considered  as  part  of  normal
management  planning.  But  it  could  be  counterproductive  to  urge  any  particular
actions out of a national context. Scarce resources should not, for example, be spent on
marginal emissions reductions if they come at the expense of important conservation
measures.  Mitigation  actions  undertaken  at  a  World  Heritage  Site  will  lead  to  zero
discernable  reduction  in  climate  change  impacts  at  that  site.  Actions  to  reduce
emissions may be local, but the chemistry of climate change is global, and the vast bulk
of emissions occur outside World Heritage Sites.

Some World Heritage Sites could be promoted as ‘sinks’, and gain carbon credits for
sequestering carbon from the atmosphere and storing it in trees. The scope for this is
limited. The Kyoto Protocol, and other major mechanisms such as the World Bank’s
Biocarbon  Fund,  only  accredit  activities  up  to  the  year  2012—not  at  this  stage
beyond—that  are  ‘additional’  to  those  that  would  otherwise  occur.36  As  World
Heritage Areas are already, by definition, protected, no credits could be claimed for
continuing this protection, even if the protection did sequester carbon. A niche oppor-
tunity may exist where trees could be planted on pieces of land that were not previously
treed, and where this could be done in ways that would not affect the World Heritage
values of a site.

For such activities to be accepted under the Kyoto Protocol or any other interna-
tional scheme, they would need to be integrated into national approaches to mitigation
and  sequestration.  The  issue  becomes  less  a  World  Heritage  one  than  a  matter  of
consistency with national approaches to climate change, and adherence to the rules of
international carbon trading schemes. To represent sinks as either a significant oppor-
tunity or a particular World Heritage issue is to confuse mandates or to raise expecta-
tions unrealistically.

The FCCC encourages, and the Kyoto Protocol requires for certain countries, emis-
sion mitigation. Both instruments minimise specifying how, where, when (within a five-
year time band, in the case of Kyoto) or what sort of mitigation should occur.37 There
are strong reasons for this, not least the recognition of national sovereignty in such
domestic decisions. It is also economically more efficient for individual countries, which
have the best information about the most efficient options, to make such decisions.

The World Heritage Convention should respect these principles, and avoid urging
any form of mitigation actions at World Heritage Sites. The Convention has an interest
in  seeing  that  emissions  mitigation  occurs,  but  it  has  no  mandate  or  expertise  to
become involved in decisions about how, where, when or what sort of mitigation. In
relation  to  mitigation,  its  role  does  not  extend  beyond  registering  its  interest.  The
mandate and the expertise for any further level of detail reside in other conventions,
particularly the  FCCC. Instead, the key  area where the World Heritage Convention
needs to be active is in ensuring that sites are as well equipped as possible to adapt to
the inevitable impacts of climate change.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

401

Adaptation

The IPCC defines adaptation as ‘adjustment in natural or human systems in response
to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits
beneficial  opportunities’.  It  distinguishes  various  types  of  adaptation,  including
anticipatory and reactive adaptation, private and public adaptation, and autonomous
and planned adaptation.38

The major international programme of activity on adaptation to climate change, the
FCCC’s Nairobi work programme, is able to encompass World Heritage, but it does
not  mention  it.39  This  is  typical  rather  than  anomalous.  Understandably,  many
governments  pay  more  attention  to  issues  such  as  food  production  and  economic
development  than  they  do  to  World  Heritage  when  responding  to  climate  change
impacts. The challenge for World Heritage is not so much to attempt to alter these
priorities, which are firmly rooted in domestic political realities, but to work within
them. A focus by governments upon development need not be inconsistent with World
Heritage.

Adaptation is perhaps the key responsibility of the World Heritage Convention in
relation  to  climate  change.  The  Convention  has  not  yet  discussed  what  type(s)  of
adaptation  it  might  best  engage  with,  or  encourage  countries  or  site  managers  to
undertake. This discussion is central to the role that the Convention can—and must—
play in relation to climate change. On many other aspects relating to climate change
other actors will be also involved. This is likely to be less so for site-based adaptation,
not least as this is a core responsibility of the World Heritage Convention.

The  challenge  for  the  Convention  is  to  determine  which  aspects  of  adaptation
Convention processes can best address, and which are best left to individual countries.
One action the Convention could undertake is to communicate the tools that already
exist. A number have been developed.40 Some of these are simple, others elaborate and
detailed. While none seems to have been developed with World Heritage in mind, all
have been designed to be sufficiently generic to be useful to a range of situations.

These tools are best employed at the individual site or country level. The Convention
may have a role in assisting their use, but this would not extend beyond training. The
application will be particular to individual sites. Given the relatively low instance of
impacts attributable to climate change to date, this form of adaptation planning fits
into the IPCC’s ‘anticipatory’ mode. Ideally, the Convention will learn as it proceeds,
rather than commit now to action in an area with which it is only becoming familiar.
So  this  might  suffice  for  three  to  five  years,  and  the  course  of  action  can  then  be
evaluated and next steps considered.

Conclusion

Because climate change presents a grander narrative than the piecemeal destruction
arising  from  poor  management,  development  pressures,  or  a  myriad  of  external
influences, it is tempting to view it as the key threat to World Heritage. But climate change
is one of many threats to World Heritage places. Other challenges are currently more

402 G. Terrill

pressing, although over time the balance will shift. Planning for adaptation to climate
change impacts must commence in the short term, although an ongoing challenge will
be to keep the level of effort commensurate with the threat. The most difficult hurdle
will be to get countries to achieve better internal coordination. It may not be exciting,
but the best path for the World Heritage Convention to respond to the impacts of climate
change involves keeping the issue in perspective in relation to other threats, limiting
responses to site-based adaptation, and encouraging domestic coordination.

Notes

1 [1] World Heritage Centre press release of 21 August 2002 lists 10 places plus others on tentative

lists in a preliminary estimate.
SwissRe maintains a ‘Large loss fact file’ at http://www.swissre.com
See generally IPCC, Climate Change 2007.

2 [2]
3 [3]
4 [4] The Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (the

World Heritage Convention) had 184 members as of January 2008.

5 [5] Nadeau, ‘The Curse of Approval’.
6 [6] Article 4 of the World Heritage Convention commits State Parties to ensuring the identifica-
tion, protection, conservation, presentation and transmission to future generations of World
Heritage.  All  references  in  this  and  the  following  paragraph  are  to  the  World  Heritage
Convention. Fund reference is on the World Heritage website.

7 [7] The criteria are elaborated in para. 77 of the Operational Guideline for the Implementation of
the  World  Heritage  Convention.  There  is  a  wealth  of  literature  referenced  on  the  World
Heritage Convention website that relates to elaborating ‘outstanding universal value’.

8 [8] As  at  July  2007—this  will  not  change  until  the  Committee  meets  in  July  2008.  Other

references in this paragraph are to the World Heritage Convention website.
9 [9]
Information on the global strategy is available from http://whc.unesco.org/en/globalstrategy/
10[10] As  at  July  2008  there  were  192  parties  (www.unfccc.int),  the  same  as  the  UN  (http://

www.un.org/members/list.shtml).
Stern, The Economics of Climate Change, summary of conclusions.

11[11]
12[12] EU trading system information is from one of the main broking houses, Natsource (http://
www.natsource.com/markets/index.asp?s=106).  The  Clean  Development  Mechanism
information  is  from  the  website  of  the  Executive  Board  (http://cdm.unfccc.int/Statistics/
index.html).

13[13] This and the following sentence is from http://www.ipcc.ch/about/index.htm
14[14]

In 2002 the FCCC’s Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice invited the IPCC
to revise its guidelines for greenhouse gas inventories (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/13); in 2006 the
Subsidiary  Body  for  Implementation  invited  the  Global  Environment  Facility  to  provide
information relating to the preparation of national communications (FCCC/SBI/2006/28); the
Joint Liaison Group brings together the FCCC, the Convention to Combat Desertification,
and the Convention on Biological Diversity.

15[15] The United Nations Environment Programme maintains a site that focuses on biodiversity

issues across a range of conventions (http://www.svs-unepibmdb.net/).

16[16] Parks  Canada  has  information  about  this  place  on  its  World  Heritage  website  (http://

17[17]

www.pc.gc.ca/progs/spm-whs/itm2-/site1_E.asp).
Information  about  both  the  praise  and  the  actions  to  adapt  to  climate  change  impacts  is
available from http://www.gbrmpa.gov.au/corp_site/info_services/science/climate_change

18[18] Google  records  1,340,000  (15  January  2008)  hits  for  a  search  on  ‘Stern  report  on  climate

change’, and sampling the returns quickly indicates the breadth of interest.
Some background is provided at http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/393/

19[19]

International Journal of Heritage Studies

403

‘Strategy’ in WHC-06/30.COM/7.1.

20[20] World Heritage Convention decision 30COM 7.1 in WHC-06/30.COM/19.
21[21]
22[22] Decision 30 COM 7.1.
23[23]

Some  explanation  of  reporting  lines  is  at  http://www.un.org/Depts/otherprgs.htm.  Traub
outlines the consequences for Secretary General Kofi Annan in The Best Intentions, 70.
See the ‘in Danger’ list at http://whc.unesco.org/en/158/
See,  for  example,  ‘Petition  to  the  World  Heritage  Committee  requesting  inclusion  of
Waterton-glacier international peace park on the list of World Heritage in danger as a result
of climate change and for protective measures and actions’, International Environmental Law
Project, Lewis & Clark Law School, 2006.

24[24]
25[25]

26[26] Assessment  of  the  author,  who  was  present.  See  list  of  participants,  WHC-06/30.COM/7.1,

pp. 19–20.

27[27] Assessment  of  the  author,  who  was  present.  The  participant  list  is  available  from  http://

28[28]
29[29]

whc.unesco.org/uploads/activities/documents/activity-471-11.doc
See bibliographies in IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
See IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Working Group II; and FCCC, ‘Compendium on Methods
and Tools to Evaluate Impacts of, Vulnerability and Adaptation to, Climate Change’, available
from  http://unfccc.int/adaptation/methodologies_for/vulnerability_and_adaptation/items/
2674.php

30[30] Cassar, Climate Change and the Historic Environment.
31[31] United States Government, Climate Change Science Program, Our Changing Planet, table 1.
32[32]
33[33]
34[34] The  strategy,  and  the  International  Environmental  Law  Project  petition  cited  above,  make

IPCC, Climate Change 2001: Mitigation, Summary for Policymakers, 3.
IPCC, Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, 13.

such calls.

35[35] World Heritage Convention WHC-06/30.COM/7.1, para. 18.
36[36]

‘Additional’ has precisely defined meanings in both—see ‘Revised Tool for the Demonstration
and Assessment of Additionality’, annex 5 to the report of the 29th meeting of the FCCC CDM
Executive Board; see also notes on World Bank Biocarbon Fund Training Seminar, 11–13 July
2005, available from http://carbonfinance.org/Router.cfm?Page=Home&ItemID=24675

37[37] Article  4  of  the  Convention  and  Articles  5–8,  12,  and  17  of  the  Protocol  are  key  in  this

38[38]

39[39]

respect.
IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, Appendix 1: ‘Glossary of
Terms’.
‘Nairobi Work Programme on Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change’, in
FCCC/SBSTA/2006/11.

40[40] The  FCCC  website  hosts  a  ‘Compendium  on  Methods  and  Tools  to  Evaluate  Impacts  of,

Vulnerability and Adaptation to, Climate Change’ (reference given above).

References

Cassar,  M.  Climate  Change  and  the  Historic  Environment.  Research  report.  London:  Centre  for

Sustainable Heritage, University College London, 2005.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). www.ipcc.ch
———. Climate Change 2001: Mitigation, Summary for Policymakers, 3. Geneva: IPCC.
———. Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis: Summary for Policymakers.

Geneva: IPCC.

———. Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis. Geneva: IPCC.
———.  Climate  Change  2007:  Working  Group  II:  Impacts,  Adaptation  and  Vulnerability.  Geneva:

IPCC.

———. Climate Change 2007: Working Group III: Mitigation of Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC.

404 G. Terrill

Nadeau, B. ‘The Curse of Approval: If UNESCO Designates it, They Will Come. Does Identifying

World Heritage Sites do More Harm than Good?’ Newsweek, 10–17 April 2006.

Stern, N. The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Traub, J. The Best Intentions: Kofi Annan and the UN in the Era of American World Power. London:

Bloomsbury, 2006.

World Heritage Convention. Documents available from http://whc.unesco.org/
United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change.  Documents  available  from  http://

unfccc.int

United  States  Government,  Climate  Change  Science  Program  and  the  Subcommittee  on  Global
Change Research. Our Changing Planet: The U.S. Climate Change Science Program for Fiscal
Years 2004 and 2005. Washington, DC.


