International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Protecting World Heritage: Regulating Ownership
and Land Use at Angkor Archaeological Park,
Cambodia

Josephine Gillespie

To cite this article: Josephine Gillespie (2009) Protecting World Heritage: Regulating Ownership
and Land Use at Angkor Archaeological Park, Cambodia, International Journal of Heritage Studies,
15:4, 338-354, DOI: 10.1080/13527250902933900
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250902933900

Published online: 17 Jun 2009.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 612

Citing articles: 12 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 15, No. 4, July 2009, pp. 338–354

Protecting World Heritage: Regulating 
Ownership and Land Use at Angkor 
Archaeological Park, Cambodia
Josephine Gillespie

154000000July 2009
JosephineGillespie
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_393562.sgm
10.1080/13527250902933900
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2009Taylor & Francis

j.gillespie@usyd.edu.auThis paper contemplates whether, and in what ways, proprietary interests in land and land
usage are affected by a World Heritage listing, using Angkor Archaeological Park, Cambo-
dia, as the case study. The effect is measured through the identification and synthesis of the
national  legislative  and  local  regulatory  response  to  the  implementation  of  the  World
Heritage listing. Such an analysis illustrates that the listing imposes significant restraints
on  land  use  and  ownership  which  impact  directly  on  the  local  resident  communities  of
Angkor. A breakdown of the regulatory response also highlights the limitations inherent in
the existing regulatory framework. There is a consideration of the concept of ‘ownership’ in
a World Heritage site of ‘outstanding universal value’. In raising these issues, this paper
highlights the challenges facing heritage managers in attempting to marry local needs with
the demands of international heritage protection in the setting of a post-conflict Southeast
Asian nation.

Keywords: World Heritage; Angkor; Cambodia; Law; Land Use; Ownership

Introduction

It is a prerequisite for the bestowing of a World Heritage classification that the sovereign
nation bears the responsibility, inter alia, for the enactment of protective legal provi-
sions.1 However, the national response to the implementation of a World Heritage list-
ing  can  often  result  in  piecemeal  laws,2  especially  with  regard  to  land  use  and  land
ownership which may fail to take adequate account of local values and needs. Sullivan,
for example, writes of the frustration experienced by local communities living within
the World Heritage Willandra Lakes Region of western New South Wales, Australia: 

Josephine Gillespie, Living with Heritage Project, School of Geosciences, University of Sydney, Australia. Address
for correspondence j.gillespie@usyd.edu.au

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2009 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250902933900

International Journal of Heritage Studies

339

… fifteen years of management of the area was characterised by a growing crescendo
of discontent and distress from the local community, including farming families who
grazed sheep in the area and Aboriginal groups with ancestral affiliations. Neither of
these groups had been properly briefed on the significance of the area, and its manage-
ment  for  World  Heritage  values  had  severe  consequences  for  them.  The  graziers
found that their farming practice was severely restricted, and were able to demonstrate
that  their  land  had  fallen  in  value  because  of  these  restrictions  …  The  Aboriginal
community was incensed that their ancestors were being treated as scientific speci-
mens … and that their ownership claims to ancestral land had been overridden by the
concept of universal value.3

This is clearly an unsatisfactory situation both for the resident communities and manage-
ment alike. Left unresolved, issues such as these threaten the long-term protection of
the heritage the regulations were created to protect. For World Heritage site management
across the globe the need to take account of the local resident communities’ connection
to the land they occupy and to establish a regulatory framework which adequately reflects
these needs is essential for the long-term preservation of these valuable sites.4 Of course,
many of the technical reports of the World Heritage advisory bodies (World Conser-
vation Union, IUCN; International Council on Monuments and Sites, ICOMOS; Inter-
national Centre for the Study of Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property,
ICCROM), which provide the assessments of World Heritage sites as part of the periodic
reporting requirements for maintenance of a site on the World Heritage List, highlight
the universal nature of this dilemma for World Heritage site management per se.5

In Cambodia, it is impossible to underestimate the value placed on private property
ownership  after  years  of  civil  and  political  turmoil  in  which  access  to  property  was
restricted. In these circumstances it is timely to review the legal responses to World
Heritage management at Angkor Archaeological Park where the landscape is populated
by  over  100  villages  and  100,000  residents  in  the  two  most  highly  protected  zones,
many of whom occupied the land prior to the World Heritage listing. It is also the case
that the issue of land use and ownership has considerable currency both within the
boundaries of the World Heritage site at Angkor and throughout Cambodia.6 Security
of  tenure  is  of  unparalleled  importance  in  Cambodia,  with  local  and  international
media  regularly  highlighting  the  issue  in  articles  on  land  grabbing,  rising  property
prices  and  corruption  generally.7  Moreover,  the  Royal  Government  of  Cambodia
(RGC) recognises the importance of land to its citizens, especially in the context of a
predominantly rural society with pressing poverty alleviation priorities.8 References to
the need for Cambodians to secure tenure of their land/s are littered throughout policy
documents,  so  much  so  that  the  concept  of  security  of  tenure  has  become  securely
ensconced in the country’s development rhetoric.9

The Importance of Ownership in Cambodia

Arguably, it is in the distinctive Cambodian context of post-civil turmoil that the issue
of security of tenure has become such a high priority for many people. Access to land,
especially for the rural poor, remains a critical issue.10 Indeed, the passing of the revised
2001  Land  Law  has  been  heralded  as  having  very  important  ramifications  for  all

340

J. Gillespie

Cambodians. The complete prohibition on the alienation of private property, and the
collectivisation of all Cambodian property under the Democratic Kampuchea regime
(1975 to 1979),11 created profound and continuing social, economic and demographic
effects. Under subsequent regimes the property ownership situation was not necessar-
ily clear. Chandler described conditions in the 1980s; 

Rural society was a shambles. Villages had been abandoned or torn down … hundreds
of thousands of people had emigrated or been killed … In response the PRK [Peoples
Republic  of  Kampuchea]  instituted  ‘solidarity  groups’  composed  of  several  family
groups, as collective units to cultivate the land.12

Thus, despite the end of the Pol Pot regime in 1979, access to land remained problem-
atic  and  private  property  ownership  remained  elusive.  In  1985  under  the  Peoples
Republic of Kampuchea regime, a law13 was enacted which prohibited the purchase
and sale of land. Indeed, it was not until the late 1980s that ‘new laws … allowed farm-
ers to pass title to land on to their children and householders elsewhere to buy and sell
real estate’.14 In fact, 1989 is a significant year for the reform agenda of the Peoples
Republic of Kampuchea and land reform was highest amongst those issues revisited by
this government.15

Against this background, in which access to land has been restricted and with the
emergence of another political regime in Cambodia after 1992, a further Land Law was
enacted. The haste with which the new regime passed land regulations illustrates that
re-establishing  security  of  tenure  was  amongst  the  highest  of  priorities  at  this  time,
despite the fact that the country was under the temporary administration of the UN.
Yet this law was not without significant shortcomings. Those critical of the law have
commented that it ‘caused many difficulties for judges, land title officials, landowners,
investors and, most commonly, for the rural poor … Less than 20% of the rural poor
have any kind of land titling documents and none have ownership rights’.16

Other commentators suggest the 1992 law was incompatible with the subsequent
1993 Constitution. Such a fundamental conflict resulted in the need to re-write the
Land Law, but it was not until 2001 that a new law was enacted. This 2001 Land Law
substantially  redresses  many  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  1992  law.17  Tracing  the
evolution of land laws from the abolition of private property in the 1970s to the re-
establishment of private property in the current regulations emphasises the fact that
security of tenure has continually been a dominant issue in Cambodian politics. The
gradual development of laws, which increasingly provide improved access to land for
Cambodian citizens, has been a priority for successive governments. The evolution of
the  laws  illustrates  how  the  regulatory  regime  has,  over  time,  attempted  to  further
narrow and define the concept of ownership in a country where the population was
stripped of any land entitlements under the Khmer Rouge regime.

The Location

Angkor Archaeological Park is located in Siem Reap Province on the northern edge of
the expansive Tonle Sap Lake, Cambodia (Figure 1). Angkor is a place of outstanding
archaeological  significance,  with  breathtaking  monuments  dotted  through  an

International Journal of Heritage Studies

341

Figure  1 Map  of  the  Angkor  Archaeological  Park,  Showing  the  Location  of  Modern
Villages in Relation to Known Archaeological Monuments, and the Protected Zones 1 and
2. Zones 3–5 are not Shown. Map Includes Data Sourced from the Japanese International
Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Autorite pour la Protection du Site et l’Amenagement
de la Region D’Angkor (the Authority for the Protection and Management of Angkor and
the Region of Siem Reap or ‘APSARA’). UTM projection (Zone 48 N) WGS84 datum.

342

J. Gillespie

agricultural landscape which remains actively and intensively occupied. Dating from
about  the  ninth  to  the  fifteenth  century,  the  Angkor  region  was  the  capital  of  a
substantial Khmer empire.18 Today, the ‘core zones’ (Zones 1 and 2) of the Angkor
Archaeological  Park,  which  consist  of  the  highly  protected  landscapes,  incorporate
approximately 400 km2 with over 100 villages and a resident population in excess of
100,000 people (Figure 1).19 This is an area in which villages exist within and around
important cultural heritage features such as the monumental temples and reservoirs
(trapeang  or  baray).  While  these  villages  remain  an  intrinsic  part  of  this  landscape
they exist with the restrictions of a legal overlay in which they have had, to date, little
participation.

Figure 1 Map of the Angkor Archaeological Park, Showing the Location of Modern Villages in Relation to Known Archaeological Monuments, and the Protected Zones 1 and 2. Zones 3–5 are not Shown. Map Includes Data Sourced from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Autorite pour la Protection du Site et l’Amenagement de la Region D’Angkor (the Authority for the Protection and Management of Angkor
and the Region of Siem Reap or ‘APSARA’). UTM projection (Zone 48 N) WGS84 datum.

International Obligations: The World Heritage Listing

Angkor Archaeological Park was first inscribed on the World Heritage List as a ‘site in
danger’ in 1992.20 Yet the history of protection of the site can be traced back to the early
1900s during the period of the French protectorate under which the monuments at
Angkor  were  declared  a  National  Park  in  1925.21  French  management  of  the  site
continues throughout much of this century and, given this, it is important to recognise
that much of the landscape has been influenced by some form of regulation for most
of the past 80 years. Nonetheless, in the context of a society rebuilding itself after years
of  civil  turmoil,  the  impact  of  the  1992  World  Heritage  listing  on  local  resident
communities should not be understated.

The 1992 World Heritage listing of Angkor on to the ‘World Heritage in Danger’ list
was unusual. At the time of listing Cambodia was, following the Paris Peace Accord of
1991, under the temporary administration of the United Nations Transitional Author-
ity  in  Cambodia  (UNTAC),  and  in  these  circumstances  some  of  the  conditions
required for listing were waived.22 The World Heritage Committee requested that: 

II.

In order to deal with the urgent problems of conservation quickly and effectively,
the Committee has inscribed the site of Angkor on the List of World Heritage in
Danger,  and  has  requested,  on  the  recommendation  of  ICOMOS,  that  the
authorities concerned take the necessary steps to meet the following conditions:
(a) enact adequate protective legislation;
(b) establish an adequately staffed national protection agency;
(c) establish permanent boundaries based on the UNDP project;
(d) define meaningful buffer zones;
(e) establish monitoring and coordination of the international conservation effort.23

Other than a three-year time frame in which an in-depth study was commissioned for
the site, no time frame was set for the implementation of these recommendations. This
paper is particularly interested in the impact of two of these ‘specific conditions’. First,
the requirement that the national government enact adequate protective legislation as
articulated in sub-section (a) and, secondly, that they establish planning controls for
the site as provided for in sub-sections (c) and (d). The former condition was met with
the passage of the Law on the Protection of Cultural Heritage, 1996. The later require-
ments were met following the recommendations of the United Nation Development

International Journal of Heritage Studies

343

Programme (UNDP) funded Zoning and Environmental Management Plan (ZEMP).
The ZEMP was implemented with the assistance of a number of international experts
within a very short time frame—at times with two site visits within five months.24 The
ZEMP process led to the formulation and articulation of plans, policies and guidelines
for the management of the monuments and landscape of the Angkor area. Importantly,
the results of the ZEMP process were codified with the enactment of the 1994 Royal
Decree25 Establishing Protected Cultural Zones in the Siem Reap/Angkor Region and
Guidelines for their Management.

Implementing International Obligations: The Enactment of Local Planning 
Controls

The 1994 Royal Decree which implemented the ZEMP codified the Park boundaries
and  introduced  a  graded  system  of  regulation  for  the  landscape  surrounding  the
monuments  (again,  see  Figure  1).  There  are  five  zones  for  the  Archaeological  Park.
Zone 1 covers an area of 208 km2, incorporating the ‘most significant archaeological
sites’,  and  the  area  has  been  accorded  the  highest  level  of  protection  (Article  3).  In
terms of the restrictions as they apply to local residents and ‘development’, the restric-
tions  on  land  use  in  this  zone  include  a  complete  prohibition  on  residential  uses
(Article 17) in addition to a complete prohibition on development, with the exception
of development for the protection and enhancement of the site (Article 8).

Zone  2  (193  km2)  has  a  lower  level  of  protection  and  is  described  as  ‘protected
archaeological reserves’ which ‘need to be protected from harmful land use practices
and  the  consequences  of  inappropriate  development’  (Article  4).  According  to  the
management authority the intended use of this zone is to act as a buffer to protect the
core Zone 1.26 Occupation and development of the land located within the confines of
Zone 2 is restricted by virtue of Articles 17 and 8 also, such that all the old villages are
to  be  preserved  and  development  is  prohibited,  with  the  exception  of  development
essential to the protection and enhancement of the site or for the preservation of local
lifestyles.

Within the zoning system there are three remaining zones. Zone 3 covers protected
cultural  landscapes,  Zone  4  deals  with  sites  of  archaeological,  anthropological  or
historical interest and Zone 5 covers the entire Siem Reap Province. These three further
zones are not without controversy, but a discussion of the dilemmas of these further
planning controls is beyond the scope of this paper.

Interestingly, the original ZEMP classification system remains in place to this day,
although  this  paper  articulates  how  regulations  refining  the  obligations  contained
therein have been modified (albeit slightly) over time. The significance of this is that
the  rules  and  boundaries  articulated  in  the  ZEMP  process  have  evaded  significant
review while the priority for site management has been focused on the protection of
the site’s monuments and temples.27 For the best part of a decade issues surrounding
land and local residents were not prioritised in terms of management of the heritage
site. However, this is no longer the case and both the international community and
the management  authority  are  increasingly  interested  in  the  concerns  of  the  local

344

J. Gillespie

communities  at  Angkor—and  amongst  the  highest  of  these  concerns  is  the  issue  of
security of tenure within the Park.28

Implementing International Obligations: Local Ownership Controls

In addition to the zoning restrictions placed upon land use in the Park, it is important
to  examine  the  legal  regulations  which  govern  ownership  of  property  in  the  Park.
Indeed, there are many laws in addition to the 1994 Royal Decree that exist to restrict
the resident population and their impact on the landscape. As previously mentioned,
one  of  the  criticisms  levelled  at  countries  which  legislate  to  implement  the  World
Heritage  Convention  at  the  national  level  is  that  the  legislation  can  be  piecemeal,
limited  and  generally  inadequate  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  national  and  local
responses offer little by way of guidance to site managers.29 In light of such criticism
some consideration of the ownership laws which apply to the World Heritage site at
Angkor are worthy of articulation and scrutiny.

In Cambodia there exists a raft of legislative provisions, and lesser regulatory by-
laws, that relate to ownership and land use, for World Heritage site management. An
appropriate  starting  point  for  the  enunciation  of  these  laws  is  Article  44  of  the
Kingdom of Cambodia’s Constitution 1993, which restricts ownership of property to
Khmer citizens (and legal entities), enshrines the protection of ‘legal private ownership’
in law and provides for ‘fair and just’ compensation provisions for those who are forced
to abandon this right.

Together with the Constitutional provisions relating to ‘ownership’, it is important
to recognise the impact of the Land Law 2001, particularly as regards the provisions for
state and private dominion of land.30 Article 15 defines state public property as prop-
erties  with  ‘archaeological,  cultural  and  historical  patrimonies’.  On  the  basis  of  this
definition land within Zones 1 and 2 of the World Heritage site are rendered ‘state
public  property’.  Article  16  then  prohibits  the  alienation  of  state  public  property—
although it is important to note that it may be subject to an authorisation to occupy.
Prima facie, therefore, land within the World Heritage site cannot be alienated—or
owned.

Turning  to  the  situation  of  ownership  within  the  Park  there  are  a  number  of
provisions (initiated at various levels in the regulatory hierarchy) which limit the extent
to which individuals are able to alienate immovable property. In terms of management
of  land  use  within  the  Park,  a  1995  law  established  the  management  authority,  the
Autorite  pour  la  Protection  du  Site  et  l’Amenagement  de  la  Region  D’Angkor  (the
Authority for the Protection and Management of Angkor and the Region of Siem Reap
or  ‘APSARA’).31  This  law,  read  together  with  the  1996  Law  on  the  Protection  of
Cultural  Heritage,32  reinforced  APSARA  as  the  responsible  authority  for  the  site.  If
there was any remaining doubt, a further law enacted in 1999 amended many of the
provisions of the 1995 law and reinforces APSARA’s control over the area.33 The 1999
law remains in force and Article 6 (Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)) articulates that the
Authority has the exclusive right to grant building permits and any transfers or conces-
sions issued by other authorities may be void.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

345

Some of the other regulatory provisions which apply to the site include a law dated
May 2003 which reiterates APSARA’s exclusive control over permits and which, again,
renders permits issued by other authorities invalid.34 In addition, a June 2004 regula-
tion requires that the protected area zone boundaries be marked out and also requires
that signs be placed around the park to inform residents and visitors alike of the land
use restrictions which apply.35 These laws are important in the context of competing
jurisdictions between the site authority (APSARA) and the administrative authorities
which govern outside the site’s boundaries. There has been and continues to be consid-
erable uncertainty as to the role of each governing authority in regulating the wider
Angkorian landscape.

Undoubtedly one of the most important legal restrictions on ownership and land use
within the Park is articulated in a law dated September 2004.36 This Decision rules that
the blanket prohibition which provides that State public property cannot be alienated
should  be  modified  in  a  concession  to  the  reality  of  the  resident  population  living
within the Park. The importance of this development merits the reproduction of its
wording. This Decision provides: 

Article 1
All  the  land  in  Zones  1  and  2  of  Siem  Reap-Angkor  Sites  is  State  public  property,
which the APSARA Authority has to manage, preserve, and develop in a sustainable
manner.
Article 2
Standards for utilization of land in Zones 1 and 2 of Siem Reap/Angkor Sites shall be
defined as follows: 
-

The citizens who have long been dwelling in the Zones may continue living there
without being subject to any evacuation;
The residents may renovate or repair dilapidated houses, or construct a new house
to replace an old one, with authorization from APSARA Authority;
The  residents  are  entitled  to  manage  the  land,  in  ways  such  as  the  transfer  of
ownership from parents to their descendants or the sale of their property to other
members of the village community, in order to cope with the difficulties of life.

-

-

Thus, despite the blanket ban on private property ownership within the heritage site,
some  form  of  ‘ownership’  appears  to  exist.  Planners  and  legal  practitioners  would
characterise these amendments as giving voice to ‘existing user rights’37 for residents
and  land  holders  within  the  Park.  The  extent  of  local  resident’s  knowledge  of  these
regulations is debatable and findings from fieldwork conducted as part of the author’s
research  throws  light  upon  a  number  of  potential  problems  with  these  provisions.
Surveys  conducted  in  two  villages  within  Zone  1  indicate  that  most  households  are
aware of many of the restrictions imposed upon them, but do not fully comprehend the
significance of state ownership of land located in Zones 1 and 2.38

Prima facie, these legislative arrangements appear to go a significant way towards
establishing the requisite legal framework for the management of the World Heritage
site. However, it is possible to argue that the cumulative effect of the regulations is that
they only fulfil the obligation that the Cambodian government has as a signatory to the
World  Heritage  Convention.39  The  apparent  lack  of  community  consultation  on
issues,  particularly  that  of  security  of  tenure  for  residents  within  the  Park,  is  highly

346

J. Gillespie

problematic.  Additionally,  there  exist  some  significant  shortcomings  or  omissions
within the legal framework itself.

Imperfections in the Legal Framework

In November 2005 Franscesco Bandarin speaking at the International Co-ordinating
Committee (ICC) bi-annual meeting for Angkor in his capacity as the Director of the
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation’s (UNESCO) World
Heritage Centre observed: 

Everything needed is there in the legal framework, the need for both conservation and
for  community  development,  which  must  remain  one  of  the  essential  purposes  of
what we are doing. So I think the legal apparatus is clearly in focus, but the concrete
enforcement thereof is unfortunately a little vague. There is no implementation regulation
…  For  example,  APSARA  is  a  regulatory  institution  empowered  to  enforce  these
decrees that stipulate what land belongs to the public domain. However, because of the
prevailing very uncertain land holding system, transactions are taking place despite the
fact that on paper ownership is held by the State.40

This succinct statement highlights the broad inadequacies of the framework. There are,
in addition, other concerns within the existing provisions. For example, arising as a
direct consequence of the provisions of Article 6 (2) of the September 2004 Decision is
a fundamental question of definition. How are citizens ‘who have long been dwelling
in the Zones’ defined? There is no definition provided within the provision and there
is no case law on the matter. It appears that deciding what constitutes ‘long been dwell-
ing’ is left to administrators. This is an obvious problem for transparency of process.
Research conducted by the author within Zone 141 indicates that residents are keenly
aware of the importance of claiming a long period of occupation in order to legitimate
their ‘ownership’ of ‘their’ land. However, and critically, many of these residents are
often unaware of the fact that they do not legally own the land they occupy.

As Bandarin said, there are a number of frailties in the exiting legal framework, and
chief amongst them is the lack of appropriate enforcement and remedial regulations.42
Is it possible to conclude that the absence of enforcement and remedial provisions is a
concession  to  the  specific  conditions  arising  from  the  Cambodian  context?  This  is
probably not the case—if it were then perhaps at the very least informal dispute reso-
lution processes would be included (and often studies considering conflict resolution
in the Cambodian context favour informal techniques).43 In any event, regardless of
the  cause  of  the  oversight,  the  absence  of  enforcement  and  remedial  regulations  is
problematic for a State which characterises itself as a constitutional monarchy—and
one which is seeking to embrace a market economy doctrine.44 Without mandatory
provisions for the enforcement of regulations the effectiveness of management is called
into question. Appropriate penalty provisions which effectively punish breaches are
essential for protection of the site. With recent initiatives it is possible to say that, to
some extent, the management authority has been mandated to give effect to enforce-
ment  provisions  with  the  establishment  of  a  sub-department  (the  Department  of
Security  and  Co-operation)  within  the  management  authority.  The  effectiveness  of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

347

such an initiative is yet to be fully tested, but the absence of evidence on its efficacy does
not detract from the observation that the absence of enforcement provisions has the
potential to undermine the protection process.

Another example of an omission in the prevailing regulatory framework for the site
relates to the absence of compensation provisions. From a national perspective, Article
44 of the Constitution requires that there be ‘fair and just’ compensation provision.45
Additionally, Article 5 of the 2001 Land Law provides, 

No person may be deprived of his ownership, unless it is in the public interest. An
ownership  deprivation  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  forms  and
procedures  provided  by  law  and  regulations  and after  the  payment  of  fair  and  just
compensation in advance. (emphasis added)

Yet  the  tailored  local  regulatory  provisions  appear  to  overlook  compensation
provisions.

A warning about floodgates is appropriate at this juncture, for this paper should not
be taken to be advocating burgeoning laws which create unnecessary burdens for both
managers and residents. Tailored solutions are preferred to remedy the issue of owning
land  in  a  World  Heritage  location.  The  reality  for  resident  communities  is  that  life
continues—property is bought and sold, new houses are constructed and land is used
in ways which conflict with the overarching legal framework. This situation is flawed
for residents and managers alike. It may be the situation that the effectiveness of the
regime in terms of the protection of heritage is met (as the monuments of Angkor are
restored and protected) but it is arguable that the failure to adequately take account of
local  needs  by  inadequately  addressing  ownership  issues  weakens  the  existing
regulatory framework.

Having highlighted and described some of the flaws in the current regulatory frame-
work the next section investigates the type of ownership regime which may best serve
the interests of local residents while ensuring that the value of the internationally recog-
nised heritage landscape is not compromised.

Ownership of Places with ‘Outstanding Universal Value’?

UNESCO’s specialist World Heritage Centre describes World Heritage sites as ‘belong-
ing to all peoples of the world, irrespective of the territory on which they are located’.46
Is the use of the word ‘belong’ an accurate reflection of the international community’s
(however defined) perceptions? Words are, or should be, chosen exceedingly carefully
when crafting public statements from institutional bodies. Sullivan observes:47 

World Heritage is a global concept and process imposed … through fear of the effects
of global development on the variety and richness of the World Heritage. It is imposed
from above—a submission by a national party to an international committee with the
aim  of  achieving  recognition  of  a  value  of  universal  significance.  This  process  can
often be intimidating, mysterious, and highly technical to local people and Traditional
Owners. This creates a high potential for resentment, misunderstanding and hostility.

In this context it is important to consider whether the current regime of state owner-
ship imposed upon Angkor by virtue of national and local regulation is compatible

348

J. Gillespie

with the reality of life at Angkor—a place where people want to claim ownership of
their own houses, stalls or rice fields.48 Do living communities have the same rights to
access the land (their land) as others—does the World Heritage classification infringe
upon any such ‘right’? As has been illustrated, the simple answer to these questions is,
in a strict legal sense, ‘no’, or a qualified ‘possibly’, but only in a very limited way. For
it is the case that despite the blanket ban on private property ownership which is artic-
ulated in national laws, some form of control is manifested in allowing existing user
rights, which makes allowance for the reality of the community living within the Park.
It  is  not  always  the  case  that  the  consequence  of  a  World  Heritage  listing  is  the
replacement of private ownership with public ownership of the site. For instance, land
tenure arrangements for Australian World Heritage sites illustrate that there are alter-
natives  to  public-only  ownership.  Indeed,  at  the  national  level  government  policy
insists  that  World  Heritage  status  does  not  preclude  private  ownership.49  Thus,  in
Australia, World Heritage sites are subject to a wide variety of tenure arrangements
ranging from public ownership through to wholly private ownership—with variations
in between. Moreover, from co-management arrangements between government and
the indigenous communities in Kakadu to long-term leaseholder rights of farmers in
Willandra, Australian government policy suggests that security of pre-existing tenure
arrangements should not be adversely affected by the imposition of a World Heritage
listing. Interestingly customary tenure still remains a relatively obscure form of tenure
amongst properties on the World Heritage list, with a notable exception being East
Rennell  in  the  Solomon  Islands  which  is  subject  to  customary  land  ownership  and
management.50 Of course, the extent to which different tenure arrangements succeed,
in either the developed or developing world, is debatable.51 The point to acknowledge
is that the imposition of a World Heritage classification on a landscape does not imply
that the land automatically reverts to state ownership, and the Convention itself stipu-
lates no such requirement. Rather a respect of state sovereignty is reaffirmed in the
Convention by virtue of Article 6(1). Many World Heritage sites—both cultural and
natural properties—are subject to development pressures associated with the presence
of  human  populations.  Many  of  these  populations  have  well  established  territorial
rights—some do not—and Angkor is an example of the latter. It is the lack of formal
pre-existing  land  rights  in  a  post-conflict  society  which  differentiates  the  World
Heritage site at Angkor from many (but by no means all) of the other 660 cultural
properties on the list.

Re-visiting the Importance of Ownership within the Heritage Park

Like Cambodians elsewhere, and as described above, residents and land-holders within
the highly restricted Zone 1 of the Archaeological Park are not immune from the need
for security of tenure. In a setting where there are few studies on the significance of land
to those living within the World Heritage site, it is interesting to note Luco’s observations: 

The traditional way of acquiring land was by plowing it. Until recently access to land
was not a problem as there was a small population and plenty of land available. Since
the promulgation of new regulations … there is a concern among the local population

International Journal of Heritage Studies

349

that  future  generations  will  not  have  access  to  arable  land.  In  some  areas  close  to
temples, old rice fields had to be abandoned … In the early 1990s the villages located
in the close proximity to Angkor Wat were moved … to southern lands. Many of the
villagers have already sold their apportioned plots and returned to the lands of their
ancestors.  This  situation,  combined  with  the  settlement  of  new  people  from  other
provinces, has created an anarchic land situation in the area west of Angkor Wat.52

Interviews and questionnaires carried out by the author within the highly protected
Zone 1 of the Park indicated that residents remain concerned about the cost of land and
are equally uneasy about their ability to leave land to (all) their children. At the same
time the management authority is aware of the need to further consider the needs of
local communities and is endeavouring to address this concern with allocating to one
department the core responsibility of controlling land and communities within zones
1 and 2.

Arguable  also  is  that  the  issue  of  security  of  tenure  is  highly  important  for  the
purposes of sustainable development—if one adopts the position that those who own
their land are more likely to care for it—as well as for the specific objective of World
Heritage site management.53 Thus, absorbing local values into the management agenda
and, in particular, ensuring that the local population can establish security of tenure
according to their requirements, may be a pre-requisite for sustainable site manage-
ment. Furthermore, it is arguable that an acknowledgement of the extent of private
ownership within the Park may encourage better co-management of the site, particu-
larly  in  an  area  with  high  rural  poverty,  as  characterises  much  of  the  landscape
surrounding the monuments of Angkor, where access to land is often related to issues
of poverty reduction.

Conclusion

The contention of this paper is that the local resident community’s values and needs,
particularly their ability to alienate land, must be given priority before, during and after
the imposition of a World Heritage classification. To do otherwise results in a piece-
meal, fragmented regulatory process where managers and residents alike are unclear of
their  obligations,  duties  and  responsibilities  in  the  protection  of  the  ‘outstanding
universal  value’  of  a  unique  World  Heritage  site.  A  comprehensive  and  tailored
regulatory  package  which  gives  voice  to  the  concerns  of  residents  while  remaining
sympathetic to heritage protection is a more just, equitable and desirable outcome for
World Heritage site management.

Acknowledgements

This  research  is  part  of  the  Living  with  Heritage  Project,  a  collaborative  research
programme  between,  inter  alia,  the  University  of  Sydney,  the  École  Française
d’Extrême-Orient  (EFEO),  APSARA  (the  management  authority  for  the  Angkor
World  Heritage  site),  UNESCO  and  Godden  McKay  Logan  Heritage  Consultants.
Funding is provided by the Australian Research Council (Discovery Linkage Project

350

J. Gillespie

LP0454989) and Industry Partners (for details see http://acl.arts.usyd.edu.au/angkor/
lwh/).

Notes

1 [1] Article 4, and more specifically, Article 5(d), World Heritage Convention, which is formerly
referred to as the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage,  1972  and  paragraph  92  Operational  Guidelines,  which  act  to  complement  the
Convention  and  are  authored  by  UNESCO’s  World  Heritage  Committee,  for  the  latest
version dated February 2005, available at http://whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines.

2 [2] UNESCO,  ‘Linking  Universal  and  Local  Values:  Managing  a  Sustainable  Future  for  World

Heritage’, 2004.

3 [3] Sullivan, ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices in the World Heritage System’, 49.
4 [4] Mumma, ‘Community-Based Legal Systems and the Management of World Heritage Sites’,

43–4.

5 [5] See for example, the questionnaire for state parties to complete as part of the periodic report-
ing exercise especially the sections on ‘Management’ (II.4) and ‘Factors affecting the property’
(II.5), available at http://whc.unesco.org/documents/pg-287-2.pdf, 9–18, 18–21.

6 [6] Kimsong and Ten Kate, ‘Villagers Welcome Titles Granting Them Their Own Land’; Vachon,
‘Pressures  over  Property’;  ABC  Radio,  ‘Radio  Australia—News—Cambodia  facing  land
disputes’.

7 [7] Some  examples  include,  Baars,  Land  of  Their  Own;  ABC  Radio,  ‘Radio  Australia—News—

Cambodia Facing Land Disputes’.

8 [8] Siem Reap Province, in which Angkor Archaeological Park is located, is the poorest province
in Cambodia, see Save Cambodia’s Wildlife, ‘Atlas of Cambodia, National Poverty and Envi-
ronmental Maps’.

9 [9] Some  examples  include  the  Royal  Government  of  Cambodian,  ‘Rectangular  Strategy  for
Growth,  Employment,  Equity  and  Efficiency’,  7,  and  the  Royal  Government  of  Cambodia,
‘National Forum on Land Management 2004’.

10[10] AusAID, ‘Australia–Cambodia Development Cooperation Strategy 2003–2006’, 5.
11[11] Chandler, ‘A History of Cambodia’, 210.
12[12]
13[13]

Ibid., 230.
Sub-Decree No.6 (Control and Utilization of Agricultural Land) cited in Russell, ‘Land Law in
the Kingdom of Cambodia’, 103.
Ibid., 105.

14[14]
15[15] Frings, ‘Cambodia after Decollectivisation (1989–1992)’, 50–54.
16[16] As  at  the  time  of  this  review,  dated  1999,  see  Williams,  ‘Review  of  Current  and  Proposed

Cambodian Land Legislation, Cambodia Land Study Project’, 2.

17[17] East–West Management Institute, Land Law of Cambodia, 31.
18[18] Mabbet and Chandler, The Khmers.
19[19] APSARA, Internal Census.
20[20] UNESCO, ‘World Heritage Committee Report of the 16th Session, Santa Fe, 1992’.
21[21] Wager, ‘Environmental Planning for a World Heritage Site’, 422.
22[22] Beschaouch, ‘Exceptional Measures for a Site of Exceptional Value’.
23[23] UNESCO, ‘World Heritage Committee Report of the 16th Session, Santa Fe, 1992’, 38; Chau

Sun, ‘Angkor Sites, Cultural World Heritage’, 148.

24[24] Wager, ‘Environmental Planning for a World Heritage Site’, 423–4.
25[25] A notation of the use of terms: in Cambodia, laws are stratified according to a specific hierar-
chy, from the Constitution as the ‘Supreme Law of the Kingdom of Cambodia’ through to the
‘Provincial Deka (“arête”): used by provincial governors within the geographical limit of their
provinces’, Sok and Sarin, ‘The Legal System of Cambodia’, 37–9. In this paper a reference to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

351

law, legal frameworks and/or regulations is a reference to all the provisions which apply to the
area,  regardless  of  their  place  in  the  legislative  hierarchy,  unless  a  detailed  explanation  is
warranted.
See  APSARA  Authority  website,  http://www.autoriteapsara.org/en/apsara/about_apsara/
legal_texts/decree3.html.

26[26]

27[27] This direction can be gleaned from a review of the documentation produced by the Interna-
tional Co-ordinating Committee for the Safeguarding and Development of the Historic Site
of Angkor (ICC). The ICC is an overseeing body that is jointly chaired by French and Japanese
representatives. The ICC meets twice per year in meetings involving the APSARA Authority,
UNESCO  and  international,  national  and  local  projects  working  in  Angkor  Archaeological
Park. The Committee produced two reports per year which document the meetings.
Ibid.; Khuon, ‘A Commitment to Community Engagement’, 115–18.

28[28]
29[29] UNESCO, ‘World Heritage Reports 12’, 34.
30[30] A note on terminology is fruitful. This paper adopts the definition of ‘ownership’ pursuant to
Article 85 of the 2001 Land Law as follows: ‘The owner of immovable property has the exclu-
sive and extensive right to use, enjoy, and dispose of his property, except in a manner that is
prohibited by law.’

31[31] Royal Decree No. NS/RD/0295/12 dated 19 February 1995 on creation of the Authority for

the Protection of Angkor and the Region of Siem Reap known as ‘APSARA Authority’.

32[32] Article  5  reads  ‘in  the  Siem  Reap/Angkor  region,  the  Authority  for  the  Protection  and
Management of Angkor and the Region of Siem Reap, called APSARA, is responsible for the
protection, the preservation and the enhancement of the national cultural heritage.’

33[33] Royal  Government  of  Cambodia,  Kret  NS/RKT/0199/18  dated  22  January  1999  amending

some provisions of the Kret establishing the APSARA Authority.

34[34] Circular of the Royal Government of Cambodia No.01/SR dated 6 May 2003.
35[35] Order of the Royal Government of Cambodia No.02/BB dated 23 June 2004.
36[36] Decision of the Royal Government of Cambodia No.70/SSR dated 16 September 2004.
37[37] A  useful  definition  of  ‘existing  user  rights’  is  ‘the  general  principle  with  regard  to  existing
development  which  does  not  conform  to  the  provisions  of  a  scheme  is  that  the  regulatory
power  of  the  State  limits  the  use  which  an  owner  may  make  of  his  property,  but  does  not
deprive  him  of  ownership,  so  that  whatever  rights  he  may  lose  are  not  taken  over’,  Fogg,
Australian Town Planning Law, 196.
Surveys (questionnaires) conducted in October 2007 with residents of two villages in Zone 1
of the Park and conducted as part of the author’s postgraduate research.

38[38]

39[39] Pursuant to Article 4 of the World Heritage Convention; Cambodia accepted the Convention

40[40]
41[41]

42[42]
43[43]

on 28 November 1991.
ICC, Plenary Session 2005, 49, author’s emphasis.
Semi-structured,  in-depth  interviews  were  conducted  in  December  2006  within  villages
located within the zone of the protected World Heritage Park.
ICC, Plenary Session 2005.
See Luco, Between a Tiger and a Crocodile. Interestingly, in fieldwork conducted by the author
using  semi-structured,  in-depth  interviews  revealed  that  the  informal  dispute  resolution
system was not unanimously favoured by either residents or administrators at a local level.
Sok & Sarin, The Legal System of Cambodia, 2.

44[44]
45[45] Article 44 says, inter alia, ‘The right to confiscate properties from any person shall be exercised
only  in  the  public  interest  as  provided  for  under  the  law  and  shall  require  fair  and  just
compensation in advance.’

Sullivan, ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices in the World Heritage System’, 51

46[46] Available at http://whc.unesco.org/en/about/.
47[47]
48[48] This is reinforced with findings from the author’s postgraduate research.
49[49] Available at http://www.deh.gov.au/heritage/worldheritage/implications.html.
50[50]

See http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/854/.

352

J. Gillespie

51[51] Moreover,  the  efficacy  of  different  tenure  arrangements  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,
however, the works of de Soto, The Mystery of Capital, or Baland and Platteau, Halting Degra-
dation of Natural Resources.

52[52] Luco, ‘The People of Angkor: Between Tradition and Development’, 126.
53[53] UNESCO, 2004, op. cit., and see, for example, Velaszquez et al., ‘Innovative Communities’;

Miura, ‘Conservation of a “Living Heritage Site”’, 3–18.

References

Australian  Agency  for  International  Development  (AusAID).  Australia–Cambodia  Development
Cooperation Strategy 2003–2006. Australian Government, Canberra, June 2003. Available at
http://www.ausaid.gov.au/publications/pdf/cambodia_strategy_03_06.pdf.

Australian Government, Department of Environment and Heritage. ‘Implications of World Heritage
at  http://www.deh.gov.au/heritage/worldheritage/implications.html

Listing’.  Available 
(accessed 7 December 2007).

Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) Radio Australia. ‘Radio Australia—News—Cambodia
facing land disputes’, 3 September 2005. Available at http://www.abc.net.au/cgibin/common/
printfriendly.pl?http:www.abc.net.au/ra/news/sto.

Authority  for  the  Protection  of  Angkor  and  the  Siem  Reap  Region  (APSARA  Authority).  Legal
Framework Related to the Management of Cultural Protected Zones 1 & 2 of Siem Reap/ Angkor
Region. Siem Reap: APSARA, June 2005.

———.  APSARA  Internal  Census  2005.  Siem  Reap:  APSARA  Department  of  Demography  and

Development, 2005.

———.  Royal  Decree  Establishing  Protected  Cultural  Zones.  Available  at  http://www.autoriteap-

sara.org/en/apsara/about_apsara/legal_texts/decree3.html (accessed 7 December 2007).

Baars, Patricia. Land of Their Own. Asian Development Bank Review, May 2005. Available at http://

www.adb.org/Documents/Periodicals/ADB_Review/2005/vol37-2/land-own.asp.

Baland, J. and J. Platteau. Halting Degradation of Natural Resources. Is There a Role for Rural Commu-
nities? Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Also available at Oxford Scholarship Online,
Oxford University Press, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/0198290616.001.0001.

Beschaouch, A. ‘Exceptional Measures for a Site of Exceptional Value’. Museum 54, no. 1–2 (2002):

104–109.

Chandler, D. A History of Cambodia. Chang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2003.
Chau Sun, K. ‘Angkor Sites, Cultural World Heritage’. In Art and Cultural Heritage: Law, Policy and
Practice, edited by B. Hoffman. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
de Soto, H. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.

London: Bantam, 2000.

East–West  Management  Institute.  Land  Law  of  Cambodia,  A  Study  and  Research  Manual.  Phnom

Penh: Asian Development Bank, November 2003.

Fogg, A. S. Australian Town Planning Law: Uniformity and Change. St. Lucia, London and New York:

University of Queensland Press, 1982.

Frings, V. ‘Cambodia after Decollectivization (1989–1992)’. Journal of Contemporary Asia 24, no. 1

(1994): 49–66

International Co-ordinating Committee for the Safeguarding and Development of the Historic Site
of Angkor (ICC). Twelfth Plenary Session Siem Reap, November 28 & 29, 2005. Phnom Penh:
UNESCO, 2005.

Khuon, Khun-Neay. ‘A Commitment to Community Engagement’. In Phnom Bakeng Workshop on
Public  Interpretation,  Angkor  Park,  Siem  Reap,  Cambodia,  December  4–6,  2005.  Siem  Reap:
Centre for Khmer Studies/World Monuments Fund, 2006.

Kimsong, Kay and Daniel Ten Kate. ‘Villagers Welcome Titles Granting Them Their Own Land’. The

Cambodia Daily, 17 June 2004.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

353

Luco, F. Between a Tiger and a Crocodile. Management of Local Conflicts in Cambodia. Phnom Penh:

United Nations Educational Scientific Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2002.

———. ‘The People of Angkor: Between Tradition and Development’. In Phnom Bakeng Workshop
on Public Interpretation, Angkor Park, Siem Reap, Cambodia, December 4–6, 2005. Siem Reap:
Centre for Khmer Studies/World Monuments Fund, 2006.

Mabbet, I. and D. Chandler. The Khmers. Oxford: Blackwells, 1996.
Muira, K. ‘Conservation of a “Living Heritage Site”: A Contradiction in Terms? Views from a Case
Study of Angkor World Heritage Site’. Conservation and Management of Archaeological Sites
71, no. 1 (2005): 3–18.

Mumma,  A.  ‘Community-Based  Legal  Systems  and  the  Management  of  World  Heritage  Sites’.  In
UNESCO,  World  Heritage  Papers  13  Linking  Universal  and  Local  Values:  Managing  a
Sustainable Future for World Heritage. Paris: United Nations Educational Scientific Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), 2004.

Royal  Government  of  Cambodia.  ‘Rectangular  Strategy  for  Growth,  Employment,  Equity  and
Efficiency’.  Available  at  http://www.car.gov.kh/hunsen/rectangularstrategy_en.asp,  p.  7
(accessed 7 December 2007).

———. ‘National Forum on Land Management 2004’. Available at http://www.car.gov.kh/hunsen/

landmanagement_en.asp (accessed 7 December 2007).

———. Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia 1993, dated 24 September 1993 and amended by

Kram NS/KRM/0399/01 dated 8 March 1999, Phnom Penh.

———. Law on the Protection of Cultural Heritage, Kram NS/RKM/0196/26 dated 25 January 1996,

Phnom Penh.

———. Royal Decree Establishing Protected Cultural Zones in the Siem Reap/Angkor Region and

Guidelines for their Management, 1994, Phnom Penh.

———. Land Law, Kram NS/RKM/0801/14 dated 30 August 2001, Phnom Penh.
———. Kret NS/RKT/0199/18 dated 22 January 1999 amending some provisions of the Kret estab-

lishing the APSARA Authority, Phnom Penh.

———.  Royal  Decree  No.  NS/RD/0295/12  dated  19  February  1995  on  creation  of  the  Authority
for the Protection of Angkor and the Region of Siem Reap known as ‘APSARA Authority’,
or  Autorite  pour  la  Protection  du  Site  et  l’Amenagement  de  la  Region  D’Angkor,  Phnom
Penh.

Russell, R. ‘Land Law in the Kingdom of Cambodia’. Property Management 15, no. 2 (1997): 101–110.
Save  Cambodia’s  Wildlife.  Atlas  of  Cambodia:  National  Poverty  and  Environmental  Maps.  Phnom

Penh: Save Cambodia’s Wildlife, 2006. 

Sullivan, S. ‘Local Involvement and Traditional Practices in the World Heritage System’. In World
Heritage  Papers  13:  Linking  Universal  and  Local  Values:  Managing  a  Sustainable  Future  for
World  Heritage,  edited  by  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Centre.  Paris:  United  Nations  Educa-
tional Scientific Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2004.

Sok,  S.  and  D.  Sarin.  The  Legal  System  of  Cambodia.  Phnom  Penh:  Cambodian  Legal  Resources

Development Centre (CLRDC), 1998.

United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO)  ‘Heritage  Legislation’.
World Heritage Reports 12: The State of World Heritage in the Asia-Pacific Region 2003. Paris:
UNESCO, 2004.

———.  World  Heritage  Committee  Report  of  the  16th  Session,  Santa  Fe,  1992.  Paris:  UNESCO,

1992.

———. Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 1972.

Adopted by the General Conference at its 17th Session, Paris, 16 November 1972.

———.  Operational  Guidelines  for  the  Implementation  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention,
WHC.05/2.  Paris:  UNESCO,  2  February  2005.  Available  at  http://whc.unesco.org/en/guide-
lines.

———. 

‘About  World  Heritage’.  Available  at  http://whc.unesco.org/en/about/  (accessed

7 December 2007).

354

J. Gillespie

———.  ‘Periodic  Reporting  Exercise  On  the  Application  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention’.

Available at http://whc.unesco.org/documents/pg-287-2.pdf (accessed 7 December 2007).

Vachon, M. ‘Pressures over Property’. The Cambodia Daily, 10–11 January 2005.
Velasquez,  J.,  M.  Yashiro,  S.  Yoshimura  and  I.  Ono,  eds.  Innovative  Communities:  People-centred
approaches  to  Environmental  Management  in  the  Asia-Pacific  Region.  Tokyo,  New  York  and
Paris: United Nations University Press, 2005.

Wager,  J.  ‘Environmental  Planning  for  a  World  Heritage  Site:  Case  Study  of  Angkor,  Cambodia’.

Journal of Environment Planning and Management 38, no. 3 (1995): 419–434.

Williams,  S.  Review  of  Current  and  Proposed  Cambodian  Land  Legislation,  Cambodia  Land  Study

Project. Phnom Penh: Oxfam Great Britain, 1999.


