International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Whose Sense of Place? Reconciling Archaeological
Perspectives with Community Values: Cultural
Landscapes in England

Emma Waterton

To cite this article: Emma Waterton (2005) Whose Sense of Place? Reconciling Archaeological
Perspectives with Community Values: Cultural Landscapes in England, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 11:4, 309-325, DOI: 10.1080/13527250500235591
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250500235591

Published online: 21 Aug 2006.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1809

Citing articles: 58 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 11, No. 4, September 2005, pp. 309–325

Whose Sense of Place? Reconciling 
Archaeological Perspectives with 
Community Values: Cultural 
Landscapes in England
Emma Waterton

114000000September 2005
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS123542.sgm
10.1080/13527250500235591
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2005Taylor & Francis Group Ltd

Like other forms of heritage, landscape provides a vital repository of cultural meaning in
relation  to  identity,  belonging  and  sense  of  place.  Despite  this,  the  process  of  heritage
management tends to obscure these links between landscapes and communities, and is thus
neglectful  of  the  experiences,  perspectives  and  recollections  that  both  individuals  and
groups bring to their engagement with heritage. This paper draws on the Hareshaw Linn
community project to illustrate the diverse ways in which communities construct relation-
ships with landscape. This case study serves as a reminder that the heritage management
process cannot usefully be reduced to the technical and scientific practice it is often assumed
to be, as it is often both emotional and conflict ridden. In light of this, it is essential to ques-
tion why landscape is underplayed in legislation and public policy, and this necessarily
entails the exploration of issues such as ownership, power, knowledge and ‘public’ heritage.

Keywords: Cultural Heritage Management; Cultural Landscape; Community Values; 
Ownership; Power/Knowledge; Identity; Sense of Place; Archaeology

Recent  emphasis  on  the  political  and  ethical  responsibilities  of  Cultural  Heritage
Management (CHM) has prompted attempts to reconsider the management process
itself.  Perhaps  most  notably  it  has  been  those  debates  emerging  from  post-colonial
nations that have triggered such a staunch questioning of the theoretical frameworks
that support and inform the management process. While such contexts have allowed a
mix  of  circumstances  ripe  for  unpacking  ideas  of  ‘universal  applicability’  and  the

Emma Waterton, University of York. Correspondence to: emmawaterton@yahoo.co.uk

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2005 Taylor & Francis 
DOI: 10.1080/13527250500235591

310 E. Waterton

certainty of Western modes of knowledge, this line of questioning has seldom been
extended  into  Western  settings.  These  debates,  however,  should  not  be  confined  to
post-colonial  nations  alone,  as  they  raise  issues  that  carry  a  broader  relevance.  For
example,  notions  of  ownership,  control,  power,  knowledge,  stewardship  and  ‘the
public’  have  been  subjected  to  renewed  interest  and  reconsideration.  Importantly,
however, such debates have worked not only to recast particular concepts but have also
prompted a critical reflection on what it actually means to manage heritage. This paper
attempts to pick up the challenge of utilising both these reworked concepts and a re-
imagined management process, and to examine them through the critical analysis of a
concrete case study in the UK—the Hareshaw Linn community project in Bellingham,
Northumberland. In particular, this research centres on the conflict that surrounds the
concept  of  ‘cultural  landscapes’,  and  attempts  to  reconcile  dominant  archaeological
perspectives  of  ‘landscape’  with  a  broader,  postmodern-inspired  understanding  of
heritage as experienced through ‘landscape’.1 Here, the concept of ‘landscape’ oscillates
between the dominance of aesthetic and scientific values within heritage protection,
and an understanding that invariably draws in intangible associations such as identity,
social history and a sense of place, thus providing an important focus for local commu-
nities.2 The case study is thus able to illustrate the interaction of two discordant views
regarding heritage, and presents an opportunity to explore the ways in which these are
encountered within current management frameworks, particularly in terms of how one
of these works to counter and foreclose the other. It also provides a useful slate upon
which to assess current political engagements with a broader social agenda, such as the
recent policy emphasis on social inclusion and efforts to capitalise on the apparent links
between  community  cohesion  and  cultural  heritage.  While  this  union  is  sound  in
theory, questions need to be asked as to how this policy actually unfolds in concrete
situations.

Drawing on the arguments outlined above, the intention of this article is theoreti-
cally to refashion the expert–community relationship and attempt to open an oppor-
tunity  for  constructing  understandings  of  landscape  previously  marginalised  by
dominant  expressions  of  science  and  materiality.  Through  the  introduction  of  the
Hareshaw Linn case study, a series of arguments will be developed that can usefully be
applied to the broader management process. Essentially, this is due to the opportunity
this  case  study  offers  for  examining  the  discursive  conflict  that  underpins  current
management  directions.  This  struggle  will  be  illustrated  by  first  developing  a  broad
understanding of the history of archaeological theory, and counter-posing this against
the  emergence  of  a  distinct,  local  appreciation  of  how  to  manage  and  interact  with
landscape. Together, the two provide substance for a sustained analysis.

Why and for Whom? The Hareshaw Linn Community Project

The Hareshaw Linn community project provides the circumstances within which to
discuss the parameters of heritage management in both theory and practice. It draws
from a community project in Bellingham, which lies just within the Northumberland
National Park, in northern England, and is thus subject to the principles set out in the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

311
Environment Act of 1995.3 This act places a duty on National Park Authorities aimed
at  ‘conserving  and  enhancing  natural  beauty,  wildlife  and  cultural  heritage  of  the
National Park’ and ‘promoting opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of
the special qualities of [the] areas by the public’. Using a National Park as a basis for
analysis presents a special set of circumstances, because their remit incorporates both
natural and cultural elements under one common authority. The Hareshaw Linn has
been managed under the authority of the National Park since 1974, with the principle
objective  of  maintaining  the  natural  and  scientifically  important  elements  of  the
landscape, particularly the ancient semi-natural deciduous woodlands making up the
Linn. These were scheduled by the Nature Conservation Council in 1974 by virtue of
‘special scientific interest’ and awarded Grade 2 status in the 1977 Nature Conservation
Review.4 At the base of the Linn lie the remnants of a dam, once utilised to power the
Hareshaw Iron Works, both of which were in operation during the 1830s and 1840s,
and are now Scheduled Ancient Monuments.5 However, the key feature to emerge from
this project sidesteps these nationally recognised elements and settles instead on a special
sense of place, raising issues that question perceptions about landscapes and their use.
The  Northumberland  National  Park  Management  Plan  (NNPMP)  is  guided  by
national policy that explicitly defines ‘heritage’ as ancient archaeological remains, sites
and historic structures, and thus largely conceives of landscape in terms of the role it
plays as a setting or backdrop for these remains, structures or sites.6 The time-depth
this framing brings with it is clear: ‘heritage’ is to be defined more closely in line with
the impressions it has of the past, as opposed to the impressions it may leave in the
present.  As  such,  the  idea  of  heritage,  and  thus  landscapes,  as  a  process  in  itself  is
overlooked.7 The term ‘landscape’, in this paper, is not the formally recognised cate-
gorisations already found in both English national and international policy documents,
such as ‘historic landscapes’, or ‘areas of natural beauty’ or ‘national parks’, as such.
Rather, it is the fact that some landscapes are imbued with an association that takes
them under the umbrella term of ‘heritage’. This is much in the way that some, but not
all, buildings become heritage places; and some, but not all, songs carry whispers of
identity  and  cultural  meaning;  and  some,  but  not  all,  objects  portray  a  powerful
message of cultural belonging. As such, ‘landscape’ is here categorised to some extent,
but  only  in  a  very  loose  sense  so  as  to  trigger  an  awareness  and  recognition  of  the
contrast between policy and practice. Indeed, the role and importance landscapes have
for  communities  is  often  underplayed  by  a  rather  one-sided  focus,  made  up  of  the
sum of bounded spaces defined in archaeological terms.8 Importantly, however, the
NNPMP places great emphasis on local communities, and while there is no real legal
framework for funding or defining development, the Northumberland National Park
Authority (NNPA) began to engage seriously with the local community following the
Hareshaw Linn project. Using this as a case in point, discussions about the reality of the
relationships between landscape and communities can take place, and an argument for
their inclusion in definitions of what constitutes heritage can take form. One important
point from this overview must be extracted: while the National Park has made attempts
to engage with issues of community aspirations and wider heritage values, there is no
legal framework to support this impetus. This suggests that a larger dialogue still needs

312 E. Waterton

to  be  opened—one  that  adequately  incorporates  an  analysis  of  how  the  discourse
underpinning wider national policy is constructed and legitimised.

Ideally, then, this case study situates discussions at precisely that point at which a
top-down approach to management is met with a bottom-up understanding of ‘heri-
tage’.  It  thus  provides  an  opportunity  to  examine  the  consequences  of  top-down
management,  and  does  so  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  questioning  the  utility  of
‘expert cultures’ and non-participatory policy-making strategies. In terms of heritage
management, such issues are rehearsed in debates surrounding ideas of ‘stewardship’,
‘ownership’, ‘responsibility’ and ‘ethics’, which are perhaps more forcibly translated
into the language of ‘control’. However, to understand the emergence of such debates
it is necessary first to develop a sense of the history of archaeological thought, particu-
larly with reference to the ways in which a specific ‘way of seeing’ has come to underpin
dominant approaches to management.

Enlightenment’s Wake: Developing a Conservation Ethic

In terms of management and definition, landscapes are perceived predominantly in
aesthetic, objectified terms based on the assumption that nature is something separate
from culture. This idea is reflected in both national and international policy-making
institutions,  such  as  the  divisions  between  English  Heritage  and  English  Nature  in
England as a national example, and the Convention for the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage of 1972, as an international example. Although the latter
has  certainly  made  attempts  to  overcome  this  distinction  with  the  addition  of  the
category for cultural landscapes, particularly ‘associative landscapes’, both continue to
illustrate the implicit or hidden transcripts that have become embedded within, and
disseminated by, dominant, scientific, archaeological discourse.

As such, perhaps the most useful way to address the issue of landscape-as-culture is
to do so while also considering the historical context that prompted the relationship
between science and archaeology, and consider how this ‘scientific’ archaeology has, in
turn,  influenced  the  management  process.  This  situates  discussions  temporally  and
spatially within the intellectual revolutions roughly covering the 18th century in West-
ern Europe, when modern philosophy, social theory and positivist science emerged.9
During the Enlightenment, certain schools of thought promoted the belief that people
could be masters of destiny, thus firmly overlaying medieval perceptions with meta-
narratives espousing progress, reason and objectivity.10 From this, the world came to
be envisaged as something that could be apprehended and manipulated by the perva-
sive autonomy of people.11 This autonomy equipped the mind with a persistent but
unhelpful  cluster  of  dichotomies  that  pushed  knowledge  in  new  directions:  nature/
culture;  man/woman;  subject/object  and  fact/value  distinctions,  which  developed
alongside notions of cultural superiority and ideas of linear and non-repeatable time.
These concepts have endured, allowing dominant, scientific approaches to hang time
within  a  seemingly  unproblematic  and  straightened  linear  sequence  with  clearly
definable epochs, but failing to grasp the inner, subjective qualities of social, ritual and
sacred meaning.12

International Journal of Heritage Studies

313

These  ideas  formed  anchoring  principles  for  theories  of  racial  superiority,  and
worked to legitimise colonial and imperialist enterprises, both of which characterised
much of Western Europe at this time. Archaeology, drawing on the authority accred-
ited to this new system of thought, established itself as a developing discipline with a
fundamentally  scientific  research  agenda  concerned  with  the  origins  of  people  and
society.13  The  conjunction  of  science,  theories  of  evolution  and  progress  proved  an
instrumental mix, culminating in the belief that Europeans were the most biologically
and culturally advanced culture, which in turn lent itself to the development of compe-
tition among European countries.14 The uptake of a conservation ethic at this time
revolved  around  this  competitive  edge,  and  thus  predictably  sought  to  register  the
monumentality  of  a  highly  civilised  nation.  This  historical  thread  of  nationalist
sentiment continued, and was supplemented by a recurring reference to conservation
philosophy, particularly that of William Morris and John Ruskin. Here, concepts of
authenticity  and  aesthetics  gained  precedence,  affirming  the  idea  of  inherent  value,
‘conserve as found’ and the focus of future generations as the inheritors of ‘heritage’.
New avenues of knowledge were opened in order to deal with this emerging sense of
‘heritage’. These ‘expert cultures’ rehearsed developments occurring in wider societal
areas,  and  are  not  a  reflection  of  archaeology  alone.  Indeed,  the  increased  scale  of
change that faced society at this time prompted the growth of a trust in systems that
took the form of abstracted and faceless committees.15 This idea of the ‘expert’ has
created a gap between ‘heritage’, ‘management’ and ‘people’, allowing the imprint left
by the latter to be diluted in comparison to the other two, and thus the particularities
of  interaction  with  heritage  objects,  acts,  places  and  landscapes  remain  surprisingly
muted.

The historical context briefly outlined above weaves together a number of threads
that are still discernible in current management frameworks. These threads are illustra-
tive of wider impulses in favour of positivist science and the ideas of truth this discourse
brought with it. The relevance of this discussion thus lies with the internal restructur-
ing of archaeology in the 1960s, which saw the logical-positivist epistemology of the
New  Archaeology,  or  processual  archaeology,  gain  prominence.  Importantly,  this
period also saw the general acceptance of CHM, which inevitably absorbed this specific
structuring of knowledge. While many of these issues have been expanded by Smith,16
a number of these points warrant revisiting here. It was with this uptake of the proces-
sual epistemology and ontology that archaeological investigations began to circulate
around  processes  of  observation,  hypothesis  testing  and  the  search  for  generalities.
Essentially,  these  investigations  embraced  an  empiricist  conviction  that  ‘legitimate
knowledge  is  properly  grounded  in  experience’,  culminating  in  a  different  kind  of
understanding regarding the past, which should be approached as a ‘problem-orien-
tated testing program’.17 The seduction of this approach was twofold, beginning firstly
with its ability confidently to provide objective statements about the past and, secondly,
the  identity  this  supplied  the  archaeological  discipline.18  The  advantages  that  came
with this scientific image cannot be understated; indeed, it allowed the discipline to
gain  intellectual  respectability,  expertise  and  authority  from  the  power  structures
already grounded in the scientific paradigm.19

314 E. Waterton

This issue of power is illustrated by the Hareshaw Linn community project, which is
used  in  this  paper  to  describe  a  concrete  example  of  how  many  communities  and
people do not necessarily share the attempts of positivist science to compartmentalise
the  world.  This  argument  is  developed  with  particular  reference  to  the  associations
ascribed  to  a  specific  tract  of  land  adjacent  to  the  village  of  Bellingham,  which  has
become an integral part of a cultural process that carries the powerful ability to interact
simultaneously with past and present. The Hareshaw Linn offers insight into the ways
by which the dominant archaeological discourse fails to accommodate a situation in
which the past mingles with the present in a series of durations.20 This idea has been
developed by Ingold, who suggests that just as we can move from place to place in the
landscape, ‘likewise we can move from one present to another, without having to break
through any chronological barriers’ separating one time from the next.21 Therefore,
landscapes  cannot  be  objects  simply  understood,  but  instead  exist  as  living,  social
processes with the ability to generate values through a community’s knowledge of the
past.22 It is never complete and is perpetually under construction, and thus can never
be satisfactorily relegated to just one past or another, or one present.23 Further, ‘people
inhabiting  and  experiencing  the  landscape  no  longer  stand  outside  it  …  on  the
contrary, they are just as much a part of the landscape they live in as are the so-called
“natural” features.24

In this, the creation and maintenance of a sense of identity involves cultural work,
and in accepting that identities change over time it is also necessary to acknowledge
that the management process must change with them.

Cultural Landscapes: Community Values versus Dominant Management Strategies

Until this point, only more abstract notions of landscape have been discussed, which
have remained separate from the practical dimensions of heritage management. Away
from the lumps and bumps of real-life landscapes it is an easy task to theorise, decon-
struct and redefine landscape into distinct parcels of ‘culture’, ‘history’, ‘environment’,
‘prehistory’, ‘associations’ and ‘nature’, but what is happening in routine practice? The
Hareshaw Linn project began as an exercise to restore a Victorian cobbled walkway,
and a series of six bridges that allow the path to wend its way alongside the Linn, cross-
ing the burn at several stages and passing through diverse surroundings. Originally, the
NNPMP project focused on the conservation and enhancement of the ‘semi-natural’
woodland habitat, and allocated few resources for aspects that deviated from this remit,
aside from maintenance of existing facilities.25 However, following local consultation,
this  seemingly  simple  project  spiralled  exponentially.  The  project,  named  ‘White
Water, Green Shade’, intended to renovate the dam, manage the woodland, undertake
an oral history project and present a creative interpretation of the Linn, pulling in a
number of local groups and individuals in intense public consultation.26

‘White  Water,  Green  Shade’  thus  provided  significant  material  for  gathering
together a sense of the role played by the Hareshaw Linn in terms of the local commu-
nity. It also provided a deeper sense of the Bellingham community itself, allowing the
somewhat homogeneous term ‘community’ to develop into a layering of groups and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

315
individuals,  thereby  expressing  a  complex  account  of  Bellingham  social  life.27  The
results of this initiative produced a number of reports, recommendations, newsletters,
management  strategies  and,  importantly,  transcripts  of  24  oral  history  recordings,
which together provided both historical and contemporary sources from which to gain
an insight into the context of the project. Of particular relevance within these sources
is the consistent reference made to an undertone of collective resistance, illuminated by
a  sceptical  unease  with  the  power  relations  that  have  historically  marginalised  and
disempowered local values and interests. This has sometimes been expressed as disas-
sociation: 

The Linn is nothing like it used to be when the local people had it. Since the National
Park bought it it’s gone down. The local people would hold dances to raise money for
the up keep … The National Park is a sore point around here.28

Used to run up there … Don’t walk so much because it’s advertised in the National
Parks as a public walk … get lots of people up there in summer so tend not to go up.29

Reluctance to participate was thus driven by a distrust arising from general dissatisfac-
tion that ownership was thought to belong with the National Park, and not the local
community.30 This can be glimpsed in discussions about ‘developing a sense of place’,
an objective that rather patronisingly assumed that this had not already been estab-
lished by the community, and significantly overlooked the role this piece of landscape
has played in the lives of the community, past and present.31 Perhaps the most telling
element of this project was the oral history project carried out by Susan Mitchell, which
was able clearly to illustrate how deeply embedded the Linn is in the culture of the
Bellingham community, who see it as being enhanced through their interactions, and
vice versa.32 While it is essential to remain aware of the biases that can occur during
oral history collection, reminiscing and memory work, Mitchell points out that it is also
important to acknowledge that there is a reality if collective memory is unanimous.
Certainly it was here, as the comments gathered from the local community will attest,
providing a vivid and tangible reminder of the importance the Linn plays: 

Our own children played up the Linn, much the same way as we did. Except they
didn’t pick things. That bit at the bottom of the Linn was the spot, spent a lot of time
playing in there, paddling and having a picnic, even the grandchildren play.33

Going up the Linn, would play up there, go for walks … exciting, in the winter. Would
go up to the top of the hill and sledge all the way down … can’t remember going up
with the school … they go up with the school now. The bridges have all been put
right.34

The  oral  history  testaments  are  supplemented  by  local  commentary  surrounding
the creative elements of the project, including a local play production and a sculpture
coordinated by the youth group: 

Hareshaw Linn has been central to the life of the Bellingham community as long as
people can remember. People have played, worked and partied there. Children have
run dares over the dams; men have dug iron ore out of the ground and families have
picnicked there … It is a very special place, with a valley so damp and lush it is almost
tropical and a waterfall that plunges through a spectacular gorge.35

316 E. Waterton

The Linn and its resources served many uses, embracing pragmatic, recreational and
spiritual elements, including food and fuel sources, freedom and a place of magic.36
The deep sense of place that can clearly be seen to have permeated past community life
continues  to  mould  the  way  in  which  the  Bellingham  community  engages  with  the
world in which they live today: 

On the days up the Linn we didn’t bother about taking food … popped back if you got
hungry … would eat wild strawberries or raspberries. Always a season for rose hips …
if you wanted to make a bit of money you would take them to a cottage and get 2d for
a pound. Just lived off the land.37

Father used to take them up to collect [nuts] … Have taken grandchildren nutting …
Don’t think the Linn has changed a lot … The stepping stones were instead of a bridge
… perhaps it was the second big flood … must have gone up in the winter because can
remember the icicles hanging. A magic place.38

Such commentary reveals how a tract of land can characterise a particular area, define
a locality and emphasise the need to belong and identify with a place, demonstrating
the articulation of social and natural.39 Access to the Linn is an important issue, and is
emphatic  of  how  deeply  embedded  it  is  in  local  culture.  This  idea  is  exemplified
throughout  the  totality  of  actions  and  cultural  work  put  into  the  Hareshaw  Linn
community project, in which the idea of the Linn as a ‘community’ sanctuary is clearly
discernible, with one person saying they would never see it the same again.40

One respondent41 recalls ‘[knowing] every tree at the beginning of the Linn’, and
others42 tell stories about certain features, using their environment, and holding an
unspoken knowledge that dictated what could and could not be done to the Linn. 

There [are] lots of plants up the Linn … can remember the wild garlic … lots of it. Go
up a couple of times a year. Very happy memories of Hareshaw Linn … not every-
where has a place like that.43

Did the schools go up the Linn? Yes they did … for nature walks … to teach us about
nature, but we knew because we lived it … we knew more than they did.44

This  commentary  exposes  the  cultural  manifestations  that  are  engaged  with  the
landscape,  and,  importantly,  highlights  the  potential  for  the  emergence  of  tensions
and a faltering of identity if these manifestations are not accorded the same impor-
tance  in  policy.  The  Bellingham  community  project  provides  an  opportunity  to
acknowledge  the  associations  vested  in  landscape,  and  thus  dismiss  the  persistent
conviction that it exists as an ‘innate and immutable essence’.45 The depth of iden-
tity  drawn  from  the  Linn  surely  parallels  that  ascribed  to  any  given  monument,
discrete archaeological site or building, and must therefore present a powerful argu-
ment for re-evaluating the basic categories that underpin ‘heritage’ in both national
and  international  policy  and  legislation.  This  move,  however,  needs  to  be  made  in
tandem  with  a  greater  movement  within  the  wider  management  process  itself.  It  is
thus  an  opportunity  to  broaden  the  scope  of  heritage  beyond  that  of  material  and
tangible elements, and engage as well with the values, meanings and aspirations that
are  symbolised  and  represented  by  that  heritage.46  In  this  way,  landscape  will
become more than a physical backdrop: 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

317

Hareshaw Linn is special not only because it is a beautiful part of the landscape with
some rare wildlife, but because it has played an important role in so many people’s
lives.47

This case study reaffirms the idea that ‘there can only be one valid reason for conserving
heritage: they are valued by elements of a community, by a whole community, or by
our society as a whole’.48 But to make this statement real we must seriously question
the  relationship  that  exists  between  people  and  place,  and  do  so  by  applying  our
assumptions and theories to real and everyday situations that use people, their words
and their circumstances. This is a lesson learnt by the NNPA, which has established a
new  ‘way  of  seeing’  heritage  following  the  Hareshaw  Linn  community  project,
epitomised by the park’s new vision: 

Northumberland National Park Authority will be proactive, innovative and forward-
looking, working towards a National Park with thriving communities and a sustain-
able local economy grounded in its special qualities, including a richness of cultural
heritage and biodiversity, a true sense of tranquillity and a distinct character associ-
ated with a living, working landscape, in which everyone has an opportunity to under-
stand, enjoy and contribute to those special qualities.49

This vision aims to reconcile previously ineffective liaison arrangements between the
authority and local communities, which is continually being improved to create greater
dialogue, engagement and feedback.50

Discussion: Clearing the Way for Embracing a Wider Landscape

Two distinct directions have been taken so far in this paper, both with the aim of isolat-
ing  the  ‘essence’  of  heritage  management,  firstly  as  it  is  currently  practised,  and
secondly as a view of what it can potentially be. Pausing at this juncture allows us to
reflect critically on the current position of the management process, and engage with
multiple forms of knowledge including archaeological values, but also incorporating
community  aspirations.  As  Casey  points  out,  landscapes  hold  the  power  to  ‘gather’
experiences, histories, memories and thoughts, and figures in the way of life of many
communities, thus somehow making it a seemingly general and universal category, but
emphatically remaining specific and singular to particular locations.51 Examining the
landscape in this light, it is difficult to equate the hills, rivers and woodlands with the
remit of nature conservation, as these features cease to be merely familiar and take on,
instead, ideological connotations that spill convincingly into the boundaries of cultural
heritage. Close inspection of the heritage, identity and landscape suggests that heritage
cannot be separated from those communities who are defined by it. However, this rela-
tionship is not as transparent or unproblematic as I have thus far suggested, and it must
be remembered that any ‘heritage’ relationship is part of a process, and is thus open to
dissonance and conflict, a point indicative of the diversity of identities linked to heri-
tage.52 Nor can identity be considered static. Or that with the ‘recovery of past’ our
sense of self will be eternally fixed: instead, identities undergo constant transforma-
tions, becoming the ‘names we give to the different ways we are positioned by, and
position ourselves within, the narratives of the past’.53

318 E. Waterton

Of course, the idea of identity has received considerable attention, especially since
the advent of postmodern and post-processual attempts to isolate the individual, or
self. Identity has remained a central concept in recent heritage discussions, and it is
this  occurrence  that  strikes  the  greatest  paradox  when  considering  the  current
management  process.  Where  are  these  issues  of  identity,  ownership  and  belonging
when  it  comes  to  the  guidelines,  assessment  processes  and  definitions  used  in  both
national  and  international  designation  strategies?  How  can  heritage  management
move towards inclusion of things that are not things at all, but intangible values stem-
ming from identity and a sense of place if the mechanisms for allowing such opportu-
nities  are  not  put  in  place?  How  can  the  management  process  move  beyond  a
consideration  of  how  people  use  the  landscape  towards  understanding  why  and  in
what way they value it?54

At a base level the failure of the current heritage management process stems from the
narrowly  conceived  definitions  used  to  gauge  what  heritage  actually  is,  which  are
informed  by  dominant  assumptions  of  archaeological  science.  Neither  adequately
recognises the role of stakeholders. To do so, the role of stakeholder must be expanded
and allowed to encroach upon the terrain of the archaeological steward, thereby also
rocking the idea of perceived universal rights and a common heritage: and ultimately,
the tendency of filtering heritage and the management process through the privileged
hands of a few. This is an argument reminiscent of that developed by Weiner, and later
Lahn,55 who argue that: 

The most important aspect of prized archaeological artefacts is not that these consti-
tute data but that these ‘inalienable possessions are the hub around which social iden-
tities are displayed, fabricated, exaggerated, modified, or diminished’.56

Such that: 

The person or group that controls (and thus defines) the movement and meaning of
such objects inherits an authority and a power over others.57

Heritage, then, has the potential to take on the most ‘ancient and powerful economic
classification’ of inalienable possessions, and archaeologists, as advocates of the past,
are able to validate their esoteric position by asserting control over heritage that repre-
sents that past.58 Those holding a dominant form of knowledge have a greater scope to
influence others, to close down other meanings and to arbitrate as to which meanings
and values are socially permissible.59 Questioning this position takes heritage manage-
ment  into  a  distinctly  uncomfortable  area  that  threatens  not  only  the  power  of  the
expert but also the loss of scientific knowledge as ‘truth’ and a discipline’s identity.60
Introducing community perspectives is not a solution in itself, as the wider politics of
heritage require deeper negotiations between desires to dismantle authoritative roles,
yet at the same time a reactionary defence of precisely that authority.61 Reconciling
archaeological perspectives with community values reveals an impasse. A reshuffling of
power depends upon our resolve to question, test and explore the underlying assump-
tions of heritage practice, and develop a process that adequately reflects the needs of
those in the present.62

International Journal of Heritage Studies

319

This requires sensitive treatment, as both community and expert knowledge need to
find a way to coexist in a negotiated partnership. Largely, this requires an awareness of
those knowledge systems that have allowed archaeologists to distance themselves from
the political and social acts of archaeology, and embed the multiplicity of voices into
the single authoritative voice of archaeologists as stewards.63 It is an argument reminis-
cent of that begun some 20 years ago by Isabel McBryde and her edited volume Who
Owns  the  Past?,  and  rehearsed  numerous  times  since.  These  arguments  have  drawn
attention to the knowledge politics that work to alienate the public in terms of owner-
ship  and  control,  and  underscore  quite  significantly  the  muted  success  of  claims  to
make  archaeology  ‘“more  relevant”  for  contemporary  needs’.64  The  paradox,  of
course, is that we have the label ‘public heritage’, but there is no distinct role for ‘the
public’ within the management process; rather, more often than not, this role is found
at the end of the process, in the form of educational or informational criteria. Instead,
the public is largely removed from the equation by a process that enables archaeological
and other heritage experts consistently to apply hegemonic understandings of the past
by allocating exclusive priority to monumental and scientific values.65 The set up of the
expert, by this token, makes the process of stepping outside the natural or ‘common-
sense’ route to take, both creating and maintaining the idea of the heritage manager as
the person best suited to represent different communities and situations.

The Hareshaw Linn case study is able to feed into this debate, but to make the point
more emphatic a line must be drawn—one that shies away from making overly univer-
sal or general claims. While it seems an easy task to cobble together a number of such
examples and from there overemphasise the degree to which people, as a somewhat
homogeneous category, engage with heritage, the strength of this argument actually
emerges from the diversity of approaches to heritage. This is not a call for the privilege
of the expert to be replaced by the privilege of the public as another formless and face-
less committee. Rather, it is a call for heritage managers and policy makers to develop
a more humanistic approach that seeks to find accountability with the specific interest
groups that emerge around an aspect of heritage.66 This process of interchanging ideas,
values  and  meanings  will  not  debase  either  archaeology  or  heritage  management;
rather, it will work towards building richer interpretations and understandings that
hold value not only for heritage practitioners but also for those people ‘whose identities
are affected by what is said about their pasts’.67 This echoes the questioning of owner-
ship in the Hareshaw Linn case study, visible in the collective resistance arising from
the disempowerment of local values. If we do not move towards the idea of a critical
sense of plurality, the balance in favour of scientific, archaeological and other expert
knowledges will continue to impose a process of management that will fail to fulfil one
of its central tenets—that we conserve cultural heritage because it is valued. In short,
heritage  acquires  value  ‘because  of,  and  through,  our  desires’.68  Importantly,  this
brings with it the assertion that people are not passively needing things done for them
but are active subjects with values and judgements relating to heritage that hold validity
in  their  lives.  Fundamentally,  attention  must  stay  focused  on  the  current  political
tendency towards greater community involvement, which inevitably brings with it a
need to broaden the definition of what constitutes heritage.

320 E. Waterton

Conclusion

This paper has attempted to take advantage of the aligning of an opportunity within
heritage studies as a result of increasing questioning and debate regarding the frame-
works within which heritage managers operate. This alignment has arisen as a reaction
both to broader, global issues that have emerged from post-colonial nations and also
in response to recent attempts to make heritage more socially relevant, such as current
policy calls for social inclusion and community regeneration. As such, emphasis here
has  been  placed  upon  understanding  the  current  position  of  CHM,  with  particular
regard to heritage discourse, and the discursive conflict emerging from the discordance
of  modernist  and  postmodernist  viewpoints.  The  difficulty  here  has  been  that  this
subject easily lends itself to the questioning of philosophical underpinnings of the CHM
process, rather than just unpacking practical problems to which there are equally prac-
tical solutions. It is a problem that remains hinged upon distance. Traditionally, heri-
tage has been confined to the distant past, but the gap between past and present grows
ever closer as heritage managers are forced to come to grips with the implications it has
in the present. By distancing the expert from real social life, heritage managers have
been able to soothe, sanitise and administer heritage to a public largely removed and
alienated from the process. However, the contraction of distance has forced issues such
as ownership and control to be renegotiated alongside the dismissal of ideas of heritage
being a relic confined to the past and accessible only by scientific strategies. Essentially,
this arises from the argument that heritage is part of contemporary society, rather than
something  dead,  thereby  contradicting  the  dominant  approach  that  overlooks  the
workings of heritage and its ability to change and reshape over time.69 The management
process needs to respond to communities attempting to decide for themselves what
constitutes value, and thus what warrants protecting as part of heritage. This resolution
will take time, as it involves redefining the limits of universal assumptions, so as to
accept  the  contribution  of  local  communities  as  valid  players  in  a  process  that  has
profound effects on cultural heritage. We must first acknowledge that our judgements
are coloured by different contexts and are thus subject to, and should welcome, ques-
tioning and investigation. Synthesis, a difficult thing, must take account of a multiplic-
ity of meanings and uses across a number of social axes, and balance these with loaded
questions as to ‘who decides’. Conflict, then, must be used to blow apart the subtle poli-
tics of heritage and lead us towards a dynamic and integrated system of management
entered into via negotiation and debate. For this purpose, the Hareshaw Linn commu-
nity project has provided a clear message of the importance of such self-reflection.

Acknowledgements

The research that forms the basis of this paper was part funded by a University of York
Masters Scholarship and my present doctoral research project is funded by the Arts and
Humanities Research Council. I am extremely grateful to both. Thanks are also due to
all those who commented on this paper: Mick Atha, Gary Campbell, Michael Fradley,
Sally Huxtable, Rebecca Griffin, Anna Marshall, and Jenny Walker. Special thanks are

extended to Drs Laurajane Smith and Kevin Walsh. Finally, greatest thanks are owed to
the generosity of Susan Mitchell, Dr Robert Young and the Bellingham community.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

321

Notes

Ibid., 1.

Stewart, ‘An Occupied Place’, 14.

1 [1] Crouch, ‘Culture in the Experience of Landscape’.
2 [2]
3 [3] Northumberland National Park, ‘The Hareshaw Linn Project’, 1.
4 [4]
5 [5] Northumberland National Park, ‘The Hareshaw Linn Project’, 1.
6 [6] Northumberland National Park Authority, Management Plan, 37.
7 [7] Ross, ‘Landscape as Heritage’, 10.
8 [8]
9 [9] Trigger,  A  History  of  Archaeological  Thought,  56;  Store,  ‘The  Ownership  of  Culture’,  162;

Ibid.

Benton and Craib, Philosophy of Social Science, 180.

10[10] Glacken, Traces on the Rhodian Shore, 494; Trigger, A History of Archaeological Thought, 57;

Johnson, Archaeology Theory, 162; Franklin, Nature and Social Theory, 19.

11[11] Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, 129; Christians, ‘Ethics and

Politics in Qualitative Research’, 208.

12[12] Artelius,  ‘The  Framework  of  Pagan  Identity’,  10;  Karlsson,  ‘Introduction’,  x;  Simmons,

13[13]

Interpreting Nature, 11.
Silberman,  ‘Promised  Lands  and  Chosen  Peoples’,  254;  Smith  and  Campbell,  ‘Governing
Material Culture’; Trigger, A History of Archaeological Thought, 61.

14[14] Hides, ‘The Genealogy of Material Culture and Cultural Diversity’, 36.
15[15] Giddens,  Modernity  and  Self-identity;  Chourliaraki  and  Fairclough,  Discourses  in  Late

16[16]

Modernity, 73; Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity, 88.
Smith,  Archaeological  Theory  and  the  Politics  of  Cultural  Heritage,  59.  See  Smith  for  an
extended discussion of these issues.

17[17] Dark, Theoretical Archaeology, 9; Nicholas, ‘The Past and Future of Indigenous Archaeology’,
34; Tilley, ‘Archaeology as Socio-political Action in the Present’, 302; Trigger, ‘Post-proces-
sual Developments in Anglo-American Archaeology’, 66; Wylie, Thinking from Things, 3.

18[18] Preucel, ‘The Philosophy of Archaeology’, 19; Smith, ‘The Repatriation of Human Remains’;

Smith, ‘Towards a Theoretical Framework for Archaeological Heritage Management’, 65.

19[19] Fritz  and  Plog,  ‘The  Nature  of  Archaeological  Explanation’,  412;  Kintz,  ‘Archaeologists  as

Intellectuals’, 47; Wylie, Thinking from Things, 1.

20[20] Olivier, ‘Duration, Memory and the Nature of the Archaeological Record’, 66.
21[21]
22[22]

Ingold, ‘The Temporality of Landscape’, 159.
See Kristiansen, ‘Perspectives on the Archaeological Heritage’, 27; and Mayne-Wilson, ‘Under-
standing and Managing Cultural Landscapes’, 13, for extended discussions of these issues.
Ingold, ‘The Temporality of Landscape’, 162.

23[23]
24[24] Van Dommelen, ‘Exploring Everyday Places and Cosmologies’, 279.
25[25] Transport for Leisure, Interpreting the Northumberland National Parks Cultural Heritage, 4.
26[26] Green, Hareshaw Linn Interpretive Project Report, 9.
27[27]

S. Mitchell, Hareshaw Oral History Community Project: Report and Recommendations (unpub-
lished), Northumberland National Park Authority, Hexham, 1999.

28[28] Respondents 7 and 8, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archive tape number

HOH/19, p. 2.

29[29] Respondent 2, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archive tape number HOH/

30[30]

2, p. 2.
S.  Mitchell,  Hareshaw  Oral  History  Community  Project:  Report  and  Recommendations
(unpublished), Northumberland National Park Authority, Hexham, 1999: 6.

322 E. Waterton

31[31] Green, Hareshaw Linn Interpretive Project Report, 13.
32[32]
33[33] Respondent 4, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archive tape number HOH/

Ibid., 21.

7, p. 3.

34[34] Respondent 9, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

22, p. 1.

35[35] White, ‘£12,000 Windfall for Beauty Spot’, Hexham Courant, 7 July 2000, 7.
36[36] Respondent 10, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archive tape number HOH/

24, p. 1

37[37] Respondent 1, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

1, p. 1.

38[38] Respondent 6, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

18, p. 2.

39[39] Allen, ‘The Management of the Rural Landscape’, 163.
40[40] Green, Hareshaw Linn Interpretive Project Report, 21.
41[41] Respondent 6, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

18, p. 1.

42[42] Respondent 1, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

1, p. 2.

43[43] Respondent 6, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

18, p. 1.

44[44] Respondent 3, transcript of oral history recording by S. Mitchell, archival tape number HOH/

4, p. 3.

Smith, Archaeological Theory and the Politics of Cultural Heritage, 195.

45[45] Gwyn, ‘Associative Landscapes in a Welsh Context’, 188.
46[46]
47[47] White, ‘£12,000 Windfall for Beauty Spot’, Hexham Courant, 7 July 2000, 7.
48[48] Pearson and Sullivan, Looking after Heritage Places, 17.
49[49] Northumberland National Park Authority, Management Plan, 5.
50[50]
51[51] Casey, ‘How to Get from Space to Place in a Fairly Short Stretch of Time’, 32.
52[52] Hall, ‘Cultural Identity and Diaspora’, 392; see also Graham et al., A Geography of Heritage;

Ibid., 55.

and Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage.

53[53] Hall,  ‘Cultural  Identity  and  Diaspora’,  304;  see  also  Osbourne,  ‘Figuring  Space,  Marking

54[54]

Time’, 25.
See  Howard,  ‘Resonance  and  Dissonance’,  239;  and  Crouch,  ‘Culture  in  the  Experience  of
Landscape’, 12, for further discussions.

55[55] Lahn, ‘Dressing up the Dead’; Weiner, Inalienable Possessions, 17.
56[56] Weiner, Inalienable Possessions, 99–100, cited in Lahn, ‘Dressing up the Dead’, 42.
57[57] Weiner, Inalienable Possessions, 10, cited in Lahn, ‘Dressing up the Dead’, 7.
58[58] Weiner, Inalienable Possessions, 17.
59[59] Gosden, ‘Endemic Doubt’, 806.
60[60] Lahn,  ‘Dressing  up  the  Dead’,  10;  see  also  Smith,  Archaeological  Theory  and  the  Politics  of

61[61]

Cultural Heritage.
Strang, ‘An Appropriate Question?’, 182; for a fuller discussion of these issues see Zimmer-
man,  ‘When  Data  Becomes  People’,  69–88;  ‘Regaining  Our  Nerve’,  71–74;  and  ‘Usurping
Native American Voice’, 169–184.

62[62] Pearson  and  Sullivan,  Looking  after  Heritage  Places,  4;  see  also  Emerick,  ‘Use,  Value  and
Significance  in  Heritage  Management’;  Smith,  Archaeological  Theory  and  the  Politics  of
Cultural Heritage; Newman and McLean, ‘Editorial’; Newman and McLean, ‘Heritage Builds
Communities’;  Russell,  ‘Towards  More  Inclusive,  Vital  Models  of  Heritage’;  Zimmerman,
‘When Data Becomes People’, for further discussion of this issue.

63[63] Feld and Basso, ‘Introduction’, 5.

Smith, Archaeological Theory and the Politics of Cultural Heritage, 410.

64[64]
65[65] McBryde,  ‘Dream  the  Impossible  Dream’,  8;  see  also  Zimmerman,  ‘When  Data  Becomes

International Journal of Heritage Studies

323

People’, 70.

66[66] Zimmerman, ‘When Data Becomes People’, 83.
67[67] Leone, ‘A Historical Archaeology of Capitalism’, 264.
68[68] Lahn, ‘Dressing up the Dead’, 4.
69[69] Tehan, ‘To Be or Not to Be (Property)’, 281.

References

Allen, T. ‘The Management of the Rural Landscape: A Sense of Place’. In Managing the Historic Rural

Landscape, edited by J. Grenville. London: Routledge, 1999: 163–72.

Artelius, S. ‘The Framework of Pagan Identity: “Time” in the Southern Scandinavian Late Iron Age’.
In  Its  About  Time:  The  Concept  of  Time  in  Archaeology,  edited  by  H.  Karlsson.  Göteborg:
Bricoleur Press, 2001: 1–27.

Benton, T., and I. Craib. Philosophy of Social Science: The Philosophical Foundations of Social Thought.

Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001.

Casey, E. S. ‘How to Get from Space to Place in a Fairly Short Stretch of Time: Phenomenological
Prolegomena’.  In  Senses  of  Place,  edited  by  S.  Feld  and  K.  H.  Basso.  Sante  Fe:  School  of
American Research Press, 1996: 13–52.

Chouliaraki, L., and N. Fairclough. Discourse in Late Modernity: Rethinking Critical Discourse Analysis.

Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1999.

Christians,  C.  G.  ‘Ethics  and  Politics  in  Qualitative  Research’.  In  The  Landscape  of  Qualitative
Research: Theories and Issues, edited by N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage, 2003: 208–43.

Crouch, D. ‘Culture in the Experience of Landscape’. Landscape Research 15, no. 1 (1990): 11–19.
Dark, K. R. Theoretical Archaeology. London: Duckworth, 1995.
Emerick, K. ‘Use, Value and Significance in Heritage Management’. In Destruction and Conservation
of  Cultural  Property,  edited  by  R.  Layton,  P.  G.  Stone  and  J.  Thomas.  London:  Routledge,
2001: 276–85.

Feld, S., and K. H. Basso. ‘Introduction’. In Senses of Place, edited by S. Feld and K. H. Basso. Sante

Fe: School of American Research Press, 1996: 3–12.
Franklin, A. Nature and Social Theory. London: Sage, 2002.
Fritz, J., and F. Plog. ‘The Nature of Archaeological Explanation’. American Antiquity 35 (1970): 405–12.
Giddens, A. The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1990.
——. Modernity and Self-identity. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991.
Glacken, C. Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought from Ancient Times

to the End of the 18th Century. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967.
Gosden, C. ‘Endemic Doubt: Is What we Write Right?’ Antiquity 66 (1992): 803–08.
Graham,  B.,  G.  J.  Ashworth,  and  J.  E.  Tunbridge.  A  Geography  of  Heritage:  Power,  Culture  and

Economy. London: Arnold, 2000.

Green, M. Hareshaw Linn Interpretive Project Report. Hexham: NNPA, 2002.
Gwyn, D. ‘Associative Landscape in a Welsh Context’. In Europe’s Cultural Landscapes: Archaeologists
and the Management of Change, edited by G. Fairclough and S. Rippon, EAC Occasional Paper
2. Brussels: Europea Archaeologiae Concilium, 2002: 187–92.

Hall, S. ‘Cultural Identity and Diaspora’. In Colonial Discourse and Post-colonial Theory: A Reader,

edited by P. Williams and L. Chrismas. Essex: Pearson Education, 1994: 392–403.

Heidegger, M. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. New York: Harper, 1977.
Hides,  S.  ‘The  Genealogy  of  Material  Culture  and  Cultural  Diversity’.  In  Cultural  Identity  and
Archaeology: The Construction of European Communities, edited by P. Graves-Brown, S. Jones
and P. Gamble. London: Routledge, 1996: 25–47.

324 E. Waterton

Howard,  P.  ‘Resonance  and  Dissonance:  When  the  Local  and  the  Global  Meet’.  In  Heritage  and
Identity: Shaping the Nations of the North, edited by J. M. Fladmark. London: Donhead, 2001:
239–49.

Ingold, T. ‘The Temporality of the Landscape’. World Archaeology 25, no. 2 (1993): 152–74.
Johnson, M. Archaeological Theory: An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999.
Karlsson,  H.  ‘Introduction’.  In  Its  About  Time:  The  Concept  of  Time  in  Archaeology,  edited  by

H. Karlsson. Göteborg: Bricoleur Press, 2001: ix–x.

Kintz,  T.  ‘Archaeologists  as  Intellectuals:  Agents  of  the  Empire  or  Defenders  of  Dissent?’  In  The
Responsibilities  of  Archaeologists:  Archaeology  and  Ethics,  edited  by  M.  Pluctennik.  Oxford:
Archaeopress, 2001: 47–55.

Kristiansen, K. ‘Perspectives on the Archaeological Heritage: History and Future’. In Archaeological
Heritage Management in the Modern World, edited by H. Cleere. London: Routledge, 1989:
23–29.

Lahn, J. (1996) ‘Dressing up the Dead: Archaeology, the Kow Swamp Remains and Some Related
Problems  with  Heritage  Management’.  In  Issues  in  Management  Archaeology,  edited  by
L. Smith and A. Clarke. St Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 1996: 25–31.

Leone,  M.  P.  ‘A  Historical  Archaeology  of  Capitalism’.  American  Anthropologist  97,  no.  2  (1995):

251–68.

Mayne-Wilson, W. ‘Understanding and Managing Cultural Landscapes’. Landscape Australia 23, no.

1 (2001): 10–17.

McBryde, I. ‘Dream the Impossible Dream? Shared Heritage, Shared Values, or Shared Understand-

ings of Disparate Values?’ Historic Environment 11, nos 2&3 (1995): 8–13.

Newman, A., and F. McLean. ‘Heritage Builds Communities: The Application of Heritage Resources
to  the  Problems  of  Social  Exclusion’.  International  Journal  of  Heritage  Studies  4,  nos  3&4
(1998): 143–53.

——. ‘Editorial’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 10, no. 1 (2004): 5–10.
Nicholas,  G.  P.  ‘The  Past  and  Future  of  Indigenous  Archaeology:  Global  Challenges,  North

American Perspectives, Australian Prospects’. Australian Archaeology 52 (2001): 29–40.

Northumberland National Park. ‘The Hareshaw Linn Project’. In News. Hexham: NNPA, 1999.
Northumberland National Park Authority. Management Plan, 3rd Review Framework Document: A

Secure Future for the Land of the Far Horizons. Hexham: NNPA, 2003.

Olivier, L. C. ‘Duration, Memory and the Nature of the Archaeological Record’. In Its About Time:
The Concept of Time in Archaeology, edited by H. Karlsson. Göteborg: Bricoleur Press, 2001:
61–70.

Osborne, B. S. ‘Figuring Space, Marking Time: Contested Identity in Canada’. International Journal

of Heritage Studies 2, nos 1&2 (1996): 23–40.

Pearson,  M.,  and  S.  Sullivan.  Looking  after  Heritage  Places:  The  Basics  of  Heritage  Planning  for

Managers, Landowners and Administrators. Victoria: Melbourne University Press, 1995.

Preucel,  R.  W.  ‘The  Philosophy  of  Archaeology’.  In  Processual  and  Postprocessual  Archaeologies:
Multiple Ways of Knowing the Past, edited by R. W. Preucel. Carbondale: Center for Archaeo-
logical Research, 1990: 17–29.

Ross,  A.  ‘Landscape  as  Heritage’.  In  Issues  in  Management  Archaeology,  edited  by  L.  Smith  and

A. Clarke. St Lucia: University of Queensland Press, 1995: 9–17.

Russell, J. ‘Towards More Inclusive, Vital Models of Heritage: An Australian Perspective’. Interna-

tional Journal of Heritage Studies 3, no. 2 (1997): 71–80.

Silberman, N. A. ‘Promised Lands and Chosen Peoples: The Politics and Poetics of Archaeological
Narrative’. In Nationalism, Politics and the Practice of Archaeology, edited by P. L. Kohl and
C. Fawcett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995: 249–62.

Simmons, I. G. Interpreting Nature: Cultural Constructions of the Environment. London: Routledge,

1993.

Smith, L. ‘Towards a Theoretical Framework for Archaeological Heritage Management’. Archaeolog-

ical Review from Cambridge 12, no. 1 (1993): 55–73.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

325

——. Archaeological Theory and the Politics of Cultural Heritage. London: Routledge, 2004.
——.  ‘The  Repatriation  of  Human  Remains—Problem  or  Opportunity?  Antiquity  78,  no.  300

(2004): 404–13.

Smith,  L.,  and  G.  Campbell.  ‘Governing  Material  Culture’.  In  Governing  Australia:  Studies  in
Contemporary  Rationalities  of  Government,  edited  by  M.  Dean  and  B.  Hindess.  Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998: 173–93.

Stewart, K. C. ‘An Occupied Place’. In Senses of Place, edited by S. Feld and K. H. Basso. Sante Fe:

School of American Research Press, 1996: 137–65.

Store, J. ‘The Ownership of Culture: Reconciling Our Common and Separate Heritage’. Australia in

Oceania 27, no. 2 (1992): 161–67.

Strang, V. ‘An Appropriate Question? The Propriety of Anthropological Analysis in the Australian
Political Arena’. In The Ethics of Anthropology: Debates and Dilemmas, edited by P. Caplan.
London: Routledge, 2003: 172–94.

Tehan, M. ‘To Be or Not to Be (Property): Anglo-Australian Law and the Search for Protection of
Indigenous Cultural Heritage’. University of Tasmania Law Review 15, no. 2 (1996): 267–305.
Tilley, C. ‘Archaeology as Socio-political Action in the Present’. In Reader in Archaeological Theory:
Post-processual and Cognitive Approaches, edited by D. S. Whitley. London: Routledge, 1998:
305–30.

Transport for Leisure (TFL). Interpreting the Northumberland National Parks Cultural Heritage: An

Interpretive Plan for Hareshaw Linn. Gosforth: TFL, 1996.

Trigger, B. A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
——.  ‘Post-processual  Developments  in  Anglo-American  Archaeology’.  Norwegian  Archaeological

Review 24, no. 2 (1991): 65–77.

Tunbridge, J., and G. Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage. Chichester: John Wiley, 1996.
van  Dommelen,  P.  ‘Exploring  Everyday  Places  and  Cosmologies’.  In  Archaeologies  of  Landscape,

edited by W. Ashmore and B. Knapp. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999: 277–85.

Weiner,  A.  Inalienable  Possessions:  The  Paradox  of  Keeping—While  Giving.  Berkeley:  University  of

California Press, 1992.

Wylie,  A.  Thinking  from  Things:  Essays  in  the  Philosophy  of  Archaeology.  Berkeley:  University  of

California Press, 2002.

Zimmerman,  L.  J.  ‘When  Data  Becomes  People:  Archaeological  Ethics,  Reburial  and  the  Past  as

Public Heritage’. International Journal of Cultural Property 7, no. 1 (1998): 69–88.

——.  ‘Regaining  Our  Nerve:  Ethics,  Values  and  the  Transformation  of  Archaeology’.  In  Ethics  in
American  Archaeology,  edited  by  M.  J.  Lynott  and  A.  Wylie.  Washington,  DC:  Society  for
American Archaeology, 2000: 71–74.

——. ‘Usurping Native American Voice’. In The Future of the Past: Archaeologists, Native Americans

and Repatriation, edited by T. Bray. New York: Garland, 2001: 169–84.


