International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Antiquity at the National Memorial Arboretum

Howard Williams

To cite this article: Howard Williams (2014) Antiquity at the National Memorial Arboretum,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20:4, 393-414, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2012.757556
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.757556

Published online: 16 Jan 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 271

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2014
Vol. 20, No. 4, 393–414, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.757556

Antiquity at the National Memorial Arboretum

Howard Williams*

Department of History and Archaeology, University of Chester, Chester, UK
(Received 30 September 2012; ﬁnal version received 3 December 2012)

The paper explores the use of ancient and historic material cultures and architec-
tures within the recent resurgence in public commemoration in the UK. Using
the case study of the National Memorial Arboretum (Staffordshire), the study
focuses on how ancient designs (including prehistoric, classical and medieval
styles and forms) interleave with the arboreal, geological and celestial themes of
the memorial gardens. Together these designs serve to create a multitude of tem-
poral poises by which auras of commemorative perpetuity and regeneration are
projected and sustained. The paper proposes that archaeologists can bring their
expertise to bear on the investigation of the complex, varied allusions to the past
within contemporary landscapes of memory.

Keywords: arboretum; commemoration; landscape; memorial; reuse

Introduction
This paper considers the National Memorial Arboretum (NMA) (near Alrewas,
Staffordshire, UK; hereafter ‘NMA’) as an assemblage of contemporary commemo-
rative artefacts and memorials. Material citations to the ancient and historic past are
replete within the NMA’s plantings, stones, material culture, monuments and
landscape. This rich and eclectic collection of memorials, gardens and woods, laid
out around the Millennium in a Midlands riverine landscape of gravel extraction,
provides a decisive case study demonstrating the enhanced appropriation of the
past, including the results and interpretations of archaeological research, in early
twenty-ﬁrst century commemorative practice.

The case study of the NMA foregrounds the veritable scramble to harness antiq-
uity within contemporary memorial gardens and within a speciﬁc landscape that is
simultaneously an arboretum, a site of national mourning, an educational facility, a
museum and a popular visitor destination. The paper addresses the tension and
connection between the retrospective appropriation of the past and the prospective
mnemonic discourse of ‘growing remembrance’ that underpins the commemorative
programme of this large and complex arboretum. As an assemblage of diverse
memorials, the NMA’s use of the past through material citation serves as a wakeup
call to heritage professionals and archaeologists by foregrounding both the depth
and breadth of
the interleaving strategies currently in operation by which a
bricolage of ancient and historical material cultures are refashioned, replicated and
reused, within memorial gardens of contrasting scales and functions. These

*Email: howard.williams@chester.ac.uk

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

394

H. Williams

citations, explained to visitors through texts, image and audio commentary, facilitate
both private and public mourning as well as constitute the selective remembering
and forgetting of the past in the present through material and monumental media. In
commemorating aspects of the UK’s national, imperial and colonial past, this site’s
memorials are of global interest.

A sketch of the NMA
The NMA was directly inspired by the founder David Childs’ visit to the Arling-
ton Cemetery and National Arboretum in Washington DC. Designed for
the
millennium, the NMA was ofﬁcially opened in 2001. Since 2003, the site has been
run by a charity, the Royal British Legion, its remit to serve as the UK’s national
garden of remembrance. The NMA’s literature and website state that it is ‘where
our nation remembers’. The ofﬁcial guidebook sums up this heterotopic commem-
orative landscape (see also Gough 2004, p. 449, 2009) as a ‘living and lasting
memorial to commemorate and celebrate … those who have given their lives to
the service of their country … all who have served and those who have suffered
as a result of conﬂict …’ and (serving as a catch-all for the civilian monuments)
‘… others who for speciﬁc or appropriate reasons are commemorated on the site’
(NMA 2009, p. 4). The more recent version of the ofﬁcial guidebook adds that it
is intended as a place that ‘fosters pride in our country’ (NMA 2012, p. 1).1

The NMA’s visitor centre contains an education centre together with a shop and
restaurant, and provides the focus of an annual schedule of activities for visitors,
including veterans’ events held by the British Legion as well as academic confer-
ences leading to publications (Andrews et al. 2011). A covered walkway (cloister)
links the visitor centre to the adjacent Millennium Chapel of Peace and Forgiveness,
available for prayer and contemplation, and where a two minute silence is observed
at 11am every day. The remaining substantial building on the site is the Far East
Prisoners of War Memorial Building, a museum within the gardens themselves.

To the south, east and north of these buildings are 150 acres of memorial gar-
dens, groves and woods linked by paths and avenues. These memorial gardens are
grouped into four ‘zones’ (each afforded a colour – purple, orange, green and blue
– to help guide visitors). The gardens border upon artiﬁcial lakes created by gravel
extraction and the River Trent to the north. To the east is the River Tame, beyond
which lies the National Forest. The NMA claims to be situated ‘at and in the very
heart of the country’ (NMA 2009, p. 2) and ‘at the heart of the Nation’ (NMA
2012, p. 2), and it is indeed a microcosm of the National Forest’s own ‘growing’
metaphor linking trees to nationhood and restoration following national sacriﬁces.
The arboretum is thus both ‘central’ within the Forest which in turn is situated to
be geographically and conceptually central within the UK (Gough 1996, 1998).

More prosaic boundaries lie to the south (the access road) and west (the large,
the NMA’s
visible and active Lafarge Alrewas Quarry donated the land for
construction). The quarry remains a ‘living’ testimony to the former industrial land-
scape that existed on the site prior to the building of the NMA.

Currently, over 120 memorial gardens and groves can be found at the NMA,
containing over 240 memorials (NMA 2009, pp. 1–2, 2012, p. 2). The site’s trees
are growing, but so are the number of memorials, a process that repeatedly reinvigo-
rates the site’s public proﬁle and diversity. Thirty-three new memorial gardens were
dedicated between August 2011 and December 2012 (NMA 2012). The memorials

International Journal of Heritage Studies

395

are sponsored and dedicated to a mixture of civilian groups, charities, societies and
organisations, the police, other emergency services, military regiments and veterans’
groups. There are gardens that commemorate speciﬁc conﬂicts, military campaigns,
the victims of war (including children and prisoners of war) and victims of accidents,
tragedies and terrorist atrocities. We also ﬁnd peace gardens. Further woods and
groves commemorate particular societies, charities and social identities in life and
death, from neonatal and stillborn deaths to couples celebrating their 50th and 60th
wedding anniversaries. There are also over 50,000 trees, many dedicated to com-
memorate individuals, either spatially afﬁliated to a particular memorial grove or in
separate themed memorial woods (NMA 2012, p. 2).

Within this phenomenal commemorative variability, designed to encapsulate per-
sonal and family mourning as well as various forms of public commemorative ritual,
there are also memorials to commemorate animals and things as well as people. An
example of the former is the Army Dog Unit Northern Ireland Memorial. An example
of the latter is a memorial to a Prisoner-of-War cemetery that no longer exists: the
Changi Lych Gate Memorial (NMA 2009, p. 83, 2012, p. 52). Hence, the NMA is a
landscape of diverse memories where the military are joined by a range of civilian
groups, and where living individuals and groups are remembered together with the
dead. At the NMA, we ﬁnd a landscape designed to incorporate discordance as well
as to inspire consensus and coherence in commemoration. Hence, the visitor can
encounter memorials to those shot for cowardice in the First World War close to
memorials commemorating the army regiments in which they served. Likewise, there
are memorials to the victims of the bombing of Dresden and memorials to the ﬂight
crews who dropped the bombs. The NMA contains memorials to the victims of the
nuclear bombs dropped on Japan, while on the far side of the site there are multiple
memorials to those that suffered atrocities as prisoners of war in the Far East.

Innumerable groups are absent from the memorial repertoire which is redolent
of the political climate during which the site was conceived. For instance, despite
the recent addition of the Railway Industry Memorial, workers in agriculture and
industry are hardly represented, including those subject to the diseases and disasters
of recent times and contemporary with the conﬂicts, regiments and charities that
form the subject of many of the memorials. Likewise, workers in public services
beyond the armed forces and emergency services are striking in their absence.

Still,

the NMA does valorise the act of remembrance over the subject of
commemoration. The manner of the founder of the NMA’s memorial reﬂects this
ideology. A plaque by the David Childs’ Trees reads a message (paraphrasing
Shakespeare’s Sonnet 30): ‘to be remembered is o’er paid’ (NMA 2012, p. 25), an
appropriate quotation that simultaneously valorises the founder’s good works and
the broader programme of the site he worked to create.

The centre piece of the arboretum, in terms of scale, location and signiﬁcance,
is undoubtedly the colossal Armed Forces Memorial, opened by Queen Elizabeth II
on 12 October 2007 (Figures 1 and 5). This memorial is inscribed with the names
of UK servicemen and women killed on active military service since 1945,
including 49 theatres as conﬂict from Palestine, Malaya and Korea to the most
recent military actions in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya (NMA 2009, p. 21, 2012, pp.
7–10). Each year, the number of names grows; currently over 16,000 names can be
read upon its Purbeck Marble surfaces.

As a dramaturgical space (see Gough 1998), the NMA’s monuments are there to
be experienced and to provoke emotive responses rather than to be passively

396

H. Williams

Figure 1. The main approach to the Armed Forces Memorial, NMA.
Photograph: Howard Williams, November 2009.

viewed. They are to be walked passed, through and read about during informal per-
sonal and group visits as well as during public ceremonies. Each grove facilitates
different levels of permeability and different conduits of access for the visitor, from
the open ‘seascape’ of the Royal Naval Review where most memorials can only be
accessed over grass without a paved surface, to the closed privacy of the SANDS
Memorial Garden surrounded by thick hedges and trees and entered via a small gate
and a spiralling wood-chip path. For those unwilling or unable to traverse the land-
scape on foot, most memorials are accessible to wheelchair users and mobility
scooters. Alternatively, the gardens and memorials can be viewed from the land
train that provides an audio commentary explaining the principal subjects of each
memorial garden.

As a young arboretum, stone and brick monuments are particularly prominent
elements of the landscapes alongside the plants and trees. Moreover,
texts are
clearly active mediators of the visitor experience. The ofﬁcial visitor guidebook, the
website and the plaques that furnish all the memorial gardens together provide a
textual gloss to direct each visitor to understand the commemorative subject(s), the
meaning of the designs, the selection and symbolism of the stones, plants and trees,
and (occasionally where appropriate) to the name of the artist. As the geographer
Gough (2004, 2009) has emphasised, despite its eponymous arboreal emphasis, the
NMA is a text-led memorial programme by which words aim to inform, instruct
and educate the visitor.

While the overall national vision of commemoration behind the NMA as a place
‘where the nation mourns’ remains pervasive in the literature about the site, Gough
(2009) has argued how the project has quickly fragmented into manifold localised
and thematic memorial strategies focusing on each memorial grove. Certainly, each
visitor today will experience the arboretum differently depending on their afﬁliation
to particular institutions, regiments and charities and indeed, whether they are a
curious visitor, a veteran and/or someone in mourning. Furthermore, each memorial

International Journal of Heritage Studies

397

has its own discourse and statement to make to the viewer and some exist in an
awkward tension with each other in form, scale and location. Yet, despite the diver-
sity of experiences and messages being integral to the character of the NMA, an
overriding ‘vision’ provided by the ofﬁcial literature continues to struggle to har-
ness the memorial variability and dissonances. Hence, although the NMA is a land-
scape of many different messages and monuments, and an end point for visitors
making very different forms of commemorative pilgrimage, it retains a core goal as
a commemorative entity that is more than the sum of its parts.

A contemporary archaeology of the NMA
Within the rich, varied and vibrant ﬁeld of ‘contemporary archaeology’ (see Harri-
son and Schoﬁeld 2010), material cultures, structures and landscapes of conﬂict
continue to be key areas where archaeological investigations have provided new
perspectives and insights onto the recent past (e.g. Saunders 2007, Schoﬁeld 2009).
Yet while an exciting range of studies have recently engaged with the materialities,
corporealities, biographies and landscapes of conﬂict commemoration worldwide
(e.g. Crossland 2000, Walls and Williams 2010), large memorial gardens including
the NMA seem to have escaped archaeologists’ attention. Moreover, few other dis-
ciplines have addressed the NMA as a complex assemblage of monuments accumu-
lated over a relatively short duration (see Gough 2009) and most have focused on
discussions of speciﬁc memorials within its grounds in relative isolation (e.g. Black
2004, Gough 2004, Graham and Whelan 2007, p. 492, McDowell 2007, Switzer
and Graham 2009, pp. 158–159).

The particular lack of archaeological engagement with the NMA is striking
given how the site spans multiple key themes in the archaeological study of the
contemporary. This is because the NMA is more than a heritage site with a theme
of conﬂict commemoration; it also forms part of the archaeology of peaceful protest
(e.g. Beck et al. 2009), the archaeology of charities and voluntary groups, and the
archaeology of conservation (e.g. Holtorf 2008). Moreover,
the NMA is part
museum but also its memorials create hyper-real spaces in which the past is por-
trayed to visitors in conﬂated and idealised fashions, reminiscent of theme parks
(Holtorf 2005, Harrison and Schoﬁeld 2010, pp. 271–278). As a landscape of mem-
ory, the NMA is of palpable interest to the archaeology of death and memory,
studying human mortality from earliest prehistory to the present. Speciﬁcally, the
NMA forms part of a long-term trend in novel, cenotaphic commemorative public
spaces, detached from the traditional churchyard and cemetery where the dead are
selectively remembering with the absence of corporeal traces (Holtorf and Williams
2006, Gough 2009, Williams 2011, 2012). This paper selects one theme in
addressing this particular archaeological component
to the NMA, how the
arboretum provides a rich case study for how material citations of multiple pasts,
including those from deep antiquity, permeate modern commemorative culture (see
Holtorf 1996, 1997).

Engaging with the NMA
The ﬁeld methods utilised for this introductory study are not exclusively archaeo-
logical techniques and are necessarily rudimentary in order to sketch broad themes
linking the NMA’s memorials. Here, the memorials of the NMA are considered to

398

H. Williams

be an assemblage, bound by context but with divergent genealogies of inﬂuence
upon their design and execution. This study results from primarily ﬁrst-hand obser-
vations of the NMA combined with a digital photographic record of the memorials
encountered between May 2009 and September 2012. I have also drawn upon infor-
mation from within two editions of the ofﬁce visitor guidebooks (NMA 2009,
2012), the NMA’s website2 and the published history of the site by its creator,
Childs (2008). This is not only because these sources of information provide detail
about memorial form and dedications and their allusions to ancient and historic
forms and materials, but because these texts are intended as active agents, directing
visitor experience and mourning practices.

The approach adopted embraces the spirit of Hamilakis’ call for an archaeologi-
cal ethnography that does not denigrate the material world but instead explores the
qualities, or ‘thingness’, of memorials in their settings as key to their mnemonic
efﬁcacy in contemporary memorial gardens (Hamilakis 2011, p. 409). Approaching
the memorials and materials of the NMA as an archaeological assemblage resists
regarding the site as a single entity, an ‘arboretum’, but instead as a complex web
of associated memorials that share themes in design and signiﬁcation. Likewise, this
approach avoids the compartmentalisation of the site into speciﬁc memorials consid-
ered in relative isolation, and hence a ‘biographical’ approach to individual memori-
als is not attempted. Equally, a visitor-focused ethnography is regarded to be
ethically contentious as well as outside of the parameters of this study and the
expertise of this author. Instead, I explore in broad terms the power of the ancient
past within multiple memorial gardens to mobilise a sense of national identity and
national imagination via a plurality of forms and spaces (see Hamilakis 2007, pp.
23–33). I regard this approach as necessary groundwork for future research that
might wish to conduct a more detailed archaeological ethnography of the NMA as
well as a wider comparative survey of contemporary memorial parks and gardens.

A place of antiquity
The antiquity of the NMA is redolent in the location itself, a ‘reclaimed’ landscape
from gravel and sand extraction quarries leased from Lafarge Aggregates within the
National Forest. The guidebook emphasises the value of quarrying for understanding
the ancient past of the area, picturing a digger driver kneeling beside the bones of a
woolly rhino found on the adjacent Alfrewas Quarry in 2002, together with the state-
ment: ‘quarrying is important to archaeologists, who can quickly search for historical
artefacts in large areas of land that are being quarried’ (NMA 2009, p. 14). Archae-
ology is, therefore, integral to the NMA’s foundation myth (NMA 2012, p. 3).

Traces of this antiquity are afforded a place within the NMA. Memorial 339 in
the Blue Zone is also directly archaeological: ‘… the land demarcated by fence
posts is a 3000 year old Bronze Age Burial Mound and because it is classed as a
Scheduled Ancient Monument it cannot be planted with trees or built upon’ (NMA
2012, p. 102). The mound ‘has not been quarried and is being developed as a wild-
ﬂower meadow providing a haven for wildlife’ (NMA 2012, p. 102). The celebra-
tion of conservation is ironic and not only because of the contrast with the
landscape destroyed by, and reclaimed from, quarrying around it. It
is ironic
because this ‘real’ and yet near-invisible ancient monument
is surrounded by
emulations of, and citations to, British prehistory.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

399

Figure 2. Pill box incorporated into the memorial landscape beside the River Trent.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

The ‘prehistory’ of the NMA is not simply one of industrial extraction erasing
and uncovering the distant past. Within the grounds, there are material vestiges of
the nineteenth century, including the railway line bisecting the eastern side of the
site. Moreover, traces of twentieth-century warfare can be found in pill boxes line
the River Tame and now reused as bird hides as integral components of the NMA’s
wildlife theme (Figure 2). The Second World War is here commemorated through
its archaeological traces as well as memorials.

remembrance can ‘grow’ rather

Rooted in antiquity
The NMA’s trees are planted in support of the desire to secure the ‘future’ of
remembrance, so that
than diminish with the
passage of time. Through the selected species, numbers and location, a complete
arboreal
established in
twentieth-century war commemoration (including the Commonwealth War Graves
Commission). A key component of this tree symbolism is the evocation of distant
times and distant places by the choices made over which species were selected for

employed following traditions well

iconography is

400

H. Williams

particular plantings and the names afforded to them (see Gough 1996, 2009, Cloke
and Pawson 2008, p. 115). Indeed, trees are not only aimed as a metaphor of living
remembrance, they also encapsulate a hope for real restoration of the living in a
spiritual and a physical sense. For example, the guidebook outlines the hope that
the yews grown at the arboretum may be one day clipped for processing in antican-
cer drugs (NMA 2009, p. 11).

Individually and collectively, trees are mnemonic agents with the NMA linking
past and present (see also Cloke and Pawson 2008). The complex and pervasive
arboreal commemorative symbolism is explained principally through the visitor
guidebook. The numbers of trees, plants and ﬂowers, their combinations, the shapes
and colours of their arrangement and species’ provenance are all employed to link to
commemoration of past conﬂicts, events and institutions in Britain’s national and the
colonial past. For example, species from the Indian subcontinent, including Kashmir
rowan, cedar and the Bhutan pine, commemorate the Indian Army and Royal Indian
Navy (NMA 2012, p. 122). The juxtaposition of trees of different regions is used to
complement the sentiment of the memorial garden: the Anglo-Japanese Grove com-
prises of ﬂowering cherry trees and plantings of European and Japanese maples as a
symbol of reconciliation (NMA 2009, p. 115, 2012, p. 85). The Bevin Boys Memo-
rial contains three trees representing England (narrow oak), Wales (mountain ash)
and Scotland (scots pine) from whence the conscripts came (NMA 2012,p. 39). Sim-
ilarly, the trees of the Twin Towers Memorial were planted to commemorate the ﬁrst
anniversary of the terrorist attacks and comprise of two giant Redwoods that repre-
sent the twin towers complemented by single trees of different species selected to
symbolise Ireland, Scotland, Wales, England and America (NMA 2012, p. 22).

Further trees commemorate the colonial history of botanical collecting itself: the
trees in the chapel commemorate David Douglas’ North American collection and
classiﬁcation of plants and the introduction of new plants into the UK, including the
Douglas ﬁr. The link of place and prehistory is more explicitly cited in other plant-
ings at the NMA. The ancient primordial forest of Ireland is cited in the Irish Infan-
try Grove where Irish yews are planted in the shape of a shamrock and a single oak
was planted, taken from a stand in Tollymore Forest Park. The guidebook tells us
that the oak was believed to be one of the few species in Ireland to have survived
the last ice age, affording the memorial with a sense of antiquity and endurance
against all hardships (NMA 2012, p. 90). Therefore, while individual trees and
plantings might commemorate speciﬁc persons or events, woodland connects the
visitor to a primordial early Holocene (Mesolithic) pre-agricultural British Isles.

The speciﬁc antiquity of certain trees is deployed in apposite contexts; the use of
a giant sequoia from California in the Golden Grove commemorates couples who
have reached their 50th wedding anniversary (NMA 2009, p. 11, 2012,
p. 90). Two pieces of bog oak frame the entrance to the Boys’ Brigade Memorial
(NMA 2012, p. 36). Meanwhile, within the Millennium Avenue there are trees spon-
sored by High Sheriffs. To commemorate this institution’s ancient Saxon origins, the
lime trees were propagated from what is believed to be the oldest tree alive in Britain
today, at Westonbirth Arboretum in Gloucestershire, making them ‘genetically over
2000 years old’ (NMA 2009, p. 53, 134). The use of the Saxon past to conjure antiq-
uity is also found in the connection made between the use of alder charcoal to pro-
duce gunpowder and the name Alrewas meaning ‘alder wash’. Together,
these
associations are connected in a single alder tree planted on an island within a water
feature that forms the centre-piece of the Royal Artillery Garden (NMA 2012, p. 46).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

401

More speciﬁc arboreal genealogies are used to commemorate the dead; conkers
were selected from Drayton Manor, the home of Sir Robert Peel, founder of the
Police Force, to grow the trees in the chestnut avenue of ‘The Beat’ (NMA 2012, p.
75). Meanwhile, the Western Front Association Memorial contains an avenue of
hornbeam propagated from the only tree in Delville Wood to survive the Battle of the
Somme (Gough 1996, p. 83, NMA 2012, p. 145). The Memorial for the Royal Tank
Regiment uses trees to commemorate two key First World War battles in which the
regiment ﬁrst operated. An oak tree within a circular seat comes from Flers on the
Somme where tanks were ﬁrst used against German positions. Meanwhile ash trees
propagated from the battleﬁeld of Cambrai ﬁll the grove (NMA 2009, p. 118, 2012,
p. 88). This marks the reverse of the practice found elsewhere, of trees from home-
lands planted on First World War battleﬁeld cemeteries (Gough 1996, pp. 81–82).

Finally, while trees dominate the commemorative symbolic repertoire, the rose
and poppy are also efﬁcacious in the memorials of the NMA (see Gough 1996).
For example, the Royal British Legion Poppy Field (NMA 2012, p. 142) and Royal
British Legion National Remembrance Garden – ‘My Remembrance Day’ (NMA
2012, p. 136) develop the symbolism of the poppy into the NMA’s landscape, the
latter complementing the former by making the ephemerality and collective charac-
ter of poppies in traditional commemoration more personal, portable and permanent
through material culture.

Stones, soil and the celestial
The geological evocation of past landscapes is another widespread theme in the
NMA. In many cases, stones’ spatial relationship with each other, rather than their
speciﬁc provenance, sufﬁces to represent events, groups and organisations; such as
with the Normandy Veterans Memorial. Here, ﬁve stones – placed in geographical
order to symbolise the coastline of Normandy – are named after the beaches Utah,
Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword (NMA 2012, p. 73). The Mediterranean Campaigns
of the Second World War Memorial is also laid out geographically with the outline
of the North African Coast, with the Sahara Desert represented in pebbles. In geo-
graphical ordering along this garden, we ﬁnd memorials to the British First and
Eighth Armies (NMA 2009, p. 112, 2012, pp. 81–82). Likewise, the British Korean
Veterans Memorial is built on a slope that the guidebook explains is intended to
represent the hills where the war was fought. Meanwhile, the four memorial stones
on the ridge represent the four years that the war lasted (NMA 2009, p. 76).

An extreme form of landscape recreation was devised for the Royal National
Lifeboat Institution Memorial at a location that is as far from the sea as one can get
within the British Isles. When observed in 2009, it overlooked the River Trent and
comprised of a sand, gravel and pebble beach adorned with a lifeboat station, lobster
pots and a memorial statue. The trees in one corner were intended to represent a
mother and her children looking anxiously out to sea hoping for the safe return of
the lifeboat (NMA 2009, p. 126). Yet the beach was not simply a representation of
the contemporary coastline; it was rooted in history. The lifeboat dates from the early
twentieth century and the oilskins of the lifeboat man sculpture cite the Victorian ori-
gins of the Institution.

In many other memorials, provenance of stone and soil take priority. The Boy’s
Brigade Memorial contains stones representing each of the four countries compris-
ing the UK. There is slate from Wales, Purbeck limestone to represent England and

402

H. Williams

bog oak citing both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. A granite rock
from the island of Ailsa Craig (in the Firth of Clyde) supports the Anchor, the sym-
bol of the Brigade (NMA 2009, p. 53). Another abstracted geological memorial is
within the Royal Naval Review; a cairn commemorating the Loch Class Frigates
and incorporating stones from each of the Scottish lochs after which the Frigates
were named (NMA 2009, p. 90, 2012, p. 127).

More speciﬁc stone provenances link the memorial to speciﬁc historical events:
the Phantom Memorial
incorporates stone from Senone, near Moussey, France,
commemorating the French men and boys of that place who were sent to Dachau
and Matthausen concentration camps in 1944 rather than reveal information about
SAS activities (NMA 2012, p. 78). Meanwhile, Dartmoor granite was selected for
the Royal Marines Association Memorial given their base and training in the
Devonian landscape (NMA 2012, p. 124). In the case of the Fauld Explosion
Memorial, the stone is a direct mnemonic of the underground explosion caused by
munitions stored in an abandoned gypsum mine in 1944 which killed 70 people
(NMA 2012, p. 44). Likewise, sand was brought from the French town’s beaches to
surround the Dunkirk Memorial’s plinth and plaque (NMA 2012, p. 21).

An interesting and purposeful inversion of this commemorative discourse on the
provenance of soil and stone is found in the Road Peace Wood (NMA 2012, p. 143).
The memorial at the wood’s entrance commemorating the victims of road accidents
is a circular piece of tarmac with the charity’s insignia painting on it like road mark-
ings. This memorial does not cite a particular place, its use of ubiquitous tarmac
allows it to call to mind everywhere and nowhere on Britain’s roads, simultaneously
citing all the locations where road deaths have taken place and hence meaningful to
mourners and victims (Figure 3). Simultaneously, this clever protest memorial cre-
ates a dissonance within the overriding emphasis on nature within the NMA.

So far we have seen the use of botany and geology to cite place and antiquity,
but the heavens also play a part in creating a sense of order and timelessness,

Figure 3. The Road Peace Memorial Wood.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

403

implicitly inspired by ancient cultures and their monuments. The Shot at Dawn
Memorial is located at the easternmost point of the Arboretum which the guidebook
tells us is the ﬁrst place touched by dawn light (NMA 2009, p. 122, 2012, p. 94).
The HMS Kandahar and HMS Neptune memorial is aligned on the exact position
off the coast of Libya near Tripoli where the wreck of the HMS Neptune lies
(NMA 2009, p. 90). Within the Memorial Chapel ‘a light shines on to the altar
from the bearing and elevation of sun at 11.00 on the 11th November, Armistice
Day’ (NMA 2009, p. 31, 2012, p. 15). Finally, the Armed Forces Memorial has a
striking use of orientation and alignment. Inspired by prehistory, speciﬁcally the
Neolithic tomb of Maeshowe in Orkney, a vertical break in the outer curving wall
and the gap in the ‘door’ on the straight southern inner wall of the memorial allow
the sun’s rays to ‘stream through the door of the sculpture, illuminating the centre
of the Memorial’ (NMA 2009, p. 25; Figure 4). Most speciﬁcally the alignment
allows light (should there be no clouds on the 11 November and in the weeks either

Figure 4. At 11am on the 11th day of the 11th month (but also for late morning during
much of the late autumn), light enters the Armed Forces Memorial, NMA through two
aligned vertical apertures to strike the bronze sculpture of a mourning woman looking up at
a stretcher held aloft by military personnel bearing their
fallen comrade. Photograph:
Howard Williams, November 2009.

404

H. Williams

side of it) to hit just above the head of the bronze sculpted ﬁgure being held aloft
on a stretcher inside the northern inner wall.

Monumental antiquity
The geological and astronomical themes lead us neatly onto the evocation of antiq-
uity through architecture. Classical and medieval – and to a lesser extent prehistoric
– architectures pervade twentieth-century conﬂict commemoration (Holtorf 1997,
Saunders 2007, pp. 63–77). Unsurprisingly, we ﬁnd many explicit examples incor-
porated into the NMA as almost all of the NMA’s memorials draw upon existing
traditions of nineteenth- and twentieth-century memorial sculptures including regi-
mental insignia incorporating ancient symbols and deities. For example, the Royal
Corps of Signals Memorial is surmounted by a bronze statue of Mercury, reﬂecting
the Corps’ cap badge (NMA 2012, p. 89). Likewise, the Basra Memorial Wall
(NMA 2012, p. 86) depicts an Assyrian sphinx upon its outer face (Figure 5). Yet,
we also ﬁnd innovative deployments of antiquity in monumental form.

The NMA includes innumerable rough-hewn stones, making it a megalithic
landscape as much as an arboreal one. For example, there are at least ﬁve stone cir-
cles. The British Korean Veterans Memorial (see above) is a stone circle. The same
is true of the Ulster Ash Grove commemorating the Royal Ulster Constabulary GC
(Figure 6). This monument also commemorates the Royal Ulster Constabulary
Reserve, the Armed Forces and other organisations in service of the crown, who
lost their lives in Northern Ireland from 1969 to 2001. There are six stones forming
a crudely circular arrangement, each one representing and derived from a different
county of Northern Ireland, focusing on a Mourne granite pillar (Childs 2008, pp.
157–159; NMA 2009, p. 95, 2012, p. 137). Meanwhile, the Anglo-German Grove
comprises two concentric circles of silver birch encircling an inner circle of stones
retrieved from the rubble of the Frauenkirche in Dresden destroyed by Allied bomb-

Figure 5. The eastern face of the Basra Memorial Wall.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

405

Figure 6. The Ulster Ash Grove.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

ing in 1945 (NMA 2009, p. 115, 2012, p. 85). Each stone has inscribed on it the
name of a British or German city subject to intensive aerial bombardment during
the Second World War. Therefore, the grove links retrieved artefacts from a medie-
val ruin caused by the bombing into a new, uniﬁed monument to peace. Another
use of prehistoric form is more abstract: a circular mound or platform is surmounted
by four stones raised on stainless steel dowels to commemorate the achievements of
the Royal Engineers (NMA 2009, p. 105, 2012, p. 74). The combination of mound
and stone circle echoes the form of the Armed Forces Memorial. The RNLI Memo-
rial discussed above was redesigned by the gardener and TV presenter Chris Beard-
shaw. Witnessed in 2012, the signboard informs the visitor that they are able to
walk through a beach with groynes, while the standing stones are intended to repre-
sent a crew of a lifeboat on a mission. A cairn represents the lives saved by their
work; it is surrounded by a circle of further standing stones, each stone intended to
represent a lifeboat man (Figure 7).

In addition to stone circles and innumerable monoliths, there are a range of
cairns and mounds that educe an ancient sepulchral form including the Royal
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 98). Likewise, the
cairn-like Dieppe Raid Memorial Garden within the Allied Special Forces Memorial
Grove contains shells and plants citing the rocky French coastline (NMA 2012,
p. 144). A rather different monument is the Golden Grove; this is a circular earth-
work planted with golden trees and shrubs (NMA 2009, p. 120, 2012, p. 90). Its
form is intended to represent a golden wedding ring, but with an inner low bank
and external ditch, both broken by causeways, it also echoes the form of prehistoric
causewayed enclosure.

Antiquity at the NMA involves more than stone circles, enclosures, cairns and
barrows. More common still are ancient and classical themes, many continuing the
emphasis upon circularity in memorial form. For example, the Leonard Cheshire
Amphitheatre serves as an open-air auditorium where services in the chapel are

406

H. Williams

Figure 7. The stone circle within the Royal National Lifeboat Institute Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

relayed and the 11am Act of Remembrance is repeated daily (NMA 2009, p. 56).
The grass banks provide a striking resemblance to the appearance of denuded
Roman amphitheatres in the British landscape, as at Cirencester and Silchester. The
Shot at Dawn Memorial’s stakes are arranged in the shape of the hemispherical
seating of a Greek theatre so as to look onto the ‘stage’ where the statue of the
blindfolded boy is positioned representing a soldier awaiting execution by ﬁring
squad (NMA 2009, p. 122). Pyramids are among oriental themes and are found on
three memorials: The Suez Veterans Association Memorial (NMA 2009, p. 69), the
Sultan of Oman’s Armed Forces Memorial (NMA 2009, p. 79, 2012, p. 51) and the
HMS Kandahar and HMS Neptune Association Memorial. The last of these reﬂects
the ships’ Second World War demise in an Italian mineﬁeld off the North African
coast (NMA 2009, p. 90, 2012, p. 127). In addition, a monument halfway between
a pyramid and an obelisk forms the focus for the memorial garden of the 41 Club
(past members of the Round Table) (NMA 2009, p. 127, 2012, p. 101). Obelisks
have a long history in British commemorative history, and at the NMA examples
include the Ulster Special Constabulary Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 135) and the
Spiritualists National Union (NMA 2012, p. 143).

In contrast to these diverse prehistoric and ancient monumental allusions, medie-
val architectural forms are also found, including the ruins of the Frauenkirche from
Dresden (mentioned above) and ‘rebuilt’ into a stone circle. The memorial to the bat-
tle for Monte Cassino commemorates Allied Forces who fought for the capture this
key site during the Allied invasion of Italy in 1944 (Figure 8). It cites the formidable
medieval hilltop monastery both through its form and its representation of the walls
within an inset panel. A stone and marble altar in the open-air chapel-shaped garden
commemorates the Brotherhood of Greek Veterans (NMA 2012, p. 77) and crosses
adorn select memorials including the Royal Logistics Corps (NMA 2012, p. 83). The

International Journal of Heritage Studies

407

Figure 8. The Monte Cassino Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

local Staffordshire landscape is also present through medieval citation: the Lichﬁeld
and District Garden has a double seat at its centre with the distinctive shape of the
three towers of Lichﬁeld cathedral providing a canopy (NMA 2009, p. 55, 2012, p.
38). Moreover, the buildings of the NMA themselves refer to Britain’s medieval
Christian heritage. The visitor centre and chapel were constructed to mimic a medie-
val monastery linked by a cloistered way (NMA 2009, p. 27, 2012, p. 11). Indeed, the
choice of a wooden building for the chapel again cites antiquity by echoing:

… the early wooden churches that were built in Britain to house the new religion
some 1700 years ago but its design goes even further back to the Greek temples where
some of the earliest Gospel teaching would have been heard. (NMA 2009, p. 27)

Meanwhile, the 12 Douglas ﬁrs that support it purport to represent the 12 apostles.
So when present, the focus of medieval allusions is upon the deep antiquity of
Christian origins and hence also primordial.

More recent allusions to the historic past in architecture and sculpture deserve
mention, including the carousel horse adjacent to the Showmen’s Guild of Great

408

H. Williams

Figure 9. The Showmen’s Guild of Great Britain Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

Britain Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 96; Figure 9). Meanwhile, the Household Division
Memorial is topped with a copy of the railings from the old Chelsea barracks (NMA
2012, p. 97). The sculpture of men and women in historic uniform reﬂects this theme
upon the Royal National Lifeboat Institution Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 100), the
Auxiliary Territorial Service Statue (NMA 2012, p. 37), the four ﬁgures (represent-
ing army, navy, air force and underground movement) of the Polish Forces War
Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 91) and the newly erected Durham Light Infantry
Memorial. Other memorials use ‘antique’ militaria to commemorate the history of
regiments, as with the miniature First World War tank surmounting the memorial
within the Royal Tank Regiment Memorial (NMA 2012, p. 88: Figure 10).

More distant places are cited through replica or retrieved materials. The Burma
Star Memorial adopts the traditional form of an obelisk (see above) but its precise
signiﬁcance comes from it being a smaller scale replica of the memorial in the
Commonwealth War Cemetery in Kohima: a crucial conﬂict in the defence of India
from the invading Japanese Empire (NMA 2009, p. 74). Meanwhile, the British
Nuclear Test Veterans memorial commemorates all personnel of the Combined
Services Task Force who served during nuclear tests between 1952 and 1966. A
grotto of Paciﬁc shells has been placed at its base evoking the geography of the
incidents. Speciﬁcally, this is a replica of a shell-decorated memorial situated on
Christmas Island where some British nuclear tests took place (NMA 2009, p. 88).
This is a powerful monument linked to an ongoing campaign for recognition by
those who died of conditions likely acquired through intense exposure to nuclear
radiation.

Merging antiquity and history
The most striking memorials are those that
juxtapose antiquity and history in
attempts to transcend the latter, including the Anglo-German Grove (above) and the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

409

Figure 10. The Royal Tank Regiment Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

Royal National Lifeboat Institution Memorial (above). It is also evident in the rela-
tively new (dedicated 12 July 2012) Parachute Regiment and Airborne Forces
Memorial. Here, we ﬁnd an example of the innumerable allusions to the ancient
past through classically inspired regimental mottos and badges merged with hyper-
real statuary (see Holtorf 2005, pp. 130–149). Situated upon a low (burial?) mound
is a sculpture of Belepheron on Pegasus,
juxtaposed with a twentieth-century
paratrooper gathering his kit after a successful jump (Figure 11).3

More striking still in its juxtaposition of recent and distant pasts is the National
Associations of Memorial Masons Memorial. This grove commemorates memorial
masons through history; the visitor walks clockwise around a ‘Bronze Age burial
mound’ along which one encounters a timeline of memorials from earliest prehis-
tory to contemporary ‘national award-winning’ memorial designs (Figure 12). On
the way, one passes prehistoric, Roman, Anglo-Saxon, medieval and modern memo-
rials of varying form (NMA 2012, p. 123). There is even a First World War memo-
rial dedicated to all British and Commonwealth service men and women who died
in the conﬂict, aping the obelisks commonly raised by local communities to their
fallen (NMA 2009, p. 86). The guidebook states that these ‘are particularly appro-
priate to the NMA and to the Education programme which the Arboretum is
delivering to children’ (NMA 2009, p. 86).

410

H. Williams

Figure 11. The Parachute Regiment and Airborne Forces Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.

Most prominent of these hybrids of deep antiquity with hyper-reality is The
Armed Forces Memorial. The guidebook explicitly states that it was inspired by ‘…
the ancient
landscapes of prehistoric Britain and the classical forms of ancient
Rome’ (NMA 2009, p. 21, 2012, p. 9) (Figures 1 and 5). The memorial’s role is
for ‘families and friends who have no grave to visit, or who remember those in
graves in far-off places’ (NMA 2012, p. 9). As a cenotaph, the monument remem-
bers not only those who were killed but the ‘wives, husbands, partners, parents,
children and colleagues who loved them’ (NMA 2012, p. 8).

The memorial is placed on a mound that the guidebook describes as ‘based on
early British barrows or tumuli’ (NMA 2009, p. 21). It ‘echoes the ancient burial
mounds of our ancestors – an earthen platform 100 m across that recollects monu-
ments like Silbury Hill and the mounds around Stonehenge’ (NMA 2009, p. 25).
The memorial on the mound is made of 200,000 bricks faced with Portland stone
and consists of two curved walls framing two straight walls inscribed with the
names of servicemen killed on active service since 1945. A ‘slender obelisk’ is
placed at one edge so as to look into the oval enclosure between the innermost
walls. Here, bronze sculptures on either side depict acts of heroic mourning. The

International Journal of Heritage Studies

411

Figure 12. The National Association of Memorial Masons Memorial.
Photograph: Howard Williams, November 2009.

bronze servicemen inside the northern wall carry a dead or dying comrade on a
stretcher, which: ‘… echoes of Homer’s Iliad and the Trojan War, where the body
of Patroclus was carried on a shield by fellow Greek warriors back to the grieving
Achilles, whose armour he had borrowed’ (NMA 2009, p. 25). As discussed above,
the guidebook informs us of the meaning of each ﬁgure, and that the alignment and
axis of the Memorial portray a greater meaning of celestial orientation inspired by
Maeshowe in Orkney (see above; NMA 2009, p. 25). The UK’s current armed
forces are therefore being commemorated through a heady mix of romanticised
prehistory and Homeric poetry, more so than any First or Second World War
memorial predecessors. Indeed,
the juxtaposition of the historic realism of the
bronze sculpture, its antique resonances and even its unfolding nature, render it
more similar
to recent American memorials than to anything else previously
conceived in the UK (see Doss 2007, p. 20, 2008).4 The enduring nature of the
memorial is underpinned by the present absences of its smooth, yet-to-be-inscribed
surfaces. The memorial appears poised between past, present and the future, impa-
tiently awaiting the addition of future names. Indeed, the memorial has space for
the addition of the names of many thousands of British service men and women
currently living or yet to be born, the victims of conﬂicts as yet unknown. Antiquity
is here used to create an aura of authority and authenticity in a novel commemora-
tive context (see Holtorf 2005, pp. 112–129).

Conclusion
This paper has reviewed and appraised the arboreal, geological, celestial and
antique allusions to the past found at the NMA. There are further strategies still by
which memorial gardens at the NMA cite the past in material media. These include
the relocation of memorials from elsewhere (see Gough 2004). A recent example of
this commemorative strategy is the Basra Memorial Wall. Originally constructed in

412

H. Williams

Figure 13. The Hiroshima Stone.
Photograph: Howard Williams, September 2012.
Basra in 2006, it was rebuilt at the NMA as a ‘personal gesture’ to commemorate
British soldiers from the 37th Armoured Engineer Squadron in 2010 and incorporat-
ing the original bronze memorial plaques (NMA 2012, p. 86, Figure 5). Equally,
there is a range of ways by which historic materials are incorporated into the
memorial gardens, particularly present as ways of staging historicity within memori-
als that commemorate suffering and tragic events. For example, the new Hiroshima
Stone Memorial (dedicated 12 July 2012 to promote reconciliation) is comprised of
stone sourced from the bombed city (Figure 13).5 These reused pasts invite further
research.

Whether by reuse or replication, the NMA conﬂates multiple pasts to stage
the heavens and antiquity.
temporalities through the use of trees, soil, stones,
Signiﬁcations inevitably vary considerably between memorials, yet
this web of
associations shared between memorials collectively serve to condense and com-
memorate the UK’s localities, nationhood, military and colonial history and merge
together individual and collective memorials in a single commemorative assem-
blage. What antiquity brings to the memorial gardens as an assemblage is a shared
sense of forgetting, both of detail and of character, allowing the memorials to
cohere and sublimate all manner of deaths into perpetual sacriﬁce and an organic
growth of remembrance for the nation within the NMA’s landscape (see also

International Journal of Heritage Studies

413

Rowlands 1999, Doss 2007, 2008). This range of replicated and retrieved material
cultures can be seen to sustain a nationalist discourse of British endurance to mili-
tary and civilian tragedies and hardship, scars that can only be healed through a
perpetual process of remembrance.

Acknowledgements
This paper was presented at the session ‘The Affective Properties of Architecture’ at the
Theoretical Archaeology Group annual conference, University of Durham, 18 December
2009. Thanks are due to the session organisers, Oliver Harris, Serena Love and Tim Flohr
Sørensen, for their support and suggestions. The paper has subsequently beneﬁtted from
critical suggestions by Tim Grady, Yannis Hamilakis, Anna Mackenzie, James Pardoe,
Laurajane Smith, Rachel Swallow, Jonathan Trigg, Samuel Walls and the anonymous
referees. I would like to acknowledge the NMA for granting permission to reproduce images
of the memorial gardens. All opinions and errors remain the author’s.

Notes
1. For this study, the 2009 and 2012 guidebooks are utilised as ‘primers’ revealing the

ofﬁcial message of the site.
2. http://www.thenma.org.uk/.
3. http://www.thenma.org.uk/about-us/memorials/featured-memorials/featured-memorials-

4. Two examples discussed by Doss are more gratuitous than the Armed Forces Memorial
but adhere to the same tradition of bronze ‘realism’ and antique context: The National
D-Day Memorial: http://www.dday.org/, and the Community Veterans Memorial: http://
www.communityveteransmemorial.org/.

5. http://www.thenma.org.uk/events/events-calendar/calendar-of-events/hiroshima-stone-

page-5/.

memorial/.

Notes on contributor
Howard Williams is Professor of Archaeology at the University of Chester. His research
interests are mortuary archaeology, archaeologies of memory, contemporary archaeology and
the history of archaeology. He has recently published on early medieval archaeology in the
books Encountering Images: Materialities, Perceptions, Relations (Stockholm Studies in
Archaeology 57) and the Oxford Handbook of Anglo-Saxon Archaeology (Oxford University
Press), as well as in the journals Landscapes and Journal of Social Archaeology.
Meanwhile, Howard’s latest work on death in contemporary society has been published in
Mortality, Journal of Material Culture and the book Image, Memory and Monumentality:
Archaeological Engagements with the Material World (Oxbow).

References
Andrews, M., Bagot Jewitt, C., and Hunt, N., eds., 2011. Lest we forget: remembrance and

commemoration. Stroud: The History Press.

Beck, C., Schoﬁeld, J., and Drollinger, H., 2009. Archaeologists, activists, and a contempo-
rary peace camp. In: C. Holtorf and A. Piccini, eds. Contemporary archaeologies: exca-
vating now. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 95–111.

Black, J., 2004. Thanks for the memory: war memorials, spectatorship and the trajectories of
commemoration 1919–2001. In: N.J. Saunders, ed. Matters of conﬂict: material culture,
memory and the First World War. London: Routledge, 134–148.

Childs, D., 2008. Growing remembrance: the story of the National Memorial Arboretum.

Cloke, P. and Pawson, E., 2008. Memorial trees and treescape memories. Environment and

Barnsley: Pen and Sword.

Planning D: Society and Space, 26, 107–122.

Crossland, Z., 2000. Burial

lives:

Archaeological Dialgoues, 7 (2), 146–159.

forensic archaeology and Argentina’s disappeared.

414

H. Williams

Doss, E., 2007. War porn: spectacle and seduction in contemporary American war memori-
als. In: R. Schubart, F. Virchow, D. White-Stanley, and T. Thomas, eds. War isn’t hell,
it’s entertainment: essays on visual media and the representation of conﬂict. London:
McFarland, 13–30.

Doss, E., 2008. War, memory and the public mediation of affect: the National World War II

Memorial and American imperialism. Memory Studies, 1, 227–250.

Gough, P., 1996. Conifers and commemoration:

the politics and protocol of planting.

Gough, P., 1998. Memorial gardens as dramaturgical space.

International Journal of

Landscape Research, 21 (1), 73–87.

Heritage Studies, 3 (4), 119–214.

Gough, P., 2004. Corporations and commemoration: First World War remembrance, Lloyds
TSB and the National Memorial Arboretum. International Journal of Heritage Studies,
10 (5), 435–455.

Gough, P., 2009. ‘Garden of gratitude’: the National Memorial Arboretum and strategic
remembering. In: P. Ashton and H. Kean, eds. People and their pasts: public history
today. London: MacMillan, 95–112.

Graham, B. and Whelan, Y., 2007. The legacies of the dead: commemorating the troubles in

Northern Ireland. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 25, 476–495.

Hamilakis, Y., 2007. The nation and its ruins: antiquity, archaeology and the national imag-

ination in Greece. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hamilakis, Y., 2011. Archaeological ethnography: a multitemporal meeting ground for

archaeology and anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 40, 399–414.

Harrison, R. and Schoﬁeld, J., 2010. After modernity: archaeological approaches to the con-

temporary past. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Holtorf, C., 1996. Towards a chronology of megaliths: understanding monumental time and

cultural memory. Journal of European Archaeology, 4, 119–152.

Holtorf, C., 1997. Megaliths, monumentality and memory. Archaeological Review from

Holtorf, C., 2005. From Stonehenge to Las Vegas: archaeology as popular culture. Walnut

Holtorf, C., 2008. Zoos as heritage: an archaeological perspective. International Journal of

Holtorf, C. and Williams, H., 2006. Landscapes & memories. In: D. Hicks and M. Beaudray,
eds. Cambridge companion to historical archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 235–254.

McDowell, S., 2007. Armalite, the ballot box and memorialisation: Sinn Féin and the state

in post-conﬂict Northern Ireland. The Round Table, 96 (393), 725–738.

NMA, 2009. Remember. Their names will live for evermore… The National Memorial Arbo-

retum. Your guide. Alrewas: National Memeorial Arboretum.

NMA, 2012. National memorial arboretum guidebook. 4th ed. Alrewass: National Memorial

Rowlands, M., 1999. Remembering to forget: sublimation as sacriﬁce in war memorials. In:

A. Forty and S. Küchler, eds. The art of forgetting. Oxford: Berg, 129–145.

Saunders, N., 2007. Killing time. The archaeology of the First World War. Stroud: Sutton.
Schoﬁeld, J., 2009. Aftermath: readings in the archaeology of recent conﬂict. New York,

Arboretum.

NY: Springer.

Switzer, C. and Graham, B., 2009. ‘From thorn to thorn’: commemorating the Royal Ulster

Constabulary in Northern Ireland. Social & Cultural Geography, 10 (2), 153–171.

Walls, S. and Williams, H., 2010. Death and memory on the home front: Second World War
commemoration in the South Hams Devon. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 20 (1),
49–66.

Williams, H., 2011. Ashes to asses: an archaeological perspective on death and donkeys.

Journal of Material Culture, 16 (3), 219–239.

Williams, H., 2012. Ash and antiquity: archaeology and cremation in contemporary Sweden.
In: A.M. Jones, J. Pollard, M.J. Allen, and J. Gardiner, eds. Image, memory and monu-
mentality: archaeological engagements with the material world. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 207–217.

Cambridge, 14 (2), 45–66.

Creek, CA: Altamira.

Heritage Studies, 14 (1), 3–9.


