International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

The representation of time at two shaker village
sites

Matthew Cooper

To cite this article: Matthew Cooper (1997) The representation of time at two shaker village sites,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 3:3, 157-167, DOI: 10.1080/13527259708722202
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259708722202

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 56

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

The Representation  of Time at  Two
Shaker  Village Sites
Matthew Cooper

Abstract
Historical restorations spatialise time,  thus  sometimes  being criticised for  their static
representation of a  dynamic  reality.  Yet  restorations, like  the  groups they represent,
themselves  have complex histories.  This paper explores how forms  of representation
relate  to  intended  content  historically,  through  discussion  of  two  American  sites:
Hancock and Pleasant Hill Shaker  Villages. Founded in  the  early  1960s,  both  saw
demands for  change by  the  1990s.  With  the passing of  the founders,  these  museum
villages began to  reevaluate their  interpretive practices and plan for  the future.  The
paper focuses on earlier decisions which have affected the representation of time.

Keywords:-
Shakers
USA
Interpretation
Time
Restoration
Living History

1. K. Lynch,  What Time

Is  This  Place?
Cambridge,  Mass,  and
London: MIT Press,
1972,  p.43.

2.  D. Hayden, Seven
American  Utopias,
Cambridge,  Mass,  and
London:  MIT Press.
1976,  p.67.

This  paper  is concerned  with  the  representation  of time  at  historic  restoration
sites. Because many  sites construct  their  interpretations  around  a single period
or  year,  they  may  project  images  of  an  unchanging  past.  Visitors  often
appreciate  such  sites  for  the  qualities  of  serenity,  peacefulness,  and  harmony
they  appear  to  embody.  Yet,  it  seems  important  to  ask,  as  Kevin  Lynch  has,
'Might  it  also  be  possible  to  use  environment  to  teach  change  instead  of
permanence?'1  This  paper  asks  how  such  images  of  timelessness  have  been
produced, especially through the use of space and built form. It argues that such
images  form  critical  elements  of  an  historically  produced  discourse  that  both
responds  to  and  shapes  the  built  environment.  As  well,  it  assumes  that
restorations  themselves  have  complex  histories  that  reflect  changing  economic,
political, and  intellectual  climates, technology,  historiography,  and  the practices
of museology  and  historic preservation.  Thus, the  paper  explores some ways in
which  representation  relates  historically  to  content.  It  focuses  on  two  major
historic  restorations  in  the  United  States,  Hancock  and  Pleasant  Hill  Shaker
Villages, and  some of the  early  decisions  that  shaped  the  subsequent  history of
the sites.

The  Shakers
The  Shakers  or  United  Society  of  Believers  in  Christ's  Second  Appearing  were
millenarians. After having emigrated from England to the United States in 1774,
they  eventually  established  nineteen  communities  in  New  England,  New York,
Ohio, Kentucky,  and  Indiana  by the  1820s. Hancock  in  western  Massachusetts
was the third to be established  (1790) and one of the last to close (1960), while
Pleasant  Hill  in  Kentucky  was  settled  in  1805  and  dissolved  in  1910.  Shaker
beliefs  and  practices,  it  has  been  argued,  differed  from  many  other  American
sects of the time in that they rested on a 'plan for the gradual redemption of the
world  aimed  at  nothing  less than  transforming  the  earth  into  heaven'.  Central
to  this  plan  was  a  'driving  sense  of  communitarian  purpose,  which  unites
people,  land,  and  buildings  in  a  mission  of  millennial  redemption'.2  The  basic

IJHS 3 (3) 157-167 © Intellect Ltd 1997

157

tenets of their faith  included celibacy, equality of the sexes, communal  property,
confession  of sins, separation  from  the world, and pacifism.  As well, they strove
for  simplicity,  purity,  and  perfection,  seeing  all  work  as  equally  valuable  and,
above all, as worship.

At  its  peak  in  the  1840s,  the  Hancock  community  included  over  three
hundred people while Pleasant Hill had  a population  of over five hundred  in the
1850s. Individuals belonged to communal groups called Families, each of which
contained  as many  as  one  hundred  men  and  women.  Brethren  and  Sisters,  as
well  as  children  for  whom  they  were  caring  and  was  overseen  by  Elders  and
Eldresses.  The  community  worked  at  agricultural  and  craft  pursuits,  while
carrying out an extensive trade with the outside world. Known for the quality of
their  products,  the  Shakers  manufactured  and  sold  seeds,  medicinal  herbs,
preserves and candies, wooden ware, baskets, brooms, and other items.

Both groups declined in  population  after  the mid-nineteenth  century. As the
century  wore  on,  the  Shakers  were  forced  to  reorganise  their  communities,
closing  several  of  the  Families,  taking  live-in  apprentices  from  the  outside
world,  and  eventually  selling off some of their  land. Yet life  during  that  period
was  described  as  peaceful  and  full.  Some  new  buildings  were  constructed,  old
ones were refurbished.  Because of the shortage of male Society members, hired
men  became a fixture  of the community.  As well, community  members  tended
more  to  adopt  fashions  and  practices  from  the  surrounding  society.  The
gradual  decline  continued  in  the  twentieth  century  until  only  a  few  elderly
women  remained.  At  Pleasant  Hill,  the  last  remaining  Shakers  gave  their
property  in  1910  to  a  local  friend  who  promised  to  care  for  them  until  they
died.  In  1959,  the  Shaker  Central  Ministry  at  Canterbury,  New  Hampshire
decided  to  close  the  Hancock  community  when  only  three  elderly  Sisters
remained  and  put  it up for  sale. Today,  a few  Shakers remain  at  a  community
in  Sabbathday Lake, Maine.

Methods
Initial site visits to Hancock Shaker Village (HSV) and Shaker Village at Pleasant
Hill  (SVPH) occurred  during  the  summer  of  1996,  with  follow-up  visits  in  the
following  spring.  Personal  interviews  were  conducted  with  the  museum
directors,  directors  of  interpretation,  education,  and  marketing,  curators  of
collections,  and  some interpreters.  Relevant  documents  were  also  collected  and
analysed  and some limited observation carried  out.

The  Sites
Although other  former  and  continuing  Shaker communities  have been partially
restored,  HSV and  SVPH are  the  largest  and most  successful  restorations. Both
are  privately-owned  non-profit  corporations  whose  primary  goals  are
preservation  and  education.  However,  they  are  involved  in  several  ancillary
activities, e.g., running  gift  shops, hosting  antique shows, producing replicas of
Shaker artefacts  for sale, and, in the case of Pleasant Hill, running  a  conference
centre and restaurant,  and housing visitors on site.

Briefly  put,  both  restorations  were  begun  in  the  early  1960s.  The  few
remaining  Shakers  decided  to  sell  the  Hancock  site  in  1959  to  a  local

158 

Matthew Cooper

3.  Personal  Interview

with  Lawrence J.
Yerdon,  Hancock
Shaker  Village, 29 May
1997.

4.  Shakertown  at

Pleasant  Hill,  Kentucky,
Inc.,  1995 Annual
Report, Harrodsburg,
Kentucky:  Shakertown
at  Pleasant  Hill,
Kentucky, Inc.

5. Hancock  Shaker

Village,  Interpretive
Plan,  Ms,  1997.

6.W.  Leon  & M. Piatt,

'Living-History
Museums', in W. Leon
& R. Rosenzweig,
History Museums in the
United States: a  Critical
Assessment, Urbana:
University of Illinois
Press.  1989, pp.65-72.
Of course, there are
exceptions,  Strawberry
Banke  in  Portsmouth.
New  Hampshire  being
an  interesting one.

committee.  HSV opened  to the public  on  a  small  scale  in  1961 while  work
continued on other parts of the site. By the early  1970s the museum village was
substantially  complete and was attracting  some 40,000 visitors per year. By the
mid-1990s  there  were twenty  restored  buildings  dating  from  1790 to 1915 as
well  as a  working  historical  farm  on the approximately  500 hectares  (1,200
acre)  site.  Visitor  numbers  had  increased  to  about  77,000  by  1996.3  At
Pleasant  Hill,  the  last  Shaker  Sister  had  died  in  1923; the  structures  and
surrounding  lands  were  used  for  a  variety  of purposes  by outsiders.  After  a
period of organisation, planning, and fund  raising by a local elite committee that
began  in 1960, actual restoration  started  in 1964. The village officially  opened
in  1968 although  work on more than  half  the buildings had not yet begun. A
second  stage  of restoration  completed  most  of the remaining  work  by 1974.
Today, SVPH is the largest of all restored Shaker communities, with  thirty-three
restored buildings and a small working historical farm on a site of approximately
100  hectares  (2,700  acres).  Also,  there  are eighty  overnight  guest  rooms in
fifteen  of the original  buildings and a restaurant  in the historic Trustees'  Office.
In  the  1990s  SVPH  was attracting  over  200,000  visitors  per year,  although
many  came to attend  conferences  or dine  rather  than  to tour  the historic site.
Approximately  70% of  SVPH's  annual  income  derives  from  these  sources,
including sales at the museum shop.4

At both sites, the early  1990s saw calls for reevaluation of their programmes
and  of the narratives  employed  to organise  their  interpretation.  Without  going
into  greater  detail  here,  the pressure  for  reassessment  reflected,  among  other
factors,  the  passing  of the  generation  of  founders,  the  professionalisation  of
administrative and interpretive staff, the changing historiography of the Shakers,
changing  markets  for cultural  tourism,  and shifts  in  North  American  culture
that  have  highlighted  change  and diversity.  At Pleasant  Hill, a colloquium of
invited  outside  expert  consultants  was  held  in  1991  to  try  to  assess  the
restoration  and suggest directions for the future.  However, it was only in 1996
and  1997 that staff began to discuss development of an interpretive plan for the
site.  Hancock  sought  to develop  a  long  range  interpretive  plan  in  1993.  An
institutional  self-study  gathered  input  from  members  of the board  of directors,
museum staff and volunteers, visitors, and others. Outside consultants, academic
social  historians  and  historic  museum  specialists,  visited  Hancock  in 1994.
During  1995 and  1996, staff  produced  a detailed  interpretive  plan  to  identify
and  define  historical  themes,  research  directions,  and  practical  methods  of
interpretation  to guide the museum into the future.5

The Representation  of Time
Most historic restoration  sites in North  America have been interpreted  as if at a
single  period.6  Their  interpretations  were  organised  by a  narrative  of past and
present,  rather  than  of change  through  time. A narrative  of past  and present
logically could lead in two directions: 1) telling how the past is connected to the
present  (and thus, perhaps, to the future);  2) telling how the past was different
from  the present. HSV and SVPH have both  employed the latter,  although HSV
now is trying to change its narrative  line to one that  is diachronic. Arguments
certainly  can  be  made  in  favour  of  the  synchronic  interpretive  approach.

The Representation  of Time at Two Shaker  Village Sites

159

7. E.D. Wallace,

Shakertown at  Pleasant
Hill: the First Fifteen
Years, Harrodsburg.-
KY.: Shakertown  at
Pleasant  Hill,  Kentucky,
Inc..  1984,  p.13.

especially  in  living-history  museums.  Perhaps  because  of its dramatic  unity  it
may  make it easier  for visitors to indulge in the willing  suspension  of disbelief
about  just  where  in  time  they  are. Informal  reports  by museum  staff  suggest
that  visitors  expect  sites  to represent  a  single  time  period.  Recently,  however,
other  trends  have  promoted  a move  towards more  diachronic  perspectives. For
example,  the  professionalisation  of  historic  museums  in  North  America,
especially  since  the  1960s,  has  led  to  heightened  concern  with  historical
research and accuracy. The growth of social history has also led to demands for
a  more  historic  approach  to interpretation,  i.e., one that  is concerned  explicitly
with change over time.

In the following,  an attempt is made to understand  how some aspects of the
representation  of  time  at  HSV and  SVPH  have  been  produced.  Particular
decisions, generally  made early  in the restoration's  history,  created  the images
now  projected.

Shaker  Village  at Pleasant  Hill - Timeless  Serenity?
Transforming  a  rundown  little  village  straggling  along  US Highway  68  in
central  Kentucky  into  a  beautiful  and serene  museum  village  depended  on a
number  of  important  decisions,  three  of  which  are  discussed  here.  These
decisions  helped  create  an  image  of  timelessness  through  transformations  of
spatial organisation  and visitors' experience of the site.

Creating  a  buffer
Between  1910 and 1960 parts of the original  village had been sold and resold.
In  1960, six individuals  owned  the village  area,  while  another  five  owned the
surrounding  lands.7  An  important  early  decision  was to  try  to  purchase  as
much of the surrounding lands as possible. At its height, the Shaker community
at  Pleasant  Hill had owned  about  1800 hectares  (4,500  acres)  of land  in the
vicinity.  Earl  D. Wallace,  guiding  spirit  of SVPH  from  its  inception  until his
death  in 1990, described what motivated him:

Figure. 7. Pleasant hill,  village landscape.  [Photo, the author.

160

Matthew  Cooper

8. Ibid. p.2.
g  j^y 

5

I
Figure  2.  Pleasant Hill, the restored main street. [Photo,  the author.

All at once I realized  if we did  get the loan  and  restored  the  buildings, the tiny 
village area  of  120  acres would be surrounded  by the  Gwinn  Bros, farm  of  1,926 
acres, and  that  after  tourists began to come, speculators  might buy  lots from  the
Gwinns and  put  up drive-ins, roadside shops, hamburger  stands,  and  the like, on
US Highway  68  and  State  Road  33 within  a  few  hundred  feet  of the  center  of the
village. I had  seen  and  deplored  this sort of development  at  the entrance  of Old
Sturbridge  Village in Massachusetts. So, for  the protection  of the restoration,  we
decided  to try  to buy  the  Gwinn Bros. 1,926  acres even  though  Shakertown  had
no  resources  except about  $82,266  in  pledges of speculative value.8

Removing  a Highway  and  Utilities
The  Shakers  had  built  much  of  their  village  near  the  main.post  road  that
connected  Lexington  and  Harrodsburg  (the earliest  permanent  white settlement
in  Kentucky). Later,  this  road  became  US Hwy  68  and  also the  main  street of
the  Shaker  Village.  In  1965,  the  State  was  prevailed  upon  to  reroute  the
highway  around  the  restoration  site.  And,  thus,  in  1968  SVPH  removed  the
asphalt and returned  the road to its appearance ca  1840. Restoration of the site
also involved burying  all outdoor  utilities and  hiding ones in the buildings.

Eating and  Sleeping  on  Site

At  historical  restorations,  visitors  generally  stay  at  most  for  a  day,  perhaps
having  lunch  or  a  snack  on  site. Even  at  Colonial  Williamsburg,  where  many
visitors  stay  for  longer  periods,  they  cannot  lodge on  site  in  original  buildings.
But at SVPH many visitors both stay on site and eat in the historic buildings. In
order  to qualify  for  a  federal  loan,  a master  plan  had  to  be developed  in  1963
that  'forced  an  early  consensus  on  what  we  wanted  the  Village  to be, and  on
how  far  we were  willing  to commercialise  the  operations  and  still  preserve  the
authenticity  of  the  restoration'.9  Development  of  the  master  plan  was  turned
over  to  Executive  Director  James  Cogar,  a  former  curator  at  Colonial
Williamsburg,  and  restoration  architect  Washington  Reed  'with  instructions  to
undertake  to  adapt  the  buildings  to  include  about  sixty  rooms  for  overnight

The Representation of Time at Two Shaker Village Sites 

161

10.  Ibid.

11.  S.T.  Swank.

Shakertown  at  Pleasant
Hill, Kentucky:  Report
to  the  Ad  Hoc  Planning
Committee.  Ms, 1991.
p.l.

Figure  3.  Pleasant Hill,  the Trustee's  Office which  today contains dining and lodging facilities.
[Photo, the author.
guests; dining  rooms  in  the  Trustees'  House;  a  collection  of Shaker  exhibits,  and
a  gift  shop'.10  Also,  several  original  buildings  were  adapted  for  use  as  a  small
conference  centre.  Reproductions  of  Shaker 
textiles  were
commissioned  from  local  crafts-people  to  furnish  the  reused  buildings.  The  plan
was  that  revenue  from  lodging,  dining,  and  conferences  would  underwrite  most
of the  general  operating  expenses  of the  museum  village  which,  therefore,  would
not  have  to  rely  on  grants  and  donations  for  its  survival.

furniture  and 

that 

strategy 

implicitly  distinguished  between 

'A Remarkable  Stage  Set'
These  decisions  helped  create  the  sought-for  illusions.  They  flowed  from  a
representational 
site  and
surrounding,  community  and  the  world.  The  decisions  helped  to  distance  the
newly  restored  village  from  its  contemporary  surroundings  and  frame  it  for
visitors  who  thus  were  stimulated  to  experience  the  site  as  a  sort  of  'time  out  of
time'.  Although  Hwy  68  is  not  heavily  travelled  by  most  standards,  still  its
rerouting  eliminated  an  important  cause of visual contamination.  The buffer  zone
surrounding  the  village  allows  visitors  to  see only  the  restored  historic  structures
(although  there  are  a  few  unobtrusive  non-historic  ones  as well) set  in  the  rolling
hills  of the  Kentucky  Bluegrass  countryside.  The decisions  also  created  a  site  that
was  in  many  ways  sanitised:  it lacked  the  noises, smells,  and  busyness  of a  living
agricultural  community.  As  a  consultant  involved  in  assessing  SVPH  wrote:-

The stage  setting,  or  set design,  is remarkable  and  herein  lies the  seduction.  The
setting  draws  the  visitor  into  a  receptive  mode, relaxes  the  senses and  heightens
spiritual  sensitivity. The  parklike  atmosphere  generates  a  blanket  of security  and
serenity  even  when  the  site is alive with  people.11

162

Matthew  Cooper

12.  WJ.  Tramposch,

Reflections  on
Shakertown  at  Pleasant
Hill, Ms,  1991,  p.l.

13.  H.  C. Slusher,  Simple

Buildings and  Orderly
Spaces - Buildings  and
Landscape  at
Shakertown:  their  care,
current  issues  and  rec-
ommendations,  Ms,
1991.  p. 4.

14  Quoted  in  S.P.

Schreiber,  Shakertown
at  Pleasant  Hill:
Directions for  the  '90s,
Summary  of a
colloquium  convened
by  the  Ad Hoc
Planning  Committee  for
the  purpose of
discussing  the  mission,
programs  and  operation
of Shakertown  at
Pleasant  Hill, Ms, 1991,
p.17.

15.  A.B. Miller.  Hancock
Shaker Village/The  City
of Peace:  An Effort to
Restore a Vision 1960-
1985.  Hancock,  Mass.:
Hancock  Shaker  Village.
1984,  p.24-25.  empha-
sis  added.

For those who stay overnight, the illusion is, if anything, heightened  and the
experience highly  unusual. As another  consultant  put  it,  'I am unable  to recall
any  [other  outdoor  history  museums]  that  offer  the  visitor  such  an  intimate
experience. It  is wonderfully  uncommon  for  guests  to  have  the  opportunity  to
enjoy  so  many  of  the  original  spaces:  to  fall  asleep  in  the  Shaker  "retiring"
rooms'. He continued that SVPH can,  'provide a "be ye separate" kind of setting
in  which  guests  can  seek  to  reawaken  their  own  historical  as  well  as  spiritual
imaginations.'12 Thus guests are supposed to be able to imagine themselves part
of a spiritual  community,  awakened  from  their  contemporary  everyday  lives to
the  simpler,  purer  lives  of  the  Shakers.  A  visit  to  SVPH  should  then  be  a
restorative experience.

The decision  to  allow  adaptive  reuse, however,  has  had  potentially  serious
consequences  for  the  integrity  of the  historic  fabric  of buildings  and  landscape.
Consulting  architect  Christopher  Slusher  argued  that  food  and  lodging  services
are,  'extremely  hard  uses  for  often-time  fragile  historic  structures'.13  In  his
report,  he detailed the stresses occasioned  by, for  example, the sheer number of
users,' climate  control,  humidity  from  kitchens  and  bathrooms,  weight  and
vibration  of  modern  machinery,  inappropriate  uses  of  spaces,  etc.  For  him,
preserving the historic structures, ensuring appropriate maintenance to, at least,
slow down the deterioration  was crucial; the structures after  all 'are the essence
of the historic fabric  at Pleasant Hill.'14

Hancock  Shaker  Village  -  'Peak  Years'  or  Change?
Until  adoption  of  the  recent  Interpretive  Plan,  the  organising  narrative  at
Hancock  Shaker  Village  was  static,  notwithstanding  the  presence  of  historic
buildings  dating  from  1790  to  1915. Interpretation  focused  on the  settlement's
so-called  'peak  years',  the  1840s.  The  narrative  also  depended  upon  a  set  of
ruptures  through  which  Shaker  difference  was  constructed.  First,  the  Shakers
were  said  to  have  rejected  contemporary  religious  and  social  practices,
constructing  their  own  communities  more  or  less  as  isolates.  Second,  their
practices  were  said  to  have  been  deeply  informed  by  values  of  purity  and
simplicity  which,  it  is  implied,  made  the  Shakers  different  from  most  other
human  beings, especially  'us'. These values profoundly  influenced  their  view of
work  and  the  products  of work. Thus, the  Shakers  were  represented  as  superb
and  innovative  farmers  and  craft-people,  which  was  best  evidenced  by  their
material culture.

From the beginning,  as the moving spirit of the restoration  recollected  twenty-five
years later,  what  the founders  envisioned  was not  a collection  of isolated  objects
but rather  a complete and  entire representation  of Shaker  life in  an  authentic
setting. It would be an  original  and  almost totally integrated  community,
authentic  in every respect and  preserved  substantially  as it was in its finest  hour.15

Yet  Mrs  Miller  also  described  several  preservation  decisions  that  seemed  to
imply  a  more  historical  (i.e. change  oriented)  perspective. For  example,  early  on,
HSV decided  to  use  the  Shaker  Trustee's  Office  to  house  the  museum  director  or
other  staff,  opening  only  the  first  floor  for  exhibits.  It  was  decided  to  leave  the

The Representation  of Time  at  Two Shaker  Village Sites

163

16.  Ibid. p.85.

17.  Ibid. p.59.

18. S.J. Stein,  Report and
Recommendations, Ms,
1994,  p.3, emphasis in
original.

Figure 4. Hancock the Trustee's Office and Store,  built 1813, remodelled in 1855, 1872 and
1895,  furnished as it was in 1960.  [Photo, the author.

building  as it was in  1960,  'wallpaper  and Grand  Rapids  furniture  and all',  at
least  in part  because  it had been  the last  dwelling  of the remaining  Hancock
Sisters and the sale had been  negotiated  and signed  there.16  She reported  that in
1967,  the Museum's  Trustees  had adopted  a policy:

to permit  buildings of varying  age and uses that  changed  with the years to
represent the growth in Shaker  thinking  and progress. It became  policy to
restore  them to their  individual  periods, retaining  certain  later  Shaker  additions,
rather  than fix an arbitrary  'official'  cut-off  date for restoration  of the  Village as
a  whole. This policy has never been  altered.17

HSV's 'Finest  Hour' or  the  'Growth  in  Shaker  Thinking  and
Progress'?
Site  interpretation  at HSV  today  certainly  does  recognise  the varying  ages and
different  uses of the  historic  structures.  Yet in 1994  a consultant  social  historian
argued,  'If  Hancock  Shaker  Village  wishes  to  describe  itself  as  "a  historic
restoration,"  the interpretive  plan  ought  to take  seriously  the responsibility of
dealing  with  the passage  of time.'18  To him, and other  consultants  invited  to
assess  the restoration,  it  was quite  clear  that  interpretation  of the site was
essentially  static,  focused  on  the Hancock  Community's  peak  period  of the
1840s.  They  urged  HSV to adopt  a perspective  that  included  the entire  history
of  Shaker  occupation  of the site  rather  than  focusing  on the peak  years. A
partial  explanation  for the static  approach  is suggested  in the Interpretive  Plan
based  on the consultants'  work  and prepared  by museum  staff  in  1996. The
founding  Steering  Committee  chose  as first  curator  Edward  Deming  Andrews,
then  the leading  scholar on the Shakers as well as a prominent  collector of their
artefacts.

In  large part a result of Andrews'  earlier  ground-breaking  studies of the  Shakers
and  their  artifacts, the museum  tended to highlight  only the exemplary, finest

164

Matthew  Cooper

Figure 5.  Hancock, 1830  Church Family Dwelling House.  [Photo, the author.

examples  and  aspects of Shaker history  as seen  through  their  material  culture
and  decorative  arts, with  less of an  emphasis  on  relating  the  collection  to
broader  social  themes  and  ideas.19

Andrews  served  for  the  first  three  years  and  also  donated  many  artefacts

from  his  own  collection  to  the  museum.

Stephen  Stein  analyses  Andrews's  contributions 

to  the  growth  of  the
contemporary  sentimentalised  and  static  image  of the  Shakers.20 Andrews,  Stein
claims,  saw  what  he  wanted  to  see  rather  than  the  diversity  and  complexity  of
Shaker  experience  over  time.  He  focussed  almost  exclusively  on  the  Shakers
before  the  1860s,  reduced  the  complexity  of  their  religious  experience  to
'primitive  Christianity  revived',21  assumed  that  the  highly  ascetic  regime  they
adopted  in  the  1840s  had  been  their  standard  of behaviour  at  all times,  and,  in
general,  'shut  his  eyes to  conflict  and  dissent  among  faithful  Shakers.'22  As well,
Andrews  helped  develop  the  focus  on  Shaker  craftsmanship  and  objects.  In
looking  at  even  the  simplest  objects,  for  example,  he  wrote,  '[T]he  geometric
Figure 6.  Hancock, 1826  Round Barn including early 20th-century  additions that  might have
been moved to establish temporal consistency. [Photo, the  author.

19.  Hancock  Shaker
Village,  Interpretive
Plan. Ms,  1997. p.6.

20.  S.J.  Stein,  The Shaker
Experience in America,
New  Haven  & London:
Yale University Press,
1992.  p.373-381.

21.  Quoted  in  ibid.

p.381.

22.  Ibid,  p.381.

The Representation  of Time  at  Two Shaker  Village Sites

165

23.  Quoted in ibid.

p.375.

24.  Personal  interview

with  Lawrence  Yerdon,
Hancock,  Mass., 29
May  1997. See  also
note 17.

25.  Hancock  Shaker
Village,  Interpretive
Plan.  Ms.  1997. p.  4.

26.  Ibid. p.18.

27.  Ibid. p.13.

28.  K. Lynch,  op.  cit..

p.65.

grace  and simplicity  of  such  pieces  are symbolical  of  a  people's  urge  for
perfection...'.  2i

Thus,  Andrews's  position  as the most  prominent  student  of the  Shakers and
his  role  as first director  made  it possible  for him to impose  the image  he  had
created  on the emerging  museum  village.  Andrews,  however,  was not able to
impose  this  image  as  thoroughly  as  he  might  have  wished.  According  to
Lawrence Yerdon,  current  museum  director,  Andrews  had  wanted  to remove all
structures  from  the site  that  postdated  the chosen  period  but was prevented
from 
'[T]he
museum...primarily 
focussed  on  preserving  and  interpreting  the  Shaker
experience, during  the "peak  years" of the  mid-nineteenth  century,  the so-called
(and  rather  mythical)  "Classic  Era" or "Golden  Age" of Shakerism...'. 25

doing  so  by  the  board  of  directors.24  Nevertheless, 

As  mentioned  above,  the Interpretive  Plan  recently  developed  adopts  an
explicitly  diachronic  approach.  Based on contemporary  Shaker  historiography and
museological  concerns, it uses the 'full  range of the  Hancock  Shaker  Village  story'
to  'illustrate  the overall  Shaker  experience,  past  and present'.26  Certain  buildings
and  landscapes  thus  will  be used  to represent  different  periods. The Plan  claims
that,  '[T]he  Shaker  story is not time  bound. It offers  the opportunity  to nurture a
dialogue  between  past,  present,  and future  that  addresses  fundamental  human
concerns  of any  time  and place.'27  The  new  Plan  is a fascinating  departure  from
the  older  interpretive  approach,  one  that  promises  seriously  to  reorder  its
representation  of the  Shakers. It seems to recognise, as Kevin Lynch  does,  that:

We preserve present  signals of the  past or control the present to satisfy our
images of the  future.  Our images of past and  future  are present  images,
continuously  recreated. The heart of our  sense of time is the sense of 'now'.28

representational  strategies 

Conclusions
The  two  sites  discussed  here  employed 
that
presuppose  oppositions  of past  and present,  as well  as site  and surroundings,
community  and the world.  Through  these  binary  oppositions  the Shakers  have
been  constructed  both  as living in a timeless  past  and as radically  different  from
other  Americans. In this  paper,  I have  discussed  a few of the  decisions  through
which  these  strategies  were  implemented.  These  decisions  involved  the spatial
reorganisation  and adaptive  reuse  of parts  of the  Pleasant  Hill  village.  Providing
a  visual  buffer  from  its surroundings  and removing the public highway  that ran
through  the village  were  thought  to help  visitors  separate  themselves  from the
present  and 'step  back  in time.'  Allowing  visitors  to lodge  in original  buildings
was  thought  to  intensify  that  experience.  At  Hancock,  the  adoption  of a
particular  historiographical  stance  on the Shakers,  it was argued,  underlay the
static  representation  of time.

The  larger  issue  implied  in this  paper,  however,  is the social  production of
historical  narratives.  This is itself an historical  process,  one  that  occurs at many
sites  (both  tangible  and intangible),  through  many  media  and diverse  activities.
Historic  preservation  sites  contribute  to the ongoing  production  of history as
they  are themselves  affected  by it. They  may be seen  as forms  of spatialised
discourse  which  have  been  produced  in part  to put forth  particular  historical

166

Matthew  Cooper

narratives  but  that  also  have  been  informed  by  such  narratives.  Restorations,
however, have a material character that constrains both the narratives that can
be produced  and  also decisions taken with respect to the site. Thus, in studying
historical  restorations  one  must  investigate  their  historicity.  Discourse  about
contemporary  sites  that  does  not  take  the  history  of their  production  seriously
into account ironically  reproduces, though in a different  form,  one of their most
commonly  criticised  features.  Such  discourse  makes  restorations  themselves
appear timeless, just  as the  groups they portray  often  have been represented.

The Representation  of Time at Two Shaker Village Sites 

167


