International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Communism, Heritage and Tourism in East Asia

Joan C. Henderson

To cite this article: Joan C. Henderson (2007) Communism, Heritage and Tourism in East Asia,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 13:3, 240-254, DOI: 10.1080/13527250701228197
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250701228197

Published online: 18 Oct 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 973

Citing articles: 19 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 13, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 240–254

Communism, Heritage and Tourism in 
East Asia
Joan C. Henderson

133000000May 2007
JoanHenderson
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_222739.sgm
10.1080/13527250701228197
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2007Taylor & Francis

ahenderson@ntu.edu.sgThis study examines the linkages which connect Communism, heritage and tourism with
reference to selected East Asian states which are governed by Communist regimes or have
recent experience of Communist rule. Aspects of the heritage of Communism are seen to be
of interest to tourists, but related visitor attractions also have a wider social and political
significance and illustrate how tourism can be employed as a hegemonic tool and propa-
ganda  vehicle.  Heritage,  including  that  of  Communism  itself,  thus  serves  as  economic,
social and political capital within a Communist context where the defining characteristics
of government give rise to a distinctive relationship between political systems, heritage and
tourism.

Keywords: Communism; East Asia; Heritage; Tourism

Introduction

The  politics  of  tourism  is  a  subject  of  considerable  interest  amongst  researchers
and encompasses a variety of themes such as policy and planning,1 development and
dependency2  and  nation  building  and  hegemony.3  Conceptions  of  nationhood  and
national identity are complex concepts and draw on a country’s past history, present
circumstances  and  future  prospects.  They  can  be  seen  as  abstractions,  yet  have  the
power  to  help  in  defining  and  asserting  notions  of  fellowship  and  belonging
amongst the individuals and groups who make up a nation’s population.4 A sense of
national  identity  does  not  preclude  regional  and  local  differences,  and  distinct
cultural  affiliations  may  exist  which  transcend  international  borders.  Assorted
identities are reflected in tangible and intangible heritage and representations of this
can,  in  turn,  influence  how  people  see  themselves  and  their  country.  Many

Joan C. Henderson, Nanyang Technological University. Correspondence to: ahenderson@ntu.edu.sg

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701228197

International Journal of Heritage Studies

241

manifestations  are  tourist  attractions  so  that  heritage  is  both  a  socio-cultural  and
economic  asset  of  economic  and  non-monetary  value.5  It  also  constitutes  political
capital  which  governments  may  attempt  to  expend  in  their  own  interests  and  as  a
means  of  control.  These  multiple  functions  of  heritage  are  apparent  around  the
world  and  there  are  numerous  instances  of  its  being  employed  for  ideological
reasons,  often  connected  to  nation  building  and  the  conceptualisation  and
construction  of  officially  preferred  national  identities,  with  concerns  about  the
consequences.6

One important facet of the debate relates to the political uses and abuses of heri-
tage  and  heritage  tourism,  especially  by  more  totalitarian  regimes,  and  a  strand  in
the  literature  deals  with  the  relationship  between  Communism  and  tourism  in
general.  Accounts  about  the  place  of  tourism  in  former  Stalinist  societies,7  where
visits  to  exhibitions  of  economic  achievements  and  model  schools  were  integral  to
tourist  programmes,  have  now  given  way  to  evaluations  of  conditions  in  the  post-
socialist era,8 following the disintegration of the Soviet bloc. Authorities have had to
deal  with  the  legacy  of  Communism9  and  the  controversy  over  a  new  museum  on
Stalinism  in  Russia  reveals  the  inherent  dilemmas.10  It  should  not  be  forgotten,
however,  that  several  governments  within  Asia  still  profess  to  be  Communist.  They
too  must  therefore  address  the  challenges  of  interpreting  and  presenting  their
heritage  for  audiences  of  visitors  and  residents,  but  additionally  have  to  try  to
reconcile the political, social and economic demands of existing Communist systems
with the needs of tourists and the international tourism industry in an age of rapid
change and globalisation.

China  is  a  notable  example11  that  merits  separate  evaluation,  and  this  paper
discusses the manner in which Communist structures, processes and personalities and
their heritage are utilised as tourism resources in Laos, Vietnam and North Korea, all
of which adhere to forms of the doctrine. Attention is also given to Cambodia as an
illustration of a country which originally embraced and then abandoned Communism
and is now trying to come to terms with its inheritance. These states provide contrasts
in  current  political  situations  which  have  implications  for  official  attitudes  towards
Communism and its exploitation for tourism. In addition, they afford insights into the
role of tourism in the communication of political messages and how it is an arena in
which tensions between past and present political ideologies and practices and efforts
at their resolution are reflected.

Changing  political  circumstances  in  the  nations  under  examination  are  first
reviewed, and the significance of domestic and international tourism for these nations
is summarised in order to set the scene. Tourist attractions related to Communism
and Communist heritage are identified and underlying imperatives regarding presen-
tation and interpretation are then explored, examining the extent to which tourism is
a vehicle for the pursuit of objectives other than those of a commercial nature. The
methodological approach is that of the case study which was selected as the most suit-
able  for  the  purpose.12  Findings  are  based  on  material  collected  and  observations
made  during  study  visits  and  analysis  of  secondary  data  from  multiple  print  and
electronic sources.

242

J. C. Henderson

A Brief Political History

The  second  half  of  the  20th  century  was  a  period  of  turbulence  across  much  of
Southeast Asia, not least for the French colonies of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam which
were known collectively as Indochina. After securing independence from France in the
years after the Second World War when the Japanese occupied Cambodia and Laos and
set up a puppet government in Vietnam, they all experienced the turmoil of internal
and  external  power  struggles.  Communism  emerged  as  a  dominant  political  force
which reshaped societies, economies and modes of governing as well as international
relations.

Vietnam was divided between the South and Communist North in 1954 at the end
of colonial rule, but hostilities between the two frustrated any hopes of peaceful reuni-
fication. The intervention of the USA in support of the South Vietnamese government
was to have an effect on the whole region, the ceasefire agreement in 1973 and with-
drawal  of  American  troops  representing  a  turning  point.  The  North  Vietnamese
invaded the South in 1975 and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was established in
1976, uniting North and South.13 Vietnam has remained a one-party state run by a
triumvirate  of  the  Communist  Party  General  Secretary,  the  Prime  Minister  and
President. There is, however, potential for political discord due to the marginalisation
of ethnic minorities who make up about one in six of the population, and regional
disparities in living standards.14

Communism  in  Laos,  as  in  Vietnam,  was  spurred  by  anti-colonialism  and  the
Communists  later  allied  themselves  with  the  royalist  government  after  the  Vietnam
War. The coalition government was short lived and the Communist Pathet Lao took
control, setting up the Lao People’s Democratic Republic after the abdication of the
king in 1975.15 The Communists, now called the Lao People’s Revolutionary Party,
have held power ever since, although they do face problems of restive ethnic minorities,
notably Hmong rebels, and some disaffection.16

In  Cambodia,  the  Communist  Khmer  Rouge  overthrew  the  government  in  1975
during the civil war which followed the declaration of a Khmer Republic in the early
1970s when the monarchy was abolished. The Khmer Rouge held sway under Pol Pot
before being ousted in 1979. Vietnam had invaded Cambodia in 1978 and backed a new
Communist government led by the Kampuchea People’s Revolutionary Party (KPRP),
consisting of many Khmer Rouge defectors, and the country was renamed the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea. Greater stability was attained only after a peace accord in 1991
and  the  return  of  the  king,  by  which  time  Communism  had  been  abandoned.  The
KPRP  became  the  Cambodian  People’s  Party  (CPP)  and  the  country  the  State  of
Cambodia.  Parliamentary  democracy  and  constitutional  monarchy  were  then
enshrined in the 1993 constitution. A coalition holds office, headed by the CPP whose
leader once served in the Khmer Rouge, but democratic politics are not strongly rooted
and the government has been criticised for its treatment of opponents. Pol Pot was
tried by the Khmer Rouge and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1997, dying soon
after, but the bringing to justice of his associates, who are guilty of the worst atrocities,
is a slow and contentious affair.17

International Journal of Heritage Studies

243

Korea, too, was separated at the end of the Second World War and the Communist
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK or North Korea) was set up north of the
38th parallel. The ensuing war between North and South, also involving world powers,
ended with a ceasefire in 1953. Reintegration seems unlikely and the opposing sides are
still  technically  at  war.  The  North  has  not  deviated  from  its  staunchly  Communist
stance, embodied by the Korean Worker’s Party (KWP) and the Great Leader (Kim Il-
sung),  its  founder.  It  is  the  ‘world’s  last  remaining  unreformed  Stalinist  state’,18
although Marxism–Leninism has been modified to accommodate Kim’s philosophy of
juche or self-reliance.19

The regime’s intense secrecy, human rights violations and nuclear ambitions have
caused worldwide suspicions and opprobrium,20 but there appears to be no threat to
its authority at home and the incumbent Dear Leader (Kim Jong-Il), son of Kim Il-
sung, shares in the public veneration attached to his father. There has, nevertheless,
been speculation about whether one of Kim’s three sons will replace him on his demise
or whether an individual from outside the family will be selected, the absence of any
clear signals indicative of some disagreement. There is a chance that the successor will
come from the army and could chart a different direction for North Korea.21

The early Indochinese Communist leaders endeavoured to construct socialist econ-
omies characterised by a high degree of central planning, state control, self-sufficiency
and collectivisation, all of which were ultimately unsuccessful and sometimes disas-
trous. In the worst instance, the Khmer Rouge compelled urban dwellers to labour in
rural farming cooperatives and industrial plants in their bid to create a worker-peasant
revolutionary  state.  Economic  chaos  was  amongst  the  many  adverse  consequences
compounded  by  measures  such  as  the  abolition  of  money,  the  ending  of  the  postal
service and maintenance of restricted ties only with China. Between1.7 and 2 million
people,  or  20%  of  the  population,  died  in  the  Khmer  Rouge  years  as  a  result  of
starvation, exhaustion and execution.22

While there was little overall desire to initiate political reforms and cede power in
pursuit  of  improvements,  there  was  less  reluctance  to  revise  economic  strategies,
especially after the break up of the Soviet Union. Tentative market reforms were intro-
duced in Laos and Cambodia in the mid-1980s, the latter eventually rejecting socialist
economics.  A  new  party  chief  in  Vietnam  also  launched  a  more  liberal  economic
programme in 1986, with a commitment to doi moi or restructuring, and subsequent
constitutions promulgated a range of economic freedoms.

There is now a greater openness to external trade and foreign direct investment as
well as overseas aid amongst all three Indochinese states and an appreciation of the role
of the private sector, revealed in preparations for joining the World Trade Organisa-
tion.  However,  progress  is  hampered  by  political  dogma,  administrative  rigidities,
corruption and a history of economic mismanagement.23 These deficiencies are also
found in North Korea; its planned economy resulted in serious crisis, with reports of
famine and starvation by the late 1990s. Official anxiety about the situation perhaps
explains a greater willingness to engage in joint ventures with other countries, amongst
them  South  Korea,  and  international  organisations.  Market  forces  are  thus  being
embraced, but more slowly and with much less enthusiasm than in Southeast Asia.24

244

J. C. Henderson

The  later  decades  of  the  last  century  were  therefore  a  time  of  great  upheaval  in
certain parts of East Asia that were exposed to war, civil disturbance, political disloca-
tion and economic collapse. Communists became a powerful political presence and
Communist  governments  of  differing  complexions  were  installed.  These  were  still
entrenched  in  Laos  and  Vietnam  at  the  beginning  of  the  21st  century,  although
economic pragmatism is increasingly prevailing over political principles. North Korea
is  continuing  to  rigidly  follow  its  own  version  of  Communism,  yet  may  be  looking
more favourably on some kind of rapprochement with parts of the capitalist world in
a shift impelled by economic necessity.

While  the  ruling  Communist  elites  allocate  the  highest  priority  to  retaining  their
authority, they do confront potentially destabilising questions of political legitimacy
and  social  and  economic  uncertainties.  They  have  dubious  human  rights  records,
particularly regarding the suppression of political opposition, and have not cultivated,
or have found it difficult to attain, acceptance by the international community. These
observations apply equally to non-Communist Cambodia where the government has
the additional dual task of managing the remnants of the autocratic past while meeting
the requirements imposed by the more democratic political machinery of the present.

Tourism Development

The countries under study possess a wealth of natural and cultural tourism assets, but
their tourism industries have been constrained by an initial lack of government interest
and investment against a background of relative isolation and chronic instability. There
are weaknesses of a poor infrastructure and communications connected to the general
stage of development, Vietnam being the most advanced. At the same time, interna-
tional tourism is widely hailed as a generator of much needed income and employment
and  an  engine  of  economic  progress,  with  Indochinese  countries  actively  pursuing
tourism  expansion.  A  new  receptivity  in  North  Korea  to  tourists,  particularly  those
from  the  South,  and  their  spending  has  been  remarked  upon,25  but  strict  entry
regulations are enforced and much of the country is off limits to visitors.26

Overall, however, there has been intensified marketing and product development in
the field of tourism. A range of holiday types is promoted, in addition to some business
and conference travel, which includes coastal and beach resorts in Cambodia and Viet-
nam. Nevertheless, high priority is given to natural and cultural heritage as a founda-
tion  for  ecotourism  of  various  descriptions,  with  officials  in  Laos,  for  example,
professedly keen to avoid mass tourism and focus on these niche markets27 that are
perceived to be more lucrative and least disruptive. The Mekong region as a whole is
recognised to possess considerable promise as a destination in view of its many ‘jewels’
and has been advertised as the ‘last of the last frontiers’,28 appealing particularly to
Westerners in search of novelty. Political heritage, too, has a place in promotion and
the tourist experience, and includes features based on war, colonialism and the physical
and less palpable legacies of different regimes.

Arrival statistics reflect some advances, principally in Laos, as depicted in Table 1,
but the pattern has been erratic in recent years owing to security concerns prompted by

International Journal of Heritage Studies

245

indigenous and exogenous factors. Nevertheless, tourism is becoming a vital sector of
regional economies. Visitors to Cambodia spent US$454 million, or 11% of GDP, in
2004 and the country hopes to triple arrivals by 2010.29 Laos earned US$87.3 million
from tourism in 2003, a fall from US$113.8 million in 2002, yet the amount still meant
that  the  industry  was  the  largest  provider  of  foreign  exchange.30  Domestic  travel  is
restricted by income in Cambodia and Laos, two of the poorest countries in the world,
but there were about 16.5 million domestic tourists in Vietnam in 2004 and substantial
rises in both inbound and domestic flows are predicted.31 In contrast, only 130,000
visited  North  Korea  in  1998,  spending  an  estimated  US$40  million.32  One  report
calculates that there are between 50,000 and 100,000 visitors annually, with very few
Westerners,33 and domestic demand is likely to be extremely low.

Communism and its Heritage as Visitor Attractions

Communist ideologies, struggles, regimes and figures have their own attributes and
heritage which have been identified as possible tourist attractions by National Tourism
Organisations and tour companies operating in destination countries and their gener-
ating markets. Some of the sites deemed of special interest to international tourists are
described in this section and it should be noted that responsibility for most of these
rests with government and its agencies.

The  cult  of  the  personality  is  obvious  in  North  Korea,  and  its  capital  of  Pyongy-
ang,  re-created  on  a  grand  scale  in  the  post-war  era,  contains  statues  and  monu-
ments  dedicated  to  the  Great  and  Dear  Leaders  and  their  achievements.  Itineraries
include  the  birthplace  of  Kim  Il-sung,  his  mausoleum  and  the  bunker  and  other
spots  around  Revolutionary  Mount  Paekdu  from  where  he  reputedly  led  the  resis-
tance against the Japanese. The secret camp said to be the birthplace of the younger
Kim,  the  Juche  Tower  which  dominates  the  capital’s  skyline  and  the  Arch  of
Triumph  (one  metre  taller  than  its  Parisian  namesake  and  erected  on  the  elder
Kim’s 70th birthday) are also featured. An International Friendship Museum of gifts
received by the two leaders and visits to industrial plants or engineering feats like the
West  Sea  Dam,  reportedly  completed  under  the  expert  guidance  of  the  Kims  and
which  has  its  own  Museum  of  Dam  Construction,  are  other  common  components
of tours.34

Table  1
(thousands)

International  tourist  arrivals  in  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Vietnam,  1999–2004

Country

Cambodia
Laos
Vietnam

1999

NA
614
2,140

2000

466
724
2,330

2001

605
674
2,628

2002

787
736
2,430

2003

701
636
2,928

2004

1,055
NA
NA

Source: ASEAN, ASEAN Statistics, 2006 [accessed 14 January 2006], available from http://www.ase-
ansec.org

246

J. C. Henderson

The Kim dynasty and Communism in general are celebrated by the Arirang festival,
which is usually held every three years and commemorates the establishment of the
KWP. It comprises mass games which combine gymnastics, acrobatics and traditional
dance with elements of the circus and military parades. The pageant is carefully choreo-
graphed and flash cards carried by as many as 50,000 people convey a stream of visual
images.  Patriotism  and  devotion  to  the  Great  and  Dear  Leaders  are  expressed  and
pictures  of  a  prosperous  and  progressive  country  whose  citizens  are  happy  and
contented are projected. Reference is additionally made to past tribulations and the
future goal of North–South reintegration.35 Tourists can also see the Party’s Founding
Museum, the Three Revolutions Museum, educational institutions and the Mansuder
Art Studio which produces statues and propaganda murals.

The circumstances in North Korea are unique, but the facts and myths of Commu-
nism  and  its  history  and  their  representations  are  similarly  judged  to  have  tourist
appeal in Vietnam and Laos. Ho Chi Minh was the founder of the Communist Party of
Indochina and is revered in Vietnam, despite being said to have eschewed the cult of
the personality. His mausoleum and last residence are incorporated in organised tours
and his birthplace is a museum. There are Ho Chi Minh Museums in Hanoi, Danang,
Hue and Ho Chi Minh City, and his father’s tomb is listed as an attraction. The name
of the South Vietnamese capital was changed from Saigon to Ho Chi Minh City in his
honour, although it lost the status of capital to Hanoi. Revolution Museums in Hanoi
and Ho Chi Minh City describe how the country gained its independence and there is
a Museum of Independence where the Vietnamese Declaration of Independence was
written. Assorted statues and monuments throughout the country also pay tribute to
the sacrifices of the Communist revolutionaries.36

There is less promotion of Communist sites in Laos and these appear to be restricted
in number. Nevertheless, there is a Revolutionary Museum in the capital which holds
artefacts, paintings and photographs about the history of the Lao People’s Revolution
and  the  National  History  Museum  covers  the  French  colonial,  resistance  and  post-
revolutionary years. The Victory Monument, fashioned after the Arc de Triomphe in
Paris, is a landmark of the capital37 and the Lao People’s History Army Museum, the
subject of which is nationalism and the Communist cause, opened there in 2005.38

Cambodia,  too,  has  a  stock  of  Communist  tourist  attractions  associated  with  the
Khmer Rouge, but these concentrate on the destruction they wreaked.39 The Prime
Minister  spoke  in  2001  of  turning  ‘all  of  the  country’s  genocide  sites  into  tourism
offices’, amongst them Pol Pot’s final home, and called for corporate sponsorship.40
While his ambitions have not been realised, two venues now compete in popularity
with Cambodia’s iconic World Heritage Site of Angkor Wat. Torture instruments and
the victims’ blood stains and photographs are exhibited in the building once given over
to this purpose, now a Museum of Genocide in the capital, and the Choeng Ek ‘killing
fields’ are the mass graves where some of the thousands killed are interred, 8,000 skulls
on display in a glass case.41

Communist  groups  were  prominent  in  anti-colonial  agitation  and  the  fight  for
independence as well as subsequent armed conflicts. Such engagements constitute a
heritage  of  war  which  is  often  aligned  to  that  of  Communism  at  visitor  sites.  For

International Journal of Heritage Studies

247

example, the Demilitarised Zone (DMZ), the Military Museum on the 38th parallel
and the Armistice Village in North Korea are excursion venues42 alongside the Victo-
rious Fatherland Liberation War Museum and the Sinchon War Crimes Museum, the
second documenting outrages committed by American troops during the Korean War.
The USS Pueblo, an American spy ship captured in North Korean waters in 1968 and
on public display, speaks of ongoing hostilities. Earlier fighting against the Japanese is
recalled  by  the  Samjiyon  Grand  Monument  to  the  guerrillas,  the  Cemetery  of  the
Revolutionaries  and  anti-Japanese  Martyrs  and  locations  connected  with  the  Great
Leader’s exploits.43

In  Vietnam,  the  famous  battle  against  the  French  at  Dien  Bien  Phu  in  1954  is
remembered  in  conserved  or  reconstructed  command  posts,  bunkers  and  the
Museum  of  Dien  Bien  Phu  Victory.  A  War  Remnants  Museum  and  War  Crimes
Museum in Ho Chi Minh City recount American abuses and a memorial and small
museum at My Lai commemorate over 500 villagers killed by American infantry on a
particular  mission.  The  History  of  Military  Museum  in  the  capital  deals  with  the
subject of war, and important revolutionary centres during both the anti-French and
US resistance wars have been designated historic sites. Several networks of Viet Cong
underground tunnels are open for public viewing and the most developed are those
of  Cu  Chi44  near  to  Ho  Chi  Minh  City.  Saigon’s  Presidential  Palace  is  now  called
Reunification  Hall  and  is  given  over  to  recording  the  independence  movement.
Specially  packaged  tours  for  former  enemy  combatants  include  a  selection  of  these
ingredients as well as others such as the North–South border on the 17th parallel and
the Demilitarised Zone.45

The north-east of Laos was a base for the Lao People’s Revolutionary Army and over
100 caves, once occupied as hideouts and bunkers, are advertised. The Ho Chi Minh
Trail, the supply route used by the North Vietnamese army to transport equipment to
the South, crosses part of Laos and it too is considered a novelty for tourists who can
still observe something of the devastation caused by intense American bombardment.
However, visitors are advised that a guide is essential, owing to the presence of unex-
ploded  bombs.46  Similar  warnings  are  issued  about  certain  locations  in  Cambodia
where minefields dating from the American war are both a curiosity and hazard for the
country’s tourists.47

Review

Communism  as  a  political  philosophy  and  system  of  government,  together  with  its
prominent practitioners, has thus become a tourism resource on which the industry is
drawing in, assembling and promoting its products and services. Attractions derived
from these raw materials occupy a place in the tourism development and marketing of
all the countries, but it must be acknowledged that much greater emphasis is given to
other types of cultural heritage and natural features in the Indochinese nations. Never-
theless,  there  is  a  willingness  to  exploit  Communist  heritage  and  conformity  to  the
global trend of the commodification of all dimensions of heritage which have led to
expressions of concern similar to those heard around the world.

248

J. C. Henderson

Commentators have complained about how Cambodia’s troubled history is being
commercialised, fearing the emergence of Khmer Rouge theme parks. These reserva-
tions are perhaps confirmed by reports about the Khmer Rouge Experience Café which
offers a ‘slice of life under the Pol Pot regime’ with a menu of ‘rice water and leaves’
delivered by waitresses ‘dressed in the black fatigues worn by Pol Pot’s guerillas’.48 A
local  authority  scheme  to  award  a  30-year  lease  to  a  Japanese  business  to  run  the
Choeng Ek memorial was shelved, however, after protests. The operators were to be
charged US$15,000 annually and intended to erect a visitor centre. Cambodian nation-
als would have had to pay an entrance fee and admission for foreigners would have
risen six-fold.49

Debate about the dangers of reducing heritage to a marketable commodity in the
interests of tourism are not confined to the more capitalist Cambodia, and doubts have
been voiced about aspects of the portrayal of the wartime past in Vietnam.50 The Cu
Chi  tunnel  complex,  for  example,  has  some  qualities  of  an  amusement  park  with  a
range of activities to entertain guests.51 The right to make money from heritage assets
cannot be denied, especially in desperately poor developing countries, but there are
risks of over-exploitation. Effective management is required to strike an appropriate
balance  between  conservation  and  development  and  education  and  diversion;
otherwise, the subject matter is trivialised, historical truths are obscured and heritage
may be lost forever.52

Distortion and manipulation of heritage is not due only to commercial pressures
and  decisions  about  which  sites  to  showcase  and  accompanying  narratives  are  also
shaped by political dictates. The summary of attractions in the preceding section indi-
cates that their objective is not just to entice tourists from overseas, but that they have
meanings for the country’s citizens and may serve a broader symbolic function. They
can be employed as tools in wider policies of nation building, articulating conceptions
of  national  identity  and  a  shared  history  and  destiny,  which  are  frequently  under-
pinned by hegemonic aims. Communist and non-Communist ideologies and world-
views can be disseminated through the medium of tourism, asserting and reinforcing
existing  power  relations  and  the  machinery  of  control,  with  information  and
propaganda directed at tourists and residents. This harnessing of tourism to political
agendas by governments and the underlying rationale are discussed more fully below
with reference to the case studies.

Visitor Attractions and Political Agendas

The general politicisation of tourism is a universal phenomenon, but is very striking in
North Korea where every effort is made to convince the visitor of the merits of the
government, the wisdom of its political stance and the acumen of its leaders. Yet there
are  some  anxieties  about  tourism  as  a  ‘Trojan  horse  tasked  with  destabilizing
socialism’, the preferred solution being to ‘minimize contact with foreigners and the
transformative possibilities of these interactions’.53

Inbound travel is thus confined to a relatively small group of business travellers and
leisure tourists who are closely supervised by official guides in a style reminiscent of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

249

organised travel in the former Soviet bloc. Tour itineraries are determined by authori-
ties and tell a story of national success in spite of external hostility, made possible by
the  KWP  and  the  exceptional  abilities  of  the  divine-like  Kims.  Festivals  such  as  the
Arirang seem designed to convey continuing approval of the regime amongst North
Koreans. The occasion was especially extravagant in 2006, the 60th anniversary of the
KWP foundation, when an unprecedented number of foreigners were allowed access.
Whilst  partly  a  tourism  initiative,  the  situation  was  interpreted  by  analysts  as  an
attempt  to  enhance  Kim’s  standing  in  international  negotiations  about  nuclear
matters.54

The  political  messages  delivered  to  travellers  in  North  Korea  are  unambiguous,
although their reception may not be that which is expected or desired. Gaps between
sanctioned accounts of a prosperous and progressive nation and the realities of depri-
vation and economic failure are palpable to the outside observer. Attempts to rewrite
or colour history are unconvincing and descriptions of the founding of the nation, the
heroic deeds of the Great Leader and talents of the Dear Leader are partial, with histor-
ical accuracy often taking second place to myth. These very absurdities have a fascina-
tion for some tourists55 as do their physical manifestations which constitute the ‘last
living  example’  of  ‘retro-Stalinist  monumental  kitsch’.56  Communism  has  thus
become an entertainment and there is a certain irony that likely visitor reactions of
amusement, scepticism and derision diverge sharply from the impressions that officials
are keen to leave.

The response of North Koreans to authorised readings of the country’s past, present
and future is much more difficult to gauge and the fact that government is founded on
the denial of individual freedoms and the commanding of unwavering loyalty to the
state  and  its  head  should  not  be  overlooked.  Phenomena  which  amuse  or  intrigue
tourists are intended primarily to inspire, intimidate and coerce nationals and some
sites  contribute  to  xenophobia  and  a  siege  mentality  which  is  fundamental  to  the
regime’s  preservation.  The  Dear  Leader  and  the  KWP,  together  with  the  army,  are
delineated  as  protectors  of  the  people  without  whom  the  country  would  be  over-
whelmed  by  the  capitalist  imperialist  threat.  Such  reasoning  can  be  dismissed  as
Communist political persuasion at its crudest, yet the survival of the regime suggests a
degree of popular acceptance of the myths it has perpetuated as well as fear of reprisals
for non-compliance.

North Korean propaganda is distinguished by its directness, but a want of subtlety
in extolling the virtues of Communism is visible at certain of Vietnam’s tourist attrac-
tions. Communism is shown as a creed and political practice worthy of exaltation and
central to notions of nationhood grounded in the overcoming of common foes. These
sentiments are captured in the visitor guide to the Cu Chi complex which explains that
the tunnels 

represent the will, intelligence and pride of the people of Cu Chi and symbolise the
revolutionary heroism of Vietnam. Cu Chi has officially been cited as Vietnam’s land
of steel and bastion of bronze. Foreign visitors are welcome to Cu Chi to understand
the hard and protracted struggle of the Vietnamese people as well as their keen desire
for everlasting peace, independence and happiness.

250

J. C. Henderson

Communist attainment is also lauded in the museums of Laos, albeit sometimes rather
half-heartedly,57 but Cambodian sites desist from honouring Communism and stress
the horrors of Pol Pot’s dictatorship.

However, analysis of the promotional materials disseminated by the tourism author-
ities  and  industry  in  all  three  Indochinese  countries  discloses  a  tendency  to  revive
memories of times well before the difficult years of the 20th century and invoke images
of ancient civilisations rich in culture and religions which were later suppressed. Such
a  heritage  may  be  a  cause  of  pride  and  is  less  contaminated  by  the  experience  of
Communism, although it too may be vulnerable to political appropriation. There is an
appreciation that aspects of these histories enjoy worldwide acclaim and have immense
appeal  to  tourists,  stimulating  interest  in  recovery  and  conservation.  Changing
perspectives on the past are further illustrated by a growth in adaptive reuse whereby
buildings  from  the  more  modern  pre-Communist  era  are  being  transformed  into
hotels and restaurants, a development facilitated by the availability of foreign funding.
French colonial architecture no longer epitomises subjection to imperialism, but has
become  a  leisure  and  tourism  space  in  a  process  which  marks  how  the  business  of
tourism  can  challenge  and  may  undermine  the  economic  and  political  theories  of
Communism.

Conclusion

Government interest in tourism is clearly observable in Indochina and North Korea
and is the outcome of assorted motives and forces. The urgent need to earn foreign
exchange is critical, but tourism is also a means of projecting particular visions of a
country abroad and at home. It can help to convey a unifying sense of national identity
and history and affirm control mechanisms. The value attached to tourism as a propa-
ganda channel is especially high within a Communist context where the fundamental
insecurity of authoritarianism gives rise to a compulsion to trumpet the superiority of
the  doctrine  and  the  benefits  of  life  in  a  socialist  utopia.  Domestic  populations  are
thereby  reminded  of  who  is  in  charge  and  theoretically  reassured  while  the  outside
world is favourably impressed and opposition is averted.

However, the stridency of political communications in North Korea is more muted
in the other Communist states which have adopted some features of a market economy
and are more amenable to accommodating international tourists and their demands.
There is a possibility that such messages will grow less assertive as external contacts
increase and economic liberalisation, alongside its social and political impacts, takes
effect. At the same time and in the shorter term, autocratic regimes will not willingly
sacrifice  their  power  and  heritage,  including  that  of  Communism  itself,  and  will
continue to function as economic, social and political reserves which ruling elites can
capitalise on when pursuing their over-riding hegemonic ambitions. Tourism is inevi-
tably politicised in such circumstances and has the capacity to act both as a catalyst of
change and instrument for reinforcing the status quo. Its dual role partly accounts for
the mix of mistrust and enthusiasm with which it is regarded by Communist leaders,
and their responses to resolving the resultant tensions merit continuing study to better

understand the dynamics of the complex relationship between politics, tourism and
heritage.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

251

Notes

1 [1] Elliott, Tourism; Hall, Tourism and Politics.
2 [2] Britton,  ‘The  Political  Economy  of  Tourism’;  Brohman,  ‘New  Directions  in  Tourism  for

Third World Development’.

3 [3] Peleggi,  ‘National  Heritage  and  Global  Tourism  in  Thailand’;  Richter.  ‘The  Politics  of

Heritage Tourism’; idem, ‘The Political Dimension of Tourism’.

4 [4] Anderson, Imagined Communities.
5 [5] Ashworth, ‘Heritage, Tourism and Places’.
6 [6] Munasinghe, ‘The Politics of the Past’; Palmer, ‘Tourism and the Symbols of Identity’; Shaw

and Jones, Contested Heritage.
7 [7] Hall, ‘Stalinism and Tourism’.
8 [8] Bachvarvov,  ‘End  of  the  Model?’;  Williams  and  Balez,  ‘From  Collective  Provision  to

Commodification of Tourism?’

9 [9] Hall,  ‘Tourism  and  Development  in  Communist  and  Post-Communist  Societies’;  Light,

10[10]

‘Facing the Future’.
‘Stalin Museum is an Insult to Millions Sent to Death in Gulags’, The Independent, 18 October
2006 [accessed 18 February 2006], available at http://news.independent.co.uk
Sofield and Li, ‘Tourism Development and Cultural Policies in China’.

11[11]
12[12] Honggen and Smith, ‘Case Studies in Tourism Research’; Yin, Case Study Research.
13[13] Ruane, War and Revolution in Vietnam.
14[14] BBC News, Country Profile: Vietnam [accessed 28 January 2006], available from http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk; EIU, Country Profile 2005: Vietnam.

15[15] Evans, A Short History of Laos.
16[16] BBC  News,  Country  Profile:  Laos  [accessed  28  January  2006],  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk; EIU, Country Profile 2005: Laos.

17[17] BBC News, Country Profile: Cambodia [accessed 28 January 2006], available from http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk; EIU, Country Profile 2005: Cambodia.

18[18] EIU, Country Profile: North Korea, 4.
19[19] BBC  News,  Country  Profile:  North  Korea  [accessed  28  January  2006],  available  from  http://

newsvote.bbc.co.uk
Ibid.

20[20]
21[21] BBC  News,  ‘Who  Will  Lead  North  Korea  Next?’,  BBC  News,  15  February  2006  [accessed

16 February 2006], available from http://newsvote.bbc.co.uk

22[22] Chandler, The Tragedy of Cambodian History.
23[23] EIU, Country Report: Cambodia; EIU, Country Report: Laos; EIU, Country Report: Vietnam.
24[24] EIU, Country Report: North Korea.
25[25] Kim  and  Prideaux,  ‘An  Investigation  of  the  Relationship  between  South  Korean  Domestic
Public Opinion, Tourism Development in North Korea and a Role for Tourism in Promoting
Peace on the Korean Peninsula’.

26[26] Lee, North Korea.
27[27] Yamauchi and Lee, ‘Tourism Development in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’.
28[28] PATA  and  American  Express,  Jewels  of  the  Mekong:  Last  of  the  Last  Frontiers,  promotional

video, 1996.

29[29] EIU, Country Report: Cambodia.
30[30] EIU, Country Report: Laos.
31[31] EIU Country Report: Vietnam.
32[32] WTO, Tourism Highlights 2001.

252

J. C. Henderson

33[33] PATA, DPR Korea Task Force Report.
34[34] Konsult, ‘What Will You See?’ [accessed 13 February 2006], available from http://www.korea-
konsult.com;  Koryo  Tours,  ‘North  Korea:  Independent  Travel  and  Group  Tours’  [accessed
7 February  2006],  available  from  http://www.koryogroup.com;  Travelog,  ‘North  Korea’,
Channel 4 broadcast, 1996 [broadcast 17 January 2006].

35[35] D. Kirk, ‘Kim’s Fantasyland Festival’, Wall Street Journal, 21–23 October 2005, 13; Reuters,
‘North Korean Mass Games Proving a Cash Cow for Regime’, The Straits Times, 17 October
2005, 9.

36[36] VNAT  (Vietnam  National  Administration  of  Tourism),  ‘Tourism’  [accessed  14  January

2006], available from http://www.vietnamtourism.com

37[37] Visit  Laos,  ‘Where  to  Visit’  [accessed  17  February  2006],  available  from  http://www.visit-

laos.com
‘Communist Laos Turns 30 Today’, The Straits Times, 2 December 2005, 15.

38[38]
39[39] Tourism  Cambodia,  ‘Attractions’  [accessed  14  January  2006],  available  from  http://

www.tourismcambodia.com

40[40] BBC  News,  ‘Cambodia  Cashes  in  on  Grim  Past’,  12  September  2003  [accessed  28  January

2006], available from http://www.newsvote.bbc.co.uk

41[41] Z.  Istvan,  ‘Killing  Fields  Lure  Tourists  in  Cambodia’,  National  Geographic  News  2003

[accessed 25 August 2004], available from http://news.nationalgeographic.com

42[42] Timothy, ‘Political Boundaries and Tourism’.
43[43] T. W. Cheng, ‘North Korea: Kingdom of the Absurd’ [accessed 13 February 2006], available

from http://weecheng.com/asia/dprk

44[44] Mangold and Penycate, The Tunnels of Cu Chi.
45[45]
46[46]
47[47]
48[48]
49[49] BBC News, ‘Killing Fields Deal Hits Delay’, 7 April 2005 [accessed 28 January 2006], available

Ibid., 34.
Ibid., 35.
Ibid., 37.
‘Pol Pot Menu’, The Straits Times, 1 October 2005, 26.

50[50]

from http://www.newsvote.bbc.co.uk
S.  Mydans,  ‘Visit  the  Vietcong’s  World:  Americans  Welcome’,  The  New  York  Times,  7  July
1999.

51[51] Henderson, ‘War as a Tourist Attraction’.
52[52] Graham et al., A Geography of Heritage; Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage; Uzzell,

Heritage Interpretation.

‘North Korea Sends a Message’, Wall Street Journal, 28–30 October 2005, 10.

53[53] Noland, Avoiding the Apocalypse, 348, 360.
54[54]
55[55] BBC  News,  ‘On  Holiday  in  North  Korea’,  17  September  2003  [accessed  7  February  2006],
available  from  http://newsvote.bbc.co.uk;  Travel  in  North  Korea,  ‘Travel  in  North  Korea’
[accessed 13 February 2006], available from http://www.stat.ualberta.ca.

56[56] EIU, Country Profile: North Korea, 22.
57[57] R. Gluckman, ‘Land in Slow Motion’, Asiaweek, January 1996 [accessed 17 February 2006],

available from http://www.gluckman.com/Laos.html

References

Anderson,  A.  D.  Imagined  Communities:  Reflections  on  the  Origins  and  Spread  of  Nationalism.

London: Verso, 1991.

Ashworth,  G.  J.  ‘Heritage,  Tourism  and  Places:  A  Review’.  Tourism  Recreation  Research  25,  no.  1

(2000): 19–29.

Bachvarov, M. ‘End of the Model? Tourism in Post-Communist Bulgaria’. Tourism Management 18

(1997): 43–50.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

253

Britton, S. G. ‘The Political Economy of Tourism in the Third World’. Annals of Tourism Research 9,

no. 3 (1982): 331–58.

Brohman, J. ‘New Directions in Tourism for Third World Development’. Annals of Tourism Research

23, no. 1 (1996): 48–70.

Chandler,  D.  The  Tragedy  of  Cambodian  History:  Politics,  War  and  Revolution  since  1945.  New

Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.

EIU. Country Profile 2005: Cambodia. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Profile 2005: Laos. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Profile 2005: North Korea. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Profile 2005: Vietnam. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Report: Cambodia. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, February 2006.
———. Country Report: Laos. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Report: North Korea. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
———. Country Report: Vietnam. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2006.
Elliott, J. Tourism: Politics and Public Sector Management. New York: Routledge, 1997.
Evans, G. A Short History of Laos: The Land in Between. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin, 2002.
Graham,  B.,  G.  J.  Ashworth  and  J.  E.  Tunbridge.  A  Geography  of  Heritage:  Power,  Culture  and

Economy. London: Arnold, 2000.

Hall, C. M. Tourism and Politics: Policy, Power and Place. New York: Wiley, 1994.
Hall,  D.  R.  ‘Stalinism  and  Tourism:  A  Study  of  Albania  and  North  Korea’.  Annals  of  Tourism

Research 17 (1990): 36–54.

———. ‘Tourism and Development in Communist and Post-Communist Societies’. In Tourism and
the  Less  Developed  World:  Issues  and  Case  Studies,  edited  by  D.  Harrison.  Oxford:  CAB
International, 2001: 91–108.

Henderson,  J.  C.  ‘War  as  a  Tourist  Attraction:  The  Case  of  Vietnam’.  International  Journal  of

Tourism Research 2 (2000): 269–80.

Honggen, X. and S. Smith. ‘Case Studies in Tourism Research: A State-of-the-art Analysis’. Tourism

Management 27 (2006): 738–49.

Kim, S. S. and Prideaux, B. ‘An Investigation of the Relationship between South Korean Domestic
Public Opinion, Tourism Development in North Korea and a Role for Tourism in Promoting
Peace on the Korean Peninsula’. Tourism Management 27 (2006): 124–37.

Lee, H. S. North Korea: A Strange Socialist Fortress. Westport: Praeger, 2000.
Light,  D.  ‘Facing  the  Future:  Tourism  and  Identity  Building  in  Post-Socialist  Romania’.  Political

Geography 20 (2001): 1053–74.

Mangold, T. and J. Penycate. The Tunnels of Cu Chi. New York: Random House, 1985.
Munasinghe,  H.  ‘The  Politics  of  the  Past:  Constructing  a  National  Identity  through  Heritage

Conservation’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 11, no. 3 (2005): 251–60.

Noland, M. Avoiding the Apocalypse: The Future of the Two Koreas. Washington, DC: Institute for

International Economics, 2000.

Palmer, C. ‘Tourism and the Symbols of Identity’. Tourism Management 20 (1999): 313–21.
Park, P. H. Self-reliance or Self-destruction? Success and Failure of the Democratic Republic of Korea’s

Development Strategy of Self-reliance Juche. New York: Routledge, 2002.

PATA. DPR Korea Task Force Report: New Directions through Tourism. Bangkok: Pacific Asia Travel

Association, 2003.

Peleggi, M. ‘National Heritage and Global Tourism in Thailand’. Annals of Tourism Research 23, no.

2 (1996): 432–48.

Richter, L. ‘The Political Dimension of Tourism’. In Travel, Tourism and Hospitality Research, edited

by J. R. Brent Ritchie and C. R. Goeldner. New York: Wiley, 1994, 219–231.

———. ‘The Politics of Heritage Tourism: Emerging Issues for the New Millennium’. In Contempo-
rary  Issues  in  Tourism  Development,  edited  by  D.  G.  Pearce  and  R.  W.  Butler.  New  York:
Routledge, 1999, pp. 108–126.

Ruane, K. War and Revolution in Vietnam 1930–1978. London: UCL Press..

254

J. C. Henderson

Shaw, B. J. and R. Jones. Contested Heritage: Voices from the Periphery. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1997.
Smith, A. D. National Identity. London: Penguin, 1991.
Sofield,  T.  and  S.  Li.  ‘Tourism  Development  and  Cultural  Policies  in  China’.  Annals  of  Tourism

Research 25, no. 2 (1998): 362–92.

Timothy,  D.  J.  ‘Political  Boundaries  and  Tourism:  Borders  as  Tourist  Attractions’.  Tourism

Management 16, no. 7 (1995): 525–32.

Tunbridge, J. E. and G. J. Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage. Chichester: Wiley, 1996.
Uzzell, D. L. Heritage Interpretation. Vol. 1. London and New York: Belhaven Press, 1989.
Williams, A. M. and V. Balez. ‘From Collective Provision to Commodification of Tourism?’ Annals

of Tourism Research 28, no. 1 (2001): 27–49.

WTO. Tourism Highlights 2001. Madrid: World Tourism Organisation, 2001.
Yamauchi, S. and D. Lee. ‘Tourism Development in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’. DESA
Discussion Paper, 9. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York,
1999.

Yin, R. K. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 3rd ed. Beverly Hills: Sage, 2002.


