International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Estimating the value of the social benefits to
visitors to a large art gallery

Michael Baker , Marion Bennett , Mungo Campbell , David Gilbert , Adele
Ladkin & Haiyan Song

To cite this article: Michael Baker , Marion Bennett , Mungo Campbell , David Gilbert , Adele
Ladkin & Haiyan Song (1998) Estimating the value of the social benefits to visitors to a large art
gallery, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 3:4, 230-243, DOI: 10.1080/13527259808722210
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259808722210

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 192

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Estimating the  Value of the  Social
Benefits  to  Visitors to  a Large Art
Gallery
Michael Baker, Marion Bennett,  Mungo
Campbell, David Gilbert, Adele Ladkin
and Haiyan  Song

Abstract
Museums  and galleries benefit the  community.  However, with  increased pressure on
funding,  galleries have to demonstrate that  the benefits equal or preferably exceed the
costs  of providing  them.  This  is  not  an  easy  task, given  the  nature  of  the benefits
which galleries provide. This paper identifies four  categories  of beneficiary:  the visitors;
the  users -  those who  may  be researchers, or from  the  media or education, who seek
information or assistance from  a gallery, or look to it  to provide research services; the
stakeholders  -  groups  or  individuals  with  an  interest  in  the  gallery,  including
politicians,  donors,  artists  and  so  on;  and  society  at  large,  which  generally  thinks
galleries and museums  are a good thing,  although not  every  member  visits  them. The
paper goes on  to  consider how,  in  practice, Cost  Benefit  Analysis  enables monetary
values to  be put  on  these benefits, with  an  example of how, for  one proposed gallery,
the social benefits to  the  visitors were  valued.

(MGC), 

the  Museums  and  Galleries  Commission 

Most large art  galleries  and  museums  are  supported  by public funds.  However,
pressures to reduce public sector funding  since the  1980s have given rise to real
cuts  in  funding  for  museums  and  galleries, particularly  in  1995. Many,  if  not
most, galleries and museums consequently now suffer  from,  in the words of the
Director  of 
'revenue
impoverishment'.1  Museums  and  galleries  now  have  to  find  new  ways  of
generating income, by introducing charges, from  retail operations, by increasing
the drawing power of the gallery by, for instance, using information  technology
(IT),  and  by  embracing  partnerships  beyond  those  with  the  normal  users,
visitors  and  usual  paymasters.  Some  of  these  initiatives  prove  successful;
research carried out in Glasgow shows that museum shops help bring in visitors
as well as raise extra  money.2 Information  Technology  can  enhance the  visitor
experience  by  transforming  it  to  an  interactive,  rather  than  a  largely  passive,
one.3  Forging  networks  with  other  contributors  of  funds  such  as  business
sponsors,  private  patrons,  philanthropic  foundations  and  the  Heritage  Lottery
Fund reduces the reliance on a single source of  funding.4

Nevertheless,  public  funding  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  in  so  many  other
countries,  continues  to  be  critical,  and  all  central  and  local  government
spending  is  under  close  scrutiny.  As  a  result,  proposals  for  the  expansion  of
existing  galleries,  or  the  creation  of  new  ones,  have  to  demonstrate  value  for
money. This leads  to  a  requirement  to place  a  monetary  value  on  the  benefits

230

IJHS 3 (4) 230-243 © Intellect Ltd 1998

Key  Words
Museums
Art  Galleries
Scotland
Cost  Benefit
Visitor  Studies

1. Museums  and  Galleries

Commission, Annual
Report, MGC, London,
1996.

2.  G. McPherson,  M.

Foley & A.  Dune,
'Redefining  the  role of
tracing  in  a  museum
service',  in  M.M.
Bennett,  D. Philips, &
N. Ravenscroft,  Tourism
and tourist attractions:
leisure, culture, and com-
merce, Eastbourne: LSA
Publications,  1998.

3.  M.M. Bennett,

'Heritage  marketing:  the
role of IT', Journal of
Vacation  Marketing,
vol.3,  no.l,  1997,
pp.272-280;  T. Stevens
& V. James,  The Future
for  Europe's Past,
Swansea:  Swansea
Institute  of  Higher
Education,  1995.

4.  V. Bottomley,  Our her-

itage, our future,
Department  of National
Heritage,  14  October,
1996.

5. P.O. Johansson, The
Economic Theory  and
Measurement of
Environmental Benefits,
Cambridge:  Cambridge
University  Press,  1987.

6. S. Davies,  By Popular

Demand:  a strategic
analysis of the market
potential for  museums
and galleries  in the UK,
London: Museums  and
Galleries  Commission,
1994.

which a gallery provides for society  at  large, to ensure  that  this at least equals,
and preferably  exceeds, the gallery's cost.

A gallery benefits  a number of groups in society. There are means of arriving
at monetary estimates for the values of the benefits which  all these categories of
beneficiaries  receive,  although  the  methodology  is  in  some  cases  difficult,  the
data  requirements  substantial,  and  the  results  subject  to  error.5  This  paper
discusses ways in which  these valuations might  be achieved,  and  then  goes on
to describe, by way of a case study, the valuation of the benefits to one sector of
the market for  a gallery's services -  the visitors.

In  assessing  the  points  made,  and  particularly  the  empirical  work  in  this
paper,  it  should  be  stressed  that  it  was  undertaken  against  a  climate  of  deep
governmental  reluctance  to  fund  major  arts  projects.  The  exercises  to
demonstrate  the  economic  benefits  from  a  new  gallery  are,  in  most  respects,
alien  to  the  spirit  in  which  most  museum  curators  prefer  to  work.  However,
since the issues addressed form an important part in governmental consideration
of any capital project,  any new methods or refinements  which can be employed
in  the process of assessment  are welcomed by the curators.

Since the original work was undertaken,  late in  1996 and into the early part
of  1997,  the  climate for  such  projects  in  the  UK has  changed  in  a  number of
respects. The presumption  by the Treasury  that  the Private Financing  Initiative
(PFI)  should  be considered  under  all  circumstances  (if  only  to  be rejected),  no
longer holds. More importantly, for this exercise, considerable debate has opened
up  about  the  desirability  of  charging  for  entry  to  museums  and  galleries.
Currently the MGC is sponsoring a major  research project in this area, the work
being undertaken  by Glasgow Caledonian  University. The objective  of this work
is to establish clearly the effects  on revenue and visitor numbers of various levels
of charging. The research is due to be published in  1998.

Who  Benefits  from  a  Gallery?
Four  different  categories  of  beneficiaries  of  an  art  gallery  are  identified  by
Davies6  as  together  making  up  the  whole  market  for  museum  and  art  gallery
services.  There  are  the  'visitors',  the  most  obvious  expression  of  consumer
demand  (who most  correspond  to,  say,  theatre  audiences). However,  museums
and  art  galleries also provide a more complex set of services to the  community,
e.g.  through  answering  enquiries  about  works  of  art,  assisting  with  or
conducting  research,  providing  information  to  the  media  and  helping  schools.
These  are  the  'users',  the  professional  beneficiaries  of  the  gallery  and  its  staff.
Another  source  of  demand  are  the  'stakeholders',  individuals,  groups  or
organisations  with  a  legitimate  interest  in  the  sector  at  national,  regional  or
local level, including politicians, conservationists,  donors, artists, historians  and
so  on.  Finally,  there  is  society  at  large,  which  generally  agrees  that  museums
and  galleries are necessary, even if not  all members actually use the  facilities.

Social  benefits  also  arise  because  of  the  drawing  power  which  the  gallery
contributes to the attraction of a destination or region in general. Because of the
need  to  look  to  other  sources  than  the  public  purse  for  funds,  museums  and
galleries have increasingly realised  that,  for better or worse, they are part of the
heritage  industry  and  the  latter  is  an  important  component  of  the  tourism

Estimating  the  value  of  the  social  benefits  to  visitors  .  .  .

231

7. W. Nuiyanti,  'Heritage

and  postmodern
tourism1,  Annals of
Tourism  Research,
vol.23,  no.2,  1996,
pp.249-26O; and J.
Swarbrooke,  The  future
of the past:  heritage
tourism  into the 21st
century',  in A.V. Seaton
et al. (eds),  Tourism -
the State of the Art.
Chichester:  John
Wiley.1994.

8. For an exposition of

CBA see one of the
standard  texts  such as
E.J. Mishan, Cost-Benefit
Analysis: an informal
introduction, (4th  ed),
London:  Routledge
1994.

9. See for example J.T.
Winpenny,  Values for
the Environment: a guide
to economic appraisal,
London:  HMSO,  1991.

10. Some  evidence

suggests  that  some visi-
tors  to Galleries and
Museums believe  there
to be entrance  charges,
see for example,
Museums in Northern
Ireland,  Survey of Public
Opinion, Ulster
Marketing  Surveys,
1991:  and The
Hancock  Museum,
Visitor Survey, Arts
Management  Centre,
Newcastle  Polytechnic,
1990.

industry,  thus  making museums  and galleries, in effect,  tourist  attractions.7 An
attraction  will  contribute  to  the  generation  of  tourism  and  leisure  income
elsewhere  in the local  economy,  and be a  factor  in decisions  to locate  inward
investment in the region.  Again,  the benefits  are difficult  to estimate,  not least
because  the attraction  of a particular  gallery  may be only  one factor  amongst
many  affecting  the decisions of a very large number of people.

This  paper  discusses how the value of the benefits  to each  category  of user
might be measured, in the case of a gallery, and considers the difficulties in each
case.  It  concludes  the discussion  of the measurement  of the social  benefit  to
visitors by describing how, in the course of preparing three alternative proposals
for  a  new gallery  in  Scotland,  the value  of the benefits  to the  visitors was
estimated.

Valuing the  Benefits
Cost Benefit  Analysis
In  the economists'  language  of cost-benefit  analysis  (CBA)8, a public  good  like
the  provision  of an art gallery  can have  a social  benefit  value to a number of
different  constituents. It can have  an  'existence  value';  many  people  who are
unlikely  ever  to visit  the gallery  value  the fact  that  it exists,  quite  apart  from
any  direct or indirect  benefits  they may obtain  from  it. It can have  an 'option
value', i.e. the price a member  of the public would pay for the ability  at some
unspecified  time in the future  to visit the gallery. And it can have a value which
equates  to the sum of the maximum  payment  each  visitor  to, or user  of, the
gallery  would  have  been  prepared  to pay, had there  been  a  charge.9  It is not
hard to see that the option  values and the existence values will be those of the
stakeholders and society at large in Davies's categories.

Cost benefit  analysis is typically employed when the market is ineffective, for
example in the case of investments in roads and flood  protection- schemes or a
quarry  affecting  the publics'  enjoyment  of peace  and quiet in a National  Park.
The  valuation  of  social  benefits  may be estimated  based  on  the  concept of
'consumer surplus'. The consumer surplus may be defined  as the worth or value
of a good or service a person is willing to pay for it minus the market  price of
the good or service  actually paid. Frequently in CBA studies there is no market
for  the good, or service  (for example  clean  air or unpolluted  rivers, as well as
galleries  and museums),  so means  have  to be found  to estimate  these  values
without the starting point of the market price. There are a number  of methods
for  doing  this,  some  of which  are set out below  in the context  of particular
categories of beneficiaries of galleries.

Visitors
In this study, for each person who visits a gallery, it is assumed  that  there is a
maximum price which they would be prepared to pay for entry. This is assumed
to vary by individual, with  some being prepared  to pay a considerable  amount,
and  others being deterred by even a small amount.10  Therefore,  the total social
benefits to all gallery visitors may be measured by subtracting the total of all the
entrance charges from the sum of the maximum amounts that all visitors would
be prepared to pay for visiting the gallery.

232  M. Baker, M. Bennett, M. Campbell, D. Gilbert, A. Ladkin and Haiyan Song

11. The seminal work is
M. Clawson, 'Method of
Measuring the Demand
for and Value of
Outdoor Recreation',
Resources for  the Future,
Washington, DC:
Brookings  Institute,
1959;  and  M.  Clawson
& J. Knetsch, The
Economics of Outdoor
Recreation, Baltimore:
Johns  Hopkins UP,
1966.

12.  Winpenny,  op. cit.

(Note  9)

If  there  are  no  resource  costs  involved  in  the  greater  use  of  a  gallery  (i.e. if
the  marginal  visitor  imposes  no  additional  cost),  then  there  will  always  be  a  net
advantage  in  reducing  the  charge  for  its  use.  Therefore,  there  would  be  an
efficiency  case  (in  which  social  benefit  is maximised)  for  no  charge  at  all.  Under
this  situation,  if  the  demand  function  (i.e.  the  relation  between  the  number  of
visitors  attending  at  different  hypothesised  levels  of price)  can  be  estimated,  then
the  value  of the  total social benefits  would  be  the  area  under  this demand  curve.
The method  of valuation  of this  consumer  surplus  most  commonly  referred  to
in  the  literature  is the  Travel  Cost  Method  (TCM).11 It  assumes  that  consumers'
preferences  are  unaffected  by  their  location.  The  travel  cost  incurred  by  a  visitor
who  comes  from  a  distant  location  establishes  a  minimum  value  for  what  he
would  be  prepared  to  pay  for  the  gallery.  This  travel  cost  is  the  minimum
surplus  obtained  by  a  visitor  who  lives  close  at  hand.

The  main  benefit  of  TCM  is  that  it  is  based  on  observable  behaviour.
However,  there  are difficulties.  The journey  itself may be perceived  as  a  pleasure,
rather  than  a  cost;  trade-offs  between  time  and  cost  are  difficult  to  assess,  with
leisure  time  being  difficult  to  value;  different  people  will  have  different  views
about  the  value  of  their  time;  and  the  relationship  between  time  and  perceived
cost  may  not  be  linear.  Data  collection  is  clearly  likely  to  be  a  difficulty.

The  data  to  carry  out  this  type  of  study  were  not  available  in  this  study..
Moreover,  with  a  large  component  of  tourist  visitors,  the  question  of  allocating
tourists'  travel  costs  across  the  range  of  attractions  they  visit  seemed  to  offer
considerable  practical  difficulties.  Three  alternative  methods  were  employed  to
estimate  the  demand  function,  and  these  are  described  later.

Users
The  group  which  Davies  calls  the  users  is  an  heterogeneous  one.  Establishing
the  value  of the  services  provided  to the  users  would  clearly require  their  careful
enumeration  and  specification.  Once  this  had  been  done,  methods  of  valuation
of each  one  could  be developed  to  suit.  An  important  consideration  is the  action
which  the  beneficiary  would  take  if the  service  from  the  gallery  was  withdrawn.
If  the  beneficiary  would  simply  turn  to  the  market  and  buy  the  service  there,
then  the  benefit  can  be  valued  at  the  market  price.  However  this  situation  will
be  rare,  since  galleries  which  are  aware  that  services  of  this  nature  have  a
market  price  will  probably  already  be  charging  it.

The more  likely situation  is that  the  beneficiary  will manage  without,  or  take
steps  to meet  the  need  in  other  ways,  and  in  this  case CBA offers  the  techniques
of  Preventative  Expenditure  (PE)  and  Replacement  Cost  (RC)  which  could  be
employed.12  Preventative  Expenditure  is  the  price  people  are  prepared  to  pay  to
prevent  the  degradation  of the  facility  (i.e. how  much  they  will pay  to retain  the
service,  or  to  provide  an  alternative  which  gives  them  the  same  amenity);
Replacement  Cost  is the  amount  they  would  accept  in  compensation  to  agree  to
the  loss  of  the  service.  Whilst  the  boundary  between  the  two  is blurred,  the  PC
approach  might  be  best  to  establish  the  value  a  researcher  placed  on  the  help
provided  by  the  gallery,  whilst  an  educational  establishment  might  respond  to
the  RC approach,  if it were  established  what  additional  sum  in  its budget  would
compensate  it  for  the  loss  of service  from  a  gallery.

Estimating  the  value of the  social benefits  to visitors  . . .

233

13. Ibid. 

Information  might be obtained in several ways. One is by observing what has
been  paid  in  other  similar  situations  by  similar  users,  or  the  costs  imposed  on
those users, or loss of value of the users' output,  where this has been the  effect.
Such information  might be available, for example, in other countries or in cases
where a gallery has started to charge for or withdrawn  certain services.

Another  source  is  asking  people  what  they  would  be  prepared  to  pay  to
prevent the service being withdrawn, or what compensation  they were prepared
to accept to compensate for its loss. This leans towards the Contingent Valuation
techniques discussed later.

Thirdly,  one can  obtain  professional  estimates  of the  cost  of steps  the  users
would  take  to  provide  a  service  of equal  utility  and/or  the  cost  effect  on  their
processes of withdrawing  it. Typically, consultants  would be asked to do this.

A number  of  difficulties  attend  these  methods  in  practice. The first method
ignores  any  consumer  surplus.  The  second,  as  well  as  tending  towards  a CV
method,  with  the  difficulties  attendant  on  that,  also  may  have  to  assume  an
ability to pay, an  assumption which may be unrealistic in, for example, the case
of  a  researcher  or,  for  that  matter,  an  education  authority.  AH the  valuation
methods  need  care  not  to make  the  assumption  that  the  expenditure  is worth
incurring.  Generally,  however,  PE  and  RC  techniques  are  considered  to  be
relatively reliable.

Where  there  is  no  identifiable  customer  for  the  service,  as  in  the  case  of
much  of  the  gallery's  own  scholarly  activity,  the  specific  community  which
benefited  might  be  asked  to  value  it  through  Contingent  Valuation  (CV); this
method  is described below.

Stakeholders  and Society at Large
Stakeholders  and  society  at  large  will  share  both  option  values  (the  value  of
being able to go to the gallery at some specified time in the future)  and existence
values (the value placed by a person with no personal interest in visiting it on a
social  asset  like a  gallery). Winpenny13  describes  these last people as  'armchair
friends'  and  suggests  motives  including  altruism,  vicarious  pleasure  (a  sense of
responsibility), and a desire to pass on the asset to future  generations.

Being  a  user  or  a  visitor  to  a  gallery  does  not  exclude  a  person  from  also
placing  option  or  existence  values  on  the  asset  as  well;  indeed  it  might  be
expected that users and visitors would be amongst those who placed the highest
value on being able to come to the gallery at some unspecified  future  time, and
would be keen for future  generations to benefit likewise.

For  estimating  existence  or  option  values,  the  Contingent  Valuation  (CV)
method is required, whereby valuations are obtained by direct questioning of the
population concerned,  asking them either  about their willingness to pay (WTP)
for  the  continued  existence  of  the  asset,  or  their  willingness  to  accept  (WTA)
compensation  for  its  hypothetical  loss.  There  are  a  number  of  techniques
employed.  The  most  straightforward  is  the  completion  of  questionnaires  by  a
sample; the  results  are then  converted  for  the population  as a  whole  (as far  as
possible relating  declared  values to personal characteristics  such  as income  and
socioeconomic group).

There  are  weaknesses  in  the  technique,  stemming  from  its  not  observing

234  M. Baker, M. Bennett, M. Campbell, D. Gilbert, A. Ladkin and Haiyan Song

14. Ibid.

15. For a discussion of a

tourism multiplier
study, see J. Fletcher &
M. Baker, 'The impact
of tourism: modelling
the effects of
expenditure assists pol-
icy-making in Scotland',
OR Insight,  Vol.7, No.4,
1994.

actual  market  behaviour,  and  because  the  respondents  do not  have  to  back  their
opinions  with  their  own  cash.  The  results  of  CV  studies  invariably  show  the
WTP  amount  to  be  several  times  lower  than  the  equivalent  WTA  amount.14
Those  interested  in  the  finer  details  should  consult  one  of  the  standard  texts  on
the  subject.

Surveys  therefore  require  careful  design,  so  as  to  eliminate  sources  of  bias

and  lack  of precision  as  far  as  possible.

Benefits from  Tourism
It  is  not  always  recognised  that  a  gallery  can  be  responsible  for  a  significant
amount  of economic  activity  (demand  and  employment)  beyond  the  employment
of  staff  and  purchasing  of materials  of  the  gallery  itself. A  tourist  who  comes  to
the  gallery  will  have  to  spend  the  night  somewhere,  travel  locally,  eat  in
restaurants  and  so  on.  Even  a  day  visitor  will  have  to  spend  money  on  travel
and  eating  out.  The  economic  activity  does  not  stop  there;  a  large  part  of  the
money  spent  by  tourists  and  day  visitors  in  hotels,  restaurants  etc.  is  spent  on
wages,  which  the  employees  in  turn  spend  in  the  local  economy,  and  much  of
the  rest  of  it  is  spent  on  goods  and  services  whose  production  and  distribution
also  gives rise  to  further  demand.  Thus  f 1 in  spending  by  the  tourist  will  result
in  more  than  £1  demand  in  the  economy  in  total.  This  is  called  the  'multiplier
effect',  and  in  many  parts  of  the  country  special  studies  have  established  the
total  demand  and  employment  effect  of  each  £1  of  tourist  spend;  elsewhere
reasonable  estimates  can  be  arrived  at.15

Market  research  estimates  of  the  composition  of  those  who  visit  museums
can  usually  be  obtained  and  these  distinguish  between  the  international  or
national  tourist  (i.e. those  staying  overnight)  and  the  day  visitors,  who  may  be
further  subdivided  into  adults,  children,  educational  visitors  etc.  Normally  the
daily  spending  patterns  of each  of these  groups  will also be  available.  Reasonable
assumptions  can  be  made  on  the  basis  of  data  on  how  long  visitors  typically
stay 
the  gallery,  about  how  much  of  a  tourist  or  visitor  day  (and
consequently  how  much  of  their  daily  spending)  should  be  attributed  to  the
gallery  visit,  for  each  class  of  visitor.  In  this  way  the  total  daily  tourism
spending  on  goods  and  services  in  the  local  economy  attributable  to  the  gallery
can  be  calculated.

in 

Once these  values  are established,  by  factoring  in  the  multiplier  values for  the
local  economy,  the  demand  and  employment  effects  can  be  calculated.  For
example,  in  the  case  discussed  later,  three  alternatives  were  being  considered,
one  a  modest  extension  to  existing  facilities  and  the  other  two  galleries  of
16,500  square  metres  and  11,000  square  metres  respectively.  The  employment
effects  (in  numbers  of  full-time  equivalents,  and  including  the  staff  in  the
gallery)  were  estimated  to  be  approximately  580  for  the  larger  two  options  and
about  110  for  the  small  option.

The most  difficult  issue  to  deal with  is that  of  'displacement'.  If all the  gallery
has  done  is to  attract  the  visitor  from  another  activity  locally  (another  gallery,  a
football  match,  a  garden  centre)  with  approximately 
the  same  multiplier
characteristics,  there  is  no  net  increase  in  local  economic  activity.  At  the  other
extreme,  if  the  tourist  stays  an  extra  day  to  go  to  the  gallery,  all  the  economic

Estimating  the  value of the  social benefits  to visitors  . . .

235

16.  S. Wanhill, The
Economic Aspects of
Displacement  in Publicly
Assisted Tourism
Projects, School of
Consumer  Studies,
Tourism  & Hospitality
Management,  University
of Wales, Cardiff,  1995,
p. 10.

17.  In  fact  the  small

gallery  was  an
extension  to  an  existing
gallery,  so the  figures
are  for  incremental
gallery  size, staff  end
annual  visitors.

activity  generated  by  that  tourist  is  a  net  increase.  Calculations  about
displacement  are  further  complicated  by  the  growing  evidence  that  the
aggregate  of  different  built  visitor  attractions  can  provide  for  a  critical  mass.
Recent research by Wanhill  supports the concept of critical mass or  'clustering'.
He says:

In urban tourism ... visitors come to see museums, galleries, historic sites, sports
and cultural events etc., which are of special quality in cities, though
individually a single attraction  may have limited ability to generate additional
visits. Putting it another way, the drawing power of a group of attractions is
greater than the sum of the individual powers.16

Any  new  major  gallery  thus  contributes  to  the  development  of  a  range  of
attractions  by  the  synergy  effect  it  provides  and  the  opportunity  to  become  a
honey-pot  attracting  large  numbers  of  people.  This  can  also  contribute  to  a
major  host  city  acting  as  a  gateway  to  less well known  regions,  notably  rural
areas,  nearby.  It  can  also  be  instrumental  in  individuals  staying  in  the  region
longer  than  they otherwise would. The implication  of this is that  a gallery in a
cluster  can  be  responsible  for  tourists  and  visitors  coming  to  the  locality  but
who never, in the event, come to the gallery itself - reverse displacement, in fact.
More research is needed on the subjects of displacement and of the clustering
effect  identified  by  Wanhill.  In  the  meantime,  estimates  need  to  be  made  in
particular  cases. In the Scottish case referred  to, a range of displacements  up to
70% were assumed for the two larger galleries - i.e. it was assumed that  the net
increase of economic activity was  30% of the gross.

The  Study
The  analysis  was  undertaken  in  the  course  of  preparing  three  alternative
proposals  for  a  major  new  gallery  in  Scotland.  The  three  proposals  were  of
differing  sizes and  costs.17 Market research  had been  undertaken  which  formed
the  basis  for  estimates  of  annual  visitor  numbers  (in  fact  ranges  of  attendance
were considered for each  alternative, but only the central estimate in each case
is  shown  here).  Table  1  shows  the  main  characteristics  of  each  of  the  three
alternatives.

Subjective Method
The  first  method  was  to  establish  subjective  estimates  of  volumes  at  different
prices. These  were  obtained  from  the  management  of  the  organisation  putting
forward  the proposal for the new gallery. The price is the single adult entry fee,
and the management  assumed that on average approximately  half of that  value
would  be  expected  to  be  achieved,  because  of  concessionary  and  free  entry
arrangements. Friends, programmes etc. The outcomes are shown below Table 1.
Table  2  shows  the  calculation  of  the  social  benefit  from  these  figures.
Effectively  a stepped  demand  function  is assumed,  with  the  steps  approximately
midway  between  each  estimated  point.  Each  row  is  calculated  assuming  that
everyone  would  be  faced  with  the  full  adult  charge.  As  noted  above,  the
management  estimated  that  the  achieved  revenue  would be on  average  around

236 

M. Baker,  M. Bennett,  M. Campbell, D. Gilbert, A. Ladkin  and  Haiyan  Song

Table 1: Visitor Numbers and other Details for the Three Options

18. S. Da vies, op. cit.

(note  6)

Option

Large Gallery

Medium Gallery

Small Gallery

Gallery Size
(sq metres)

Approx No of

Staff

16500

11000

2380

100

80

15

Visitor
Numbers

814000

744000

75000

Large Gallery

Price(f)  Visitor Numbers

Medium Gallery
Visitor Numbers

Small Gallery
Visitor Numbers

8
5
3
0

200,000
450,000
550,000
815,000

185,000
420,000
510,000
744,000

18,405
41,410
50,610
75,000

Subjective estimates of volumes at different prices.
half the  adult rate. The final  row allows for  this factor,  giving of the order  of a
social  benefit  of about  £2  million  a year  for  the  largest  option,  slightly  less for
the medium option  and about. £180,000  a year for the smallest option.

The drawbacks of this method are obvious; it relies on subjective estimates on
the  part  of  an  interested  party.  However,  in  undertaking  this  type  of  study,  it
would  be  negligent  not  to  seek  information  from  those  in  the  best  position  to
make  estimates  of  this  sort.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  gallery
management  will have the experience of mounting special exhibitions for which
charges will  have been made, and  will be familiar  with  the  general  willingness
to pay  for  other  amenities  exhibited  by  the  local  public. Besides, the  method is
both cheap and easy.

Extrapolation  front  Known Examples of the Effect of Charging
There are some data from  galleries which  have imposed or removed charges for
entry. There is no doubt that  even modest charges make a significant  difference
to visitor numbers. Table 3 shows the change in visitor numbers in a number of
museums which  have removed charges.

However,  data  relating  price  to  demand  are  required.  Davies  provides
information  on  a small number  of galleries which have imposed charges.18 This
enabled the  comparison  of the proportions lost with the charges  levied now. As
the change to charging occurred at different  times, the assumption made is that
charges  since  then  have  just  kept  pace  with  inflation  and  that  otherwise
conditions  and  the  market  have  not  changed.  Table  4  shows  the  effect  of
imposing  charges in  a number  of galleries. Visitor numbers before  and after  the
imposition  of  charges  are  shown,  together  with  the  1995  adult  entry  charge.
The visitor numbers  are the  average over three years. The table also shows the
post-charge  number  of  visitors  as  a  percentage  of  the  pre-charge  number.
Inevitably  the pre-charge  numbers  are  estimates, whilst  it can  be assumed  that
the post-charge figures  are actuals.

Estimating the value of the social benefits to visitors . . .

237

Table 2: Valuation of Social Benefits: Subjective Method

Price

£

Large
gallery

Price
applies
over

Social
Benefit
£000

Medium
Gallery

Social
Benefit
£000

Price
applies
over

8

5

3

0

0-
325,000

2,600

0-
300,000

2,400

325,000

875

300,000

825

500,000

465,000

500,000

480

465,000

495

660,000

630,000

800,000

0

630,000

0

660,000

744,000

Small
Gallery

Price
applies
over

0-
29,910

29910 -
46010

46010-
62805

62805
-75000

Social
Benefit
£000

239

80

50

0

Table 3: The Effects of Removing Visitor Charges on Visitor Numbers

Museum

Museum of Oxford

Scuntborpe Museum &  Gallery

Blakesley Hall  Birmingham

Birmingham Nature Centre

Moyse's Hall Bury St Edmunds

Lydiard House  Swindon

Winchester City Museum

York City Art Gallery

AVERAGE

Date of
Change

Post  Change

Visitors as a %  of

Pie-Change

I9SS

19S6

1986

1986

1986

1986

1986

1987

197

115

214

309

313

249

184

178

219

238 

M. Baker,  M. Bennett,  M. Campbell, D. Gilbert, A. Ladkin  and  Haiyan  Song

19. Multiple  linear

regression  is a  statistical
technique  which  is an
extension  of the method
of fitting a line to a
number  of points on a
graph  so that the sums
of the squares of the
distances of the points
to the line is minimised.
Whilst  the simple
regression  method
familiar  to schoolrooms
only permits the
relationship  of two vari-
ables to be fitted,
multiple  linear
regression  permits the
estimation  of  functions
including  a number of
variables, with the
choice of the inclusion
of a constant  term:

Y=a+bp+cq+dr

where y is the
dependent  variable, a,
b,  c etc. are constants
and  p, q, r etc are
explanatory  variables

Table 4: Effects of Charging on Visitor Numbers

Museum

Charge
Imposed

Visitor
Numbers
Before

Visitor

Numbers  After

After  as

K  of
Before

Price
1995

Avof

Previous 3

years

Avof

Subsequent  3

Years

Year

000s

000s

Natural History Museum

1987

3205

Science Museum

1988

4722

National Museum  of Wales

'  1989

Royal Air Force Museum

1988

893

333

1560

2605

6S6

205

Victoria  and  Albert

1985

2119

1430

(d) TheV&A  instituted  a formal request for  donations from visitors at the  door
Source: Authors'  Analysis  of data from Davics  (1994) op  dl

I

5

5

2.5

5.2

%

49%

55%

73%

62%

67%

Figure 1 shows the percentage of no-charge visitors against price. A value for

the Victoria and Albert has been assumed of £3.

A  linear  function  is assumed.  Figure  2  shows  two such  demand  functions
which  represent  the highest  and lowest  which  would  embrace  all the points
except the estimated value for the V&A.

From this it can be seen that the prices at which demand becomes zero range
from  about £13.50 to £9.40. These values give the social benefit  values for the
three galleries shown in Table 5.

These  values  are similar  to, if a  little  higher  than,  the subjective  estimates
above. The higher figures would imply the valuation  was based mainly on data
from  London,  whilst  the  lower  figures  relate  to  Welsh  gallery  data.  The
advantage  of  this  method  is  that  it  uses  observed  behaviour  as  data. The
weaknesses  lie in the small  sample  size and the generalisation  to the Scottish
situation.  The small  sample  size  forced  the simplifying  assumption  of a  linear
relationship. A larger sample might also have increased confidence in the extent
the results can be generalised. Nevertheless, some confidence  could be placed in
these results.

Statistical  Approach

A  multiple  linear  regression  model19  was  constructed  to  explain  gallery
visitor  numbers,  using  data  collected  from  the  Museum  and  Galleries
Commission's  (MGC) DOMUS database, and by collecting other data by phoning
galleries. There  is reasonable  correlation  between  visitor  numbers  and: gallery

Estimating the value of the social benefits to visitors . . .

239

Effects of Charging - Selected Museums

Price v Change in Visitor Numbers

0 

10  20  30  40  50  60  70  BO  90  100

Visitor Numbers as % of pre - charge Visitor Numbers

Figure  1: Effects of Charging - Selected  Museums

Suggested Demand Function

Price v Change in Visitor Numbers

14

12

Q 

10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100

Visitor Numbers as % of pre - charge Visitor Numbers

Figure 2: Suggested Demand Function

Table 5: Ranges of social benefit values for the three galleries.

Large Gallery

Medium
Gallery

Small Gallery

Estimated  Consumer
Surplus

£5.4 million to
£3.8 million

£5.1 million to
£3.5 million

£510,000 to
£350,000

After discounting for
average entry price
being half adult entry

£2.7 million to
£1.9 million

£2.5 million to
£1.8 million

£255,000 to
£175,000

240 

M. Baker,  M. Bennett,  M. Campbell,  D. Gilbert,  A. Ladkin  and Haiyan  Song

size;  current  market  size;  total  number  of staff;  and  number  of permanent  staff.
A  function  was  hypothesised:

20 S. Davies, op. cit.

(note 6).

Market
Market

Share  =
Share  =

i.e.

A*Size
A*Size

(1  -  BTrice)
-  A*B*Price*Size

Market  share
Where:

is  defined

as:

V/M
V=

Annual  Visitor  Numbei
gallery

M=  Regional  Current  Market  Size  (Million
visits),  defined  as the number  of visits
to  museums  and  galleries 
in  the
tourist  board  region.  The  source  is
Sightseeing  in  the  UK as  reported  by
Davies.2"

Size  is  the  gallery  size  in  square  metres  (using  the  MGC  DOMUS  Care  of
Collections  Survey  definition,  but collected  by phone  by the gallery  staff),  price is
the  price  for  adult  entry  and A and B are constants.  This  enabled  us to  estimate
the  second  term  of the  equation  for  different  gallery  sizes,  and  thus  the  loss of
market  share  at  different  levels  of price.

Regression  of fifteen  observations  gave  poor  fits,  only  explaining  25% of the
variation. The coefficients  (i.e. A and A*B) were, however,  significant  at the 95%
level. The equation  estimated was:

Market  Share  =  4.16  Size - 0.76  Size* Price.

The  Scottish  Regional  market  size  is  9.6  million  visits  (as  defined  by
Sightseeing  in the UK ). This  permitted  the calculation  of loss of market  share  at
different  price  levels  and  gallery  sizes, as  shown.

These  give rise to social benefits  (allowing for, as before,  half the adult  charge
being  on  average  achieved  per  visitor)  of  £1.4  million  for  the  large  option,
£1.75  million  for the medium  option,  and  £128,000  per annum  for the  smaller
option.

loss  of Visitors

Price (£)

0
2
3
4
5
6

6.87
9.26.

Large Gallery

Medium Gallery

Small Gallery

0
-232624
-348935
-465247
-581559
-697871
-815000

0
-  160512
-240768
-321024
-401280
-481536

-744,000

0
-21808
-32713
-43617
-54521
-65425
-75000

Estimating the value of the social benefits to visitors . . .

241

21. Non-linear functions
can be introduced into
linear regression by
specifying logarithmic
transformations of vari-
ables.

Experience  in  developing  a  model  to  explain  gallery  visitor  numbers  in
museums which made no charges, as an earlier part of the project, prepared the
ground for the poor fit. Regression is no more than a statistical technique which
will  estimate  the  appropriate  coefficients  if  the  model  is  correctly  specified.
Whilst, as noted  above, there  are reasonable correlations between  a number of
variables,  there  are certainly  many  intangibles  which  do not lend  themselves
easily  to  enumeration  but  which  are  factors  which  affect  visitor  numbers.
However  the  low  sample  size  made  it  impossible  to  introduce  additional
independent variables  which  were available in suitable  form,  whilst the poor fit
suggested  that  the model  was either  mis-specified  or  some  of the  important
explanatory variables were missing from the model.

In  many  ways  this  method,  which  employed  techniques  of  the  highest
sophistication, was the least satisfactory.  However, this method had the greatest
potential.  Had the  sample  size  been  in  excess  (ideally  well  in  excess)  of a
hundred  (an attainable  objective),  there  would  have  been  the possibility  of a
well  specified  model,  with  the consequent  prospect  of good  predictive  power.
Better specification  could have included non-linear  functions  (i.e. a curve rather
than a straight line).21

Concluding  Discussion
The three methods, each of which  uses different  data,  come to more or less the
same  conclusions.  This  does  suggest  that  some  confidence  could  be placed on
them.  There  is one caveat.  In  all three  cases  the same  factor,  based  on the
gallery  management's  judgement,  was applied  to allow for a proportion  of the
visitors' not paying full  price. Variation in this factor  would affect  all the results
equally.

It  can be argued  that  these  values  are understated.  A large  proportion of
galleries,  including  some  of  the  largest,  still  offer  free  entry,- and  there  is
resistance  to paying  entry  fees,  reflected  in the public  willingness  to  enter  a
gallery for which they have to pay.

However,  whilst  free  entry  may be common  in Britain,  this is often  not the
case  overseas.  This  raises  the question  of overseas  tourists  and the extent to
which the social benefits  are accruing  to them rather  than  to the local society,
whose  taxpayers  are footing  the bill if the gallery  is free  to enter.  If overseas
tourists generally are used to paying for galleries at home, and presumably will
find  even  quite high  charges a very  small proportion of the cost of their  whole
trip,  and therefore  no significant  deterrent  to their  going  to the gallery,  it is
likely  that  they  would  be amongst  those  who would  be prepared  to pay the
highest  amount  to get into  it. This  means  that  a  large  proportion  of the total
social benefits  provided by galleries which  have a significant  proportion of their
visitors from overseas will go to them. For example, using the model in Table 2,
and assuming, for the large gallery,  162,000 of the 800,000  are from  overseas
and  all are prepared  to pay the maximum  entry  (here  hypothesised  as £8),
about  £650,000  of the approximately  £2 million  total  social benefits  would go
to  them  if the gallery  were  free.  It is these  sorts  of considerations  which are
causing  the directors  of major  galleries  some concern,  especially  some London
galleries where the proportion of visitors from  overseas is exceptionally high.

242  M. Baker, M. Bennett, M. Campbell, D. Gilbert, A. Ladkin and Haiyan Song

22. London Economics,
The case for continued
public funding: a
resource pack for the
Consortium of
Administrators of
National Museums and
Galleries, 1997 (unpub-
lished)

It  will  be  noted  that  the  demand  functions  estimated  were  relatively  elastic.
Whilst 
this  study  was  underway,  London  Economics,  who  had  been
commissioned  by  the  Consortium  of  Administrators  of  National  Museums  and
Galleries,  were  also  conducting  an  enquiry,  making  the  case  for  public  funding
of  museums  and  galleries.22  Their  study  concluded  that  museum  and  gallery
visitors'  demand  was  relatively  price  inelastic. For  institutions  which  charge,  an
increase  of  10%  in  price  made  little  difference  to  visitor  numbers,  and  even  an
increase  of  50%  on  average  was  estimated  to  reduce  visitors  by  22%.  For
institutions  which  did not  charge  the  estimated  effect  of doubling  a  hypothesised
admission  charge  from  £2  to  £4  would  reduce  the  numbers  of  visitors  by  on
average  10%.  As  can  be  seen,  London  Economics'  results  differ  from  those
reported  here.  One  interpretation  of  this  difference  might  lie  in  the  assumption
made  here,  in  two  out  of  the  three  methods,  of  a  linear  demand  function.  If  a
large  proportion  of  visitors  is  deterred  by  charges  as  low  as  £2,  the  remainder
may  be relatively  insensitive  to  price increases. If this  were  the  case,  it would  be
another  reason  to  believe  that  the  values  of  social  benefit  arrived  at  here  are
underestimates.

The  paper  has  described  the  estimation  of  the  valuation  of  social  benefit  to
visitors to  a  gallery. As noted  in  the  introduction,  this  is only  one  of four  sources
of  social  benefit.  Each  of  these  are,  in  principle,  capable  of  estimation.  In  the
paper,  methods  of  doing  this  were  outlined  and  the  drawbacks  and  advantages
were  discussed  in  brief.

Estimating  the  value  of the  social benefits  to visitors  . . .

243


