Profile  of Heritage Visitor  Attractions
The  visitor  attractions  sector  in  Scotland  is  dominated  by  heritage  attractions,
both  in  terms  of  supply  and  demand.  The  Scottish  Tourist  Board  Strategic  Plan
lists the  wide range  of attractions  available  as  one of the  strengths  of the  Scottish
tourism  product.3  Public  access  to  these  museums  and  galleries,  castles  and
natural  sites  is  a  crucial  part  of  the  whole  tourism  product  base  for  tourists  and
local  residents  alike. Many  definitions  of visitor  attractions  have  been  suggested,
with  general  acceptance  of that  stated  by  the  British  Tourist  Authority4

'a  permanently  established  excursion  destination,  a primary purpose  of which
is to allow public access for  entertainment,  interest  or education,  rather  than
being  a  primary  retail  outlet  or venue for  sporting, theatrical  or film
performances.  It must be open to the public without prior booking  for
published  periods each  year  and  capable  of attracting  day visitors or tourists
as well as local residents'.

In  determining  a  working  definition 

for  heritage  visitor  attractions
specifically,  the  authors  are  using  the  following  categorisation  of heritage  visitor
attractions  :

3  Scottish Tourist

Board, Strategic Plan
for Scottish  Tourism.
Edinburgh, 1994.

4  British Tourist

Authority,  Visits to
Tourist Attractions
1996. London. 1997.

5  A. Leask&  P.Gould-

ing, 'What price our
heritage?'  in M.
Robinson et al, Man-
aging Cultural
Resources for the
Tourist., Centre for
Travel & Tourism,
1996.

6  British Tourist

Authority, Sightseeing
in the UK 1996. Lon-
don, 1997.

7  Ibid.

Natural

Built for purposes other than
tourism/adapted for tourism use

Purpose built for tourism use

Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
- if historical based interpretation
Country Parks - if historically based
interpretation
Castles
Historic Houses/stately homes
Gardens - if attached to historic houses
Industrial Heritage Sites - if historical
theme
Archaeological sites and monuments
Churches and Cathedrals
Historic Transport - if  historical
interpretation included
Visitor centres - if based on historical
theme
Heritage centres - with interpretation
Craft centres - only if historical theme, not
if only retail
Museums and galleries
Theme parks - only if historical basis of
interpretation

Table  1 Classification of Heritage  Visitor Attractions5

Analysis  of  the  supply  and  demand  activity  at  visitor  attractions  in  Scotland
shows  that  the  majority  of  the  sites  are  heritage  resource  based  and  account  for
the  most  visitors.  For  example,  Historic  Properties  and  Museums  alone  recorded
37%  of  the  total  number  of  visits  to  attractions  in  Scotland  in  1996,  before
consideration  of Gardens, Visitor Centres  and  Natural  sites.6 It is also these  sectors
that  are  experiencing  increased  visitor  activity  within  the  UK,  with  visits  to
Historic Properties  and  Museums  & Galleries up  by  3% between  1995  and  1996.7
The  supply  of the  heritage  product  in  Scotland  is  increasing,  mainly  due  to
the  availability  of  Heritage  Lottery  Fund  support,  all  in  a  country  that  already

The Development  of Core Concepts of Yield  Management

97

8  Scottish  Enterprise

Network,  Scottish Visi-
tor Attractions Review
1997.  Scottish  Enter-
prise  Network:
Edinburgh,  1998.

9  British  Tourist

Authority,  op.cit.
(note  6).

10 Ibid.

11 Scottish  Enterprise

Network, International
Benchmarking and Best
Practice for Visitor
Attractions. SEN,
1998.

12 National  Trust  for
Scotland,  interview
with  Chris  Thornton,
June  1998.

13 A. Fyall&B.  Garrod,

Sustainabitity and Rural
Heritage : a question of
price? Rural  Tourism
Management  Confer-
ence, SAC Ayr,  1998.

boasts  the  highest  Visitor  Attraction  Product  Provision  Ratio  hi  the  UK, with
one  attraction  per  every  5,300  residents.8  The  potential  for  over-supply  and
product standardisation  is evident.

to  maximise 

The  majority  of  heritage  visitor  attractions  in  Scotland  are  owned  and
managed by public or voluntary bodies, such as the National Trust for Scotland
and Historic Scotland. This type of ownership dictates the wide range  objectives
of the organisations, relating to conservation, education and public needs rather
than  simply  profit  maximisation.  This  can  often  lead  to  a  conflict  of  interests
between  property  managers,  keen 
revenue-generating
opportunities,  and  curatorial  staff,  keen  to  preserve  or  conserve  the  resources.
Heritage  Visitor Attractions may also measure success by different  criteria  than
visitor  attractions  in  general,  not  simply  hi  terms  of  profit  maximisation,  but
rather,  hi  terms  of  widening  public  access,  conservation  aims  and  break-even
management.  For  example,  many  of these  properties  do not  charge  admission,
while some offer  free  admission policies for members. While some HVAs do not
charge for  entry, many properties do, with  95% of Historic Properties  and 66%
of Museums & Galleries hi the UK receiving revenue from  admissions  (including
donations) hi  1996.9 In fact,  a decreasing number of Historic Properties charged
admission  hi  1996,  compared  to  1993,  down  to  78%  from  84%.  It  would
appear  that  while the percentage  of properties making  a charge  has  decreased,
the  average  admission  charge  has  increased,  overall  and  between  price bands,
with  the  average  charge  now  standing  at  £2.61,  increased  from  £2.17.
Admissions accounted for 65% of visitor expenditure hi Historic Properties hi the
same period, although La the Museums & Galleries sector the highest category of
visitor  expenditure  was  Retailing  (53%)  with  Admissions  only  accounting  for
43%.10  A  total  of  58% of  all  Scottish  visitor  attractions  charge  some  form  of
admission.11  Another  of  the  mam  issues  facing  heritage  visitor  attraction
operators  is  the  increasing  expectations  of  their  visitors,12  demanding  high
quality  interpretation,  visitor  care  and  facilities.  Managers  are  becoming
increasingly  aware  of the  opportunities  and  need  to  provide  a  quality  product
that  meets  the  needs  of  both  the  visitor  and  the  organisation.  Charging
admission  to  HVAs  is  currently  a  controversial  topic,  with  many  local  and
national properties having to decide whether or not to introduce charges. While
the Government has  stated  a desire to maintain  and increase free admission for
properties such as National Collections, the need to charge admission continues,
as  the  amount  of  funds  released  for  this  is  insufficient  to  allow  free  access
nation-wide. It is therefore important that, if the decision to charge is taken, the
operator makes an informed  decision. A number  of factors  influence  the pricing
policies  adopted  within  heritage  visitor  attractions,  the  role  of  the  attraction
within  the  destination,  price  levels  of  competitors,  value  for  money  pricing,
seasonality,  the  objectives  of the  owner  organisation  and  the  degree  to  which
the  product  can  be  extended  or  augmented.  Heritage  assets  are  often
undervalued13  with  admission  charges  set 
low  to  cover  property
maintenance and necessary conservation work. Equally some properties may not
be able to cope with the rigours of visitor  access and may need to be managed
to  discourage  them.  The  heritage  attractions  sector  has  traditionally  charged
low  or  'token'  admission  prices,  as  part  of  their  attempts  to  meet  wider
objectives. Their response to the need to increase revenue generation  has  often
been to increase promotion of their properties, to increase visitors and secondary

too 

98

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman

14 Ibid.

15 National  Trust for
Scotland, Interview
with  Chris Thornton,
June 1998.

16 K. Donaghy  & U.
MacMahon,  Yield
management  -  a mar-
keting  perspective'
International Journal of
Vacation Marketing,
Vol.2, no.l, 1995,
pp.55-62.

17 Kimes, S., op. cit.

(note 1).

18 Ibid.

19 P.P.Belobaba, Air

Travel Demand and Air-
line Seat Inventory
Management
Unpublished  PhD The-
sis,  Massachusetts
Institute of
Technology, USA,
1987.

20 Larsen, T.D., Yield
Management and
your  passengers  Asta
Agency Management,
June  1988. pp.46-48.

21 Kimes, S., op. cit

(note 1).

22  Ibid.

spend, rather than to charge higher prices.14 This has created other problems in
terms of overcrowding, damage to properties and lower visitor  satisfaction.15

The nature of the Heritage Visitor Attraction sector itself results in a number
of revenue generation issues that influence the extent to which this is applicable
and  appropriate.  For  example,  it  is not  always  possible  to  provide  a  visitor
management  presence at the site and therefore  there may be no direct revenue
generating capability or the HVA may trade off revenue from  admission charges
against broader marketing objectives,  such as at many whisky distilleries.

The  operating  environment  for these  organisations  is constantly  changing,
resulting  in  a  need  to  reconsider  priorities  and policies.  This  paper  aims to
address one of the most pressing issues, that of the increasing need to generate
revenue at heritage properties. While it may not be a priority to achieve a profit,
reductions in central and local government  funding  mean  that  many  sites now
need  to break  even.  This  is a  challenge,  when  the operating  costs  of historic
properties can be high and competition is constantly  increasing.

Yield  Management
The airline industry has been  credited  with the development  and refinement of
yield management  (YM) following  deregulation of the US airline industry in the
late  1970s. Yield management was introduced as a method of utilising capacity
and  maximising  revenue  or  'yield'  where  airline companies  sought  to fill their
planes with the optimum mix of passengers.

In similar highly competitive circumstances, YM began to be adopted in the
hotel  industry  around  the middle of the 1980s. At this  time  the industry was
being confronted  with  excess capacity,  severe short-term  liquidity problems and
increasing  business-failure  rates.  Major  hotel  chains  such  as  Hyatt,  Mariott,
Quality Inn and Radisson  endeavoured  to redress  these  difficulties  by adopting
YM.16 Yield  management  suits  the hotel  industry  where  capacity  is fixed, the
demand  is unstable  and where  the market  can be segmented.17 As with  many
service  organisations,  a  feature  of hotels is that  they  have  low marginal  costs
and  usually  sell their  perishable  product  to their  customers  well in advance of
consumption. Developing these ideas further,  Kimes18 has outlined  a number of
pre-conditions  for  the  success  of YM and  suggested  a  number  of factors  or
ingredients  which  are  prerequisites  for  the  implementation  of  YM  as  a
functioning,  workable system.

Yield  management  in the airline  industry  is considered  as the revenue or
yield per passenger mile, with yield being a function  of both the price the airline
charges for differentiated  service options  (pricing) and the number  of seats sold
at each price (seat inventory control).19 Larsen20 further  clarifies the meaning of
YM in the airline industry by dividing it into two distinct functions,  overbooking
and  managing  discounts. In hotels, YM is concerned  with  the market-sensitive
pricing  of fixed room  capacity  relative  to  a  hotel's  specific  market  segments.
Kimes21  states  therefore  that  YM in  hotels  consists  of two functions,  rooms
inventory management  and pricing.

Heritage  Visitor Attractions  and Yield  Management
Kimes's  evaluation  of yield  management  for the hotel  and airline industry has
been  adopted  as a ideal  framework  in which  to compare  with  Heritage  Visitor
Attractions.22  These  characteristics  draw  upon  previous  research  on  yield

The  Development  of Core  Concepts  of Yield  Management

99

Characteristic

Fixed Capacity

High Fixed Costs

Low Variable Costs

Time-Varied Demand

Similarity of Inventory Units

Characteristics of Yield Management

Application to Heritage Visitor
Attractions
HVAs have  physical capacity  fixed
in short to medium term. The
experience is perishable. It is not
conceivable to able extra capacity
due the boundaries of conservation.

HVAs are characterised by high cost
of extending capacity beyond
current full production limit, e.g.
extending space.  The cost of adding
extra capacity per visitor incurs
extra costs because of legislation
and conservation requirements.

Variable sales costs for visitor
attractions vary according to size of
attraction, level of admission
charge, promotional spend and
market base. This is  lower for
multiple attraction operators where
economies of scale are realisable.
HVAs also have the additional
characteristic of  low marginal staff
costs in voluntary sector attractions
High reliance on leisure markets
causes unpredictability in demand
patterns. Also  performance of
tourism in the destination area
exerts a strong influence on visitor
attraction demand.  Demand is
influenced by leisure day trip
patterns and activity. There is also
periodicity of demand (time of day,
day of week)which  affects revenue
flows

Concepts of capacity utilisation and
unit of productions are hard to
define and measure

Application in Hotel & Airline
Industries
Hotels and airlines  tend to be
capacity constrained with no
opportunity to inventory their
products or goods. Many hotel
services and products are
perishable. Capacity can be changed
by, for example, adding a number of
new bedrooms as this involves a
large financial investment in terras
of equipment and plant
The industries are  characterised by
high fixed costs and, as explained
above, the cost of adding
incremental capacity can be very
high and is not quickly adjusted.
Adding new bedrooms to a hotel not
only entails a large capital outlay
but may involve a long planning
and construction period.

The costs incurred by, for example,
selling a bedroom or airline seat  to
a customer in otherwise unused
capacity is relatively inexpensive
and incurs only minor servicing
costs.

Since capacity is  fixed,
organisations cannot easily adjust
their capacity to meet peaks and
troughs in demand. Therefore
demand varies, hotels  can benefit
from controlling capacity when
demand is high and relaxing that
control when demand is low. As
with airlines, utilisation of
reservation systems can assist in
managing demand since they log
requests for rooms in advance.
As a general rule, YM systems
operate in a situation where
inventory units are similar.
However, it should be noted that
service firms like hotels and airlines
can differentiate their units by, for
example, offering add-on luxury

100

Anna  E. Leask & Ian  Yeoman

Market Segmentation

Historical Demand and Booking
Patterns

Pricing Knowledge

Overbooking

features or the possibility of
upgrades.

Hotels and airlines normally have
the ability to divide their customer
base into distinct market segments
such as leisure, or business. These
customers have different behaviour
patterns, for example corporate
clients are usually time sensitive are
willing to pay higher tariffs whilst
leisure travellers who tend to book
longer in advance are price
sensitive. Airlines have
sophisticated consumer behaviour
models drawn from good
information management systems.

Detailed knowledge of  hotel and
airlines sales and booking data per
market segment should help
managers predict peaks and troughs
in demand and assist in effectively
aligning demand with supply.

YM is a form of price
discrimination. In practice, hotels
operate YM systems which depend
on opening and closing rate bands.
In order to stimulate demand in
periods of low demand, hotels can
offer discounted prices whilst
during periods of high demand low
rates can be closed off.  Additionally,
by offering a number of rates in the
hotel the manager will, ideally,
profitability align price, product and
buyer and increase net yield.

Overbooking is an essential YM
technique. Overbooking levels are
not set by chance but are determined
by a detailed analysis of what has
happened in the past and a
prediction of what is likely to
happen in the future. Predicted no-
shows, cancellations, denials all
form part of a complex calculation
carried out in advance. In this way
the risk of disappointing a customer
who has booked in advance is
minimised.

Demand is heavily geared towards
leisure markets / discretionary
demand and  limited exploitation of
corporate business opportunities.
Visitor attractions are able to
segment leisure markets according
to a range of variables - typically by
age, affinity, place of origin,
purpose and  independent/group
travel. HVAs have a limited ability
to segment according to time of
utilisation (in comparison to leisure
centres) given generalised nature of
demand. Attractions use
intermediaries such as coach tour
operators, consortia, destination
management organisations to
segment markets. Modelling visitor
profile as willingness to pay is not
as sophisticated as airlines

Knowledge is not so detailed as
airline and hotels per market
segment

HVAs do not have a sophisticated
pricing knowledge system based
upon demand and supply. Firstly,
the process may be perceived as
unfair. Secondly, be complicated to
operate and finally, a body of
opinion suggests that visits to HVAs
should be free.

The relationship between price and
capacity in HVA is very unique. As
a visitor is going through an
experience, the amount of personal
space a visitor needs to enjoy the
experience is critical. A threshold of
how many visitors to let into an
attraction has to be made in order
not to spoil or damage the heritage
product or the visitor experience.

The  Development  of  Core  Concepts  of  Yield  Management

101

Information  Systems

Information systems and procedures
are the cornerstone to effective yield
management according to Kimes M

The HVA sector show no
characteristics of using  Artificial
Intelligence (AT) in order to
maximise the optimal price. Many
HVA operate stand alone packages
which don't integrate  information.

Effective  management  information
is essential for successful  YM.
Information technology can assist
greatly in the sorting and
manipulation of required data. The
use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
has enormous potential for  handling
the complexities of YM because of
its abilities in complex problem
solving, reasoning, perception,
planning and analysis of extensive
data. Expert Systems (ES) are
"knowledge based'  software
packages that reflect the expertise in
the area of the application and these
type of systems have extensive
capacity in dealing with non-
numeric, qualitative data. However,
warn that YM systems need to be
integrated to property management
systems, reservation systems and
group systems. If this is not the case
incomplete or inaccurate
information may be entered into the
YM system.

23 Yeoman  & Leask, op.

cit.  (note  2).

24 P.  Goulding  & A.
'Scottish

Leask, 
visitor  attractions  :
revenue  versus  capac-
ity'  in  Yeoman &
Ingold,  op. cit.  (note
1).

25 U.  MacMahon-Beattie,
K. Donaghy  & I. Yeo-
man,  'Yield
Management'  in
Accommodation  Man-
agement,  ' R.  Wood
(ed) Working  paper.
Strathdyde  University,
1999.

26 Kimes, op. cit.  (note

1).

27 V. Middleton,  Market-

ing in  Travel and
Tourism. Oxford:
Heinemann,  1988.

28 P.  Yale, From Tourist
Attractions to Heritage

Table II: Comparison of  Yield Management Characteristics  between the Hotel & Airlines
Industries  to Heritage Visitor Attractions

management  by  Yeoman  & Leask,23  Goulding  & Leask  24  and  MacMahon-
Beattie.  25  The  framework  allows  for  an  assessment  of  yield  management  in
order  to  establish  its  appropriateness  to  the  HVA sector.  Table  2  explains  the
degree of the  application  of the principles of yield management,  in  the terms of
economic, operational  and marketing characteristics that  pertain from the hotel
and  airline  industries  against  the  HVA  sector,  such  as  that  of  a  perishable
product and high price inelasticity of demand.

Conclusions can be drawn that HVAs27-28-29 cost structures typically contain
a  significant  element  of fixed costs in relation to variable costs. Capital costs for
new attractions or for the extension costs of new sites tend to be high in relation
to  annual revenue potential for many  attractions, similar  to the hospitality  and
airline industry.

Goulding  &  Leask30  suggest  that  market-oriented  pricing  policies  are
appropriate for attraction  operators who have to meet the costs of servicing the
investment  on  their  attraction,  together  with  the fixed costs  of  operation  (i.e.
where  subsidies  are  not  provided  by  public  or  voluntary  bodies).  In  practice
these  are  private  sector  operators.  In  such  cases, it  is  a  function  of pricing  to
optimise  revenue  yield  through  a  variety  of  segmentation  and  promotional
pricing techniques, in much the same way as airline and hotel operators do.

Research  into  the  operation  of  heritage  visitor  attractions,  in  terms  of
performance  and visitor profiles, is limited.31 The Scottish Tourist  Board  annual
Visitor Attraction  Survey is the  main  source,  providing  information  relating  to
the  ownership  of  attractions,  revenue  split,  capital  costs  and  employment
figures. This  however  relates  to  visitor  attractions  in  general,  not  specifically

102

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman

Tourism., Huntingdon:
Elm, 1991.

29 S. Wanhill,

'Attractions' in C.
Cooper,  et al. (eds)
Tourism : Principles &
Practices, London: Pit-
man, 1993.

30 Goulding  & Leask, op.

cit.  (note 24).

31 Ibid.  .

32 Tourism  Resource

Company,  in R.
MacLellan & R. Smith
(eds)  Tourism in Scot-
land, London:  Business
Press, 1998.

33 Scottish Visitor Attrac-

tions Review, op. cit.
(note 8).

34 Goulding & Leask, op.

cit.  (note 24).

35 Ibid.

36 Yeoman  & Ingold, op.

cit  (note 1).

37Kimes, op. cit. (note

1).

38 Yeoman  & Ingold, op.

cit.  (note 1).

heritage,  and attractions  only  participate  on  a  voluntary  basis.  Other  ad hoc
surveys  have  been  published,  including  one by Tourism  Resource  Company,32
plus the Scottish Visitor Attractions Review in  1997.33 None of these has been
related to yield management  activities within visitor  attractions.

The  main  study  analysing  yield  management  was  undertaken  in  the
summer  of 1995 by Goulding & Leask.34  The survey  sampled  250 admission-
charging  visitor  attractions  in Scotland,  with  a  69% response  rate. A total.of
125 of the sample were defined  as heritage  visitor  attractions, using the earlier
definitions,  with the findings from  those showing the following :
• nearly two thirds of respondents were seasonal  attractions
• many sites had limited markets in volume terms
• neither seasonal admission pricing nor day-differentiated  pricing is
practised to any great extent
• price differentiation  of visitor markets is widely practised
• promotional pricing techniques are frequently  used
• pricing decisions are taken on the basis of a range of factors including local
information,  competition, revenue targets
• price setting is mostly a joint undertaking  'by committee'
• few properties own computerised management  information  systems

Goulding  and Leask  concluded  from  their  research  that  the application of
yield  management  in HVAs appears  to depend  on three  fundamental  issues.35
Firstly, the sector is at the mercy of a set of demand variables over which it has
little influence  and even less control. Secondly, there is the difficulty  in solving
the  relationship  between  how visitor  attractions  define  their  capacity  in sales
volume  and how they  measure  their  unit  of production.  Finally,  there  is the
dimension of conservation, which is unique to the HVA sector. Therefore,  these
characteristics  are the founding  basis  of the development  of core  principles of
yield management for heritage visitor attractions.

Developing  Core Principles  of Yield Management for Heritage
Visitor Attractions
Designing core principles of yield management  depends upon understanding the
process  of decision-making  in organisations.  Yeoman  &  Ingold36  discuss yield
management  as a process of decision  support, to enable an operations  manager
to  take  decisions  about  the relationships  of price  with  capacity  and vice versa,
very  much  a  principles  or guidelines  approach  rather  than  fundamental  law.
Therefore  Kimes's  definition  of yield  management  has been  redefined  by the
authors, to suit the HVA sector, as 'the ability to sell the right experience to the
right visitor  at the right time, for the right price in order to maximise  revenue
or yield.'37

This enables the operations manager to be placed into the mainstream of the
HVA's decision  making  activity  with the emphasis on focusing  decisions  about
the yield management. A yield management  approach will make a contribution
towards improved revenue management within HVAs. For yield management to
be effective,  operations managers must adopt a pro-active approach to managing
capacity.  Therefore  the organisation  must  gear  itself  towards  a clearly  defined
process  of yield  management  to  enable  the operations  manager  to focus and
make  the best  decisions in the yield  management  process. Yeoman  & Ingold38

The Development of Core Concepts of Yield  Management

103

39 J. Huyton & S. Peters,
'Yield  Management in
the  Hotel Industry' in
Yeoman  & Ingold, op.
cit.  (note 1).

40 P. Jones & E. Kewin,
'Yield Management in
UK hotels :  Principles
and Practices' Paper
presented  to 2nd
Annual  Yield Manage-
ment  Conference,
University of Bath,
1997.

41 R.G. Cross, Revenue
Management,  New
York,  Broadway
Books.

42  Ibid.

43 Scottish  Tourist

Board,  Scottish  Visitor
Attractions  Survey
1997,  Edinburgh
1998.

44 Historic  Scotland,
Annual Report &
Accounts  1996-1997,
Edinburgh:  Historic
Scotland, 1997.

45  Historic  Scotland,

interview  with  Gordon
Young, June 1998.

therefore suggest a decision support mechanism, so that the operations manager
is provided with a rational framework to examine the decision-making process of
yield  management.  That  decision-support  system  has  evolved 
into  a
sophisticated  set  of  concepts,  which  have  been  adopted  from  many  yield
management writers.39'40 In particular, Cross41 has successfully  adopted a range
of principles,  which  has been  coined  'core principles of revenue  management'.
These  principles  are  the  corner  stone  of  yield  management  practice  in the
hospitality,  tourism  and  other  service  industries.  Cross  has  developed  these
principles42 based upon the characteristics of the hotel and airlines industries as
described  in Table  2. New core  principles  of yield  management  for HVAs are
being  advocated  by  the  authors,  based  upon  those  by  Cross  but  with
consideration  of the specific  characteristics  of HVAs, namely  their  purpose to
provide  education,  enlightenment,  preservation  and conservation,  rather  than
those of the airline industry. These ten core principles draw upon the nature of
HVAs, as described in Table 2, and are as follows.

Ten Core Concepts of Yield Management for Heritage Visitor  Attractions

1. Focus on conservation
2. Focus on visitor's willingness to pay through market  segmentation
3. Focus on market pricing rather  than  cost-based  approach
4. Focus on knowledge management i.e. visitor profiles  and information

management.

5. Design decision-making process
6. Focus on selling added value
7. Focus on available tactics and options to deal with peaks and troughs in

demand.

8. Focus on contribution  pricing
9. Determine a perceived fair price
10. Exploit secondary  spend opportunities
These  newly  developed  principles  are  now  evaluated  against  Historic
Scotland  and National  Trust  for Scotland.  These two organisations  have  been
selected on the basis that  they provide a benchmark for success, where success
is the achievement of the organisation's  objectives, be they profit or break-even.
Both have key decision-makers in the revenue management and pricing process
within  their  organisations  and each  manages  the team  of individuals, property
managers, regional directors and so forth, who contribute to the pricing process
and are accountable for the revenue generated  at the properties overall.

Historic  Scotland  & National  Trust for  Scotland
The  National  Trust  for  Scotland  and Historic  Scotland  were  selected  for  this
research on the basis of their  dominance of provision in Scotland  (15% of total
supply),43  plus  they  were  both  felt  to  represent  the  move  towards  more
commercially aware management practices within the heritage field.

Historic Scotland (HS)44 is the government agency which owns and operates
330  ancient  monuments,  sites  and  historic  buildings,  of  which  62  are
designated  as  revenue-generating  attractions.  These  range  bom  Edinburgh
Castle,  which  received  1.2  million  visitors  in  199745  to  castles,  abbeys and
industrial buildings in remote locations, which record less than 5000 visitors per
annum. The Agency's  primary  role is to 'preserve  and protect'  Scotland's  built

104

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman

46 National Trust for

Scotland, Guide to over
100 properties.
Edinburgh: NTS,
1998.

47 Cross, op. cit. (note

41).

48 I. Yeoman & A.

revenues 

heritage,  although  revenue  and  visitor  number  targets  are  set  for  most
properties.  The  process  of  price  setting  involves  regional  managers  and
individual  property  managers.  Revenue  targets  are  subdivided  into  admission
charge 
sales,
restaurants/tea-rooms  and  events. Spend per  visitor  analysis  is undertaken  on  a
monthly  basis  according  to  each  trading  component,  so  that  the  relationship
between  admission  spend  and  other  on-site  spend  can  be  evaluated  and
monitored.  Increasing  income  generation  is  specifically  identified  as  an  agency
management  objective.

revenues  which 

include 

trading 

retail 

and 

The  National  Trust  for  Scotland  (NTS)  is  a  voluntary  body  with  charitable
status.  Its  remit  includes  the  care  and  conservation  of  landscape,  historic
buildings  and  their  contents,  and  the  promotion  of  public  enjoyment  at  these
attractions. A total  of  120  properties  are  owned  or managed  by NTS, although
only  60  of these  can  be described  as commercial  (in  that  they  have  a  managed
admission  charge  system,  rather  than  overall  site objectives),  with  a  further  11
relying  on  'honesty  boxes'. The  remainder  are  either  free  entry  or  not  open  to
the  public (e.g. tenanted  cottages).46

Each of the  ten  core concepts identified  by Cross47 and  the  authors  has been
considered  in  light  of  the  techniques  employed  by  HS  and  NTS  in  order  to
identify  the  following  set of concepts  that  are particular  to HVAs.

Core Concept One: Focus on  conservation
The  primary  purpose  of  HVAs  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  conservation,  for
legislative  and  trustee's  reasons.  Therefore  the  role  of  yield  management  is  to
support  conservation,  by  generating  revenue  to  ensure  that  conservation
happens. Both  HS and  NTS are  fundamentally  clear  about  this. However,  there
is  also  a  balance  to  be  achieved  between  revenue  and  visitors.  NTS  had
problems  at  Craigievar  Castle  and  Hill  House  resulting  in  them  placing
restrictions  on  coach  parties  and  increasing  prices  to  restrict  demand.  NTS
management  plans  very  rarely  consider  revenue  generation,  as  the  focus  is
conservation  and  management  of the resource. The primary  purpose of HS is to
preserve  buildings  then  present  them  to  the  public.  HS  has  introduced  a  new
interpretation  centre  at  Skara  Brae, Orkney to  cope with  the  number  of visitors,
therefore  conserving the site but  satisfying  visitors' needs by providing a way for
them to see inside  the dwellings, via multi-media  applications, rather  than  them
traipsing  over  the  remains  themselves.

Core Concept Two: Focus on visitors'  willingness to pay  through  market
segmentation
HVAs  must  be  able  to  segment  their  market  by  willingness  to  pay.  This
information  provides  the  operations  manager  with  valuable  knowledge  in
determining  strategies for periods of peak demand  and  extending the peak period
into the off-season.  It allows the  operations manager to decide which visitors are
time-sensitive  and  price-sensitive.  For  example,  HVAs  may  experiment  with
discounts  for  pre-booking.  At  present  the  NTS and  HS gear  themselves  towards
mass  market  segmentation  for  leisure  and  discretionary  demand,  rather  than
specific  micro-markets.  Little  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  business  and  corporate
opportunities.  This  is  reflected  in  HS  policy  towards  groups,  offering  a  10%
discount  to  all groups rather  than  targeting  specific  visitors.

The Development of Core Concepts of Yield Management

105

Ingold,  'Decision-mak-
ing'  Yeoman  & Ingold
op.  cit.  (note  1).

49  Goulding & Leask,  op.

cit.  (note  24).

50 R.E. Curry,  ,A  market-

Core Concept Three: Focus on market pricing  rather  than  cost-based
pricing
If a cost-based approach was adopted within HVAs, many sites within NTS and
.HS would not open at all as revenue generation rarely  covers the high  running
costs involved in many  of the properties. Admission may  also be free  or only a
nominal  charge  enforced.  Therefore,  only  a market-based  approach  is realistic.
Using  a  market-based  approach  allows  the  operations  manager  to  focus  on
creative ways to  attract  visitors to the site. NTS and HS adopt this  approach to
attract members to the organisations, bringing new visitors to sites and allowing
free access to properties. Both NTS and HS offer a range of discounted tariffs  and
packages to achieve this aim.

Core Concept Four: Focus on knowledge management i.e. visitor  profiles
Both NTS and  HS admit  they  are  not  strong  in  this  area. Decisions  are  based
upon  experience,  supposition  and  preference.  The lack  of knowledge  is  due  to
decisions  being  made  in  a  committee  structure,  a  lack  of  entrepreneurship,
government  and  volunteer  organisations  culture,  a  lack  of priority  to  set  up  a
system  and  the  cost  of  installation  across  all  properties.  HS has  invested  in  a
system for their  top twenty  sites to provide information  that will support  future
decision-making. HS only undertakes  a limited  amount  of market  research  into
visitors' reasons for visiting properties. Further focus on knowledge management
could  contribute  greater  revenue.  NTS  feels  the  investment  in  information
management systems would not justify  the return on the investment, nor would
it  be  appropriate  for  many  of  the  properties  and  staff  involved,  in  terms  of
technical ability.

Core Concept Five: Design  decision-making  process
Yeoman  &  Ingold48 
identified  poor  yield-management  decision-making
characteristics, such as the problems of organisational culture, quality decisions,
overconfidence  and flexibility of decision makers. Both NTS and HS acknowledge
that  their  organisation's  decision-making  processes  display  these  symptoms.
Many decisions  about  pricing  happen  in  a  formal  committee  structure,  to  take
account  of  the  range  of  opinions  the  organisation  represents.  Authority  for
decisions  about  tariffs  in  HS properties  is  not  with  the  Site  Manager  but  the
Regional  Director  (of  which  there  are  three).  The  Regional  Director's  team  is
responsible for the management  of sites and this is where the authority lies.

Core Concept Six: Focus on selling  added value
Leask  &  Goulding49  state  that  HVAs  are  about  education,  preservation,
conservation, enlightenment  and entertainment. Therefore  a pricing mechanism
should  reflect  that  'added  value',  which  is  appropriate  and  included  in  the
product offering. HS emphasise the added value of the experience through  a four
tariff-band  system  (excluding  Edinburgh  & Stirling  Castles)  depending  on  the
level  of  interpretation  at  the  site.  HS  emphasises  Scottish  Explorer  tickets,
allowing  a  visitor  to  visit  every  attraction,  with  unlimited  access  within  a
specific  time  period.  The  NTS operate  a  similar  price  banding  structure.  They
find  that  visitor  expectations  are  rising  due  to  other  HVAs  investing  in
interpretation,  and  therefore  matching  customer  expectations  is difficult.  Where
NTS has invested in upgrading their interpretation they have found  that visitors

106

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman

level pricing model for
airlines', Scorecard
Technical Brief,  1988,
p.2.

51 Goulding & Leask, op.

cit.  (note 24).

are  not  willing  to  pay  more  for  that  experience,  as  it  is  merely  being  taken  to
the  level of interpretation  offered  elsewhere.

tactics/options

Core Concept Seven: Focus on  available 
In  the  airline  industry,  people  believe yield  management  is  a  method  by  which
firms change  their price several  times  a  day. But  in reality,  airlines rely  on  rate
control methods  and  dynamic pricing systems.50 Yield management  is a  process
of decision-making,  enabling  the  operations  manager  to  concentrate  activity  in
determining the most appropriate price for  the HVA inventory. When  demand is
low,  discounted  prices  become  available  and  when  demand  is high,  discounted
rates  are  unavailable.  Instead  of  using  discounts,  operations  managers  may
consider  additional  charges  for  certain  aspects  of  the  HVA  experience.  During
the  period  of  high  demand,  the  focus  is  on  price  to  optimise  revenue.  The
operations  manager  must  operate  a  pricing  policy  based  upon  periodicity  of
demand  (time of day, day of the week) to maximise yield. Therefore  by operating
a  range  of tactics  and  options, the  operations  manager  can  match  demand  and
supply. HS does  not  use  pricing  to  manage  demand  by  time  of  day  and  day of
the  year.  At  Edinburgh  Castle,  HS  tries  to  avoid  discounts,  as  the  majority  of
visitors are in the following  categories  : they will only visit once, are not  usually
price  sensitive,  are  not  Edinburgh-based,  are  between  25-44  years  of  age  and
couples.  No  education  visits  (which  are  free)  are  allowed  to  Edinburgh  Castle
during the summer, because of the high  number  of paying visitors. NTS operate
limited  options  and  tactics,  mainly  used  to  attract  mass  markets  not  micro-
markets. NTS and HS offer  two for  one deals, have the  same tariffs  all year  and
do not  run  events  to  extend  peak  period  into  off peak;  indeed  they  tend  to  run
events  during  peak  season,  to  ensure  sufficient  visitor  numbers  to  support  the
events.

Core Concept Eight:  Focus on  contribution  pricing
Yield  management  is  designed  for  capacity-constrained  service  firms,  which  is
what  an  HVA  experience  is.  This  constraint  cannot  be  buffered  to  deal  with
fluctuations  in  demand  as  an  HVA has fixed capacity  which  cannot  be  moved,
due  to physical  capacity  constraints. Heritage visitor  attractions  have  high fixed
costs,  therefore  there  is  a  high  marginal  cost  of extending  capacity.51  This  cost
is  often  too  expensive  for  an  HVA  to  bear  and  cannot  be  rapidly  adjusted  to
meet  demand.

As HVAs have high fixed costs, the  additional  cost of servicing  an  additional
visitor  is  very  low.  Therefore  HVAs  must  start  to  realise  the  potential  to
encourage  extra  visitors,  using  their  admission  charge  or  secondary  spend  as  a
contribution  towards  fixed  costs.  HS  has  systems  that  show  no  connection
between  expenditure  and  revenue,  therefore  an  understanding  of  contribution
pricing  is  not  achievable.  Separate  managers  within  the  organisation  have
responsibility  for  revenue  and  expenditure,  for  example  when  purchasing  stock
for  the  shop  at  Stirling  Castle,  the  amount  of  stock  purchased  has  no
relationship  to  projected  revenue.  NTS  operates  contribution  pricing  through
membership,  the  more  members  that  NTS  has,  the  greater  the  contribution
towards  fixed  costs.  Similarly,  HS  have  their  Friends  of  Historic  Scotland
organisation.

The Development of Core Concepts of Yield Management

107

52 Museums & Galleries

Commission, To
Charge or Not  To
Charge?,  M&GC, 1998.

53 N. Johns,  'Quality' in
A. Leask & I. S.  Yeo-
man,  (eds)  Heritage
Visitor Attractions: an
operations  management
dimension, London:
Cassell, 1999.

54 Historic  Scotland,

Annual  Report and
Accounts  1996-97,
Edinburgh:  Historic
Scotland, 1998.

Core Concept Nine: Determine a perceived fair  price
All HVAs need  a policy on a 'perceived  fair  price' because  there is an opinion
that  HVAs,  particularly  museums,  should  allow  free  access.52  Historically the
decision  to charge  admissions  to museums  in  Scotland  has varied  across the
country;  Glasgow  operates  a free  entry  policy,  whereas  Edinburgh  charges for
certain  museums,  including  the National  Museum  of Scotland  and Museum of
Scotland.  Therefore  finding  an  appropriate  perceived  price  is  difficult.  HS
determine  price  according  to  income  requirements  for  the  Agency,  market
position,  values  and  customer  perception.  The  exceptions  are  Stirling  and
Edinburgh  Castles,  as  they  are  considered  important  destination  properties,
therefore  prices  are on par with  Lego  Land,  Tower  of London,  Buckingham
Palace  and other  important  visitor  attractions.  A perceived  fair  price  at HS is
based  upon  the  level  of  emotional  appeal  and  level  of  interpretation. NTS
determines  a  perceived  fair  price  according  to  inflation,  local  context  i.e.
competition, state of the property,  'gut feeling'  and members' opinions.

Core Concept Ten: Exploit  secondary  spend  opportunities
Opportunities  for  further  revenue  in  visitor  attractions  focus  on  secondary
products, such as catering, retail and membership. Visitors may feel reluctant to
pay  an admission  charge  to enter  HVAs, but many  are willing  to purchase  a
product  they  can  take  home  with  them.  Therefore,  the  management  of
secondary  products  is  very  important  at  many  HVAs.  The  importance  of
managing secondary-spend opportunities is becoming a higher priority, with less
revenue available from other sources plus growing competition from other HVAs
and  non-heritage  visitor  attractions.  The  NTS  has  recently  appointed  a
Commercial Director at board level for the first time, recognition of the growing
importance of revenue management within the organisation. Visitors' perception
of service  quality  includes the provision  of catering  and retail53  as part  of the
experience, indeed it is often  a determining  aspect when  choosing an attraction
for  a  family.  Therefore  HS have  invested  in  generation  of  revenue  through
secondary  products. Retail shops provide a large slice of income to HS (27% of
the  total  income  from  properties  in  1996-97),54  partly  prompted  by  recent
investment in additional retail outlets offering  a widely priced range of products.
Catering is contracted  out as the organisation  does not consider  itself  a caterer
although  the organisation  still  benefits  from  negotiated  rates  and  associated
business.  Further  revenue  is  achieved  through  letting  properties  for  product
launches, wedding and functions,  with  significant  investment  into provision for
these activities at both Stirling and Edinburgh Castles.

Conclusions
Parallels can be drawn from the hotel and airline industry as means to compare
yield and revenue practices, in so far as these are market-driven and each sector
depends  on leisure-based  markets.  However,  the management  of capacity and
the measurement  of the unit of production or experience is unique to the HVA
sector.  Heritage  visitor  attractions  serve  a broader  set of objectives,  other  than
business. In particular, neither Historic Scotland nor National Trust for Scotland
have  revenue  maximisation  as a priority,  though  there  are growing  pressures
from  within  these  organisations  to  increase  revenue-generating  activities.
Operations  Managers  are having  to devise imaginative  and innovative  ways of

108

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman

managing  sites  to  attract  visitors  in  a  sustainable  manner,  such  that  revenue
generation  increases  without  damage  to  the  very  resource  that  motivated  the
visits  in  the  first  instance.  A pricing  mechanism  is  required  that  addresses  the
demand  and  supply issues in  Scottish visitor  attractions, particularly  in  light of
the  supply  side increasing  due  to  the  availability  of the  Heritage  Lottery Fund
support.  A demand  management  mechanism  needs  to  be  in  place  in  order  to
evaluate  capacity  and  pricing  decisions.  Both  HS  and  NTS  lack  a  degree  of
responsiveness,  flexibility  to  market  conditions,  constraints  on  capacity  and
difficulty  in managing  demand which, when  compared  to  other tourism  sectors
i.e.  airlines  and  hotels, 
implementation  of  yield
management.

limits  the  successful 

Therefore,  yield management  offers  HVAs an  opportunity  to have  a  focused
methodology  with  which  to  improve  revenue  generation,  which  suits  the
particular characteristics of the HVA experience. The HVA sector is both distinct
and  diverse  in  the  style  of attractions  offered  to  the  visitor,  though  the  sector
has  characteristics  of economic, operational  and  marketing  dimensions  that  are
similar to the hotel  and airline industries.

Yield  management  provides  a  decision  support  system  to  the  operations
manager  to assist revenue-management  decision-making. The ten core concepts
of yield  management  are  unambiguous  and  simple,  allowing  transferability  of
the  concepts  to  the  management  of  HVAs.  By  adopting  this  approach,  yield
management reinforces  the ability of managers to improve their decision-making

Core Principle

Historic Scotland

Focus on conservation

Focus on visitor's willingness to
pay through market
segmentation

Focus on market pricing rather
than cost based approach

Yes

No

Yes

Focus on knowledge
management i.e. visitor profiles
and information  management

Limited

Design decision making
process's

Focus on selling added value

Focus on available tactics and
options to deal with peaks and
troughs in demand.

Yes

Yes
No

Focus on contribution pricing

No

Determine a perceived fair price

Limited

Exploit secondary spend
opportunities

Limited

Table  3;  Core  Principles  of  Yield  Management

National Trust for
Scotland
Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Limited
No

Limited

Limited

No

The Development  of Core Concepts of Yield  Management

109

capability. In  avoiding the pitfalls  of organisational  culture, quality of decisions,
overconfidence  and flexibility of decision makers, both HS and NTS have  further
opportunities  to  generate  revenue,  using  the  ten  core  principles  of  yield
management,  to  sustain  and  develop  their  primary  objective  of  conservation.
Table  3  makes  an  elementary  evaluation  to  the  degree  HS  and  NTS  have
adopted  the  core  principles  of yield  management.  NTS and  HS follow  a mass-
marketing  strategy,  not  targeting  visitors  by  willingness  to  pay,  therefore
missing  out  on  a  core  principle  of  yield  management  objective.  Both
organisations  have  adopted  the  yield  management  principle  of  market-pricing
approach,  as  a  cost-based  approach  would  be  unrealistic.  HS have  adopted  a
stronger  approach  to  knowledge  management  compared  to  NTS,  having
invested  in  a  system  for  their  larger  properties.  HS and  NTS have  focused  on
selling  added  value  through  their  'tariff  band'  structures,  though  neither
organisation  has  yet  adopted  any  practices  to  show  the  relationship  between
price and demand for their products. HS have systems and procedures which are
not  geared  towards  contribution  pricing,  though  NTS  and  HS  demonstrate
limited understanding through their membership schemes. Perceived fair price at
HS is  based  on  the  level  of  interpretation  available,  whereas  NTS focus  on  a
number  of judgmental factors,  as discussed earlier.

Revenue  generation  is  fundamentally  important  to  both  NTS  and  HS,  as
government  and  voluntary  grants  do not  cover  all of the  conservation  costs in
their  HVA  properties.  Both  organisations  already  practice  some  of  the  core
concepts,  for  example, both  now  recognise  the  extra  opportunity  of  exploiting
secondary  spend,  with  HS  already  following  this  path  and  NTS  starting  to
develop  such  methods.  However,  as  can  be  seen  from  Table  3,  further  yield
management principles could be adopted. The ten concepts of yield management
allow  the  heritage  manager  to  adopt  a  reference  framework  to make  decisions
about price, volume and conservation, thus generating further  revenue which in
turn  would  assist in achieving the primary objectives of the  organisation.

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  contribute  to  the  debate  regarding  the
relationship between price and volume. HVA managers need to draw upon  and
adapt  principles from  other  industries,  in  order  to  achieve the  objectives  of the
organisations in  the long term.

110 

Anna E. Leask & Ian Yeoman .


