International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Public folklore dialogism and critical heritage
studies

Robert Baron

To cite this article: Robert Baron (2016) Public folklore dialogism and critical heritage studies,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 22:8, 588-606, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2016.1150320
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1150320

Published online: 09 Mar 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 658

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2016
Vol. 22, no. 8, 588-606
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1150320

Public folklore dialogism and critical heritage studies

Robert Baron

folk arts Program, new York State Council on the arts, new York, nY, uSa

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 25 January 2016 
accepted 29 January 2016

KEYWORDS
Intangible cultural heritage; 
public folklore; dialogism; 
critical heritage studies

inevitably 

interventions 

that  heritage 

ABSTRACT
Public  folklore’s  dialogic  engagement  with  communities  incorporates 
methodologies  for  sharing  representational  and  interpretive  authority, 
collaborative  programme  development,  mutually  constructed  modes 
of  presentation  and  stakeholder  participation  in  policy-making.  While 
recognising 
involve  power 
asymmetries,  public  folklore  seeks  to  mitigate  and  diminish  these 
imbalances as it develops approaches to enable communities to present 
their culture on their own terms. This paper explores dialogic public folklore 
practice through community self-documentation projects, folklife festivals, 
government folk arts funding programmes and a project promoting places 
of  local  cultural  significance.  It  provides  examples  of  the  integration  of 
multiple  roles  of  public  folklorists  as  scholars,  administrators,  producers 
of folklore presentations and government heritage officers. Public folklore 
praxis achieved through the integration of these roles is seen as a potential 
model for critical heritage studies praxis for scholars who are advisors and 
researchers in intangible cultural heritage (ICH) initiatives. Critical heritage 
scholars involved with ICH can learn from how public folklorists engage with 
communities and foster cultural self-determination. For public folklorists, 
collaboration and increased dialogue with critical heritage scholars could 
foster greater awareness of hegemonic discourses, reconceptualisation of 
the social base of ICH and recognition of the pitfalls of fostering economic 
development through heritage.

Introduction
The field of critical heritage studies is rapidly expanding alongside an upsurge of initiatives spurred 
by the 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). Scholars who critically interrogate and 
analyse government intervention in heritage often find themselves enmeshed in heritage policy-making 
and practice. They serve on national and regional heritage commissions, act as policy advisors, develop 
protocols for inventorying intangible cultural heritage (hereafter ICH), document traditions for the 
UNESCO lists and create frameworks for safeguarding ICH. Through these multiple roles, heritage 
scholars experience at first-hand issues of mediation, intervention in ongoing cultural processes and 
community self-determination in heritage matters. These experiences shape the empirical foundations 
of their research but also engender role conflicts. Bortolotto (2015, 252) discusses the ‘difficult position 

CONTACT  robert Baron 

 rbtbaron@gmail.com, robert.baron@arts.ny.gov

© 2016 robert Baron. Published with license by taylor & francis.

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  589

of being both an agent in and an observer of the implementation of ICH policies’, an ‘uncomfortable 
situation’ that ‘complicates the relationship between the discipline of anthropology, which scientifically 
investigates cultural transmission, and the policy field regulating this process’.

Integration of these multiple roles can enable heritage scholars to tangibly address concerns expressed 
in their critical scholarship through collaborations with communities to develop heritage practices, 
programmes and policies that advance cultural self-determination. Such a praxis would respond to 
objectives stated in the manifesto on the website of the Association of Critical Heritage Studies (ACHS) 
as ‘democratizing heritage by consciously rejecting elite cultural narratives and embracing the heritage 
insights of people, communities and cultures that have been traditionally marginalised in formulating 
heritage policy’, as well as the 2003 Convention’s expectation of community participation. The 2003 
Convention, as Neyrinck (2014, 319) notes, incorporated a ‘deeply participatory approach in cultural 
work’ and ‘urged for the involvement and – prior and informed – consent by ICH practitioners, by 
individuals, groups or communities concerned’ (see UNESCO 2014).

For the past three decades, public folklore has addressed key issues of current concern for critical 
heritage studies and engaged in a praxis of dialogic engagement with communities. It has developed 
methodologies  for  sharing  representational  and  interpretive  authority,  carrying  out  collaborative 
programme development, creating cultural conversations through mutually constructed modes of 
presentation, enabling stakeholder participation in policy development and equipping communities 
to present and safeguard their traditions on their own terms.

In contrast with critical heritage studies, public folklore does not generally address hegemonic 
heritage discourses and divergences between government authorities and communities. Rather, public 
folklorists integrate multiple roles as scholars, producers of programming, administrators and gov-
ernment cultural officials. The inherent dialogism of public folklore diminishes power asymmetries 
and fosters participation through its distinctive approaches to mediation, intervention, representation 
and community cultural self-determination.

While public folklorists uncritically embrace participation of communities in programmes that 
represent their traditions, many heritage scholars are critical of the ICH participatory paradigm. 
Adell et al. (2015, 10) report that the ‘inherent ambivalence of the participatory paradigm’ is widely 
acknowledged, stating that, ‘on the one hand’, the ‘taking over of bureaucratic paternalism by civil 
society has encouraged debate and activism as a counter-hegemonic approach towards radical social 
transformation’. On the other hand, ‘numerous critical analyses’ have ‘demonstrated’ that the participa-
tory paradigm has been ‘re-politicized’ from earlier conceptualisations ‘inspired by the emancipatory 
pedagogy of Paolo Freire and based on the Marxist-oriented Participatory Action Research’. They 
see it as serving a ‘neoliberal agenda as a self-help technology’ that ‘legitimizes marketization and 
state retrenchment’, domesticating ‘their potential for radical political opposition, contributing to the 
commodification and depoliticization of the cultural field’ (Adell et al. 2015, 11).

Some heritage scholars who work within the participatory paradigm are exploring new approaches 
for  collaboration  among  scholars,  heritage  professionals  and  community  members.  They  seek  to 
advance cultural self-determination through incorporating the expertise and perspectives of com-
munity members. Jean-Louis Tornatore’s involvement in the design and implementation of an ICH 
policy for the Ballons des Vosges Regional Nature Park in France entailed creation of a ‘citizen’s jury’ 
to select ‘cultural asset[s]’ to ‘transmit and promote’ (Barbe, Chauliac, and Tornatore 2015, 207). It was 
viewed as a method to ‘“bend” the Convention by redistributing expertise’, with the scholar becoming 
‘less a content specialist, with the kind of jurisdiction over an object that an ethnologist usually has, 
than a guide’ (Barbe, Chauliac, and Tornatore 2015, 203). This approach involved ‘bucking the dom-
inant practice of documentary expertise and promoting the idea of participatory expertise, or, at the 
very least, a sharing of cultural and heritage expertise’ (Barbe, Chauliac, and Tornatore 2015, 204). 
Such sharing of expertise and authority is much less common in ICH programmes than in US public 
folklore. Neyrinck (2014, 334) contends that it should be widespread in ICH programmes, calling for 
the ‘co-production’ of ICH, with professionals and the groups with whom they work, to be engaged in 
a ‘continuous problem-solving process, implying negotiation, deliberation and joint learning’.

590 

  R. BaRon

While public folklore provides important models for heritage theory and practice, the current 
global discourse on ICH has largely elided public folklore scholarship and practice, which is primarily 
associated with the US. Flemish heritage scholar, Marc Jacobs (2014, 279), notes that public folklorists 
have ‘years of experience’ with ‘participatory methods, theoretically informed practices and brokerage’ 
that could meet ‘an international demand for appropriate methods and good practices for safeguarding’ 
ICH. Unfortunately, as Jacobs (2014, 270) indicates, an ‘intercontinental link’, which previously encom-
passed ‘institutional and intergovernmental bridges’, is ‘drifting apart’. Jacobs (2014, 279) attributes 
this drift to the current US refusal to fund UNESCO. The US Government has not ratified the 2003 
Convention, isolating US-based public folklorists from the global conversation about ICH.

The diminished awareness of public folklore outside of the US can also be ascribed to the negative 
valence of folklore as a retrograde term for many scholars in other disciplines unaware of contemporary 
folklore scholarship. During the late twentieth century, folklore studies reconceptualised its subject of 
study as an emergent in performance possessed universally, by any cultural group in any social strata, 
within and among communities constituted on the basis of any kind of shared identity and association 
(see Bauman and Paredes 1972; Shuman and Briggs 1993). Such an approach contrasts with prior views 
of folklore as associated primarily with marginalised peoples, studied by a discipline centred upon 
texts abstracted from social interaction. Folklorists are acutely aware of the problematic resonances of 
the term folklore, especially pernicious legacies of romantic nationalism that their discipline discarded 
long ago, but remain inaccurately associated with it. Folklorists recurrently ponder substituting other 
names, but they stick with the term folklore, historically associated with their discipline and familiar 
to laypersons. While ICH and folklore encompass many of the same domains of culture, folklore 
remains a term widely accepted in its eponymous discipline, within its communities of practice and 
among heritage agencies in the US. In contrast, ICH is a term limited to academic discourse. Therein 
lies a gulf between the US and much of the rest of the world, where ICH, according to Jacobs (2014, 
267), presents a challenge for folklore studies as a ‘paradigm that is whipped into shape by avoiding 
the central concept in the name of the discipline itself’.

Public folklore addresses key concerns of the global movement to safeguard ICH, and its approaches 
should be articulated with the new global discourse on heritage theory, ideology, policy and practice. 
Greater involvement of public folklore with critical heritage studies and the new global heritage dis-
course would be mutually beneficial. It would bring public folklore into the international heritage arena 
and sharpen its critical discourse while providing models for dialogically constructed representational 
practices and modes of presentation, as well as integration of the multiple roles of heritage scholars 
within the public sphere.

This article describes and analyses public folklore dialogism through an overview of US public 
folklore practices and methodologies, drawing from examples of several innovative programmes. It 
examines its intrinsically dialogical modes of presentation, initiatives to equip communities to repre-
sent their traditions on their own terms and government programmes directed by public folklorists 
that integrally involve community stakeholders. I explore power asymmetries between heritage spe-
cialists and the communities they represent, strategies for diminishing imbalances, and ways to share 
authority while acknowledging that imbalances will inevitably persist to some extent.

Public folklore’s inception in the dialogic turn
From its beginnings in the 1970s, public folklore has been predicated on dialogism. In contrast with 
an older paradigm of applied folklore that applied and disseminated expertise and scholarship in a 
unidirectional manner, public folklore entails mutual engagement and collaboration, eschewing a ‘top 
down’ approach that assumes that expertise and interpretive authority resides only with the folklorist 
designing programmes on behalf of a community (Baron 2010, 71).1 While public folklorists in the 
1980s previously called themselves ‘applied folklorists’, professional self-identification shifted to a 
new term consonant with collaboration and the recontextualisation associated with the ‘representa-
tion of folklore and application of folk traditions in new contours and contexts within and beyond 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  591

the communities within which they originated’, as stated in the introduction to the edited volume, 
Public Folklore (Baron and Spitzer [1992] 2007, 1). The performance-based approach that transformed 
the study of folklore informed the concern with recontextualisation. The Smithsonian Festival of 
American Folklife, established in 1967, and state folk arts programmes developed through the National 
Endowment for the Arts (NEA) beginning in the late 1970s, were highly influential in the development 
of new approaches to the public presentation of recontextualised traditions and collaborations with 
communities. Public folklore has also been shaped by the premise that it is, as David Whisnant (1988, 
233) states, ‘unavoidably interventionist’, with inevitable impacts upon the traditions documented and 
presented. Whisnant’s (1988) words appeared in The Conservation of Culture: Folklorists and the Public 
Sector, which like Public Folklore, contained critical reflexive case studies about the implications of the 
work of public folklorists for traditional practitioners and their communities.

The paradigm shift associated with the emergence of public folklore paralleled late twentieth cen-
tury developments in anthropology. Indigenous cultures were challenging anthropological research, 
asserting control over whether they would be studied and how they would be represented, and chal-
lenging the epistemological authority of the anthropologist. At this time when folklore studies turned 
from a text-centred to an increasingly performance-based approach, anthropology was moving away 
from positivism, adopting a constructivist approach that views culture as emergent and constantly 
in the making, while rejecting static representations of cultures as ideal types maintained out of time 
in the ethnographic present. Anthropology’s dialogic turn was also in motion, incorporating critical 
reflexivity within ethnographies and using the first person while attempting to situate the anthropol-
ogist transparently in the research account, approaches which influenced folklore studies. As Clifford 
(1988, 84) notes, ethnography was now viewed as a ‘dialogical enterprise in which both researchers 
and natives are both active creators or, to stretch a term, authors of cultural representations’.

At this time, the humanities and social sciences discovered Mikhail Bakhtin, the most important 
proponent of dialogism. His ideas on dialogism as the construction of meaning through a multiplicity 
of voices, and the contrast of heteroglossia with fixed meanings and monologism, have been highly 
influential. He saw it as an open, ongoing process that is not finalised within a particular interaction. 
Bridges and divides coexist in dialogic social interactions (Bakhtin 1981).2 As Fernandes, Carvalho, 
and Campos (2012, 96) indicate in their discussion of educational action as dialogism, it is an ‘inter-
active process which presupposes encounters and collisions of ideas with polyphonic movements and 
enunciative positions’.

Solicitous listening and narrative ownership
‘Surviving Katrina and Rita in Houston’ was a project lasting from 2005 to 2009 that enabled survivors 
of these hurricanes to interpret their experiences through learning how to document and present 
each other’s narratives, constructing meaning in dialogue with one another. The survivors of these 
2005 disasters, which devastated the US Gulf Coast from Alabama to Texas, consisted in large part of 
lower-income African Americans. They came to ‘own’ their experiences of the disasters through the 
narratives they possess that were presented to new audiences, countering distortions in the mass media 
that represented them as victims and/or criminals in the wake of disaster. Their narratives tell of being 
marooned for days on bridges, acts of mutual support and kindness by strangers, resilience and the 
experience of being surrounded in their homes by rising waters. Folklorists Pat Jasper and Carl Lindahl 
designed the project to present these narratives to the public through audio productions, exhibitions 
and a website with compelling narratives and still photographs taken by a survivor.3 Their work fulfills 
the ideal of the ‘emancipatory potential of folklore as praxis’, viewed by Kirshenblatt-Gimblett ([1988] 
2007, 33) in her influential essay, ‘Mistaken Dichotomies’, as ‘how what we do as folklorists can be of 
socially redeeming value in ways that go beyond celebration’.

While Lindahl and Jasper framed the overall organisational and programmatic structure of the 
project, provided technical direction in the use of equipment and enlisted specialists to design the 
formal structure of the exhibition, audio production and website, they took a decidedly hands-off 

592 

  R. BaRon

approach to the interpretation of survivors’ experiences. Survivors were told that they are the experts, 
and the folklorists practiced what Lindahl (2012, 157) calls ‘solicitous listening’, in contrast to oral 
history methodologies that set the narrative agenda through directed interviews.

For Lindahl (2012, 153), ‘sovereignty over one’s story is a guiding precept’. These stories consist of 
‘natural narratives’ shaped by the survivors. In contrast to the evidentiary requirements of history, these 
folklorists accepted disaster legends that might not have a factual basis for historians. The folklorists 
accepted them because they were believed to be true by the survivors. Lindahl (2012, 143) contends 
that they are an ‘essential vernacular tool for expressing how the tellers feel about the prevailing social 
order and for helping their communities seek explanations that squares with their convictions’. His 
views embody a different understanding of what historian Michael Frisch (1990) calls ‘shared authority’. 
Frisch (1990, 20–22) stresses the mutual construction of meaning by historian and interviewee in the 
course of the oral history interview, and acknowledges the value of local knowledge, but maintains 
the historian’s interpretive authority. This approach, although considerably more dialogical than con-
ventional historical scholarship, emphasises the distinction between ‘vernacular understandings’ and 
professional scholarship, while allowing for dialogue between the two and recognition that historians 
are not the sole interpreters of events (Frisch 2011, 128). Public folklorists may also exercise their 
interpretive authority in the mutual construction of meaning, but they will often defer to the expertise 
of community members as they let them drive the interpretation of public programmes.

A virtual dialogism
Dialogism does not just occur in immediate face-to-face communication. It also involves, as Bakhtin 
(1984, 1986) stressed, the anticipation of dialogue with others not present at the moment, as well as 
in non-oral situations. Contemporary virtual communication through the Internet and social media 
is dialogical, both through synchronous and asynchronous communication and the anticipation of 
responses in cyberspace. There is now an ‘electronic vernacular’, expanding the channels for trans-
mitting folklore, with online vernacular discourse seen by folklorists as distinct from institutional 
electronic communication (Blank 2009, 7).

Public folklorists utilise the Internet as a source for folklore, as a medium of professional commu-
nication and as a platform for communicating with communities and promoting their work. For the 
Place Matters and City of Memory programmes of City Lore, a folklife organisation based in New 
York City, the Internet is a means of eliciting and sharing vernacular knowledge, as well as a mode 
of presentation that is both institutional and vernacular. Since 1998, Place Matters has identified 
places in New York City of local vernacular significance, paying particular attention to places at risk 
of destruction. Its public programmes and websites serve as a documentary record of these sites 
and promotional tool to foster public awareness and protection. The general Place Matters website 
uses both user-generated nominations by any visitor to the site, as well as documentation of places 
identified through research by City Lore’s staff. Hundreds of places are included on the website, 
including a beloved luncheonette, public spaces appropriated as neighbourhood gathering places, a 
Chinese general store, a Latin dance club, a storefront mosque and a neon sign company. City Lore 
advises potential contributors about methods to help ‘identify, promote and protect places that you 
care about’ through its online Place Matters Toolkit, which it describes as a ‘guidebook’.4 It has also 
organised workshops in New York City neighbourhoods to instruct community members in docu-
mentation practices.

City of Memory, another City Lore project, contains an ‘interactive urban story map’ consisting of 
accounts of places in New York City contributed by visitors to the website, as well as field research by 
City Lore.5 The contributed accounts on City of Memory are vetted by City Lore and appear on the 
website in ‘curated’ form, an approach that City Lore founder and Executive Director, Steve Zeitlin 
(2011, 35), views as incorporating both curation and broad based participation. The site includes film 
clips, slide shows and narrated tours of neighbourhoods and places of local significance throughout 
the city, narrated mainly by local residents.

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  593

As in ‘Surviving Katrina and Rita in Houston’, we see in the Place Matters and City of Memory 
sites folklorists framing the form, overarching interpretation and technical dimensions of the mode 
of presentation. The Houston project promotes the authority of all of the narrators in interpretation 
and  the  strong  role  community  members  play  in  shaping  the  direction  of  the  project.  City  Lore 
acknowledges that their curatorial role involves selectivity in choosing narratives to preserve and 
present, minor editing of the narratives selected and ongoing curation of the website. Zeitlin (2011, 
43) considers City of Memory as an ‘open-ended cultural work – having all the elements of a book or 
film, but with endless potential to change and grow and yet still retain the vision we had for a virtual 
home’ for the stories of New Yorkers. This open-endedness anticipates and invites ongoing dialogue.

Community scholars documenting and interpreting
Both ‘Surviving Katrina and Rita in Houston’ and Place Matters train community members to identify 
and document their heritage. Other US public folklore programmes, including the Smithsonian Centre 
for Folklife and Cultural Heritage and New York Folklore Society have organised institutes and field 
schools for ‘community scholars’ to learn how to carry out field research and interpret their research in 
public programmes.6 The Community Scholars Program of the Kentucky Arts Council ‘trains members 
of a community in documentation, interpretation and dissemination of their unique local cultural 
resources and traditional art forms’ so that they can ‘support and promote the traditional arts and cul-
ture’ at the local level. Such intensive community involvement in cultural research and documentation 
resonates with UNESCO’s participation mandate for ICH. While local stakeholders may be involved 
in advocating inclusion in the implementation process for the 2003 Convention, their participation 
in the inventorying process is typically limited to serving as research subjects. They may be informed 
about the research process, but excluded from undertaking field research, which is regarded as the 
province of academically credentialed ‘experts’ (Bendix, Eggert, and Peselmann 2013). Bortolotto 
(2013, 269) indicates, with particular reference to France, that the ‘majority of academic or heritage 
experts and professionals’ regard the ‘new definition of expertise in the heritage field’ that ‘entrusts 
communities with key responsibilities in the safeguarding process’ as ‘a dangerous hyper-relativistic 
and populist instrument’.

In contrast with ICH programmes based upon field research by academically trained ‘experts’ who 
do not incorporate lay fieldworkers in the documentation process, many public folklore projects view 
the carriers of traditions as ‘experts’ empowered with the authority to document and interpret their 
experience on their own terms. Community scholar programmes epitomise the differences between 
the attitudes of ICH experts and authorities described by Bortolotto, and those of US public folklorists 
carrying out community scholar programmes with regard to privileging the authority of convention-
ally credentialed experts. Diana N’Diaye, Project Director of the Smithsonian Centre for Folklife and 
Cultural Heritage’s African Immigrant Folklore Program, describes its community scholar programme 
as developing ‘interpretive voices and paradigms of representation’ by ‘cultural insiders from their own 
unique perspectives rather than those of professional researchers who were outsiders to the community 
cultures’. Even with the ‘best intentions’, these outside researchers were ‘apt […] to regard Africans 
as “Other”, to use and to privilege paradigms shaped by their experience’ (in Thompson 2008, 111).

Cultural conversations and presentation methods at the Smithsonian Folklife Festival
Dialogically constructed modes of presentation mutually engage folklorists, community members and 
audiences in representations of heritage to the public. They are designed to embody the sharing of 
authority through what Spitzer ([1992] 2007, 99) calls ‘cultural conversations’, where the communities 
represented and the folklorist ‘negotiate mutual representations in the media, on the festival stage, 
or in the text’. Cadaval (2000, 191) views successful presentations at the Smithsonian Folklife Festival 
(formerly known as the Smithsonian Festival of American Folklife) as entailing the modelling of 

594 

  R. BaRon

behaviour for the audience, as well as an ‘ethnographic encounter’ involving collaborative construction 
of representations between the presenter and the participant.

At public folklore events, such as the Smithsonian Folklife Festival, audience members are invited 
into the cultural conversation, with modes of presentation designed for dialogical engagement. This 
dialogue – actually, a trialogue – among folklorist presenters, practitioners of the represented tradi-
tions and audience members is especially marked in modes of presentation designed to diminish the 
distance, both physical and psychic, between the presenter/participant and audience members. The 
presentations act as spatial, psychological and interpretive framing devices, distinguishing them from 
ongoing community life, shaping the representations of culture and enabling audience members to 
experience the traditions of other cultural groups through interaction with participants (Baron 2010, 
68).

Folklorists design festival workshops to frame demonstrations and performances by traditional 
practitioners and conversations among practitioners, audience and presenter. Discussions in workshops 
cover the backgrounds of the practitioners, characteristics of the cultural practices they are demon-
strating and the sustainability of these practices in their community, among other topics. Narrative 
stages, another type of mode of presentation, involve the sharing of stories among narrators and the 
exchange of points of view about cultural issues among audience members interacting with the pre-
senters and narrators.

In participatory folklife festival modes of presentation, audiences gain embodied knowledge through 
making a craft or dancing, complementing knowledge acquired verbally. Through crafts demonstra-
tions, audience members engage craftspersons in discussions about the objects they make and their 
cultural contexts, with audience members at times referring to their own culture and experience. 
Visitors may try their hand at making the craft being presented, an affective and cognitive experience 
that engages dialogue with the artist. Dance concerts integrally involve dancing by audience members, 
often with instruction by members of the community whose traditions are represented. Musicians 
perform on a stage of low elevation, which enhances the quality of interaction by diminishing the 
distance between performer and audience. The musicians frame their performances with introductions 
to the songs they sing and the cultural context of performance. Dialogue entails sensorial response as 
audience members become participants, moving to the dance floor in front of the stage and dancing 
to the music being performed.

These interactions involve the interplay of bridges and divides among participants, presenters and 
audience members. Ricardo Trimillos (2008), an ethnomusicologist who consulted for the Philippines 
programme at the 1998 Smithsonian Folklife Festival, discusses a ‘fascinating dynamic of cross-cultural 
encounter’ at the Filipino American day of the Festival, ‘in which homeland Filipinos and diasporic 
Filipinos found how they were both similar and yet different’; ‘dance (with music)’ was a ‘major forum 
for reconciliation’. The American Filipino dancers performed in a style influenced by the Bayanihan 
dance company, which has been ‘frequently criticized and accused of overstylizing and theatricalizing 
traditional dance forms’. Often, ‘exchanges between the dance directors and the traditional artists were 
[…] burdened with notions like “showbiz versus authentic” and the tensions that they generated’. 
Reconciliation occurred as artists from the Philippines ‘offered suggestions for change and correction 
to their US-based colleagues. Since these exchanges were face-to-face, the commentary tended to be 
initially laudatory with substantive points of criticism deeply embedded or delivered through the 
diplomatic strategy of the kuwento storytelling’ (Trimillos 2008, 75).

While cultural conversations at the Festival often involve members of a diaspora and practitioners 
from the homeland, presentations are more frequently observed and experienced by outsiders to the 
cultures represented. Presentational frames have had varying degrees of success in achieving engaged 
participant-audience interaction, enabling representation of participants’ voices and avoiding negative 
objectification. Cantwell ([1991] 1994) provides an extensive comparison of presentations at the 1985 
Smithsonian Festival of American Folklife. A ‘cornrowers’ exhibit’ of hairstyles created by local African 
and African-American hairdressers was the most successful presentation. Festival staff designed it 
as a ‘kind of informal “hangout” on the [National] Mall’, situated in a ‘small, “embracing” semicircle 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  595

at a height of six inches’ (Cantwell [1991] 1994, 172). Cantwell ([1991] 1994, 175) reports that the 
presentation became a ‘genuine living’ place where visitors, especially children, congregated. They 
asked questions, talked with the hairdressers and had their hair braided in an atmosphere of ‘tender, 
sensuous intimacy’, all the while expressing their ‘opinions and personalities’.

At the other end of the dialogic spectrum, Kmhmu traditional practitioners were placed in a ‘com-
pound’ of a ‘garden, blacksmith shop and small platform shaded by a tent’ (Cantwell [1991] 1994, 172). 
Most of the artists ignored the visitors. Communication with visitors was ‘difficult’, and only children, 
‘unburdened by stereotypes and undaunted by language barriers they could not anticipate’, tried to 
communicate (Cantwell [1991] 1994, 176). In the Kmhmu area, the presentational frame inhibited 
interaction, reinforcing distance between performers and audience members who lacked common 
grounds of discourse. Interaction between artists and audience members was not effectively mediated 
by Smithsonian presenters, which would have diminished negative objectification.

Over the years, Smithsonian Folklife Festival curators have self-critically revised and refined pres-
entational frames. They concentrate upon enabling agency by participants and fostering fruitful engage-
ment among participants, presenters and audiences. A forthcoming volume, Curatorial Conversations: 
Cultural Representation and the Smithsonian Folklife Festival, discusses the relationships of Smithsonian 
Folklife Festival curators with Festival participants during its planning and production. The curators 
describe participants exercising substantial agency in reframing and asserting authority within pres-
entational frames, which enabled them to shape dialogue with audiences on their own terms (Cadaval, 
Kim, and N’Diaye, 2016).

Cadaval, one of the editors of Curatorial Conversations, discusses ‘developing a process for a col-
laboration base with participants that contribute to greater cultural democracy by distributing and 
reordering curatorial authority’, which ‘deepens the quality of the emerging cultural conversation’. 
For Cadaval, the Festival’s ‘discursive potential’ depends ‘most importantly on the participants sense 
of their own authority over their representation and over the event’. While over time Cadaval has 
‘honed curatorial collaborative approaches to ethnographic research, presentation formats, site design, 
and sponsorship/authority structures […] these strategies are constantly dialogically negotiated with 
the different players as the program develops’ (Cadaval et al. 2016). For the Festival’s quincentenary 
programmes, Cadaval engaged in intensive collaborative planning with indigenous communities to 
develop representations that constituted a counter narrative of Columbus’s first voyage to the Americas, 
and emphasised an emergent creolisation process. As an example of her negotiations with participants, 
Cadaval notes that Maroon and Kumina Jamaican participants initially insisted on ‘only presenting 
social music and dance because they feel it is inappropriate to present rituals in a public setting’. 
However, after observing Vodou ceremonies at this festival, they decided to ‘present some of their 
own ritual practices. Scholars further negotiate[d] with participants to break into the performance 
frame with commentary’ (Cadaval et al. 2016).

At times, participants disrupt or appropriate curatorial planning with remarkably effective results 
welcomed by curators. Cadaval’s essay describes how Rastafarians at the 1989 Festival temporarily 
appropriated spaces for impromptu performances unplanned by the curator. The Rastafarians negoti-
ated the use of these spaces with Jamaican Maroon and Ghanaian Ga participants, acting on their own 
initiative. Shua participants from the Ecuadorian rain forest appropriated the interpretive framework 
by engaging issues of cultural rights and exploitation of subsoil mineral resources while distancing 
themselves from ‘wild Amazon head-reducers’ stereotypes. Conscious though she is of the impor-
tance of distributing and reordering curatorial authority, Cadaval acknowledges that Smithsonian 
staff members retain overarching authority for the whole of the event. The curator, she states, ‘always 
has in the balance the larger context that gives meaning to the whole effort and touches on the larger 
social polity’ (Cadaval et al. 2016).

Power asymmetries are intrinsic to the relationships between heritage specialists producing pro-
grammes and the community members represented. These asymmetries are diminished when authority 
is shared or turned over to the community, as the examples of the cornrower, Rastafarian and Shua 
participants demonstrate. Some public folklore programmes have been designed from the outset for 

596 

  R. BaRon

folklorists to eventually disempower themselves by turning over responsibility for representation 
entirely to local communities. In all but a few cases, however, power asymmetries persist along with 
the assertion of the interests of both the representer and the represented (see Baron 1999, 195; 2010, 
85; 2012, 310). These asymmetries should be acknowledged, as Cadaval does in indicating that she 
had overall authority for designing and producing the heritage programmes she describes.

Heritage  specialists  also  shape  the  means  and  character  of  mediations,  with  mediation  in  the 
Smithsonian examples referring to both the medium of communication structured through a mode 
of presentation (such as a crafts demonstration or narrative session), and mediated interactions among 
participants, presenters and audience members.

As Cantwell ([1991] 1994) demonstrates, these mediations vary in their degree of reciprocity, dia-
logic character and participant agency. In his analysis of the 1985 Smithsonian Festival of American 
Folklife presentations, Cantwell ([1991] 1994, 173, 174) indicates that the

palpable substance and intrinsic forms of representation shape both that which is represented and the awareness 
to which it is represented – even though the aim of representations is ultimately to dissolve itself and its frame, 
bringing the visitor and the participant into a kind of mutual imaginative absorption.

Despite the authority residing with the heritage specialist in shaping an event, participants may appro-
priate space, reframe interpretation and select the aspects of their culture that they choose to represent 
to outsiders, as Cadaval shows with her Rastafarian and Shua examples. The power balance thus shifts, 
with participants asserting greater control. Whether or not authority shifts so palpably, mediation 
through heritage programmes, as in any social process, should be seen as involving the exercise of 
agency by all parties, including choices by participants about how – and whether – they engage in 
mediation. Agency may involve the assertion of participants’ authority in reshaping a presentation, 
active participation within presentation frames developed by presenters, or reluctance to participate. 
Such agentive range can also be seen in ICH programmes, where communities may alternatively choose 
to participate in UNESCO’s international list nominations and inventorying processes, substantially 
reshape safeguarding approaches at a local level, or decline to be considered for the Representative 
List (Ballacchino 2013). Any mediation that occurs involves what Williams (1977, 97–100) views as 
an ‘active process’ of mediating structure and agency, entailing ‘the making of meaning and values, in 
the necessary form of the general social process of signification and communication’.

Autonomy, shared authority and national infrastructure among government public 
folklore programmes in the US
Critical heritage studies scholars underscore the importance of government authorities in determin-
ing cultural and heritage policy, allocating funds and intervening in ongoing cultural processes to 
develop local heritage initiatives. Until recently, critical heritage studies viewed government heritage 
mediations as highly centralised. Coombe (2013, 379) underscores the need to ‘break down the image 
of government as the preserve of a monolithic state operating as a singular source of power’. Heritage 
studies scholars now see government heritage engagement as entailing multifaceted horizontal, ver-
tical and transversal relationships among government agencies, non-governmental organisations and 
community stakeholders (da Silva 2013, 61).

US public folklore programmes, like other cultural activities in the US, have an exceptionally high 
degree of autonomy from the central government, in contrast to comparable programmes in many 
other nations. The major federal folklife programmes at the American Folklife Centre of the Library 
of Congress and the Smithsonian Centre for Folklife and Cultural Heritage have specific missions that 
oftentimes involve collaborations with state and local public folklore programmes, but they are by no 
means superordinate to them with regard to the exercise of authority over policy and programming. 
The Folk and Traditional Arts Program of the NEA provides vital support to many state and local 
programmes, but its guidelines are open ended; it is reactive in response to requests for funding and 
has no statutory authority over folk cultural policies in states and localities. As with other government 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  597

arts funding programmes, the NEA’s Folk and Traditional Arts Program makes funding decisions 
based upon recommendations of peer review panels composed of specialists representative of its field.
In its first two decades, the NEA Folk and Traditional Arts Program acted proactively to create a 
national infrastructure of state folk arts programmes, most of which have been situated in, or exist 
in relationship to, state arts agencies (see Hawes 2008, 150–154). State folk arts programmes directly 
engage in or support ongoing field research concerning local traditions and produce programming in 
collaboration with ethnic, regional, occupational and Native American tribal communities. They also 
carry out joint initiatives with other government agencies and fund local non-profit organisations to 
carry out folk arts projects of their own.

Most directors of state folk arts programmes are academically trained folklorists. They fulfil multiple 
roles, sharing their expertise about folklore, acting as administrators and government officials, and, 
in many cases, also carrying out field research and producing programming. As stakeholders of the 
NEA Folk and Traditional Arts Program, they contribute to policy development. The state folk arts 
programmes peer group of the National Assembly of State Arts Agencies meets biennially to consider 
issues of policy and professional practice and attend workshops to enhance their abilities as produc-
ers of programmes, grant-makers and field researchers. In 2011, confronting concerns about future 
directions for the national state folk arts programmes infrastructure and NEA support, the peer group 
convened a series of meetings to dialogue with NEA officials and conducted a needs assessment survey 
of its membership. A report resulted from this initiative contained a number of policy recommenda-
tions for sustaining the national infrastructure.7 These recommendations stressed the indispensability 
of continued NEA support, the importance of professional direction for state programmes provided by 
folklorists or specialists with related backgrounds, and the value of field research. The report included 
a number of ideas for technical assistance, resource sharing and professional development that could 
be enhanced to benefit traditional artists, constituent community-based organisations and state folk 
arts programmes.

The ecology of public folk arts programmes in the US consists of a highly reticulated, mutually 
reinforcing and supportive network linking federal, state and local programmes. The principal forums 
for these programmes are the annual meetings of the American Folklore Society and Publore, the 
public folklore listserv.8 Their collective conversation includes folklorists working primarily within 
the academy, as well as those employed as staff or freelance consultants with government agencies or 
non-profit organisations. Many ‘academic folklorists’ situated in colleges or universities consult with 
public folklore programmes and serve on funding panels, and public folklorists, employed in the public 
sector, often also teach in universities. While at one time some academic folklorists criticised applied 
folklore as compromising the work of scholars (Baron [1992] 2007; Green [1992] 2007, 55–57), very few 
now object to public folklore. Nearly all academic folklore programmes offer public folklore courses, 
and the field of folklore is now constituted as both an academic discipline and practicing profession.
At the local and regional levels, publicly funded folklore activities are preponderantly carried out by 
non-profit organisations and individuals, rather than by government entities. The Folk Arts Program 
of the New York State Council on the Arts (NYSCA), which I direct, supports community-based non-
profit organisations, such as Los Pleneros de la 21, performers of Afro-Puerto Rican Bomba and Plena 
music, as well as folklorist-directed organisations, such as City Lore. Our annual funding for over 
80 applicants includes support for projects that comprise concerts, exhibitions and festivals, general 
support for the ongoing administration and programming of folk arts organisations, and funding for 
apprenticeships that bring together master and apprentice artists from the same cultural community for 
the teaching of a traditional art or practice. In New York, as in other states, apprenticeships represent 
a highly effective means of passing on the knowledge, skills and meanings of traditions in situations 
where the customary chains of transmission have been weakened. We also support regional and count-
ywide programmes directed by staff folklorists who engage in ongoing field research, programming, 
assisting individual artists in obtaining opportunities for presenting and marketing their work and 
support to other cultural organisations developing folk arts programmes.

598 

  R. BaRon

Each year our programme organises the New York State Folk Arts Roundtable with the New York 
Folklore Society. The Roundtable is a forum for public folklorists and community scholars to present 
their work to each other in a mutually supportive and constructively critical manner, as well as par-
ticipate in workshops on topics that have included the curation of exhibitions, marketing folk arts, 
narrative theory and techniques for presenting traditional storytelling, video, audio and photographic 
documentation, and production of performing folk arts presentations. During the Roundtable, par-
ticipants discuss and develop positions on state-wide policy issues and engage in dialogue with the 
NYSCA Folk Arts Program about its funding policies, contributing to the direction of the programme. 
The Roundtable is planned through a series of conference calls open to all participants, who collectively 
plan the structure and content of each year’s convening.

Our partner in organising the Roundtable, the New York Folklore Society, is a nonprofit organisation 
whose activities complement the work of the NYSCA Folk Arts Program. It acts as a parallel, non-gov-
ernmental organisation with a state-wide mission. It organises workshops for educators, publishes 
a journal for lay and academic readers, operates a gift shop of New York State traditional crafts and 
produces programming of traditional artists from its Capital District region in upstate New York. Its 
partnerships with the NYSCA Folk Arts Program include, in addition to the Roundtable, an intern-
ship programme for folklore graduate students at folk arts programmes in the state, and a Mentoring 
and Professional Development Program that provides technical assistance designed to enhance the 
organisational, programmatic and technical capacities of artists and organisations.

While the NYSCA Folk Arts Program provides essential funding for its constituents, catalyses 
new programmes through interactions with cultural organisations and engages in service activities 
for the professional field, the actual production and administration of public folklore programming 
and field research is carried out by our non-profit constituents. This is not the case in countries where 
governments initiate most ICH programmes. In New York State, stakeholders from non-profit organi-
sations shape the development of NYSCA funding policies at the Roundtable, in public forums and in 
advisory panels that also evaluate and recommend applications for funding through peer review. The 
funding panels are made up of folklorists, ethnomusicologists and practitioners of traditions broadly 
representative of the ethnic and regional diversity of the state. During the evaluation of applications, 
a running discussion of policy emerges, which is reflected in the revision of application guidelines.
While the programme aims for stakeholder involvement on multiple levels, I am mindful of per-
sistent power asymmetries. The NYSCA staff and governing board make the ultimate decisions on 
funding policies and the draughting of application guidelines. While they take into account policy 
recommendations by stakeholders, the staff and board follow general agency policy. These policies 
were developed in consultation with the broader arts community through meetings and surveys 
during long range planning processes. Fortunately, NYSCA’s overall mission emphasises cultural and 
aesthetic diversity, inclusiveness and participation, which mesh perfectly with the objectives of the 
public folklore field.9

My daily work involves cultural brokerage, as is the case for other public folklorists. In interac-
tions with the folk arts field through inquiries from applicants, presentations at workshops and the 
Roundtable, I provide information, professional advice and access to funding opportunities and other 
resources. In these activities, my dual roles as administrator and folklorist converge. I try to be mindful 
that these mediations entail the exercise of professional and bureaucratic authority. As a funder, my 
ideas and recommendations carry a weight for applicants dependent upon my government agency 
for funding, which represents a persistent power asymmetry. Endeavouring to be an honest broker of 
culture, I try to always be mindful of the need to mitigate and diminish these asymmetries.

What can public folklore and critical heritage studies learn from one another, and 
how can this dialogue be accomplished?
The late twentieth century saw the beginning of a fundamental realignment of relationships between 
ethnographers and the cultural groups they study. In anthropology, the onset of dialogical approaches 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  599

created a methodology for distributing epistemological authority and more equitably representing 
community perspectives in its scholarship. Concurrently, the field of folklore incorporated dialogism 
in both its scholarship and public practice. From its beginnings, public folklore dialogism has been 
predicated on mutual engagement with communities, designed to enable them to present and safeguard 
their culture on their own terms within suitable modes of presentation.

The 2003 Convention has created new challenges, opportunities and responsibilities for scholars 
to put dialogism into practice in the public sphere. Just as the dialogic turn in anthropology brought 
about new methods for relating to the cultural groups studied and rendering this relationship in pub-
lications, involvement in ICH initiatives as policy advisors and researchers requires dialogism with 
communities represented in these programmes. Most evidently, this can include collaboration with 
community members in the documentation process, interpretation of research jointly undertaken by 
scholars and communities and inclusive stakeholder involvement in policy-making. While the 2003 
Convention encourages community involvement in safeguarding, it does not specifically indicate how 
this is to occur. Heritage scholars have not yet, in most cases, satisfactorily articulated their multiple 
roles as scholars, advisors and researchers through critical reflexivity and a praxis addressing issues 
expressed in their critical scholarship through engagement in ICH programmes.

US public folklore dialogism points to how ICH scholars, professionals and heritage authorities 
can integrate their multiple roles to foster community involvement that is empowering and represents 
a community’s perspectives. Public folklore has developed practices to renew and validate traditions 
while enabling the voices of community members to be shared more widely. Innovative public folklore 
approaches for sharing authority could be productively replicated in ICH programmes elsewhere, with 
acknowledgement of the power asymmetries that inevitably persist.

Power  asymmetries  in  heritage  work  of  all  kinds  persist  amidst  other,  supra-local  contexts  of 
authority structures, social injustices and hegemony. A few public folklorists directly address hegem-
onic discourses in their advocacy for an activist public folklore concerned with social justice. Their 
approach articulates a praxis that would be especially consonant with critical heritage theory. In 1988, 
Whisnant called for ‘public sector folklorists’ to turn to a ‘tougher politics’. He contended that ‘like 
most reactionary regimes’, such as Franco’s in Spain, ‘the current [Reagan] administration is attempting 
to legitimize and sell its program under the very banner of tradition through appropriating symbols 
of “school, home, church, flag” and words like “tradition”, “freedom” and “democracy”’. A tougher 
politics would consist of a ‘structural approach to change’ addressing ‘social, political and economic 
structures as central and primary in every policy and program consideration’. It would also develop 
‘more substantial mechanisms of change’ and ‘understand, analyse, and interpret culture … in relation 
to power’ (Whisnant 1988, 241–245).

‘Public interest folklore’, advocated by Debora Kodish (2011), is consonant with Whisnant’s (1988) 
call for a ‘tougher politics’ devoted to a ‘structural approach to change’. She sees ‘activist, responsible and 
engaged practice’ as ‘concerned with what is equitable, where power lies, and how people in situations 
of inequality make significant art and change’ (Kodish 2011, 32, 33). Kodish (2011, 39) emphasises 
programming ‘traditions that come out of engagement with systems of oppression’. Citing Archie 
Green’s (1983, 351) statement that ‘only a handful of folklorists during the past century have identified 
with radical theses challenging majoritarian consensus’, Kodish (2011, 51) contends that Green ‘may 
still be right’ about the acceptance of American folklorists of ‘dominant ideology: empiricism, prag-
matism, individualism, parliamentary reform, free market economics’. Similar themes were sounded 
in Kirshenblatt-Gimblett’s ‘Mistaken Dichotomies’ essay, which challenged public folklore to examine 
the ‘ideology, national political interests and economic concerns’ of the entire ‘folkloristic enterprise’ 
(Kirshenblatt-Gimblett [1988] 2007, 32).

Public folklorists work with many groups experiencing marginalisation or oppression, but rela-
tively few explicitly identify as activists focusing upon social and political justice issues. Even if most 
public folklorists do not articulate the activist ideology and critique of power structures advocated 
by Whisnant and Kodish, their practice is inherently counterhegemonic, like much of folklore itself. 
Many of us may work for government cultural agencies that could be viewed as hegemonic, but we 

600 

  R. BaRon

support and advocate for counterhegemonic cultural practices. Folklore serves as a means of resist-
ance, whether as overt protest or by its mere presence. For Antonio Gramsci (in Lombardi-Satriani 
1974, 104, 105), folklore is 'a "concept of the world and of life" … in contraposition … to the “official” 
conceptions of the world’. Luigi Lombardi-Satriani (1974, 103) extends a Gramscian notion of folklore 
as counterhegemonic, seeing it as ‘other, opposing testimony that the folk world provides against the 
“official” ideology … sustained by the dominant class’. This testimony is seen as ‘contesting at times 
only with its own presence, the universality, which is only superficial, of the official culture’s concepts 
of the world and of life’ (Lombardi-Satriani 1974, 104).

While public folklorists recognise that folklore may be possessed by any social group, they con-
centrate upon traditions and communities that would otherwise be neglected by cultural institutions 
representing what Smith (2006) calls the ‘authorised heritage discourse’. The creation of the folk arts 
programmes at the NEA and NYSCA came about as a result of advocacy led by folklorists, who 
countered claims by these agencies that folk arts was already adequately served by existing arts disci-
plines and did not require a programme recognising it as a discrete, autonomous cultural field (Baron 
2002, 69; Hawes 2008, 122–128). The establishment of the American Folklife Centre of the Library of 
Congress was a result of years of lobbying the US Congress, led by folklorist, Archie Green ([1976] 
1988). Throughout the US, state and local folklife programmes devote substantial ongoing resources to 
immigrant groups and political refugees. Extensive involvement of US public folklore with immigrants 
and refugees contrasts with European ICH programmes, which are preponderantly concerned with 
the legacy traditions of long established communities (Baron 2015, 479). In many rural areas of the 
US, which may have few if any non-profit cultural institutions, state folk arts programmes provide 
the largest source of support for cultural activities of any kind. Public folklore initiatives frequently 
engage marginalised groups, such as prisoners,10 featured in the Oregon Folklife Network’s Hooks, 
Yarns and Bars project, as well as groups whose creativity has been insufficiently recognised, such as 
the women artists featured in the Brooklyn Arts Council’s ‘Half the Sky Festival: Women In Traditional 
Performance’.11

Public folklorists maintain a dual focus of sustaining traditions within their source communities 
– an approach comparable to ICH safeguarding – and providing opportunities for diverse commu-
nities to experience one another’s culture, thus fostering intercultural understanding. Noyes (2015, 
171), commenting on the articles in UNESCO on the Ground: Local Perspectives on Intangible Cultural 
Heritage, notes that ‘applied and public folklore agencies’ in the US ‘have been extensively concerned 
with facilitating artist- and community-determined agendas’. Drawing from her experience and knowl-
edge of the Philadelphia Folklore Project (founded by Kodish), she relates that the activities of these 
agencies include ‘not only access to grant funding and performance venues but matters of material and 
social infrastructure such as the defense of neighborhoods against gentrification and the cultivation of 
workable intergroup relationships within urban populations under pressure’ (Noyes 2015, 171). While 
the Philadelphia Folklore Project is relatively unique in its involvement with countering gentrification, 
cultivating positive intergroup relationships is widespread among public folklorists.

The Philadelphia Folklore Project, while exceptional in the extent of its organisational engagement 
with activism, is not alone in public folklore with regard to critically addressing social issues and public 
policy. Noyes describes several public folklore programmes which ‘drew broader attention to social 
issues through the apparent safety of folklore, and revealed the pretty forms to be modes of social action’ 
(2012, 28). These include ‘an exhibition on New York City street play [that] noted the pressures on 
communal sociability created by real estate development and zoning laws’ (Dargan and Zeitlin 1990); 
‘a project on West Virginian sense of place [that] produced early evidence of mountaintop removal 
coal mining’ (Hufford 2003), and a ‘conference on Italian-American hip-hop [that] opened up heated 
community debate on the whiteness of “white ethnics”’ (Sciorra 2000).

Although ethnic traditions dominate many public folklore programmes, public folklorists also 
work with a wide variety of other types of groups, including occupational and religious communities, 
children and regional groups. They increasingly represent how folklore is shaped by influences from 
popular culture, recognise that Americans maintain multiple cultural identities and present creolised 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  601

forms that are shaped by the interactions of two or more cultures. Public folklorists embrace an expan-
sive notion of ‘community’ characterised by various kinds of social bonds and associations, shared 
interests and common identities. ‘Community’ tends to be the default term for the groups with whom 
they work. Since public folklorists generally defer to how a community chooses to represent itself, 
public presentations of ‘a community’ generally elide internal differentia within a group presenting 
its traditions to outsiders. Public folklorists who present communities relatively monolithically would 
benefit from greater awareness of critical heritage scholarship examining divisions within communities 
responding to nominations for ICH representative lists and heritage site designations (see Bendix, 
Eggert, and Peselmann 2013).

Many heritage scholars criticise the absence of a definition of community in the UNESCO ICH 
participation mandate. According to Hertz (2015, 35), the 2003 Convention and the UNESCO’s 2006 
Expert Report on Community Involvement ‘propose … in effect [,] contradictory understandings’ 
of what communities, groups and individuals means in the participation mandate. The Expert Group, 
consisting of anthropologists, folklorists, heritage practitioners, museum curators and heritage admin-
istrators, viewed communities, groups and individuals for UNESCO ICH definitional purposes as 
‘networks, contingent, practice- or performance-based collectives’, a conceptualisation they see as 
‘similar to Lave and Wenger’s “communities of practice”’ (see Lave and Wenger 1991). Hertz (2015, 35) 
considers this as contrasting with the 2003 Convention’s effort to ‘grant if not rights at least claims to 
ethnicized, historically constituted minority groups and populations’, representing a ‘move away from 
fixist notions of communities or groups and towards performative, contingent, network based models 
for understanding collective action in the area of cultural heritage’. Drawing from Noyes’s analysis of the 
social base of folklore (Noyes 2012) she sees this movement of thought as ‘largely identical to folklore 
scholars’ centuries-old attempts to understand where and what “the folk” is or are’ (Hertz 2015, 27).
While the notion of community employed by public folklorists is closer to the ‘fixist notions’ to 
which Hertz refers, in practice public folklorists work with a broad spectrum of social and cultural 
groups connected in various kinds of ways. Public folklore embodies the two notions of community 
incorporated in heritage processes identified by Groth (2015, 78): ‘One accepts the political necessity 
of quasi-essentialization and calls for collective rights to cultural heritage and property; the other, in 
a relational approach to cultural heritage, stresses social dynamics and relations of cultural heritage 
rather than its objects’.

Public folklorists, activist and otherwise, should know – and participate in – critical heritage schol-
arship that considers the relationships of local communities and heritage programmes to structures 
of power. While public folklore policy and programmes are highly decentralised in the US, public 
folklorists could more broadly engage in critical examination of governmentality and power structures 
within and among the multiple levels in which they operate.

Both public folklore and critical heritage theory have explored how heritage initiatives transform 
the form, content and performance contexts of traditions. Public folklore’s critically reflexive exam-
inations about cultural interventions, and case studies from both fields about the local impact of 
heritage programmes, provide a strong foundation for dialogue and joint research projects about the 
transformation of traditions. Studies of the impact of ICH safeguarding on traditions and communities 
are proliferating at a rapid pace, warranting close attention by public folklorists. Folklorists trained in 
the US and writing about ICH in other countries analyse these transformations within the grounds 
of discourse of ICH while overlooking US public folklore scholarship about intervention. Hafstein 
(2015, 148, 149), providing a ‘critical assessment’ of the fine grained empirical studies by folklorists 
in UNESCO on the Ground, recognises negative impacts of ICH intervention that other ICH scholars 
note while also trenchantly identifying three kinds of impacts when ‘safeguarding’ is ‘successful’:
When successful, safeguarding (1) reforms the relationship of subjects with their own practices (through sentiments 
such as ‘pride’), (2) reforms the practices (orienting them through display through various conventional herit-
age genres) and ultimately (3) reforms the relationship of the practicing subjects with themselves (through social 
institutions of heritage that formalize previously informal relations and centralize previously dispersed powers).

602 

  R. BaRon

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, trained also as a folklorist but writing as a pioneering critical heritage scholar, 
decisively sparked a paradigm shift in heritage studies through her theorisation of heritage as metac-
ultural, involving the creation of new cultural products as a ‘mode of cultural production that has 
recourse to the past’ (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998, 150), and frequently involving the display orientation 
to which Hafstein refers. As Whisnant (1988) turned the attention of folklorists to their impact upon 
traditions and communities, Kirshenblatt-Gimblett was instrumental in shaping current perspectives 
of heritage scholars about heritage as new and transformed cultural products.12

The extensive critical heritage scholarship on cultural tourism’s impacts on communities, as well as 
the commoditisation of culture, offers important critiques and insights that could be applied to public 
folklore programmes involved with economic development, community revitalisation and tourism. 
Paradoxically, while critics of neoliberalism may view the US as its epicentre, expectations of cultural 
tourism and related corporate involvement associated with public folklore are relatively limited. In 
other countries, the designation of cultural practices and expressions as ICH is eagerly sought for 
economic benefits that would hopefully accompany international prestige and recognition (see e.g. 
Ballacchino 2013; Fournier 2013; Leblon 2013). According to Noyes (2015, 170), ‘local authorities 
or activists frequently pitch UNESCO as a deux ex machina that will rescue the regional economy. 
Practitioners hold the more immediate hope that UNESCO will raise their income’. However, according 
to Noyes (2015, 170), these ‘expectations are routinely disappointed’.

Critical heritage studies of tourism, economic development and other topics embody the approaches 
of multiple disciplines of the social sciences. As Jacobs (2014, 290) highlights, heritage studies scholar-
ship is ‘open and broad enough to bring together the inheritances of the classical scholarly disciplines 
that deal with the past, heritage and actors involved’, and ‘allows … interesting methodologies and 
applied sciences’ to be combined. Citing Roderick Lawrence, he views heritage studies as engaging 
transdisciplinarity, which ‘tackles complexity and heterogeneity, challenges knowledge fragmentation, 
and accepts local contexts’ (Jacobs 2014, 290). Folklore studies, both academic and public, can benefit 
from greater transdisciplinary engagement, which could diminish stigmatisation and increase aware-
ness of its scholarship by other disciplines.

Dialogically speaking, public folklorists and critical heritage scholars need to engage with each 
other much more frequently in academic discourse and joint initiatives. Publications such as this 
represent a positive step towards greater interactions. Unfortunately, the failure of the US government 
to ratify the 2003 Convention is a major constraining force, limiting professional engagement of US 
public folklorists with heritage scholars and practitioners based in other countries. Although the US 
is represented at international ICH meetings by national and federal folklife programmes, there is 
an absence of broad-based engagement in such ICH activities by US public folklorists who work at 
state and local levels.

Many public folklorists who are aware of the 2003 Convention would like to see it ratified by the 
US Government, but apparently reluctance, or a lack of interest by senior State Department officials 
and opposition to international treaties in US Congress, may make any movement towards ratification 
impossible. Ratification of the 2003 Convention could provide an infusion of funds for field research, 
help to raise awareness of the importance of ICH traditions, and broadly engage public folklorists in the 
vibrant global conversation about safeguarding ICH. Nonetheless, at present, the robust infrastructure 
of public folklore programmes creatively engages the safeguarding of traditions in a decentralised, 
highly grounded manner distinguished by fruitful collaborations with communities and successful 
modes of presenting traditions. As such, if ratification is ever achieved, implementation of the 2003 
Convention would need to respect the highly decentralised character of ICH support structures already 
in place, with federal agencies playing a supportive and coordinative role. These agencies would need 
to maintain the high degree of autonomy for state and local programmes and serve to bring these 
programmes into global ICH policy and programming discourse.

Regardless of whether or not the US ratifies the 2003 Convention, initiatives should be under-
taken to create greater interaction among US public folklorists and heritage scholars and practitioners 
from other countries. This could include professional exchanges to observe and participate in public 

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  603

folklore and ICH programmes, joint panels and workshops at professional conferences, such as the 
International Society for Ethnology and Folklore (SIEF) and the American Folklore Society (AFS), 
reciprocal technical assistance and workshops for community-based programmes and publications 
about both practice and theory. We have much to learn from each other, with substantial mutual 
opportunities and benefits to be brought about when US public folklore theory and practice enters 
global ICH networks and discourse.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

 Some folklorists who practice folklore in non-academic contexts continue to self-identify as ‘applied folklorists’. 
They now see their work as entailing collaboration with communities. In a 1999 issue of the Journal of Applied 
Folklore, ‘Notes from the Editors’, David Shuldiner and Jessica Payne, acknowledge the ‘contribution of public 
folklorists’ to the ‘growing legitimation of applied folklore’, which includes ‘collaborating with, rather than simply 
“on behalf of” community members’ (1999, 2).
 See Mary Hufford’s article in this issue of the International Journal of Heritage Studies for a consideration of the 
application of Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s notion of dialogism for community-based fieldwork. Merleau-Ponty 
conceptualises how dialogue creates a common ground which Hufford sees as undermining ‘the ideal of an 
“objectivity” that strictly separates subject from object’.
 See http://www.survivortosurvivorstories.com/#!surviving-katrina-and-rita-in-houston/cmbo
 see http://www.placematters.net/node/13
 see http://www.cityofmemory.org/map/index.php
 see N’Diaye 1997; http://www.nyfolklore.org/progs/educ/esc08.html; http://artscouncil.ky.gov/Opportunities/
CommScholars.htm.
 This report was compiled and published by State Arts Agencies Folk Arts Peer Group Planning Committee in 
association with the American Folklore Society, the National Assembly of State Arts Agencies, and the NEA 
Folk and Traditional Arts Program; see AFS 2011.
 Publore is the most accessible and frequently updated resource for participating in discourse with the public 
folklore field and learning about its current activities. Heritage scholars and practitioners can join Publore at  
https://list.unm.edu/cgi-bin/wa?SUBED1=PUBLORE&A=1
 See http://www.arts.ny.gov/public/about/mission_values.htm

9. 
10.   See http://ofn.uoregon.edu/hooks-yarn-and-bars/
11.   See http://www.brooklynartscouncil.org/documents/1880.
12.   It is striking that US trained academic folklorists writing about critical heritage studies elide public folklore 
scholarship,  which  is  about  concerns  similar  to  critical  heritage  studies  scholarship  about  ICH.  While 
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett famously decried over a quarter century ago the ‘mistaken dichotomies’ between applied 
and academic folklore (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett (1988) 2007), and public folklore is well integrated within most 
academic programmes and the American Folklore Society, nearly all American academic folklorists writing 
about ICH reference and address their work entirely within the ICH discourse.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Pertti Antonnen for starting me on the path towards relating public folklore to heritage studies and 
Michelle Stefano along with the anonymous reviewers for incisive critical readings of this article. Earlier versions of this 
article were presented at the University of Helsinki in 2012, 2013 Congress of the International Society for Ethnology and 
Folklore, 2013 annual meeting of the American Folklore Society, 2014 Intangible Cultural Heritage: An International 
Dialogue gathering of the Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, the Safeguarding and Representing 
Traditional Arts as Intangible Cultural Heritage: East Asian and American Perspectives conference at Honghe University 
in 2014 and at East China Normal University in 2015.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Robert Baron is the founding director of the Folk Arts Program of the New York State Council on the Arts (NYSCA). 
Baron also directs the Music Program at NYSCA and is on the faculty of the Master’s Program in Cultural Sustainability 

604 

  R. BaRon

at Goucher College. He has also served as folklore administrator of the National Endowment for the Humanities, sen-
ior research Specialist in the Education Division of the Brooklyn Museum, a fulbright senior specialist in Finland and 
the Philippines, a Smithsonian Museum Practice Fellow and Non-Resident Fellow of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for 
African-American Research at Harvard University. He received the Benjamin A. Botkin award for significant lifetime 
achievement in public folklore from the American Folklore Society. Baron’s research interests include public folklore, 
cultural policy, the history of folklore studies, creolization and museum studies. His publications include Public Folklore, 
edited with Nick Spitzer; Creolization as Cultural Creativity, edited with Ana Cara, and articles in Curator, Journal of 
American Folklore, New York Folklore, Western Folklore and the Journal of Folklore Research. Baron holds a Ph.D. in 
Folklore and Folklife from the University of Pennsylvaniaurse.

References
Adell,  N.,  R.  Bendix,  C.  Bortolotto,  and  M.  Tauschek.  2015.  “Introduction:  Between  Imagined  Communities  and 
Communities of Practice: Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage.” In Between Imagined Communities 
and Communities of Practice: Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage, edited by Nicolas Adell, Regina F. 
Bendix, Chiara Bortolotto, and Markus Tauschek, 7–21. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

AFS. 2011. “State Folk Arts Programs: Achievements, Challenges and Needs.” AFS. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://c.

ymcdn.com/sites/www.afsnet.org/resource/resmgr/Best_Practices_Reports/State_Folk_Arts_Programs_-_A.pdf

Bakhtin, M. M. 1981. The Dialogical Imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. 1984. Problems of Dostoyevsky’s Poetics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. 1986. Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Ballacchino, K. 2013. “Unity Makes … Intangible Heritage: Italy and Network Nomination.” In Heritage Regimes and 
the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert, and Arnika Peselmann, 121–140. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag 
Göttingen.

Barbe, N., M. Chauliac, and J.-L. Tornatore. 2015. “Intangible Cultural Heritage Exposed to Public Deliberation: A 
Participatory Experience in a Regional National Park.” In Between Imagined Communities and Communities of Practice: 
Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage, edited by Nicolas Adell, Regina F. Bendix, Chiara Bortolotto and 
Markus Tauschek, 201–217. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Baron, R (1992) 2007. “Postwar Public Folklore and the Professionalization of Folklore Studies.” In Public Folklore, edited 

by Robert Baron and Nick Spitzer, 307–337. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Baron,  R.  1999.  “Theorizing  Public  Folklore  Practice  –  Documentation,  Genres  of  Representation,  and  Everyday 

Competencies.” Journal of Folklore Research 36 (2/3): 185–201.

Baron, R. 2002. “Public Folklore Brings into High Relief the Issues of Ideology, Representation and Practice at the Center 
of the Discipline.” In Voicing Folklore: Careers, Concerns and Issues: A Collection of Interviews, interviewed and edited 
by M. D. Muthukumaraswamy, 66–79. Chennai: National Folklore Support Centre.

Baron, R. 2010. “Sins of Objectification? Agency, Mediation and Community Cultural Self-determination in Public 

Folklore and Cultural Tourism Programming.” Journal of American Folklore 122 (487): 63–91.

Baron, R. 2012. “‘All Power to the Periphery’: The Public Folklore Thought of Alan Lomax.” Journal of Folklore Research 

49 (3): 275–317.

Baron, R. 2015. Review of Heritage Regimes and the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert and Arnika 

Peselmann.  Journal of American Folklore 128 (510): 478–481.

Baron, R., and N. Spitzer. (1992) 2007. “Introduction.” In Public Folklore, edited by Robert Baron and Nick Spitzer, 1–14. 

Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Bauman, R., and A. Paredes, eds. 1972. Toward New Perspectives in Folklore. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bendix, R., A. Eggert, and A. Peselmann, eds. 2013. Heritage Regimes and the State. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag 

Blank, T. 2009. “Introduction: Toward a Conceptual Framework for the Study of Folklore and the Internet.” In Folklore 
and the Internet: Vernacular Expressions in a Digital World, edited by Trevor. J. Blank, 1-20. Logan, Utah: Utah State 
University Press.

Bortolotto, C. 2013. “The French Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage: Domesticating a Global Paradigm into 
French Heritage Regime.” In Heritage Regimes and the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert, and Arnika 
Peselmann, 265–282. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Bortolotto,  C.  2015.  “  UNESCO  and  Heritage  Self-determination:  Negotiating  Meaning  in  the  Intergovernmental 
Committee  for  the  Safeguarding  of  the  ICH.”  In  Between  Imagined  Communities  and  Communities  of  Practice: 
Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage, edited by Nicolas Adell, Regina F. Bendix, Chiara Bortolotto, 
and Markus Tauschek, 249–272. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Cadaval, O. 2000. “‘Show Trial’ or ‘Truth and Reconciliation’? A Response.” Journal of Folklore Research 37 (2/3): 185–195.
Cadaval, O. 2016. “Imagining a Collaborative Curatorial Relationship: A Reordering of Authority over Representation.” 
Unpublished mss., to appear in Curatorial Conversations: Cultural Representation and the Smithsonian Folklife Festival, 
edited by Olivia Cadaval, Sojin Kim, and Diana N’Diaye. University Press of Mississippi.

Göttingen.

InTeRnaTIonal JouRnal oF HeRITage STudIeS 

  605

Cadaval, O., S. Kim, and D. N’Diaye, eds. 2016. Curatorial Conversations: Cultural Representation and the Smithsonian 

Folklife Festival. University Press of Mississippi.

Cantwell, R. (1991) 1994. “Conjuring Culture: Ideology and Magic in the Festival of American Folklife.” In Conserving 

Culture: A New Discourse on Heritage, edited by Mary Hufford, 167–183. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Clifford, J. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature and Art. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press.

Coombe, R. J. 2013. “Managing Cultural Heritage as Neoliberal Governmentality.” In Heritage Regimes and the State, 
edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert, and Arnika Peselmann, 375–388. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Dargan, A., and S. Zeitlin. 1990. City Play. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Fernandes, J. F., M. G. Carvalho, and E. N. Campos. 2012. “Vygotsky and Bakhtin: The Educational Action as a Dialogic 

Project of Meaning Production.” Bakhtiniana: Revista De Estudos Do Discurso 7 (2): 95–108.

Fournier, L. 2013. “Intangible Cultural Heritage in France: From State Culture to Local Development.” In Heritage 
Regimes and the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert, and Arnika Peselmann, 327–340. Göttingen: 
Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Frisch, M. 1990. A Shared Authority: Essays on the Craft and Meaning of Oral and Public History. Albany: State University 

of New York Press.

Frisch, M. 2011. “ From a Shared Authority to the Digital Kitchen, and Back.”In Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority 
in a User-Generated World, edited by Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, 126–137. Philadelphia, PA: The 
Pew Center for Art and Heritage.

Green, A. (1976) 1988. “ P.L. 94-201 – A View from the Lobby: A Report to the American Folklore Society.” In The 
Conservation of Culture: Folklorists and the Public Sector, edited by Burt Feintuch, 269–281. Lexington: The University 
Press of Kentucky.

Green, A. 1983. “Interpreting Folklore Ideologically.” In Handbook of American Folklore, edited by Richard Dorson, 

Green, A. (1992) 2007. “Public Folklore’s Name: A Partisan’s Notes.” In Public Folklore, edited by Robert Baron and Nick 

351–358. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Spitzer, 49–63. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Groth, S. 2015. “Between Society and Culture: Society and Culture: Recognition in Cultural Heritage Contexts.” In 
Between Imagined Communities and Communities of Practice: Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage, edited 
by Nicolas Adell, Regina F. Bendix, Chiara Bortolotto, and Markus Tauschek, 60–81. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag 
Göttingen.

Hafstein, V. 2015. “Learning to Live with ICH: Diagnosis and Treatment.” In UNESCO on the Ground: Local Perspectives 
on Intangible Cultural Heritage, edited by Michael Dylan Foster and Lisa Gilman, 161–175. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.

Hawes, B. L. 2008. Sing It Pretty: A Memoir. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Hertz, E. 2015. “Bottoms, Genuine and Spurious.” In Between Imagined Communities and Communities of Practice: 
Participation, Territory and the Making of Heritage, edited by Nicolas Adell, Regina F. Bendix, Chiara Bortolotto, and 
Markus Tauschek, 25–57. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Hufford, M. 2003. “Reclaiming the Commons: Narratives of Progress, Preservation and Ginseng.” In Culture, Conservation 
and Environment in the Appalachian South, edited by Benita J. Howell, 100–120. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Jacobs, M. 2014. “Cultural Brokerage: Addressing Boundaries and the New Paradigm of Safeguarding Intangible Cultural 

Heritage Folklore Studies, Transdisciplinary Perspectives and UNESCO.” Volkskunde 3: 265–291.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblee, B. 1998. Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage. Berkeley: University of California 

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. (1988) 2007. “Mistaken Dichotomies.” In Public Folklore, edited by Robert Baron and Nick 

Spitzer, 29–48. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Kodish, D. 2011. “Envisioning Folklore Activism.”  Journal of American Folklore 124 (491): 31–60.
Lave, J., and E. Wenger. 1991. Situated Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leblon, A. 2013. “A Policy of Intangible Cultural Heritage between Local Constraints and International Standards: ‘the 
Cultural Space of the Yaraal and the Degal.” In Heritage Regimes and the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya 
Eggert, and Arnika Peselmann, 97–117. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Lindahl, C. 2012. “Legends of Hurricane Katrina: The Right to Be Wrong, Survivor-to-Survivor Storytelling, and Healing.”  

Journal of American Folklore 125 (496): 139–176.

Lombardi-Satriani, L. 1974. “Folklore as Culture of Contestation.” Journal of the Folklore Institute 11: 99–121.
N’Diaye, D. 1997. “Collaborative Cultural Research and Public Sector Folklore Presentation: Am Ethnographic Study 

of the African Immigrant Folklife Study.” PhD diss., Union Institute Graduate School.

Neyrinck, J. 2014. “Beyond the Conventional: How to Foster Co-production for Safeguarding ICH.” Volkskunde 3: 

Press.

Noyes, D. 2012. “The Social Base of Folklore.” In A Companion to Folklore, edited by Regina F. Bendix and Galit Hasan-

Rokem., 13–39. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.

319–337.

606 

  R. BaRon

Noyes, D. 2015. “From Cultural Forms to Policy Objects: Comparison in Scholarship and Policy.” In UNESCO on the 
Ground: Local Perspectives on Intangible Cultural Heritage, edited by Michael Dylan Foster and Lisa Gilman, 161–175. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Sciorra, J. 2000. “Hip-Hop from the Italian Diaspora”. Workshop held at the John A. Calendra Italian-American Institute, 

Queens College, City University of New York, New York, NY.

Shuldiner, D., and J. Payne. 1999. “Notes from the Editors.” Journal of Applied Folklore 4 (1): 2.
Shuman, A., and C. Briggs, 1993. “Introduction.” Western Folklore 52 (2/4): 109–134.
da Silva, M. C. 2013. “Castles Abroad, Nations, Cultures and Cosmopolitanisms in African Heritage Sites of Portugese 
Origin.” In Heritage Regimes and the State, edited by Regina F. Bendix, Aditya Eggert, and Anika Peselmann, 375–388. 
Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

Smith, L. 2006. The Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Spitzer, N. (1992) 2007. “Cultural Conversation: Metaphors and Methods in Public Folklore.” In Public Folklore, edited 

by Robert Baron and Nick Spitzer, 77–103. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Thompson, K. A. 2008. “Beyond Tarzan and National Geographic: The Politics and Poetics of Presenting African Diasporic 

Culture on the Mall.” Journal of American Folklore 121 (479): 97–111.

Trimillos, R. 2008. “Histories, Resistances and Reconciliations in a Decolonizable Space: The Philippine Delegation to 

the 1998 Smithsonian Folklife Festival.” Journal of American Folklore 121 (479): 60–79.

UNESCO. 2014. “Operational Directives for the Implementation of the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage.” UNESCO. Accessed September 27. http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/doc/src/ICH-Operational_
Directives-5.GA-EN.docx

Whisnant, D. 1988. “Public Sector Folklore as Intervention: Lessons from the past, Prospects for the Future.” In The 
Conservation of Culture: Folklorists and the Public Sector, edited by Burt Feintuch, 233–247. Lexington: The University 
Press of Kentucky.

Williams, R. 1977. Marxism and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zeitlin, S. 2011. “Where Are the Best Stories? Where is My Story? Participation and Curation in a Digital Age.” In Letting 
Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-generated World, edited by Bill Adair, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski, 
34–43. Philadelphia, PA: The Pew Center for Art and Heritage.


