International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Inclusive archives and recordkeeping: towards a
critical manifesto

Joanne Evans & Jacqueline Z. Wilson

To cite this article: Joanne Evans & Jacqueline Z. Wilson (2018) Inclusive archives and
recordkeeping: towards a critical manifesto, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 24:8,
857-860, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2018.1428671
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2018.1428671

Published online: 01 Feb 2018.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 238

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS
2018, Vol. 24, No. 8, 857–860
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2018.1428671

INTRODUCTION
Inclusive archives and recordkeeping: towards a critical manifesto

Joanne Evansa,c and Jacqueline Z. Wilsonb

afaculty  of  Information  technology  Caulfield,  Monash  university,  Melbourne,  australia;  bCollaborative  research 
Centre in australian History, federation university australia, Ballarat, australia; cCentre for organisational and Social 
Informatics, Caulfield faculty of Information technology, Monash university, Melbourne, australia 

ABSTRACT
Archival practices must now reflect both advances in information technology, 
and the ethos of inclusivity that assures that the subjects of records have full 
opportunity to participate in the memory-making process, and to ‘own’ the 
resulting records. This themed section presents four articles demonstrating 
various ways in which this is being done or could potentially be done, and 
why it is needed. The articles model new and innovative modes of archiving, 
closely collaborative approaches to ensuring that the ‘personal’ is included 
in the record, and ways in which the norms of historical practice, heritage 
and social memory can be transformed by new ways of thinking about and 
defining archival practices.

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 2 January 2018 
accepted 2 January 2018

KEYWORDS
Inclusive archives; heritage; 
grass-roots activism; 
disruptive histories

The need for archiving systems and methodological approaches that acknowledge and accommodate 
the manifold complexities of memory-making has been well established for decades. Just as history 
and heritage have come to be understood as domains of (at times hotly) contested narratives, so too the 
archival sources upon which they draw, and in turn further create, are now increasingly interrogated 
regarding their intrinsic ideological biases, their role in creating and maintaining power imbalances, 
and their integrity as products of variant, at times conflicting, motives and points of view.

A growing community archives movement has taken advantage of the capabilities of digital and 
networking technologies to build archives to create, capture, collect and share their stories. It is excit-
ing to see archival and recordkeeping processes and systems being valued and used by individuals 
and communities to express and signify their identity. The diversity of ways in which a multiplicity 
of life experiences and world views can be represented is also inspiring, along with leading to the 
recognition and emergence of a myriad of different kinds of evidentiary and memory texts. Through 
these initiatives archives become tools for promoting and promulgating social justice and inclusion 
agendas — for questioning attitudes, changing thinking, and refiguring practices — rather than as 
institutional bastions of power and privilege in support of a dominant hegemony. In raising issues 
about the ownership, control, and shaping of the archival record the traditional structures, strictures 
and ethics of archival and recordkeeping professional practice are also called into question.

These developments have given rise to a growing number of educators, practitioners, and researchers 
joining with community advocates and activists to question the social constructs, values and power 
differentials embedded in existing archival and recordkeeping frameworks, processes, systems and 

CONTACT  Jacqueline Z. Wilson 

  jz.wilson@federation.edu.au

© 2018 Joanne evans, Jacqueline Z. Wilson. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

 
858 

 

 J. EVANS AND J. Z. WILSON 

technologies. As with Critical Heritage Studies this community is keen to ask provoking and uncom-
fortable questions about the marginalisation and exclusion that traditional thinking and practices 
sustain and propagate, and to interrogate the role that archives and recordkeeping plays in the exer-
cise and abuse of power in society. It is also keen on moving beyond insight and critique, utilising 
interventionist and inclusive research and development methodologies to bring about radical and 
fundamental transformations in the way recordkeeping and archiving are understood and enacted. 
Of particular interest is enabling decolonised, imagined and participatory archives built on principles 
for acknowledging, respecting, representing, and negotiating multiple rights in records in and through 
time and space.

In this themed section of the journal we explore this movement from a variety of perspectives with 

the aim of developing a critical archives and recordkeeping ethos.

In an era of rapidly emerging technological advances in information storage and retrieval, a plethora 
of issues which may be encapsulated in the over-arching concept of ‘accountability’ must be addressed 
in the creation of contemporary memory-systems. How is this best to be done? Leisa Gibbons essays 
a comprehensive response to this question in her article, ‘Use of personal reflexive modelling in chal-
lenging conceptualisations of cultural heritage’, with her explication of the ‘Mediated Recordkeeping 
Model’ (MRkM), a structured archival schema designed to provide a detailed conceptual framework, 
or map, by which inclusive, interactive and subject-owned memories can be create and managed.

Gibbons’s model embodies a series of procedural steps that in their final expression encompass an 
abundance of aspects of the archival process. The MRkM is depicted in graphic form that illustrates its 
scope to guide the practitioner toward a full appreciation of the multi-dimensional skein of facets to 
be accounted for. Thus the personnel involved  –  the co-creator of the records (cognate, in Gibbons’s 
schema, with the modeller), and those who interpret, organise and curate them, among others  –  are 
defined and systematised in the context of environment, process, purport, motive and expectations.
Gibbons demonstrates the MRkM in use with an example taken from a YouTube clip that has 
been archived by the National Film and Sound Archive (NFSA): a tongue-in-cheek reinterpretation 
of ‘Zorba’s Dance’ by an Aboriginal troupe calling themselves ‘The Chooky Dancers’. Her step-by-step 
analysis of both the original video and the memory-making processes at play in the NFSA’s preserva-
tion of it amply demonstrate the complexities involved, and the sheer multiplicity of factors requiring 
attention, in creating a genuinely inclusive archive. It also serves to illustrate the scope of archiving as 
a dynamic, technologically sophisticated practice.

In  their  article ‘Between  speaking  out  in  public  and  being  person-centred’,  Chloe  Brownlee-
Chapman and her fellow-researchers explain the development of their Living Archive of Learning 
Disability History (LALDH), aimed at achieving a synthesis of heritage, learning disability and the 
role of archives in empowering those traditionally deemed unable to engage meaningfully in high-end 
analytical research. Through the personal narratives of individuals with a range of learning disabilities, 
outlining their experiences of participating in inclusive analytical research, we come to understand 
how the LALDH can potentially reverse the long-established trend in archiving, especially in public 
institutions, that results in records ‘dominated by the viewpoint of those in power, the decision makers’ 
(Brownlee-Chapman et al.).

The LALDH, which is designed to embody the flexibility and inconstancy of real-world individuals’ 
intent  –  contributions can be temporary or ongoing, for instance  –  exemplifies the value of ‘self-ad-
vocacy’ as a form of activism that has proved effective in achieving equitable autonomy for excluded 
or marginalised groups. Here, too, the role of memory-making methods and facilities is central, pro-
vided they are controlled and ‘owned’ by those whose stories are represented. This is achieved through 
processes of conversational collaboration, public activism, and the pursuit of a ‘person-centred’ ethos.
A re-imagining of disability, in which the individual is defined not in terms of limitations but in 
terms of potential, is key to projects such as the LALDH, and needs to become far more a feature 
of wider societal and academic perceptions and expectations. ‘Between speaking out in public and 
being person-centred’ provides invaluable insights and perspectives upon which such a perceptual 
shift could occur. It also describes the project team’s methodology for ‘de-mystify[ing] the research 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

 

859 

process’ (Brownlee-Chapman et al.) in order to facilitate engagement and inclusion across the fullest 
possible spectrum of intellectual abilities. One of the article’s great virtues is that it challenges all of 
us in the academic community to rethink our assumptions regarding the nature of our work and its 
relationship and relevance to a wide range of people.

In ‘More voice, less ventriloquism’, Anna Sexton and Dolly Sen recount the inception and develop-
ment of the Mental Health Recovery Archive (MHRA), the result of a collaboration between researchers 
whose relationship evolved, in the course of creating the archive, from a working partnership into a 
friendship. They explain the ramifications of this shift in the research dynamic, and how and why it 
proved a positive factor in the project.

An exemplar of participatory research, the article cogently illustrates the inherent shortcomings in 
‘traditional’, authority-based archiving processes as representative of those undergoing treatment in 
a mental health environment. All too often  –  as in so many situations involving interaction between 
health professionals or carers and their clientele  –  an innately adversarial relationship prevails and 
tends to be reflected in the content, tenor and form of records created. As Dolly Sen tellingly puts it, 
‘most of the archives that depict mental health lived experience are filtered by mental health profes-
sionals, but that is like lions representing bird song in roars. Why should the hunter give the hunted’s 
history?’ (Sexton and Sen)

The MHRA aims to address this power imbalance by gathering the personal writings and remi-
niscences of people as they recover from mental illness, thus preserving a record of the stories not 
heard by the treating professionals. In the process the tendency of the system to objectify the patient 
and render them abstract and categorised is countered, and thus privilege and power are challenged 
and scrutinised. Sexton & Sen’s article not only explores challenges for inclusive archiving, but also of 
inclusive research. Through the exploration of their research relationship, they artfully illuminate many 
of the dilemmas encountered in seeking to undertake participatory research from within frameworks 
that privilege academic over lived experience and expertise. Their article can serve as a guide on how 
to navigate and negotiate participation in both archiving and research processes to challenge and 
transform embedded power differentials.

The nature of heritage itself, and its relationship to processes of memory-making, is central to 
Jacqueline Wilson and Frank Golding’s article ‘Loud Fences’, which examines a grass-roots activist 
campaign that arose out of the recent Australian Government’s Royal Commission into Institutional 
Responses  to  Child  Sexual Abuse.  The  campaign,  which  involved  no  marches,  slogans  or  overtly 
adversarial tactics, consisted of simply installing coloured ribbons, as symbolic commemorations of 
the victims, on the boundary fences of institutions — churches, schools, former orphanages, and so 
on — that had been implicated in the Royal Commission as having contributed to the suffering of 
children in their care.

As Wilson and Golding point out, many of the institutions targeted by Loud Fences have long 
histories within their communities as bastions of ‘Establishment’ heritage, and their shaming in the 
Royal Commission has had significant impact not only on their community standing, but also on those 
aspects of community identity bound up with the institutions’ historical narratives. The installation 
of hundreds of coloured ribbons, as ironically bright signifiers of the institutions’ darkest aspects, 
both disrupts the existing heritage narrative, and overlays a new narrative, not exclusive of the old but 
incongruent with it, that must then be somehow assimilated into each institution’s overall heritage 
identity. How, the article asks, is this ‘disrupted history’ to be recorded? How archived?

These are complex questions, given that any activist campaign is bound to be a dynamic and perhaps 
ephemeral affair. In the case of Loud Fences, which comprises material artefacts whose physical location 
is intrinsic to their symbolic meaning, the various institutions’ responses to the campaign — which 
ranged from rejection, through grudging partial acceptance, to wholehearted embracement of both 
artefact and shame — and the campaigners’ subsequent ‘replies’, constitute a silent, symbolic ‘dialogue’ 
with manifold implications for heritage and memory-making. Wilson and Golding acknowledge the 
difficulties inherent in archiving such transient events and phenomena, while yet noting the urgent 
need to make some sort of attempt, however imperfect, to do so.

 
860 

 

 J. EVANS AND J. Z. WILSON 

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was supported by Australian Research Council [grant number DP170100198].

Notes on contributors
Joanne Evans is an Associate Professor and ARC Future Fellow in the Faculty of Information Technology, Monash 
University, and co-ordinator of the Records Continuum Research Group, part of the Faculty’s Centre of Organisational 
and Social Informatics. Her research explores the multifarious roles metadata plays in creating, managing, and sustain-
ing information and recordkeeping infrastructure and systems, particularly in community settings. Her Connecting the 
Disconnected: Co-designing Integrated and Inclusive Recordkeeping and Archival Networks Future Fellowship research 
programme is exploring inclusive archival design methodologies for sustainable living archives.
Jacqueline Z. Wilson is an Associate Professor in the Collaborative Centre for Australian History at Federation University 
Australia. She has authored over forty scholarly publications, including Prison: Cultural Memory and Dark Tourism 
(2008) which was the first national study of prison heritage sites, and she is the lead editor for The Palgrave Handbook 
of Prison Tourism (2017). Jacqueline is currently a chief investigator on several collaborative research projects supported 
by the Sidney Myer Fund and the Australian Research Council Discovery Awards. She is a former ward of the State 
of Victoria and an activist and advocate for Care Leavers in Australia. This underpins much of her research which is 
concerned with historical justice, national memory, heritage and experiences of State care and punitive welfare systems.


