International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Conserving Colonial Heritage: Raffles Hotel in
Singapore

Joan C. Henderson

To cite this article: Joan C. Henderson (2001) Conserving Colonial Heritage: Raffles Hotel in
Singapore, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 7:1, 7-24, DOI: 10.1080/13527250119383
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250119383

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1119

Citing articles: 22 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 7± 24

Conserving Colonial Heritage: Raffles
Hotel in Singapore
Joan C. Henderson

Abstract
The paper considers the case of Raffles Hotel in Singapore which has been the subject of a
conservation project  with  a significant  element  of  redevelopment. The  circumstances  are
discussed within the context of heritage tourism in colonial cities and changing approaches
to conservation in  Singapore. Built  colonial heritage exhibits a symbolism  which affects
how it is presented  and interpreted, serving as a tool for nation building and as a tourist
attraction. Policies about conservation and use are influenced by these alternative and often
contested  meanings,  while  economic  imperatives  may  demand  that  buildings  generate
revenue.  Raffles  Hotel  illustrates  the  difficulties  involved  in  managing  and  marketing
colonial heritage and securing an acceptable balance between commercial and conservation
objectives, with possibilities for confusion as a consequence of the combination of restoration,
reconstruction and new building techniques employed. The case has a wider relevance which
extends to other forms of built heritage around the world and highlights the dilemmas facing
those making decisions about how to present the conserved past as a contemporary tourist
space.

Key words: Raffles Hotel; Singapore; Conservation; Colonial Heritage; Heritage
Tourism; Restoration

This paper is concerned with the relationship between built heritage, conservation
and tourism in colonial cities and uses the example of Raffles Hotel in Singapore to
explore the issues and conflicts that can arise. Raffles Hotel is a tourist icon and has
a  history  which  reflects  that  of  Singapore  itself,  the  most  recent  event  being  its
reopening  in  1991  after  work  which  involved  both  conservation  and  extensive
refurbishment. The case illustrates the tensions which exist  between conservation
and commercialisation of heritage, complicated by the circumstances of colonisa-
tion whereby buildings acquire symbolic meanings for both residents and visitors.
They  may  be  interpreted  as  representations of  the  authority  and  control  of  the
former colonial  power,  as  well  as  its  values,  and  the  source of  some  contention
regarding preservation and use.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/01/010007-18   2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250120043320

The history of Raffles Hotel is discussed within the context of a shift in attitude
to conservation in Singapore, after a review of the literature on heritage and tourism
in colonial cities. Reference is also made to the built environment inherited from the
British  who  ruled  Singapore  for  almost  150  years,  and  its  symbolism.  The
contribution of tourism to  the  conservation effort is acknowledged, but  concerns
are also identified about the consequences of allowing tourists to exercise too much
influence over the presentation of  heritage.  Finally,  some general conclusions are
derived  from  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case  about  the  difficulties  of
managing  the  heritage± tourism  relationship,  the  need  to  secure  an  appropriate
balance  between  conserving and  commercialising sites  and  tourism as  a  form of
neo-colonisation.

These issues apply to many heritage sites around the world and are not confined
to Singapore. Decisions have to be made about what forms of heritage to conserve
and how to present them as tourist environments that will be attractive to visitors,
and  also  generate  revenue  where  appropriate,  whilst  remaining  meaningful  to
residents. The process occurs at sites and in cities around the world and reconciling
competing interests continues to be a central challenge for heritage managers.

Heritage and Tourism in Colonial Cities
Ashworth1 in a recent review of studies of heritage and tourism, notes the growing
literature on the subject and alternative approaches adopted. Built heritage tends to
be  concentrated  in  cities,  hence  an  emphasis  on  urban  heritage  tourism  which
extends beyond Western cities2 to include those of Asia.3 While some commentators
see  opportunities for harmony and  symbiosis, others describe the  relationship in
more negative terms. Tourism may exploit cultures and their heritage4 and this is a
particular  threat  in  developing  countries  and  former  colonies  which  are  now
independent.

1. G.J. Ashworth, `Heritage, tourism and places: a review’ , Tourism Recreation  Research, Vol. 25, No. 1,
2000, pp.  19± 29.

2. G.J. Ashworth & P.J. Larkham (eds) Building  a new heritage: tourism, culture  and identity  in the new
Europe, London: Routledge, 1994; J. van den Borg,  P. Costa & G. Gotti, `Tourism in European
heritage cities’, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 23, No.  2, 1996, pp.  306± 321; J. Glasson, K. Godfrey
& B.Goodey, Towards visitor impact management: visitor impacts, carrying capacity and management
responses in Europe’s historic towns  and cities, Vermont: Ashgate Publishing,  1995; P. Larkham,
Conservation and the cities, London: Routledge, 1996.

3. C. Cartier, `Megadevelopments in Malaysia: from heritage landscapes to leisurescapes in Melaka’s
tourism sector’, Singapore  Journal  of Tropical Geography, Vol. 19, No.  2, 1998, pp.  505± 632; S.C.H.
Cheung, `The meanings of a heritage trail in Hong Kong’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.  26, No. 3,
1999, pp.  570± 588; D.J. Timothy & G. Wall, `Tourist accommodation in an Asian historic city’,
Journal of Tourism Studies, Vol. 6, No.  2, 1995, pp.  63± 73; G. Wall, `Linking heritage and  tourism in
an Asian  city: the case of Yogyakarta, Indonesia’ ,  in P. Murphy (ed.) Quality management in urban
tourism, Chichester: John Wiley, 1997, pp.  137± 148.

4. J.E. Tunbridge, `Whose heritage to conserve? Cross-cultural reflections on political dominance and
urban heritage conservation’ , Canadian Geographer, Vol. 28, No.  2, 1984, pp.  171± 180.

8

Joan C. Henderson

International tourism is frequently accused of being a vehicle for neo-colonisation
through the perpetuation of inequalities and inequities.5 Palmer uses the example of
the Caribbean to illustrate that tourism there continues to express the ideology of
colonialism  and  inhibits  the  emergence  of  a  genuine  sense  of  national  identity,
arguing that it is `inextricably linked to notions of slavery, racial discrimination and
inequality’ .6 The work  of  Crick,7 English,8 and  Erisman9 supports these conclu-
sions  about  the  links  between  tourism,  power,  dominance  and  authority.  Such
theories frequently make reference to the arguments of Said10 who has written more
generally  of  Orientalism  as  an  intellectual  tradition  based  on  assumptions  of
European-Atlantic superiority, symbolising the power and domination of the West
over the Orient. While writing principally about Orientalism as a system of beliefs
applicable  especially  to  the  Middle East,  many  of  Said’s  observations  do  have  a
resonance in any discussion of the distribution of power among the parties involved
in international tourism.

Colonial societies thus have a potentially `dissonant heritage’ 11 and dealing with
it means addressing the question `whose heritage?’  which `clouds the conservation
and marketing of urban heritage in all formerly colonial societies seeking to exploit
the  tourism  markets  of  their  former  masters’ .1 2 Part  of  this  dissonance  occurs
because heritage requires narration to residents as well as tourists. It can be read as
a `post-colonial dialogue over nationalism . . . about what parts of a colonial history
should  be  upheld  for  contemporary  narratives  about  national  identity,  political
ideology, and perceived economic imperatives’ .1 3 Heritage tourism is not, therefore,
concerned only with preserving the remains of the past for visitor enjoyment, but

5. S.G. Britton, `The political economy of tourism in the Third World’ , Annals of Tourism Research,
Vol.  9, 1982, pp.  331± 358; N. Morgan & A. Pritchard, Tourism promotion and power: creating  images,
creating  identities, Chichester: John Wiley, 1998; M. Mowforth & I. Hunt, Tourism and sustainability:
new tourism in the Third World, London: Routledge, 1998.

6. C. Palmer, `Tourism and colonialism: the experience of the Bahamas’ , Annals  of Tourism Research,
Vol.  21, No. 4, 1994, pp.  792± 811, p. 801.

7. M. Crick, `Sun, sex, sights, savings and servility: representations of international tourism in the
social sciences’ , Criticisms, Heresy and Interpretation, Vol. 1, 1988, pp. 37± 76.

8. P.  English, The Great Escape: an  examination of north-south tourism, Ottawa: North-South Institute,
1986.

9. M. Erisman, `Tourism and cultural dependency in the West Indies’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.
10, 1983, pp.  337± 361.

10. E.W. Said, Orientalism, New York: Random House, 1994.

11. J.E. Tunbridge & G.J. Ashworth, Dissonant  heritage: the  management of the past as a resource in
conflict, Chichester: John Wiley, 1996.

12. G.J. Ashworth & J.E. Tunbridge, The tourist-historic city, London: Belhaven, 1990, p. 55.

13. C. Cartier, `Conserving the built environment and generating heritage tourism in peninsular
Malaysia’, Tourism Recreation  Research, Vol. 21, No. 1, 1996, pp.  45± 53, p.  51.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

9

also  about  contemporary  struggles  for  power  and  the  concept  of  nationhood.
Buildings  acquire  meanings  and  associations,  often  disturbing  when  seen  to
symbolise  colonial  oppression,14 and  these  have  to  be  negotiated  when  making
decisions about contemporary forms and functions.15

Despite  these  dilemmas,  which  are  especially  contentious  within  a  colonial
context, and concerns about excessive commercialisation and commodification,16
heritage tourism is increasing in popularity17 and the demand for nostalgic heritage
appears particularly strong. Such a trend can be explained by a variety of factors
including better education and greater  curiosity about heritage, improved access,
expansion in leisure time and the need to escape the uncertainties and stresses of the
present. Waitt1 8 describes the  `fragmentary  nature  of  postmodern society’   where
`contemporary experiences are said to lack a sense of depth, originality and place’ .
Heritage  attractions  thus  have  a  potentially  large  and  responsive  market,  but
managers also have responsibilities regarding matters of presentation, operation and
marketing.

Singapore’s Colonial Heritage
The debate about heritage interpretation has a relevance to Singapore, which was
established as a trading post for the British East India Company by Stamford Raffles
in 1819. The company was seeking safe ports to protect and promote its trade with
China and accepted colonialism as a means of furthering trading ambitions.19 The
Dutch, also active in the region, objected to the British presence in Singapore and
the territorial dispute between the two was settled by the Treaty of London in 1824.
Under the agreement, the Dutch accepted the British occupation of Singapore and
pledged not to intervene in the Malay peninsula. Britain was given Malacca and, in
exchange,  transferred Bencoolen to  the  Netherlands  and  accepted  Sumatra  and
other islands south of Singapore as Dutch interests. Singapore was combined with
Malacca and Penang to form the Straits Settlements in 1826 governed firstly from
India and then as a Crown Colony from London, `a form of government essentially

14. A.D. King, Colonial urban development:  culture,  social power and environment, London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul,  1976.

15. A. Southall, `The impact of imperialism upon urban development in Africa’ , in V. Turner (ed.)
Colonialism in Africa, 1870± 1960, London: Cambridge University Press, 1971; UNESCO, `The
economics of heritage: conference/workshop on the adaptive reuse of historic properties in Asia and
the Pacific’, 9± 17 May 1999, Conference Programme; J. Western, `Undoing the colonial city?’ ,
Geographical Review, Vol. 75, No. 3, 1985, pp. 335± 375.

16. R. Hewison, The heritage industry: Britain in a climate of decline, London: Methuen, 1987.

17. P. Boniface & P.J. Fowler, Heritage  and tourism in the global village, London: Routledge, 1993.

18. G. Waitt, `Consuming  heritage: perceived historical authenticity’, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.
27, No. 4, 2000, pp.  835± 862, p.  838.

19. W.W. Rostow, The stages  of economic  growth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

10

Joan C. Henderson

unchanged from 1867  up to the Second World War’ .20 That war and the Japanese
occupation of Singapore was a turning point and marked the beginning of the end
of  British imperial rule; in its  aftermath,  Singapore was granted a  degree of  self-
government  before  full  independence  firstly  from  Britain  and  then  from  the
Malaysian Federation in 1965.21

British  involvement  in  the  destiny  of  the  country  is  reflected  in  the  urban
landscape.  The  early  plan  of  Raffles22 set  out  a  town  with  specific  zones  for
commerce, government, recreation and residence; in the latter, the European area
was  clearly  distinguished  from  the  ethnic  communities  of  Arabs,  Chinese  and
Indians. Jayapal23 relates the subsequent evolution of the city which was accelerated
by the growth in trade and economic prosperity, especially in the late 19th century
when  Malaya’s  booming  tin  and  rubber  industries  provided  business  for  the
entrep Ãot into which Singapore had developed.

Singapore was thus transformed from a fishing village of about 15024 to one of the
busiest  ports  in  the  world,  the  changes  in  physical  appearance  being  well
documented in  histories  of  its  architecture.25 The  resulting  style  incorporated a
variety of influences representing `the  sum total  of two hundred years of building
experience in the East by the settlers and colonizers of India, Indonesia, Penang and
Malacca’ 26 which  has  been  described  as  essentially  Anglo-Indian.27 Palladian
designs  once  popular  in  England  arrived  in  Malaya  by  way  of  engineers  and
architects who had worked in India, with some modifications due to  climate and
local conditions. These buildings were the `stones of Empire’ 28 constructed to `tell

20. C.M. Turnbull, A history of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei,  Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1989, p.
208.

21. J. Baker, Crossroads: a popular history of Malaysia and Singapore, Singapore: Times Books
International, 1999.

22. J. Crawfurd, Journal of an embassy from the Governor-General of India  to the Courts of Siam and
Cochin China, London: Henry Colburn, 1828; reprinted 1987, Singapore:  Oxford University Press.

23. M. Jayapal,  Old  Singapore, Singapore:  Oxford University Press, 1992.

24. W. Bartley, `The population  of Singapore in 1819’ , in M. Sheppard (ed.) Singapore: 150 Years,
Singapore: Times Books International, 1982.

25. N. Edwards, The Singapore house and residential  life 1819± 1939, Singapore:  Oxford University
Press, 1990; M. Gretchen, Pastel portraits: Singapore’s architectural heritage, Singapore: Singapore
Coordinating  Committee, 1984; K.L. Lee, The Singapore house 1819± 1942, Singapore: Times Edns,
1988; G. Liu, In granite and chinam; the  National Monuments  of Singapore, Singapore: Landmark
Books, 1996; R. Powell, Living legacy: Singapore’s architectural  heritage renewed, Singapore: Singapore
Heritage Society, 1994.

26. J. Beamish  & J. Ferguson, A history of Singapore architecture: the making of a city, Singapore:  G.
Brash, 1985, p.  19.

27. P. Gurnstein, Malaysian architecture  heritage survey: a handbook, Kuala Lumpur: Badan Warisan
Malaysia, Heritage of Malaysia Trust, 1985.

28. J. Morris, Stones  of empire: the buildings  of the Raj,  Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 1983.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

11

a moral tale. They were monuments of rulers, and a way of life impervious to the
riotous and excessive East.’ 29 As in India, they served to assert British authority in
Singapore30 where the colonisers organised `the urban built environment in such a
way as to facilitate colonial rule and express colonial aspirations and ideals’ .3 1

Such buildings were concentrated in what today is known as the Civic District or
historic core, where the pattern envisaged by Raffles is still evident.3 2 They include
City  Hall, Parliament House and the Supreme Court, structures which might  be
perceived as symbols of domination and contested spaces although now occupied by
Singaporean officials. Commercial and social buildings perhaps carry less symbol-
ism  than  those  of  government and  they  have  had  considerable alterations  in  use
which distance them from their colonial past, but they still recall the colonial era in
appearance, often name and sometimes function. Several tell a story of the wealth
and privilege of an exclusive elite who led a comfortable life while the majority of
immigrants were living in squalor.33 For example, the Singapore Cricket Club, from
which Eurasians were excluded and forced to erect their own facilities nearby, still
stands and Raffles Hotel itself was a venue for the privileged few; both are indicative
of the divided and unequal society which colonialism engenders.3 4

Despite these sensitivities, the buildings have been recognised for other qualities
related  to  historical  understanding and  shared  experience  described later. Their
visual appeal also adds `dignity, constancy and history to the fast-changing city’ ,35
which  makes  an  interesting  contrast  to  the  high-rise  skyline  of  contemporary
Singapore. These changing attitudes to the historic built landscape have determined
conservation  policies  in  Singapore,  discussed  in  the  following  section  which
provides a background to the Raffles Hotel project.

Heritage Conservation in Singapore
After independence, Singapore launched a comprehensive urban planning exercise
which was to transform the city and entire island.36 Rapid urbanisation followed with
areas cleared for industrial, commercial and residential purposes. Old buildings were

29. Beamish & Ferguson, op. cit. (note  26), p.  24.

30. K. Yeang, The architecture  of Malaysia, Amsterdam/Kuala Lumpur: Pepin Press, 1992.

31. B. Yeoh, Contesting  space: power relations and the urban built environment  in colonial Singapore, Kuala
Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1996, p. 16.

32. N. Edwards & P. Keys, Singapore: a guide  to buildings,  streets, places, Singapore: Times Books
International, 1988.

33. O.J.  Dale, Urban planning  in Singapore: the transformation of a city, Kuala Lumpur: Oxford
University Press, 1999.

34. A. Memmi, The colonizer  and the colonized, London: Earthscan, 1990.

35. Gretchen, op. cit. (note 25), p. 141.

36. URA, The Golden  Shoe: Building  Singapore’s Financial District, Singapore:  Urban Redevelopment
Authority, 1989.

12

Joan C. Henderson

an unproductive use of land which was already in short supply and they were judged
incompatible with government notions of modern statehood. There was little support
for  conservation,  which  was  seen  as  an  obstacle  to  progress  and  damaging  to
government policies of economic growth deemed in the national interest.

There was some recognition of the role of historic landmarks as a link with the past,
however, illustrated by the founding of the Preservation of Monuments Board (PMB)
by Act of Parliament in 1970. The Board is charged with gazetting such monuments,
which implies a level of protection.37 The Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA),
responsible for  overall  planning and  development, then  started  to  become  more
active in conservation and was formally given powers to conserve and protect land
and buildings in the 1990 Planning Act.38 These powers have been executed through
the designation of conservation areas and a Conservation Master Plan39 incorporated
into the more comprehensive plan for the country’s long-term development.40 There
is also a system of controls and regulations for developers and owners. The result of
this activity is forty-four conservation areas covering nearly 6,000  buildings across
Singapore, while the PMB has gazetted forty-two buildings. Colonial architecture
features prominently, with most examples found in the Civic District.

Several reasons account for this  shift  in policy, not least  popular awareness, as
evidenced by the formation of a Heritage Society in 1986. More importantly, there
was a growing official acceptance that built heritage had a place even in the most
modern of countries, a priority which could be addressed now that the country had
achieved many of its economic goals. As the URA states,

the restoration of our historic areas add variety to our streetscapes and modulate the scale
of our urban fabric, creating the visual contrast and excitement within the city while
protecting the important reminders and representations of our past. In addition, it adds to
the distinctive character and identity of our city, giving it a sense of history and memory of
the place.4 1

There were other relevant social and political forces relating to the need for a sense
of nationhood in a relatively new country with an ethnically diverse population of
Chinese, Malays, Indians and others, occupying a vulnerable geopolitical location
between the much larger states of Malaysia and Indonesia with whom relations are
often strained. Despite a surface of multicultural harmony, there are signs of racial

37. MITA Web site,  < http://www.gov.sg/mita > , 15 May 2000.

38. R.A. Smith, `Urban Redevelopment Authority: tourism and heritage conservation in Singapore’,
in D.H. Hooi (ed.) Cases in Singapore hospitality and tourism management,  Singapore:  Prentice Hall,
1999.

39. URA, A future with a past: saving our heritage, Singapore: Urban Redevelopment Authority,  1991.

40. URA, Living the next lap: towards  a tropical city of excellence, Singapore: Urban Redevelopment
Authority, 1991.

41. URA Web site,  < http://www.ura.gov.sg > ,  15 May 2000.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

13

tensions and the government is anxious to avoid a repeat of a period of unrest in the
1960s. Heritage and its physical manifestations can be a vehicle for nation building
whereby the population is encouraged to accept a shared Singaporean history which
transcends ethnic allegiance. As a senior official said in 1986, `a nation with a memory
. . . gives it a sense of cohesion, continuity and identity . . . a sense of common history
is what provides the links to hold together a people who come from the four corners of
the earth.’ 4 2 There are clearly political rewards to be gained from this use of heritage
by  the  People’s  Action  Party  (PAP),  which  has  remained  in  office  since
independence.

The promotion of heritage tourism reinforces these objectives as it is a `powerful
force in the construction and maintenance of national identity because it relies upon
the  historic  symbols  of  the  nation  as  a  means  of  attracting  tourists’ .43 Heritage
tourism also  generates  revenue  as  a  marketable  commodity,  an  effect  which  the
pragmatic authorities fully appreciate. Anxiety about a slowdown in visitor arrivals in
the 1980s resulted in a review of the country’s tourism resources which recognised
heritage  as  a  significant  visitor  attraction. The  loss  of  much of  Singapore’s  built
colonial and vernacular heritage in the rush towards modernisation would, therefore,
have a damaging impact on tourist numbers.44 In response, heritage themes were
introduced  into  the  new  Tourism  Product  Development  Plan45 and  the  URA
presented plans for a Civic and Cultural District which combined conservation and
commercial  considerations.4 6 The  latter  was  strengthened  by  the  creation  of  a
Museum Planning Area in 1997 with a Museum Precinct set to become a node in the
Civic District.

The current strategy of the Singapore Tourism Board (STB), devised when it was
known as the Singapore Tourist Promotion Board (STPB), gives some prominence to
heritage, covering the colonial landscape and ethnic enclaves of Chinatown, Little
India  and  Kampong  Glam.47 The  Board  is  now  an  enthusiastic  supporter  of
conservation and has acted as the lead agency in several initiatives. Tourists can follow
a Civic District Trail to `rediscover the heart of old Singapore . . . covering the colonial
period through World War Two to independence’ 48 or join Nostalgia/History Tours for

42. URA, 1991, op. cit. (note 39), p.  24.

43. C. Palmer, `Tourism and symbols of identity’ , Tourism Management, Vol. 20, 1999, pp.  313± 321,
p. 313.

44. K.C. Wong, Report of the tourism task force, Singapore: Ministry of Trade and Industry, 1984.

45. MTI, Tourism Product Development  Plan, Singapore: Ministry of Trade and Industry, 1986.

46. URA, Master plan for the Civic and Cultural District, Singapore: Urban Redevelopment Authority,
1988.

47. STPB, Tourism 21 vision of a tourism capital, Singapore: Singapore Tourist Promotion Board,
1996.

48. National Heritage Board, Civic District Trail: rediscover the heart of Singapore, Sydney: ZCARD
ASIA PACIFIC, 1999.

14

Joan C. Henderson

`an  overview  of  the  trials  and  tribulations  Singapore  faced  before  it  became  the
economic miracle it is today’ .49

Alternative strategies for post-colonial societies in dealing with inherited buildings
have been identified as renaming, neglecting, removing and using.50 In Singapore,
commitment to heritage conservation has saved much of the remaining built colonial
heritage, and the emphasis is now on using and adapting. There is evidence of neglect
and removal5 1 but these appear to be trends of the past. While there have been some
name changes, these indicate new functions rather than ideological considerations
and there is little reluctance about naming places and business ventures after Raffles
who might be seen as the personification of colonialism. He has given his name to
schools, streets, a light railway  station, a shopping complex, business class on the
national airline, a golf club and marina in addition to Raffles Hotel.

Western5 2 also argues that decisions depend on whether the former colonial power
is still a threat, a factor unlikely to apply in Singapore which has made remarkable
progress  since  independence  to  become  an  economically  successful  and  self-
confident nation whose citizens enjoy a high standard of living.5 3 The experience of
colonisation  is  not,  therefore,  a  cause  of  embarrassment, but  rather  of  pride  in
achievements subsequent and Raffles remembered as the figure who helped to make
this possible. The treatment of Raffles makes an interesting contrast to that accorded
to other prominent colonial figures, such as Cecil Rhodes.

Overall, governmental and religious institutions tend to have retained their original
purposes  and  physical  forms  with  some  exceptions;  adaptive  reuse,  defined  as
alterations that  permit `old buildings to serve a contemporary function’ 54 is more
common for commercial buildings. This had earlier been defined as rehabilitation by
the URA,55 where buildings are returned to `a state of utility which makes possible
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features which are
significant to its history, architecture and cultural values’ . Adaptive reuse may lead to
modifications in either form or function and occasionally both, as in the example of
CHIJMES. This is a complex of shops and restaurants in the former Convent of the
Holy Infant Jesus School created by the restoration of two National Monuments, the
conservation of  four buildings, the  addition of  another and the  construction of  a
sunken  courtyard  and  basement  car  park.  Such  radical  changes  attracted  some

49. STB, Official guide  New Asia Singapore, Singapore: Singapore Tourism Board,  2000.

50. J. Western, `Undoing the colonial city?’ ,  Geographical Review, Vol. 75, No. 3, 1985, pp.  335± 357.

51. Edwards & Keys, op. cit. (note 32); Gretchen, op. cit. (note 25); Powell, op. cit. (note 25).

52. Western, op. cit. (note 50).

53. P. Kotler, S. Jatusripitak & S. Maesincee, The marketing of nations:  a strategic approach to building
national  wealth, New York: Free Press, 1997.

54. URA, Chinatown  Historic District, Singapore: Urban Redevelopment Authority,  1995, p. 94.

55. URA, Objectives, principles and standards for preservation and conservation, Singapore:  Urban
Redevelopment Authority and Preservation of Monuments Board, 1993, p.  20.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

15

opposition,5 6 as  has  the  approach  in  general,5 7 but  the  site  is  now  a  National
Monument operated  by  a  private  company  in  circumstances similar  to  those  of
Raffles Hotel.

Raffles Hotel: a brief history
Raffles Hotel opened in 1887 with only ten bedrooms housed in a bungalow on Beach
Road which then fronted the shore. The hotel flourished and a pair of two-storey
wings were built to provide a further twenty-two suites and a billiard room, with the
Palm Court Wing erected later. Large-scale redevelopment took place at the end of
the century and a new Main Building was completed to replace the old bungalow; this
comprised twenty-three new rooms, a dining room, drawing rooms, verandas and a
main staircase. Further changes between 1900 and 1915 were the opening of the Bras
Basah Wing, which provided twenty suites, and a row of ground-floor shop units, the
enlargement of the bar and billiard room and the extension of verandas. The billiard
room was converted into extra guest rooms in 1917 and a ballroom constructed in
1921. There were other alterations after this date internally and to the exterior, but
these  were  not  on  such  a  scale  as  previously,  with  an  emphasis  on  upgrading,
redecoration and renovation.58

Liu59 and Sharp60 recount the  changing fortunes of the hotel, the  former with
extensive visual material drawn from its archives and other collections. From modest
beginnings,  it  acquired  an  international  reputation  which  attracted  tourists  and
expatriates as well as wealthier Asian customers. Business was adversely affected by
external events such as the World Wars and the depression of the 1930s, but it still
retained an image of glamour, quality and character which continued to draw the rich
and famous until the 1960s. Circumstances then changed, however, as new hotels
were  built  to  accommodate  increasing  visitor  numbers,  many  in  the  principal
shopping area of Orchard Road, which had the conveniences and facilities modern
tourists expected. Raffles was perceived as old-fashioned, shabby and uncomfortable
in comparison and its financial performance suffered accordingly.

A  redevelopment  proposal  mooted  in  1980  showed  a  realisation  of  the
deteriorating condition of the property and failure of the site to realise its commercial
potential.  The  Development  Bank  of  Singapore  (DBS)  and  Overseas  Chinese
Banking Corporation (OCBC), which both had a financial interest in the property
and  land,  announced  a  plan  to  restore  the  historic  buildings,  purchase  the

56. The Straits Times, `Old girls start petition to preserve dignity of CHIJMES site’, 16 June 1990.

57. S. Rajoo, `Facadism is not conservation!’ , in C.  Hoffmann & S. Lau (eds) Badan Warisan
Malaysia annual  report, Kuala Lumpur: Badan Warisan Malaysia,  1993.

58. URA, Raffles Hotel preservation guidelines, Prepared by the Urban Redevelopment Authority  for
the Preservation of Monuments Board, Vol. 1, Singapore: Urban Redevelopment Authority,  1997, pp.
22± 24.

59. G. Liu, Raffles Hotel, Singapore: Landmark Books, 1992.

60. I. Sharp, There is only one Raffles: the story of a grand hotel, Singapore:  Souvenir Press, 1981.

16

Joan C. Henderson

surrounding ground and erect a thirty-two-storey hotel with 774 rooms. The idea
was, however, abandoned as a result of a surplus of hotel rooms and a slowing down in
arrivals  in  the  mid± 1980s,  when  Singapore  appeared  to  be  entering  a  stage  of
maturity as a destination.

Despite its difficulties, the hotel was awarded the status of National Monument in
1987, such a designation being based on three criteria. These require that a building
(a)  be `representative  of  vernacular or classical architecture and  testimony of  the
aspirations  of  Singapore’s  multi-racial  population’ ,  (b)  be  of  importance  in
`exhibiting  particular  aesthetic,  creative  and  technical  qualities  in  design  and
construction of late nineteenth and early twentieth century colonial architecture’ ,
and (c) contribute to `depicting cultural, economic and social life of Singaporeans in a
particular period of Singapore’s culture’ .61 While there may be some question over
the extent to which Raffles Hotel met the second part of the first criterion and all of
the third criterion, the award confirmed its role as a tourist attraction in whose future
the tourism authorities had a stake.

Action was  clearly necessary to  avert  further decline and ultimate closure, and
there were demands from within and outside for measures to protect the hotel and
help it recover its position. In the words of a Tourist Board report:

Raffles Hotel is quite possibly more famous than Singapore itself . . . What was once one of
the world’s great hotels is now a wasting asset, not providing the impact on visitors that its
name implies. The irony is that the bones of the original building and its gracious spaces
are still there, but they have been clogged with gross and unthinking additions and misused
spaces in order to provide some semblance of quick fit economic viability . . . It is still
possible to return it to its former splendour and make it the national treasure it should
beÐ

the Crown Jewel of the visitor industry in Singapore.6 2

The  statement  reveals  the  combination  of  motives  which  prompted  the  project,
seeing the hotel as an asset to be exploited for economic gain and an historic building
worthy of preservation and restoration to its earlier condition. This dual perspective
underlines  conservation  policies  in  Singapore,  and  it  was  a  combination  of
commercial necessity and conservation pressures which acted together as a catalyst in
the closure of Raffles and its redevelopment.

The Redevelopment of Raffles
The strong commercial orientation of the scheme is suggested by the pattern of hotel
ownership and management. A partnership of owners was formed in which a majority
shareholder was a wholly owned subsidiary of DBS Land, one of Singapore’s largest
property, hotel and healthcare groups. The OCBC and another 100  shareholders
held the remaining stake. A new management company was also set up and has since
become the hotel and resort arm of DBS Land. The bankers participated in early

61. URA, 1997, op. cit. (note 58), p.  3.

62. MTI, op. cit. (note 45), p.  37.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

17

Figure 1. Raffles Hotel front façade. [Courtesy of Raffles Hotel.]

negotiations amongst the interested parties alongside government officials, hoteliers,
architects and designers. Those financing the project would have had considerable
authority and be seeking an adequate return on investment; in such circumstances,
decisions are likely to be made as much on commercial as conservation grounds.

This tension between conservation and development has been acknowledged by
the  then  chief  executive  of  the  management  company  speaking  on  the  topic  of
heritage hotels in general. He describes having to maintain `a delicate balancing act’ .
Also necessary is `the creation of totally new tourism space, within the project site, to
accommodate the requirements of today’s travellers and to make the project viable
. . .  to  create  additional  revenue  flows  through  existing  space  without  negatively
impacting or over-commercialising the original structures and spaces’ .63 The high
costs of prime real-estate sites makes it even more essential to generate income.

The  project  was  led  by  an  executive  director  co-ordinating  a  team  of  fifteen
consultants, including one  for  restoration, who  decided that  the  hotel  should be
returned to what it had been in 1915. This year was chosen as the benchmark because
the `series of major additions and alterations since then had significantly altered the
architectural and spatial character of the hotel’ .64 Sources of information were the
original plans, architect drawings, old photographs, postcards and other memora-
bilia. To achieve the goal, the 1920 ballroom had to be removed and replaced, the bar
and billiard room re-created and the timber staircase repaired. In addition to such
major structural alterations, attention was given to details like decorative plaster work
and marble floor tiles. There was also a new wing built to house shops, restaurants, the
ballroom and Jubilee Hall; the latter is a Victorian-style theatre which seats 400. At the

63. R. Helfer, Branding the Grand Heritage Hotel product, Singapore:  Global Tourism Conference,
1995.

64. URA, 1997, op. cit. (note 58), p.  25.

18

Joan C. Henderson

Figure  2. Raffles Hotel museum.  [Courtesy of Raffles Hotel.]

Figure 3. Raffles Hotel lobby. [Courtesy of Raffles Hotel.]

Conserving Colonial Heritage

19

Figure 4. Raffles Hotel Long  Bar.  [Courtesy of Raffles Hotel.]

same  time,  the  facilities  expected  of  a  luxury  hotel  were  put  in  place,  lifts  and
escalators  installed,  an  underground car  park  constructed and  the  gardens  were
doubled in area and landscaped.

Raffles reopened after two years at the end of 1991, although the development was
not fully completed until early 1992 when it filled almost the entire city block. The
hotel  site  now  has  ninety-six  standard  and  eight  Grand  Hotel  suites,  thirteen
restaurants and bars, over sixty shops, a museum, a Culinary Academy, gardens and
function rooms. It employs 800 staff. On opening, it claimed to fill the three roles of
`international landmark, grand historic hotel and exciting social venue’ .65 The prices
of  accommodation range  from  S$650  (£250)  for  a  Courtyard  Suite  to  S$4,000
(£1,500)  for  a  Grand  Suite.6 6 The  entire  site  was  re-gazetted  as  a  National
Monument in 1995.

In total, the project cost S$160 million (£60 million) and company reports claimed
that the hotel became profitable after one year’s operation. The manager explained
the success as  a combination of  luck, the  strategy  of  promoting the facilities as a
destination for Singapore residents, and timing.67 From modest beginnings in 1965,
when Singapore became an independent republic, the tourism industry experienced
significant growth and arrivals exceeded one million in 1975. Expansion continued in
the 1980s, although at a declining rate, and five million visitors were recorded in 1990
with continued upward movement predicted.68 Raffles thus reopened when tourism
and the economy were very buoyant and was able to take advantage of these trends.

65. Liu, op.  cit. (note 59), p. 191.

66. Raffles Web site,  < http://www.raffles.com > ,  20 May 2000.

67. M. Ng, `Re-inventor of Raffles’, Asia Magazine, 1± 3 May 1998.

68. N. Cockerell, Singapore.  International Tourism Reports Number 1, London: Economist Intelligence
Unit, 1994.

20

Joan C. Henderson

Figure 5. Raffles Hotel swimming  pool. [Courtesy of Raffles Hotel.]

The pattern of international tourism arrivals has since been adversely affected by the
Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s which led to a decline from the peak of over
seven million in the middle of the decade and a postponement of the official target of
ten million arrivals by the new millennium; however, recovery now appears underway
with a return to pre-crisis growth levels.69

Discussion
Raffles Hotel provides an illustration of the difficulties of the relationship between
heritage and tourism and the struggle to reconcile conservation and commerce at
historic sites. In many ways, it can be judged a successful project which effectively
combines  restoration,  reconstruction  and  new  additions.  The  result  is  visually
impressive, adds character to an area of predominantly modern buildings and has
won  awards  from  the  Singapore Institute of Architects  and  the  URA. The  URA
noted that all the historically significant features of Raffles Hotel had been restored
in accordance with its three principles of preservation and conservation; these are
maximum retention, sensitive restoration and careful repair.70 Additional work was
also well integrated in terms of height, scale, the rhythm of solids and voids and roof
details.71

There is also no doubt about  its  appeal to tourists, and it  continues to  feature
extensively  in promotion material as  a  representation of  Singapore. Although the
market  for  accommodation  may  be  limited  by  cost,  the  shopping  arcades,
restaurants  and  grounds are  always  busy  with  sightseers. Tourism has  saved  the
property, which might otherwise have disappeared, and it is now a facility for both

69. Travel Business Analyst, Asia, Travel Measurements, July  2000.

70. URA, 1993, op. cit. (note 55).

71. URA, 1997, op. cit. (note 58).

Conserving Colonial Heritage

21

tourists  and  residents,  the  latter  reported  to  contribute  about  65%  of  hotel
restaurant income.7 2 Recognition of success by the travel industry is confirmed by
the numerous accolades received since reopening.

Nevertheless, the buildings might be criticised for offering as authentic that which
is fake. Powell7 3 writes of `additions which are indistinguishable from the original.
It  is  difficult  to  know  when  one  is  in  the  Raffles  Hotel  which  existed  prior  to
restoration, and what is a replication of the original. Does this distort history?’  Such
questions  of  authenticity  and  integrity  in  tourism  have  generated  considerable
interest7 4 since MacCannell75 identified the concept of staged authenticity. Wang76
describes  the  three  forms  of:  objective  authenticity  applying  to  that  which  is
original,  constructive  authenticity  projected  on  to  objects  by  tourists  and  the
tourism industry and existential authenticity derived from the  tourist experience.
Constructive and existential authenticity are increasingly dominant and the notion
of actual or objective authenticity has begun to disappear in a post-modern world of
tourism that centres on images, simulacra and idealised representations. Authentic-
ity is no longer fixed, but the subject of negotiation77 and constant reinterpretation.
Issues about agency also arise78 and loss of local control, although Adams79 claims
that  residents  may  assert  some  influence  against  the  power  of  international
tourism.

Another concern is the priority allocated to making an historic property pay, and
the manner in which the past is exploited in the hotel’s marketing, souvenirs on sale
and museum. Raffles Hotel is presented in the context of colonial society and its
values,  and  nostalgia  for  this  era  is  constantly  evoked,  especially  the  1920s  and
1930s which are generally accepted as its heyday. Connections with literary figures
like Somerset Maugham are emphasised, such personalities clearly belonging to a
Western  and  not  an  Asian  culture.  A  very  partial  view  of  history  is  thus

72. Ng, op. cit. (note 67).

73. Powell, op. cit. (note 25), p.  27.

74. E. Cohen, `Rethinking  the sociology of tourism’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 6, 1979, pp.
18± 35; P.L. Pearce & G. Moscardo, `The concept of authenticity in tourist experiences’, Australian
and  New Zealand  Journal of Sociology, Vol.  22, 1986, pp.  121± 132; T. Selwyn, The tourist image: myth
and  myth making in tourism, Chichester: John Wiley, 1996.

75. D. MacCannell, `Staged authenticity: arrangements of social space in tourist settings’, American
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 79, No. 3, 1973, pp.  589± 603.

76. N. Wang, `Rethinking authenticity in tourism experience’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 26, No.
2, 1999, pp.  349± 370.

77. Waitt, op.  cit. (note 18) p. 838.

78. E.M. Bruner, `Abraham  Lincoln as authentic reproduction: a critique of postmodernism’ ,
American Anthropologist, Vol. 96, 1994, pp.  397± 425.

79. K. Adams, `Taming traditions: Torajan ethnicity in the age of tourism’ , in J. Forshee, C. Fink &
S. Cate (eds) Converging interests:  traders, travelers and tourists in Southeast Asia, Berkeley: University of
California, 2000.

22

Joan C. Henderson

communicated, supporting Teo and Huang’s claim that the building belongs to the
heritage of colonial rulers with which there is little identification amongst residents,
creating a landscape `described as elitist and removed from the lived experiences of
the locals’ .80 Peleggi81 sums up the refurbishment as `a matter of private enterprise
. . . astutely marketed as the recovery of a major asset of Singapore’s heritage’ .

Marketing  activity  to  sell  the  hotel’s  facilities  and  services  are  part  of  wider
destination promotion efforts which have become critical in the highly competitive
international  tourism  industry.8 2 Much  attention  is  devoted  to  establishing  and
manipulating  image83 in  pursuit  of  favourable  associations  which  encourage
visitation.  Commercially,  Raffles  Hotel  possesses  the  advantage  of  a  strong  and
recognisable image grounded in nostalgia for the past, and its status as a tourist icon
has already been noted.

The  value  of  this  high  awareness is  reflected  in  the  fact  that  Raffles  is  now  a
product to be sold globally. The management company is Singapore’s largest limited
hotel  group  with  a  market  capitalisation  of  S$1.77  billion  (£664  million)  and
responsible for a series of hotels under the Raffles brand which include the Hotel
Vier Jahreszeiten in Hamburg, the Hotel Le Royal in Phnom Penh and Grand Hotel
d’Angkor in Siem Reap (both in Cambodia) and Brown’s Hotel in London. All the
properties are seen as heritage hotels with a history and distinct personality to be
maintained,  but  also  used  economically.  In  the  words  of  the  company,  they
`represent  strategic  investments  offering  a  solid  platform  to  extend  this  master
branding as well as enhance geographical spread’ .84

Another illustration of an historic property becoming a recognisable hotel brand
is  that  of  Reid’s  Palace  Hotel  in  Madeira  founded  in  1891  and  now  owned  by
Orient-Express  Hotels. There  are  also  some  similarities  with  the  franchising  of
catering legends such as Harry Ramsden’s fish and chip restaurants, modelled on
the original Yorkshire restaurant first opened in 1928, now found in Dublin, Hong
Kong and Singapore. In addition, branding in tourism is increasingly being applied
to  destinations  as  a  whole,85 although  the  process  has  attracted  criticisms  of

80. P. Teo & S. Huang, `Tourism and heritage conservation in Singapore’ , Annals of Tourism Research,
Vol.  22, No. 1, 1995, pp.  589± 615, p. 595.

81. M. Peleggi, `National heritage and global  tourism in Thailand’, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.
23, No.  2, 1996, pp.  432± 448, p.  444.

82. G. Ashworth & B.  Goodall (eds) Marketing tourism places, London: Routledge, 1996; S.V. Ward,
Selling  places: the marketing and promotion of towns  and cities 1850± 2000, London: Routledge, 1998.

83. K.S. Chon, `The role of destination image in tourism: an extension’ , Tourist Review, Vol. 47, No.
1, 1992, pp.  2± 8; J.D. Hunt, `Image as a factor in tourism development’, Journal of Travel Research,
Vol.  13, No. 3, 1975, pp.  1± 7.

84. Personal communication,  1997.

85. W.C. Gartner, `Image formation process’, Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, Vol. 2, No. 3,
1993, pp.  191± 215.

Conserving Colonial Heritage

23

attempts  to  redefine  place  identity  for  ideological  reasons86 and  the  dangers  of
commodification for tourist consumption.87

Conclusion
Much  of  the  colonial  built  heritage  of  Singapore  survives  through  conservation
efforts  fuelled by  a  combination of  political,  social  and  economic motivations  in
which tourism plays a significant role, but it would appear that this urban landscape
is  no  longer  closely  associated  with  British  rule.  Currently,  many  buildings  are
occupied  by  the  Singapore  government  and  represent  national  authority  while
others continue to function as religious institutions or are now museums. They have
also become commercial opportunities, such as Raffles Hotel and its transformation
into a modern leisure/lifestyle attraction designed for tourists and a wider market of
residents. It remains rooted in the past and retains a quality of exclusivity, but this
is dictated by affordability rather than power relations within colonial society, and
public areas are open to all. Together, the buildings are seen as repositories of the
country’s heritage and landmarks in the story of Singapore’s history.

However, the increasingly popular technique of adapting buildings for contempo-
rary usage has generated some confusion about the meanings of conservation and
the outcome of implementation. It is important to distinguish between terms and
activities  such  as  preservation,  restoration,  reconstruction and  adaptive  reuse or
rehabilitation in order to maintain the integrity of the site and avoid misunderstand-
ings about authenticity which can devalue the visitor experience. At the same time,
economic imperatives have  to  be  acknowledged and efforts made to render these
compatible  with  conservation  interests; this  is  a  major  challenge  facing  all  those
involved in heritage tourism. Analysis of the case of Singapore, and Raffles Hotel in
particular,  indicates  one  possible approach  to  meeting this  challenge,  suggesting
both its successes and limitations.

Returning finally  to  the  criticisms of  tourism as  colonisation by  another  name
which  perpetuates  unequal  and  inequitable  relations,  such  theories  are  not
necessarily supported by  the  circumstances of  Singapore. Here, colonial heritage
has been claimed by government and the resident population and is being employed
by them to define and assert national identity, to attract tourists and for pragmatic
reasons of practical necessity. The relationship is no longer one of subservience and
perhaps  has  become  that  of  partnership  in  the  global  economy  and  tourism
industry. However, further research is necessary into tourist and resident attitudes
towards colonial heritage, their experiences of it and its management and marketing
to allow a better understanding of these distinctive cultural landscapes.

86. J. Gnoth, `Branding tourist destinations’, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 25, No. 3, 1998, pp.
758± 760; Morgan & Pritchard, op. cit. (note 5).

87. D. Tyler, Y.  Guerrier & M. Robertson (eds) Managing Tourism in Cities, Chichester: John Wiley,
1998.

24

Joan C. Henderson


