International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Regarding the Zoo: On the Deployment of a
Metaphor

Kathryn Denning

To cite this article: Kathryn Denning (2008) Regarding the Zoo: On the Deployment of a Metaphor,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14:1, 60-73, DOI: 10.1080/13527250701712372
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250701712372

Published online: 30 Nov 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 335

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 14, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 60–73

Regarding the Zoo: On the 
Deployment of a Metaphor
Kathryn Denning

141000000January 2008
Dr KathrynDenning
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_271134.sgm
10.1080/13527250701712372
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

kdenning@yorku.caOnce upon a time, the zoo-goer’s vision of ferocious animals was half obscured by heavy
bars. Designed partly for the purpose of physical containment, and partly for the purpose
of symbolic subjugation, the cage had a fearsome presence of its own. In contrast, recent zoo
design has focused upon minimising the visual presence of the cage as much as possible, and
pretended, in fact, that it is not there at all. However, a cage is still a cage. There is a funda-
mental problem in captivity that defies aesthetic transformation. Clarity about captivity is
essential to the humane transformation of zoos, and related institutions like museums, too.
But can we still see captivity clearly for what it is? The multifaceted deployment of the
metaphor of ‘the zoo’ by the media during the initial stages of the Iraq War suggests that
such clarity is difficult to achieve, and perhaps becoming more so.

Keywords: Zoo; War; Iraq; Representation; Captivity; Heritage

Preliminaries

‘In addressing you on the subject of animals,’ she continues, ‘I will pay you the honor
of skipping a recital of the horrors of their lives and deaths. Though I have no reason
to believe that you have at the forefront of your minds what is being done to animals
at this moment in production facilities (I hesitate to call them farms any longer), in
abattoirs, in trawlers, in laboratories, all over the world, I will take it that you concede
me the rhetorical power to evoke these horrors and bring them home to you with
adequate force, and leave it at that, reminding you only that the horrors I here omit
are nevertheless at the center of this lecture.’ (Fictional novelist Elizabeth Costello, in
J. M. Coetzee’s The Lives of Animals, 19)

At  the  centre  of  this  paper  is  a  similar  litany  of  horrors,  which  I  will,  with  minor
exceptions, elide for your sake and mine. I ask, however, that you, dear reader, keep in

Kathryn Denning, York University. Correspondence to: kdenning@yorku.ca

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701712372

International Journal of Heritage Studies

61

mind something which you already know: that in zoos around the world, many animals
are suffering because of human beliefs, preferences, and actions.

This reminder is not intended as a condemnation of all zoos, or those who run them.
Far from it: after all, many people are spending their lifetimes making zoos vastly better
than they once were. Rather, my intent is to consider how we can continue to construc-
tively transform institutions and practices which originated long ago in the service of
multiple goals, some of which we no longer condone. The projects of decolonisation
are difficult, particularly so when dealing with the legacies of long-lived institutions.

Naturally, some zoos are much better than others at caring for animals. About the
bad ones there is not much to be said, except that there is much work to do, and those
who are trying their best to do it, and need support. About the better ones, however,
we become complacent only at our peril, for there is still something violent at their
centre: captivity. In steadily-improving zoos, this violence persists, but is made harder
to see by the very same processes of transformation which are making those institutions
better; those transformations make the intrinsic violence of custody and display more
palatable, more subtle, and less visible.

It is for such reasons that when considering the future of natural heritage, and zoos
in  particular,  we  also  need  to  look  closely  at  how  such  institutions  are  seen  and
understood today.

Captivity, Heritage, Zoos … and Museums Too

Some contributions to this special issue focus on zoos’ physical landscapes, and/or how
zoos  express  ideas  through  materiality.  Here,  I  look  instead  at  the  ideological  and
cultural landscapes in which zoos are situated. But before we proceed, a brief digression
is warranted: it is worth noting that these landscapes are shared by museums.

Zoos and museums are complex entities with a host of motivations and rationales.
Many of these are culturally specific, but others are standard manifestations of colo-
nialism. There isn’t a direct one-to-one correlation between each aspect of the zoo and
the museum; however, there is a strong analogy in that they share historical and devel-
opmental connections,1 and they face similar challenges today as public institutions.
There is also a shared problem at their core—i.e. the problem of captivity. In their land-
mark book Zoo Culture, Mullan and Marvin conclude that the zoo is fundamentally
about  captivity  and  domination—‘an  expression  of  power’.2  It  is  increasingly
suspected  by  many  scholars  that  museums  have  long  performed  a  similar  function.
There  is  also  a  great  deal  of  scholarship,  in  both  arenas,  about  the  ways  in  which
displays  and  their  subjects  interact;  just  as  museums  and  artefacts  are  mutually
constitutive, the wild animal and the cage define each other.3 Thus, it seems that an
examination of zoos and animals today could laterally inform broader inquiries into
contemporary heritage practices involving museums and material culture.

One  question  well  worth  asking  is  this:  what  is  generally  understood  about  the
nature of captivity, i.e. by those who go to and thus sustain the zoo, rather than by those
who create and maintain these institutions? One way to answer is through zoo visitor
studies.4 Another is to examine representations of the zoo in the media.

62 K. Denning

Taking the latter approach, this paper begins to address this question through one
small window: portrayals of zoos in the English-speaking mass media during the early
days of the Iraq War.

The Zoo and War: Version 2003

A Moment in Time

My remarks here are based on an examination of media coverage during the first several
months of the war in Iraq, which began with American missile strikes on 20 March 2003.
Currently, this is generally referred to as the ‘Iraq War’; however, it may be seen as one
chapter in a much longer conflict in the Persian Gulf. The Iraq War was considered by
some to be essentially over within weeks of the first strikes, as ‘major combat operations’
were declared to have ceased at the beginning of May 2003, after the fall of Baghdad.5
However, as I complete revisions in spring 2007, the conflict continues.6

My references to Iraq are primarily restricted to a window of several months in 2003,

for two reasons.

First,  my  aim  is  solely  to  problematise  zoos  within  contemporary  references  to
captivity and liberty in wartime; the enormity of the Iraq conflict itself defies a compre-
hensive  analysis.  Amongst  other  things,  a  longer  interval  and  larger  frame  would
require a close examination of the Guantanamo Bay detention centre, and 2004’s reve-
lations of prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib prison, with its shocking intersection of captiv-
ity, power, humans, animals, cages, and media coverage.7 These are important subjects,
but cannot be done justice here. 

Second, there is particular utility in the stories about Iraq’s zoos in those initial stages
of the war because at that time the public in America, Britain, and elsewhere were form-
ing their understanding of the invasion and occupation of Iraq.

In  selecting  news  stories  for  examination,  my  methodology  was  simple;  I  used
Google News (http://news.google.com/), a version of the Google search engine that, at
that time, could search 4,500 news sources worldwide simultaneously. This enabled me
to see how the coverage of the zoos in Iraq unfolded and spread around the world, and
also to see instances in which the word ‘zoo’ cropped up in a metaphorical sense.8

Media Coverage of the Iraq War

Media coverage of the Iraq War has been the subject of much discussion, concerning
both  form—such  as  ‘embedded’  journalism,  real-time  television  coverage,  and
online  ‘warblogs’  from  those  inside  the  conflict9—and  content.  Of  the  latter,  it
seems scarcely necessary to state that there has been public manipulation and spin-
doctoring in the news media during the conflict. It would be surprising if there had
not,  given  the  historical  role  of  media  in  wartime,  both  in  the  service  of  govern-
ments  and  in  critique  of  them.10  In  2004–2006  much  attention  was  paid  to  the
American  media’s  role  in  garnering  public  support  through  repetition  of  justifica-
tions  for  the  invasion  of  Iraq, particularly  claims  regarding  Iraqi  weapons  of  mass

International Journal of Heritage Studies

63

destruction,  and  Iraq’s  connections  to  Al  Qaeda  and  9/11—claims  which  are  now
generally  regarded  to  have  been  at  best  unsubstantiated,  and  at  worst  fabricated.11
Early  in  the  war,  questions  regarding  the  invasion’s  ‘legitimacy  and  legality’  were
abundant,12  and  attempts  were  made  to  cast  the  conflict  as  a  ‘humanitarian  inter-
vention’—as  Bellamy  has  noted,  ‘[t]he  2003  war  in  Iraq  is  important  because  it
represents the first time a group of intervening states have justified their actions by
referring  to  the  humanitarian  outcomes  that  were  produced  by  acts  primarily
motivated by non-humanitarian concerns’.13

Each of these issues is, of course, important in its own right. However, for my limited
purposes here, this is primarily context, which reminds us that media coverage in war
both mirrors and influences public opinion, and that the Iraq conflict in particular has
been a locus for intense debate about, amongst other issues, freedom and how best to
ensure it.

Attempting to use media sources to piece together exactly what really happened at
any time or place in Iraq is surely futile; by such means, we can only ever achieve a
partial  picture  of  events.  However,  even  a  limited  exploration  of  the  news  coverage
concerning the zoos of Iraq may help with seeing the way that zoos are understood
today, at the most abstract level. The coverage of Iraq’s zoos during the war has been,
arguably, both refracted through and constitutive of popular notions of captivity and
liberty in Western, particularly American, society.

For comparison, we might look to the much-publicised, iconic image of the statue
of Saddam Hussein being toppled in April 2003. This was certainly symbolic of the
toppling of Hussein’s regime, though he himself was not yet in custody, but more than
that, the image substantially influenced subsequent war coverage, public opinion and
perhaps even later events. Aday et al. argue that this image explicitly reinforced the
construction  of  the  invading  American  and  British  forces  as  liberators,  improved
George W. Bush’s approval ratings, and consolidated public opinion that the war was
all but over. Furthermore, both the occurrence of such an event, and the use of such an
image, were essentially predictable.14

Whether or not the coverage of Iraq’s zoos had a similar effect is a matter for further
study; however, events and their representation were also disconcertingly predictable.
Given the previous war-ravaged zoos of Kuwait, Kabul and Belgrade,15 and the advance
warning that the museums and zoos of Baghdad would be vulnerable, one could easily
have  anticipated  the  broad  contours  of  what  would  turn  up  in  the  media  about
Baghdad’s zoo: coverage of the plight of suffering animals, a plea to the public for help,
and foreign teams sent in to save the animals and the zoo. And indeed this is what
transpired, with the addition of the zoo being looted, animals being stolen, eaten, and
sold, and American forces being represented as liberators and caretakers who stepped
in to protect the helpless animals abandoned by the Iraqis themselves. The news was,
to put it mildly, rhetorically rich.

Three themes in particular are worthy of comment: first, the rhetorical uses of the
zoo in the Iraq coverage; second, the contrast between depictions of Baghdad’s big cats
and  those  kept  in  America;  and  third,  the  concrete  consequences  for  the  captives
themselves of linguistic games and situational views of captivity.

64 K. Denning

How was ‘The Zoo’ Used in the Iraq War Coverage?

In the news coverage, the following themes and subthemes were particularly prevalent:
zoo as representative of the nation, zoo as degrading, and zoo as normality.

Zoo as Representative of the Invaded Nation

This metonymy, whereby Baghdad’s zoo was used to stand for Iraq itself, took several
notable forms: 

● Zoo  as  impoverished  due  to  the  nation’s  marginalised  place  in  the  international
community. References were made to the deprivation of Baghdad’s zoo under the
UN sanctions against Iraq.16

● Zoo as battleground/scene of destruction, pillage, and death. There was literal truth to
this in the case of Baghdad, as fire was exchanged on the main zoo site, animals were
stolen, eaten, and sold, and the zoo architecture was extensively damaged.17

● Zoo as locus of liberation: the initial interventions of US soldiers at the zoo—once
the first fighting stopped—were told in the classic ‘rescue’ trope. For example, in
June 2003, a piece intended to help The Mirror raise funds for animal rescue efforts
noted of the zoo animals that ‘Their sadistic masters are long gone but, unlike the
people of Iraq, these prisoners of Saddam Hussein’s cruel regime are still awaiting
liberation.’18

● Zoo as symbol of recovery. The post-invasion stabilisation of Baghdad Zoo—a very
popular topic in the media—was at times portrayed as part of the general post-war
reconstruction  of  Iraq,  in  a  quite  literal  way.19  A  deputy  to  Jay  Garner,  then  in
charge of the post-war reconstruction of Iraq, actually said that efforts to restore the
zoo were ‘a metaphor for the kind of effort we are hoping to succeed in’. It is no
wonder that American officials specifically invited the media to come and see it.20
● Zoo as evidence of backwardness and the necessity of external intervention. Although
the Baghdad Zoo was not particularly old, its architecture was of the traditional zoo
style, with bars, small cages, and cement floors. Many zoos in the Western world are
still like this but, nonetheless, the need for ‘modernising’ the zoo (or is that civilising
the zoo?) was repeatedly invoked as a reason for the intervention of foreign teams.
For example: ‘This is an 18th century zoo … We need to plug this zoo into the inter-
national family of zoos, with exchange programs and financing.’21

Zoo as Degrading

The zoo metaphor was used repeatedly to describe the plight of the Iraqi people. For
example,  Voices  from  Baghdad,  a  film  by  an  Iraqi  filmmaker,  used  the  metaphor  to
suggest  that  Iraqis  have  been  treated  like  animals.  His  film  ‘juxtaposes  shots  of  zoo
animals with images of people—children hanging from the bars of a cage, inmates of
an insane asylum, blank stares mediated by barred windows.’ Similarly, the distribu-
tion of food aid to Iraqi people from the backs of lorries was likened to ‘a keeper feeding
animals at a zoo.’22

International Journal of Heritage Studies

65

Captured soldiers were described as being kept in zoos. The treatment of American
POWs—i.e.  being  shown  on  Iraqi  television—was  characterised  as  contrary  to  the
Geneva Convention, and likened in the American media to the display of animals in
the  zoo.  An  American  Gulf  War  veteran  described  his  POW  camp  as  a  ‘zoo’.
Conversely,  an  American  officer  said  of  Iraqi  detainees:  ‘They  must  feel  like  zoo
animals. Everybody coming by for a look.’23

Finally,  the  idea  of  the  zoo  was  used  as  the  ultimate  expression  of  contempt  and
conquest. It was widely reported in the American media that an Iraqi resident of the
USA suggested that members of Hussein’s regime should be displayed like zoo animals:
‘Don’t kill them. Put them in cages in a zoo. And then we can use the admissions fees
to rebuild Iraq.’24

Zoo as Normality away from the War Zone

The zoo was also used as a symbol of the good and normal life in a free society. Back in
the  USA,  zoos  were  considered  as  places  to  forget  about  the  war—places  of  safety,
childhood, order, civility, socialization, and escape to the exotic (but not too exotic,
since that is where the war is). For example, the Pittsburgh Zoo had extremely high visi-
tor  attendance  in  late  March  (good  weather?),  American  people  enjoyed  their  local
zoos as a distraction, and a special support team for families of American soldiers orga-
nized trips to a Kansas zoo: ‘Anything to take their minds off of what’s going on.’25 This
coverage  also  had  explicit  associations  with  nuclear  families  and  positive  paternal
behaviour. Dead American soldiers were described in eulogies as good family men who
would take their children to the zoo.

There are other zoo-war connections, but these are the main ones pertinent to this
conflict. Immediately obvious, and important, are the simultaneously strongly positive
and strongly negative associations of the zoo. At the very moment when captivity in a
zoo was being acknowledged as the epitome of degradation, Americans at home were
going to the zoo as a form of pleasant escape with their children. This bespeaks a profound
disconnection: the violence of captivity and display is openly recognised, and yet, in some
contexts, and for some beings, it is seen as appropriate and even positive. Also of key
interest here is the ‘right’ of some to keep others in captivity: there was the distinct impli-
cation in some of the coverage that the Iraqis had failed in their responsibilities to the
animals in their custody. This brings us to the subject of rightful/responsible care and
custody of animals in captivity. How was this subject addressed in the media in 2003?

Case Study: Big Cats in Baghdad and America

Much was made of the big cats of Baghdad, both in the main Baghdad Zoo (Saddam
Hussein  Parkin)  and  in  the  private  menagerie  of  Uday  Hussein,  Saddam’s  son.
Because  of  this  abundant  coverage,  in  2003,  the  general  news-watching  wildlife-
interested public in the West probably knew a great deal more about the plight of big
cats in Baghdad than of any other lion or tiger since Marjan, the besieged and trauma-

66 K. Denning

tised one-eyed lion of Kabul. And indeed, the situation of lions and tigers in Iraq was
not good.

After  the  arrival  of  US  troops  at  the  abandoned  and  looted  Baghdad  Zoo,  three
lionesses and one lion were shot by US soldiers when the starving animals escaped and
charged them. The same report indicates that then, there were two tigers and three
lions left at the Baghdad Zoo. They were subsequently cared for by US Special Forces
and foreign zoo personnel.26

There was also the widely publicised discovery by American soldiers of the lions,
tigers, and cheetahs from Uday Hussein’s private menagerie at the presidential palace
complex. Like those at the Baghdad Zoo, these animals were hungry and abandoned,
and the soldiers fed them to the best of their ability with their own army rations, but
their condition remained terrible and much-dramatised in news reports.27 Amazingly,
one lioness had six cubs. Subsequently, there was discussion of releasing these lions into
the wild in Africa, but it seems that in the end, they were merely transferred to the main
Baghdad Zoo.28

These  events  certainly  warranted  ‘zoo-interest  stories’,  and,  indeed,  there  were
frequent updates from zoo personnel and animal welfare specialists who were working
to stabilise the animals, and modernise the zoo—or perhaps ‘civilise’ it. (I do not mean
to  disparage  these  brave  individuals’  efforts  to  care  for  the  animals  in  very  difficult
conditions, but to remark on the media’s use of their stories.)29

Overall,  the  abundant  news  coverage  gave  the  impression  of  big  cats  in  a
desperate  condition,  kept  in  inhumane  conditions,  suffering  in  ways  possible  only
in  a  war  zone,  having  been  abused  by  the  local  populace  and  abandoned  by  those
responsible  for  them,  and  then  being  rescued  from  deprivation  and  given  a  chance
of  a  better  life  by  the  occupying  American  forces  and  the  later  Western  relief
teams.  There  was  also  the  general  insinuation  that  the  private  menagerie  was  a
militaristic  oriental  decadence,  along  with  Uday’s  ‘harem’,  weaponry,  and  fast  cars.
There  was,  unsurprisingly,  a  clear  metanarrative  of  zoo  animals  being  liberated
from  oppression.  The  undertones  of  a  ‘clash  of  civilizations’—or  perhaps  a  clash
of  the  less  civilised  and  more  civilised—were  also  distinctly  present.  Certainly  the
animals  were  portrayed  as  suffering  and  needing  Westerners’  help,  and  the
question  of  how  they  got  that  way  tended  to  be  glossed  over.  The  parallels  with
Iraqi civilians are obvious.

These stories of Baghdad’s big cats may be quite true,30 but there are other stories to
be told, too. A comparative comment is warranted here on the subject of big cats in
captivity.

As these events were unfolding in Iraq, back in the USA new legislation was tabled to
combat the rapidly expanding trade in exotic pet cats. A news brief from the American
Zoo and Aquarium Association read: 

This legislation takes aim at the dramatic increase in the number of unregulated and
untrained individuals who are maintaining large wild felids as personal pets. Accord-
ing to most estimates, there are between 5,000 to 10,000 tigers in private hands as pets
in the United States—more than there are in their native habitats throughout Asia. In
addition, there are hundreds, and possibly thousands, of lions, cougars, and other big

International Journal of Heritage Studies

67

cats being kept as pets in small cages, on tethers in backyards, holed up in garages, and
even living in people’s homes.31

The  same  news  brief  noted  that  in  the  USA  only  12  states  had  full  bans  on  private
ownership of exotic big cats, tiger cubs could be purchased for as little as $300, and at
least nine people had recently died after big cat attacks. In 2002, it was estimated that
there were 4,000 pet tigers in Texas alone, i.e. more than in their natural habitat in
India.32 One wildlife rehabilitator commented on the increase in big cats (primarily
tigers, lions, cougars, leopards) at rescue centres in the USA: ‘These animals are bred
for  profit.  There’s  no  conservation,  preservation,  [or]  reintroduction.  People  who
claim to be educating people on the plight of the tigers … it’s pure malarkey … [this]
is the very tip of the iceberg of constant breeding for profit of large cats.’ Lion and
tiger cubs bought by private individuals for their adorability end up growing too big
for  the  house,  and  typically  end  up  confined  in  small  cages  in  back  yards,  with  ‘no
exercise or companionship, substandard food’, and grim prospects. In spring 2002, it
was  reported  by  a  World  Conservation  Union  publication  that  tigers  are  being
slaughtered in the USA for their skins and body parts; several court convictions have
been obtained.33

Even in rescue centres, the animals may not be safe. In May 2003, 90 dead tigers and
other large cats—including 58 cubs in freezers—were found at an exotic cat shelter in
California. Sixteen felony charges of animal cruelty were laid against the operators, not
because of the dead animals but because of the pitiful condition of the living animals,
including two adult tigers that had to be euthanised, not to mention nine tiger cubs and
two  leopard  cubs  that  were  being  kept  in  an  attic.  Many  of  the  animals  came  from
circuses or other entertainment industries.34

In New Jersey, in spring 2003, a woman who owned 24 tigers was before the courts
because  her  compound  was  determined  to  be  substandard.  The  tigers  were  to  be
shipped to Texas.35 But Texas may not have provided a safe haven; also in May 2003, a
small  zoo  in  Atlantic  City  accepted  a  tiger  in  precarious  condition  that  had  been
rescued from a tiger facility in Texas—the fourth tiger saved from the same facility.36
The stories of big cats and America are myriad, but one more is particularly worth a
mention  here.  In  spring  2001  Botswana  banned  the  hunting  of  lions,  forgoing  the
$30,000 per head permit fee often paid by American, European, and Japanese hunters.
The reason for the ban was the recent two-thirds decline in the wild lion population,
and the impact of hunting, which is worsened by the fact that hunters greatly prefer
mature, fully maned alpha males, which are key in pride organisation. The response of
Safari  Club  International  (SCI),  an  American  organisation  and  the  largest  hunting
organisation in the world, was to ask the Botswana government to lift that ban. The
alpha males in SCI who signed that request included: George Bush Sr, Dan Quayle, and
Rt. General Norman Schwarzkopf. Their request was denied.37

These examples make it abundantly clear that the story of Baghdad’s lions, tigers,
and cheetahs was only a small part of the picture for big cats in captivity in the spring
of 2003. It is perhaps unsurprising that these ‘foreign’ animals became characters in
wartime propaganda, but the stark duality of the ‘zoo interest story’ and the everyday
predicament of captive animals at home is remarkable nonetheless.

68 K. Denning

Consequences

Why so much coverage of the Baghdad zoos, compared to say, the hunger of big cats at
a Chinese zoo suffering the financial consequences of SARS in 2003?38 Or compared to
the death of hundreds of animals at the St. Petersburg Zoo—including ‘all of the zoo’s
amphibians … 167 birds and nine mammals’—due to mismanagement and a lack of
heat over the winter of 2002–2003?39 Or the American cases mentioned above?

None of these ‘animal-interest’ stories—which were roughly contemporary to the
early stages of the Iraq War—received the same quantity of coverage as the tales of
Baghdad’s big cats. Notably, they paint an equally grim picture of big cats in private
hands in the USA—or perhaps grimmer, considering the scale of the problem. But the
plight of tigers in America is portrayed in the media as a consequence of the failure of
the legal system, and of individual ethics, rather than a failure of the society itself, which
was the clear insinuation regarding the cats in Iraq. Similarly, within the USA, the luck-
ier tigers are rescued from mismanagement, not liberated from oppression. These are
stunning contrasts, which certainly beg questions not only about the choices made by
the  media  during  war  but  also  about  public  understandings  of  power,  liberty,  and
captivity, on more than one level.

As  Aday  and  co-workers  and  others  have  noted,  media  coverage  can  have  real
consequences in war, shaping public opinion and subsequent events.40 It seems likely
that the rhetorical deployment of the Baghdad zoos helped to frame the invasion of
Iraq  as  a  humanitarian  intervention.  But  there  may  be  additional  consequences  of
such coverage.

Photographs and stories about the suffering of others are a draw; the media choose
stories that will hold their readers’ interest, and too often these are stories of suffering.
Susan Sontag is eloquent on this point in her 2003 book, Regarding the Pain of Others.
But what of the effects of such depictions? John Berger describes some of these powerfully
in his essay ‘Photographs of Agony’, in reference to Vietnam: 

The truth is that any response to that photographed moment is bound to be felt as
inadequate  …  The  possible  contradictions  of  the  war  photograph  now  become
apparent.  It  is  generally  assumed  that  its  purpose  is  to  awaken  concern.  The  most
extreme  examples  …  show  moments  of  agony  in  order  to  extort  the  maximum
concern. Such moments, whether photographed or not, are discontinuous with all
other moments. They exist by themselves. But the reader who has been arrested by the
photograph may tend to feel this discontinuity as his own personal moral inadequacy.
And as soon as this happens even his sense of shock is dispersed: his own moral inade-
quacy may now shock him as much as the crimes being committed in the war. Either
he shrugs off this sense of inadequacy as being only too familiar, or else he thinks of
performing  a  kind  of  penance—of  which  the  purest  example  would  be  to  make  a
contribution to OXFAM or to UNICEF.41

Or, perhaps, to one of the funds set up to assist the Baghdad Zoo. Berger goes on to
describe how effectively war photographs actually depoliticise war: ‘In both cases, the
issue of the war which has caused that moment is effectively depoliticized. The picture
becomes  evidence  of  the  general  human  condition.  It  accuses  nobody  and  every-
body.’42 It is a similar point to the one Berger made about looking at animals in a zoo:

International Journal of Heritage Studies

69

that  the  zoo  animal  has  ‘been  rendered  absolutely  marginal’—so  much  so  that  we
cannot really see it anymore.43

Further, the rhetorical use of the zoo or a zoo animal as a symbol of something else—
whether  a  nation,  conquest,  responsible  care,  or  social  order—contributes  to  an
incredible imprecision about captivity. How can one possibly see any zoo clearly, when
‘the zoo’ is so carefully manipulated, so deeply invested with political significance and
other meanings?

Conclusion: Regarding the Zoo

Implications are myriad. As I complete revisions on this paper in May 2007 the war in
Iraq is much-debated, and American support for it is steadily waning. ‘Zoo interest
stories’ have long since been replaced with grave concern over a conflict, arguably a
civil  war,  that  shows  little  sign  of  abating.  In  light  of  the  scale  of  human  suffering
involved, it seems, perhaps, trivial to bring this discussion back to the abstract issues of
heritage and zoos. But these are all connected. In wars, zoos, and museums alike, the
pivotal questions are these: who is entitled to keep whom, or what, captive? Why may
they do so? And under what circumstances may they do so? Understandings from one
realm thus reverberate into the others.

As  custodians  of  some  of  Earth’s  natural  heritage,  zoos  today  occupy  a  difficult
space. They are faced with the logistical challenges of caring for their animal charges,
generating enough revenue or obtaining enough funding to continue operating, and
achieving assortments of goals, including public education, entertainment, breeding,
conservation, and research. Many are undertaking the unenviable task of transforming
themselves  from  the  simple  spectacles  they  once  were—or,  indeed,  as  some  have
argued,  the  essentially  pornographic  zoöpticons44—into  21st-century  institutions
which help teach new values about the natural world.

Doing this successfully, I submit, requires clarity about captivity—not just on the
part of those who design and run the zoos, but the public too. Even if societies decide
that captivity of some animals is acceptable because of the greater goals served, it is
imperative to know it, always, for what it is. And it is of this, I believe, that we are losing
sight. The captivity of the zoo animal was once foregrounded, and perhaps, in a way,
the bars of the menagerie cage interested the observer as much as the animal behind
them did. In many modern zoos, however, the captivity of the animal is increasingly
obscured, and all but denied, through artful enclosure design and invisible barriers.
The reasons for and effects of this are surely myriad—a better view, a more vivid or
spiritual encounter45—but is it truly possible to keep insisting that captivity be humane
when we cannot see it anymore? And, as the coverage of Iraq’s zoos requires us to ask,
is it possible to know captivity for what it is, when the metaphor of ‘the zoo’ and real
zoos are deployed by the media to serve political ends of enormous proportions?

Marc Augé observes in The War of Dreams that humanity’s ‘relationship with the real’
is being transformed for the worse, through the colonisation of society by representa-
tions, and the invasion of our consciousness by media images. In this way, he diagnoses,
now ‘the enemy is within us … Our sickness is auto-immune, our war is civil.’46

70 K. Denning

And so it is that both wars continue.

Acknowledgements

A  version  of  this  paper  was  presented  at  the  World  Archaeological  Congress  in
Washington, DC, in 2003, as part of the WAC theme ‘Landscapes, Gardens, and Dream-
scapes’, organised by Mark Leone and Felipe Criado Boado, and, more specifically, part
of the session named ‘The Archaeology of Zoos’. Thanks to session participants for their
feedback. I am grateful to two anonymous reviewers and to this special issue’s editor,
Cornelius Holtorf, for their perceptive comments. My heartfelt thanks also go to Mark
Knackstedt for the ongoing discussion about truth and power and the media, to the
Archaeology of Zoos Network, especially Sarah May and Cornelius, for zoo news and
debates, and to my former colleagues and students at McMaster University, and current
colleagues and students at York University, for inspiration. Errors are mine.

Notes

Ibid., 160.

1 [1] Mullan and Marvin, Zoo Culture.
2 [2]
3 [3] Feldman, ‘The Physics and Metaphysics of Caging’, 167.
4 [4] Davey, ‘Visitor Behavior in Zoos’.
5 [5]

‘Bush  Makes  Historic  Speech  aboard  Warship’,  CNN,  2  May  2003,  available  from  http://
edition.cnn.com/2003/US/05/01/bush.transcript/index.html.  See  also:  ‘The  Final  Word  is
Hooray! Remembering the Iraq War’s Pollyanna Pundits’, from the Fairness and Accuracy in
Reporting  weblog,  15  March  2006,  available  from  www.fair.org/index.php?page=2842
[accessed May 2007].
Iraq  War  timeline:  BBC  News,  available  from  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/
737483.stm  and  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/in_depth/middle_east/2002/conflict_with_iraq/
day_by_day_coverage/default.stm [accessed May 2007].
See  Roth,  ‘Getting  Away  with  Torture’,  or  ‘The  Abu  Ghraib  Files’,  available  from
www.salon.com/news/abu_ghraib/2006/03/14/introduction/, or Human Rights Watch, http:/
/hrw.org/campaigns/torture.htm [accessed May 2007].
I am also indebted to Sarah May, who also undertook the endeavour of searching out stories,
and was extremely diligent in sharing her archive.

6 [6]

7 [7]

8 [8]

9 [9] Lewis et al., Shoot First and Ask Questions Later; Mirzoeff, Watching Babylon; Schulman, ‘State
of the Art’. Marc Augé comments in The War of Dreams upon the media coverage of the first
Gulf War, i.e. that it was carefully staged, appearing ‘like a video game about warfare’ (110).

10[10] Rozell, ‘Solomon, Norman’.
11[11] Heinze, ‘Humanitarian Intervention and the War in Iraq’. See also the The 9/11 Commission
Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States
(Washington:  GPO,  2004),  available  from  www.9-11commission.gov/report/index.htm,  or
The  Downing  Street  Memo  site  (www.downingstreetmemo.com/).  Also  pertinent  is  ‘Al
Qaeda–Hussein Link is Dismissed’, Washington Post, 17 June 2004, available from www.wash-
ingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A47812-2004Jun16.html;  ‘Hussein  Link  to  9/11  Lingers  in
Many Minds’, Washington Post, 6 September 2003, available from www.washingtonpost.com/
ac2/wp-dyn/A32862-2003Sep5;  ‘Powell  Says  Iraq  WMD  Speech  Blot  on  his  Record’,
9 September  2005,  available  from  www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/news/iraq/2005/09/
iraq-050909-rferl01.htm [accessed May 2007].

International Journal of Heritage Studies

71

12[12] Bellamy, ‘International Law and the War with Iraq’.
13[13] Bellamy, ‘Motives, Outcomes, Intent and the Legitimacy of Humanitarian Intervention’, 217.
14[14] Aday et al., ‘As Goes the Statue, so Goes the War’.
15[15]

It is worth noting here that Kuwait’s zoo was ravaged during Iraq’s occupation of the country
in 1991; troops occupied the zoo, and 95% of the animals died through starvation or being
shot and eaten. The zoo has since been restored, with donations of new animals, but the few
survivors were permanently traumatised. ‘Hanging on to Heritage’, The Middle East, no. 226
(September 1993): 26.
See, for example, ‘Dogs and (Big) Cats Living Together’, St. Petersburg Times, 1 June 2003,
available 
www.sptimes.com/2003/06/01/Floridian/Dogs_and_big_cats_liv.shtml
[accessed May 2007].
See,  for  example,  ‘Baghdad  Zoo  Animals  to  Get  Help  from  U.S.  Zoos’,  Hilary  Mayell  for
National  Geographic  News,  18  April  2003,  available  from  http://news.nationalgeo-
graphic.com/news/2003/04/0418_030418_baghdadzoo.html [accessed May 2007].

16[16]

17[17]

from 

18[18] Ruki Sayid, ‘The Forgotten Victims of War’, The Mirror, 16 June 2003, 37, Factiva Document

dmirr00020030616dz6g0004o.

19[19] For example, in April, when Garner arrived in Baghdad as the first American post-war admin-

istrator: 

Landing at Baghdad airport from Kuwait, retired Lt. General Jay Garner said his
priority was to restore basic services such as water and electricity as soon as possi-
ble—a task he said would take intense work … In Baghdad, stores were open and
the streets crowded as residents swept up debris. Trying to head off food shortages,
the US military opened a warehouse to UN aid shipments and stockpiled flour. A
convoy of food arrived over the weekend for the malnourished animals at the Bagh-
dad Zoo. (Nico Price, ‘US Administrator Setting up Shop’, Cincinnati Post, A1, 21
April 2003, Associated Press Factiva Document CINP000020030422dz4l00022)

20[20]
Ian Fisher, ‘Zookeepers’ New Task: Getting Animals Back’, New York Times, 6 May 2003, A20.
21[21] Carol Morello, ‘Baghdad’s Needs Extend to Zoo Residents: Troops, Conservationists Struggle

22[22]

to Reverse Neglect and Thievery’, Washington Post, 30 April 2003, A19.
Jim  Quilty,  ‘Documentaries  Expose  Awful  Reality  of  Iraq’s  Demise’,  Daily  Star  (Beirut,
Lebanon),  28  March  2003,  Factiva  Document  dstar00020030328dz3s000gp;  and  Gethin
Chamberlain,  ‘Aid  Mission  Proves  a  Hard  Battle’,  The  Scotsman,  28  March  2003,  available
from www.thescotsman.co.uk/index.cfm?id=367232003 [accessed May 2007].

23[23] Eyewitness News Channel 7, ‘The Geneva Convention: A Closer Look at the Rules Governing
Prisoners  of  War’,  24  March  2003,  available  from  http://abclocal.go.com/wabc/news/
WABC_032403_genevaconvention.html  (New  York-WABC)  [accessed  May  2007].;  and
Michael  Wilson,  ‘At  Makeshift  POW  Camp,  Marines  Try  to  Tell  Soldiers  from  Civilians’,
International Herald Tribune, Thursday 27 March 2003, 6.

24[24] Wayne Parry, ‘TV Images of Crumbling Iraqi Regime has Many Iraqis in U.S. Celebrating’,

Associated Press Newswires, 9 April 2003.

25[25] Michael  A.  Fuoco,  ‘The  Homefront:  Life  Goes  On—With  a  Touch  of  Malaise’,  Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette,  25  March  2003,  available 
from  http://www.post-gazette.com/nation/
20030325homefrontnp5.asp; Jim Memmott, ‘The Mood in Rochester: There is Some Anxiety,
along  with  Patriotism’,  Democrat  and  Chronicle,  23  March  2003,  available  from
www.democratandchronicle.com;  and  Rick  Bella,  ‘War  Little  Kink  in  Weekend  for  Many’,
The  Oregonian,  23  March  2003,  www.oregonlive.com/oregonian/;  and  AP  Feed,  ‘Fort  Riley
Serves  Needs  of  Spouses,  Children’,  KCTV5  News,  Kansas  City,  22  March  2003,  available
from www.kctv5.com/Global/story.asp?S=1193648&nav=1PuZElHH [accessed May 2007].
‘Americans  Kill  Four  Escaped  Lions’,  New  York  Post,  22  April  2003,  8;  Rosalind  Russell,
‘Baghdad Zoo Hungry Animals Charged at Soldiers’, The Scotsman, 22 April 2003, 11. The
lions may well have been the same, or related to, a pair of lions given to Saddam Hussein in

26[26]

72 K. Denning

27[27]

1991 by Sudan, as a demonstration of support after the end of the Gulf War: see Darwish,
‘Saddam Wins on Points’.
‘Exotic  Beasts,  Fine  Wine,  and  Bush’s  Daughters’,  The  Age,  15  April  2003,  available  from
www.theage.com.au/articles/2003/04/15/1050172589741.html; ‘The Baghdad Zoo Welcomes
Visitors’,  USA  Today,  10  April  2003,  available  from  www.usatoday.com/news/world/iraq/
2003-04-10-bagvignettes-usat_x.htm; and Sammy Ketz, ‘Saddam’s Lions, Tigers and Bears Go
Hungry’,  15  April  2003,  Agence  France-Presse  Document  afpr000020030415dz4f008z1
[accessed May 2007].

30[30]

29[29]

28[28] Leon  Marshall  for  National  Geographic,  ‘Uday  Hussein’s  Lions  May  be  Freed  in  African
Wilds’,  4  June  2003,  available  from  http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2003/06/
0604_030604_udayslions.html;  and  ‘Saddam  Lions  Have  New  Home’,  BBC,  25  July  2004,
available from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/3924681.stm [accessed May 2007].
‘IFAW Rushes Experts and Urgently Needed Supplies to Baghdad Zoo Animals’, 17 June 2003,
available from www.ifaw.org/ifaw/general/default.aspx?oid=13268 [accessed May 2007].
See Anthony and Spence, Babylon’s Ark, but also see the new fictionalised version of the story
in a graphic novel, Pride of Baghdad, by B. Vaughan and N. Henrichon (2006).
‘American Zoo & Aquarium Association Presents Testimony on H.R. 1006 Captive Wildlife
Safety Act’, 12 June 2003, US Newswire Factiva Document USWIR00020030612dz6c000e9.
‘Tiger, Tiger, Buying Right: For Every Tiger in the Wild, Two are Kept as Pets in America’,
CAT News, no. 37 (Autumn 2002), 15.
‘Crackdown on Illegal Trade in Big Cats in USA’, CAT News, no. 36 (Spring 2002), 24.

33[33]
34[34] Captive Wild Animal Protection Coalition, ‘63 Charges Filed against Couple who Ran Sanctu-

31[31]

32[32]

ary’, 21 May 2003, available from http://cwapc.org/news/ [accessed May 2007].

35[35] Brian  Murray,  ‘Court  Lets  Tiger  Lady’s  Eighth  Lawyer  Drop  her  Case’,  The  Star-Ledger

36[36]

(Newark, NJ), 29 May 2003, 19.
‘New Tiger at Popcorn Park’, Press of Atlantic City, 22 May 2003, available from www.presso-
fatlanticcity.com

37[37] Bush Sr, Quayle, and ‘Stormin’ Norman’ Schwarzkopf were, of course, notable for their roles
as key players in the Gulf War of 1990–1991. Chris McGreal, ‘Lions Face New Threat: They’re
Rich,  American,  and  They’ve  Got  Guns’,  Guardian,  27  April  2001,  available  from  http://
www.guardian.co.uk/GWeekly/Story/0,,481872,00.html;  and  Fiona  Macleon,  ‘From  Canned
to  “Candy-coated”  Hunting’,  Mail  and  Guardian  (Johannesburg),  27  September  2002,
available 
from  http://allafrica.com/stories/printable/200209270547.html  [accessed  May
2007]. Update: apparently, some lion hunting is once again available in Botswana, as of 2005.
38[38] Elaine Kurtenbach, ‘Hungry Tigers at Chinese Zoo Maul Each Other as Managers Struggle to

Feed Them Amid SARS Slump’, Associated Press Newswires, 27 May 2003.

39[39] Mark  McDonald,  ‘Report  Describes  Russian  Zoo  as  Abusive,  Notes  Hundreds  of  Animal
Deaths’, Knight-Ridder/Tribune News Service, 5 June 2003, available from http://www.high-
beam.com/doc/1G1-119329788.html [accessed May 2007].

Ibid.

40[40] Aday et al., ‘As Goes the Statue, so Goes the War’.
41[41] Emphasis in original. Berger, ‘Photographs of Agony’.
42[42]
43[43] Berger, ‘Why Look at Animals?’, 22.
44[44] Acampora, ‘Zoos and Eyes’.
45[45] Veltre, ‘Menageries, Metaphors, and Meanings’.
46[46] Augé, The War of Dreams, 2–8.

References

Acampora,  R.  ‘Zoos  and  Eyes:  Contesting  Captivity  and  Seeking  Successor  Practices’.  Society  and

Animals 13, no. 1 (2005): 69–88.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

73

Aday, S., J. Cluverius and S. Livingston. ‘As Goes the Statue, so Goes the War: The Emergence of the
Victory Frame in Television Coverage of the Iraq War’. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic
Media 49, no. 3 (September 2005): 314–32.

Anthony, L. and G. Spence. Babylon’s Ark: The Incredible Wartime Rescue of the Baghdad Zoo. New

York: St. Martin’s Press, 2007.

Augé, M. The War of Dreams. London: Pluto Press, 1999.
Bellamy, A. J. ‘International Law and the War with Iraq’. Melbourne Journal of International Law 4,

no. 2 (October 2003): 497–521.

———. ‘Motives, Outcomes, Intent and the Legitimacy of Humanitarian Intervention’. Journal of

Military Ethics 3 (November 2004): 216–32.

Berger,  J.  ‘Photographs  of  Agony’.  In  About  Looking.  Essay  originally  published  in  1972.  London:

Writers and Readers, 1980.

———. ‘Why Look at Animals?’ In About Looking. London: Writers and Readers, 1980.
Coetzee, J. M. The Lives of Animals. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Darwish, A. ‘Saddam Wins on Points’. The Middle East, no. 286 (January 1999): 8–11.
Davey, G. ‘Visitor Behavior in Zoos: A Review’. Anthrozoös 19, no. 2 (2006): 143–57.
Feldman,  M.  ‘The  Physics  and  Metaphysics  of  Caging:  The  Animal  in  Late-nineteenth-century

American Culture’. Mosaic 39, no. 4 (2006): 161–80.

Heinze, E. ‘Humanitarian Intervention and the War in Iraq: Norms, Discourse, and State Practice’.

Parameters 36, no. 1 (2006): 20–35.

Lewis, J. et al. Shoot First and Ask Questions Later: Media Coverage of the 2003 Iraq War. New York:

Peter Lang, 2006.

Mirzoeff,  N.  Watching  Babylon:  The  War  in  Iraq  and  Global  Visual  Culture.  London:  Routledge,

2005.

Mullan, B. and G. Marvin. Zoo Culture. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
Roth, K. ‘Getting Away with Torture’. Global Governance 11, no. 3 (July–September 2005): 389–407.
Rozell, M. J. ‘Solomon, Norman: War Made Easy: How Presidents and Pundits Keep Spinning Us to

Death’. History: Review of New Books 34, no. 1 (2005): 12.

Schulman,  D.  ‘State  of  the  Art:  Their  War’.  Columbia  Journalism  Review  44,  no.  3  (September–

October 2005): 13.

Sontag, S. Regarding the Pain of Others. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2003.
Vaughan, B., N. Henrichon, and W. Dennis. Pride of Baghdad. DC/Vertigo, 2006.
Veltre, T. ‘Menageries, Metaphors, and Meanings’. In New Worlds, New Animals: From Menagerie to
Zoological Park in the Nineteenth Century, edited by R. J. Hoage and W. A. Deiss. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996: 19–29.


