‘Working of the Train Gang’: 
Alienation, Liminality and Communitas 
in the UK Preserved Railway Sector
Terry Wallace

Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_160399.sgm
10.1080/13527250600604167

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2006Taylor & Francis

123000000May 2006The article initially draws upon the notion of non-alienated labour to explain the motiva-
tions of volunteers who offer their time and expertise freely to the running of steam and
diesel  locomotives  within  UK  preserved  railways.  It  suggests  that  in  this  instance  the
concept is flawed in that volunteers operate outside the cash nexus. In drawing upon the
anthropological concepts of liminality and communitas it aims to develop the notion of
non-alienated labour by adding a subjective dimension. It argues that volunteers working
on preserved railways are modern-day pilgrims through their moving in and out of differ-
ent identities as they seek solace in the certainty of operating and working in complex and
highly satisfying workplaces.

This article is concerned with the issue of why people volunteer to spend their time
working, without payment, in a work environment that Marx would have described as
having an ‘alien character’ in which when ‘no physical or other compulsion exists’ work
would be ‘avoided like the plague’.1 It draws upon informal conversations with volun-
teers from 10 preserved railways in the UK and my own experience as a volunteer loco-
motive  cleaner  at  the  North  Yorkshire  Moors  Railway  (NYMR),  in  the  north  of
England. The experience consisted of living and working in Grosmont, the home base
of the footplate crew, for three or four days at a time, and living and sleeping in shared
accommodation  with  other  volunteers,  who  in  the  main  I  had  not  met  before.  The
work experience consisted of getting out of bed at 4.30 in the morning, walking to the

Terry Wallace, Edge Hill College of Higher Education. Correspondence to: wallacet@edgehill.ac.uk



219

locomotive shed and clocking-on before 5.00 a.m. The work itself consisted of 8–10
hour shifts in which volunteers, under the direction of a salaried employee, prepared
up to four steam locomotives, cleaned them with kerosene and polish and readied them
for duty prior to the driver and fireman coming on duty at 7.30 a.m. When the loco-
motives had left the shed it was our job to clean the workshop, empty the pits of the ash
from the previous day’s work and generally carry out duties at the direction of the duty
fitter. We were also encouraged to learn how locomotives worked and to converse with
the thousands of people who visit the railway every year.2 At the end of the shift, I and
most of the other engine cleaners hung around the railway, passing the time of day with
other volunteers and visitors, watching the trains, or even, on occasion, returning to
the workshop to see if there was anything we could do to help.

Context

Although it is primarily concerned with volunteer motivations, this article has its roots
in Sociology of Work and Organisations. Throughout the 20th century, the discipline
moved from more managerially focused writings3 towards ethnographic case studies of
different workplaces and workers’ experiences of them.4 In questioning the dominance
of  instrumental  views  of  labour,  they  argued  that  work  was  becoming  increasingly
degraded.5 The literature, in concentrating on paid work, implied a set of distinctions
between paid work and leisure. This bifurcation has been both exaggerated and chal-
lenged over the last 20 years by what might loosely be called theories of post-modernity.
Those who exaggerate the distinction have tended towards prioritising issues of culture
and consumption as against what they see as the over-concentration on production in
earlier work.6 Those who challenge the bifurcation have suggested that production and
consumption are intrinsically linked.7

These issues have also concerned authors within the heritage and leisure traditions,
particularly in the way they address the issue of volunteer motivations. Here, there are
two main schools. Firstly, an economist’s view sees volunteering as ‘work’ that fills a
gap  between  public  and  private  provision  of  social  welfare  and  leisure  activity.8  A
second perspective sees volunteering as either ‘casual leisure’, an activity which is iden-
tified by participants as important but peripheral to that of work, or as ‘serious leisure’
in that volunteering, amongst other leisure pursuits, can be as important to partici-
pants as work itself.9 For an understanding of volunteering in the heritage sector, ‘seri-
ous leisure’ has conceptual strengths in that it looks at the idea of individuals looking
for social belonging in the information age in which identity is linked less to the arena
of paid work than to other social, political and cultural arenas.10 However, within the
industrial heritage sector the notion of ‘serious leisure’ is not strong enough to support
the complexity of issues involved in explaining volunteer experiences. Initially, the arti-
cle suggests that we need a return to debates within the sociology of the workplace and
in particular to the concept of ‘alienated labour’. As a powerful critique of the capitalist
workplace,  Marx’s  use  of  alienated  labour  is  as  relevant  today  as  it  was  in  1844;
however, it is ultimately unsatisfactory in that it fails to adumbrate the outlines of what
a non-alienated form of labour might look like. In looking to Social Anthropology,

220 T. Wallace

particularly the work of Victor Turner and Arnold van Gennep, we are to some extent
able to overcome the fragilities of the concept of alienated labour through an applica-
tion of the concepts of liminality and communitas to the volunteer experience.11 I take
liminality here to refer to a set of experiences which are outside, and significantly differ-
ent from, those we experience in our everyday milieu. In the sense of a pilgrimage,
volunteers are seen as individuals in a constant state of transition between the everyday
and the liminal. What distinguishes the liminal from the everyday is that in the liminal,
external forms of status are left behind. The state of liminality, although transitory, is
solidified through the development of what Turner and van Gennep define as commu-
nitas. This refers to more than a community of individuals with shared interest; it is a
more  or  less  undifferentiated  community  of  equals  in  which  individuals  commune
with each other in a relatively unstructured and egalitarian way. In order to contextu-
alise the work of Turner and van Gennep it will be helpful to address the issue of indus-
trial heritage and its experiential relevance in the 20th and 21st centuries.

Industrial Heritage—Themes and Issues

Heritage, defined as things that ‘reflect a heterogeneous nostalgia for the past as imag-
ined  or  presented’,12  can  include  ‘products  of  the  older  technology’  considered  as
‘historical artefacts’ that produce ‘feelings of nostalgia and novelty’.13 This has led to a
process of commodification through the way the production of nostalgia has super-
seded the production of industrial goods.14 For example, increasing numbers of tourist
attractions are focusing on the preservation of distilleries, textile mills, mines, oil refin-
eries, shipyards and railways.15 The effect is the development of a ‘celebratory interpre-
tative style’ that creates a ‘mythical transport heaven’ in which ‘workers and users are
always happy’ and nothing ever goes wrong. The increasing importance of preserving
the past is becoming commonplace with, for example, younger generations viewing
manufacturing  with  curiosity  whilst  older  generations  see  it  through  the  prism  of
nostalgia.  Critiques  have  argued  that  this  has  produced  a  ‘distancing’  from  those
processes which have impacted upon our lives and so marginalised issues of commu-
nity and society,16 producing a malignancy in the way representations of our industrial
past  stand  in  for,  and  take  the  place  of,  a  deskilled,  low-waged  de-industrialised
present.17  Heritage  also  makes  invisible  crucial  aspects  of  our  industrial  past,  thus
creating ‘an institutionalised mode of amnesia’ in which the ‘ruptures, conflicts and
transformations’ are transformed into a seamless narrative. This marginalises labour’s
resistance  to  the  process  of  industrialisation  and  women’s  active  presence  in  the
factory.18  However,  an  alternative  view  regards  sites  such  as  the  Rhondda  Heritage
Park as producing a ‘memorialist’ discourse that articulates labourism in which ‘the
values of a mining occupational culture are upheld as part of a wider valuation of work-
ing class labour and forms of organisation’.19

However, much of the critical literature actually overlooks the experiences of volun-
teers in the sector, who constitute up to 66% of the staff within museum and heritage
sites.20 The evidence presented here suggests that volunteers working on preserved rail-
ways have an interest in preserving some aspects of our industrial past. They are also



221

motivated by a need to manufacture a distance between presentations of themselves in
their everyday lives21 to one in which these presentations are silenced. In seeking solace
in the communitas of the railway they are able to represent themselves in what might
be called the liminal experience of the extraordinary.

Conceptualising Labour’s Experience of Volunteering

Generally, volunteer labour is not within the cash nexus and thus leaves the control of
the labour process, within certain limits, largely in labour’s hands. However, the spec-
ificity of the use of volunteer labour on preserved railways develops out of the econom-
ics of railway preservation and the requisites of running the trains on time. It therefore
requires a mix of traditional and non-traditional labour management techniques. It is
important for volunteer retention that the railways manage to develop a form of work
organisation  that  is  interesting,  co-operative,  engaging  and  fulfilling.  Experience
suggests that direct forms of management control are largely hidden.22 This impacts on
how volunteers experience the labour process, particularly in the way it opens up space
for volunteers to organise their own labour process, both spatially and temporally. But
does this equate to non-alienated labour?

Marx  defines  our  essence  in  terms  of  the  co-operative  efforts  between  individual
human beings in the transformation of the raw materials of nature into socially useful
products.23 Alienated labour relates to the subjugation of this essence, an essence Marx
calls our ‘species being’, through the way the Capitalist Mode of Production (CMP)
reifies exchange-value whilst at the same time subordinating use-value in the process
of  commodity  production.  Therefore,  workers  only  experience  their  species  being
outside work, and work itself, as soon as no physical or other compulsion exists, is
‘shunned like the plague’.24 Although in Marx’s writing we are offered a critique of
alienated labour within the CMP we are left tantalised by only spasmodic references to
what non-alienated labour might look like.25 This links into an interesting set of ques-
tions—what is the situation if labour is voluntary and not forced? Can the study of
voluntary  labour  further  develop  our  understanding  of  the  relevance  of  alienated
labour in the 21st century? Although Blauner26 argues that increased levels of labour’s
control of the labour process can reduce alienation, an under-developed element in his
work is the argument that alienation can be reduced through the presence of strong,
local communities. In presenting positive and, in some cases, life-changing experiences
of volunteers, this article enhances the role of community and shared experience as
explanatory factors in the positive experiences of working on railways. So whilst the
idea of non-alienated labour is useful for understanding the position of labour outside
the cash nexus, alienated labour’s objective status within the CMP cannot be overcome
through its utilisation in explicating the experiences of volunteer labour. The work of
Turner and van Gennep can help us to develop the idea of non-alienated labour in
volunteer work and make us better able to understand these experiences.

Most railway volunteers’ experience is that both of visitor to and producer of the
same  intangible  product.  The  visitor  and  the  volunteer  share  the  experience  of  the
steam locomotive and share in becoming part of a community based around industrial

222 T. Wallace

preservation. The interest of the industrial heritage tourist and volunteer is in some
aspect of the nature of work and the industrial workplace as they gaze upon the arte-
facts and experiences of a bygone age. Perhaps this is because work, particularly indus-
trial  work,  has  now  become  a  ‘mere  attribute  of  society  and  not  its  central  theme’;
consequently, our obsessive interest in the workplace is articulated as ‘alienated leisure’
since leisure involves a return to the realm of ‘alienated labour’ in the workplace.27
Thus, we are encouraged to look at the liminal aspect of the tourist and volunteer expe-
rience—the suspension of the everyday and the transcending of the conventional social
ties,  bifurcations  and  divisions  of  labour.28  It  is  certainly  the  case  that  those  I  have
spoken to, visited with and worked alongside, on preserved railways exhibit the char-
acteristics of liminality in that they see themselves as ‘threshold people’ in which their
identities ‘are necessarily ambiguous’ in that they ‘elude or slip through the network of
classifications that normally locate states and positions in cultural space’. They occupy
a  cultural  space  in  which  ‘they  are  betwixt  and  between  the  positions  assigned  and
arrayed by law, custom, convention, and ceremonial’.29

The footplate crew on preserved railways are predominantly men seeking and glory-
ing in the company of like-minded individuals. Their links to the railway—although
not without internal hierarchy and status—are denuded of external status in terms of
class and occupation. However, one has to be careful how much we can make claims of
widespread cultural diversity here; in the main the footplate crew are predominantly
white, middle-aged men. Nonetheless, they are bound by some commonality of expe-
rience and interest with status accruing through things such as how much knowledge
they have of ‘working on the train gang’, how much experience they have of working
in gangs, and how willing they are to share both technical and experiential knowledge.
From my observations these are the main attributes you have to possess to be ‘one who
is talked about’ and one about whom myths and legends accrue—the unspoken fetish
of belonging to the community. In other words, there is a fascination with the idea of
belonging to a community of what can be described as ‘train players’ in which we, as
the aspirants, wish to become inaugurated in, and accepted by, the community as we
dip in and out of its purview. It is this aspiration to become a ‘train player’ that dilutes
any external identities we bring to the community.

Turner  describes  this  form  of  social  ‘togetherness’  as  ‘communitas’—a  society
unstructured  or  rudimentarily  structured  and  relatively  undifferentiated—a
‘communion of equal individuals who submit together to the general authority of the
ritual  elders’.  Presence  is  a  ‘stereotyped  sequence’  of  activities  involving  gestures,
words, and objects performed in a sequestered place, and designed to influence preter-
natural entities or forces on behalf of the actors’ goals and interests.30 In this sense, the
idea of pilgrimage links intrinsically to the procession of families brought from all over
the world, mainly, but not exclusively, at the instigation of fathers and grandfathers, to
the railway to gaze upon the remnants of an industrial age. However, this article is more
interested in the idea of ‘volunteer as pilgrim’ and the way volunteers travel from all
over the UK (and in some cases from all over the world) to work on the railway for
anything from a couple of days to three months at a time. In so doing they join a mixed
‘community’ of full-time employees who live within 30 km of the workplace and other

The Evidence

At this stage it would be useful to provide some background information on the UK
preserved railway movement. Within the UK there are nearly 180 operating railways,
museums and steam centres dedicated to some aspect of the industrial past consisting
of 600 km of track with 279 stations. In 2004 they had six million visitors, employed
around 1,300 salaried staff and called upon the labour of around 13,000 volunteers.31
NYMR is a limited company, run as a trust with elected officers, with a typical pyramid
structure of functional management. In 2004 it had around 300,000 passengers, leading
to a turnover in the region of £4 million, with around 100 salaried employees and 7,800
members.32 At NYMR the railway workshops (and signing-in point for most staff on
the railway) are located in the tiny village of Grosmont, which consists of a main street,
a pub, a couple of shops, the railway station and railway workshops. During the season
(March to October) from about 9.00 a.m. until 6.00 p.m. the village is full of employees,
volunteers and tourists drawn to the locale by the presence of the railway and the activ-
ities of the ‘train players’.

Volunteers  regularly  offer  their  services  free  of  charge  and  work  co-operatively
together  without  much  evidence  of  direct  managerial  control  or  the  articulation  of
negative sentiments towards their organisations. This is to some degree situated in a
transition  from  industrial  to  post-industrial  society  in  which  volunteers  reify  and
attempt to recreate what they see as the romanticism of an industrial past. They also
have some difficulty in coming to terms with the exigencies of post-modern existence
and what they see as a process of de-industrialisation and concomitant process of de-
skilling. Volunteers actually enjoy the work they do, need very little in the way of disci-
plinary process to ensure that they turn up for their shifts, do the work expected of
them and complete their shift. This is not to argue that there are no mechanisms in
place for managing the volunteer labour process.

The recent literature on volunteer motivations within the care and social-provision
sector suggests that difficulties occur in managing the employment relationship. For
example, differences in role perceptions between volunteers and managers can lead to
conflict,33 whilst the shift in the strategic direction of public services towards a more
market-led approach has led organisations to investigate the possibility of ‘adopting
private-sector based theories of people management’.34 However, volunteer motiva-
tions in the heritage sector are different from those in other areas in that they are based
around some notion of intrinsic value in the labour process itself,35 a value that would

224 T. Wallace
be challenged through the introduction of direct forms of managerial control.36 The
experiences of volunteers are that they are easier to manage than paid staff. Labour
management is based around issues of task allocation and training rather than issues of
control and resistance. The role of management is to develop spaces in which the inter-
ests of the volunteers, the interests of the preservation movement and the interests of
the visitor coincide. At NYMR, for example, the labour process for engine cleaners was
such that we were left very much to our own devices to get on with the job, with a paid
member of the workshop staff being on hand to ensure that all the locomotives were
ready in time for duty.

The controls that do exist are either imposed externally or linked to the nature of the
operation  rather  than  to  managerial  prerogatives.  Health  and  safety  legislation,  for
example,  imposes  a  need  to  wear  appropriate  clothing  and  not  allow  visitors  into
dangerous  areas  of  the  workshops.  This  was  never  an  issue  either  for  volunteers  or
managers during the period of the research. Also, the trains have to run to timetables,
have to be safe and comfortable, catering facilities have to be provided, tickets sold and
checked, locomotives cleaned and the track maintained to a legally enforced standard.
This requires the presence of a wide range of labour tasks and skills that in the main are
not in themselves intrinsically satisfying.

In the provision of services and being part of something important, the experience
of the labour process does not fit the pattern of alienated labour in capitalist enterprises
as described by Marx. Volunteers receive variable levels of training, carry out a range of
tasks, have high levels of choice of when they work and in what areas they work and
work because they have an interest in preserving some aspect of past life and experience.
Railways attract a range of different people who have different motives for working
as volunteers. For example, a train guard on a railway in the middle of England, who
had worked on the railway from his retirement in 1993, told me: 

I think it is essentially that I was brought up in a railway family. The railways were a
bit like a coal mine in which sons followed fathers. To be honest when I was a child it
was expected that I work on the railways. The only thing my father did not like about
the job was the hours. I ended up as an accountant.

However,  volunteers  working  as  footplate  crew  articulate  different  motivations.  My
experiences at NYMR were in the footplate department as a steam engine cleaner as
part  of  a  team  operating  in  what  has  been  identified  as  the  glamorous37  end  of  the
industry. Following 150-year-old traditions, a crucial element of the cleaner’s role was
to  learn  about  the  workings  of  the  locomotives,  locomotive  shed  and  workshop  in
order to progress through the ranks to becoming a locomotive driver. Volunteers in the
footplate department adhere to training and health and safety policies inherited from
the old steam railways, and new volunteers have to do a minimum of 30 full-day shifts
as a cleaner working from 5.00 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. On signing on, the duty fitter allocates
a locomotive to each volunteer to light up and clean. When their locomotives have
departed for their tours of duty, volunteers clean other locomotives and carry out other
duties at the request of the duty fitter or charge cleaner—a volunteer who has passed
his  cleaning  examinations  and  is  waiting  to  achieve  the  trainee  fireman’s  grade.  A



225

crucial element in this part of their daily work is to assist fitters in order ‘to further their
knowledge of the locomotive’.38 After completing two shifts, or turns, cleaners join a
locomotive crew for the day to ‘gain further knowledge and experience of footplate
practice’.39  Whilst  working  as  a  cleaner,  volunteers  learn  about  such  things  as  ‘the
general arrangement of the various types of locomotives and learn the names of various
locomotive parts. They are also encouraged to increase their knowledge by asking ques-
tions of fitters, drivers, firemen, and inspectors and by attending mutual improvement
classes.’40

So my typical day as a cleaner starts at 5.00 a.m. when I report to the duty fitter and
am allocated the task of lighting up one of the locomotives. At all times the fitter is at
hand in order to oversee the process and to train me in the idiosyncrasies of specific
locomotives. We then clean the outside of the locomotives until they are ready to go on
duty and in a condition ready for taking over by the footplate crew (see Figure 1). After
getting everything ready for the following day’s roster, cleaners have to shovel out the
ash pit and help the paid staff in the workshop (see Figure 2). Although there are no
formal rules that dictate that you have to complete the full shift, in the 20 turns I carried
out  not  one  volunteer  left  before  their  shift  ended.  This,  for  me,  is  the  crux  of  the
matter. It means that as volunteers we can decide, within certain constraints, what we
want to do and when we want to finish. However, time is important for the running of
the railway, particularly in the first three or four hours of the shift when we have to get
the locomotives ready for duty. For example, volunteer 1, an industrial chemist with a
doctorate in organic chemistry, aware of the discipline of time and the needs of the
timetable, told me: 

Coming here for me the main thing is discipline and the importance of time. Time is
one of the key things. Everything has to run by time. Time is extremely important in
this industry. It affects everything I am doing; maybe in the workshop it is a little bit
different. The importance of turning up on time and getting things done on time.
Absolutely crucial. At first it took quite a long time to actually come to terms with it
and adjust to it. In my job we were largely left to our own devices, it was a little bit like
a University, no huge pressure on you to produce a report. Here, you have to do it, or
the railway does not run. That in itself gives you a kick the fact that your involvement
is pretty crucial at every level.

Figure 1

Figure 2On a number of occasions when I felt that I had done enough and wanted to finish my
shift, I felt that if I did so I would be letting the other cleaners and the railway down. It
is difficult to identify the source of this pressure but after a while working on the railway
you begin to feel a sense of belonging, pride and camaraderie in being part of some-
thing important. Wearing overalls on the railway, irrespective of the work you do, is
important. Class, status or outside occupations are not indicative of status on the rail-
way;  rather,  status  is  factored  around  your  contribution  to  the  railway  and  not  any
other externalities. For example, although people do talk about their jobs outside the
railway, it is in passing and not a major source of conversation or status.

During my time, I talked to other cleaners—just chewing the fat (see Figure 3). We
all agreed that this was a useful training experience as we learnt from each other and we
justified our lack of activity by saying that we were after all volunteers, not being paid

226 T. Wallace

Figure 1
Shed, October 2005. Photo: T. Wallace.

SR Class S15 30825 receiving final cleaning before going on duty at Grosmont

for our time and a good part of our job was to learn about the railway from each other.
Volunteer 2, a middle manager for a private-sector railway company, commented that
we should not be afraid of going when we wanted—we were volunteers. However, this
does  not  deflect  from  the  overall  positive  experience  of  volunteering.  Volunteer  3
commented that he volunteered because he wanted to get away from his real job work-
ing in the Ministry of Defence: 

It is not the muck that they want to get away from, it is the politics and the rules and
regulations they want to get rid of. They do not want the stress. You come here, do
your cleaning job and switch off. You do not have someone looking over your shoul-
der and trying to stab you in the back.

Figure 3Volunteer 4, who worked in financial services, said: 

I would not mind retiring here. I am quite happy doing this [cleaning], it would not
worry me. Yesterday I was supposed to be out on a locomotive but I did a cleaning
turn instead. It is a learning curve and a way of learning is working with people. I do
not mind the long days here [some shifts last 12 hours].

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  response  came  from  volunteer  1.  His  motivation  for
working on the railway was a love of Victorian engineering and work ethic: 

Coming here is a wonderful opportunity to do a proper job and a hard job as well as
working to a format. You come in here and you are doing a full-time job, work as laid



227

Figure 2 Volunteer cleaners removing ash from dropping pit at Grosmont Shed, October
2005. Photo: T. Wallace.

down by railway people. It is far more regulated than anything I have done before. So
in that respect it has taught me quite a lot. I found the actual work ethic almost as
interesting as the railway. They are intertwined really.

He also commented that: 

There is a basic need to work or perhaps we are conditioned to that by our social
upbringing and I suspect it is that really. But the thing that interests me is that you are
working to a standard and procedures that are from another century. We could be
back in the Victorian period and we would fit in really well.

He further admitted to being ‘the kind of person who likes to work on his own’ and ‘a
little bit shy’. Despite this basic shyness, he enjoyed the social side to the railway and
enjoyed going into the social club and talking to railway people he had met during his
shifts. I did notice that, despite his shyness, he was greeted enthusiastically by everyone
I saw him make contact with. I suspect that from what he said and what I observed he
had found a home on the railway and felt at one with himself. He himself observed that
the  railway  was  ‘a  little  bit  like  a  club’  and  ‘is  obviously  very  special  to  everybody
concerned’. At this point in our conversation I asked him whether the railway was an
important part of his life, to which he replied: 

It is becoming so. I mean it is sort of an evil fascination. When I first came here it was
a tremendous interest for me because it was so atmospheric. That in itself fascinates

228 T. Wallace

Figure 3 Cleaners, drivers and firemen ‘chewing the fat’ at Grosmont Shed coaling point,
October 2005. Photo: T. Wallace.

me, the whole lifestyle of the work. I find it very fascinating even though a lot of it is
very menial work to most people.

Consequently, he has a fascination with doing the job right and to ‘do the job to the
best of my ability’ and has been surprised at what ‘I can do. It is damned hard work.’ I
asked him what he had learnt about himself: 

I have learnt that I have got a lot more in me than I thought. One of the problems I
found is that when I retired I lost my purpose for working. I had more than enough
money to live on and the incentive to work was nil really. I took a few dead end jobs
but I did not get a great amount of satisfaction out of that. I have learnt that I am not
finished and I have surprised myself at every stage. I kept seeing things and I thought
I would never get the hang of that and master it but I kept going.

In a crucial insight to his psyche he also told me that after an initial disenchantment
with the railway he got his interest back: 

It actually stemmed from the fact that I decided to split up with my partner who I had
been with for 10 years and therefore I knew if I came over here, it would soften the
blow. One of the things I find that when I come over here is that I completely lose
myself in the place. Even I was not drawn in the first place because I was a fanatic,
nevertheless  there  is  something  about  the  place—I  think  as  I  have  worked  I  have
become more and more enthusiastic actually. It is a sort of enrichment process for me
and it is the working part—I could never get that enrichment purely by observing or



229

taking photographs. For some people that is all they do. But I would get bored with
that because—it goes back to the work ethic.

These  sentiments  provide  indicative,  if  not  conclusive,  evidence  that  a  significant
element of volunteer motivation results from a sense of, if not alienation, then at least
anomie and frustration with the labour process within their everyday experiences of the
workplace.  There  is  evidence  from  workplaces  such  as  electronics  factories,  truck
assembly  plants,  call  centres  and  financial  services  that  modern  workplace  manage-
ment  is  increasingly  limiting  the  prospects  for  social  interaction  between  work
colleagues.41 This is in sharp contrast to the encouragement I experienced from more
experienced peers actually to interact with, as well as learn from, other volunteers and
visitors and was a significant factor in the positive experience I took away from the
activity.

Working as a volunteer is an extremely tiring process, especially when one considers
the age of most of the volunteers; by the time my shifts finished I was far too tired to
contemplate anything more than sleep. Lack of sleep is an important aspect of railway
life. It was said that one of the reasons why the railway insists on cleaners starting at
5.00 a.m. is to get them used to the discipline of early starts and to see if they are capa-
ble of maintaining discipline and time-keeping. Nonetheless, despite the tiredness, the
need for sleep and knowing that work started again at 5.00 the next morning, the rail-
way  acted  as  a  magnetic  force  drawing  the  volunteers  into  its  purview.  Most  of  the
people I worked with, like myself, were seen wandering around the railway mid-after-
noon and frequenting the railway club after the last train had left and after they had
eaten their tea.

Analysis and Conclusion

What is of interest here is an understanding of the reasons why volunteers give time to
working in conditions that are sometimes dirty, hard, and not particularly interesting
in terms of task and skill requirements. Major motivations are an interest in preserving
aspects  of  an  industrial  past—a  shared  interest  in  the  aesthetic  beauty  of  the  steam
locomotive. The article has shown that there is also a sense of belonging in the closed
environment  and  shared  meanings  of  communitas  as  a  shelter  from  the  potentially
alien  environment  of  the  external  world.42  This  has  resonance  with  a  Durkheimian
view of anomic individuals unable to find themselves in a world shaped by mechanical
solidarity  as  opposed  to  the  certainty  of  organic  solidarity  found  in  pre-industrial
times.43 But here we have individuals who found a kind of certainty within the indus-
trial and professional communities they had worked in and find difficulty coming to
terms with their location in service occupations or in retirement—in other words in a
kind of post-industrial lacuna.

Working as a volunteer becomes a kind of pilgrimage in which the baggage of exter-
nal  identity  renders  itself  invisible.  It  does  not  matter  who  or  what  you  are  in  the
outside world; all that matters to the volunteers is what you contribute whilst you are
there. It is pilgrimage into a form of religiosity as the railway becomes similar to the
‘retreat’ as the pilgrims seek out forms of peace and contentment. My initial thoughts

230 T. Wallace

about these experiences were that they seemed consistent with an idea of volunteering
as non-alienated. This was because in terms of temporality in the capitalist organisa-
tion, managerial, monetary and political strategies are enacted to minimise the distance
between labour and labour power by control patterns that ensure that labour’s control
of time is subordinated to the needs of valorisation. In preserved railways, the volun-
teer’s control of time and space is more flexible and organised as much around the
needs  of  the  volunteer  as  the  interests  of  the  organisation.  The  issue,  however,  is
complex. There are complexities around issues of spatial and temporal control in the
labour process and suggestions that, although most of the objective factors associated
with alienated labour identified by Marx are missing from the labour process, there are
certain  structural  constraints  operating  which  impose  a  discipline  upon  the  labour
process and make more complex the issue of non-alienated labour. For example, the
railway has to run on time and there is a certain ordering of mundane tasks on an oper-
ational basis. The study presents a complex picture of the experience of working on
preserved railways in the way it concentrates on issues of the amount of spatial and
temporal control that labour has on a day-to-day basis during working time. It suggests
that the experience of labour is structured around a need to (re)create practices, struc-
tures and visions of their and significant ‘other’ past workplace experiences.

Grosmont acts as a kind of ‘communitas’ in which the pilgrims, volunteers and visi-
tors appear and reappear on a regular basis, in between returning to the experiences of
everyday life. The idea of liminality or the extraordinary allows an explanation of why
volunteers perform and behave in a way that they would refuse to do in their everyday
life. The fact of communitas shields them from any form of ridicule they would no
doubt  experience  if  they  behaved  in  similar  ways  back  home  within  their  own  peer
networks. One final point of reflection: the research project on preserved railways has
in some sense facilitated a ‘coming-out’ experience in that I no longer need to justify
myself to anyone as being a ‘gricer’. This is a term used by railway enthusiasts or train-
spotters to define what they do as a leisure pastime. It results from the rather negative
social perception of enthusiasts who stand for hours at the ends of railway platforms
taking down engine numbers. The term ‘trainspotter’ is used as a metaphor in the UK
for certain kinds of uninteresting activities and to poke fun at the people who engage
in them. From experience, to admit to being a trainspotter in a wider social milieu
leaves oneself open to high levels of ridicule.44 In some respects, both working as a
volunteer and writing in an academic way about these experiences acts as a ‘talking
cure’ in the way it gives a certain amount of subjective legitimacy and credibility to the
activity of railway volunteering. This is not to suggest that railway volunteering needs
this kind of legitimacy and credibility. Nor is it meant to undermine the very real sense
of commitment that volunteers give to their environments and does not suggest that
there is no intrinsic value in the activity itself. It is rather an attempt to understand how
my experiences of volunteering have legitimated my identity as gricer.

Of course, this could all be construed as exhibiting traits of false consciousness in which
volunteers are seeking solace from the ‘silent compulsion of economic relations’45 from
their activities on preserved railways. The activity of volunteering, therefore, masks their
real source of oppression within the capitalist mode of production. The idea of false



231

consciousness assumes the potential for a true consciousness in which work allows the
release of the humanities ‘species being’.46 What distinguishes the analysis presented here
from both scientific and humanist forms of Marxism is that this potential may be realised
in non-commodity forms of production through a liminal form of existence in space
defined through communitas. Now this may be a form of false consciousness in which
the root cause of alienation is never challenged. However, in an era in which talk of social-
ist revolution—never mind its realisation—is so far removed from everyday experience
and consciousness, that to seek solace and find some form of human essence in the volun-
teer labour process does give some meaning to human existence in the 21st century.

Notes

1 [1] Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts.
2 [2] Of all the hundreds of volunteers I speak to and correspond with all but one of them are steam
railway or locomotive enthusiasts and are themselves visitors to other preserved railways in
the UK and across the globe.

3 [3] Fayol, General and Industrial Management; Hackman and Oldham, Work Redesign; Mayo, The

Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization; Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management.
See, for example, Beynon, Working for Ford.

4 [4]
5 [5] Braverman, Labor and Monopoly Capitalism; see also Wood, The Degradation of Work?
6 [6] Lash and Urry, Economies of Signs and Spaces; Bauman, Intimations of Postmodernity.
7 [7] Du Gay, Consumption and Identity at Work; Pettinger, ‘Brand Culture and Branded Workers’.
8 [8] For a discussion see Holmes, ‘Volunteers in the Heritage Sector’.
9 [9]

Stebbins, ‘Casual Leisure’; Stebbins, ‘The Costs and Benefits of Hedonism’; Stebbins, ‘Serious
Leisure’.
See, for example, the work of Tourraine, Post-industrial Society.

10[10]
11[11] Turner, The Ritual Process; Turner, The Anthropology of Performance; van Gennep, Rites of Passage.
12[12] Rudd and Davis, ‘Industrial Heritage Tourism at the Bingham Canyon Copper Mine’.
13[13] Prentice, ‘Motivations of the Heritage Consumer in the Leisure Market’.
14[14] Hewison, The Heritage Industry.
15[15] Richards, ‘Production and Consumption of European Cultural Tourism.
16[16] Walsh, The Representation of the Past..
17[17] Hewison, The Heritage Industry.
18[18] Read, ‘Historical Representations and the Gendered Battleground of the Past; Bennett, The

Birth of the Museum.

Ibid.

19[19] Dicks, ‘The Life and Times of Community’.
20[20] Holmes, ‘Volunteers in the Heritage Sector’.
21[21] Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life.
22[22] Edwards, Contested Terrain.
23[23] Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts.
24[24]
25[25] Engels, Anti-Duhring; Marx and Engels, The German Ideology.
26[26] Blauner, Alienation and Freedom.
27[27] MacCannel, The Tourist, 156; see also Offe, ‘Work’.
28[28] Urry, The Tourist Gaze.
29[29] Turner, The Ritual Process.
30[30] Turner, The Anthropology of Performance.
[31] These  figures,  supplied  by  the  Heritage  Railway  Association,  relate  only  to  those  railways
belonging to the Association. They do not include all UK preserved railways and are subject to
between a 4% and 8% increase.

232 T. Wallace

32[32] Various copies of Moors Line, the railway’s in-house magazine for members.
33[33] Liao-Troth and Dunn, ‘Social Constructs and Human Service’.
34[34] Cunningham, ‘Human Resource Management in the Voluntary Sector’.
35[35] Thompson, ‘Work without Wages’.
36[36] Edwards, Contested Terrain.
37[37] Morgan, Steam Railway.
38[38] NYMR, Training Manual.
39[39]
40[40] Mutual  improvement  classes  are  formally  organised  sessions  in  which  trainees  learn  about
how  locomotives  work  and  they  can  get  the  most  efficient  use  of  them.  One  has  to  attend
these classes and pass exams to pass through the various grades on the railway.

Ibid.

41[41] For electronics see McKinlay and Taylor, ‘Power, Surveillance and Resistance’; for analysis of
emotional exhaustion and ‘invasive forms of workplace control’ in call centres see Deery et al.,
‘Work Relationships in Telephone Call Centres’; for the automotive sector I draw on as yet
unpublished evidence from conversations that I had with blue-collar employees in an English
truck assembler. For financial services see McCabe, ‘“A Land of Milk and Honey”?’
van Gennep, Rites of Passage; Turner, The Ritual Process.

42[42]
43[43] Durkheim, Suicide; Durkheim, On the Division of Labor in Society.
44[44] For  a  discussion  of  the  coming-out  experience  of  the  trainspotter  see  Whittaker,  Platform

Souls; Strangleman, ‘The Nostalgia of Organisations and the Organisation of Nostalgia’.

45[45] Marx, Capital, 899.
46[46] Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts. ‘The term “species-being” (Gattungswesen) is
derived from Ludwig Feuerbach’s philosophy where it is applied to man and mankind as a
whole’, footnote 20.

References

Bauman, Z. Intimations of Postmodernity. London: Routledge, 1992.
Bennett, T. The Birth of the Museum: History Theory, Politics. London: Routledge, 1995.
Beynon, H. Working for Ford. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973.
Blauner,  R.  Alienation  and  Freedom:  The  Factory  Worker  and  his  Industry.  Chicago:  University  of

Chicago Press, 1964.

Braverman, H. Labor and Monopoly Capitalism: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century.

New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974.

Cunningham,  I.  ‘Human  Resource  Management  in  the  Voluntary  Sector:  Challenges  and

Opportunities’. Public Money and Management 19, no. 2 (1999): 19–27.

Deery, S., R. Iverson, and J. Walsh. ‘Work Relationships in Telephone Call Centres: Understanding
Emotional Exhaustion and Employee Withdrawal’. Journal of Management Studies 34, no. 4
(2002): 471–96.

Dicks,  B.  ‘The  Life  and  Times  of  Community:  Spectacles  of  Collective  Identity  at  the  Rhondda

Heritage Park’. Time and Society 6, nos. 2/3 (1997): 195–212.
Du Gay, P. Consumption and Identity at Work. London: Sage, 1996.
Durkheim, E. On the Division of Labor in Society. New York: Free Press, 1947.
———. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. London: Routledge, 1990.
Edwards,  R.  Contested  Terrain:  The  Transformation  of  the  Workplace  in  the  Twentieth  Century.

London: Heinemann, 1979.

Engels, F. Anti-Duhring—Eugen Duhring’s Revolution in Science. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1878.
Fayol, G. H. General and Industrial Management. London: Pitman, 1949.
Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. London: Pelican, 1959.
Hackman, J. R. and G. R. Oldham. Work Redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980.
Hewison, R. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London: Methuen, 1987.



233

Holmes,  K.  ‘Volunteers  in  the  Heritage  Sector:  A  Neglected  Audience’.  International  Journal  of

Heritage Studies 9, no. 4 (2003): 341–55.

Lash, S. and J. Urry. Economies of Signs and Spaces. London: Sage.
Liao-Troth, M. A and C. P. Dunn. ‘Social Constructs and Human Service: Managerial Sense-making
of  Volunteer  Motivation’.  Voluntas:  International  Journal  of  Voluntary  and  Nonprofit
Organizations 10, no. 4 (1999): 345–61.

MacCannel, D. The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class. London: Macmillan, 1976.
Marx, K. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1974.
———. Capital. Vol. 1. London: Pelican, 1976.
Marx, K. and F. Engels. The German Ideology. Moscow: International Publishers, 1932.
Mayo, G. E. The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,

1945.

McCabe, D. ‘“A Land of Milk and Honey”? Reengineering the “Past” and “Present” in a Call Centre’.

Journal of Management Studies 41, no. 5 (2000): 827–56.

McKinlay, A. and P. Taylor. ‘Power, Surveillance and Resistance: Inside the “Factory of the Future”’.
In The New Workplace and Trade Unionism: Critical Perspectives on Work and Organisation,
edited by P. Ackers, C. Smith and P. Smith. London: Routledge, 1996.

Morgan, D. Steam Railway no. 241 (2000): 23.
Offe,  C.  ‘Work:  The  Key  Sociological  Category?’  In  Disorganised  Capitalism,  edited  by  C.  Offe.

London: Polity Press, 1985.

Pettinger, L. ‘Brand Culture and Branded Workers: Service Work and Aesthetic Labour in Fashion

Retail’. Consumption, Markets and Culture 7, no. 2 (2004): 165–84.

Prentice, R. ‘Motivations of the Heritage Consumer in the Leisure Market: An Application of the

Manning Haas Demand Hierarchy’. Leisure Services 15, no. 5 (1993): 273–90.

Read,  B.  ‘Historical  Representations  and  the  Gendered  Battleground  of  the  Past:  A  Study  of  the
Canterbury Heritage Museum’. European Journal of Women’s Studies 3, no. 2 (1996): 115–30.
Richards,  G.  ‘Production  and  Consumption  of  European  Cultural  Tourism’.  Annals  of  Tourism

Research 23, no. 2 (1996): 261–83.

Rudd, M. A. and J. A. Davis. ‘Industrial Heritage Tourism at the Bingham Canyon Copper Mine’.

Journal of Travel Research 36, no. 3 (1998): 85–89.

Stebbins, R. A. ‘Casual Leisure: A Conceptual Statement’. Leisure Studies 16 (1997): 17–25.
———. ‘Serious Leisure’. Society (May/June 2001): 53–57.
———.  ‘The  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Hedonism:  Some  Consequences  of  Taking  Casual  Leisure

Seriously’. Leisure Studies 20 (2001): 305–9.

Strangleman, T. ‘The Nostalgia of Organisations and the Organisation of Nostalgia: Past and Present

in the Contemporary Railway Industry’. Sociology 33, no. 4 (1999): 725–46.

Taylor, F. W. The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: W. W. Norton, 1991.
Thompson,  A.  M.  ‘Work  without  Wages:  The  Motivation  for  Volunteer  Firefighters’.  American

Journal of Economics and Sociology 52, no. 3 (1993): 323–54.

Tourraine, A. Post-industrial Society. London: Random House, 1971.
Turner, V. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-structure. Chicago: Aldine, 1969.
———. ‘Symbols in African ritual’. In Symbolic Anthropology: A Reader in the Study of Symbols and
Meanings, edited by J. L. Dolgin, D. S. Kemnitzer and D. M. Schneider. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1977: 183.

———. The Anthropology of Performance. New York: AJ Publishing, 1988.
Urry, J. The Tourist Gaze. London: Sage, 1990.
van Gennep, A. Rites of Passage. London: Routledge, 1960.
Walsh, K. The Representation of the Past: Museums and Heritage in the Post-modern World. London

and New York: Routledge, 1992.

Whittaker, N. Platform Souls: The Train Spotter as Twentieth-century Hero. London: Gollancz, 1995.
Wood,  S.,  ed.  The  Degradation  of  Work?  Skill,  Deskilling  and  the  Labour  Process.  London:

HarperCollins, 1986.


