International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

“‘I just don’t ever use that word’: investigating
stakeholders’ understanding of heritage”

Elizabeth Kryder-Reid, Jeremy W. Foutz, Elizabeth Wood & Larry J.
Zimmerman

To cite this article: Elizabeth Kryder-Reid, Jeremy W. Foutz, Elizabeth Wood & Larry
J. Zimmerman (2018) “‘I just don’t ever use that word’: investigating stakeholders’
understanding of heritage”, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 24:7, 743-763, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2017.1339110
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2017.1339110

Published online: 22 Jun 2017.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 558

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2018
Vol. 24, no. 7, 743–763
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2017.1339110

“‘I just don’t ever use that word’: investigating stakeholders’ 
understanding of heritage”

Elizabeth Kryder-Reida, Jeremy W. Foutzb, Elizabeth Wooda and Larry J. Zimmermana

aIu School of liberal arts, IuPuI, Indianapolis, In, uSa; bSteaM Workgroup, Indianapolis, In, uSa

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 30 november 2016 
accepted 28 May 2017

KEYWORDS
Settler colonial; stakeholder; 
value; repatriation; contested 
heritage

ABSTRACT
Understanding the value of heritage sites for diverse stakeholders requires 
both paying attention to the fields of power in which the sites operate and 
applying methodologies that are open to user-defined paradigms of value. In 
the U.S., official discourse often frames the value of heritage sites associated 
the  deep  Native  American  past  as  archaeological  sites,  an  interpretation 
that is consistent with settler colonial ideologies. This narrative generally 
obfuscates connections between the heritage of the sites and contemporary 
peoples, and it effaces the history of colonialism and dispossession. A study 
of stakeholder-defined heritage at two contested sites in the central Midwest 
revealed  both  congruencies  and  conflicts  among  diverse  constituencies’ 
articulations of the sites’ value. At Mounds State Park a proposed dam and 
reservoir ‘Mounds Lake’ project would inundate a large portion of the site. At 
Strawtown Koteewi, Native American tribes have made repatriation claims 
under  the  federal  Native  American  Graves  Protection  and  Repatriation 
Act (NAGPRA).The study also problematised the term ‘cultural heritage’ as 
it is understood and used by the different constituencies, particularly for 
culturally and historically affiliated Native Americans. It also highlighted the 
positions of the constituencies within the broader fields of power implicated 
in these contested sites.

Introduction
The impetus for this study began with an incongruous series of recent developments at two heritage 
sites set against the larger backdrop of issues around democratising and decolonising heritage prac-
tices (Archibald 2004; Adair, Filene, and Koloski 2011; Lonetree 2012; Oland, Hart, and Frank 2012; 
Runnel and Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt 2014). Specifically, multi-year archaeological excavations at one 
site were put on hold and popular Archaeology Day activities discontinued while at the same time an 
extensive poured concrete simulation of a dig was built, complete with embedded features and tinted 
soil layers (Figure 1). At a second site, a coalition of public and private entities with interests in spur-
ring economic development in a struggling county proposed damming a river to create an artificial 
reservoir named ‘Mounds Lake’ which would inundate a large portion of the property on which the 
eponymous mounds were located (Figure 2). These seeming contradictions suggested that there were 
potentially divergent interests operating at these sites and that they would be productive for testing 
varied methodologies to assess the value of heritage sites as defined by diverse groups of stakeholders.

CONTACT  elizabeth Kryder-reid 
this article was originally published with errors. this version has been corrected. Please see Corrigendum (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 
13527258.2018.1442778).

  ekryderr@iupui.edu

© 2017 elizabeth Kryder-reid, Jeremy W. foutz, elizabeth Wood and larry J. Zimmerman. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as 
taylor & francis group

744 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

Figure 1. Simulated archaeological excavation at Strawtown Koteewi, Hamilton County, Indiana. Source: Photo by e. Kryder-reid.

Figure 2. View of the circular ‘great mound’ at Mounds State Park, anderson, Indiana. Source: Photo by e. Kryder-reid.

The research design for this project is premised on some key assumptions about the nature of 
cultural heritage and the work it does in communities. We agree with Harrison’s (2013) position that 
heritage is a political act, and consequently we are interested in both the fields of power in which 
heritage operates and the roles of heritage professionals within the terrains of competing interests 
(Smith 2006; Smith and Waterton 2009). We understand heritage to be inextricable from the power 
dynamics of ‘nationalism, imperialism, colonialism, cultural elitism, Western triumphalism, social 
exclusion based on class and ethnicity, and the fetishising of expert knowledge’ (ACHS 2012). Because 
heritage is a political act, we do not see a distinction between archaeological remains from the past 
and living cultures, and we eschew dualities of tangible and intangible, natural and cultural. Rather, 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  745

heritage is the relationship between past and present. As a result, we find the study of cultural heritage 
to be a productive way to understand the ideological underpinnings of society, and we pay particular 
attention when those heritage narratives are resisted or appear to fray. Those fissures are often disputes 
not only about the allocation of resources or the development of land, but about whose stories are 
heard and valued, whose authority is recognised, and who is in control (Silverman and Ruggles 2007; 
Lynch and Alberti 2010; Macdonald 2013; Mitterhofer 2013; Rico 2015). Furthermore, contested 
heritage sites may also reveal fundamentally different paradigms of understanding the relationships of 
past and present and help us to trace how those respective frameworks of value have been privileged, 
marginalised, or erased in the history of those sites (Scott 2009, 2013; Holtorf and Kristensen 2015).

Background
Description of sites
This investigation of stakeholder-defined value of heritage focused on two sites, Mounds State Park 
and Strawtown Koteewi Park, each located in central Indiana about an hour north of Indianapolis, 
Indiana, in the heart of the American Midwest. Both of the sites are government-owned public parks. 
Mounds State Park, as the name implies, is one of 25 Indiana Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) state parks, while Strawtown Koteewi is one of 11 parks operated by the Hamilton County 
Parks and Recreation Department. Mounds State Park was established in 1930 and is listed on the 
National Register of Historic Places because of its Native American earthworks dating to the late 
Archaic culture known as the Adena-Hopewell. The largest earthwork, the Great Mound, is believed 
to have been constructed around 160 BC. The mounds are thought to have been primarily used as 
gathering places for religious ceremonies and were constructed to align with astronomical events 
such as the solstice and equinox. While the 259 acre park contains a nature preserve and a unique 
fen environment as well as a campground, Nature Centre, and miles of trails, the park ‘was dedicated 
for the purpose of protecting a nationally recognised cultural site’ and the preserve ‘encompasses and 
buffers the cultural site’ (Mounds State Park 2011, 1).

Strawtown Koteewi is a much newer park than Mounds, created in 1999 when the county purchased 
750 acres from the estate of a local resident. The relatively undeveloped land was known to contain 
significant archaeological sites, as well as woods, prairies, and 3.25 miles of wetlands along the White 
River that surrounds three sides of the park. Like Mounds, the park was developed for recreational 
uses and now contains not only hiking and horseback riding trails, but an archery range, treetop trails, 
and zip lines. Strawtown’s Native American history is also more recent in that, while it contains earlier 
sites, its most significant occupation is an enclosed village site dating between 1250 AD and 1400 AD.1 
Strawtown Koteewi has been the focus of intensive archaeological investigation through partnerships 
with local universities and has run a volunteer archaeology programme.2 The Park also has an active 
public programme and maintains a permanent exhibit in the Taylor Centre of Natural History.

In addition to their proximity and similar cultural histories, each of the sites has multiple stake-
holders, often with conflicting interests. Recreational users such as horseback riders and mountain 
bikers sometimes intrude on the bird watchers’ desires for undisturbed nesting areas and quiet places 
to observe the wildlife. Those who want to preserve native plants and grasslands have opposed the 
construction of zip lines and archery ranges espoused by promoters of local tourism. Archaeologists 
are similarly concerned with the preservation of intact historical resources and with maintaining access 
to the sites for research purposes. Some Native groups have challenged the right of other Native groups 
to hold ceremonies at the sites. Those charged with managing the sites must balance these competing 
interests as well as serve the broader mission of their respective Parks Departments. Added to these 
issues are the concerns of the Native peoples with cultural affiliations to Indiana who have been dis-
placed and dispersed through two centuries of colonial and settler colonial politics.

One of the reasons we selected these sites for the study is that, in addition to the daily tensions 
over competing uses of the sites, each one is also embroiled in a contested heritage issue. Mounds 
State Park has been at the centre of a proposal dam and reservoir project that would flood about two 

746 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

thirds of the park property including several Native and settler archaeological sites, as well as poten-
tially endanger the primary mound sites through erosion and threaten its context within the riverine 
setting. It would also inundate a rare fen environment and dramatically change the habitat along 
the free flowing river. Strawtown Koteewi has been the subject of claims by the Miami of Oklahoma 
that archaeologists excavating at the park were not in compliance with the federal National Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). Both issues are still being contested as of this publication.

Native history
Archaeological evidence documents that Native Americans have lived in the American Midwest for at 
least 10,000 years and, based on discoveries elsewhere in North America, probably much longer. Native 
oral traditions suggests a far greater depth of time. People living in the region adapted to dramatic 
environmental changes, substantial population growth, and increasing levels of intercultural contact. 
Early nomadic hunting-gathering groups eventually grew to become complex chiefdoms, and include 
urban settlements such as Cahokia whose populations exceeded those of European cities from the 
same time period. By 200 BCE Native Americans were making pottery, raising sizeable burial mounds 
with elaborate grave offerings, and starting to use cultivars as part of an emergent horticulture. By 
600 CE, there was a cultural florescence that included a vast inter-regional trade network extending 
from the Rocky Mountains to the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic coast. Groups, who might today be 
identified as tribes, built burial mounds and large, geometric earthworks including those in Mounds 
State Park. From 1050 CE until just before European contact, populations grew to a pre-contact peak 
with subsistence based on intensive horticulture focused on maize, beans, and squash. Ceremonial 
centres with truncated pyramid temple mounds, plazas, and markets served farms and palisaded 
settlements. Complex, non-egalitarian social hierarchies developed around a wide range of social 
roles and craft specialties.

Because cultural affiliation and ideas about property ownership are central to the sites in this study, 
it is worth elucidating current thinking about the history of cultural identity in the region. The general 
narrative of cultural change described above only hints at the many localised variations that occurred 
within the American Midwest. Change happened at different rates depending on population sizes, 
relative isolation or movement, resource control, and a range of lifeways and ideological patterns. 
People also travelled or even relocated in response to the impacts of trade, warfare, and climate. Tribal 
identification or belonging was very likely quite fluid, and territorial boundaries probably reflected that 
fluidity. Thus, to say with assurance that a particular contemporary tribe is associated with a particular 
archaeological complex is problematic at best. Archaeologists recognise that most people who lived 
in a region at the time of contact were likely descended from people who had lived there for a much 
longer period, perhaps millennia, but archaeologists in the American Midwest rarely wish to make 
definitive claims about tribal origins from any complex earlier than about 800 CE (for some of these 
potential affiliations for Indiana see Jones and Johnson 2016, 18–19). There can be little question, 
however, that the people living in the region at the time of contact and many of their contemporary 
descendants have a deep, abiding interest in the sites discussed in this paper.

Critical to this study is also the history of colonialism and the enduring dynamics of American 
settler colonial ideologies. The arrival of Europeans came with devastating consequences, particu-
larly epidemic diseases with mortality rates that frequently exceeded 80%. Increasing European and 
European-American populations pushed more eastern tribes toward the Midwest, intensifying levels 
of conflict between tribes. Eventually Americans came into the region in large numbers, and by the 
mid-1800s forced the removal of the many tribes that once lived in the region, most of them to Indian 
Territory in the contemporary state of Oklahoma. Still, even when a tribe was removed to Indian 
Territory, people from that tribe sometimes remained in place. Cultural affiliation is also complicated by 
the process of tribal recognition by both states and the federal government. In general terms, Figure 3 
shows the distribution of the more well-known tribes in what would become Indiana, but locations 
shifted and groups moved into and through the area, usually becoming associated with particu-
lar river drainages. According to Jones and Johnson (2016, 16–18) the Miamis, Weas, Piankashaws, 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  747

A W A T O M I

T

O

P

A

M I

E

R

A

W

A

L

E

W

M I A

E

D

O
O
P
A
K
C

I

K

PIANK

A

S

H

A

W

N E E

W

A

S H

Figure 3. general historical tribal distributions in Indiana. early Peoples of Indiana/Indiana department of natural resources. Source: 
department of natural resources.

Potawatomis, Kickapoos, Mascoutens, Delawares, and Shawnees were present from the late seventeenth 
century until the early-to-mid nineteenth century. The Winnebago and Wyandot were also briefly in 
the area during the period.

Several of these tribes recognise descent from groups that made and used the earthworks at Mounds 
State Park with some, such as the Shawnee, still using them for ceremonies. The issue of cultural affili-
ation is even more complex at Strawtown Koteewi where multiple archaeological sites on the property 
represent occupation at different times and probably by different groups. By general agreement among 
the tribes who may have a claim to heritage at the park, the Miami of Oklahoma, who have federal 
recognition, have agreed to take the lead on resolution of repatriation issues and consultation on the 

748 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

development and interpretation of the site. The Miami of Indiana, descendants of individuals who 
remained in the state at the time the Miami were removed, express interest in Strawtown Koteewi, but 
because they are not federally recognised they have agreed that their concerns can be represented by 
the Miami of Oklahoma. Although they technically reside in Michigan, a large number of citizens of 
the Pokagon Band of Potawatomi live in the northern tier of Indiana counties near Lake Michigan. Late 
in 2016, the Pokagon Band received federal approval to move former tribally-held lands in the area 
back into tribal control. They are the only federally recognised tribe in Indiana, but even though they 
have interests in the broader region, they tend to focus their heritage concerns on the northern part of 
the state. The Shawnee historically emphasised the Ohio River drainage as the core of their territory, 
and tend to be concerned primarily with archaeological sites in the southern portion of the state.

Methodology
Our premise of exploring stakeholder-defined value uses R. Edward Freeman’s definition of stakeholder 
as ‘any group or individual who can affect, or is affected by’, the organisation’s purpose (Freeman 1984, 
vi). Stakeholder theory has been largely the purview of the business world and promulgated as an 
alternative of a shareholder capitalism perspective in which value is accounted for only in terms of 
those positioned to profit from the enterprise. Instead, stakeholder theory expands the framework of 
analysis to include other kinds of value creation and privileges ideas such as corporate social respon-
sibility and business ethics (Freeman et al. 2010). Conversely, as not-for-profits and governmental 
heritage organisations face increasing pressures to generate earned revenue, the complex and often 
competing interests of stakeholders in non-profit contexts are coming to resemble those of for-profit 
enterprises. The central issues stakeholder theory addresses for corporations – the creation of value, 
ethics, and management – apply to the heritage industry as well (Freeman et al. 2010, 4–5). This 
study also builds on the recent work on framing and assessing the public value of heritage sites and 
organisations (Semmel and Bittner 2009; Weinberg and Lewis 2009; Soderland 2010; Fredheim and 
Khalaf 2016; Scott 2013). While scholars have explored instrumental, intrinsic, institutional, and use 
values mapped across individual and community levels (Scott 2009), this study draws on Jane Legget’s 
approach developed for her work with Maori on the collections of the Canterbury Museum (Legget 
2009, 2012). We selected Legget’s methodology, which has also been used for a study of the University 
of Alaska Museum of the North (Conner, Larson, and Diebel 2014), because it relies on stakeholders 
to generate statements of value and to identify relevant concepts, thereby mapping not just distinct 
attributes but whole paradigms of value.

To identify the particular stakeholder groups we consulted with staff at the sites and with heritage 
experts in the area. We also conducted research on the history of the sites and the contemporary 
debates and controversies about the sites. Based on this research we identified a preliminary list of 
more than twenty groups that shared an interest in the sites because of cultural affiliation, affinity, 
proximity, profession, or use. From that preliminary list, we selected twelve groups that represented 
constituencies who we felt could speak to the range of perspectives about the sites. Specifically, we 
identified three groups of stakeholders unique to each site (park employees, volunteers, and recre-
ational users who included a variety of people including horseback riders, hikers, runners, birders, 
native plants enthusiasts, etc.) and three groups who had professional or cultural connections to one 
or both sites (archaeologists, educators, and Native Americans). In addition, for Mounds State Park the 
stakeholder groups included those who self-identified as opponents or proponents of the dam project, 
and Strawtown Koteewi’s unique stakeholders included the Parks Department board representing 
governance interests at the county agency level.

Once the stakeholder groups were identified, we issued an open invitation for people who self- 
identified as belonging to each stakeholder group to participate in a focus group. The methodology of 
the focus groups was modelled after Legget’s study to elicit meanings and concepts important to the 
participants, rather than ask them to respond to preordained lists. In each focus group, participants 
were asked to define and discuss the meaning of the terms heritage, culture, and cultural heritage. The 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  749

Which of the following group(s) do you feel you are a part of or affiliated with?

Casual recreational/trail user
Wildlife enthusiast/naturalist

Cultural heritage…

Anderson community member
Park volunteer
Educator
Native American community member
Department of Natural Resources/Park…

Other local or state government staff
Business manager or owner
Strawtown community member

Figure 4. responses of self-identified affiliations. respondents could list as many as were applicable.

participants then wrote down statements or phrases, articulating what they valued about the site in 
question, and those statements were shared with the group. They then discussed the various statements 
and sorted them according to their common elements. For three individuals who were unable to attend 
the focus group, we replicated the process through one-on-one phone interviews.

Based on the focus group statements, we developed an online survey based on the statements and 
concepts mapped by the focus groups in order to test them with a larger sample of respondents. The 
survey was designed using a Q-sort methodology called exploratory factor analysis that helps reveal 
how people think about a topic by having them rank and sort a series of statements (See Appendix A 
for a full list of the statements). The survey also asked questions about respondents’ familiarity with 
the parks and their connections to the sites (Figure 4), and asked them to self-identify from a list of 
stakeholder groups. We distributed the online survey widely through existing communication networks 
(the parks’ email lists, professional organisations’ listservs), through emails gathered for the study, and 
through postings to social media such as the Facebook pages for the Native American Indian News 
in Indiana and the Strawtown Koteewi Park (SKP) fan group.

Sample description
We received 74 complete surveys (out of 127 started for a 58% completion rate), and it is important 
to note that the views expressed in the survey are neither monolithic nor generalisable.3 Respondents, 
who self-identified their stakeholder groups, did not see their identities in relation to the sites in 
discrete terms and often selected multiple affiliations (for example, one could be both a staff member 
and an archaeologist or a volunteer and a recreational user). We also asked respondents to rank their 
affiliations, which allowed us to understand where they placed the most weight or strength in terms 
of their affiliation (Figure 5). Those with cultural and professional connections to the site were most 
likely to be singular in their affiliation, while local residents and recreational users were more likely 
to have multiple affiliations. These multiple affiliations reflect the complexity of relationships with 
and views of these sites.

There are also definitive differences in the familiarity of stakeholder groups with each site (Figure 6). 
The sample size for some of the subgroups (DNR and Hamilton Parks staff, Anderson community 
members, etc.) limit the statistical analysis that is possible, yet there are certain trends that are sug-
gested in the data. For example, cultural heritage professionals and Native Americans seem to be 
equally familiar with both sites, while wildlife enthusiast/naturalists and park volunteers were far 
more familiar with MSP. In general, primary group affiliation accounts for approximately 30% of the 

750 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

Group

Group Affiliation

Native American community member 
Cultural heritage professional/ 
archaeologist 
DNR/Park staff member 
Casual recreation/Trail user 
Wildlife enthusiast/naturalist 
Other local or state government staff 
rotacudE
Anderson community member 
reetnulovkraP
Business manager or owner 
Strawtown community member 

Mean
Rank 
1.18 
1.32

1.38 
2
2 
2.25
92.2
2.37
65.2
3.75
n/a 

N

11 
25

8 
41
38 
4
41
19
81
4
0 

Figure 5. Mean rank for respondent affiliation.

Primary Connection 

Casual recreational/trail 
user
Wildlife 
enthusiast/naturalist 
Anderson community 
member 
Native American 
community member 
Department of Natural 
Resources/Hamilton 
Parks staff member 
Park volunteer 
Educator
Cultural heritage 
professional/archaeologist 
Strawtown community 
member 
Business manager or 
owner
Other local or state 
government staff 

Familiar with SKP 
(Mean)
2.33

Familiar with 
MSP (Mean) 
3.5

3.1 

1.67

3 

2.67

1.7 
3.5
4.23 

n/a

n/a 

n/a

4.45 

5

3.71 

4.33

4.71 
4.5
4.05 

n/a

n/a 

n/a

N

6

20 

3

7 

3

7 
5
22 

0

0 

0

Figure 6. familiarity of stakeholder groups with each site.

variance for familiarity with SKP (R² = .301, F = 4.05, df = 7, p < .01), while primary affiliation was 
not a significant variable for familiarity with MSP.

Results
The survey results provide the most cogent findings for understanding stakeholder-defined values of 
heritage at the two Indiana sites. As noted, the survey was based on the statements gathered during 
the focus groups about the value of the sites. Survey respondents were asked to sort and rank the 
statements (Q-Sort methodology). The resulting ranking of concepts indicates what people strongly 
agree with, what they disagree with, and which values are neutral. The analysis of the survey responses 
identified six factors that showed significant patterns of thought (Appendix B).4 A factor, in the context 
of factor analysis, is a concept or concourse of thought indicated by similar response patterns that are 
associated with a variable that is not directly measured. The statements with the highest and lowest 

Table 1. Comparison of top 6 factors and their stakeholder groups.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  751

Themes of closest value

Themes of farthest value

Stakeholder groups

 
factor 1

factor 2

factor 3

factor 4

Value lies in connection to native 
americans, sacred sites, places 
of identity for their story, burials, 
and ritual

Value lies in places of recreation, 

connection with nature, apprecia-
tion of nature’s beauty

Value is knowledge gained through 
preservation and public education

Valued as places of learning

factor 5

Valued as public, recreational spaces

factor 6

Valued for ecology and archaeo-

logical study, and for preserving 
native american mounds

Public and shared spaces for leisure 

and general recreation

Places of plurality of meanings, 

places of learning

general recreation

Primarily native american commu-
nity members, but also educators, 
cultural heritage and archaeology 
professionals

Primarily recreational users

Cultural heritage professionals, 
archaeologists, and educators

Places for connecting history and 

Cultural heritage, wildlife enthusiast, 

nature

Connections between past and 

present and between natural and 
cultural heritage

Public spaces for recreation, multi-

ple meanings

native american

recreational user, volunteers, cultur-

al heritage professionals

Park staff, cultural heritage profes-

sionals

scores for each factor sort were qualitatively analysed to articulate the common element or aspect 
view of each factor. We also looked at the correlations between each factor and the self-identified 
stakeholder affiliation of the respondents (Table 1).

The survey results were both expected and unexpected. Unsurprisingly, the top six factors (or con-
cepts) reflected views we heard in the focus groups. Factor 1 statements of closest valie focus on the 
sacredness of the sites and their value as Native American places for their stories, burials, and ritual. 
Factor 1 is the most common and strongest factor, and views of this factor alone account for 33.5% 
of all variance in how statements are sorted by all respondents. Factor 2 statements value the sites as 
resources for general recreation, connection with nature, and appreciation of nature’s beauty. Factor 
3 statements value the research potential of the sites and their contributions to our knowledge of the 
past through preservation and public education. The remaining Factors (4–6), while less common 
and weaker in strength, are still significant. The statements associated with Factor 4 value the sites as 
places of learning, but not for connecting history and nature. It is worth noting that while this factor 
was significant for a small group of respondents, other survey participants strongly disagreed with it. 
Factor 5 documents a set of views that resonate with the Factor 2’s emphasis on recreational use, but 
did not value the sites as places to make connections between past and present or between natural and 
cultural heritage. Factor 5 is interesting in that it seems to privilege use value over the sites’ signifi-
cance as cultural resources or the value of those resources for education and other intangible benefits 
that might be derived from their history. As with Factor 4, a significant number of respondents also 
disagreed with it. Factor 6, while the weakest in the set of concourses of thought, is significant in that 
it clearly articulates a singular view of the value of the sites as places of ecology and archaeological 
study, with an emphasis on the preservation, research, and educational value of the Native American 
cultural resources.

The survey results were also unsurprising in that when we correlated the factors with the self- 
identified stakeholder groups, they aligned largely as we anticipated given the views expressed in 
interviews and focus groups (Table 1). Native Americans were the main group who valued the sites as 
sacred places for burial and ritual, although others, including some cultural heritage professionals, held 
this view as well. Recreational users valued the sites as a place to connect with nature, while cultural 
heritage professionals appreciated the research and educational value of the sites. While these findings 
reinforced impressions from the focus groups, they also provided valuable quantitative confirmations 
of the broader consensus about the value of the sites.

The results became even more interesting when we started looking at which statements the survey 
respondents ranked farthest from their views (Table 1), in other words those they strongly disagreed 

752 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

with. The data suggest that the sites’ primary value for recreation was the most important aspect for 
the Factors 2 and 5 groups, comprised mostly of recreational users, but it was the farthest or least 
valued aspect for Native Americans and cultural heritage professionals in Factors 1, 3, 6. Conversely, 
the value of the sites as places of meaning, identity, and education for Factors 1 and 3 groups were 
the farthest values for Factors 2, 5, and 6. Factor 5 statements, while similar to Factor 2, reveal even 
more starkly the contrast between public and recreational values on the one hand, and educational or 
other benefits that might accrue from the cultural resources at the sites. Specifically, the least valued 
statements articulate the connection between history and nature and between past and present. The 
inclusion of the last statement ‘Sites hold Indiana’s memories’ in the ‘closest’ category creates some 
ambiguity in a set of statements that otherwise privileges the present use of the sites, but the interpre-
tation of ‘Indiana’ may reflect the sense that visiting the sites over the years has become its own form 
of heritage practice, a sentiment expressed in some of the focus groups, particularly by the Mounds 
State Park recreational users and volunteers, some of whom have deep family connections to the site 
during its 87 year history as a park. Factor 6 represents a small, but significant view in that the sites’ 
value for ecology, archaeological study, and for preserving Native American mounds stood in direct 
contrast to the public, multivalent, and recreational values of the sites. These findings provided clear 
and convincing evidence for the reasons behind contested heritage. Not only were the different stake-
holder groups’ paradigms of value distinct, but they were in direct opposition regarding what they 
valued the most and the least about the sites.

As one might expect, there was a correlation among factors in the sample (Table 2). Specifically, 
Factors 1, 3, and 6, are positively correlated at approximately the same strength. Simplistically phrased, 
when respondents align with Factor 1 they also significantly agree with Factors 3 and 6. There is also 
a significant positive correlation is found between Factors 4 and 5. Conversely, Factors 1 and 5 are 
negatively correlated with each other, meaning that the people articulating values aligned with Factor 
1 are likely to strongly disagree with Factor 5. Factors 5 and 6 are similarly negatively correlated. Of 
note is the finding that Factor 2 does not appear to be strongly correlated with any other factor.

Examining the data more deeply reveals the complex and nuanced relationships among the seem-
ingly diametrically opposed stakeholder-defined frameworks of value. Not only are the implications 
of the congruence and divergence among the respective paradigms of value at these heritage sites 
important for potential dialogue about the sites, but they illuminate the fields of power in which the 
sites operate and raise issues for critical heritage studies more broadly.

After completing the Q-sort of statements, survey respondents were asked to further refine their 
views. The three closest and three farthest statements each respondent selected (i.e. the statements they 
felt most strongly about, positively and negatively) were displayed. Each of those statements was paired 
with an opposing statement and randomly placed on the left or right side of a six-point spectrum. 
Respondents were then asked, ‘Thinking about Strawtown Koteewi Park and Mounds State Park, which 
statement describes your values more? For each pair of statements, select a point. The stronger you 
feel about a statement, the closer you should place your point to that statement’. Those pairs with at 
least 10% of the responses were examined. The stronger respondents felt about a statement, the closer 

Table 2. Strength of factor correlation.

1

2

1

Factor correlation matrix
Component
1
2
3
4
5
6
notes: factor extraction Method: Principal Component analysis; rotation Method: oblimin with Kaiser normalisation.
*significant correlation.

−0.242*
−0.113
−0.112
0.255*
1

−0.171
0.255
−0.105
−0.242*
0.291*

−0.03
−0.097
−0.113
−0.034

1
0.255*
−0.157

−0.105
−0.097
−0.073

−0.073
−0.112
0.156

−0.278*

−0.171

0.255*

−0.03

3

4

5

1

1

6

0.291*
−0.034
0.156
−0.157
−0.278*

1

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  753

ecnairavelttilhtiwstnemetatS

Without them we would lose our past history and our 
knowledge of the area. 
The cultural and natural heritage are both present. 
The sites have a long history of human activity and diverse 
natural ecosystems. 
The sites’ archaeological remains hold untold stories of life 
in Central Indiana. 
They are places to experience the connection between past 
and present. 
They are important to Native American people as sacred 
sites. 
They are public resources made available to the 
community.
They are places where people can take in the natural beauty 
of the trails. 
The sites blend history and nature. 
The sites give us a continuous story about the area and its 
people.
It is important to preserve the Native American mounds 
and earthworks. 
They are shared spaces for the public 

naeMsesnopseR
8

1

  7 
16

  20 

8

  12 

13

  11 

14
  8 

9

  20 

6 
5.9

5.9 

5.9

5.8 

5.8

5.7 

5.6
5.6 

5.6

1.5 

Figure 7. Statements with little variance.
*the stronger respondents felt about a statement, the closer the mean to the extremes (i.e. 1 or 6).

the mean to the extremes (i.e. 1 or 6). The statements that had the least ambiguity for respondents 
(Figure 7) document the most strongly held positions.

Equally interesting to the strongly held views are the statements that showed more variance (Figure 8). 
For these statements, the means were not only closer to the middle of the scale; the responses also more 
varied. In other words, this is not a case of one group rating a statement the absolute strongest and 
another rating it the absolute weakest – shades of grey were present. This suggests that the respondents 
viewed these statements with nuance and not just as binary choices. This finding is further supported 
by the fact that two thirds of respondents indicated that they did not feel neutral even with the  
statements that remained (i.e. those not represented in their top six statements).5

Respondents’ familiarity with the two sites mapped across the six factors (Table 3) is also revealing. 
Mounds State Park (MSP), which is the older, more established park, is better known on the whole, 
but most people were fairly familiar with both sites. The only two factors for which the respondents 
are more familiar with Strawtown (SKP) than Mounds (Factors 3 and 6) are worth noting. Both of 
these factors were primarily associated with archaeologists and other heritage professionals. In the 
archaeological community, Strawtown Koteewi is seen as a highly significant site for understanding 
the complex lifeways and long-term occupation of a Woodland village site. It is unusual both in its 
preservation and its protected status on public land, Furthermore, after many decades in which the 
private land owner refused to permit any archaeological testing, it was the focus of intensive research-
driven excavations for at least a decade. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that archaeologists prize it 
as a unique site for producing knowledge about the Native past and for education.

Given this importance of Strawtown Koteewi among archaeological circles, it is significant to note 
that Factor 2 respondents – primarily recreational users – were quite familiar with Mounds State Park 
(4.5 on a scale of 1–5) but were far less knowledgeable about Strawtown Koteewi (1.75). There was also 
a significant percentage of respondents (35%) who had never been to Strawtown Koteewi vs. only 8% 
who had never been to Mounds State Park (Figure 9). This frame of reference is important because 
even though the two sites are 20 miles apart and both have significant Native American earthworks, 
there is little public awareness of the human remains associated with the sites. Instead, Mounds State 
Park’s signficance for Native history is seen primarily as ceremonial site. Although six burials have 
been identified there, they were excavated in the late 1960s and are not a prominent part of the public 

754 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

Statement pairs with 
greater variance

They provide a feeling 
of leisure, a place to get 
away.
We can learn from the 
past and build on it to 
make our future better. 

They are Native 
American sacred sites. 

Number of responses 
for each part of 
spectrum
1     2     3     4    5    6 
7 

7  4 

1 

  

4

2

2

1

6 

1  1 

1 

  

1  They are Native 

Responses Mean

19 

9

10 

9

28 

7

2.0 

2.0

2.1 

2.2

2.3 

2.3

   They stop a feeling 
of leisure, a place to 
get away. 
We can’t learn from 
the past and build on 
it to make our future 
better. 

American settlement 
sites. 
They tell the story of 
one culture. 

   They provide few 
opportunities for 
recreation. 

1 The sites represent 

an atypical picture of 
the history of 
settling North 
America. 

They tell the story of 
many different cultures. 
They provide many 
opportunities for 
recreation. 
The sites represent a 
microcosm of the history 
of settling North 
America. 

5

1
2

3

2

2  1 

1

  

2

1

1
3

1

They educate people that 
there are still Native 
Americans here. 

They provide 
opportunities for people 
to do common activities. 

They are places for 
Native Americans to 
have stories told for 
them. 

6 

2  3 

  

  

2  They educate people 

13 

2.4 

that Native 
Americans are 
extinct. 

1

1

1

6

3

4 They provide 

16

4.3

opportunities for 
people to do things 
they don’t normally 
do.

1 

  

2 

  

  

4  They are places for 

7 

4.4 

Native Americans to 
tell their story. 

Figure 8. Statements with greater variance.
*the stronger respondents felt about a statement, the closer the mean to the extremes (i.e. 1 or 6).

Table 3. Mean scores on an endpoint anchored scale of 1–5.

How familiar are you with…
Factor
1
2
3
4
5
6

 

 

SKP
3.67
1.75
4.6
3.25
3.5
4.5

MSP

4
4.5
4.4
4.75
4.75
4

interpretation of the site.6 Strawtown Koteewi, by contrast, was an intensively occupied village with 
multiple burials. While human remains have been excavated there over the past ten years, few people 
outside of the archaeology profession and Native American communities are aware of the presence of 
human remains at the site.7 The relative invisibility of burials at the site for most of the casual users is 
significant because it is explicitly the presence of human remains and their recovery in archaeological 
excavations that is so problematic for many Native Americans.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  755

Figure 9. frequency of park visitation among survey respondents.

Furthermore, few people in the general population are aware of the cultural significance of the 
presence of ancestors for Native American people today, let alone knowledgeable about the intricacies 
of federal NAPGRA legislation. The contour maps, plan views, and cross-sections that inform archae-
ological understandings of the sites are circulated in technical reports and conference presentations, 
and debates about repatriation take place largely within the closed circles of heritage professionals 
and Native consultation. While Native people participating in this study expressed interest in the 
information archaeology could produce and the understanding it could offer of Native history, they 
were appalled by what they perceived as the lack of sensitivity toward human remains at the site. Yet 
their outrage and pain of learning that children helped to screen dirt that potentially contained the 
remains of ancestors is heard only within Native communities and closed NAGPRA consultation 
sessions. For recreational users, the parks are nature preserves with attractive trails and perhaps some 
curious mounds that are remnants of long-past cultures. Even official records reveal the disconnec-
tion with contemporary Native communities. For example, the ‘Phase I Feasibility Study’ conducted 
by Anderson Corporation for Economic Development for the proposed dam and reservoir project 
noted in their summation of impacted historic properties and archaeological resources: ‘The Adena 
first inhabited the site around 1000 BC and built several of the mounds. Later cultures, such as the 
Hopewell, used the earthworks for burial purposes in addition to using them for gathering places 
for religious ceremonies’ and then recommended that in addition to an archaeological survey ‘it will 
also be imperative that outreach include the tribes referenced above as their official approval may be 
required’ (Anderson Corporation 2011, 10–11).

Significance of the findings for stakeholder-defined values of heritage
This case study of two sites in central Indiana has a number of implications for revealing the fields 
of power in which these sites operate and for understanding the significance of stakeholder-defined 
values of heritage sites more broadly. First, the findings reflect the fundamental structures of power 
and ideology that frame the interpretation of Indigenous history and cultural heritage in much of the 
United States. The history of Native peoples at the sites are subsumed within a broader settler colonial 
narrative that objectifies the past into material remains essentialised as archaeological or cultural her-
itage resources. The discourse around these resources is informed by the technologies, languages, and 
epistemologies of the archaeological discipline, and reified through its circulation within the largely 
closed networks of professional communication and its presentation in interpretive panels at the sites. 
Although Native interpreters, particularly at Strawtown Koteewi, help to mediate this codification of 
Native history as archaeology, for the most part the official interpretation at the sites perpetuates the 

756 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

nineteenth-century paradigm of presenting Indigenous history as natural history (Karp and Wilson 
1996; Hill 2000; Peterson, Allen, and Hamby 2008; Lonetree 2012; Larson 2015). This approach is 
exemplified by the fact that the interpretive centres at parks are called the ‘Taylor Centre of Natural 
History’ and the ‘Nature Centre’. Their exhibits tend to objectify and essentialise the Native past as a 
series of material patterns represented through artefacts, organised into chronologies, and distanced 
from the present-day cultures and concerns of Native peoples.8 Furthermore, in addition to framing 
Native history through chronologies and typologies, the static displays echo typical settler colonial 
tropes by glossing over the violence and dispossession of colonialism and ignoring the contemporary 
consequences for Native communities.

Like the exhibits’ epistemologies for framing Native history as archaeology and the tropes for 
interpreting it in natural history museum idioms, the focus group and survey data provide evidence 
of the fundamental ideologies informing perceptions of the value of the two sites. They also reveal 
the divergence between the groups (including archaeologists, heritage professionals, and recreational 
users) who view sites as property or physical remains to be enjoyed, studied, and protected and the 
Native Americans who relate to the sites with a very different way. For many Native people, the sites are 
significant because they are seen as their ancestral home, the burial places of their ancestors imbued 
with spiritual significance and experienced through personal connections to earth, creator, and ances-
tors. The value of the sites is not defined merely by their corporeal existence, although the human 
remains are hugely important, but as places of relationships. The most revealing articulation of these 
contrasting paradigms of value came in a conversation with a Native American during the first phase 
of the research. When asked in an interview what heritage means, he responded ‘I don’t really use the 
word heritage … [I] Don’t ever use the term – doesn’t inform my thought process. If I had to give a 
stereotypical answer, I guess I would say the customs of a people, but I just don’t ever use that word’.

After we concluded the interview, he wrote a follow up email.
I just thought of why I don’t use ‘heritage’. To me, it connotes a disconnect from a particular group’s culture. If 
one labels things as ‘heritage’, it makes those things abstract and easier to write off as novelty. At least in regards 
to Native American culture. When people talk about Native American heritage it’s usually regarded as a spectacle, 
something to talk about for nostalgic reasons. But, that’s no one particular person’s fault, it’s unfortunately just 
the way that we have been represented. Where some people say ‘heritage’, I would say ‘way of life’. The ancestors 
who made those sites still live though us today, and we gain strength through that.
The implications of this study echo the findings of other critical heritage studies seeking to map 
the fields of power in which heritage works, particularly in settler colonial societies. The findings 
not only trace the similarities and contrasts of what people value about the sites, but they also open 
the conversation to a critique of the notion of cultural heritage as a material resource to be managed 
and interpreted (Harris 2005; Colwell-Chanthaphonh and Ferguson 2006; Smith 2006, 276–298). 
The Native American respondent’s comments reject the potentially objectifying import of the term 
cultural heritage and instead articulate a paradigm predicated on relationships and the continuity of 
past and present. Whereas the non-Native respondents expressed the value of the sites in a variety of 
ways, they all conceived of the sties as property – something potentially to be owned, used, developed, 
studied, and managed.

The findings also suggest strategies that might to counter the longstanding hegemony of official 
heritage discourses, such as those evident in the Strawtown Koteewi and Mounds State Park exhib-
its. Calls to democratise and to decolonise museum practices by embracing a wider range of voices 
including indigenous perspectives (Hakiwai 2005; Lonetree 2012; Runnel and Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt 
2014; Onciul 2015) could inform programming at the sites. For example, in addition to the current 
practice of inviting Native people to demonstrate traditional arts and foodways, site managers might 
host dialogue-based programmes that address the histories of displacement and diaspora of Native 
peoples in Indiana, discuss the divergent views of the value of the sites, explore the significance of the 
narratives as they are currently being presented, and help visitors make connections between the rich 
record of the Native past and contemporary Native communities.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  757

Although statements from many of the focus group participants recognised the importance of the 
sites to contemporary tribal communities, in the survey responses those statements resonated as the 
highest priority largely only within Native American respondents and some heritage professionals. 
That lack of public understanding of those connections and the controversies associated with the 
sites create an opportunity to go beyond the officially mandated consultation regarding the handling 
and repatriation of excavated cultural property and to embrace more collaborative, inclusive prac-
tices. Since the enactment of NAGPRA, there has been substantial growth in what has been labelled 
Indigenous Archaeology, which emphasises collaboration between tribal members and archaeologists 
and is guided by the research questions or concerns of Indigenous people (Watkins 2000; Smith and 
Wobst 2005; Nicholas 2014). Methodologies and perspectives on interpretation are often negotiated at 
the time projects are started, but continually adjusted as needed. Many projects employ community- 
based participatory research (Atalay 2012), and several have produced excellent jointly managed 
heritage programmes that might be possible models for sites like Mounds State Park and especially at 
Strawtown Koteewi Park. These multivalent perspectives could be incorporated into the interpretation 
at the sites, potentially even creating safe spaces for visitor responses or dialogue-based programmes.
This study identifies both the shared interests and the inherent contradictions in the value paradigms 
of key stakeholders. A contextual analysis of the politics of heritage similarly points to contested terrain, 
both physically and ideologically. And yet, there is evidence of a potentially productive space in the 
midst of these polarised views. The Q-Sort analysis not only identifies extremes, but also measures 
the shades of grey in between, that is, those statements to which respondents neither strongly agree 
nor disagree. We found that in addition to the values held most closely and those ranked farthest, 
most people also embraced in neutral terms the underlying themes of the sites as places where peo-
ple connect with nature now and in the past, where people learn about other ways of life, and where 
people understand connections. That common middle ground may be a place to start conversations.
Mapping the paradigms of stakeholder-defined value also raises questions for government owned 
and managed sites that are held accountable to both the missions of the sites and the tax-funded 
premise of contributing to their citizens’ quality of life. Adjudicating among conflicting criteria for 
that quality – sacred sites to be honoured, economic engines to be invested in, ecological and cultural 
resources to be studied, preserved, and interpreted, recreational spaces to be developed – requires 
not merely understanding the range of audiences, interests, and values, but a constant negotiation 
of priorities. In rare instances legislation such as NAPGPRA guides those decisions, but a thousand 
smaller choices framed by the policies of governmental agencies build the political and ideologi-
cal structures that ultimately mandate whose interests are privileged. Some National Park Service 
and other government-owned sites in the U.S. have recognised the need to transform the ways they 
interpret the past, but many more are constrained by ‘bureaucratic inertias, entrenched patterns of 
insularity, and reliance on top-down authority’ (Shea, Zujewski, and Parker 2016, 129). Contestation 
and controversy can be a constructive force in disrupting the status quo. The clear evidence of the 
fissures and frictions of site values could be a catalyst for those responsible for the sites’ management 
and governance to engage in thinking about the role that heritage can play in a democratic, pluralistic 
society (Zimmerman 2013).

Conclusion
The opportunity at Strawtown Koteewi and Mounds State Park, as in contested heritage sites around 
the globe, is to name the ways in which the uses of the sites are complicit in the histories of colonialism 
and politics of heritage. It is also an opportunity to invite people into conversation about how these 
sites could be used and interpreted in ways that respect and acknowledge their diverse values and 
range of meanings to multiple communities. Throughout the study, it was evident that people in all 
of the stakeholder groups care deeply about these sites. Most also expressed an openness to learning 
about the sites and about other stakeholders’ perspectives. Perhaps the most striking observation we 
can take away from this study is the contrast between the complex but largely rigid frames of value 

758 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

evident in the survey results and the much more dynamic, generous, and fluid discussions about 
meaning and value in the focus group conversations. While such conversations are time consuming 
and can be uncomfortable, the study affirmed the power of dialogue to provoke thoughtful questions, 
expand understanding, and create empathy.

Notes
1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

 A period known as the Oliver Phase of the Middle Woodland.
 Archaeological investigations included a three year National Science Foundation funded ‘Research Experience 
for Undergraduates (REU)’ with Indiana University Purdue University, Fort Wayne (IPFW).
 Ignoring incomplete surveys, the remaining data were screened for univariate outliers. There were 16 out-of-
range values due to participant and/or platform error(s), but these values did not impact the analysis because 
it related to an element that is not included in the methodology – the statement ranking of statements within 
each of group (i.e. ‘closest/farthest from my values’).
 For this study, we determined that a scree plot was the most reliable method for discovering the appropriate 
number of factors to extract. These six factors explain 63% of all variance in sorting the statements.
 In the Q-sort methodology, the statements that remain after the sorting process should be primarily statements 
for which the respondents have neutral feelings. However, since the statements derived from focus groups, it 
was expected that some respondents would not be ambivalent about even these left over statements.
 Six burials were excavated at Mounds in 1968 and 1969. Of those, four appear to be Late Woodland intrusive 
burials into the mounds, and two date to the construction of the Great Mound. ‘Two burials had been placed on 
the floor of the tomb, and associated with them were some fragments of mica and a platform pipe. The burials 
consisted of a redeposited cremation and a secondary or “bundle” burial, the latter of which was an adult male’ 
(Vickery 1969, 78). The excavations at Mounds State Park were directed by Claude F. White in 1968 and by 
Kent D. Vickery in 1969. The project was financed by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources with the 
cooperation of the Glenn A. Black Laboratory of Archaeology, Indiana University (Cochran and McCord 2001).
 This awareness may be changing as an article in the Indianapolis Star titled ‘How a Native American burial site 
was desecrated in Hamilton County’ was published 5 November 2016 detailed the grievances of Native American 
groups regarding the excavation and treatment of human remains at Strawtown (Sikich 2016).
 The framing of the site’s significance within ‘nature’ is consistent with the founding of the parks by Richard 
Lieber in 1916 in honour of the state’s Centennial. It is also consistent with the colonialist trope of seeing Native 
Americans as part of nature rather than culture, the trope with a history that goes back to at least Lewis and Clark.

Acknowledgement
This project was supported by Indiana University’s New Frontiers in the Arts & Humanities Programme, a programme 
of the Office of the Vice President for Research funded by the Office of the President. Elizabeth Kryder-Reid is the 
PI. Co-PIs Elizabeth (Elee) Wood and Jeremy Foutz, principal at STEAM Workgroup, helped to develop the research 
methodology. Wood facilitated the focus group sessions. Collaborator Larry Zimmerman served as consultant for work 
with Native American communities. Foutz designed and administered the survey and conducted the statistical analysis 
of these data. Emma Marston served as graduate research assistant for the first six months of the project. A preliminary 
version of this analysis was presented by Elizabeth Kryder-Reid at the ACHS Conference in Montreal in June, 2016, in 
the session ‘“For people then and for people now”: approaches to heritage and shared authority’. All four authors col-
laborated on writing this article. We greatly appreciate the assistance of the staff at MSP and SKP, particularly Ted Tapp 
and Christy Brocken, for generously sharing documents, hosting the focus groups, helping disseminate information 
and recruit participants, and for their willingness to investigate stakeholder-defined values of the sites they administer.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was supported by Indiana University [New Frontiers in the Arts & Humanities Programme].

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  759

Notes on contributors
Elizabeth Kryder-Reid is a professor of Anthropology and Museum Studies in the IU School of Liberal Arts at IUPUI 
and director of the Cultural Heritage Research Center and the former Director (1998-2013) of the IUPUI Museum 
Studies Program. With a background in archaeology, art history, and public history, her research investigates cultural 
heritage with a particular focus on the intersections of landscape and power and how materiality is deployed in the 
contestation of social inequalities across boundaries such as gender, race, class, ethnicity, and religion. Her publications 
include California Mission Landscapes: Race, Memory, and the Politics of Heritage (University of Minnesota Press, 2016) 
and the co-authored Keywords in American Landscape Design (Yale University Press, 2010).
Jeremy W. Foutz Leveraging his knowledge and experience in the arts, culture, education, technology, and evaluation 
fields, Jeremy W. Foutz works with cultural arts and science organizations to help them evaluate their programs and 
goals to make them more meaningful to a variety of audiences in multiple environments. After earning his Bachelor’s 
degree in Music Education and Master’s Degree in Ethnomusicology, he founded STEAM Workgroup, a research and 
evaluation consulting company.
Elizabeth (Elee) Wood, M.Ed., Ph.D., is an associate professor of Museums Studies in the IU School of Liberal Arts at 
IUPUI and Director of the IUPUI Museum Studies Program. A practitioner and scholar in the field of informal and 
non-formal learning in museums and community settings, her current research focuses on the role and meaning of 
objects in museums, learning and human development; the use of critical pedagogy in museum exhibitions and pro-
gramming, and civic engagement practices of museums. She teaches courses in museum education, museums and audi-
ences, museum theatre, and object-based learning. She also serves as the editor of the journal Museums & Social Issues.
Larry  J.  Zimmerman  is  a  professor  of  Anthropology  &  Museum  Studies  and  Public  Scholar  of  Native  American 
Representation at Indiana University–Purdue University, Indianapolis and the Eiteljorg Museum of American Indians 
and Western Art, in Indianapolis. He received his PhD in 1976 from the University of Kansas, then taught at the University 
of South Dakota from 1974-1996, where he was Distinguished Regents Professor. He then served as Chair of American 
Indian and Native Studies at the University of Iowa from 1998 to 2001, and as head of the Archaeology Department at 
the Minnesota Historical Society before taking his present position in 2004. He has authored, edited, or co-edited 25 
books and more than 300 articles, book chapters and technical reports. He has been a consultant for a wide range of 
American Indian nations and organizations. His research interests include the archaeology of the United States Great 
Plains and Midwest, indigenous archaeology, ethics, and issues related to cultural property. He is now heavily involved 
in a research project on the archaeology of homelessness in Indianapolis.

Press.

References
Adair, Bill, Benjamin Filene, and Laura Koloski. 2011. Letting Go? Sharing Historical Authority in a User-Generated 

World. Philadelphia, PA; Walnut Creek, CA: Pew Center for Arts & Heritage; Left Coast Press.

Anderson Corporation for Economic Development. 2011. Anderson Reservoir Feasibility Study. Anderson, IN: Anderson 

Corporation for Economic Development.

Archibald, Robert R. 2004. The New Town Square Museums and Communities in Transition. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira 

ACHS (Association of Critical Heritage Studies). 2012. Manifesto. Online. http://www.criticalheritagestudies.org/history/.
Atalay, Sonya. 2012. Community-based Archaeology: Research with, by, and for Indigenous and Local Communities. 

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cochran, Donald R., and Beth K. McCord. 2001. The Archaeology of Anderson Mounds: Mounds State Park, Anderson, 
Indiana Reports of Investigation 61. Muncie, IN: Archaeological Resources Management Service, Ball State University.
Colwell-Chanthaphonh, Chip, and T. J. Ferguson. 2006. “Memory Pieces and Footprints: Multivocality and the Meanings 

of Ancient Times and Ancestral Places among the Zuni and Hopi.” American Anthropologist 108 (1): 148–162.

Conner, Laura D. Carsten, Angela M. Larson, and Carol E. Diebel. 2014. “What Matters to Stakeholders? Measuring 

Values at a University Museum.” Visitor Studies 17 (1): 45–65.

Fredheim, L. Harald, and Manal Khalaf. 2016. “The Significance of Values: Heritage Value Typologies Re-examined.” 

International Journal of Heritage Studies. 22 (6): 466–481.

Freeman, Richard Edward. 1984. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. Marshfield, MA: Pitman.
Freeman,  Richard  Edward,  Jeffrey  S.  Harrison,  Andrew  C.  Wicks,  Bidhan  L.  Parmar,  and  Simone  de  Colle.  2010. 

Stakeholder Theory: The State of the Art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hakiwai, Arapata. 2005. “The Search for Legitimacy: Museums in Aortearoa, New Zealand – A Maori Viewpoint.” In 
Heritage, Museums and Galleries: An Introductory Reader, edited by Gerard Corsane, 154–162. London: Routledge.
Harris, Heather. 2005. “Indigenous Worldviews and Ways of Knowing as Theoretical and Methodological Foundations 
behind Archaeological Theory and Method.” In Indigenous Archaeologies: Decolonizing Theory and Practice, edited 
by Claire Smith and H. M. Wobst, Indigenous Archaeologies, 33–41. London: Routledge.

760 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

66–67, 74.

Harrison, Rodney. 2013. Heritage: Critical Approaches. New York: Routledge.
Hill, Richard. 2000. “The Museum Indian: Still Frozen in Time and Mind.” Museum News 79 (3): 40–44, 58–61, 63, 

Holtorf, Cornelius, and Troels Myrup Kristensen, eds. 2015. “Heritage Erasure (Special Theme Issue).” International 

Journal of Heritage Studies 21 (4): 313–317.

Jones, James R. III, and Amy L. Johnson. 2016. Early Peoples of Indiana. Indianapolis: Indiana Department of Natural 

Resources (DHPA). https://www.in.gov/dnr/historic/files/HP_earlypeoples.pdf.

Karp, Ivan, and Fred Wilson. 1996. “Constructing the Spectacle of Culture in Museums.” In Thinking about Exhibitions, 

edited by Reesa Greenberg, Bruce W. Ferguson, and Sandy Nairne, 251–267. London: Routledge.

Larson, Carolyne R. 2015. Our Indigenous Ancestors: A Cultural History of Museums, Science, and Identity in Argentina, 

1877–1943. State College: Penn State Press.

Legget, Jane. 2009. “Measuring What We Treasure or Treasuring What We Measure? Investigating Where Community 

Stakeholders Locate the Value in Their Museums.” Museum Management and Curatorship 24 (3): 213–232.

Legget, Jane. 2012. “Using Concept Mapping and Stakeholder Focus Groups in a Museum Management Case Study.” In 
Field Guide to Case Study Research in Tourism, Hospitality and Leisure: Advances in Culture, Tourism, and Hospitality 
Research, edited by Kenneth F. Hyde, Chris Ryan, and Arch G. Woodside, Vol. 6, 61–88. Emerald Group Publishing Ltd.
Lonetree, Amy. 2012. Decolonizing Museums: Representing Native America in National and Tribal Museums. Chapel 

Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Lynch, Bernadette T., and Samuel J. M. M. Alberti. 2010. “Legacies of Prejudice: Racism, Co-production and Radical 

Trust in the Museum.” Museum Management and Curatorship 25 (1): 13–35.

Macdonald, Sharon. 2013. Memorylands: Heritage and Identity in Europe Today. London: Routledge.
Mitterhofer,  Johanna.  2013.  “Competing  Narratives  on  the  Future  of  Contested  Heritage:  A  Case  Study  of  Fascist 

Monuments in Contemporary South Tyrol, Italy.” Heritage & Society 6 (1): 46–61.

Mounds State Park. 2011. Interpretive Plan. Anderson, IN: Department of Natural Resources. Online. http://www.in.gov/

dnr/parklake/files/sp-Mounds_State_Park_IMP_2011.pdf.

Nicholas, George P. 2014. “Indigenous Archaeology.” Oxford Bibliographies. Online at http://www.oxfordbibliographies.

com/view/document/obo-9780199766567/obo-9780199766567-0073.xml.

Oland, Maxine, Siobahn M. Hart, and Liam Frank, eds. 2012. Decolonizing Indigenous Histories: Exploring Prehistoric/

Colonial Transitions in Archaeology. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

Onciul, Bryony. 2015. Museums, Heritage and Indigenous Voice: Decolonising Engagement. New York: Routledge.
Peterson, Nicolas, Lindy Allen, and Louise Hamby, eds. 2008. The Makers and Making of Indigenous Australian Museum 

Collections. Mebourne: Melbourne University Publishing.

Rico, Trinidad. 2015. “Heritage at Risk: The Authority and Autonomy of a Dominant Heritage Framework.” In Heritage 
Keywords: Rhetoric and Redescription in Cultural Heritage, edited by Kathryn Lafrenz Samuels and Trinidad Rico, 
147–162. Boulder: University Press of Colorado.

Runnel, Pille, and Pille Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, eds. 2014. Democratising the Museum: Reflections on Participatory 

Technologies. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Scott, Carol A. 2009. “Exploring the Evidence Base for Museum Value.” Museum Management and Curatorship 24 (3): 

Scott, Carol A., ed. 2013. Museums and Public Value: Creating Sustainable Futures. London: Routledge.
Semmel, Marsha L., and Mamie Bittner. 2009. “Demonstrating Museum Value: The Role of the Institute of Museum 

and Library Services.” Museum Management and Curatorship 24 (3): 271–288.

Shea, Margo, Maryann Zujewski, and Jonathan Parker. 2016. “Resuscitating the Promise: Reflections on Implementing 
Innovative and Collaborative History from the Nation’s First National Historic Site.” The Public Historian 38 (4): 
129–148.

Sikich,  Chris.  2016.  “Eternal  Unrest:  How  a  Native  American  Burial  Site  Was  Desecrated  in  Hamilton  County.” 

Indianapolis Star 1A (Nov. 6): 12A–14A.

Silverman, Helaine, and D. Fairchild Ruggles, eds. 2007. Cultural Heritage and Human Rights. New York: Springer.
Smith, Laurajane. 2006. The Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Smith, Laurajane, and Emma Waterton. 2009. Heritage, Communities and Archaeology. London: Duckworth.
Smith, Claire, and H. M. Wobst, eds. 2005. Indigenous Archaeologies: Decolonizing Theory and Practice. London: Routledge.
Soderland, Hilary A. 2010. “Values and the Evolving Concept of Heritage: The First Century of Archaeology and Law 
in the United States (1906–2006).” In Heritage Values in Contemporary Society, edited by George S. Smith, Phyllis 
Mauch Messenger and Hilary A. Soderland, 129–143. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.

Vickery, Kent D. 1969. “Preliminary Report on the Excavation of the ‘Great Mound’ at Mounds State Park in Madison 

County, Indiana.” Proceedings of the Indiana Academy of Science 79: 75–82.

Watkins, Joe E. 2000. Indigenous Archaeology: American Indian Values and Scientiﬁc Practice. Walnut Creek, CA: Left 

Weinberg,  Mark  L.,  and  Marsha  S.  Lewis.  2009.  “The  Public  Value  Approach  to  Strategic  Management.”  Museum 

Management and Curatorship 24 (3): 253–269.

Zimmerman, Larry J. 2013. “Is ‘The Past is a Public Heritage’ Democratizing or Alienating?” https://www.academia.

edu/16637059/Is_The_Past_is_a_Public_Heritage_Democratizing_or_Alienating.

Coast Press.

195–212.

Appendix A.  List of statements generated by focus groups and sorted by survey 
respondents

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  761

Statement #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Statement

they are sites of heritage for people then and people now.
they provide opportunities to connect with history and nature.
they are places to experience the connection between past and present.
they provide a connection to past cultures.
the mounds help us learn about past peoples who have lived here.
We can learn from the past and build on it to make our future better.
they help us to gain greater knowledge of all of us.
they educate the public.
they are native american sacred sites.
they are important for the preservation and protection of ancestral burials.
they are important to native american people as sacred sites.
the cultural and natural heritage are both present.
the sites blend history and nature.
the sites have a long history of human activity and diverse natural ecosystems.
Without them we would lose our past history and our knowledge of the area.
this land is an important part of the history of the area.
the sites represent a small microcosm of the history of settling north america.
they educate people that there are still native americans here.
It is important to preserve the native american mounds and earthworks.
they offer many opportunities for reconnection with nature.
they have unique natural resources in the area.
they are places where people can take in the natural beauty of the trails.
they are public land.
they are shared spaces for the public.
they are public resources made available to the community.
the land has been used by a diversity of cultures.
the sites hold Indiana’s memories.
the sites mean many things to many people.
they have many opportunities for recreation.
People can enjoy walking where others have walked for generations.
they provide a feeling of leisure, a place to get away.
they provide opportunities for people to do things they don’t normally do.
the sites give us a continuous story about the area and its people.
they are places for native americans to tell their story.
they tell the story of many different cultures.
the sites’ archaeological remains hold untold stories of life in Central Indiana.

Appendix B.  Statements by factor analysis

factor 1
Statement #
11
19
10
9
18
34

Statement #
24
21
25
29
31
23

 
Statement Closest to Values
they are important to native american people as sacred sites.
It is important to preserve the native american mounds and earthworks.
they are important for the preservation and protection of ancestral burials.
they are native american sacred sites.
they educate people that there are still native americans here.
they are places for native americans to tell their story.

Statement Farthest from Values
they are shared spaces for the public.
they have unique natural resources in the area
they are public resources made available to the community.
they have many opportunities for recreation.
they provide a feeling of leisure, a place to get away.
they are public land.

 

Z-score
1.95
1.911
1.788
1.677
1.671
1.491

 

−1.064
−1.118
−1.151
−1.307
−1.439
−1.631

 

Factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

 
−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5

(Continued)

762 

 

 E. KRYDER-REID ET AL.

Appendix B.  (Continued)
factor 2
Statement #
21
20
22
25
2
14

 
Statement Closest to Values
they have unique natural resources in the area
they offer many opportunities for reconnection with nature
they are places where people can take in the natural beauty of the trails.
they are public resources made available to the community.
they provide opportunities to connect with history and nature.
the sites have a long history of human activity and diverse natural ecosystems.

Statement #
4
3
28
7
6
35

factor 3
Statement #
Statement #
36
25
19
7
8
1

Statement #
29
20
30
27
22
31

factor 4
Statement #
6
10
7
28
21
17

Statement #
4
19
2
5
16
13

factor 5
Statement #
23
32
29
24
25
27

Statement #
6
3
12
8
14
2

Statement Farthest from Values
they provide a connection to past cultures.
they are places to experience the connection between past and present.
the sites mean many things to many people.
they help us to gain greater knowledge of all of us.
We can learn from the past and build on it to make our future better.
they tell the story of many different cultures.

 
Statement Closest to Values
Statement
the sites’ archaeological remains hold untold stories of life in Central Indiana.
they are public resources made available to the community.
It is important to preserve the native american mounds and earthworks.
they help us to gain greater knowledge of all of us.
they educate the public.
they are sites of heritage for people then and people now.

Statement Farthest from Values
they have many opportunities for recreation.
they offer many opportunities for reconnection with nature
People can enjoy walking where others have walked for generations.
the sites hold Indiana’s memories.
they are places where people can take in the natural beauty of the trails.
they provide a feeling of leisure, a place to get away.

 
Statement Closest to Values
We can learn from the past and build on it to make our future better.
they are important for the preservation and protection of ancestral burials.
they help us to gain greater knowledge of all of us.
the sites mean many things to many people.
they have unique natural resources in the area
the sites represent a small microcosm of the history of settling north america.

Statement Farthest from Values
they provide a connection to past cultures.
It is important to preserve the native american mounds and earthworks.
they provide opportunities to connect with history and nature.
the mounds help us learn about past peoples who have lived here.
this land is an important part of the history of the area.
the sites blend history and nature.

 
Statement Closest to Values
they are public land.
they provide opportunities for people to do things they don’t normally do.
they have many opportunities for recreation.
they are shared spaces for the public.
they are public resources made available to the community.
the sites hold Indiana’s memories.

Statement Farthest from Values
We can learn from the past and build on it to make our future better.
they are places to experience the connection between past and present.
the cultural and natural heritage are both present.
they educate the public.
the sites have a long history of human activity and diverse natural ecosystems.
they provide opportunities to connect with history and nature.

 

Z-score
1.977
1.967
1.462
1.349
1.344
1.163

 

−1.004
−1.136
−1.141
−1.509
−1.683
−1.698

 

Z-score
Z-score
2.138
1.224
1.070
1.025
0.843
0.828

Z-score
−1.174
−1.526
−1.625
−1.731
−2.058
−2.492

 

Z-score
2.019
1.694
1.509
1.490
1.143
1.078

Z-score
−0.896
−1.135
−1.191
−1.331
−1.447
−2.340

 

Z-score
1.958
1.511
1.478
1.389
1.267
1.264

Z-score
−1.082
−1.270
−1.293
−1.419
−1.987
−2.241

 

Factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

 
−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5

 

Factor score
factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

Factor score

−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5

 

Factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

Factor score

−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5

 

Factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

Factor score

−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  763

Appendix B.  (Continued)

factor 6
Statement #
17
36
14
33
10
19

Statement #
7
29
32
28
18
24

 
Statement Closest to Values
the sites represent a small microcosm of the history of settling north america.
the sites’ archaeological remains hold untold stories of life in Central Indiana.
the sites have a long history of human activity and diverse natural ecosystems.
the sites give us a continuous story about the area and its people.
they are important for the preservation and protection of ancestral burials.
It is important to preserve the native american mounds and earthworks.

Statement Farthest from Values
they help us to gain greater knowledge of all of us.
they have many opportunities for recreation.
they provide opportunities for people to do things they don’t normally do.
the sites mean many things to many people.
they educate people that there are still native americans here.
they are shared spaces for the public.

 

Z-score
2.819
1.812
1.323
1.173
1.169
0.903

Z-score
−0.964
−1.048
−1.104
−1.366
−1.443
−2.124

 

Factor score

5
4
4
3
3
3

Factor score

−3
−3
−3
−4
−4
−5


