All that we are – heritage inside out and upside down

Roshi Naidoo

Independent Scholar, Cardiff, uK

ABSTRACT
This  article  explores  how  the  axis  between  heritage  on  the ‘inside’  and 
heritage on the ‘outside’ is imagined and produced, theoretically, politically 
and institutionally. It asks which outsider narratives are privileged and which 
are contained, and what the management of these boundaries inadvertently 
tells us about the politics and anxieties of the ‘inside’. It offers reasons for the 
pervasiveness of the border despite various initiatives to invite the outside in.

In the first volume of his Memories of Empire trilogy Schwarz (2011) explores how empire, memory and 
ideas of racial whiteness interacted to shape the cultural and political landscape of the metropole in the 
years after decolonisation, bringing with it legacies that we are still living within. Memories of empire, 
in the 1960s moment that Schwarz begins his insightful analysis with, are organised not by the past but 
by the present, where an imagined order from colonial times is pitted against a perception of current 
disorder – even though both are fantasies. ‘Memories of the ordered past are thus the consequences of 
the experience of disorder. And like all memories they are organised in the present’ (Schwarz 2011, 9). 
For the followers of the famous British politician and right-wing ideologue of race, Enoch Powell, 
the presence of former colonial subjects in Britain triggered and structured recollections of empire. 
Such memories then were not lodged in some deep, essential way in the national psyche, but were 
revived and embedded within the body politic as a reaction to the present. Migrants, he notes, acti-
vated ‘memories of the imperial past – memories of white authority, in particular’ (Schwarz 2011, 11).
I begin with this as a way into thinking about the border between heritage on the ‘inside’ and that 
which remains ‘outside’. Heritage is about understanding which presents are served by the pasts in 
circulation in the contemporary moment. Discourses of race in critical heritage studies and heritage 
representations and practices therefore, can be read against these dialogues between past and present, 
particularly in relation to authority, agency and importantly, silences. Schwarz considers the evasions 
and displacements in memory work around histories of empire in the years after decolonisation and 
therefore may help shine a light on that inside/outside binary. Highlighting ‘forgotten’ heritage has not 
launched a great ‘remembering’ of the histories of outsiders. Rational argument about the centrality 
of colonialism in understanding national heritage has not led to race becoming centralised. This leads 
us to consider the irrational, the displacements of memory, wilful forgetting and the persistence and 
subtlety of patterns of white authority and class domination. Perhaps this will expose how power and 
exclusion operate, even when under the guise of inclusion and egalitarianism and why the border 
between heritage on the inside and heritage on the outside remains largely intact.

CONTACT  roshi naidoo 

 roshi.naidoo@yahoo.co.uk

© 2016 roshi naidoo. Published with license by taylor & francis.

 

  505

This article offers a partial analysis of that border. It is not about the outsider heritages which 
have gained discernible and impactful access to the inside, neither is it focussed on the many ways in 
which museums, for example, have engaged with issues of historiography, social justice and cultural 
representation. Rather, it is about the boundary itself and how the axis between heritage on the ‘inside’ 
and heritage on the ‘outside’ is imagined and produced, theoretically, politically and institutionally; 
and how it is challenged and navigated by those on the outside, and by those occupying both spaces. 
The first section considers the ways in which political, economic and social power relations structure 
the inside/outside boundary; the second section attempts to give voice to the more intangible factors 
that perpetuate it; and the third considers some of the perspectives of those outsiders looking in, and 
what is at stake for them as they navigate the choppy waters of being included into the mainstream.
It is informed by the work of cultural theorists foregrounding the economics of cultural prac-
tices more thoroughly (Littler, forthcoming; McGuigan 2011; Philips and Whannel 2013) thereby 
reinforcing the ‘critical’ in critical heritage studies. In a field where the consequences of how the 
past is organised and understood has direct relevance to everything from migration debates, global 
ecological collapse, feminist politics and the erosion of the public sector, to give just a few examples, 
the connections between heritage debates and the contemporary conjuncture can sometimes be hard 
to identify. Cultural studies as a discipline is concerned with laying bare the political, economic and 
social assumptions underpinning the ideas, cultures and attitudes which converge to construct notions 
of ‘common sense’ (Hall and O’Shea 2015). The desirability of ‘including the excluded’ has become 
naturalised within heritage discourses and does not necessarily represent a radical intervention that 
heralds a great changing of the guard. Therefore as exclusion persists, different tools are required to 
unpack what may lie behind the impetus to bring the outside in.

This article is also informed by collaborative work I have undertaken with museums, galleries and 
archives to affect change and influence policy and practice in the sector, by bringing a perspective on 
the cultural politics of difference that evaded essentialism; ceased ‘celebrating’ diversity in a liberal, 
patronising manner; and acknowledged these issues as central and vital for any post-colonial nation 
that wanted to have a genuine handle on its past (Littler and Naidoo 2005). Most important in this 
work was to root out more polite and respectable forms of discrimination, therefore visibility and 
representation were not the only issues – the narratives around ‘otherness’ that heritage practices 
utilised preoccupied those colleagues in the sector pursuing more progressive approaches. The binary 
of inside/outside hung over us all the time – our job was to eliminate it.

Heritage policies in the UK have routinely addressed the issue of including the excluded, particularly 
under the New Labour government (1997–2010) where heritage and culture were tied to a range of 
programmes aimed at regenerating communities and championing equality and diversity (Hewison 
2014). Yet much public history remains untroubled by the need to address the ways in which the 
outsiders are at the centre of the history of European modernity and the very fabric of every heritage 
expression situated as part of the inside. Popular understandings of the content of British heritage 
have changed little in the last 30 years, and the high ideals that accompanied the notion that the arts 
and heritage sector would respond to economic inequality or social discrimination have not troubled 
the foundations of that inside to produce different narratives of national identity.1 Mostly it has been 
business as usual. For example, when the right-wing press scaremonger about immigrants changing 
the face of traditional British culture, popular heritage narratives have not been a resource to help 
confidently counter these statements and instead have returned to discourses of ‘tolerance’ and benign 
multiculturalism. The most repeated metaphor that heritage institutions have deployed in thinking 
about the relationship of inside and outside is ‘margins to the core’ (V&A 2010), which comes with a 
presumption that this is the desired direction of travel. But where does that core actually reside and 
are we even speaking a similar philosophical language when we talk about it?

Imagining that the outside is in by virtue of, for example, a museum considering the views of a 
community group before it embarks on an exhibition, is profoundly different than the outside getting 
in through a reconfiguring of the boundary itself and a self-reflexive critique of how problematic it is 
for the inside to set the terms of the encounter. What constitutes inside and outside requires forensic 

506 

  R. NaIdoo

examination to root out the complex, often subliminal associations that accompany it. To facilitate 
some of the arguments I refer to the inside and outside in broad and perhaps generalised terms, but 
the fact that there is a tacit understanding of what belongs where, speaks volumes about the politics 
of heritage as it is popularly and professionally understood. My observations and examples are also 
skewed towards languages of race and exclusion and to the UK context, but I hope they speak to 
many of the barriers that different expressions of outsider heritage come up against across the world.

Inside looking out
The first issue to consider is how patterns of power maintain the status quo through, rather than 
despite, policies and practices that purport to do the opposite. To do that we need to focus in on 
the meanings attached to the inside and outside and how and why they are perpetuated. The inside/
outside border reproduces the idea that there is ‘real’ or ‘proper’ heritage, reflected in such things as 
the country house, the eternal landscape of the English countryside, the monarchy, etc., and ‘new’ or 
‘worthy’ heritage where we talk about slavery, mining communities, or the role of women in the First 
World War (Littler and Naidoo 2014). Every instance of media furore about ‘political correctness’ 
in historical representation holds up a mirror to how institutional discourses about ‘diversity’ have 
been circulated and interpreted in popular parlance and illustrates the impact that the inside/outside 
boundary has had on public heritage narratives.2 To borrow Schwarz’s point, it may be that the New 
Labour government project in Britain, which required the cultural sector to tackle social exclusion and 
promote diversity, may have created the conditions for people to imagine, construct and mythologise 
a stable and monocultural heritage that predated these ‘modern’ ideas about historical representation.
It becomes apparent that heritage on the inside is coded as representing a range of identities that 
on the surface appear unmarked, be they white, hetero-normative or upper-middle class. Perhaps a 
suitable starting point in bringing the ‘margins to the core’ would be to return to the extensive body 
of cultural and political criticism that focuses on how the boundary between inside and outside is 
produced and experienced by those subjected to its power; a power that makes some subjects visible 
and others appear to be benign representatives of normal humanity. Critics such as Fanon (1986), 
Said (1991), Morrison (1992), Spivak (1988), Hall (2005), Bhabha (1994), Gilroy (2000), Dyer (1997), 
hooks (1992) and Ware and Back (2002) to name a few, have turned their theoretical attention to the 
ways in which representational power allows some subjects to define themselves as somehow invisible, 
while others are marked by difference. They and many others have also repeatedly examined the ways 
in which the ‘other’ confers meaning on the centre and gives flesh and solidity to those who maintain 
their supremacy through the binary of ‘self’ and ‘other’, endlessly reproduced through culture, lan-
guage, the political economy and other discourses of power. The notion of invisible whiteness is still 
deeply ingrained in heritage practices and made clear when the ‘other’ is invited into the institution 
to talk about outsider heritage only when they can be ‘seen’, rather than acknowledging that the ‘other’ 
is always present in all displays, exhibitions, ideas, institutional practices and discourses. The fact that 
you cannot see them does not mean they are not there.

There is a reason why the works cited above remain fresh and challenging and why Fanon never 
goes out of fashion (Gordon and Cornell 2015). Currently, white and middle-class supremacy codes 
itself through languages of meritocracy (Littler 2013), and the means by which power and exclusion 
shape shift to suit changes in the political climate have consistently been the subject of scholarship 
(Bhopal 2016) as well as institutional and popular debate, illustrating how ‘common sense’ ideas about 
race, class, etc. morph and adapt. For example, recent frustration at the continued ways in which white, 
male authority operates even in spaces devoted to increasing diversity, have coalesced around the 
colloquial term ‘whitesplaining’ – a word summing up how powerful subjects patronisingly explain 
the politics of and solutions to exclusion to ‘others’ (Achola 2015).

This brings up the problem of theorising from the inside as those in positions of power try to grapple 
with exclusion but cannot decentre themselves in the quest for equality. Rather like the billionaires 
and industry leaders coming together at a TED conference to discuss solutions to global poverty and 

 

  507

injustice, they are never going to come to the conclusion that they may in fact be the problem (West 
2015). In the heritage sector, thinking from the inside about what the solutions to exclusion should be 
can take many different forms. Sometimes this can be precluded by a sensitive acknowledgement of the 
power relations in operation, for example between a curator and a community group. Such declarations 
however are often the end, rather than the start of more meaningful considerations of what constitutes 
an equitable encounter. Ware and Back (2002, 5) discuss the field of writing on whiteness and how it 
offers theories of ‘how to identify the links between the premeditated violence of the disempowered 
white supremacist and the “unwitting” solipsism of the individual unaccustomed to questioning the 
idea that she or he occupies a privileged political and cultural category’. This ‘“unwitting” solipsism’ 
stalks the sector and contributes to the illusion that the inside is neutral and can offer a hand to those 
outside without interrogating the basis of its confident assertions to ‘include’. On an institutional level 
this means assumptions are made about mainstream audiences and what reflects inside and outside 
heritages for them. Schwarz notes:

… the determination to open up the story of empire to new voices – colonized as well as colonizers, black as 
well as white, women and children as well as men, queer as well as straight – has met continuing resistances. A 
tone of easy omnipotence still pervades the literature, as if intellectual authority remains the necessary preserve 
of those situated at the centre. Above all a more pluralist, complete picture of empire needs to interrogate that 
most naturalized of phenomena, whiteness itself. (2011, 17)
Heritage on the outside reinforces the representational power of the inside to appear universal and 
transhistorical. If museums are a product of modernity and the ordering of peoples and the world are 
central to that project, then a politics of difference should be on the inside, even if that inside appears 
to be transparent and lacking in substance in relation to that difference. Paul Goodwin, former cura-
tor of cross-cultural programmes at Tate Britain, explains in an interview why he was reluctant to 
approach his post from the position of targeting ethnic audiences and instead focussed on the museum 
as a space of knowledge production about cultural difference so that central questions about what 
was on the walls, curatorial practice and ideas about Britishness could be addressed (Dewdney et al. 
2011). In my experience in the sector the opportunity to do such work is rare and invites to address 
cultural difference are usually confined to discussions about ‘new’ audiences thus maintaining the 
inside/outside paradigm.

Therefore decisions about which outsider narratives are invited in and which are contained are 
already shaped by this configuration. By analysing which discourses prevail and which are expelled, 
critics have discerned a deep institutional ambivalence to the full story of modernity and its power 
relations (Appignanesi 2010; Araeen 2010). Cultural Diversity as an institutional cultural policy in the 
UK effectively solidified and naturalised the inside/outside boundary despite valiant attempts by many 
progressive artists, curators, activist, etc. to utilise the agenda and funding opportunities to produce 
work that undermined it. Therefore, in general, mainstream projects that operated under the auspices 
of this rubric found it hard to take audiences to a place which enabled them to experience a deeper, 
more enriched vision of the inherent cultural complexity of the history of British art for example, and 
it was left to cultural organisations specifically committed to this – such as the Institute of International 
Visual Arts (Iniva) and Autograph (ABP) – to present work and ideas that showcased the indelible 
presence of the ‘other’ in that story. Richard Appignanesi notes:

… in this view of cultural diversity the strains of disquieting difference come from the ‘ethnic minority’ cultures, 
those unsettled and problematic guests in the midst of the host mainstream culture. Mainstream, of course, 
meaning Western, European and predominantly white; and mainstream also implicitly presuming itself wholly 
unified and homogeneous. Diversity from this viewpoint is disruptive, an upset of status quo normality, which 
must somehow be governed so that the mainstream culture can function undisturbed by any threat of ‘difference’ 
from the inside. (2010, 5)
Appignanesi and others, notably artist, curator, writer and activist Rasheed Araeen, have worked 
for decades to have a fuller story of post-war modernism, abstraction, minimalism, conceptualism, 
etc. written into the mainstream of British art history – fuller meaning one that can not only name-
check, but critically engage with, the work produced by artists of Caribbean, African and Asian descent 

508 

  R. NaIdoo

working in Britain. Artists such as Ronald Moody, Araeen himself, Aubrey Williams, Frank Bowling, 
those who were part of the London-based Caribbean Artists Movement, were not engaged in some 
side project but were part of the development of the visual language of modernism, yet they are 
consistently overlooked by an historical narrative disturbed by transnational complexities, by the 
ideologies of power, colonialism and race, and by the idea that the ‘other’ within may have something 
crucial and defining to say.

The increased marketisation of the cultural sector means that the inside/outside boundary is also 
perpetuated by economic imperatives. The ‘inclusion of minorities’, ‘diversity’ or the importance 
of ‘working with communities’ are now standardised discourses in the cultural sector and not nec-
essarily at odds with neoliberal economics – they are ‘common sense’ positions. On the contrary, 
for the more canny corporate investors they provide the perfect means to promote brands. In their 
book The Trojan Horse – the growth of commercial sponsorship, Philips and Whannel (2013) explore 
how and why corporations have naturalised their presence in the cultural sector. As I have noted 
elsewhere, a corporate funder would have little interest in supporting a heritage display that drew 
attention to the representational nature of dominant whiteness. However the boundary between 
‘real’ and ‘new’ heritage projects suits the neoliberal economic order well – one through which 
to perpetuate hegemonic power relations through an evocation of timeless, traditional cultural 
heritage; the other to provide a safe space to perform good deeds for communities and make cap-
italism appear benign and caring while it loots the public sector in the interests of private capital 
(Naidoo 2015).

Analysing the relationship between heritage studies and the neoliberal revolution within British 
universities can also help shed light on how the inside and outside operates. As universities strive to 
make academic research have ‘impact’, and consequently seek to strengthen the links between them 
and both the dwindling public sector and the private sector, heritage studies has been identified as 
a key area where such connections can be made, especially around tourism. Jobs advertised in this 
field increasingly make reference to the need for applicants to mediate between the cultural sector 
and the academy, especially with a view to pursuing funding from traditional research councils and 
from newer revenue streams. Few would not want their research to shape heritage practices, but there 
is a minefield of other issues here around how ‘impact’ can utilise and exploit community heritage 
projects for a broader, self-serving agenda.

The structure of funding that followed the inside/outside narrative of heritage practice has also 
mitigated against the outside moving in. This is summed up neatly in the report Whose cake is it 
anyway? by Bernadette Lynch, a study on engagement and participation in museums and galleries 
commissioned by the Paul Hamlyn Foundation, which concludes that

… the funding invested in public engagement and participation in the UK’s museums and galleries has not 
significantly succeeded in shifting the work from the margins to the core of many of these organisations. In fact, 
as this study demonstrates, it has curiously done the opposite. By providing funding streams outside of core 
budgets, it appears to have helped to keep the work on the organisations’ periphery. This situation becomes even 
clearer now that external funding streams are under serious threat and museums and galleries are scrambling for 
alternative sources of short-term funding to support their public engagement work. (2011, 5)
The organisation of funding and the categorisation of people (e.g. as BME – black and minority 
ethnic) has meant that community engagement becomes an issue when a heritage institution initiates a 
project that they assume is of interest to a marginalised group. What such interest should be, the shape 
it should take and the outcomes it should produce are therefore already structured into the project 
narrative, again illustrating the problem of theorising from the inside. The terms of engagement and 
languages of inside and outside create, rather than simply represent pre-existing communities. Lynch 
and Alberti (2010, 5) remark:

An African-Caribbean participant invited to consult on Hackney Museum’s plans to commemorate the bicen-
tenary angrily commented, ‘either it’s all to do with me or it’s nothing to do with me!’ – neatly summarising 
the confusion and frustration that many participants reported from their engagement with museums in 2007.

 

  509

The discursive regimes within such classifications as BME construct people as having the right 
sort of ethnicity. This impacts not only those deemed ‘non-white’ but also those who are not born but 
‘made’ white through this.

Inside looking in
The inside/outside boundary is also shaped by something more intangible – fear and anxiety (Naidoo 
2011). Therefore we need to not simply acknowledge the presence of these emotions but account for 
their underlying causes, their tendency to materialise in unrecognisable forms and their ability to 
stubbornly remain unspoken. There seems to be a fear that something will be taken away from heritage 
on the inside if there is more equality – that somehow those outside will critique ‘our’ culture, expose 
the power relations within, make people ashamed and compromise heritage as a commodity and as a 
resource for anchoring national identity. The body of work on heimat is increasingly relevant as much 
heritage and memory work is shaped by abstract longings for a fictionalised homeland where the trou-
bling, rootless people who bring change do not exist (Morley 2000) and where it was unnecessary to 
confront casual discrimination and linguistic violence. As Boa and Palfreyman (2000, 2) tell us: ‘Key 
oppositions in the discourse of Heimat set country against city, province against metropolis, tradition 
against modernity, nature against artificiality, organic culture against civilisation, fixed, familiar, rooted 
identity against cosmopolitanism, hybridity, alien otherness, or the faceless mass’.

Heimat infuses contemporary heritage work with an accompanying consensus that it is an accept-
able and natural impulse to entertain such longings, whereas out and out exclusion is obviously not. 
The inside seeks to retain ownership of certain heritages and cultures creating an alternative space 
for difference. This is why non-white, British people are rarely courted or positioned as the authori-
tative voice of any aspect of mainstream culture and heritage. The fear acts as an incentive to police 
the boundary so that it can maintain a version of the past untainted by exploitation, subjugation, 
inequality and misery, while also accepting that such things existed. During the 2007 slavery projects 
I regularly encountered people who expressed the view that historically, Africans had enslaved people 
too – though this is true it can be read against a series of fearful and sometimes hysterical reactions to 
the presence of outside heritages on the inside (Smith et al. 2011). This reaction is often accompanied 
by the view that difference is new and that it is irrational to make all heritage representations stand 
up to this sort of critique. The inside/outside, real/new binary has another dimension and that is true/
politically correct.

In a piece entitled, ‘It’s only political correctness – race and racism in British history’, Caroline 
Bressey (2008) discusses a BBC radio programme about the remake of the Second World War film, 
The Dam Busters and the potential offence that would be caused by the use of the original name of 
the dog featured in it called ‘nigger’. Bressey (2008, 30) notes that not one of the interviewees had 
what was crucial to be able to participate in this discussion, namely an ‘understanding or knowledge 
of black history, an essential part of any debate around the historical and contemporary use of racist 
language’. She presents the important contextual information for this such as remembering that Dr 
Harold Moody and the League of Coloured Peoples were doing anti-racist work in Britain many years 
before the war, and also cites Una Marson’s poem Nigger to remind us that even in 1930s the term was 
‘always deeply offensive’ (Bressey 2008, 34). Most importantly, evidence of a BBC apology in 1940 for 
use of the word makes it clear that by the time the Dam Busters was made, knowledge of its meaning 
and impact was already in the public realm (Bressey 2008, 34). As Bressey says, ignoring the history 
of anti-racism reflects two things:

Firstly, it illustrates the power of historical ignorance as a tool for those who reinforce racism by arguing that they 
are in fact challenging ‘political correctness’, and secondly, the general failure of British society to acknowledge 
black and Asian experiences as a key part of British historiography. (2008, 36)
The erasure of the history of political opposition to inequality repeatedly strips people of their 
active, historical agency, characterising them as endlessly passive. Accusations of ‘political correctness’ 

510 

  R. NaIdoo

compromise the ability to confront right-wing revisionists for whom the fact of Britain as an island 
of migration, unstable identities and four nations, is best ignored.

When the inside looks in on itself it is haunted by the idea that a more representative history will 
diminish it in some way. Kevin Guyan, blogging about the project Drawing over the Colour Line,3 
which explores the forgotten history of the black and Asian presence in the creative and intellectual 
life of the Bloomsbury area of London, anticipates this response noting:

Some visitors have questioned the purpose of the exhibition and the political motivation for attempting to expand 
people’s image of Bloomsbury. As I see it, it is not an attempt to evict Virginia Woolf, Lytton Strachey and John 
Maynard Keynes from their associations with Bloomsbury and replace them with a new assortment of characters 
but instead to complicate this image and suggest that, as was the case with areas like Soho, there was an equally 
cosmopolitan presence in early 20th Century Bloomsbury. (Guyan 2013)
If heritage cultures could articulate these anxious responses to the outside – something played 
out individually, collectively, institutionally and nationally – it would become a less onerous task to 
mainstream ‘other’ histories. Fear manifests itself in hysterical responses, apologetic disclaimers about 
power relations, defensive protecting of territory and the seeking out of the ‘other’ in ways that con-
form to the established boundary between inside and out. It also points to the overwhelming anxiety 
there is about honestly confronting the impact of the histories of empire internationally, nationally, 
domestically and psychically. Schwarz again:

Memory brings the past into the present, but does so under its own terms. If the events of the past are experienced 
as peculiarly difficult, silence and unspeakability may continue long into the future and, as we know from the 
current literature on trauma, they may only come to be recognized for what they are much later in time. (2011, 13)
Waterton (2010, 155), in her analysis of the visual representations used to promote heritage in 
England, unpacks the symbols that tie it to an elite, white, middle-class but importantly notes that: 
‘Nonetheless, this understanding of heritage is presented as a consensual past, such that heritage 
touristic places become ideological spaces within which experiences are presented as conflict-free, 
sanitised, focussed on leisure and predominantly family orientated’. This is precisely why the trouble-
some ‘other’ must be placed outside of this – in the space marked community, engagement, inclusion, 
diversity or new audiences. The very presence of difference marks those spaces as contested and con-
flictual. Here then may be the spaces where it is possible to map the repression of memory and wilful, 
anxious forgetting. Outside identities must be accounted for, labelled, made visible and subjected to 
stern, disciplinary regimes. Richard Appignanesi’s point about managing the ‘other’ within seems 
increasingly relevant. He notes:

We can understand cultural diversity as a sort of foreign policy intended for domestic application. Perhaps this 
way of looking at it will bring strikingly home to us the question: why is there an officially differentiated category 
of diverse cultures for some citizens who are undeniably in the fabric of British society? Some of us in Britain 
are being cast as outsiders who require a domestically engineered foreign policy. (2010, 5)
Placing the heritage of the outsider within as ‘out there’ banishes something potentially fearful 
to another dimension. However, as we know, the repressed has the unfortunate habit of returning 
(Dyson 1995).

Outside looking in
In March of 2015 I went to Tate Britain to see an exhibition called Spaces of Black Modernism: London 
1919–39, part of the Drawing over the Colour Line project mentioned above that explored ‘the experi-
ences and interactions of people from diverse ethnic backgrounds in London’s art world between the 
wars’ (Tate 2015). The narrative on Tate Britain’s website continues:

In  the  inter-war  period,  cosmopolitan  networks  of  artists,  activists,  writers  and  artists’  models  in  London 
helped shape the cultural and political identity of the city. The studios, art colleges and social clubs of Chelsea, 
Bloomsbury and Soho became places of trans-national exchange. Spaces of Black Modernism draws together 
paintings, sculpture, photographs and archival material from Tate’s collection with others loaned from public and 
private collections. It follows the interactions between artists such as John Banting, Edward Burra, Jacob Epstein, 

 

  511

Barbara Ker-Seymer, Ronald Moody, Glyn Philpot and Matthew Smith with others including the writers Claude 
McKay and Una Marson, the poet and political activist Nancy Cunard, the model ‘Sunita’ (Amina Peerbhoy) 
and the singer Elisabeth Welch. (Tate 2015)
The exhibition challenged the received wisdom about the black presence in Britain as a post-war 
phenomenon, and invited audiences to redraw the historical geography of the political, artistic and 
cultural life of the capital. The characters who inhabited Bloomsbury came alive in this room, remind-
ing us that the most interesting artistic, cultural and intellectual movements occur through encounters 
across barriers of class, gender, race, sexuality and other forms of difference. This exhibition therefore 
captured crucial aspects of black heritage in Britain – the existence of agency and differing kinds of 
dialogue between those who find themselves categorised as different from each other (Tulloch 2014). 
These aspects of black heritage in Britain are articulated by curators, project workers, academics and 
community activists seeped in the material culture, historical literature and theoretical frameworks that 
are necessary to understand the wider contexts of these histories and the dialogues they can establish 
between past and present. They differentiate themselves from hastily cobbled together projects serving 
someone’s diversity agenda.

However, as I walked around it I couldn’t help wondering what would happen to this knowledge 
once the exhibition was over. Would it become lodged in curatorial memory so that future exhibitions 
on the period could recall it, or would another generation happen upon this world through specialist 
research on black London in another twenty years’ time? The question of how to embed or move from 
the margin to the core needs to reflect on how curatorial memory can be sustained if people who are 
experts in this field do not have full-time, permanent jobs within the heritage sector. All the theoreti-
cal reflection from heritage and museology about how to change the relationship is redundant unless 
there are opportunities for experts in these fields to have power over heritage representations and a 
space to vocalise how they can negotiate anxieties over the loss of white and class authority. Again the 
binary of ‘inside/outside’ operates to make expertise on black heritage in Britain not something that 
every self-respecting national cultural institution should have, but something that can be bought in 
to fulfil an occasional commitment to diversity.

The axis of inside/outside does not easily facilitate an exploration of the histories figured in Spaces 
of Black Modernism, any more than it can accommodate the mundane presence of black Victorians 
presented in the exhibition Black Chronicles II, curated by Autograph (ABP) and focussed on nine-
teenth century and early twentieth century Britain. The introduction says:

Drawing on the metaphor of the chronicle the exhibition presents over 200 photographs, the majority of which 
have never been exhibited or published before. As a curated body of work, these photographs present new 
knowledge and offer different ways of seeing the black subject in Victorian Britain, and contribute to an ongoing 
process of redressing persistent ‘absence’ within the historical record. (Autograph [ABP] 2014)
This exhibition with its myriad of images of people of Asian, Caribbean and African descent who 
occupied Victorian Britain makes one wonder what would happen to those people who shout ‘political 
correctness’ at any attempt to confront this history. And what would they think about the subjects 
in them – many confident and poised in front of the camera exuding their full humanity even under 
the colonial gaze.

Conclusion
The inside/outside paradigm may appear to be a pragmatic means to facilitate good work in the 
sector, but by serving its own, mostly unspoken, agenda it can ensure that the cultural heritage of 
outsiders remains outside. It often prevents exploring the centrality of the politics of difference and the 
exclusionary ‘whiteness’ of the cultural heritage deemed to be normal or mainstream. It also releases 
the inside of its obligations to interrogate the role the outside plays in the formulation of the inside. 
Through it all sorts of identities have fallen through the cracks and diminished our understanding of 
the histories of the cultural landscapes many of us grew up in.

512 

  R. NaIdoo

Heritage discourses order and create identities on the outside, rather than simply giving voice to 
the historically marginalised ‘out there’. Organisational categories are imposed upon the outsider, yet 
institutions are surprised when people express their discomfort with them. One’s otherness must be 
performed in the appropriate way. As Homi Bhabha notes:

Terms of cultural engagement, whether antagonistic or affiliative, are produced performatively. The representation 
of difference must not be hastily read as the reflection of a pre-given ethnic or cultural traits set in the fixed tablet 
of tradition. The social articulation of difference, from the minority perspective, is a complex, on-going negoti-
ation that seeks to authorize cultural hybridities that emerge in moments of historical transformation. (1994, 2)
To move forward we have to find space for the nuance of hybridities, the complexities of the politics 
of difference, and be able to critique homogenising notions of ‘community’. Attention should be paid 
to how the inside/outside boundary is strengthened and reconfigured within, rather than in spite of, 
languages of inclusion and diversity. By privileging some outsider narratives and containing others, 
heritage culture signals, to those who enter to participate, which parts of their cultural identity to 
check at the door and which to foreground. As participation is usually based on the idea of promoting 
anti-racism, tolerance, dignity or giving voice to marginalised peoples, the pressure to brush over the 
complexities of subjectivity is immense. However this pressure must be resisted even if it is presented 
as a ‘first step’ towards genuine cultural democracy. Discourses about outsiders could easily be univer-
salised as applicable to all even if the effects of different forms of violence, oppression and exclusion 
are obviously experienced in specific ways by different groups, as are the cultures of resistance and 
solidarity they produce.

Heritage practices leave many citizens untethered from historical context, disconnected from past 
political struggles, forced into suffocating categories and denied the resources to make sense of their 
place in the contemporary world. Rather than remaining fragmented and frustrated, though, people 
all over the globe find the means to express their heritage in all its messy complexity. As the poet and 
activist Lorde (1984, 137) said; ‘if I didn’t define myself for myself, I would be crunched into other 
people’s fantasies for me and eaten alive’. If outsider thinking, captured so insightfully by Lorde, could 
genuinely determine the theories and practices of the inside, things could change very quickly. The 
space to talk honestly about what is at stake for all of us if the outside is in may help counter the fears 
that come with any power shift. If we could meet in solidarity rather than duty the wall could come 
tumbling down.

Notes
1. 

2. 

3. 

 Even on the very basic level of recruitment there has been slow progress. For example, the Museums Association 
(December 2015) reports; ‘ACE (Arts Council England) announces £2.6m fund to tackle lack of diversity’, 
noting that: ‘Figures show museums are behind arts organisations in efforts to become more diverse’. Accessed 
December  10,  2015  from  http://www.museumsassociation.org/museums-journal/news/07122015-diversity-
figures-change-makers?dm_i=2VBX,4JG1,27MFCX,D8HW,1
 See the battle fought over the removal of black Crimea nurse Mary Seacole from the UK national curriculum. 
Muir, H. 2013. “Why is Gove Trashing Mary Seacole?” The Guardian. Accessed March 31, 2015. http://www.
theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/06/gove-mary-seacole-black-florence-nightingale
 The project Drawing over the Colour line, explores the arts and cosmopolitan politics of London from 1919 
(the year of race riots in many ports across the country) and 1939 and is being researched by University 
College London’s (UCL) Equiano Centre. Accessed March 31, 2015 from http://www.ucl.ac.uk/equianocentre/
Drawing_Over_the_Colour_Line.html

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

 

  513

Notes on contributor
Roshi Naidoo writes on cultural politics and has worked in the arts and heritage sector. She is a member of the edito-
rial board of the journal Soundings.  Recent publications include ‘The only game in town – the coalition, culture and 
neoliberalism’ in Cultural Trends (Volume 24 Issue 1 March 2015), pp. 62–65 and ‘Imagining the next day – music, 
heritage and hope’ in Glenn Hooper (ed.), Heritage at the Interface: Interpretation and Identity (forthcoming 2016, 
Florida University Press, in their ‘Cultural Heritage Series’).

References
Achola, Ella. 2015. “Whitesplaining – It’s Not Just Matt Damon: Why I Set Up a Black Women’s Blog.” The Telegraph, 
September  25.  Accessed  September  30,  2015.  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11890566/
Whitesplaining-not-just-Matt-Damon-Why-I-set-up-a-black-womens-blog.html

Appignanesi, Richard. 2010. “Introduction ‘Whose Culture?’ – Exposing the Myth of Cultural Diversity.” In Beyond 

Cultural Diversity – The Case for Creativity, edited by Richard Appignanesi, 5–15. London: Third Text.

Araeen, Rasheed. 2010. “Cultural Diversity, Creativity and Modernism.” In Beyond Cultural Diversity – The Case for 

Creativity, edited by Richard Appignanesi, 17–34. London: Third Text.

Autograph (ABP). 2014. “Black Chronicles II.” Exhibition September 12–November 29. Accessed October 2, 2015. 

http://autograph-abp.co.uk/exhibitions/black-chronicles-ii

Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bhopal, Kalwant. 2016. The Experiences of Black and Minority Ethnic Academics: A Comparative Study of the Unequal 

Academy. Abingdon: Routledge.

Boa, Elizabeth, and Rachel Palfreyman. 2000. Heimat: A German Dream – Regional Loyalties and National Identity in 

German Culture 1890–1990. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bressey, Caroline. 2008. “It’s Only Political Correctness – Race and Racism in British History.” In New Geographies of 

Race and Racism, edited by Claire Dwyer and Caroline Bressey, 29–40. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Dewdney, Andrew, David Dibosa, and Victoria Walsh. 2011. “Tate Encounters – Britishness and Visual Culture.” Accessed 
October 2, 2015. http://www2.tate.org.uk/tate-encounters/edition-6/dewdney_dibosa_walsh_interview_tate_paul_
goodwin.shtm

Dyer, Richard. 1997. White. London: Routledge.
Dyson, Lynda. 1995. “The Return of the Repressed? Whiteness, Femininity and Colonialism in the Piano.” Screen 36 

Fanon, Frantz. 1986. Black Skin, White Mask. London: Pluto Press.
Gilroy, Paul. 2000. Against Race – Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Color Line. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 

(3): 267–276.

Press.

Gordon, Lewis R., and Drucilla Cornell. 2015. What Fanon Said – A Philosophical Introduction to His Life and Thought. 

New York: Fordham University Press.

Guyan, Kevin. 2013. “Engaging with Black Bloomsbury.” In Drawing Over the Colour Line: Geographies of Art and 
Cosmopolitan Politics in London, 1919–1939. Accessed October 2, 2015. https://drawingoverthecolourline.wordpress.
com/

Hall, Stuart. 2005. “Whose Heritage? Un-settling ‘The Heritage’, Re-imagining the Post-nation.” In The Politics of Heritage 

– The Legacies of ‘Race’, edited by Jo Littler and Roshi Naidoo, 23–35. Abingdon: Routledge.

Hall, Stuart, and Alan O’Shea. 2015. “Common-sense Neoliberalism.” In After Neoliberalism: The Kilburn Manifesto, 

edited by Stuart Hall, Doreen Massey and Michael Rustin, 52–68. London: Lawrence and Wishart.

Hewison, Robert. 2014. Cultural Capital – The Rise and Fall of Creative Britain. London: Verso.
hooks, bell. 1992. Black Looks – Race and Representation. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Institute of International Visual Arts (Iniva). XXXX. Accessed October 2, 2015. http://www.iniva.org/
Littler, Jo. 2013. “Meritocracy as Plutocracy: The Marketising of ‘Equality’ Under Neoliberalism.” New Formations 80 

Littler, Jo. Forthcoming. “Cultural Studies and Consumer Culture.” In Ethics and Morality in Consumption: Interdisciplinary 

Perspectives, edited by Deirdre Shaw, Michal Carrington, Andreas Chatzidakis. Abingdon: Routledge.

Littler, Jo, and Roshi Naidoo, eds. 2005. The Politics of Heritage: The Legacies of ‘Race’. Abingdon: Routledge.
Littler, Jo, and Roshi Naidoo. 2014. “‘All that Jazz’: English Heritage and the Downton Effect.” Unpublished paper for 
King’s College London symposium The Legacy of “The Destruction of the Country House”: 40 years of English 
Heritage, October 1, 2014.

Lorde, Audre. 1984. Sister Outsider – Essays and Speeches. CA: The Crossing Press.
Lynch, Bernadette. 2011. Whose Cake Is It Anyway? A Collaborative Investigation into Engagement and Participation in 

12 Museums and Galleries in the UK. London: Paul Hamlyn Foundation.

Lynch, Bernadette, and Samuel Alberti. 2010. “Legacies of Prejudice: Racism, Co-production and Radical Trust in the 

Museum.” Museum Management and Curatorship 25 (1): 13–35.

(1): 52–72.

514 

  R. NaIdoo

McGuigan, Jim. 2011. “From Cultural Populism to Cool Capitalism.” Art & the Public Sphere 1 (1): 7–18.
Morley, David. 2000. Home Territories – Media, Mobility and Identity. London: Routledge.
Morrison, Toni. 1992. Playing in the Dark – Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 

Press.

62–65.

Naidoo, Roshi. 2011. “High Anxiety – 2007 and Institutional Neuroses.” In Representing Enslavement and Abolition in 
Museums – Ambiguous Engagements edited by Laurajane Smith, Geoff Cubitt, Kalliopi Fouseki, and Ross Wilson, 
44–60. Abingdon: Routledge.

Naidoo, Roshi. 2015. “The Only Game in Town – The Coalition, Culture and Neo-liberalism.” Cultural Trends 24 (1): 

Philips, Deborah, and Garry Whannel. 2013. The Trojan Horse – The Growth of Commercial Sponsorship. London: 

Bloomsbury Academic.

Said, Edward. 1991. Orientalism. London: Penguin Books.
Schwarz, Bill. 2011. Memories of Empire, Volume 1 – The White Man’s World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Laurajane, Geoff Cubitt, Kalliopi Fouseki, and Ross Wilson, eds. 2011. Representing Enslavement and Abolition 

in Museums – Ambiguous Engagements. Abingdon: Routledge.

Spivak, Gayatri. 1988. In Other Worlds – Essays in Cultural Politics. New York: Routledge.
Tate Britain. 2015. Spaces of Black Modernism – London 1919–39. Exhibition October 13, 2014 – October 4, 2015. Curated 
by Dr Gemma Romain and Dr Caroline Bressey of University College London with Emma Chambers (Curator of 
Modern British Art) and Inga Fraser (Assistant Curator, Modern British Art) at Tate Britain. Accessed October 2, 
2015. http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/display/bp-spotlight-spaces-black-modernism-london-1919-39

Tulloch, Carol. 2014. “A Riot of Our Own: A Reflection on Agency.” Open Arts Journal 3 (Summer): 25–59.
V&A Museum London. 2010. “From the Margins to the Core?” March 24–26, 2010. Accessed March 31, 2015. http://

www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/f/from-the-margins-to-the-core-2010-conference/

Ware, Vron, and Les Back. 2002. Out of Whiteness – Color, Politics and Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Waterton,  Emma.  2010.  “Branding  the  Past:  The  Visual  Imagery  of  England’s  Heritage.”  In  Culture,  Heritage  and 
Representation – Perspectives on Visuality and the Past, edited by Emma Waterton and Steve Watson, 155–172. 
Farnham: Ashgate.

West, Lindy. 2015. “It’s Good to Talk.” The Guardian, March 23.


