 OPEN ACCESS

Historical empathy in a museum: uniting contextualisation and 
emotional engagement

Geerte M. Savenijea 

 and Pieter de Bruijnb 

aresearch Institute of Child development and education, university of amsterdam, amsterdam, the netherlands; 
bfaculty of Humanities and law, open university of the netherlands, Heerlen, the netherlands

ABSTRACT
Museums,  memorial  centres  and  other  heritage  institutions  use  various 
strategies to evoke an emotional response that serves to elicit empathy with 
the historical events and actors that are portrayed in exhibitions. To increase 
historical understanding, however, both emotional engagement with and 
contextual understanding of these historical figures are needed. Using the 
concept of historical empathy, this paper examines the continuous interplay 
between cognitive and affective dimensions of history learning in museums. 
We conducted a case study at Museon in The Hague, the Netherlands. We 
studied  a  learning  session  on  children  living  through  the  Second World 
War,  the  museum’s  strategies  employed  in  the  exhibition,  the  entrance 
narratives  of  secondary  school  students  participating  in  the  session  and 
their engagement with the exhibition and with the educational activities. 
While most of the students did not feel related to WWII prior to their museum 
visit, the museum managed to engage many of them with personal stories 
and artefacts and by offering multiple and new perspectives. Our findings 
underscore the interplay between cognitive and affective dimensions of 
historical empathy and show that museums can serve as powerful contexts 
for developing this skill among school students.

Museums, memorial centres and other heritage institutions have traditionally relied on the use of 
physical artefacts to provide visitors with an experience of authenticity. Increasingly, they draw on other 
strategies to trigger people’s imaginations, which either support or replace existing modes of display 
(Dicks 2003; Mason 2004). Often these strategies are – consciously or unconsciously –  solicited to 
evoke an emotional response that serves to elicit empathy for and/or moral engagement with  historical 
events and actors portrayed through an exhibition. Within the field of history and museum education, 
it has been emphasised that emotional engagement and empathy evoked in a museum context may 
stimulate young people’s historical understanding by bringing a past world to life (Marcus, Stoddard, 
and Woodward 2012; Spalding 2012). On the other hand, strong emotional engagement can also 
hinder students in terms of contextualising historical events within the time and place in which they 
occurred, which is an important element of historical thinking and reasoning (van Drie and van 
Boxtel 2008; Seixas and Morton 2013). Within the field of museum studies, it has been argued that 
deep emotional engagement does not necessarily engender critical insight (Smith 2016). Thus, when 

CONTACT  geerte M. Savenije 
© 2017 the author(s). Published by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group.
this  is  an  open  access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  attribution-nonCommercial-noderivatives  license  (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.

  g.m.savenije@uva.nl

  

  833

aiming to advance the learning of history in a museum context, it is important to understand the ways 
in which both cognitive and affective engagement with the past emerge out of an interplay between 
a museum exhibition and its visitors.

This paper uses the concept of historical empathy to emphasise the interaction between cognitive 
and affective dimensions of this skill while learning in a museum. The ways in which the concept of 
historical empathy has been developed through history teaching methodology theories, in focusing 
on dialogue between caring for historical actors and the evidence-based reconstruction of their per-
spectives, provide a useful operationalisation for analysing these cognitive and affective dimensions. 
The case study presented in this paper analyses a learning session on children who lived through the 
Second World War (WWII) that was held in a dedicated exhibition space of Museon in The Hague. 
The session was attended by 22 secondary school students through their history classes. We conducted 
an in depth analysis of the exhibition, of educational activities and materials used, of the entrance 
narratives of the school students and of their degrees of engagement with the learning session to study 
the dialogue between the learning session and the participating students. We will argue that muse-
ums can provide fertile ground for stimulating both affective and cognitive dimensions of historical 
empathy and can in turn create powerful contexts for developing such skills among school students.

Historical empathy
The concept of historical empathy has been developed through history teaching methodology theo-
ries. It involves the reconstruction of people’s perspectives through the acquisition of knowledge and 
understanding of the broader historical contexts in which figures have acted and an analysis of the 
possible motives, beliefs and emotions that guided their actions (Endacott and Brooks 2013). Students 
contextualise the actions of historical figures by explaining and evaluating their actions and situating 
them in particular temporal, spatial, and social contexts. In addition, they need to be aware of their 
own positionality and the distinction between the past and the present (van Drie and van Boxtel 
2008; Seixas and Morton 2013; Huijgen et al. 2016). The skill of historical empathy is considered to 
constitute an important element in the development of students’ historical understanding. Historical 
empathy is a complex undertaking for students, and particularly because at a young age, they are just 
beginning to master the necessary abstract forms of thought. As historical actors are distanced from 
students in space, time and experience, historical empathy can be considered to be as unfamiliar to 
students as taking the perspectives of strangers, which research has shown is very difficult to achieve 
(Ma-Kellams and Blascovich 2012).

In history education, the notion of empathy has long been associated with imagination as literary 
invention and fantasy. Scholars have argued that it has been confused with generating sympathy with 
particular historical figures and have therefore emphasised that historical empathy must be based 
on historical inquiry and evidence (Lee and Ashby 1987). More recently, some educationalists have 
responded to this emphasis on cognitive elements of empathy and have stressed that affective engage-
ment is an inseparable aspect of this process. This affective dimension may involve showing interest in 
historical actors, caring for them, and responding to consequences of events of the past and present 
(Barton and Levstik 2004).

Together with Barton and Levstik (2004) and Endacott and Brooks (2013), we regard historical 
empathy as both a cognitive and an affective endeavour. This perspective is in congruence with psy-
chological research that suggests that cognitive and affective aspects of empathy are interdependent, 
defining it as a process of understanding and emotionally responding to the thoughts and feelings of 
others (Hoffman 1984). It also resonates with recent insights of museum studies, in which interrelations 
of reason and emotion and the notion that emotional responses are shaped by people’s cultural back-
grounds have similarly been emphasised (Watson 2015). Smith’s (2011) notion of registers of engage-
ment attempts to give justice to the whole spectrum of ideological and affective visitors’ responses as 
well as to the intensity of their engagement in museums. This process of engagement, like historical 

834 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

empathy, is coloured by people’s own positionality and is informed by knowledge, beliefs and emotions 
and a willingness to engage with the other (Smith 2011; Endacott and Brooks 2013).

Distance and engagement while learning about history in museums
As historical empathy is both a cognitive and affective endeavour, the extent to which museums can 
actively foster this process is dependent on the ways in which they construct temporality (the degree 
of distance or proximity from the past) and engagement in their exhibitions and educational resources, 
which has been conceptualised through the notion of historical distance (Phillips 2004; Grever, de 
Bruijn, and van Boxtel 2012). In a study of exhibitions and educational resources on the Trans-Atlantic 
Slave Trade, World War II and the Holocaust in the Netherlands and UK (De Bruijn 2014), an analytical 
framework was developed for studying this configuration of temporality and engagement by integrat-
ing theories of history theory, memory and museum studies, and history teaching methodology. This 
analytical framework allows one to study strategies employed by museums, archives and memorial 
centres to foster distance, proximity and engagement and can thus be used to analyse the impacts 
of modes of display and educational approaches on the potential for developing historical empathy.
First, the narrative structure of historical representations affects how people relate to historical 
events and figures presented in a narrative. Historical narratives can present a synchronic or dia-
chronic approach to the past and can reflect an ideal-typical plotline of progress, decline, zigzag or 
rhyme (Zerubavel 2003). Second, perspectives embedded within these narrative plots and the narrative 
mode – tense, perspective, focalisation – impact the configuration of temporality and engagement. 
Narrating history through a singular perspective, such as that of an individual person, stimulates 
emotional engagement, allowing people to identify with the thoughts and feelings of historical actors. 
Providing multiple perspectives, on the other hand, in the form of geographical levels, historiographical 
viewpoints or the points of view of different historical actors (Stradling 2003; Lorenz 2004) supports 
a more contextualised approach. Such narratives can be told through external focalisation, whereby 
the point of view lies with an anonymous agent who is not part of what is being narrated, or through 
character focalisation, whereby the perspective lies with characters who are participants of the events 
narrated (Bal 2009). In a museum context, these narrative strategies can not only be introduced through 
textual interpretations of object labels, text panels or educational materials, but they also stem from 
spatial arrangements and structures that impact the visitors’ experience of the exhibition (Pearce 1998; 
Basu and Macdonald 2007). Scholars have argued that exhibitions and heritage sites can facilitate an 
embodied learning experience that, in using all senses, can more easily elicit an affective response and 
stimulate empathy (Gregory and Witcomb 2007; McRainey and Russick 2010).

Temporality and engagement can also be fostered through mnemonic bridging, which refers to 
the creation of a link between the past and present. In addition to the narrative bridging strategy of 
creating an historical analogy, these techniques include the emphasis on same place through time, the 
use of physical objects, and practices of imitation and replication (Zerubavel 2003). These bridging 
techniques can take different forms and can be approached in various ways. The ‘same place’ tech-
nique, for instance, can either focus on continuity or changes through time for a particular site and 
can emphasise how people have related to a place or can merely highlight a place’s former function 
(De Bruijn 2014). Presenting material relics in glass display cases stripped of their contexts and encap-
sulated in interpretive texts generates more distance than when such objects are presented ‘in situ’ 
(Lidchi 1997; Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998). The specific use of these bridging techniques determines 
visitors’ experiences of temporality and engagement.

Clearly, the particular register of engagement that these strategies connect with during a museum 
visit depends to a great extent on the visitors’ entrance narratives, the ‘internal story’ that they bring with 
them into the museum (Doering and Pekarik 1996; Falk and Dierking 2013). To ensure true engage-
ment with the museum narrative, the design of an exhibition and objects on display must connect to 
visitors’ stories (Schorch 2015). As various researchers have demonstrated, students’ entrance narratives 
and historical understanding are shaped by their socio-cultural, ethnic and religious backgrounds and 

  

  835

by their individual identities (Epstein 1998; Peck 2010). Barton and McCully (2012) have noted that 
students’ degrees of affective engagement with a historical topic can limit their understanding or can 
even lead to a rejection of perspectives other than their own. Particularly regarding sensitive histories 
such as the history of WWII, students may have difficulties departing from their own perspectives, as 
these histories may induce negative emotions or strong moral responses (SSavenije, van Boxtel, and 
Grever 2014a). In this way, their emotional engagement may hinder historical empathy. Consider, for 
example, students who identify with enslaved people and who may hold descendants of slave owners in 
the present responsible for the actions of their ancestors (Savenije, van Boxtel, and Grever 2014b). On 
the other hand, a study in the Israeli context has shown that such identification may also work well as 
a stimulant of historical reasoning (Goldberg 2013). Within the museum context, Spalding (2012) has 
shown the significant contributions of emotional engagement and empathy to a deep understanding 
of sensitive histories. Furthermore, neglecting students’ emotional responses may lead to superficial 
learning and missed opportunities in helping students come to grips with histories that are relevant 
to their society (McCully et al. 2002).

In this paper, we use the concept of historical empathy to discuss whether students develop an 
emotional connection with historical actors and acquire a contextualised understanding of these 
people from the past, thus acknowledging their different perspectives. Taking a sociocultural and 
contextual approach (Falk and Dierking 2013), we integrate this concept into the analytical framework 
of temporality and engagement. This enables us to examine how the cognitive and affective dimen-
sions of historical empathy complement, interfere with and interact with one another and in what 
ways the specific contexts of a museum, the strategies it uses, and the entrance narratives of students 
affect capacities to engage in historical empathy. A case study was considered the most suitable study 
design (Cohen, Manion, and Morrison 2011) for this initial empirical exploration of such processes.

Method
Exhibition
Museon is an educational museum located in The Hague that was founded in the early twentieth century 
and which focuses primarily on issues of culture, nature and the applied sciences. ‘Child in War’, one of 
its permanent exhibitions, was developed in 2004 with the primary aim to show that war deeply affects 
children’s lives and that this is still the case today (Museon 2016). The exhibition was partly funded by 
the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, which in the Netherlands plays a major role in nurturing 
the commemoration and remembrance of WWII. Motivated by a goal to encourage an awareness of 
the blessings of living in freedom, the department provides funding for projects that relate the history 
of WWII to current themes such as freedom, democracy and human rights (Rijksoverheid [national 
government] 2016). The exhibition at Museon explored what it was like to live through WWII as a 
child through the personal stories of 34 people using objects, documents, pictures and film clips.

The exhibition was located in a small and darkly lit dedicated exhibition space that could be closed 
off from the rest of the museum with large doors to facilitate workshops with smaller groups. Scattered 
around the room were black, slightly tilted pillar-shaped display cases, each of which told the stories 
of specific children by displaying artefacts (including personal belongings) and autobiographical texts 
on each side of the display. Some of the displays contained film clips of the era, and the first display 
case presented footage of present-day refugees. To illuminate the displays, visitors needed to step on 
large black buttons placed at the bottom of each case.

The back of the exhibition space featured a brown wooden archival wall with drawers and closets 
on the bottom half providing information on various other children living through WWII. The top 
half of this wall, which could be accessed from two sets of stairs, displayed general objects and infor-
mation on WWII. Attached to the wall next to the archive was a small memorial listing the names of 
the 2,061 Jewish, Sinti and Roma children deported from The Hague in 1942.

836 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

Learning session
This case study focuses on a learning session entitled ‘War Children in Conversation’ that was specif-
ically developed for the history and citizenship curriculum of senior high school education. The aim 
of the session was to help students empathise with children of various cultural and social backgrounds 
living through WWII and to develop their enquiry and presentation skills (Museon 2016).

In this 90-minute workshop, the students worked in groups to write and act out an imaginary 
dialogue on the day of the opening of the gallery between a journalist and two persons whose life 
stories were featured in the exhibition. The educator had paired these persons thematically. The stu-
dents were allowed to choose a specific theme, but most of them were assigned a pair of life stories to 
investigate. The students were required to use the exhibition to acquire information, using worksheets 
that guided them to the relevant objects and display cases. In addition, they received a sheet listing 
a chronological timeline that they could use to write down events that had occurred in the lives of 
the persons they were investigating and to relate these events to the general events of WWII. After 
conducting research on the exhibition, the students presented their imaginary dialogues at the end 
of the workshop in a plenary session.

The session was developed and led by one of the institute’s educators, a white male historian and 
history teacher, who offered to help the individual groups through the task. He also provided a general 
introduction and plenary closing session, during which the students sat in a circle on stools in the 
middle of the exhibition space.

Participants
Participants included the museum educator of Museon and 22 fourth- and fifth-year pre-university 
education students aged 15 to 19 years (most students were 16 to 17 years of age). The student pop-
ulation reflects the broad variety of social, religious and cultural backgrounds found in the urban 
area in which the school is located. The classes were culturally and ethnically diverse (e.g. student 
backgrounds included: Moroccan, 35%; Surinamese, 30%; and Turkish, 15%). Although 80% of the 
students were born in the Netherlands, none of their parents were. A total of 60% of the participating 
students were female, and 74% identified as Muslim (the remaining students identified as Christian 
or Hindu). Based on the diversity in their responses to a questionnaire that revealed their different 
backgrounds, prior knowledge and views on the significance of WWII, 12 students were selected to 
participate in interviews and to be observed during the session.

Data collection and analysis
Data were collected from 2011 to 2012 by means of a content analysis of the museum’s exhibition and 
learning session, student questionnaires and interviews and observations of the museum educator 
and students during the learning session.

We photographed the entire exhibition space, collected educational materials used in the learning 
session and videotaped the session to capture the educators’ dialogue. A qualitative scheme of analysis 
developed through a previous study (De Bruijn 2014) was used to examine the extent to which the 
museum visit stimulated emotional engagement and contextualisation. We focused on techniques of 
mnemonic bridging and on narrative references to present-day events or processes other than historical 
analogies and we conducted a narrative analysis of the various plot structures and perspectives used.
The student questionnaires and interviews were conducted before and after the visit to examine the 
students’ entrance narratives prior to the visit and their degrees of engagement during the visit. The 
interviewed students were videotaped during the learning session. Responses to the questionnaires 
and recorded and transcribed student interviews and students’ statements made during the visit were 
analysed via constant comparison using ATLAS.ti qualitative analysis software (Miles and Huberman 
1994). We examined the entrance narratives to determine the students’ degrees of familiarity with 

  

  837

various WWII narratives, their attributions of significance to these narratives and corresponding 
relationships with their self-reported ethnic identities. Our analysis of student engagement levels 
during the museum visit focused on students’ emotional engagement with historical actors described 
in the exhibition. Emotional engagement was analysed by studying the students’ degrees of interest in, 
affective responses to and identification with the historical actors. Students’ nonverbal behaviours (e.g. 
movements and facial expressions) were analysed as an indicator of interest and emotional engagement. 
To examine students’ contextualisation, we studied their use of historical knowledge and evidence or 
of universal and present-day values in understanding the historical actors and their acknowledgement 
and integration of multiple perspectives.

Findings
Personal belongings as a trigger for emotional engagement
The students’ degrees of engagement with the topic prior to the museum visit ranged from emotionally 
engaged to rather disengaged positioning. For example, one student described her feelings of sadness:

I think it’s really, really pitiful for the people who have been killed. WWII is really a black page in history. It’s 
distressing for the people who wanted to live a normal life. I feel sad when I see the images1 [student 4].

On the other side of the spectrum, one student wrote: ‘I don’t feel much when thinking about it because 
within my family, I’ve never heard about anyone who lived through the war’ [student 22]. Due to their 
immigrant backgrounds and lack of family memories of the war, none of the students regarded WWII 
as their heritage. However, 21 of the 22 students considered WWII to be an important topic of history 
education, a perspective that many of them related to their Dutch identity and to their education from 
a Dutch school. In general, they attributed significance to the war, and particularly because it had 
changed the lives of many people and because its legacy is of significance to those who experienced 
the war and to their children. In this way, the students clearly related WWII to particular groups of 
people whom they often did not relate to themselves.

As most of the students did not feel emotionally attached to WWII, it is interesting to note that 
many of them were triggered by the exhibition’s focus on personal stories, which primarily relied on 
methods of character focalisation to recount narratives of WWII through the eyes of those who had 
directly experienced it (Bal 2009). One student elaborated:

Because you easily forget that it was a personal war as well, an individual war, everyone fending for themselves, 
and uh, it’s like a war with so many millions of deaths […] Because people have been through it individually 
and it has affected them personally and if they then show their personal belongings [in the museum], that’s so 
much more beautiful than something more general [student 2].

The museum stimulated such engagement by presenting the various life stories and related artefacts 
in one open space, offering no fixed walking route. Resembling a synchronic approach to the past, this 
exhibition design provided a sense of immersion. Most of the text panels and object labels were writ-
ten in a first-person narrative mode with texts having been paraphrased from oral history interviews. 
Furthermore, a couple of display cases offered seemingly authentic video footage, family pictures or 
audio clips of certain children telling a particular anecdote. Some of these audio clips were provided 
through earpieces, a technique often used by museums to create an intimate atmosphere (Witcomb 
2015). Several students were attracted to these earpieces, although in most cases their assignment 
did not require them to listen to them. In addition to the museum reinforcing a focus on personal 
stories in various ways, emotional engagement among the students also stemmed from the fact that 
the exhibition focused specifically on children’s perspectives. Half of the interviewed students high-
lighted the fact that these children were like themselves, showing that they could more easily relate 
to the experiences of those of their own age. They talked about that the children had to leave their 
parents or lost them, could not attend school and experienced so much misery at such an early age.

838 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

A second stimulant of emotional engagement included the objects in the exhibition. Several students 
stated that the objects made them realise that ‘it actually happened’ and that ‘it is all real’ or that the 
objects helped them empathise with the war children.

An analysis of the objects mentioned in the interviews shows that artefacts presented with a specific 
emotional story attached to them had a particularly strong impact. The students indicated that for these 
cases, objects acted as triggers that generated interest and that encouraged them to learn about the 
story behind an artefact. One of these objects, for instance, was a bracelet that an Auschwitz-Birkenau 
survivor used to obscure the number tattooed on her arm. One student explained:

I read the story about the girl, how she felt at that moment and why that bracelet was so important to her and 
then I understood why it has been preserved and why it was of so much significance to her and that is just, if 
you really see that and read, you feel more compassionate [student 5].

The way that the bracelet was displayed against a family picture and personal letter and with a short film 
explaining the significance of the object contributed to this student’s emotional engagement. Generic 
objects more typically encountered in exhibitions on WWII and that were not shown as artefacts 
explicitly related to a specific personal recollection, such as a Star of David and military equipment, 
did not trigger as much engagement.

The fact that the students were primarily engaged with personal stories attributed to the objects 
rather than with the artefacts themselves could also be explained by the setup of the learning session, 
which encouraged the students to study information available to them on text panels and object 
labels, as they needed this information to reconstruct the biography of two persons featured in the 
exhibition. Furthermore, activity sheets that Museon provided only directed the students to relevant 
drawers and display cases rather than highlighting specific information on the objects or encouraging 
the students to engage with them. In the wrap-up session, during which they re-enacted interviews 
with the children featured in the exhibition, none of the students mentioned the artefacts on display.
Third, the learning session aimed to further reinforce the emotional engagement fostered by the per-
sonal stories through imitation and replication by encouraging the students to act out the information 
that they had gathered as interviews between a journalist and the two persons they had investigated 
in the exhibition on the day of the exhibition’s opening. The assignment read as follows:

Write a conversation between the two war children you have chosen. Use your creativity, imagination, logical 
reasoning and knowledge of the Second World War. The conversation should consist of at least 400 words. Use 
as your first sentence: ‘Where did you live in 1940?’

Six students reported that the interview activity helped them empathise with the children depicted in 
the exhibition. For example, one student explained that it generated images in his head and that it made 
him feel like a different person for a short while. The exercise encouraged them to take a first-person 
perspective and to verbalise the experiences and emotions of children who had lived through WWII. 
It directed the students to draw on universal human experiences of being children themselves by 
referring to their ‘creativity, imagination, logical reasoning’ as possible resources for their role-play 
conversations. In his introduction, the educator altered the assignment slightly by asking the students 
to write their conversations down as interviews between a journalist and the two children, possibly 
adding a layer of distance, as journalists apply a more investigative approach in their questioning.

This re-enactment task is in line with current trends to bring the past to life and to allow visitors to 
sense ‘what it was like’ using sound, images and smell and text panels that ask visitors to imagine what 
they would have done in a similar situation (McRainey and Russick 2010). The assignment at Museon 
seemed to aim at more than just the experiences of a past world, as the re-enactment task carried a 
moral message on the disruptive effects of war and encouraged a commitment to actively contribute 
to preventing conflicts in the present. This was exemplified by the educator at the end of the learning 
session, who used the bridging technique of historical analogy to draw parallels between the past and 
present in explaining that there is a common thread across all of the stories featured in the exhibition 
in the sense that war creates conditions in which it is impossible to act as a child.

  

  839

So this makes clear, and I’d like to end with this, that War, whether it’s the Second World War or if you’re in Libya 
now in the troubled area: war makes it so that you can’t be a child anymore. You have to be aware, hunt for food, 
make sure that you don’t get caught up in a fight. You have to hide sometimes, you can’t play anymore, you can’t 
go to school, it actually unravels your entire existence.

This analogy was also present in the exhibition through a small video screen showing interviews with 
present-day refugee children displayed at the entrance of the exhibition. The presence of a memorial 
listing the 2,061 Jewish, Sinti and Roma children deported from The Hague in 1942 showed the strong 
significance that is attributed to the history of WWII in Dutch society today while the dark exhibition 
space with its tilted display cases worked with the students’ sense of balance, communicating that 
WWII was a time of chaos and instability for people in a very embodied manner. The idea of the 
war’s history as a ‘terrible gift’ (Simon 2006) was strengthened by the fact that the stories and most 
of the objects shown were in fact gifts from eye witnesses of WWII to Museon with the specific wish 
of educating future generations about the war to prevent it from ever occurring again. For one of the 
students, the very idea that people had given away their precious personal belongings for them to learn 
from this experience allowed him to instantly grasp the significance of these objects and their message.
The strategies used by Museon to stimulate emotional engagement did not resonate with all of the 
students. Seven students reported feeling neutral throughout the visit and three students reported 
feeling neutral and bored. Half of the students on the other hand stated the learning session did not 
trigger their emotions enough and expressed a dislike of active inquiry, which they thought resembled 
a school setting. They preferred to watch a movie about the topic. One of them explained:

Then you’re just watching and seeing these emotions and now we had to read about it, but I think, yes, it gets 
you more, you know, it touches you more when you see it through a movie [student 4].

The active engagement that the workshop forced this student into did not sit well with her. She preferred 
a more passive, although deeply emotional, engagement with the topic. The students’ discomfort with 
the re-enactment exercise as well as their remarks about not feeling emotionally engaged both related 
to a distanced feeling toward the history of WWII that the students reported before participating in 
the learning session. In part, the students regarded the 35 persons as strangers of a foreign history, 
placing high demands on the bridging techniques used in the exhibition and on the learning session. 
However, another distinctive feature of the exhibition and of the learning session – the explicit use of 
multiple perspectives – did resonate deeply with the students.

Contextualisation through multiple perspectives
To examine Museon’s contextualisation strategies, we will discuss: (1) engagement with multiple per-
spectives and (2) the use of sources and background knowledge to build a context.

(1) The exhibition and learning session presented many different plotlines and perspectives that 
allowed the students to broaden their narratives of WWII. The exhibition as a whole, the various life 
stories and contextual information shown through the display cases, the educational activity sheets, 
and the educator’s framing can all be viewed as different narratives interacting with one another and 
with the students’ entrance narratives. These entrance narratives showed a rather uniform account 
at the beginning of the project that reflected the dominant narrative of WWII used in Dutch society, 
which focuses on Jewish persecution (including stories of people’s lives in hiding and in concentration 
camps) and on the starvation that people experienced during the Dutch famine of 1944–45.

The different perspectives presented by Museon related to various geographical areas, highlighting 
that WWII affected the entire world. The exhibition covered the experiences of children in, for instance, 
the Netherlands, Germany and the Dutch East Indies. At the start of the session, the educator also 
drew attention to the global scale of the conflict by asking students which continents were involved 
in the war. Furthermore, the children featured in Museon’s exhibition had different backgrounds and 
experiences, representing distinct perspectives on the war. Each group of students investigated the story 
of two children whose experiences bared resemblance thematically. The contrasting set up of these 
pairs corresponded to the design of the pillar-shaped display cases, wherein for instance a Moroccan 

840 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

teenager who enlisted as a professional soldier in the French army and a girl who was active in the 
resistance movement were brought together under the theme of ‘courage’. Another display case on 
‘liberation’ described the story of a Jewish girl who ended up in Auschwitz-Birkenau and that of a boy 
whose parents were members of the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands.

Many students enjoyed learning about these different geographical and historical perspectives. 
One student explained how the exhibition, with all of these stories brought together in one room, 
made clear to him that the whole world was involved in WWII in very different ways. This insight 
may have been reinforced by the synchronic approach reflected in the exhibition’s design. Some of the 
perspectives presented were completely new to the students and changed their existing understanding 
of WWII. For example, one student said:

The diversity of stories – I thought that in most cases a child was sent to the camps and was killed immediately, 
but if you really delve into it, you see that everyone has a different story. One lost her mother, another lost a loved 
one, those kinds of things [student 6]

Another student reported being surprised about the person she had investigated, as she had not known 
that another group of people (Sinti) had been repressed as well. Some of the students referred to the 
educator’s introduction, in which he had stressed that the curators ‘had searched for as many different 
stories as possible’, and to the end of the session when they presented their stories to one another. The 
different perspectives Museon offered thus provided them with a more diversified account of WWII, 
broadening their understanding of this historical event.

Museon’s choice to include non-traditional perspectives on WWII triggered the students’ interest 
and appealed to them in a way that made them willing to seriously engage with these narratives. For 
example, the four students who described their identity as partly Moroccan mentioned the story 
about a Moroccan soldier in the French army as a particularly interesting story from the exhibition. 
One of them elaborated:

Because that man is of the same descent as I, so yes, I always find it interesting to know how they contributed 
to the war and if they contributed to it and how they dealt with that and yes how they left their families in their 
country of origin [student 14].

For these four students, this rarely touched upon perspective shown in the exhibition and the learn-
ing session generated a feeling of identification and through this affective engagement helped them 
develop a more contextualised account of WWII. Interestingly, three other students who did not 
describe themselves as Moroccan felt connected to this story as well based on identification with their 
more general immigrant descent. One of them said that because he was an immigrant, he could more 
easily understand and empathise with this person than with a person who was in hiding, because he 
had never been in hiding himself.

Although the students did expand their knowledge of WWII by engaging with these multiple 
perspectives, our results do not indicate that the students made the more difficult move towards 
integrating these points of view into their existing narratives. The task that should have allowed the 
students to combine the various perspectives into a multi-perspective narrative did not have this 
intended effect. Slightly different instructions to the task made by the educator – to write a dialogue 
between a journalist rather than a conversation between two persons featured in the exhibition – may 
have allowed the students to divide the tasks and to each dive into only one story. A few students even 
mentioned that the diverse personal stories presented this history in a way that was too fragmented. 
One of the students said:

It’s really different for every person, so I don’t really need to know how one person lived during wartime. That’s 
why I didn’t really make any progress [student 5].

This student felt that because the personal and detailed stories did not tell the whole story, she did not 
learn much about the war at the museum. This remark raises questions concerning how the students 
used historical contextual knowledge present in the museum to connect the various stories through 
a contextualised WWII narrative.

  

  841

(2) The museum provided background information on WWII in the archival wall display and on 
the timeline activity sheet. The task set by the educator to write an imaginary dialogue between a 
journalist and two persons featured in the exhibition encouraged the students to review and interpret 
various primary and secondary sources presented in the exhibition. Our results however indicate 
that in general, the students did not engage in this process of historical enquiry. They rarely used the 
timeline activity sheets and although most did examine some closets and drawers on the archival wall, 
they seldom reflected on this information in the plenary session or in the post-interviews.

This absence of evaluating historical sources and evidence likely stems from the fact that the assign-
ment did not explicitly require the students to use available sources in building their narratives, nor 
did it encourage them to consider the specific historical contexts of the people that they were investi-
gating to explain and evaluate their actions and motives. The assignment also did not explicitly guide 
the students into a critical examination of the various layers of interpretation that encapsulated the 
objects and information shown in the exhibition. As we noted above, however, half of the students 
also disliked the enquiry-based approach used in the learning session. One student indicated that 
her group had ignored the displays showing contextual information, as they felt they already knew 
enough about this information. Our results however show that some students actually did not have 
sufficient contextual knowledge to understand the perspectives of some historical actors featured 
in the exhibition and that they did not acquire such information by the end of the learning session. 
One post-interview for instance shows that one of the students did not fully grasp the context of Jews 
wearing a Star of David in public during the 1930s and 1940s as a measure taken by the Nazi regime, 
for which resistance would have had serious consequences.

Yes, I asked [the educator] why as a Jew would you walk on the street with a Jewish badge when that was exactly 
the danger: you will be banned exactly because you’re a Jew or you’ll be sent to a camp. Why then would you 
show that you’re a Jew when that is not visible on you? […]

I will never understand that. Maybe, uhh, yeah, then I try to empathise with it, imagine that the, uhh, that the 
Muslims would be banned and that something would reveal that I’m a Muslim because I wear a headscarf. Would 
I then take it off, would I then present myself differently, let’s say, by dyeing my hair blonde or whatever? But 
uhh maybe it’s pride or uhh I don’t know.

The student thus did not possess the knowledge required to fully understand the historical perspectives 
of the person she had investigated. Rather than using the information provided by the exhibition, she 
tried to make sense of it by drawing on her own experiences, which did not prove to be sufficient and 
which actually distorted her understanding of WWII. Such comparisons may have been stimulated 
by the exhibition’s and educator’s emphasis on children’s experiences. The analogy of all of the chil-
dren being victims of the war focused on a universal and timeless view of childhood and may have 
blurred the unicity of the historical figures. Thus, while serving as a powerful tool for engaging the 
students, it may also have hindered the students’ understanding of the children in their particular 
historical context.

One student did evaluate the exhibition’s sources. He said that he would rather have searched for 
information on the Internet or through documentaries, relating his preference for such sources to 
his perception that the various stories shown in the exhibition were prejudiced in the sense that they 
represented personal perspectives and in general in the sense that they were based on a Western point 
of view. While the idea that the Internet or documentaries would provide more neutral information 
can of course be disputed, his assessment that the exhibition provided an overly Western-centred 
account is accurate in the sense that non-Western perspectives were always framed from a Dutch 
point of view. The learning session thus caused this student to question the seemingly objective nature 
of the exhibition, in turn unintentionally stimulating a critical approach toward cultural heritage.

Discussion
This paper investigated interactions between a specific museum exhibition, the strategies it used, the 
entrance narratives of school students and their abilities to engage in historical empathy. Integrating 

842 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

theories of historical empathy with an analytical framework on the configuration of temporality and 
engagement in exhibitions allowed us to reveal the complex and continuous interplays between cogni-
tive and affective dimensions of learning history within the context of a museum visit. This analytical 
perspective may have limited our study by focusing too heavily on learning processes and on the 
educational goals of museums, as visitors may have other needs than these and may apply their own 
attitudes when dealing with cultural heritage. This limitation is reinforced by our focus on the single 
case of one educational museum. Nevertheless, our analysis provides insight into the processes and 
interactions that occur during a museum visit that can broaden our understanding of what learning 
in a museum may entail.

While most of the students did not feel related to WWII prior to their museum visit, the museum 
managed to engage many of them in various ways. The personal stories shown in the exhibition and 
artefacts related to these stories acted as a stimulant for emotional engagement for several students. 
Objects that were explicitly presented in relation to personal stories were especially effective at trig-
gering emotional engagement in congruence with a study on visitor responses to exhibitions on the 
British slave trade conducted by Smith (2016). Paradoxically, by offering multiple perspectives, a 
strategy geared towards contextualisation, the exhibition and learning session also helped some stu-
dents affectively engage with the subject matter through their identification with particular narratives 
based on a shared cultural background. This finding underscores the interplay between cognitive and 
affective dimensions of historical empathy, as the feeling of identification fostered by this perspective 
also allowed these students to develop a broader understanding of WWII.

While in this case the museum positively related to the students’ entrance narratives, for many stu-
dents the exhibition did not meet their expectations, as it did not offer many opportunities to become 
fully immersed into the past. Their dissatisfaction likely originates from a memory culture of WWII 
that has a strong tendency towards experience-based forms of representation (Ribbens and Captain 
2011). Moreover, some students’ prior ideas and experiences interfered with their understanding of 
historical points of view within their historical contexts. Many students did not contextualise the 
new perspectives and did not integrate them into their existing narratives of WWII. This can likely 
be attributed to the structure of the learning session, which did not encourage the students to analyse 
information and objects shown in the exhibition as historical sources, presenting them as neutral and 
objective. Another contributing factor, however, was the ways in which the museum communicated 
an historical analogy and moral message on the impacts of war on children, which limited a mul-
ti-perspective approach and may have distracted the students from carrying out thorough evaluations 
of the different perspectives. In this regard, our study is limited in its focus on a sensitive historical 
topic, as discourse on WWII in the Netherlands and the global memory of the Holocaust over the 
last decades have evolved into a specific historical narrative wherein the importance of democratic 
values is strongly emphasised.

Our findings hence reveal potential means for advancing historical empathy in a museum con-
text through several strategies that can provide unexpected and promising results in stimulating 
both cognitive and affective dimensions of this skill. The fact that none of the students were able to 
fully engage in historical empathy however also points to specific challenges of the museum context. 
Museum exhibitions are often heavily shaped by the given contextual background, aims and mission 
of a museum but are presented as neutral and objective, supported by the authoritative voice of the 
institution. To support the development of historical empathy, museums must be aware of the ways 
in which they implicitly provide various layers of interpretation. Allowing objects and sources to 
speak for themselves allows visitors to investigate them as evidence and to use them to reconstruct 
perspectives of historical actors.

While providing a fully multi-perspective narrative can allow for a more inclusive approach, engag-
ing people in actually applying multiple perspectives requires providing a platform for dialogue and 
debate (Ashley 2005). Facilitating discussion on museum roles in society, on the significance of their 
presentations and on potential conflicts between people’s entrance narratives and a museum’s narrative 
can help guide people’s affective engagement and contextualisation of historical perspectives (Gosselin 

  

  843

2011). Reflections on emotions raised and on the notion of museums as present-day manifestations 
of today’s memory culture, especially in dealing with sensitive histories, is necessary to thoroughly 
support and scaffold processes of historical empathy.

Note
1. 

 The student is referring to images of WWII shown in movies (e.g. movies about Anne Frank and Schindler’s 
List). No particular images were included in the questionnaire.

Acknowledgements
We would like to express our great appreciation to Museon, the museum educator, the teacher and the students for 
participating in the study. We thank Maria Grever, Carla van Boxtel, and Stephan Klein for their substantial contribu-
tions to our work.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was supported by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) [grant numbers 360-69-002] 
and [360-69-003]; by the Netherlands Institute for Heritage (Erfgoed Nederland); and by The Netherlands Expertise 
Centre for Arts and Cultural Education (LKCA).

Notes on contributors
Geerte M. Savenije is a researcher at the Research Institute of Child Development and Education at the University 
of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Her research interests include historical perspective taking, identification, sensitive 
topics in history education and learning in museums or sites. In addition to her research activities, Savenije is a teacher 
educator and she supervises a Professional Learning Community of teachers of history, social studies, economy and 
geography in secondary education.
Pieter de Bruijn is assistant professor in cultural education and cultural heritage at the Open University of the Netherlands. 
His research interests include the use of cultural heritage in education, the representation of history in museums and 
sites, particularly on slavery and World War II, and the relationship between citizenship and history education. He also 
coordinates a project that aims to stimulate the valorisation of research on heritage learning.

ORCID
Geerte M. Savenije 
Pieter de Bruijn 

 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1774-8771

 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6246-8392

References
Ashley, S. 2005. “State Authority and the Public Sphere: Ideas on the Changing Role of the Museum as a Canadian Social 

Institution.” Museum and Society 3 (1): 5–17.

Bal, M. 2009. Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Barton, K. C., and L. S. Levstik. 2004. Teaching History for the Common Good. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Barton,  K.  C.,  and  A.  McCully.  2012.  “Trying  to  ‘See  Things  Differently’:  Northern  Ireland  Students’  Struggle  to 

Understand Alternative Historical Perspectives.” Theory and Research in Social Education 40 (4): 371–408.

Basu, P., and S. Macdonald. 2007. “Introduction: Experiments in Exhibition, Ethnography, Art and Science.” In Exhibition 

Experiments, edited by S. Macdonald and P. Basu, 1–24. Oxford: Blackwell.

Cohen, L., L. Manion, and K. Morrison. 2011. Research Methods in Education. 7th ed. New York: Routledge.
De Bruijn, P. 2014. “Bridges to the past: Historical Distance and Multiperspectivity in English and Dutch Heritage 

Educational Resources.” Doctoral dissertation, Erasmus University of Rotterdam.

844 

 

 G. M. SAVENIJE AND P. DE BRUIJN

Dicks, B. 2003. Culture on Display: The Production of Contemporary Visitability. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Doering, Z., and A. Pekarik. 1996. “Questioning the Entrance Narrative.” Journal of Museum Education 21 (3): 20–23.
Endacott, J., and S. Brooks. 2013. “An Updated Theoretical and Practical Model for Promoting Historical Empathy.” 

Epstein, T. 1998. “Deconstructing Differences in African-American and European-American Adolescents’ Perspectives 

Social Studies Research and Practice 8 (1): 41–58.

on U.S. History.” Curriculum Inquiry 28 (4): 397–423.

Falk, J., and L. Dierking. 2013. The Museum Experience Revisited. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Goldberg, T. 2013. “’It’s in My Veins’: Identity and Disciplinary Practice in Students’ Discussions of a Historical Issue.” 

Theory and Research in Social Education 41 (1): 33–64.

Gosselin, V. 2011. “Open to Interpretation: Mobilizing Historical Thinking in the Museum.” Doctoral dissertation, 

University of British Columbia, Vancouver.

Gregory, K., and A. Witcomb. 2007. “Beyond Nostalgia: The Role of Affect in Generating Historical Understanding at 
Heritage Sites.” In Museum Revolutions, edited by S. Knell, S. McLeod and S. Watson, 263–274. New York: Routledge.
Grever, M., P. de Bruijn, and C. van Boxtel. 2012. “Negotiating Historical Distance: Or, How to Deal with the past as a 

Foreign Country in Heritage Education.” Paedagogica Historica 48 (6): 873–887.

Hoffman, M. 1984. “Interaction of Affect and Cognition in Empathy.” In Emotions, Cognitions and Behavior, edited by 

C. Izard, J. Kagan and R. Zajonc, 103–131. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Huijgen, T., C. van Boxtel, W. van de Grift, and P. Holthuis. 2016. “Toward Historical Perspective Taking: Students’ 
Reasoning When Contextualizing the Actions of People in the past.” Theory & Research in Social Education 45: 
110–144.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. 1998. Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage. Berkeley, CA: University of 

California Press.

Lee, P., and R. Ashby. 1987. “Children’s Concepts of Empathy and Understanding in History.” In The History Curriculum 

for Teachers, edited by C. Portal, 62–88. London: Falmer.

Lidchi, H. 1997. “The Poetics and the Politics of Exhibiting Other Cultures.” In Representation: Cultural Representations 

and Signifying Practices, edited by S. Hall, 151–222. London: Sage.

Lorenz, C. 2004. “Towards a Theoretical Framework for Comparing Historiographies: Some Preliminary Considerations.” 

In Theorizing Historical Consciousness, edited by P. Seixas, 25–48. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press.

Ma-Kellams, C., and J. Blascovich. 2012. “Inferring the Emotions of Friends versus Strangers.” Personality and Social 

Marcus, A. S., J. D. Stoddard, and W. W. Woodward. 2012. Teaching History with Museums: Strategies for K-12 Social 

Psychology Bulletin 38 (7): 933–945.

Studies. New York: Routledge.

Mason, R. 2004. “Nation Building at the Museum of Welsh Life.” Museum and Society 2 (1): 18–34.
McCully, A., N. Pilgrim, A. Sutherland, and T. McMinn. 2002. “‘Don’t Worry, Mr Trimble. We Can Handle It’: Balancing 

the Rational and the Emotional in the Teaching of Contentious Topics’.” Teaching History 106: 6–12.

McRainey, D. L., and J. Russick, eds. 2010. Connecting Kids to History with Museum Exhibitions. Walnut Creek, CA: 

Miles, M., and A. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: 

Museon. 2016. “Webpage about the Learning Session ‘ Child in War’.” http://www.museon.nl/nl/onderwijs/primair/

Pearce, S. 1998. Museums, Objects and Collections. a Cultural Study. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Peck, C. L. 2010. “‘It’s Not like I’m Chinese and Canadian. I’M in between’: Ethnicity and Students’ Conceptions of 

Historical Significance.” Theory and Research in Social Education 38 (4): 574–617.

Phillips, M. S. 2004. “History, Memory, and Historical Distance.” In Theorizing Historical Consciousness, edited by  

P. Seixas, 86–102. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press.

Ribbens, K. and E. Captain. 2011.Tonen Van De Oorlog. Toekomst Voor Het Museale Erfgoed Van De Tweede Wereldoorlog 

[Sounds of the War. Future of the Heritage of the Second World War]. Amsterdam: NIOD.

Rijksoverheid [national government]. 2016. “Governmental Information Policy about the Second World War.” https://

www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/tweede-wereldoorlog/inhoud/voorlichting-tweede-wereldoorlog.

Savenije, G. M., C. van Boxtel, and M. Grever. 2014a. “Learning about Sensitive History: ‘Heritage’ of Slavery as a 

Resource.” Theory and Research in Social Education 42 (4): 516–547.

Savenije, G. M., C. van Boxtel, and M. Grever. 2014b. “Sensitive ‘Heritage’ of Slavery in a Multicultural Classroom: 

Pupils’ Ideas regarding Significance.” British Journal of Educational Studies 62 (2): 127–148.

Schorch, P. 2015. “Museum Encounters and Narrative Engagements.” The International Handbooks of Museum Studies 

Seixas, P., and T. Morton. 2013. The Big Six: Historical Thinking Concepts. Toronto: Nelson.
Simon, R. I. 2006. “The Terrible Gift: Museums and the Possibility of Hope without Consolation.” Museum Management 

12 (1): 437–457.

and Curatorship 21: 187–204.

Left Coast Press.

Sage.

kind-in-oorlog.

  

  845

Smith, L. 2011. “Affect and Registers of Engagement. Navigating Emotional Responses to Dissonant Heritages.” In Representing 
Enslavement and Abolition in Museums: Ambiguous Engagements, edited by L. Smith, G. Cubitt, K. Fouseki and R. Wilson, 
260–303. New York: Routledge.

Smith, L. 2016. “Changing Views? Emotional Intelligence, Registers of Engagement and the Museum Visit.” In Museums 
and the past. Constructing Historical Consciousness, edited by V. Gosselin and P. Livingstone, 101–121. Vancouver: 
UBC Press.

Spalding, N. 2012. “Learning to Remember Slavery at the Museum: School Field-Trips, Difficult Histories and Shifting 

Historical Consciousness.” Dissertation, Newcastle University.

Stradling, R. 2003. Multiperspectivity in History Teaching: A Guide for History Teachers. Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
van Drie, J., and C. van Boxtel. 2008. “Historical Reasoning: Towards a Framework for Analyzing Students’ Reasoning 

about the past.” Educational Psychology Review 20 (2): 87–110. doi:10.1007/s10648-007-9056-1.

Watson, S. 2015. “Emotions in the History Museum.” In The International Handbooks of Museum Studies, edited by  

A. Witcomb and K. Message. Vol. 11, 283–301. Milton: John Wiley & Sons.

Witcomb, A. 2015. “Toward a Pedagogy of Feeling: Understanding How Museums Create a Space for Cross-Cultural 
Encounters.” In The International Handbooks of Museum Studies, edited by A. Witcomb and K. Message. 1st ed., 
321–344. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

Zerubavel, E. 2003. Time Maps. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.


