International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

From analogue to digital and back again:
institutional dynamics of heritage innovation

Bas van Heur

To cite this article: Bas van Heur (2010) From analogue to digital and back again: institutional
dynamics of heritage innovation, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 16:6, 405-416, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2010.510663
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2010.510663

Published online: 11 Oct 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 781

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 16, No. 6, November 2010, 405–416

From analogue to digital and back again: institutional dynamics of 
heritage innovation
Bas van Heur*

Maastricht Virtual Knowledge Studio, Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, Maastricht 
University, the Netherlands

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_510663.sgm

(Received 16 December 2009; final version received 7 April 2010)

166000000November 2010
Dr Basvan Heur
b.vanheur@maastrichtuniversity.nl
10.1080/13527258.2010.510663
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis

This  article  traces  the  emergence  of  a  digital  imperative  –  the  belief  in  the
necessity  of  digitising  cultural  expressions  –  in  a  particular  heritage  project  in
the Dutch city of Maastricht. The main reason for doing so is to contribute to the
growing  body  of  literature  on  digital  cultural  heritage,  a  perspective  that  pays
analytical  attention  to  the  organisational  and  institutional  dynamics  of  heritage
innovation.  Such  a  perspective  complicates  the  popular  assumption  that
digitisation  will  be  beneficial  to  participation  and  instead  puts  forward  –  by
drawing  on  institutional  theory  and  the  sociology  of  expectations  –  a  less
technology-centric  and  more  contextual  understanding  of  digital  heritage.  The
conclusion highlights the potential of institutional analysis and the sociology of
expectations for digital heritage studies.

Keywords: digital heritage; institutions; organisations; expectations; innovation;
participation

Introduction
In  2002,  an  Amsterdam-based  consulting  agency  was  commissioned  by  the
municipality of the Dutch city of Maastricht to develop a guiding vision for cultural
heritage  management  in  Maastricht.1  This  was  to  be  part  of  the  formulation  of  the
main  cultural  policy  guidelines  for  the  years  2002–2010,  in  which  a  more  active
engagement  with  local  cultural  heritage  was  advocated.  Drawing  on  the  work  of
Gerard Rooijakkers, professor of Dutch ethnology at the University of Amsterdam,
the notion of cultural biography was adopted to conceptualise the city of Maastricht
as  a  city  of  shifting  identities  over  time.  At  this  early  stage,  the  development  of  a
digital heritage infrastructure was occasionally mentioned, but always as one element
within a much wider-ranging attempt to rethink the presentation and use of cultural
heritage in Maastricht. Indeed, the notion of cultural biography was largely adopted
strategically  to  counter  the  popular,  but  much  more  expensive  idea,  of  a  physical
historical  museum.  Although  publications  by  Rooijakkers  offer  a  justification  for
focusing  on  digital  technology  investment,  this  emphasis  is  not  at  all  visible  in  the
original project offer by the Municipality to the consultancy group, and is only visible
to a limited extent in their final report (Rooijakkers 1999, LAgroup 2003).2 Over the
next  couple  of  years,  however,  it  was  precisely  the  development  of  the  digital

*Email: b.vanheur@maastrichtuniversity.nl

ISSN 1352-7258 print/ISSN 1470-3610 online
© 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2010.510663
http://www.informaworld.com

406

 B. van Heur

infrastructure that became the core concern of those involved in the cultural biography
of Maastricht project.

How can this apparent paradox be explained? In this article, I argue that at least a
beginning of an explanation can be found in tracing the emergence of a digital imper-
ative in this particular project. The notion of digital imperative refers to the belief that
the future is digital and that current practices need to digitise in order to make this
future a reality. The digital imperative, in other words, creates a strong sense of social
pressure and potentially even guilt among those not yet taking part in the project of
digitisation (Wyatt 2008). Although partly the result of contingent dynamics within
the project organisation, the digital imperative in Maastricht became stabilised due to
wider  institutional  priorities  (in  particular  related  to  funding)  that  favoured  digital
heritage  projects.  Also,  despite  digitisation  of  heritage  commonly  being  associated
with openness and participation, the empirical data to be discussed below show that
the emergence of a digital imperative actually led to a ‘closing down’ of the cultural
biography of Maastricht project: for a number of years, only a select group of actors
was able to shape its development. And finally, it has only been the increased ques-
tioning of the centrality of the digital infrastructure in recent years that has led to a
relative  ‘opening  up’  of  the  project  to  a  wider  range  of  actors.  The  phrase  ‘from
analogue  to  digital  and  back  again’  in  the  title  of  this  article  –  appropriating  ICT
vocabulary  for  a  rather  different  purpose  –  is  used  as  shorthand  to  describe  this
process.

A problem in explaining this process is that most research in digital heritage stud-
ies  does  not  have  the  analytical  tools  to  capture  these  complex  dynamics.  Broadly
speaking, research on digital heritage fits within one of two main strands. First, there
is the research that provides detailed intra-textual analyses of websites, hyperlinks and
the design of virtual environments (Paraizo and Ripper Kós 2007, Chen and Kalay
2008). Although often informative, the textual nature of these publications unavoid-
ably  downplays  the  complex  organisational  and  institutional  environment  in  which
these new technologies are embedded. A second strand investigates the role of new
media in shaping learning and experience in museum contexts (Brown 2006, McCar-
thy and Ciolfi 2008). In paying attention to the relation between new technologies and
users in physical museums, this strand opens up digital heritage studies to questions
of participation. Its user-orientation, however, pushes analysis away from a focus on
the  actual  development  and  organisation  of  digital  heritage  projects.  An  emerging
third strand might be the research on the role of place in relation to digital technolo-
gies, which addresses the situated socio-spatiality of digitised practices. In situating
digital heritage in actual places and beyond the museum walls, some of the work in
this strand is starting to move beyond the established paths in digital heritage research
(Malpas 2008). This article aims to contribute to this emerging strand by highlighting
the local organisational and institutional complexities involved in the development of
digital heritage.

To  develop  these  claims,  the  outline  of  the  remainder  of  this  article  is  quite
straightforward. The next section introduces institutional theory and the sociology of
expectations in order to develop a basic framework with which to analyse digital heri-
tage projects. This is followed by an analysis of the cultural biography of Maastricht
project  in  which  particular  attention  will  be  paid  to  three  aspects:  constructing  the
digital imperative; institutionalising digital heritage; and the emergence of alternative
logics.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 407

Institutional expectations
In emphasising the organisational and institutional dynamics of digital heritage inno-
vation, this article supports the recent ‘institutional turn’ in new media and technology
studies,  which  argues  that  digital  technologies  can  only  be  understood  through  a
sustained investigation of their diverse institutional contexts (Orlikowski and Barley
2001, Pickard 2008, Pinch 2008, Shah and Kesan 2009). In drawing on this literature,
it is not merely to suggest that research on digital heritage can benefit from taking note
of these sociologically more nuanced discussions in related disciplines (although that
is one goal), it is also to reconnect digital heritage studies with the broader field of
heritage studies as such. Organisational and institutional questions are clearly being
addressed in the wider tradition of heritage studies – most obviously and interestingly
in  relation  to  economic  development  (Graham  et  al.  2000,  Dicks  2003),  tourism
(Chang et al. 1996) and identity discourses (Shore 1996) – but for some reason these
issues have hardly been addressed in the subfield of digital heritage studies. At the
same  time,  in  mainstream  heritage  debates  the  role  of  digital  technologies  remains
conceptually underdeveloped. By introducing the notion of digital imperative from an
institutionalist  perspective,  this  article  thus  hopes  to  contribute  to  a  much-needed
convergence between digital and ‘non-digital’ heritage studies.

Without having the space to summarise the complex history of institutional theory,
for the purposes of this article the notion of institutions refers to those processes that
contribute  to  social  order  and  stable  behaviours  (cf.  DiMaggio  and  Powell  1991).
Scott (2008) distinguishes between three elements that constitute social order: regula-
tive,  normative  and  cultural-cognitive  elements.  Regulative  elements  refer  to  rules,
monitoring  and  sanctioning;  normative  elements  highlight  the  moral  obligations  in
social  interaction;  and  cultural-cognitive  elements  emphasise  the  assumptions  and
classifications underlying institutional logics. Drawing on this broad understanding of
institutions, the following dimensions deserve particular attention.

First, institutional elements operate on multiple but intertwined and linked scales,
from the local to the regional, national and global. There is no determinate causality
between scales, but these institutional elements do order, to an extent, heterogeneous
social  practices,  since  actors  deliberately  or  unconsciously  draw  on  the  available
range of what Searle (1995) would call ‘institutional facts’. Ribes and Finholt (2009,
pp.  377–378)  have  pointed  to  the  multi-scalar  dimension  of  digital  infrastructure
development by arguing that these projects should be understood simultaneously as
technological  ventures,  involving  concrete  working  practices,  and  as  institutional
ventures  dedicated  to  providing  services  to  various  communities.  The  notion  of
institution adopted by Ribes and Finholt, however, is strikingly instrumental and goal-
oriented (institutions are developed in order to enable the construction of infrastruc-
tures) and more attention will need to be paid to pre-existent institutional elements
located on various scales in constituting the very character of infrastructural practices
in  the  first  place.  Also,  as  actor-network  theory  in  particular  has  highlighted,  the
ordering of institutions remains a heterogeneous undertaking and, unavoidably, trans-
lations will lead to a wide variety of practices not subsumable under the logic of one
particular infrastructure project (Law 1992).

Second, analysts have started paying more attention to the process of institutional-
isation in order to counter the perceived static and functionalist tendencies of early
institutional theory. It is in adopting a processual perspective that institutional analysis
shows  similarities  with  actor-centred  approaches  in  heritage  studies,  although  the

408

 B. van Heur

strength of the former tradition is its more sophisticated conceptualisation of the ways
in  which  institutional  histories  and  path  dependencies  shape  future  trajectories
(Pierson 2004, Sewell 2005). We can expect, in other words, the institutionalisation
of new digital heritage projects due to the already-institutionalised landscape in which
actors operate.

Third,  empirical  research  has  increasingly  questioned  the  assumption  of  unifor-
mity  within  institutional  environments.  Friedland  and  Alford  (1991)  in  particular
argue  that  a  non-functionalist  and  non-deterministic  analysis  of  society  requires  a
much stronger acknowledgement of multiple institutional logics and of the ways in
which these multiple logics lead to institutional contradictions that can be strategically
exploited  by  actors.  Discussing  the  classic  sociological  themes  of  the  state,  the
capitalist economy, religion and the family, they emphasise that ‘important struggles
between  groups,  organisations,  and  classes  are  over  the  appropriate  relationships
between  institutions,  and  by  which  institutional  logic  different  activities  should  be
regulated and to which categories of persons they apply’ (p. 256). This raises ques-
tions concerning the ‘vertical depth’ (Krasner 1988) of institutionalisation, that is, the
extent  to  which  institutional  logics  can  actually  shape  particular  organisational
cultures, since logics are always counteracted by other logics. Zooming in on the more
specific theme of digital infrastructures, researchers have noted similar institutional
contradictions.  Thus,  in  their  ‘Agenda  for  Infrastructure  Studies’,  Edwards  et  al.
(2009)  highlight  that  ‘any  new  infrastructure  must  somehow  integrate  with  an
installed base that includes not only artefacts but human habits, norms, and roles that
may  prove  its  most  intractable  elements’  (p.  366).  This  unavoidably  leads  to  a
‘recurring issue of adjustment’ (p. 369) in which infrastructure projects adapt to and
reshape their environment as well as failure when these mutual adjustments do not
generate substantive embedding of infrastructures in everyday working practices.

Fourth,  in  concretising  the  notion  of  temporality  in  institutional  analysis,  the
sociology of expectations has drawn attention to the role of expectations in managing
institutional  change.  Expectations  are  central  to  understanding  institutional  change
due to their ambivalent nature. On the one hand, they generate enthusiasm, mobilise
resources at multiple scales, and bring together highly diverse groups of actors in the
pursuit of a new project (Brown and Michael 2003, Borup et al. 2006). This is the
truly  emergent  moment  of  expectations,  visible  in  particular  in  the  early  phases  of
‘infrastructural imagination’ and infrastructure development (Jackson et al. 2007). On
the other hand, expectations are also usefully understood as shaped by institutional
elements in that they manage and order change along relatively fixed and pre-estab-
lished lines. In other words, after a while, the new doesn’t look so new anymore. This
at least seems to partly explain the recurring pattern in which expectations move from
early excitement and promise to later disappointment (Geels and Smit 2000).

The cultural biography of Maastricht
Having established an analytical framework that directs attention to the institutional
dynamics  of  and  the  role  of  expectations  in  shaping  digital  heritage  projects,  this
section  discusses  in  more  depth  the  cultural  biography  of  Maastricht  project.
Empirical data for this analysis has been derived from an extensive archival analysis
in 2008. My contacts with the key actors involved in this project, together with the
public  nature  of  municipal  archives  in  the  Netherlands,  enabled  access  to  a  wide
variety  of  project-related  documents.  These  included  minutes  of  steering  group

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 409

meetings, e-mail exchanges, letters of interest groups, official policy documents, inter-
nal reviews, funding applications and newspaper articles. Although interviews have
also been conducted with the main actors involved in the heritage project, due to the
richness of archival data I decided to concentrate on these particular data for this arti-
cle. The focus, in other words, is not on the memories of the recent project history as
expressed through interviews, but on the primary documentary sources as produced at
the time of the events described. Although these sources are surely not more objective
than interviews, archival data do sensitise us to the ‘genealogy of ideas’ and allow us
to  trace  the  main  narratives  through  time  (Gidley  2004).  Based  on  these  data  and
informed by the theoretical framework discussed above, three main processes can be
identified: constructing the digital imperative; institutionalising digital heritage; and
the emergence of alternative logics.

Constructing the digital imperative
With the decision in place to develop the cultural biography of Maastricht as formu-
lated by the consultancy group, the first phase largely concentrated on making more
concrete the notion of cultural biography to fit the particularities of Maastricht and on
the development of a collaboration model that could be used to implement the imag-
ined infrastructure of a cultural biography. This infrastructure was seen less in digital
than  in  narrative  and  organisational  terms.  The  consultancy  report  (LAgroup  2003)
emphasised the need to understand the city as a layered, differentiated and complex
phenomenon in which the ‘life and social meaning of urban artefacts (streets, build-
ings) and events are inextricably connected with the biographies and genealogies of
city  users  and  inhabitants’  (p.  20).  Four  core  elements  of  the  cultural  biography  of
Maastricht were identified, namely its identity as a Roman establishment, a medieval
religious centre, an early modern garrison town, and as an industrial city. This cultural
biography  of  Maastricht  was  in  turn  seen  to  consist  of  three  layers:  the  ‘collective
memory’ of the city, including the ‘source material’ of buildings, works of art, literary
texts,  maps,  rituals,  archives,  stories  and  scientific  interpretations;  the  ‘permanent
story’  including  the  four  core  elements;  and  the  ‘temporary  stories’  not  in  need  of
‘structural attention or that present the permanent stories from a different (non-direct)
perspective’ (pp. 28–32).

Ignoring  for  the  moment  the  implicit  assumption  that  permanent  stories  can  be
presented directly through the objective accounts provided by academic researchers
and objects, the material implementation of the cultural biography was envisioned to
necessitate a central depot for the collective memory objects, a permanent information
building in the centre of the city, permanent presentation spaces in the cultural insti-
tutions  and  temporary  spaces  throughout  the  city.  Digital  technologies  were  only
mentioned briefly as ‘multimedia support tools’ (p. 33) that could aid visitors to the
information centre in selecting historical narratives.

The dominant actors in this  early stage  were the Municipality of Maastricht (in
particular senior civil servants within the department of arts and culture) and the hired
consultants. Academic researchers were interviewed and offered important expertise
that strongly shaped the narrative dimensions of the envisioned project. This applied
in particular to Ed Taverne, emeritus professor of history of architecture and urban
planning at the University of Groningen, who co-authored the chapter discussing the
four core elements of the cultural biography of Maastricht. Through interviews and
discussion  sessions  opinions  from  local  cultural  institutions  were  at  least  formally

410

 B. van Heur

integrated  into  the  development  of  the  project.  In  the  imagined  infrastructure  these
representatives  from  the  cultural  organisations  were  awarded  a  much  more  central
role, namely as producers of the information that could be fed into the presentation
formats  of  the  cultural  biography.  Local  citizens  and  tourists  were  granted  a  rather
passive role as ‘recipients’ (p. 27) of the cultural biography, although inhabitants were
also positioned as potential contributors to the development of the temporary stories
(though not the permanent stories).

Following the recommendations in the consultancy report, one of the first tasks of
the civil servant responsible for the coordination of the cultural biography project was
to  find  candidates  for  a  steering  group  that  could  guide  the  development  of  the
project. Even before executing this task, however, he commissioned a local website
design  firm  to  develop  a  plan  of  action  concerning  the  online  dimensions  of  the
project, a demo-website to show the added value of multimedia, and a project website
to be used for streamlining communication between project participants. In December
2003,  the  website  designer  produced  a  ‘step-by-step  plan  online  cultural  biography
Maastricht’ as well as a report on ‘multimedia and the cultural biography of Maas-
tricht’ in which the content and form of the envisioned website was described. Leav-
ing  behind  the  original  commission  of  producing  a  demo-website,  this  step-by-step
plan is much more ambitious: a full-blown online cultural biography that effectively
replaces the less technology-centred vision of the consultancy agency is to be devel-
oped.  Although  the  description  of  this  website  is  dealt  with  rather  summarily,  it  is
seen to include, among other things, an ‘integrated interactive timeline’, an ‘interac-
tive map’, a search function and thematically organised items based on images, text,
animation, film, video and audio. All this is promised to be based on a ‘database of
common  ‘open’  technology’,  although  the  precise  type  of  open  technology  is  not
further specified.3 From this moment onwards and only six months after the consul-
tancy report advocated a concept- and organisation-driven project, the cultural biog-
raphy  project  came  to  revolve  primarily  around  the  development  of  a  digital
infrastructure and the digitisation of heritage information. In line with the literature
on  path  dependency  that  highlights  the  important  role  played  by  early  decisions  in
ordering subsequent developments, this rather contingent decision to commission the
design  of  a  demo-website  proved  to  be  path-shaping  for  the  cultural  biography  of
Maastricht project.

Having established the digital biography as a ‘matter of concern’ (Latour 2004),
three expectations were key to the further stabilisation of the digital imperative. First,
the digital infrastructure was positioned as absolutely central to the development of
the cultural biography project as a whole, since it was argued that this digital infra-
structure would function as the core technology to connect producers of heritage infor-
mation (cultural organisations in Maastricht) with consumers (tourists, local citizens,
schools).  Whereas  in  the  early  phase,  the  participating  cultural  organisations  were
given the task of delivering information to be presented in various formats (such as
exhibitions, archival material, historical objects, etc.), this task was now understood
as  one  of  almost  exclusively  delivering  digital  information.  This  is  stated  quite
directly in an early concept paper: 

When the decision will be made, as is to be expected, to adopt a phased approach, then
the  development  of  a  digital  cultural  biography  should  be  first  priority.  This  digital
system […] will play a pivotal role in connecting those that should deliver the contents
of the biography (the institutions) with the consumer. The producers of the content can
deliver their product digitally in the digital system. Museums and other cultural heritage

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 411

institutions,  the  tourist  information  office,  educational  institutions,  tourists,  local
citizens, etc. can consult this content directly via the internet and possibly give comments
or add their own stories.4

Second, it was argued that an online environment enabled an individualisation of
information: with profiles as well as global positioning system (GPS), users would be
able to gain access to heritage information in a highly location- and subject-specific
way. And third, the digital information was positioned as representing the collective
memory of the city of Maastricht. According to the website designer, this digital infor-
mation could then be re-used in a variety of different (physical) contexts: from infor-
mation booths to museum exhibitions, local cultural centres or homes for the elderly.5
In short, by positing the digital biography of Maastricht as the core solution to a vari-
ety of problems, these expectations justified substantial financial and time investment
in the building of the digital infrastructure.

Institutionalising digital heritage
The  construction  of  this  digital  imperative  involved,  in  other  words,  a  particular
ordering  of  the  project  organisation  in  which  the  key  actors  came  to  orient  their
activities and imaginations around the development of the digital infrastructure. The
further institutionalisation of this digital imperative was enabled through two parallel
developments: one was the emergence of an organisational division between what one
could call infrastructural logic and content logic; another was the linking up with the
national scale and the wider Dutch debates on digital cultural heritage.

In having put forward the development of the digital biography as the key objec-
tive,  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  the  new  steering  committee  became  to  manage  this
process. Six people were selected to be part of this group: two civil servants (including
the one formally responsible for the cultural biography project), two historians, one
director of a cultural organisation, and the website designer.6 At this stage, the website
designer was the only actor with specific ICT expertise in the steering group; he was
also  the  only  actor  with  a  clear  economic  interest  in  further  promoting  the  digital
dimensions of the cultural biography of Maastricht. In effect, these diverging forms of
expertise between the main actors produced a division between infrastructural logic
and content logic from the very beginning that shaped almost all following discus-
sions. To an extent, this division created a relative autonomy for debates on the history
of Maastricht and its four main identities (Maastricht as Roman establishment, medi-
eval religious centre, early modern garrison town, and industrial city). A conference
was organised in early 2005 to discuss the cultural biography project with all cultural
heritage organisations in Maastricht. The focus of this conference was not on the digi-
tal  biography,  but  on  the  four  identities  and  the  minutes  of  these  sessions  show  no
concern with questions concerning digitisation (the only exception being the session
in  which  the  website  designer  participated).7  Following  this  conference,  a  project
director was hired in order to achieve two goals: to support cultural organisations in
Maastricht in generating relevant information for the cultural biography project; and
to function as the chief editor for the online cultural biography. However, the fact that
no specific ICT expertise was requested from this new director created a problematic
situation  in  which  the  director  was  ultimately  responsible  for  translating  historical
narratives, visual material and audio files into digital data without necessarily having
the skills to do so.8

412

 B. van Heur

This  limited  ICT  expertise  among  the  main  actors  intertwined  with  a  second,
parallel  development,  namely  the  application  for  extra  funding  to  subsidise  the
development  of  the  digital  infrastructure.  Parallel  to  the  formation  of  the  steering
committee,  the  civil  servant  responsible  for  the  cultural  biography  project  had
submitted  a  funding  application  to  the  Mondriaan  Foundation  (one  of  the  main
foundations  that  funds  projects  in  the  arts,  design  and  cultural  heritage  in  the
Netherlands).  Even  though  this  first  application  was  rejected,  the  Mondriaan
Foundation  advised  the  resubmission  of  an  improved  version.9  By  doing  so,  the
organisational  bias  in  favour  of  digitisation  gained  in  strength  by  linking  up  with
broader institutional trends, in particular debates on the national scale on the value of
digitising  the  cultural  heritage  of  the  Netherlands.10  The  ‘positive’  rejection’11  by
the  Mondriaan  Foundation  generated  a  dynamic  that  led  to  a  sedimentation  of  the
imagined digital infrastructure in the steering group debates and to its eventual reali-
sation.  The  criticism  made  by  the  Mondriaan  Foundation  was  clear:  it  was  argued
that, instead of the website designer, the heritage organisations should play a more
central role in information provision. Also, the relation between content production
and  technical  infrastructure  was  seen  as  imbalanced  –  ‘a  lot  of  overhead  for  little
interaction’.12 Instead, a more flexible and open digital infrastructure was advocated.
Following the advice to resubmit an improved application, and after discussions with
Digital  Heritage  Netherlands  –  a  knowledge  platform  sponsored  by  the  Dutch
government  and  aimed  at  a  professionalisation  of  ICT  practices  in  the  field  of
cultural heritage – the steering committee replaced the website designer with a new
committee  member  who  had  extensive  experience  in  researching  and  organising
digital  media  projects.  A  revised  application  was  submitted  to  and  then  granted  by
the Mondriaan Foundation.13

The inclusion of a new steering group member with substantial ICT-expertise had
a very paradoxical effect on the development of the cultural biography project. On the
one hand, it generated a questioning of the infrastructural logic as promoted by the
website designer by criticising technical choices. This becomes visible when tracing
the  discussions  in  the  steering  group  meetings  after  the  project  had  received  the
Mondriaan Foundation grant. Thus, one of the first remarks made by the new steering
group member was that it might be productive to consider the digital system already
in use by the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, since it was not too expensive and easy to
use.  Although  this  generated  discussions  for  almost  one  whole  year,  in  the  end  the
decision  was  taken  to  simply  continue  with  the  infrastructure  as  proposed  by  the
website  designer,  since  neither  the  website  designer  nor  his  employees  possessed
the necessary  programming  skills  for  XML  and  Java.14  Similarly,  a  representative
from Digital Heritage Netherlands proposed to do a technical and usability test of the
website,  but  this  was  rejected  by  the  website  designer  and  not  followed  up  by  the
steering group.15 On the other hand, the funding by the Mondriaan Foundation and
the inclusion of a new steering group member with extensive ICT expertise can also
be  understood  to  have  led  to  a  further  institutionalisation  and  sedimentation  of  the
digital  imperative  in  the  cultural  biography  project.  Neither  Digital  Heritage
Netherlands nor the Mondriaan Foundation or the steering group ever fundamentally
questioned the added value of developing a digital infrastructure – the decision to digi-
tise  had  been  made  early  on  (even  before  starting  the  steering  group)  and  was
supported by an institutional environment in favour of digital cultural heritage. As a
result,  content  logic  became  subordinated  to  infrastructural  logic:  even  though
steering  group  discussions  on  historical  themes  related  to  the  cultural  biography  of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 413

Maastricht  took  place  regularly,  these  were  often  reduced  to  practical  questions
concerning the types of text and visuals to add to the website.16

Emergence of alternative logics
With the benefit of hindsight, this period in which the digital imperative was further
institutionalised can be understood as a relatively compact period in which the time-
consuming  development  of  the  website  effectively  dominated  all  other  concerns.
Despite  the  primary  focus  on  the  website  and  occasional  criticisms  regarding  its
design,  the  limited  ICT  expertise  in  the  steering  group  and  the  reluctance  of  the
website designer to discuss his choices effectively contributed to a ‘black-boxing’ of
the  digital  infrastructure.  Although  this  did  not  go  unnoticed  and  led  to  criticisms
concerning the top-down nature of and limited interaction possible through the digital
infrastructure, the website continued to be developed irrespective of these criticisms
which  created  facts  on  the  ground  that  were  somewhat  grudgingly  accepted  by  the
steering group.17

These moments of criticism, however, became more visible and formative for the
organisational  process  after  the  completion  of  the  website.  Whereas  it  was  earlier
emphasised that the digital biography would need to form the core of the project, it
was  now  highlighted  that  ‘the  site  is  not  a  goal  in  itself’.18  Having  started  with
‘analogue’  understandings  of  heritage  innovation  and  after  a  period  of  dedicated
digitisation,  the  project  again  returned  to  more  ‘analogue’  means  of  presenting  the
heritage of Maastricht. The key criticisms revolved around the fact that the website did
not really generate interaction with local citizens or with the many cultural organisa-
tions in Maastricht. Although the development of the digital infrastructure continued
(in particular, addition of multiple languages for the website and the development of
mobile  applications),  this  was  now  only  one  aspect  of  a  much  more  multimedia
approach. Thus, in their June 2008 recommendations to the municipality, the steering
group proposed to focus on the following activities: develop a physical information
centre for the cultural biography project; organise a thematic festival every two years;
develop  temporary  exhibitions;  organise  thematic  activities  together  with  other
cultural  organisations;  pay  more  attention  to  the  peripheral  areas  in  Maastricht  and
give a voice to local citizens; add new items to the website; extend the back office
function of the website to allow for more contributions by the cultural organisations;
and develop educational projects.19 A discussion of these latest developments would
be beyond the scope of this article, but it seems clear that the partial completion of the
website  also  allowed  for  a  more  radical  questioning  of  the  digital  imperative.  As  a
result,  the  digital  infrastructure  is  no  longer  understood  as  the  core  technology  to
connect cultural organisations, tourists and local citizens, but as only one technology
among many others.

Conclusion
In presenting the case of the digital biography of Maastricht, and in drawing on insti-
tutional theory and the sociology of expectations, this article has shown the ways in
which organisational and institutional dynamics shape digital heritage development.
In doing so, it has moved away from the dominant concerns in digital heritage studies
with users or the design of virtual environments towards a concern with the emergence
of digital heritage and its slow but steady stabilisation as well as transformation. This

414

 B. van Heur

processual socio-technical approach has a number of advantages. First, and instead of
simply accepting digital heritage as a starting point for analysis, it understands digital
heritage as an accomplishment that is the result of previous decisions. Other choices
could  (and  perhaps  should)  have  been  made.  This  allows  for  a  more  substantive
sociological approach that investigates in depth the power relations between actors,
digital  technologies,  organisations  and  institutions.  Second,  a  processual  approach
gives us insight into the multiple logics active within digital heritage projects and how
these logics relate to broader institutional trends. Third, this socio-technical approach
directs  attention  to  the  important  role  played  by  expectations.  By  positing  digital
heritage technologies as the main solution to a variety of identified problems (such as
participation or accessibility), these expectations justify substantial financial and time
investment and marginalise other possible solutions to the same problems.

Notes
1. I have decided not to identify by name the main actors involved, even though the archival
data used are publicly accessible and a quick internet search and browsing of these notes
would provide most of these names. The goal of this article is to trace the emergence of a
digital  imperative  in  a  heritage  project  due  to  organisational  and  institutional  dynamics.
With  the  exception  of  a  number  of  important  heritage  organisations  in  the  Netherlands,
adding names seems unnecessary, since it does not add much to the status of the analysis.
2. See  the  document  ‘Het  verstrekken  van  een  opdracht  aan  Lagroup  om  het  concept  van
de  Culturele  Biografie  uit  te  werken’,  27  May  2002,  from  the  municipal  archive.  This
and  all  other  documents  are  derived  from  the  municipal  archive,  unless  mentioned
otherwise.

3. Bureau  Interactieve  Communicatie,  ‘offerte  i.h.k.v.  online  Culturele  Biografie’,  13
November 2003; Carole Muizelaar, ‘Opdracht Culturele Biografie’, 25 November 2003;
Bureau Interactieve Communicatie, ‘stappenplan online culturele biografie Maastricht’, 1
December  2003;  Bureau  Interactieve  Communicatie,  ‘Multimedia  en  de  Culturele
Biografie van Maastricht’, 8 December 2003.

4. Jan Habets, ‘Concept Plan van Aanpak Invoering Culturele Biografie’, 29 June 2004.
5. Bureau Interactieve Communicatie, ‘Stappenplan Online Culturele Biografie Maastricht’,
1  December  2003;  Bureau  Interactieve  Communicatie,  ‘Multimedia  en  de  Culturele
Biografie van Maastricht’, 8 December 2003.

6. Jan Habets, ‘Aan de kandidaat-leden v.d. Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie i.o.’, 7 September

2004; Jean Jacobs, ‘Culturele biografie’, 26 October 2004.

7. Jan  Habets,  ‘Afschr.  t.k.n.’,  27  January  2005;  ‘Workshop  De  Culturele  Biografie  van
Maastricht, identiteit Religie’, 16 February 2005; ‘Verslag workshop “vesting” (groep D)’,
16  February  2005;  ‘Workshop  Industrie’,  16  February  2005;  ‘Groep  1:  Maastricht  als
Romeinse Stad’, 16 February 2005.

8. Ed Taverne, ‘Regisseur Culturele Biografie’, 22 March 2005.
9. C. Muizelaar, ‘subsidieverzoek cultureel erfgoed’, 17 September 2004; Gitta Luiten, ‘Digi-

taal systeem culturele biografie’, 10 November 2004.

10. For  an  overview  of  the  wide  range  of  policy-oriented  publications  dealing  with  digital
cultural heritage in the Netherlands, please see the website of Digital Heritage Netherlands,
http://www.den.nl.

11. E-mail, Jan Habets 25 November 2004.
12. Gitta Luiten, ‘Digitaal systeem culturele biografie’, 10 November 2004.
13. Carole  Muizelaar,  ‘Digitaal  systeem  culturele  biografie’,  15  March  2005;  Gitta  Luiten,

‘Digitaal systeem culturele biografie’, 7 April 2005.

14. Jac van den Boogard, ‘Verslag meeting 1juli met vz stuurgroep’, 4 July 2005; ‘Actielijst
n.a.v. de vergadering van de Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie’, 18 October 2005; Jan Habets,
‘Agenda Vergadering Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie’, 13 December 2005; Dick Rijken,
‘Heb  “informele”  offerte  gevraagd  van  Q42’,  13  March  2006;  Jan  Habets,  ‘Actielijst/
vergadering Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie’, 14 June 2006.

15. Marcel Ras, ‘Re: eerste presentatie culturele biografie’, 8 March 2006.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

 415

16. M. Melkert, ‘Vergadering Werkgroep I Culturele biografie Maastricht (CBM)’, 26 August

2005; Jac van den Boogard, ‘Item 8 t/m 18 Verdedigingswerken’, 31 January 2006.

17. Jan Habets, ‘Actielijst/verslag vergadering Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie’, 14 June 2006;
Jan Habets, ‘Verslag/afspraken vergadering Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie Maastricht’, 4
September 2006; Jan Habets, ‘Evaluatie eerste fase culturele biografie’, 11 October 2006;
Jan Habets, ‘Verslag Vergadering Stuurgroep Culturele Biografie Maastricht’, 23 January
2007.

18. Jan Habets, ‘Evaluatie eerste fase culturele biografie’, 11 October 2006.
19. Jan Habets, ‘De culturele biografie van Maastricht onontkoombaar: aanbevelingen voor de

zichtbaarheid van de culturele biografie’, 5 June 2008.

Notes on contributor
Bas van Heur is a postdoctoral researcher at the Maastricht Virtual Knowledge Studio, Faculty
of Arts and Social Sciences, Maastricht University, the Netherlands. His research focuses on
cultural heritage, the creative industries and urban development.

References
Borup, M., Brown, N., Konrad, K., and van Lente, H., 2006. The sociology of expectations in
science and technology. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 18 (3/4), 285–298.
Brown, S., 2006. Do richer media mean better learning? A framework for evaluating learning
experiences in museum website design. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 12 (5),
412–426.

Brown, N. and Michael, M., 2003. A sociology of expectations: retrospecting prospects and

prospecting retrospects. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 15 (1), 1–18.

Chang,  T.C.,  Milne,  S.,  Fallon,  D.,  and  Pohlmann,  C.,  1996.  Urban  heritage  tourism:  the

global-local nexus. Annals of Tourism Research, 23 (2), 284–305.

Chen,  X.  and  Kalay,  Y.,  2008.  Making  a  liveable  ‘place’:  content  design  in  virtual

environments. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14 (3), 229–246.

Dicks, B., 2003. Heritage, governance and marketization: a case study from Wales. Museum

and Society 1(1), 30–44.

DiMaggio, P.J. and Powell, W.W., 1991. Introduction. In: W.W. Powell and P.J. DiMaggio,
eds.  The  new  institutionalism  in  organizational  analysis.  Chicago,  IL:  University  of
Chicago Press, 1–38.

Edwards, P.N., Bowker, G.C., Jackson, S.J. and Williams, R., 2009. Introduction: an agenda
for  infrastructure  studies.  Journal  of  the  Association  for  Information  Systems,  10  (5),
364–374.

Friedland, R. and Alford, R.R., 1991. Bringing society back in: symbols, practices, and insti-
tutional contradictions. In: W.W. Powell and P.J. DiMaggio, eds. The new institutionalism
in organizational analysis. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 232–263.

Geels,  F.W.  and  Smit,  W.A.,  2000.  Failed  technology  futures:  pitfalls  and  lessons  from  a

historical survey. Futures, 32 (9/10), 867–885.

Gidley, B., 2004. Doing historical and archival research. In: C. Seale, ed. Researching society

and culture. 2nd ed. London: Sage, 249–264.

Graham,  B.,  Ashworth,  G.J.  and  Turnbridge,  J.E.,  2000.  A  geography  of  heritage:  power,

culture & economy. London: Arnold.

Jackson,  S.J.,  Edwards,  P.N.,  Bowker,  G.C.  and  Knobel,  C.P.,  2007.  Understanding

infrastructure: history, heuristics, and cyberinfrastructure policy. First Monday, 12 (6).

Krasner, S.D., 1988. Sovereignty: an institutional perspective. Comparative Political Studies,

21 (1), 66–94.

LAgroup, 2003. Eindrapport: De culturele biografie van Maastricht. Amsterdam: LAgroup.
Latour,  B.,  2004.  Why  has  critique  run  out  of  steam?  From  matters  of  fact  to  matters  of

concern. Critical Inquiry, 30 (2),  225–248.

Law, J., 1992. Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, strategy and heterogeneity.

Systemic Practice and Action Research, 5 (4), 379–393.

Malpas, J., 2008. New media, cultural heritage and the sense of place: mapping the conceptual

ground. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14 (3), 197–209.

416

 B. van Heur

McCarthy,  J.  and  Ciolfi,  L.,  2008.  Place  as  dialogue:  understanding  and  supporting  the

museum experience. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14 (3), 247–267.

Orlikowski, W.J. and Barley, S.R., 2001. Technology and institutions: what can research on
information technology and research on organizations learn from each other? MIS Quar-
terly, 25 (2), 145–165.

Paraizo, R. and Ripper Kós, J., 2007. Urban heritage representations in hyperdocuments. In:
F.  Cameron  and  S.  Kenderdine,  eds.  Theorizing  digital  cultural  heritage:  a  critical
discourse. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 417–435.

Pickard, V.W., 2008. Cooptation and cooperation: institutional exemplars of democratic Inter-

net technology. New Media and Society, 10 (4), 625–645.

Pierson,  P.,  2004.  Politics  in  time:  history,  institutions,  and  social  analysis.  Princeton,  NJ:

Princeton University Press.

37 (5), 461–483.

Pinch, T., 2008. Technology and institutions: living in a material world. Theory and Society,

Ribes,  D.  and  Finholt,  T.A.,  2009.  The  long  now  of  technology  infrastructure:  articulating
tensions  in  development.  Journal  of  the  Association  for  Information  Systems,  10  (5),
375–398.

Rooijakkers, G., 1999. Het leven van alledag benoemen. Cultureel erfgoed tussen ondernem-

erschap en nieuwe technologie. Boekmancahier, 41, 275–289.

Scott, R.W., 2008. Approaching adulthood: the maturing of institutional theory. Theory and

Society, 37 (5), 427–442.

Searle, J., 1995. The construction of social reality. New York: Free Press.
Sewell Jr., W.H., 2005. Logics of history: social theory and social transformation. Chicago,

IL: University of Chicago Press.

Shah, R.C. and Kesan, J.P., 2009. Recipes for cookies: how institutions shape communication

technologies. New Media and Society, 11 (3), 315–336.

Shore,  C.,  1996.  Imagining  the  New  Europe:  identity  and  heritage  in  European  Community
Discourse.  In:  P.  Graves-Brown,  S.  Jones  and  C.  Gamble,  eds.  Cultural  identity  and
archaeology: the construction of European communities. London: Routledge, 96–115.

Wyatt, S., 2008. Challenging the digital imperative. Inaugural lecture. Maastricht: Maastricht

University.


