Say What You Like: Dress, Identity and 
Heritage in Zanzibar
Rosabelle Boswell

125000000September 2006
RosabelleBoswell
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_182092.sgm
10.1080/13527250600821548

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2006Taylor & Francis

r.laville@ru.ac.zaThe paper considers the significance of dress to identity and power among women living on
the  island  of  Zanzibar.  Drawing  on  her  own  preliminary  fieldwork  in  Zanzibar  (June
2004) and on the work of Laura Fair (2001), the author discusses the ways in which dress
(in  general),  and  the  wearing  of  kanga  fabrics  in  particular,  offers  women  a  means  of
communication in an image conscious and historically stratified society. It is argued that
kangas are still an integral part of ritual and social activities in Zanzibar and that they shed
light on the complex history of the Swahili coast. Placing the ethnography in a broader and
contemporary context, the author states that kangas contribute to the intangible heritage
of Zanzibar in their encapsulation of the island’s oral history, art, social commentary and
concepts of beauty. The author concludes by outlining some of the challenges that heritage
regimes face in the Indian Ocean region and potential strategies for preserving or managing
its mixed cultural resources.

Eternal Nothingness is Fine if you Happen to be Dressed for it1

We carry our identity not only within us but also on our bodies. Through clothing, orna-
mentation and scarification, human beings use the body to indicate age, marital status,
class, ethnicity, sex differences and sense of style. In contemporary Africa, dress and
fabrics are important mediums for social differentiation and ritual/symbolic expression
and experience. Along the east coast of Africa they remain integral to social communi-
cation and organisation and produce the means through which one can begin to deci-
pher the phenomenological or ‘lived’ worlds of the Swahili. From this perspective, it is
easy to agree with Hansen that there is ‘nothing quite like [dress] in anthropology to
enrich … cross-cultural understanding [because dress is more than] an accessory in

Rosabelle Boswell, Rhodes University. Correspondence to: r.laville@ru.ac.za



441
symbolic, structural, or semiotic explanations’.2 In the following discussion I focus on
the use and meaning of kangas on Zanzibar islands.3 I start with an historical overview
of  Zanzibar,  arguing  that  we  cannot  ‘situate’  kangas  without  an  appreciation  of  the
island’s particular historical trajectory. I then argue that in Zanzibar these fabrics offer
more than ‘body modifications or supplements’;4 they provide a social framework, act
as a nexus between the islands and the rest of the world, and offer their wearers style,
philosophy, clothing, ritual symbolism and a means of communication.

Drawing on my preliminary fieldwork in Zanzibar (June 2004) and on the work of
Laura  Fair,5  I  focus  specifically  on  the  gender  and  relational  implications  of  kanga
wearing. Situating the ethnography in a broader political context, I argue (towards the
end  of  the  paper)  that  kangas  are  a  source  of  tangible  and  intangible  heritage  for
Zanzibaris  because  they  encapsulate  the  island’s  oral  history,  sense  of  aesthetics,
concept of beauty and material culture. I outline some of the challenges that this partic-
ular form of heritage poses for culture regimes and heritage managers in the Indian
Ocean region and offer potential solutions.

Zanzibar
Zanzibar is a spectacularly beautiful island 30 km off the coast of Tanzania.6 It is also
part of the Swahili corridor (a literate and culturally innovative) region that stretches
from Mozambique to Mogadishu. For many centuries before the arrival of Europeans,
Zanzibaris made use of the monsoon seasons to participate in maritime trade and to
socialise  with  East  Africans  and  people  from  India,  Oman  and  Persia.  By  the  12th
century, the island’s small fishing village of Shangani rapidly grew into the commercial
trade  centre  of  the  south-west  Indian  Ocean.  Today,  there  is  clear  evidence  (most
apparent  in  their  architecture,  language  and  customs)  that  Zanzibaris  managed  to
cultivate strong links with the cities and populations of Shiraz (Persia), Muscat and
Aden (Oman), Bombay (India), and Mombasa and Kilwa (East Africa).7

Figure 1 Persian baths, Kidichi.

In 1498 the Portuguese conquered Zanzibar and attempted to assert their religion
and customs on the people living there. What remains of the Portuguese influence can
be seen in the use of Portuguese words in Swahili and the persistence of some Portu-
guese  culinary  traditions  on  the  East  African  coast.  After  a  period  of  200  years,  the
Omani Arabs ousted the Portuguese and assumed control of Zanzibar. From 1700 to
1897 the Omani controlled Zanzibar politics and society. Their power was sustained
largely through the institution of slavery, the cultivation of spices and the autocratic
control of the island’s black population. In 1896, Zanzibar was the site of the shortest
war in history (45 minutes) during which the British seized control of the island and
made Zanzibar part of the British colony of Tanganyika. It was only in the aftermath of
a  bloody  revolution  in  1964  that  Zanzibar  regained  some  of  its  independence,  as  it
became a semi-autonomous state that is today part of Tanzania.
Figure 2 Slaves in a hole.Contact  among  these  socially  and  politically  varied  groups  created  a  complexly
hierarchical  society.  It  also  encouraged  the  development  of  traditions  and  material
culture that went on to shape the social reality of Zanzibaris. In her work on Zanzibar,
Laura Fair describes 19th-century Zanzibar as the ‘Paris of the Indian Ocean’.8 She also

442 R. Boswell

Figure 1 Persian baths, Kidichi.

Figure 2

Slaves in a hole.



443

presents a detailed discussion of how Zanzibaris used dress to indicate power, ethnicity,
gender, origins and class mobility. Focusing on the contemporary significance of dress
in Zanzibari society, I follow on from Fair’s discussions, arguing that in Zanzibar dress
is not simply an adjunct to broader socio-economic processes but is an ‘organising’ and
political entity in and of itself.

Anthropology of Dress

The earliest use of textiles for social and cultural purposes in Africa dates back to the
Phoenician times.9 Around 1,000 BC African traders used strips of cloth as currency in
trans-Saharan  trade,  and,  several  centuries  later,  Africans  participated  in  the  global
trade of fabrics with Indians and Europeans, encouraging the development of designs
and  social  exchange  that  became  useful  in  varied  social  and  political  contexts.  In
anthropological works on dress10 one encounters analyses similar to those of Le Blanc
and  van  Lowe  in  which  dress  is  presented  as  a  central  entity  in  cultural  and  social
expression.

Global and local forces, in the form of UNESCO’s emphasis on heritage preservation
and local demands for the preservation of indigenous knowledge and practices11 have
led to an increased focus on heritage identification and preservation. To date, the iden-
tification  of  heritage  (particularly  tangible  heritage  in  the  form  of  monuments  and
archaeological sites) has occurred mostly in Europe and North America. Furthermore,
recent discussions on cultural heritage12 suggest that it is largely the views and values
of  the  ‘developed’  world  which  are  articulated  in  efforts  to  preserve  and  manage
heritage elsewhere. This has resulted in few African heritages being inscribed on the
World Heritage List (WHL), the difficult management of identified heritages and asso-
ciated resources and the poor consideration of the wide range of cultural heritages.
These challenges are outlined in Fekri’s report on heritage in Africa.13

Said’s  overview  of  ‘cultural  heritage  care  in  sub-Saharan  Africa’  also  notes  that
‘information about the contribution of sub-Saharan Africa to the diversity of world
culture is either missing or very insignificant’.14 He traces this absence to the historical
pillaging  of  African  cultural  artefacts  and  the  colonisation  of  Africans.  While  Said’s
paper  does  not  offer  much  detail  on  the  precise  nature  of  sub-Saharan  peoples’
contribution to world heritage, he does say that African heritages include a vast range
of semiotic elements, including: ‘the signs and symbols used in art and literature, as
well as languages, traditions, beliefs and ceremonies’.15 Long builds on this discussion,
stating that in Africa and other parts of the colonised world, heritage is also ‘creolised’,
highlighting the ‘hybrid nature of cultural interactions’.16 She argues that this percep-
tion  of  heritage  should  encourage  heritage  regimes  and  managers  to  develop  ‘more
flexible and sensitive ways to manage cultural heritage in the living present’. In partic-
ular, creolised heritage can help heritage professionals understand the complexities of
cultural production and, as such, assist them in devising non-binary means of heritage
management.17

In  Zanzibar,  the  kanga  is  part  of  the  creolised  heritage  of  the  Zanzibari.  It  is
culturally and politically embedded and informed by a wide range of interdependent

444 R. Boswell

signs,  symbols  and  practices.  As  I  show  in  the  ethnographic  discussion:  language,
aesthetics, gender norms, belief and oral history all play a role in the definition and use
of  the  kanga.  One  might  also  argue  that  the  kanga  is  also  symbolic  of  the  creolised
heritage  of  East  Africa.  The  fabrics  present  Indian,  African  and  Arabic  cultural
contributions. The ethnography presented here also focuses attention on the role of
context in heritage management. Discussing the link between traditional context and
authenticity,  Taylor  argues  that  in  Bangkok  it  is  the  ‘local  traditional  lifestyle  that
enriches [one’s] experience of Bangkok’.18

On the other hand, beautifying a place for tourism development can be ‘culturally
destructive and lead to an impoverished visitor experience’. Seeing kangas as a source
of  culture,  the  following  discussion  shows  that  the  fabrics  and  the  women  wearing
them  enhance  a  sense  (at  least  for  the  outsider)  that  one  is  experiencing  authentic
Zanzibari culture. More than this, the kanga is a potent symbol of Swahili culture as it
is  a  product  of  many  cultural  interactions  produced  at  a  cultural  crossroads  in  the
south-west Indian Ocean. The extent to which Zanzibaris perceive kangas as part of
their publicly acknowledged tangible and intangible cultural heritage requires further
research. As Taylor argues in his study on Bangkok society, one needs to study the rise
in heritage consciousness and remain critically aware of those involved in conscious-
ness-raising.  In  his  paper,  Taylor  focuses  specifically  on  heritage  regimes  and  their
associated organisations, arguing that their standard-setting initiatives may diminish
cultural  complexity  and  diversity.  Recent,  poststructuralist  emphases  on  agency,
performance and practice have also encouraged social historians, art and design schol-
ars, anthropologists, and literature and heritage scholars to study intangible heritage
critically. One could argue that this is happening partly because we now recognise that
cultural meanings and their production are complex and multilayered. Scholars inter-
ested in the mechanisms of identity construction in the post-colony would also argue
that these semiotic elements also invoke particular memories and feelings of belonging
for the politically and culturally displaced.

From this point of view, dress is more than aesthetic expression. It offers an alter-
native epistemological foundation, a form of political, visual and tactile communica-
tion  that  reveals  aspects  of  the  inner  psyche,  community  practice  and  broader
political  change.  Anthropological  studies  on  dress  reveal  that  dress  is  a  site  of
convergence  for  transnational,  global  and  local  forces.  In  Africa,  anthropologists
tended to perceive European colonialism as largely responsible for this convergence.
This  is  most  apparent  in  Comaroff  and  Comaroff’s,  Hendrickson’s19  and  James’s20
work  on  the  link  between  colonisation  and  changing  fashions  in  southern  Africa.
Post-independence  studies  by  Allman21  and  De  Jorio22  have  focused  on  the  effects
of  nationalism  on  dress,  again  perceiving  dress  as  adjunct  to  broader  political
processes in a time of social change. Fair23 and Martin24 analysed dress as a medium
for class and generational struggles, innovation and hybridisation. Studies of female
clothing in particular25 alter this focus on colonisation by emphasising the multilec-
tic  aspect  of  dress.  Some  of  these  authors  do  not  really  say  that  dress  produces  a
language and knowledge frame of its own, but they do refine political discussions on
dress—women’s  clothing  speaks  not  only  to  those  who  dominate  them  but  also  to



445

their  equals  and  are  thus  a  means  of  communication  beyond  the  domains  of  local
men.

Recent scholarship focuses on dress as a source of materiality,26 explores the material
properties of cloth and clothing,27 studies the experiential dimension of dress28 and
attempts  to  explain  the  effect  of  dress  on  lived  experience.29  Thus,  anthropological
studies of dress have moved beyond a local focus to account for the effects of globali-
sation, transnational cultural flows and global culture. In the following, I touch on some
of these important factors and show how dress evokes multiple and contested meanings,
conditions  behaviour  and  how  it  reveals  complexity  and  ambiguity  in  the  symbolic
terrain  of  everyday  life.  I  do  so  by  suggesting  that  dress  achieves  multidirectional
communication in a literate and symbol-aware society.

My argument is inspired partly by Le Blanc and Van Lowe’s brief analysis of cloth
in Africa, in which they suggest that Africans have used four basic types of cloth to
create clothing. These are (1) weaves, (2) tie dyes (3) batiks and (4) industrial prints.
They go on to argue that different cloths helped designers and wearers maintain links
with the ancestral world, receive the wisdom of divination (weaves), produce cultural
artefacts for ritual activity (batiks and industrial prints) or achieve unparalleled levels
of style and fashion by their society’s standards. In an earlier but ethnographically rich
discussion of the anthropology of cloth, Schneider30 offers further detail on this line
of argument by saying that ‘cloth intensifies sociality, not only at marriage and death
but  in  rituals  of  birth,  initiation,  and  curing,  too’.31  However,  the  omnipotence  of
dress was not fully acknowledged, although hints of it are evident in Fox’s reflections
on dress as something that ‘swaddles the newborn, wraps and heals the sick, embraces
and unites the bride and groom, encloses the wedding bed and in the end enshrouds
the dead’.32

Kangas Up Close

Writing about the significance of dress to identity and society, Fair notes that ‘dress has
historically been used as one of the most important and visually immediate markers of
class,  status,  and  ethnicity  in  East  African  coastal  society’.33  While  at  lunch  with  a
Kenyan colleague (20 October 2004) I was informed that in East Africa dress first indi-
cates the extent to which one has been colonised, then one’s class aspirations, ethnic
identity and, lastly, preferences. We discussed the order of these elements for some time
and I concluded that what I found interesting in Zanzibar is that it is not just that dress
signals social position and aspirations but that it provides a ‘language’ that shapes social
interactions.

The  arrival  of  the  Portuguese  to  Zanzibar  in  1498  saw  the  introduction  of  cloth
known  as  Leso  (handkerchief  in  Portuguese),  which  was  basically  two  pieces  of
cloth—one worn around the head and the other around the lower body. As the trade
in spices and slaves increased, slaves brought to the island from the continent were
made to wear white cloth, known locally as merikani (because it came from America)
which  they  either  wrapped,  sarong  style,  around  the  waist  (men)  or  under  the
armpits (women). Fair describes how slave women gradually sought to differentiate

446 R. Boswell

themselves from men by altering the cloth allocated to them. Several years before the
abolition of slavery on the island (1897), women began to dye their merikanis black
or dark blue, thus producing what today is referred to as kaniki cloth. They achieved
patterns  on  this  cloth  by  using  wood  dipped  in  indigo.  Eventually,  local  producers
perfected this technique and named the cloth kanga ze mera. The kanga became an
item of fashion and distinction among urban female slaves, as it was colourful, differ-
ent from the dark kanikis.34 Visually, kangas must have been especially important for,
as  Fair  tells  us,  the  Omanis  went  to  great  lengths  to  distinguish  between  slaves  and
the freeborn, preventing the former from covering their head or wearing shoes in the
presence  of  the  free.  As  formal  slavery  came  to  an  end  in  1897,  more  slave  descen-
dants  began  to  identify  themselves  as  Swahili,  mainly  because  symbolically  the
Swahili were freeborn and therefore occupied a more socially prestigious position in
Zanzibari  society.  Wearing  kangas  with  Swahili  proverbs  helped  to  confirm  one’s
Swahiliness publicly. Furthermore, the fact that some of the kangas had Arabic script
on  them  indicated  to  the  powerful  that  one  had  become  mwungana  (free  and
respectable) and had not remained mshenzi (slave).

In terms of design, initially the kanga had no borders but the first kangas had Swahili
messages in Arabic script. Furthermore, at first they contained only two colours, but as
textile developments occurred further colours were added and a vast array of different
kangas was produced. Colour remains important in the choice and wearing of kangas
and they indicate cultural continuities between mainland and island colour symbolism.
Red and black kangas are worn during menstruation and communicate to family and
friends that a woman has either just given birth or is unavailable for sex. Conversely,
white kangas are worn during the full moon or to indicate a woman’s fecundity and
purity.

At the time of my research in Zanzibar, the kanga was a piece of cotton cloth that
measures about 2 m × 2 m. I saw many rural women wearing kangas and was told that
people in Zanzibar wear ‘their kangas differently to women on the mainland’. Specifi-
cally, Zanzibari women wear their kangas in public and they also wear two pieces of
kanga cloth, one covering the lower part of the body and another draped over their
head so that their hair is covered. Zanzibari women cover their hair as a way of indicat-
ing and respecting their Islamic beliefs and it seemed to me at the time that the colour-
ful kangas also produced the perfect frame for their dark skins. Thus kangas did not
only hide but also revealed.

Kangas also bear testament to the particular aesthetic tastes of the Zanzibaris. Specif-
ically, much attention is given to irony, nuance and verbal skill in Zanzibar. At the time
of my brief research in Zanzibar, most of the kangas being sold in the Old Town or
Ng’ambo  (The  Other  Side)  were  printed  and  being  produced  on  a  mass  scale  in
Mumbai, India, then imported by Stone Town traders. But about 50 years ago Mumbai
was not the chosen producer of kangas among Zanzibaris. Special limited prints from
England, and specifically Holland, were preferred above fabrics coming from India.
Furthermore, it was imperative for local traders to match the requests of their clients,
for if they did not it was likely that they would not manage to sell their recently acquired
stock.



447

Figure 3

Stone Town proper.

Figure 3 Stone Town proper.

The Messages and Their Meanings
There are many different messages on kanga fabrics. An Internet site35 on kanga fabrics
indicates that there are hundreds of idioms, proverbs, slogans, expressions and riddles
printed on the bottom-centre of each fabric piece. The sayings are designed to evoke
emotions of all kinds (anger, pity, hope and joy) or emphasise irony/sarcasm, defer-
ence,  impart  information  and  encourage  humour.  The  kanga  increases  sociality,  it
serves as clothing for both the young (baby nappies) and old as well as the dead.36

After a brief look at some of commonly bought kangas at one store in Ng’ambo, one
can  perceive  common  daily  concerns  and  motivations.  Among  young  unmarried
women who are concerned about their education and their achievement of urbanity,
kangas with the phrase ‘education is an ocean’ or ‘good luck begins in the morning’ are
very popular. The first phrase suggests that acquiring an education is a difficult thing
because, like an ocean, it has no end; the second phrase encourages them to devote their
energies  to  work  early  in  the  morning,  so  that  they  can  obtain  that  which  is  often
perceived as ‘luck’ but is really the fruit of hard work. Kangas are also useful in commu-
nication with a boyfriend. In a religiously conservative community it is often not easy
for  young  women  to  speak  to  men—especially  those  who  are  not  deemed  family.
Kangas allow such women and girls specifically to address the ‘boy–girl’ relationship.
Thus,  the  kanga  with  the  saying  ‘I’m  not  jealous,  I  just  feel  bad’  is  popular  among
unmarried  women  who  might  wish  to  retain  the  attention  of  their  lover.  Similarly,

448 R. Boswell

because of the continued practice of polygamy in Islamic Zanzibar, the kanga that says
‘you will exhaust the butcheries while all the meat tastes the same’ is a way for a wife to
avoid direct confrontation with her husband and to inform him that she is aware/angry
with his infidelity.

Some  (particularly  Internet)  authors  on  the  subject  of  kangas  see  them  as  East
Africa’s equivalent of a bumper sticker. But kanga text offers a sophisticated means of
communication  in  situations  where  speech  may  be  difficult  or  inappropriate.  In
terms of the latter, I am thinking beyond the fact that many of the women of Zanzi-
bar are of the Islamic faith and are therefore ‘restricted’ in the ways in which they can
communicate  in  the  public  domain.  Studies  of  Islamic  dress  show  very  clearly  that
dress  is  an  important  meta-text  for  women.37  Dress  delineates  the  public  from  the
private,  women  from  men,  those  in  purdah  and  those  who  are  not,  young  children
from women.

Among  rural  women  along  the  east  coast  of  Zanzibar,  kangas  acknowledge  the
relationship between a young married woman and her blood relatives and establishes
the relationship with her affines. A woman leaving her home will give thanks to her
mother through the symbolic fabric that incorporates red, black and white (symbols of
separation (death?) and purity) and the phrase ‘mother give me blessing for it is diffi-
cult to live with people’. Before the completion of the wedding ceremony her prospec-
tive husband presents her with a sanduku (suitcase) full of kangas that are carefully
chosen to reflect his views on her incorporation into his household and family. Thus
kangas help such young women to cope with the transition to a new household; they
also prepare the young woman for the possible experience of having to deal with a diffi-
cult  mother-in-law.  Militant  young  brides,  for  example,  might  quickly  establish  the
power dynamics between daughter and mother-in-law by wearing a kanga that says:
‘She may be his mother but I have him in my bed’ or ‘Say what you like, I don’t give a
damn.’ After the damage is done, a woman might wear a kanga that says: ‘the axe38
forgets but the tree does not’.39 From these kanga proverbs alone, I wondered whether
such clothing offers women a means of communication in an image-conscious and
historically stratified society.

Kangas are also vital to love relationships—this is a point that was stressed in my
own purchasing of kanga fabrics in Ng’ambo. Hasma, a friend who accompanied me
to the stalls there, said to me ‘you must buy some "for" your husband; there are many
different kinds here that say the things we can’t say’. She pointed out to me that there
were some that are particularly good for ongoing romance between husband and wife.
Hasma warned me, though, that those reading kanga proverbs may not always receive
the  same  message  or  at  least  understand  the  proverbs  or  sayings  in  the  same  way.
Ambivalence and multidirectional communication are therefore aspects of the kanga
that  in  my  view  make  it  a  flexible  medium  and  framework.  The  kanga  provides  a
means of communication and indicates the tensions between these two, and contin-
ued efforts to spark romance and sexual interest. Laying a kanga on the marital bed
bearing the slogan ‘lover turn the light off’ is a way of signalling sexual desire; however,
it  may  also  suggest  that  one’s  partner  is  not  interested!  However,  not  all  kanga
messages are ambiguous. Some like ‘the wife is the husband’ or ‘work in the sun and



449

Figure 4 Two men with ngalawa.

you  will  reap  in  the  shade’  are  clear  in  meaning,  although  some  might  contest  the
veracity of such statements.

Kangas  also  contain  informational  messages  and  political  slogans.  During  British
colonial  rule,  for  example,  kangas  printed  in  England  bore  slogans  inspired  by  the
political rhetoric of Winston Churchill. These kangas were meant to obtain the votes of
local women. To show their disdain for colonial rule women chose to wear their old
kangas  and  to  buy  from  Indian  and  Chinese  suppliers.  In  the  postcolonial  era,  the
ruling political party Chama Cha Mapinduzi40 (CCM) has, from to time, made use of
kanga  fabrics  for  the  promotion  of  party-political  candidates  and  to  celebrate  the
victories of the CCM.

Figure 4 Two men with ngalawa.

The View from Afar

Perceiving kangas in a broader context, one can argue that they are sites of convergence
for transnational, global, urban and local forces. Slave descendant women originally
produced the early form of kangas (kaniki cloth) for local use. Then, these fabrics went
on to be popularised by those aspiring to higher social status and power in urban Zanzi-
bar. Shortly after the abolition of slavery, more local women (especially those of slave
descent) began to wear kangas as a way of signalling their freedom and changed aesthetic
preferences.  Their  demands  encouraged  the  international  production  of  kangas  by
manufacturers  in  England,  the  Netherlands  and  India.  Through  kangas,  different
aesthetic, technical and ideological elements were brought together and given unique

450 R. Boswell

expression. Seen from this perspective, I would also argue that kangas do not simply
offer a means of communication for messages derived from a local context but also offer
communication  from  elsewhere—they  are  cultural  composites.  To  elaborate,  the
particular prints produced by the Dutch manufacturers differed greatly from those less
intricate and less symmetrical designs produced by the English and the Indians. Accord-
ing to Fair,41 women were prepared to wait for the Dutch consignment rather than
purchase the English stock. During the Second World War the inclusion of English
political slogans on kangas meant that women refused to act as advertising or campaign
objects  for  the  British  Empire.  In  other  words,  using  their  bodies,  women  resisted
subordination, asserted their identity and solidarity with Zanzibaris and chose to send
a different message to the world. These acts emphasise not only the use of kangas in
women’s  performance  and  agency  but  also  indicate  the  meta-textual  nature  of  the
kanga.  In  a  complicated  yet  illuminating  essay  on  culture,  the  anthropologist  and
philosopher Wim van Binsbergen highlights the omnipresence of culture in anthropol-
ogy, arguing that ‘in Western scholarship and subsequently in North-Atlantic society
as a whole, the concept of "culture" has developed to acquire such great self-evidence
that it has almost assumed a transcendental nature’. Reflecting on dress not only as
material culture but also as an element that may be just as important as culture—one
can begin to appreciate that dress goes beyond ‘body modifications and supplements’.42

National Dress Competitions and the Kanga

In  2003  the  government  of  Tanzania  set  aside  54  million  Tanzanian  shillings  for  a
national competition aimed at the designing of a new national dress. A local couturier,
Ndesembuka Merinyo, argued that this money was not nearly enough for the task as
his own research into dress and design in nine of the provinces of Tanzania cost him 13
million shillings. If the government was serious about such a competition, more money
needed to be set aside. Clear instructions were set out for competitors, including state-
ments about the dress being ‘flowing … not [restricting] one from walking. [The dress]
should not be tight. And above all, it should be truly Tanzanian.’ The winner would be
announced in April 2004.

This competition shows the extent to which Tanzanians and neighbouring Zanzi-
baris are deeply concerned about dress and the deeper meanings of self-presentation.
Interviews with other East Africans in South Africa suggest, however, that these national
dress competitions are not new and are ways in which the various governments of the
region  attempt  to  obtain  leverage  when  political  stakes  are  high.  This  is  especially
important when we consider the continued significance of dress to politics and the fact
that dress remains important to ethnic and cultural differentiation in Africa. Tanzania,
for example, has more than 120 ethnic groups. The dress of this population has changed
with the diffusion of fashions from West and Central Africa, acculturation in this ethni-
cally diverse part of the world and the arrival and passing of colonial rule.

Popular writings on dress in East Africa (as the New African article shows) highlight
the political motivations for changing dress in this part of the world. The New African
article  notes  that  in  the  1950s  the  founding  ‘father’  of  the  Tanzanian  nation,  Julius



451

Figure 5 Women of Kiwengwa.

Nyerere, ‘wore white colonial khaki shorts, long socks and shirt as worn by teachers of
his time’.43 In the 1960s he often wore Kente cloth, which was popular among other
liberation fighters in West Africa. From time to time, he was also often seen in mgolole,
a cloth wrapped around the body from head to toe, which he teamed up with sandals,
thereby  creating  the  image  of  a  peasant  man  from  the  pastures  of  Tanganyika.  To
appeal to the Muslims just off Dar es Salaam, ‘Nyerere would add a Muslim skull-cap’
(ibid.)
Figure 5 Women of Kiwengwa.As political communication between socialist Tanzania and China increased, Nyer-
ere and his African political allies began to wear collarless Chinese suits—which locally
came  to  be  known  as  the  Chou-en-Lai,  after  the  first  Chinese  premier  to  establish
contact with Tanzania. Nyerere was adept at changing fashions to win votes, show his
solidarity with the peasant population or indicate the changed politics of his country.
Focus  on  the  political  dimensions  of  national  dress  competitions  simplifies  such
competitions as sources of national unity or as attempts to homogenise cultural forms
apparent on the Swahili coast. However, perceiving such competitions as part of the
existing cosmopolitanism of this region and broader debates around national identity
and global culture presents a more complex and satisfying picture. Drawing the differ-
ent strands of my argument together, I would say that first and foremost, in Zanzibar,
dress  offers  a  medium  through  which  ritual,  symbolic  expression  and  politics  can
occur. Secondly, dress (such as kangas) is an integral part of the regional process of
creolisation and bricolage. This is most apparent in the kanga print, its use and in the
writing  on  kanga  fabrics.  Thirdly,  kanga  fabrics  are  not  only  important  to  regional

452 R. Boswell

social processes and ideas but are also (as noted at the start of the discussion) a signif-
icant nexus and transit point between the local and the global. In terms of production
and consumption, local women and communities attempt to engage with the world
through kanga fabrics. They express their aesthetic and social needs to local buyers and
have these satisfied (or not) through orders sent to manufacturers in India or Europe.
Similarly,  outsiders  (as  tourists,  collectors,  researchers)  acquire  the  fabrics  and  use
them in ways that are culturally/aesthetically significant to them. Taking into account
the different ideas, histories and people that have contributed to the form of the kanga,
it is now possible to say that, in and of themselves, kanga fabrics offer both national
identity and access to global culture. This multifaceted view of the kanga may present
problems for its recognition, preservation or management by internationally trained
and funded heritage managers working in Zanzibar or in Dar es Salaam.

Conclusion: Intangible Heritage in Zanzibar

In its definition of intangible heritage, Article 7 of the UNESCO Universal Declaration
on Cultural Diversity indicates that this includes ‘oral traditions, customs, languages,
music, dance, rituals, festivities, games [and] culinary arts’. UNESCO perceives intan-
gible  cultural  resources  as  a  means  of  preserving  human  diversity  (in  the  face  of
modernisation and Western globalisation) and to ensure sustainable development. In
2003, members of the United Nations Education and Scientific Council (UNESCO)
voted unanimously for an international convention aimed at the preservation of intan-
gible cultural heritage (ICH). The 120 members agreed that ICH consisted of music,
folklore, epics and tales produced by the diverse peoples of the world. Drawing their
inspiration  from  a  1972  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and
Natural  Heritage  (a  normative/standard-setting  instrument  for  the  management  of
heritage), the council members created a World Heritage List on which more than 721
sites are currently inscribed. Most of the ‘heritage’ on this list is tangible (monuments,
archaeological sites, museums) and is to be found in Europe and North America. Very
few heritage sites on the list are of African origin and few African countries (37) have
ratified the World Heritage Convention. One of the major problems faced by heritage
managers seems to be that both Africa and Asia possess significant ‘intangible’ heritage
but  there  were  no  mechanisms  (until  2003)  to  bring  about  the  preservation  or
management of such resources. With the new international convention it seems that
the latter will now be possible.

However, a close look at what constitutes ICH in Zanzibar and the Indian Ocean
islands (Mascarenes, Seychelles, Madagascar) indicates that some resources like dress
encompass  both  the  tangible  and  intangible;  highlight  resources  of  distinctly  and
recently mixed cultural origin; are influenced by local and global flows of capital; are
dynamic elements of society; require specific ritual conditions for use or are part of
everyday use. To this end, kangas, integral to cross-cultural understanding of Zanzibari
and Swahili society, are not easily preserved or managed as heritage resources.

Anticipating possible difficulties with ICH management, UNESCO hopes to develop
a programme in Africa (in 2009) that will build local capacity in heritage management.



453

It is envisaged that this will involve raising awareness about heritage, providing training
and the sharing of expertise and information on heritage management. In my view, it
is important that such managers are encouraged to reflect on the particular challenges
of ICH preservation in Africa. In the case of dress in Zanzibar, ICH managers should
become aware of the fact of creolisation in East Africa and they should be encouraged
to  investigate  the  cultural  significance  of  what  may  normally  be  seen  as  ‘everyday’
items.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  that  they  remain  aware  of  the  normalisation  of
hierarchy and domination. For example, it is poor, often rural, women who still wear
kangas and yet these are established and dynamic elements that are indispensable to a
wide range of ritual and cultural activities in Zanzibar.

International/dominant  approaches  to  cultural  preservation  and  management
currently emphasise authenticity/indigeneity boundedness and homogeneity and are
not  clear  on  provisions  made  for  mixed/globalised  cultural  forms.  Unless  there  is
further critical reflection on the various facets of intangible heritage in Africa, heritage
managers may rely on politicians’ interpretations of heritage. This will mean that as
individuals  tasked  with  the  communication,  preservation  and  management  of  ICH
they will fail to acknowledge and respond to dress (and other forms of material culture)
as entities that are part of an ideologically ambiguous, complex and creolised world.

Notes

1 [1] Woody Allen, http://www.quotationspage.com/quotes/Woody_Allen/ (accessed June 2006).
2 [2] Hansen, ‘The World in Dress’, 369–92.
3 [3] A CODESRIA Advanced Research Fellowship (2004) and an NWO/WOTRO grant (2005–2007)

support the research presented in this paper.

4 [4] Eicher and Roach-Higgins, ‘Definition and Classification of Dress’, 8–28.
5 [5] Fair, ‘Remaking Fashion in the Paris of the Indian Ocean’, 13–30.
6 [6]

‘Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the world. The economy depends heavily on agri-
culture, which accounts for about half of GDP, provides 85% of exports, and employs 80% of
the  work  force’  (World  Factbook,  2004)  http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/
tz.html.
Some remnants of American, German and English influence are apparent in Zanzibar but not
so much as to detract from the evident impact of Middle-Eastern and Asiatic populations.

7 [7]

8 [8] Fair, Pastimes & Politics, 84.
9 [9] Le Blanc and Van Lowe, ‘Clothing as Cultural Expression’, 1.
10[10] Abu-Lughod, ‘The Romance of Resistance’; Allman, Fashioning Power; Brydon and Niessen,
Consuming Fashion; Burgess, ‘Cinema, Bell Bottoms, and Miniskirts’, 287–313; Comaroff and
Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution; Schneider, ‘The Anthropology of Cloth’.

11[11] Howard, ‘Editorial’, 7–8.
12[12] Long,  ‘Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Post-colonial  Polities’,  317–22;  Harvey,  ‘Heritage
Pasts  and  Heritage  Presents’,  319–38;  Medina,  ‘Commoditizing  Culture’,  253–68;  Deacon,
‘Intangible  Heritage  in  Conservation  Management  Planning’,  309–19;  Edson,  ‘Heritage’,
333–48.

Said, ‘The History and Current Situation of Cultural Heritage Care in Sub-Saharan Africa’, 91.
Ibid., 93.

13[13] Fekri, Periodic Report on Africa 2002.
14[14]
15[15]
16[16] Long, ‘Cultural Heritage Management in Post-colonial Polities’, 317.
17[17]

Ibid., 322.

454 R. Boswell

James, ‘“I Dress in this Fashion”’, 34–65.

18[18] Taylor, ‘Cultural Heritage Management’, 419.
19[19] Hendrickson, Clothing and Difference.
20[20]
21[21] Allman, Fashioning Power.
22[22] De Jorio, ‘Gendered Museum, Guided He(tour)topias’, 50–72.
23[23] Fair, ‘Remaking Fashion in the Paris of the Indian Ocean’, 13–30.
24[24] Martin, ‘Contesting Clothes in Colonial Brazzaville’, 401–26.
25[25] Abu-Lughod, ‘The Romance of Resistance’; El Guindi, Veil; Fuglesang, ‘No Longer Ghosts’,
123–57; Heath, ‘Fashion, Anti-fashion, and Heteroglossia in Urban Senegal’, 19–33; Rabine,
The Global Circulation of African Fashion.

26[26] Miller, ‘Style and Ontology’, 71–96.
27[27] Küchler and Miller, Clothing as Material Culture.
28[28] O’Connor, ‘Lycra, Girdles and Leggings’.
29[29] Woodward, ‘Looking Good’.
30[30] Weiner and Schneider, Cloth and the Human Experience.
31[31]
32[32] Fox, Harvest of the Palm, 77.
33[33] Fair, Pastimes & Politics, 64.
34[34]
35[35] http://www.swahilicoast.com/kangas_-_a_medium_of_communication.htm 

Ibid., 411.

Ibid., 68.

(accessed

October 2004).
Schneider, ‘The Anthropology of Cloth’, 409–48.

36[36]
37[37] Abu-Lughod, ‘The Romance of Resistance’; El Guindi, Veil.
38[38] This gives a whole new meaning to the term ‘the old battle-axe’.
39[39] As my research project on heritage in the Indian Ocean develops I hope to investigate inci-

dences where young women have worn kangas that have such messages.

40[40] The Revolutionary Party. This party is made up of supporters from mainland Tanzania, are of
African  descent  and  are  largely  Christian  or  Sunni/Shi’ite  Muslims.  The  minority  party  in
Zanzibar is the Civic United Front (CUF). This party is dominated by supporters from Pemba
Island and is made up of people of Omani descent who adhere to principles of Ibadi Islam.
Unlike followers of Sufism who see devotion as a way of obtaining Allah’s favour, adherents of
Ibadi Islam emphasise descent and contact with prestigious Islamic scholars as their source of
faith and beneficence.

41[41] Fair, Pastimes & Politics.
42[42] Van Binsbergen, Intercultural Encounters, 460.
43[43] Herald Taqama in New African, December 2003, 57.

References

Abu-Lughod, L. ‘The Romance of Resistance: Tracing Transformations of Power Through Bedouin

Women’. American Anthropologist 17, no. 1 (1990): 41–55.

Allman,  J.  Fashioning  Power:  Clothing,  Politics  and  African  Identities.  Bloomington:  Indiana

University Press, 2004.

———.  ‘“Let  your  Fashion  be  in  Line  with  Our  Ghanaian  Costume”:  Nation,  Gender  and  the
Politics of Clothing in Nkrumah’s Ghana’. In Fashioning Power: Clothing, Politics and African
Identities, edited by J. Allman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004: 144–65.

Arthur, L. B. Religion, Dress and the Body. Oxford: Berg, 1999.
———. Undressing Religion: Commitment and Conversion from a Cross-cultural Perspective. Oxford:

Berg, 2000.

Banerjee, M. and D. Miller. The Sari. Oxford: Berg, 2003.
Barnes, R. and J. B. Eicher. Dress and Gender: Making and Meaning. Oxford: Berg, 1992.



455

Bastian,  M.  L.  ‘Female  “Alhajis”  and  Entrepreneurial  Fashions:  Flexible  Identities  in  Southeastern
Nigeria’. In Clothing and Difference: Embodied Identities in Colonial and Post-colonial Africa,
edited by H. Hendrickson. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996: 97–132.

Besnier,  N.  ‘Transgenderism,  Locality,  and  the  Miss  Galaxy  Beauty  Pageant  in  Tonga’.  American

Ethnologist 29, no. 3 (2002): 534–66.

Bhachu, P. Dangerous Designs: Fashion, Asian Women and Diaspora. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Bourdieu,  P.  Distinction:  A  Social  Critique  of  the  Judgment  of  Taste.  Translated  by  R.  Nice.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984.

Brenner,  S.  ‘Restructuring  Self  and  Society:  Javanese  Muslim  Women  and  “the  Veil”’.  American

Ethnologist 23, no. 4 (1996): 673–97.

Brydon,  A.  and  S.  Niessen.  Consuming  Fashion:  Adorning  the  Transnational  Body.  Oxford:  Berg,

1998.

Burgess, T. ‘Cinema, Bell Bottoms, and Miniskirts: Struggles over Youth and Citizenship in Revolu-
tionary Zanzibar’. International Journal of African Historical Studies 35 no. 2/3 (2002): 287–313.
Comaroff, J. L. and J. Comaroff. ‘Fashioning the Colonial Subject’. In Of Revelation and Revolution.
Vol. II, The Dialectics of Modernity on a South African Frontier, edited by J. L Comaroff and J.
Comaroff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997: 218–73.

De  Jorio,  R.  ‘Gendered  Museum,  Guided  He(tour)topias:  Women  and  Social  Memory  in  Mali’.

Polar 25, no. 2 (2002): 50–72.

Deacon,  H.  ‘Intangible  Heritage  in  Conservation  Management  Planning:  The  Case  of  Robben

Island’.  6, no. 4 (2004): 309–19.

Denzer,  L.  ‘High  Fashion  and  Fluctuating  Fortunes:  The  Nigerian  Garment  Industry  under
Structural  Adjustment’.  In  Money  Struggles  and  City  Life:  Devaluation  in  Ibadan  and  Other
Urban Centers in Southern Nigeria, 1986–1996, edited by J. Guyer, L. Denzer and A. Agbade.
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002: 93–114.

Durham, D. ‘The Predicament of Dress: Polyvalency and the Ironies of Cultural Identity’. American

Ethnologist 26, no. 2 (1999): 89–411.

Edson, G. ‘Heritage: Pride, Passion, Product or Service?’  10,

no. 4 (2004): 333–48.

Eicher, J. B. ‘The Anthropology of Dress’. Dress 27 (1995): 59–70.
———. Dress and Ethnicity: Change across Space and Time. Oxford: Berg, 1995.
Eicher, J. B. and M. E. Roach-Higgins. ‘Definition and Classification of Dress: Implications for Anal-
ysis of Gender Roles’. In Dress and Gender: Making and Meaning, edited by R. Barnes and J. B.
Eicher. Oxford: Berg, 1992: 8–28.

El Guindi, F. Veil: Modesty, Privacy and Resistance. Oxford: Berg, 1999.
Fair,  L.  Pastimes  &  Politics:  Culture,  Community,  and  Identity  in  Post-abolition  Urban  Zanzibar,

1890–1945. Oxford: James Currey, 2001.

Fair, L. ‘Remaking Fashion in the Paris of the Indian Ocean: Dress, Performance and the Cultural
Construction of a Cosmopolitan Zanzibari Identity’. In Fashioning Power: Clothing, Politics and
African Identities, edited by J. Allman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004: 13–30.

Fekri, H. Periodic Report on Africa 2002. Paris: UNESCO, 2003.
Fox,  J.  J.  Harvest  of  the  Palm:  Ecological  Change  in  Eastern  Indonesia.  Cambridge:  Cambridge

University Press, 1977.

Friedman, J. Consumption and Identity. Chur: Harwood, 1994: 167–88.
Friedman,  S.  ‘Embodying  Civility:  Civilizing  Processes  and  Symbolic  Citizenship  in  Southeastern

China’. Journal of Asian Studies 63, no. 3 (2004): 687–718.

Fuglesang, M. ‘No Longer Ghosts: Women’s Notions of “Development” and “Modernity” in Lamu
Town, Kenya’. In Kam-Ap or Take-off, edited by G. Dahl and A. Rabo. Stockholm: Stockholm
Studies of Social Anthropology, 1992: 123–57.

Gandoulou,  J.  L.  Dandies  á  Bakongo:  le  culte  de  l’élégance  dans  la  société  congolaise  contemporaine.
Paris: L’Harmattan Gondola CD, 1999. ‘Dream and Drama: The Search for Elegance among
Congolese Youth’. African Studies Review 42, no. 1 (1989): 23–44.

456 R. Boswell

Grabski, J. ‘Making Fashion in the City: A Case Study of Tailors and Designers in Downtown Dakar’.
Paper  presented  at  the  symposium  on  the  Cultured  Body:  African  Fashion  and  Body  Arts,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, 2002.

Hansen, K. T. ‘The World in Dress’. Annual Review of Anthropology 33 (2004): 369–92.
Harvey,  D.  C.  ‘Heritage  Pasts  and  Heritage  Presents:  Temporality,  Meaning  and  the  Scope  of

Heritage Studies’.  7, no. 4 (2001): 319–38.

Heath, D. ‘Fashion, Anti-fashion, and Heteroglossia in Urban Senegal’. American Ethnologist 19, no.

1 (1992): 19–33.

Hendrickson, H. ‘The “Long” Dress and the Construction of Hetero Identities in Southern Africa’.

African Studies 53, no. 2 (1994): 25–54.

———. Clothing and Difference: Embodied Identities in Colonial and Post-colonial Africa. Durham,

NC: Duke University Press, 1996.

Howard, P. ‘Editorial—Heritage Challenges in the New Century’. International Journal of Heritage

Studies 6, no. 1 (2000): 7–8.

James,  D.  ‘“I  Dress  in  this  Fashion”:  Transformations  in  Sotho  Dress  and  Women’s  Lives  in  a
Sekhukhuneland  Village,  South  Africa’.  In  Clothing  and  Difference:  Embodied  Identities  in
Colonial and Post-colonial Africa, edited by H. Hendrickson. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 1996: 34–65.

Küchler, S. and D. Miller. Clothing as Material Culture. Oxford: Berg, 2005.
Le  Blanc,  D.  and  C.  R.  Van  Lowe.  Clothing  as  Cultural  Expression:  African  Fashion.  Issue  Brief.

Washington, DC: TransAfrica Forum, 2001.

Long,  D.  L.  ‘Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Post-colonial  Polities:  NOT  the  Heritage  of  the

Other’.  6, no. 4 (2000): 317–22.

Martin, P. ‘Contesting Clothes in Colonial Brazzaville’. Journal of African History 35, no. 3 (1994):

401–26.

Masquelier,  A.  ‘Mediating  Threads:  Clothing  and  the  Texture  of  Spirit/Medium  Relations  in Bori
(Southern  Niger)’.  In  Clothing  and  Difference:  Embodied  Identities  in  Colonial  and  Post-
colonial Africa, edited by H. Hendrickson. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996: 66–94

Medina, L. K. ‘Commoditizing Culture: Tourism and Maya Identity’. Annals of Tourism Research 30,

no. 2 (2003): 353–68.

Miller, D. ‘Style and Ontology’. In Consumption and Identity, edited by J. Friedman. Chur: Harwood,

1994.

Moorman, M. ‘Putting on a Pano and Dancing Like our Grandparents: Nation and Dress in Late
Colonial  Luanda’.  In  Fashioning  Power:  Clothing,  Politics  and  African  Identities,  edited  by  J.
Allman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004: 84–103.

Mustafa, H. N. ‘Sartorial Ecumenes: African Styles in a Social and Economic Context’. In The Art of
African Fashion, edited by E. van der Plas and M. Willemsen. Prins Klaus Fund, the Netherlands.
Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1998: 13–48.

O’Connor, K. ‘Lycra, Girdles and Leggings: The Immaterial Culture of Social Change’. In Clothing as

Material Culture, edited by S. Küchler and D. Miller. Oxford: Berg, 2005.

Perani, J. and N. H. Wolf. Cloth, Dress and Art Patronage in Africa. Oxford: Berg, 1999.
Polhemus,  T.  Style  Surfing:  What  to  Wear  in  the  3rd  Millennium.  London:  Thames  &  Hudson,

1996.

Rabine, L. W. The Global Circulation of African Fashion. Oxford: Berg, 2002.
Renne, E. P. ‘Cloth and Conversion: Yoruba Textiles and Ecclesiastical Dress’. In Religion, Dress and

the Body, edited by L. B. Arthur. Oxford: Berg, 2000: 7–24.

Ross, D. H. Wrapped in Pride: Ghanaian Kente and African American Identity. Fowler Museum of

Cultural History Textile Ser. no. 2. Los Angeles: University of California Los Angeles, 1998.

Rovine,  V.  L.  Bogolan:  Shaping  Culture  through  Cloth  in  Contemporary  Mali.  Washington,  DC:

Smithsonian Institution Press, 2001.

Said, H. ‘The History and Current Situation of Cultural Heritage Care in Sub-Saharan Africa’. Asian

and African Studies 8, no. 1 (1999): 91–100.



457

Scheld, S. ‘The Production and Consumption of La Sape: Researching Fashion Fever and Writing
Teen Fashion Magazines in Dakar, Senegal’. Paper presented at the Colloq. Women’s Studies
Department, Coll. University NY, New York, 2001.

Schneider, J. ‘The Anthropology of Cloth’. Annual Review of Anthropology 16 (1987): 409–48.
Taylor,  K.  ‘Cultural  Heritage  Management:  A  Possible  Role  for  Charters  and  Principles  in  Asia’.

 10, no. 5 (2004): 417–33.

Taylor,  L.  ‘Ethnographical  Approaches’.  In  The  Study  of  Dress  History.  Manchester:  Manchester

University Press, 2002: 193–241.

Turner, T. ‘The Social Skin’. In Reading the Social Body, edited by C. B. Burroughs and J. Ehrenreich.

Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1993 [1980]: 15–39.

Van  Binsbergen,  W.  Intercultural  Encounters:  African  and  Anthropological  Lessons  towards  a

Philosophy of Interculturality. Munster: Lit, 2003.

Van der Plas, E. and M. Willemsen. The Art of African Fashion. Prins Klaus Fund, the Netherlands.

Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1998.

Weiner,  A.  and  J.  Schneider.  Cloth  and  the  Human  Experience.  Washington,  DC:  Smithsonian

Institution Press, 1989.

Woodward, S. ‘Looking Good: Feeling Right—Aesthetics of the Self’. In Clothing as Material Culture,

edited by S. Küchler and D. Miller. Oxford: Berg, 2005.


