International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Museums and the ‘Death of Experience’:
singularity, interiority and the outside

Kevin Hetherington

To cite this article: Kevin Hetherington (2014) Museums and the ‘Death of Experience’:
singularity, interiority and the outside, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20:1, 72-85, DOI:
10.1080/13527258.2012.710851
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.710851

Published online: 06 Aug 2012.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 710

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2014
Vol. 20, No. 1, 72–85, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.710851

Museums and the ‘Death of Experience’: singularity, interiority
and the outside

Kevin Hetherington*

Faculty of Social Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
(Received 18 December 2011; ﬁnal version received 3 July 2012)

This paper discusses a number of well-known critiques of the museum that seek
to identify it as a problematic space for experience. The key argument put for-
ward is that we can ﬁnd within that analysis a critical geography around the
museum that help us to understand the work that it does in relation to experience.
Three spatial motifs are drawn from this analysis and discussed: the singular, the
interior and the outside. The paper argues that museums since the nineteenth cen-
tury have established a topos for experience based on a mimetic realism around
the experience of both culture and history through the ﬁrst two of these spatial
expressions. Through them museums produces a fabulation of culture and history
that supplements for the lack of topos for experience found within modern soci-
ety as a whole. The latter spatiality – that of the outside – is found in the form of
the absent–presence of the event in relation to the archiving principle of the
museum, thereby continually unsettling the ﬁrst two expressions and calling them
into question. This dynamic reveals the museum as a space to critically think
about what it does with experience and the importance of spatial analysis for
that.

Keywords: museum; archive; experience; social space

Introduction: museums and the problem of experience
Many long-standing critiques of the museum place the issue of experience centre
stage in what they see as wrong about the role they play in displaying artefacts to
visiting audiences. Often premised on the European art museum tradition, beginning
with the Louvre, writers like Quatremere de Quincy (see Bann 1984, Sherman
1994, Maleuvre 1999), Valery (see Adorno 1967) and Blanchot (1997a, 1997b) all
typically highlighted either the problem of taking artefacts out of their original
displaying context and creating a desacralising experience of art or of packaging an
art experience that is really a museum experience. Others, following more in the
tradition of novelist Marcel Proust, have tended to focus on the transformations of
cultural memory and history within museums into everyday experience, noting in
particular, a fetishistic approach to the history that
is represented in museums
(see Adorno 1967, Benjamin 1999). Far from being of mere historical interest and
outdated by more recent approaches to museums that are more attuned to their
diversity and engagement with questions of
identity and identity politics
(e.g. Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998, Bennett 2004, Karp et al. 2007) these critiques,

*Email: k.i.hetherington@open.ac.uk

Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

73

notably the latter around issues of history and memory, continue to resonate with
contemporary debates around the way that the past continues to have resonance
within the present (see Donato 1979, Huyssen 1995, 2003, Gordon 1997, Maleuvre
1999, Crane 2000, Smith 2006).

My aim in this paper is not simply to present those earlier critiques anew and to
claim lasting relevance for them. Much of what they have to say – in particular
around their selectivity of museum type and approach to issues of aesthetic recep-
tion and practice by visiting audiences – might now seem quite dated, even wrong
in many of its assumptions. Neither is it my intention to re-present an argument that
museums are mere spaces of the commodity fetish/Spectacle in a neo- or post-
Marxist manner. Rather, what I argue in this paper is that embedded within these
early critiques of the museum is an unacknowledged recognition of the importance
of the spatiality of the museum that allows us to re-theorise what museums do.
What I seek to show is that within earlier, critical arguments that have questioned
not simply the practices but the very principle of the museum is an unacknowl-
edged recognition of the problem of topos that should remain central to any ques-
tion around understanding museum (or heritage) experience (see Koselleck 2004).

Topos as a word is generally understood to mean ‘place’, but this is not just
‘place’ in the hermeneutic sense of meanings attributed by social actors to particular
locations that form a basis for how they come to be represented, understood and
remembered. A central tenet for understanding the character of modernity has been
to look at what it does to experience. For Koselleck, notably, modern society, since
its emergence in the 1500s, has seen the gradual erosion of experience as something
enduring, communicable and shared (Erfahrung). In a way,
this is a means of
describing tradition. And topos is the location and understanding of experience as a
part of tradition. That understanding of experience – continuous, unchanging and
enduring – has been well charted for a very long time within social science. The
major claim has been that it has been eroded by the interventions of an industrial
capitalist or modern society (for an overview see Berman 1982, Kern 1983, Frisby
1985, Koselleck 2004). Experience within this understanding of modern society
becomes, it is argued, more fragmented, fractured, detraditionalised and less com-
prehensible as a shared totality (Erlebnis) (see Frisby 1985, Simmel 1990, Ziarek
2001). Within these arguments, topos is the term used to try and convey a sense of
the spatio-temporal aspect of experience – in other words it is a shared experience
grounded in a common spatial and temporal order. This,
the modernity thesis
argues, is eroded and replaced by the disjuncture of a series of ﬂeeting and uncer-
tain events and spaces that characterise experience in modern, urban life.

What remains prescient within the mid-twentieth century critiques of the museum
that I will discuss here is that they had a grasp of this changing character of experience
within modernity and its relationship between spatial and temporal order. What they
sought to show was how the museum as a modern institution was in many ways a
reﬂection of this change in patterns of experience and moreover, was used as a cultural
space in which to try and resolve some of the uncertainties that such a shift produced.
In this paper, I offer an overview of a range of critiques of the museum that seek
to draw out these questions of time and space, and show that they sought to under-
stand the museum as an institution in relation to this idea of topos and its apparent
lack within society. I identify two expressions of spatiality, singularity and interiority,
around which these critiques are developed. I then seek to add a third from more
recent analysis of archival institutions in order to add a dynamic element to how we

74

K. Hetherington

might see museums as spaces of experience (see Derrida 1996). In the ﬁrst two
expressions, we see the museum being presented as a supplementary topos to make
up for the lack of a shared sense of experience grounded in time and space in modern
society. Here, the museum is a space that is seen as: (1) singular in its presentation of
culture and as (2) an interior in which tropes of cultural and historical certainty and
security are re-established. It is around these forms of spatiality, I will suggest, that
the museum as topos is constructed. What we can also see in these critiques, how-
ever, is a recognition that such a topos will always be unstable and open to challenge.
I argue that we need to introduce a third spatial descriptor to capture this issue. That
descriptor conveys the spatial idea of otherness and is expressed through a notion of
‘the outside’. Through interplay around ideas of supplement, mimesis and topos, I
argue that we can see the principles of museumness at work while the idea of the out-
side offers a deconstructive moment though which to suggest a more dynamic under-
standing of the museum and its future curatorial possibilities.

Singularity and the museum experience
A useful way in to these arguments, one which highlights and exempliﬁes many of
these questions about museums, and from which much subsequent critical work
take their reference point, is to return to Adorno’s (1967) well-known essay on the
museum, Valery Proust Museum. This essay takes as its approach an engagement
with earlier work on museums from the early part of the twentieth century by the
poet Paul Valery and the novelist Marcel Proust, both of whom were deeply con-
cerned with issues of memory and experience in modern society. While divergent in
their conclusions, what
the
museum as a somewhat tragic space; one where the high intentions of the bourgeoi-
sie to present culture in one place for all to see and to learn from was somehow
undermined by that very aim. They are also exemplars of two subsequent divergent
approaches to the critique of museums. Valery is very much in a critical tradition
concerned with the museum as an artistic context for experience and its problems,
while Proust really inaugurates an interest in the museum as an historical supple-
ment to living memory.

typiﬁes both of these authors is that

they present

Adorno presents Valery as a cultural critic for whom museums are spaces of
betrayal. Valery senses betrayal because he sees museums take the great works of
art from the past and decontextualise them from their original environment. In
doing this, he believes, they devalue the true signiﬁcance and potential revelatory
power of that art for the viewing subject. This is not a unique argument. Paul
Valery was not the ﬁrst person to put forward this proposition and he was not to be
the last (see Blanchot 1997a, 1997b). If one looks back to the early nineteenth cen-
tury, one ﬁnds the beginnings of such an argument with people like Quatremere de
Quincy. He was the Intendent General for public arts in the reactionary Bourbon
government that took power and restored the monarchy in France after the revolu-
tionary period of Napoleon Bonaparte. That earlier regime had established the
Louvre out of the appropriated royal palaces and through colonial conquest (notably
in Egypt). It was around the Louvre that the ﬁrst principles of the modern museum
were established – of bringing together artworks and other artefacts from all times
and places as a part of a total, universal survey and of using that collection as a
key cultural reference in establishing the national, secular identity of France (see
Duncan 1995). In the Bourbon aftermath to Napoleon’s regime, Quatremere de

International Journal of Heritage Studies

75

Quincy argued that he wanted to close the museums down (see Bann 1984, Duncan
1995, Maleuvre 1999), not least because such a secular and rational organisation,
he believed, stripped many once sacred artefacts of their holy aura. He also believed
that the Louvre had appropriated the representation of history for speciﬁc political
and nationalist ends, and he wanted to challenge that on political grounds. From the
outset, museums like the Louvre, then, were credited by critics like Quatremere de
Quincy and Valery with the decontextualising of art and of undermining of what
they saw as its proper experience because, they believed, museums created a new
and distinct environment for that art that was different from the one for which it
had been created by artists themselves (see Maleuvre 1999).

A later author to adopt a similar, though somewhat more sophisticated philosoph-
ical position, was Blanchot (1997a (1997b) writing around 1950 largely in response
to Malraux’s (1978) famous 1947 evocation of the universal and accessible possibili-
ties for art made apparent in what he called the musée imaginaire. For Malraux, the
idea of the musée imaginaire was premised on a notion of the universalising of the
museum principle made possible by print technology and the reproduction of images
of artworks (in books). For Malraux, photographic reproduction of artworks freed art
from its location within the walls of the museum while retaining and universalising
the museum principle of the representation of art to the experience of the viewer. In
distinct contrast to Malraux, Blanchot believed that art in itself captured something
inexpressible and vital to experience that directly challenged the very idea of the
museum as a context for its display. Through art, he believed, we experience alterity
(otherness to ourselves) and an openness to the possibility of understanding that
exists outside of ourselves as experiencing subjects (on this theme of the outside in
Blanchot’s work and in general, see Foucault 1998, Hetherington 2011). Museums,
for Blanchot, are not concerned with facilitating this experience of art but only with
realising themselves as spaces for the display of art. They are, he believes, self-refer-
ential spaces – singular in their self-referencing or what he calls monads without
windows, parodying Malraux’s (1997a, p. 22) museums without walls idea. In such a
monadic and singular self-referential space, the character of art as a portal onto the
outside, a space of otherness, is, for Blanchot, undermined because he sees that art
experienced not in itself but as part of a broader material and representational narra-
tive of art told by the space of the museum. For Blanchot, when a person visits a
museum they do not experience art in all its radical otherness rather they experience
museum in all its familiar sameness. In museums, Blanchot believes, art becomes
part of a wider museum story – each artefact reduced to an index to that story rather
than something through which visitors might contemplate something other to their
experience of themselves as subjects. The latter is important for Blanchot because he
sees that as the way in which subjects realise themselves precisely as imaginative
subjects in that act of contemplative recognition of what is other to everyday, com-
mon sense understandings.

The key problem of the museum, as these critics conceive it, is that the museum
appropriates this singular character from art – something that comes about because
of its sacred or other character and assumes those qualities for itself as the space
where art is experienced. In other words, what they have in common as a basis for
their critique is a sense of the loss of a sacred topos for experience in the museum.
The singular character of art, within these critiques, becomes the singular character
of art in the context of the museum. For these authors, art was once the topos for

76

K. Hetherington

(sacred) experience, now the museum is seen to appropriate this topos for its own
ends in representing art.

Returning to Adorno’s reading of Valery as an exemplar of this critical tradition,
he was not one to take such arguments about the undermining of experience at face
value. In challenging this approach, he posits Marcel Proust as a possible alternative
source of understanding. Proust, in contrast to Valery, is presented by Adorno as
accepting the decline in the revelatory power of art once it is placed within the
museum. However, for Proust, Adorno suggests, this is because it is not the sacred
experience of art that is important but, rather, art’s inﬂuence on personal remem-
brance that reveals its true signiﬁcance to modern forms of experience. Adorno sug-
gests that Proust treats a visit to the museum in a similar manner to the way he
does a visit to another icon of modernity – the railway station – both at the time
are special experiences, novel and a little out of the ordinary; visits likely to be
remembered in individual experience rather than taken for granted as part of the
everyday.

For Valery, the work of art can no longer be enjoyed once it has been placed in
a museum; its singularity, he believes, is betrayed by the attempt to transpose the
conditions of the singular from the work of art onto the museum itself as a distinc-
tive space for art. For Proust, this role of the museum matters little because the sig-
niﬁcance of art escapes the terrain of aesthetic appreciation and enters instead that
of memory, reception and consciousness. Both see the museum signalling the death
of the work of art but whereas for Valery this is a tragic loss and the basis for an
erosion of experience, Proust has a more positive view: the demise of the work of
art within the museum is what brings it to life in the creative powers of personal
memory and recollection which might lead to an awakening to the past (Adorno
1967, p. 182).

For Adorno, the problem with Valery’s position is that it is imbued with a
fetishism for the work of art while the problem he has with Proust, who gets a
somewhat more sympathetic treatment from him, is that he is accused of subjectiv-
ism (p. 183). But rather than calling for the end to the museum in principle, how-
ever, Adorno suggests our approach should be to go there – not for what today
might be called the ‘museum experience’ (see Huyssen 1995) – but simply to con-
template one or two important artworks in depth. Despite being presented as a tra-
gic space for the death of aesthetic reception, one can still ﬁnd within its walls and
effectively contemplate, Adorno believes, a few expressions of autonomous art. For
Adorno,
that resists the
museum experience and the commodiﬁed culture industry of which it is a part. In
such art, Adorno believes, the last vestige of experience as Erfahrung – even if only
glimpsed as a lack – might be encountered. Different though Adorno’s and Blan-
chot’s claims are, premised on quite different understandings of human nature and
subjectivity, they share a sense that the museum promotes something fundamentally
and irrevocably diminishing to experience. They do so through a sense of topos as
tragically lost to experience and this colours their views of the museum as a social
space for the presentation of culture to experience.

this is art autonomous from commodity fetishism, art

The museum as tomb interior
If through the tradition associated with Quatremere de Quincy, Valery and Blanchot
we get a critique of the museum as a space of singularity that removes topos from the

International Journal of Heritage Studies

77

experience of art and replaces it with the experience of museum, we ﬁnd something a
little different in another key critic of the museum from this time, Walter Benjamin
(1973, 1999), who can be placed more in the lineage of Proust’s understanding of the
museum. Benjamin’s attitude to collecting and to an appreciation of fragments from
the past was in many ways more sympathetic to the museum idea and notions of mul-
tiple reception than his friend Adorno’s, albeit critical at the same time around issues
of historicity and experience. Such ambivalence is on show in his now famous
Arcades Project where he treats the museum both as a dream house in which we expe-
rience the past and present through the alienating lens of commodity culture and also
a space in which the opportunity for remembrance of what it masks remains a live one
with the appropriate work of reception. For Benjamin, the key objective is to ﬁnd a
way of revealing the positive opportunities for a reception not of art but of history
found in the museum that challenges what he sees as its fetishistic or phantasmagoric
representation of the present through a story of progress unfolding from the past and
laid out before the viewer as a representation of historicity. Whereas the other authors
surveyed here tend to equate the museum with the art museum or gallery (no doubt
because they tend to equate culture with high culture) and have little to say about other
types of museums, Benjamin is more sensitive to these other types of museum and to
the cultural artefact in general rather than just painting or sculpture.

In his arcades analysis, Benjamin aligns the museum with a series of spaces
that were prominent within nineteenth century consumerism, notably the bourgeois
interior or parlour, world fairs and department stores. He also, less obviously but
signiﬁcantly, conﬂates the museum with the subterranean world of Paris, notably
its tombs and sewers (1999, #L: 407ff). The relationship between the museum
and the sites of consumption is readily apparent in their mode of display to shop-
pers/visitors and their relationship to the display of commodities to consumers
(shoppers or visitors) and this part of his analysis has been widely explored in
recent years (e.g. Buck-Morss 1989, Cohen 1995, Gilloch 1995). Benjamin was
conscious of the museum’s role in the creation of phantasmagoric representations
of consumer society and its fetishistic powers. Indeed, his analysis of commodity
fetishism in relation to what he called dream houses of commodity culture has
become something of a landmark of analysis for many later studies of the com-
modity fetish character of culture and cultural institutions within modern, capitalist
societies (e.g. Buck-Morss 1989, Maleuvre 1999, Hetherington 2007). As one of
his so-called dream house, the museum is, for Benjamin, a cultural site that capi-
talism uses to create illusions that veil the commodity character of cultural pro-
duction and art. Our task, he suggests, is to ﬁnd ways of awakening from this
dream of change which he suggests is really a nightmare of the eversame of capi-
talist social relations.

Some of Benjamin’s critique of the museum, then, as with Adorno, shares an
understanding based on describing the alienation of experience within the sphere of
culture. However, it is the association between the museum and the underground
spaces of death that take his analysis beyond this familiar critique and suggest a
broader question of the issue of historicity and its relationship to experience that is
worthy of further attention. In the convolute of his Arcades Project where he dis-
cusses the museum and its relationship to these other spaces, that of tombs and sew-
ers, Benjamin begins by outlining the important inﬂuence on Bourgeois culture of
the discovery and relationship with the ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii at the end
of the eighteenth century. For Benjamin, these classical ruins became the mise en

78

K. Hetherington

scene of a later bourgeois cultural ennoblement; the space where bourgeois society
gets to make reference to itself and its historical position in relation to the revered
classical past as some form of culmination. For Benjamin, nineteenth century bour-
geois culture – and its presentation of history – engages with the appropriation of
such ruins of the past in ways that present its own ideas about itself as a class with
historical signiﬁcance while at the same time denying the problem of history as a site
of struggle and change. For Benjamin, the approach to the past in the museum is one
in which ideas of progress and change as measured against the cultural artefacts from
the past are tied in with a space of representation in which there is no outside (1999,
#L: 406). Museums, he suggests, are constructed like dreams (of the past) in which
there is no escape; their interiority, like the state of dreaming, becomes self-contain-
ing as the experience of the past. This self contained ‘tomb’, which he aligns promi-
nently with the ‘tomb’ of the bourgeois interior and its broader cultural validation of
interiority in general, is, for Benjamin, an ironic space for the representation of histo-
ricity – bringing history inside the imaginary spaces of the bourgeois topos in order
to make it seem safe and self-validating.

For Benjamin, for all its heroic chronological narratives about civilisation and
empire, cultural high achievement and above all representation of progress, muse-
ums also represents this Bourgeois understanding of history, which is also a capital-
ist vision of history, as the end of history enclosed in on itself in a state of
permanent and enduring insiderness. Museums, Benjamin argues, monumentalise
time into something static and enclosed as if there could be no change, no rupture
and no glimpse of an outside to this capitalist dream (see Maleuvre 1999). Benja-
min’s methodological
through forms of immanent critique
(including visual and textual juxtaposition, reading against the grain, and shock
images that he calls dialectical images), an understanding in which a shock of rec-
ognition might be realised by the receptive subject, revealing that things are nor
really as they appear. Through that, experience, he believes, might be realised as a
form of awakening from a self-enclosed topos of interiority that is a key feature of
the phantasmagoria of a capitalist commodity culture.

task is to construct,

Again, the point is not whether we agree with these arguments in total or his
approach to them. What is signiﬁcant, and what still resonates for us and how we
might understand more clearly what museums are is the distinctly spatial character
of this critique around the theme of interiority. What Benjamin is suggesting is that
museum constructs a topos of experience through which a shared sense of history
and idea of progress is tied to this notion of the interior. His intent is to subject that
topos to a form of critique.

Looking at the themes discussed so far, we can see that there are a number of
common threads that inform these diverse critical traditions and how they have
approached the museum. First, they present the museum as representing art/artefacts
in ways that undermine the possibility for an experience in which subjects area rea-
lised outside of some ideological (or discursive) location. Second, museums are
seen as singular, self-deﬁning spaces – through the ways in which they represent
and use their collections to offer an experience that is deﬁned by its museumness.
They do this by appropriating the singularity of art and the enquiring experience it
promotes to themselves as a topos for valid experience. In this way, both art and
history become museum art and museum history. Third, museums are presented as
utilising historicity – the ability to narrate a sense of the past – in ways that posi-
tion subjects in relation to the past through the displays in the museum gallery that

International Journal of Heritage Studies

79

are somehow contrary to their real interests – principally through an interiorising of
history within a self-enclosed total space.

What these varied arguments have in common, despite their philosophical and
sometimes different political leanings, is a distinct sense of establishing experience
within the museum through these tropes of singularity and interiority. While we
might want to questions the underpinning critiques of alienation for their essentialis-
ing and universalising of human nature, or question the idea of the art as a privi-
leged portal onto the contemplation of otherness (Which art? For whom? Who
decides?), what we might want to retain and develop from these critiques is this
analysis of the museum as a constructed topos that is both singular and interiorising
in its effects on experience. Above all, they are shown to fuse a sense of history
with an experience of social time in keeping with the discourse of progress strongly
articulated until well into the twentieth century. They do this, I suggest, principally
around the singular and interior through which they construct a topos for experience
through ideas of containment in terms of totality, classiﬁcation and order.

Museum, archive and the fabulation of history
While earlier collections and cabinets of curiosities were profoundly open,
unbounded to modern eyes, heterodox, fascinated with exotica, freaks and boundary
objects, modern museum and modern collecting have largely been all about creating
and archiving a totality that can be understood as such and its internal divisions be
understood through classiﬁcatory schemes and placings (see Richards 1991, Hoo-
per-Greenhill 1992, Whitehead 2009). Archives that function as spaces like the
museum, I argue, are premised on the dream of being singular interiors for total
collections. From gallery layouts, to cataloguing, to the establishment of disciplinary
boundaries around classes of objects (ethnographic, natural history, archaeological,
art historical, etc.), understanding order as something total, singular and interior to
the spaces in which they are housed are key principles of the modern archive prin-
ciple that informs much museum practice over the past two centuries. The archivist
can cope with seeming disorder from within this space because they can do schol-
arly work to reposition, create order and put things in their proper place as knowl-
edge develops. What is problematic is the idea of a disorderly outside that might
impinge upon the archive and challenge not its representation of an order but its
very principle as an ordering device. It is the outside that is anathema to this topos
of singularity and interiority. And what I want to highlight is that it is that outside
that this earlier generation of museum critics that I have discussed so far are all
searching to understand.

To develop this argument a little further, we can say that it is well known that
the great cultural fear of leading nineteenth century observers of modern culture
from around the high period of museum creation like Thomas Carlyle, Matthew
Arnold and John Ruskin, amongst others, was disorder and anarchy (see Bauman
1987). This was not just a fear of the unruly mob in need of proper regulation and
governance but also of unruly collections that exceeded classiﬁcatory boundaries
and of unruly time in which events or understandings from outside the narrative
told within the space of display might be challenged (see Bennett 1995). As Donato
suggests, the discovery at the time by scientists of the second law of thermodynam-
ics – that all things tend towards a condition of meaningless stasis (entropy) and
ultimately to potential decadence was profoundly troublesome for the Bourgeois

80

K. Hetherington

mind that sought to imagine the world they were creating as one of dynamic but
controllable improvement and progress (Donato 1979). The museum, Donato sug-
gests, is one way of trying to address those concerns. It rests on an archive princi-
ple that provides a sense of order – a museum is assumed to be a total or bounded
collection of artefacts, often premised on a desire for completeness, whose state-
ments can be organised in a narrative way that is internally consistent and under-
standable to its visitors. The reality of local haphazard collections policies and
contingent additions and losses would speak of a different reality but the ideals of
totality and order are there nonetheless as the history of any of the great museums
would attest (e.g. The British Museum, Miller 1974).

The outcome is that museums have always sought to narrate through their collec-
tions and displays this sense of coherence and order about whatever it is they are
seeking to archive. That is fundamental to their sense of topos. In doing so they
typically aim to erase any trace of heterogeneity and uncertainty in what they do
(Donato 1979, p. 221). The objects in a collection are narrated, in a realist way
moreover, that allows them to tell a story through their emplacement of things within
an ordered understanding as something that comes to be recognisable from the dis-
plays themselves. But such placings, Donato suggests, are premised not on a natu-
rally occurring order that such realism would suppose but rather on the necessity of
narrative devices that fabulate that sense of order. The narrative might vary from
large storys such as nation, Empire, civilisation, an era in human history, a school of
art or smaller things like stylistic changes within the history of a class of objects and
so on. But singularity and interiorising – constructing the boundaries around a sub-
ject as something knowable – are a key part of the narrative device that lies behind a
collection, its display and thereby its sense of topos and how it promotes ideas of
how it should be experienced. In doing so narrative devices are used to try and natu-
ralise a sense of order in keeping with stories about the past and the future that such
a society wants to tell itself. Take that fabulated sense of order away and not only do
the collections become a meaningless arrangement of stuff but their cultural signiﬁ-
cance and the story that they tell about history runs the risk of collapse too (see
Donato 1979). What we can add to this analysis is that the process of fabulation
relies on particular forms of topos formation in which marking out the museum as a
singular space capable of telling orderly stories and interiorising that as a totality of
knowledge are prominent elements.

Bann’s (1984) work on the early nineteenth century museum charts some of this
process of fabulation in practice, showing how different discourses of history
informed different ways of displaying the past within museums. He simpliﬁes these
into two distinct approaches: a ‘schools’ approach (what he calls metonymic
museum displays) and a ‘reconstruction’ approach (synecdochical museum displays)
(1984, p. 91). In the former, different schools that succeed one another (e.g. in the
development of art) are organised spatially in the museum galleries to illustrate his-
torical change through the passage of a museum. In the latter approach, all artefacts
from a particular time are collected together in the proto–form of the period room
to act as an exemplar of a particular period that condenses it so that it can become
meaningful as a totality.

Such types of display are still prominent in many museums today. Similarly,
recent research by Klonk (2009) on gallery interiors and their role in the shaping of
experience during the period of the nineteenth century has shown that museums in
the nineteenth century sought expressly to educate the experience of visitors who

International Journal of Heritage Studies

81

came to them by evoking emotions that cultivated an appreciation of the artefacts
and the stories they told. She shows, too, how prominent ideals from the bourgeois
interior were to this process; the parlour in particular, with its sense of familiar
security and order in inﬂuencing the design of galleries for most of that century.

What we know of the bourgeois interior, that space of enclosure and patriarchal
security, I would suggest, can be applied to this idea of interiority within the
museum as well. As Logan (2001, p. 53) suggests in the context of the Victorian
parlour itself, key to its cultural signiﬁcance in the way that room was laid out and
understood by convention was that it became a space of mimetic realism engaged in
the symbolic resolution of social conﬂicts in the outside world through its narrative
of display to the experience of the inhabitant. As a topos of interiority the parlour
was a self-enclosed room of all Bourgeois imaginings, hopes and aspirations. The
parlour became, in effect, a synecdoche for the values of interiority associated with
familial and patriarchal authority. It offered a sense of stability felt to be under threat
from social change in the public realm. The museum, I would argue, and this echoes
some of Benjamin’s observations too (see also Maleuvre 1999), played a similar role
within that public sphere only around the idea of a stable and ordered sense of his-
tory rather than family life. It constructed a fabulated topos in which narratives of
historicity assumed a mimetic realism in which the display of artefacts sought to
evoke a sense of the past to visitors in ways they could come to understand not only
that past but also their place in the present in relation to it. Often informed by aca-
demic studies of history – such as those associated with the works of people like
Winckelmann, Ranke and Hegel – this historicity involved not simply the presenta-
tion of the past but the construction of a space of historicity that sought to address
directly issues of experience within a singular space of a valued interiority. If the
modern world is experienced as all bustle and ﬂux and disordered uncertainty then
somehow the museum aims to become a still counter point for contemplation.

In many ways, this problem of the relationship between the objects on display
and their narrative ordering goes to the heart of the question of history and its rela-
tionship to an archive principle on which the idea of the museum is founded and
which Donato and others have sought to problematise (see also Derrida 1996). The
construction of a stable narrative of history that derives from the archive of sources
of its own making is, for the bourgeois imagination, a key principle of the institu-
tion of the museum as a topos in which social ordering stories are held in place.
And yet this is also the place where such an anxiety and its possibility are at their
most visible and challengeable. This returns us to the earlier issue of the changing
character of experience. We can argue that the museum supplements Erlebnis expe-
rience with its own fabulated sense of Erfahrung that rests upon a mimetic realism
that produces a believable topos of a temporal order within an imagined narrative
of history and a celebration of the present as a culminating part of it. What is most
unsettling to such a fabulation is the questioning of the archive from the outside.

The archive, as Derrida (1996, p. 1) has recently pointed out, is both the space
where things commence and also where things have command. The ﬁrst of these
principles speaks of ‘documents’ collected together (material culture or written
papers) and the second is the authority that is derived from them in that place. In
ofﬁcial archives, those documents would be the sources from which the law is
derived and thereby performed. In the museum, it is another kind of authority that
is given voice – the authority of the order of things, of the attempt to produce a
classiﬁcation of a natural order that is also an historical and cultural order. There

82

K. Hetherington

are also second order narratives that follow from such a principle too: empire,
nation, social class, race, gender and so on – all naturalised within the authority of
the archive and dependent on a seamless and unquestioned relationship between
these ideas of commencement and commandment.

In the museum, this relationship works through the principle of mimetic realism
that they seek to achieve and through which they establish their representational
authority. What Derrida goes on to show, however, through his deconstructive read-
ing of Freudian analysis and it relationship to Judaism as an archive, is that that is
never in fact the case in practice. What Derrida shows is that the archive, any
archive, and that would go for any museum too as an archiving space, is endlessly
challenged by the possibility of a disordering outside coming within (1996, see also
Foucault 1998). New ideas, new manifestations of culture and artefacts, new inter-
pretations of existing ones not only subtly challenge the narratives told within
museum displays but they continually redraw the topos of the museum around what
is seen as inside and what outside (on these effects see Hetherington 1997). This
notion of an outside is not to be found simply in the idea of some form of presence
– person or thing – rather the outside is a manifestation of otherness that takes the
form more speciﬁcally of an absent presence – not a thing or set of visible spaces
but a principle of disruption that endlessly erodes the very idea of stability and order
on which that topos of the museum, interiorising and singular, is established. The
challenge for the museum as archive has always been a gatekeeping one in relation
to this unspeciﬁed realm of the outside. And yet its continued presence is really what
makes museums interesting – something that makes them become dynamic spaces
through which to think about society and cultural life even if against the grain of the
stories they themselves are trying to tell (see Gregory and Witcombe 2007).

It does this, we might add, around questions of the relationship with the past
because this absent presence of the outside manifests itself signiﬁcantly in the slip-
page between history (narrative) and temporality (event). Put simply: museums exist
as points of representational temporal stability (Chronos) in a world in which time is
in ﬂux (Kairos) (see Lindroos, 1998). They typically seek to hold the world at bay
and make sense of it though various ordering narratives in the construction of an
orderly topos for visitor experience.

This manifests itself in gradual changes as much as disruptive shocks. Over
time, museum narratives lose their validity; new readings are sought or are made
apparent through events. For example, what were once seen and displayed as the
triumphs of Empire become displays and stories of the shame of slavery. At its
most basic, the overriding challenge for any museum over time is that the realism
in its narrative ceases to be mimetic; the fabulation it constructs starts to become
visible as such. What this suggests is that events intervene in the story of history.
The space of the outside which no one has control over inevitably encroaches on
the topos of the singular and the interior.

Conclusion
In this paper, I have sought an understanding of the relationship between the
museum and experience that draws directly from the key sources of critiques of
the museum. My aim has not been to agree with one set of criticisms or another,
nor to defend the museum against its critics, rather I have sought to draw out
dominant and unacknowledged themes of spatiality that can be taken from these

International Journal of Heritage Studies

83

critiques and use them to understand the museum and the problems it generates in
principle as an archiving institution. The two themes that I have identiﬁed – singu-
larity and interiority ― are both distinctly spatial in character. These, I have sug-
gested, are dominant ordering principles behind the narrative fabulation of order
that museums aim to tell through their collections and through the material order-
ing ephemera associated with them. There is, however, also a third spatialisation,
an excluded third, that is a part of this story – the space of the outside (to the
archive principle) that is also the space of the event. More abstract, perhaps, and
less easy to grasp than spaces of singularity or interiority, it is important nonethe-
less for our analysis for it is its signiﬁcance as a space of an absent present disor-
dering principle that gives the rationale to those other spatial expressions as well
as being their main challenge and their main impetus for change.

What should be apparent from this analysis – my main argument – is that ques-
tions of topos and its relationship to the category of experience are vital to under-
standing and critically interrogating what museums are and what they are about.
Rather than a secondary issue within museum and heritage studies, I would advo-
cate that the spatial questions this raises be placed centre stage to give us a better
overview of the museum in both historical and contemporary perspective. I have
also tried to show that is this not a completely novel intervention. I have explicitly
tried to draw these themes of space out of earlier and well-known approaches to
museums to show that it has always been there even if not fully articulated as such.
This issue of spatiality is also vital to addressing the question of experience as it is
constituted in relation to the museum. Within this geographical analysis, I am not,
however, operating within a realist or Euclidean understanding of space as a series
of locatable sites that act as containers for action, rather I am treating space as a set
of cultural imaginaries through which forms of understanding are constituted as the
terrain of experience and subjectivity. The three spatial motifs that are apparent,
then, are those of singularity, interiority and outside. I am proposing that to get an
understanding of what a museum is and what it does to experience (and what expe-
rience also does to it) requires that we recognise the importance of these spatial
motifs to the museum and develop our analysis around them. The motif of singular-
ity is what provides the sense of a museum as a legitimate geographical site of
experience – a container for the experience of art or for history or science or what-
ever might be the theme of a collection. Interiority is the motif of enclosure and a
sense that there can be no possible understanding or valid experience of what is on
display except through the museum as an archival totality. Both are legitimation
claims. The motif of the outside, however, is the one that potentially reveals the
contrived or fabulated nature of the mimetic realism that museums promote through
these other spatial motifs. The main point to recognise, though, is that experience is
made across all three of these spaces of representation and not just the ﬁrst two as
museums often assume. It is through that acknowledgement that we can open up
the question of museums and experience to further critical scrutiny, reveal it to be
less stable and more plural in character. Indeed, it is what gives museums, and their
analysis, a continued vitality.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Gordon Fyfe, John Law, Rodney Harrison, Laurajane Smith, Graham
Gilloch, Anne Cronin, John Urry, Beatriz Jaguaribe and three anonymous referees for their
comments on drafts of this paper. This paper draws on sections in an earlier paper translated

84

K. Hetherington

in Portuguese as O Tempo do Arquivo: a Decadência do Museu e a Poéticada História.
Revista Eco-Pos 14(1): 268–290, It is been substantially revised and changed here as to
constitute a new paper but acknowledgement is made to elements that appeared in that
earlier work.

Notes on contributor
Kevin Hetherington is Professor of Geography at The Open University, where he is also the
Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences. He works on issues of museums and the city,
theorising museums, social and spatial theory, and the presentation of the past within the
present. His books include The Badlands of Modernity (Routledge, 1997), Expressions of
Identity (Sage, 1998) and Capitalism’s Eye (Routledge, 2007). With Robin Smith, he is
currently working on a book called Urban Rhythms (forthcoming Wiley-Blackwell/The
Sociological Review, 2013). He was a co-founder of the online journal Museum and Society
which he co-edited from 2003 to 2009.

References
Adorno, T. 1967. Valery Proust Museum. In Prisms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 173–185.
Bann, S., 1984. The clothing of clio: a study of the representation of history in nineteenth-

century Britain and France. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bauman, Z., 1987. Legislators and interpreters. Oxford: Polity Press.
Benjamin, W., 1973. The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction. In: H. Arendt, ed.

Illuminations. London: Fontana Press, 211–244.

Benjamin, W., 1999. The arcades project. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bennett, T., 1995. The birth of the museum. London: Routledge.
Bennett, T., 2004. Pasts beyond memory: evolution, museums, colonialism. London: Routl-

Berman, M., 1982. All that is solid melts into air. London: Verso.
Blanchot, M., 1997a. The museum, art and time. In Friendship. Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-

versity Press, 12–40.

Blanchot, M., 1997b. Museum sickness. Friendship. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,

Buck-Morss, S., 1989. The dialectics of seeing: Walter Benjamin and the arcades project.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cohen, M., 1995. Profane illumination: Walter Benjamin and the Paris of the Surrealist rev-

olution. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Crane, S., 2000. Museums and memory. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Derrida, J., 1996. Archive fever: A freudian impression. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago

Donato, E., 1979. The museum’s furnace: notes towards a contextual reading of Bouvard
and Pécuchet. In: J. Harari, ed. Textual strategies: perspectives in post-structuralist criti-
cism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 213–238.

Duncan, C., 1995. Civilizing rituals: inside public art museums. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M., 1998. The thought of the outside. In: J. Faubion, ed. Michel Foucault: aesthetics,

the essential works. 2. London: Allen Lane, 147–169.

Frisby, D., 1985. Fragments of modernity: theories of modernity in the work of Simmel, Kra-

cauer and Benjamin. Oxford: Polity.

Gilloch, G., 1995. Myth and metropolis: Walter Benjamin and the City. Cambridge: Polity

edge.

41–49.

Press.

Press.

Gordon, A., 1997. Ghostly matters: haunting and the sociological imagination. Minneapolis,

MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Gregory, K. and Witcombe, A., 2007. Beyond nostalgia: the role of affect in generating his-
torical understanding at heritage sites. In: S. Knell, ed. Museum revolutions: how muse-
ums change and are changed. London: Routledge, 263–275.

Hetherington, K., 1997. Museum topology and the will to connect. Journal of Material

Culture, 2 (2), 199–218.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

85

Hetherington, K., 2007. Capitalism’s eye: cultural spaces of the commodity. New York, NY:

Hetherington, K., 2011. Foucault, the museum and the diagram. The Sociological Review, 59

Hooper-Greenhill, E., 1992. Museums and the construction of knowledge. Leicester: Leicester

Huyssen, A., 1995. Twilight memories: marking time in the culture of amnesia. New York,

Routledge.

(3), 557–575.

University Press.

NY: Routledge.

Huyssen, A., 2003. Present pasts: urban palimpsests and the politics of memory. Stanford,

CA: Stanford University Press.

Karp,

I., et al., eds., 2007. Museum frictions: public cultures/global

transformations.

Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Kern, S., 1983. The culture of

time and space, 1880–1918. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B., 1998. Destination culture: tourism, museums and heritage. Berke-

ley, CA: University of California Press.

Klonk, C., 2009. Spaces of experience: art gallery interiors from 1800 to 2000. New Haven,

CT: Yale University Press.

Columbia University Press.

Koselleck, R., 2004. Futures past: on the semantics of historical time. New York, NY:

Lindroos, K., 1998. Now-time/image-space: temporalization of politics in Walter Benjamin’s

Philosophy of history and art. Jyaskyla: University of Jyaskyla Press.

Logan, T., 2001. The Victorian parlour: a cultural study. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Maleuvre, D., 1999. Museum memories: history, technology, art. Stanford, CA: Stanford

Malraux, A., 1978. Voices of silence. At Albans: Paladin.
Miller, E., 1974. That noble cabient: a history of the British museum. Athens, OH: Ohio

Richards, T., 1991. The commodity culture of Victorian England: advertising and spectacle,

Press.

University Press.

University Press.

1851–1914. London: Verso.

Sherman, D., 1994. Quatremere/Benjamin/Marx: art museums, aura and commodity fetishism.
In: D. Sherman and I. Rogoff, eds. Museum culture: histories, discourses, spectacles.
London: Routledge, 123–143.

Simmel, G., 1990. The philosophy of money. London: Routledge.
Smith, L., 2006. Uses of heritage. London: Routledge.
Whitehead, C., 2009. Museums and the construction of disciplines: art and archaeology in

nineteenth century Britain. London: Duckworth.

Ziarek, K., 2001. The historicity of experience: modernity, the avant-garde and the event.

Evanson, IL: Northwestern University Press.


