World Heritage as a Model for
Citizenship: the case of Cyprus
Julie Scott

Abstract
This  paper  explores  the  imaginative  spaces  in  which  world  heritage  is  constructed  and
consumed:  on the one hand, as  the  landmarks  of a `global landscape’  mediated  through
the virtual mobility  of  cyberspace,  essentially  freed  from `place’  or location; on  the  other
hand,  as  the  place-bound  focus  of  nation-building  projects,  where  the  narratives  of
`destiny’   of  nationalist  mythology  confront  the  serendipity  of  modern  state  boundaries.
The  paper  links  these  two  aspects  of  `World  Heritage’   to  two  contrasting  models  of
citizenship, one of which is rooted in the ideal of an inclusive democratic world citizenry,
whilst  the  other  is  tied  to  more  exclusive  notions  of  citizenship  attached  to  membership
of  specific  nation-states  and  riven  by  boundaries  of  ethnicity,  religion,  state  and  class.
Taking the case of Cyprus,  the paper examines the ways in which these discourses of the
global and the national, of heritage and citizenship,  are mobilised  by different  groups as
symbolic  resources  in  the  politics  of  this  divided  island.

Key  words:  Cyprus;  Archaeology;  Nationalism;  Ethnicity;  World  Heritage;
Citizenship

reproduced  on  the  Web  siteÐ

During the year  2000, a Web site was launched to celebrate the new millennium.
New7Wonders.com called on `Citizens of the World’ to `participate in the world’s
first global internet vote to select THE NEW 7 WONDERS OF THE WORLD’ Ð
a
democratically selected new canon, which `continues the tradition of paying tribute
to our collective global cultural heritage’ . The project was launched by the filmed
landingÐ
of  an  amphibious  aircraft  in  Sydney
Harbour,  Australia,  a  few  days  before  the  start  of  the  Sydney  Olympics,  thus
symbolising `the bringing together of two great traditions founded in ancient Greece
that honour the achievements of mankindÐ
the first Olympic Games in 776 BC and
the  proclamation  of  the  Seven Wonders  of  the World  in  20  BC’ .  In  this  spirit  of
cosmopolitanism  and  historical  continuity,  visitors  to  the Web  site  are  invited  to
indicate  their  seven  choices  from  a list  of  twenty-one compiled  from UNESCO’s
World  Heritage  List,  and  to  add  to  this  list  by  nominating  their  own  candidates.
When  the  UK’s  Guardian newspaper  reported  on  the Web  site  in  October  2000,

more  than  1.5  million  people  had  voted,  with  the Taj  Mahal,  the  Great Wall  of
China, and the Mayan ruins of ChichÂen-ItzÂa top of the poll.1

The  `comments’  pages  of  the  Web  site  evince  enormous  enthusiasm  for  the
project and appreciation of its intended symbolic significanceÐ
the world imagined
as a single democratic space, without boundaries, and consumed through images of
its heritage, with instant access to selected sites through the medium of virtual tours.
Despite this, a subtext of national identity runs strongly throughout. Contributors
to the comments page are identified by name and nationality, and the number of
votes received is recorded and published by country. As the Guardian article noted,
some of the voting reflects more than a tinge of nationalism. The early mobilisation
of the Turkish vote was particularly striking, accounting for 50% of the total votes
cast (compared with 10% from the USA), and placing the Hagia Sophia mosque in
Istanbul in the top seven `new wonders’. Yet surprisingly, perhaps, this nationalist
sentiment was expressed through support for an example of Byzantine heritage, a
6th-century  former  Christian  basilica  which  pre-dates  by  900  years  the  Ottoman
conquest from which the modern Turkish state claims antecedence.

The  use  of  `world-class  heritage’   as  symbolic  capital  in  the  process  of  state
formation is by no means new. It has been practised most successfully perhaps by
the  modern  Greek  state,  which  has  skilfully  exploited  its  status  as `owner’  of  the
Hellenic heritage to which the whole of `western civilisation’  traces its roots.2 The
deployment  of  the  Olympic  Games  as  public  relations  for  the  `New  Seven
Wonders’  project  is  but  one  illustration  of  the  centrality  of  ancient  Greece  as  a
reference for modern notions of world heritage. But if UNESCO’s World Heritage
List has formalised the status of `the nation’  as the repository of cultural identity,3
it  has  also  broadened  the  official  canon  of  world-class  heritage  and  institution-
alised  the  channels  for  converting  national  heritage  into  symbolic  capital  at  the
global level, potentially opening the doors for any number of nascent nation-states
to  play  the World  Heritage  card. There  is,  however,  a  contradiction  here,  for  as
Wallerstein points out,4 nation-states face two ways, representing both a source of
diversity  within  the  world  system,  and  at  the  same  time  a  force  for  homogeneity
in  relation  to  the  ethnic  minorities  within  their  own  national  boundaries.  Put
another  way,  nation-states  find  themselves  at  the  intersection  of  two  conflicting
trends: one, towards the inclusivity of the global; the other towards the exclusivity
of  the  national,  with  its  focus  on  borders  and  boundaries  of  various  types.5

1. Guardian, October 2000.

2. Y. Hamilakis & E. Yalouni, `Antiquities as symbolic capital in modern Greek society’, Antiquity, Vol.
70, 1996, pp. 117± 129.

3. Cf. Evans, this issue.

4. I. Wallerstein, `The national and the universal: can there be such a thing as world culture?’, in A.D.
King (ed.) Culture, globalization and the world-system: contemporary conditions  for the representation  of
identity, Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1991, pp. 91± 106.

5. Cf. R. Bryant, `Justice or respect? A comparative perspective on politics in Cyprus’, Ethnic  and
Racial Studies, Vol. 24, 2001, pp. 892± 924.

100

Julie Scott

Allcock’s6 account of how regional folk culture has been appropriated in order to
construct  a  ` ª thousand-yearº   history’  for  the  Croatian  state  both  demonstrates
the  atavistic  connotations  of  heritage,  and  also  highlights  the  inherently  political
processes  of  heritage  designation,  in  which:

To designate any object, practice or idea as a component of heritage (or equally to
exclude any item from this designation) is to participate in the social construction of a
reality which is contested.7

As the author goes on to point out, this is a contest for control in which power is
distributed asymmetrically. In the case of the Cretan town of Rethemnos, Herzfeld
has  meticulously  and  lovingly  documented  the  `rhetorical  strategies  with  which
townspeople  and  civil  servants  battle over  the  inhabited history they call  home’.8
But there is another type of battle, in which it is not only the temporal, but also the
spatial  dimensions  of  home  which  are  fought  overÐ
in  which  political  borders,
superimposed  on  a  monumentalised  landscape  already  drenched  with  cultural
meanings, cross and undercut boundaries of ethnicity, religion and class.

The  island  of  Cyprus,  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean,   has  become  one  such
battleground.  In  1974,  following  an  attempted  Athens-led  coup  and  subsequent
military intervention/invasion by Turkey, Cyprus was divided and the populations
exchanged  between  a Turkish  zone  in  the  north,  and  Greek  zone  in  the  south.9
The  cultural  heritage  of  the  island,  usually  framed  in  terms  of  the  cultural
property  of  the  two  main  ethnic  groups,  has  been  an  important  element  in  the
propaganda war which continues to be waged between the Republic of Cyprus in
the  south,  and  the Turkish  Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus,  the  entity  which  was
unilaterally  established  in  the  north  in  1983. The  contest  for  cultural  legitimacy
has  been  internationalised   through  the  validating  role  of  world  bodies  such  as
UNESCO.  Thus  the  international  status  and  visibility  gained  through  the
inscription  of  three World  Heritage  Sites (WHSs)  in  the  south  (Paphos  in  1980,
the painted Byzantine churches of the Troodos Mountains in 1985/ 2001, and the
Neolithic  site  of  Khirokitia  in  1998)  become  even  more  symbolically  charged

6. J.B. Allcock, `International tourism and the appropriation of history in the Balkans’ , in M.-F.
Lanfant (ed.) International tourism: identity  and change, London: Sage, 1995, pp. 100± 112.

7. Ibid., p. 101; emphasis in original.

8. M. Herzfeld, A place in history: social and monumental  time in a Cretan town, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1991, p. xii.

9. The Republic of Cyprus had been established in 1960 on independence from Britain, with a
power-sharing constitution intended to safeguard the rights of the two national groups, and with
Britain, Greece and Turkey as its guarantors. The Turkish Cypriot community at that time composed
about 18% of the population. The events of the period from 1960 to 1974 are hotly debated, and the
terms of the debate highly politicised. In Turkish Cypriot accounts Turkey `intervened’  in 1974
according to the terms of the constitution in order to protect the lives of Turkish Cypriots. Greek
Cypriot accounts view Turkey’s act as `invasion’ .

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

101

when contrasted  with  the  international isolation and  cultural  embargoes imposed
on  the  north.

In their review of current conditions in Cyprus, Knapp & Antoniadou quote the

opinion of Silberman that:

For a nation like the Republic of Cyprus with its obvious political attachment to images
of Greek antiquity, the extensive excavation and presentation of classical cities like
Paphos, Kition, and Ammathus [sic] are clearly linked to a modern national
self-consciousness.10

They go on to ask:

But what of those places that do not become part of the official heritage, or are denied
a role in that heritage, because they are inaccessible (i.e. in occupied territory)?

the  global  resonances  of  the  island’s  heritageÐ

A glance at `Who’s who in Cypriote archaeology’ ,11 published eleven years after the
island’s formal independence from British rule, suggests, however, that the national
cultural heritage of Cyprus was riven by unacknowledged boundaries long before
1974. The preponderance of British, American, French, Italian, Irish, Swedish, etc.
names (members of excavation teams, professors of archaeology, art historians and
museum  curators)  testifies  both  to  the  interest  of  the  outside  world  in  Cyprus’s
treasuresÐ
and  also  to  the
favourable position enjoyed by foreign scholars and collectors under colonialism.12
A substantial minority of Greek names hints at the growing influence of Greek and
Greek  Cypriot  nationals  in  the  field;  as  archaeologists  with  academic  positions,
directors  and field  officers  of  the  Department  of Antiquities  of  Cyprus,  curators,
assistant  curators  and  technicians  in  the  Museum  of  Cyprus,  owners  of  private
collections of antiquities, or the proprietors  of licensed antique shops. The complete
absence of any Turkish Cypriot involvement at any level is striking; the only Turkish
name  in the  long list  being  that  of  an Istanbul-born   and  -based museum  curator
who  had  published  a  paper  on  `Cypriote  sculpture  of  the  Cesnola  collection  in
Istanbul archaeological museums’. In the context of the politics of world heritage,
it is not so much the overwhelming outside interest which needs to be accounted for
here;  rather,  it  is  the  complete  absence  of  Turkish  Cypriot  involvement  in
particularÐ
their  specific  non-appearance  in  the  world  community  of  `heirs’  of
Cypriot cultureÐ which cries out to be explained.

10. Quoted at p. 15 in A.B. Knapp & S. Antoniadou, `Archaeology, politics and the cultural heritage
of Cyprus’ , in L. Meskell (ed.) Archaeology under  fire: nationalism, politics and heritage in the eastern
Mediterranean and Middle East, London: Routledge, 1998, pp. 13± 43.

11. P.  str Èom `Who’s who in Cypriote archaeology’, Studies  in Mediterranean Archaeology, Vol. 23,
1971.

12. A.B. Knapp & S. Antoniadou, op. cit. (note 10); M. Given `Inventing the
EteocypriotsÐ
Mediterranean Archaeology, Vol. 11, 1998, pp. 3± 29.

imperialist archaeology and the manipulation of ethnic identity’ , Jour nal of

102

Julie Scott

The focus of this paper is specifically Cyprus, but the case of Cyprus encapsulates
many issues of much wider relevance. State strategies involving the projection onto
a  world  stage  of  narratives  of `national  destiny’,  strategies  which  have  often  been
developed  in  response  to  the  experience  of  colonialism,  are  closely  linked  to
concepts of ethno-national heritage and patrimony which are derived from notions
of  private  family inheritance  and  the unbroken `genealogical  chain’ .13 This  paper
argues that, in Cyprus, such strategies have tended to promote an incomplete and
potentially damaging model of citizenship, which is poorly adapted to the demands
of accommodating the two ethno-national groups of the island within some form of
political solution. I start by exploring the development of archaeology in Cyprus,
which is linked intrinsically to the production of knowledge about the past and its
consumption in the form of `heritage’ .14

Colonialism, Nationalism, and the Production of Monumental
Heritage in Cyprus before 1974
In recent decades, archaeology, like anthropology, has turned a critical spotlight on
itself, exposing the ideological content of its theory and practice.15 Its origins in the
colonial world order of the 18th and 19th centuries have been acknowledged to have
facilitated  access  to  ancient  sites  for  Western  archaeologists,  whilst,  in  turn,
colonialist  archaeology  provided  the  moral  and  intellectual  justification  for  the
colonial  project  through  its  culture-historical  framework,  premised  on  `the
unambiguous distinction between different races and the ranking of those races in
a  pecking  order  based  on  their  level  of  ª civilizationº ’ .16 When  applied  to  the
contemporary  colonial context, this not only enabled a clear distinction to be made
between rulers and ruled, but also established the credentials of the colonisers as the
only fit and proper guardiansÐ
of the antique heritage of Europe
and the West. However, the very categories employed within colonialist archaeology
could equally well be put to the service of the nationalist movements of the 19th and
20th centuries, which sought to legitimise their claims to modern statehood by the
appeal to a national past, of which later generations were presented as descendants
and heirs.17 Colonialist narratives, in other words, were challenged not on the basis
of the essentialist ethnic categories employed, nor their assumptions concerning the

the true heirsÐ

13. C.-M. Bazin, `Industrial heritage in the tourism process in France’, in M.-F. Lanfant, op. cit.
(note 6), p. 122.

14. Cf. P. Sant Cassia, `Tradition, tourism and memory in Malta’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute (N.S.), Vol. 5, 1999, pp.  247± 263.

15. C. Gosden, Anthropology and archaeology: a changing relationship, London: Routledge, 1999; M.
Given, op. cit. (note 12).

16. M. Given, op. cit., p. 6.

17. N.A. Silberman, `Promised lands and chosen peoples: the politics and poetics of archaeological
narrative’, in P.L. Kohl & C. Fawcett (eds) Nationalism, politics and the practice of archaeology,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995, pp. 249± 262.

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

103

transhistoric role of the nation implicit in the notion of national destiny.18 Rather,
the  revival  of  national  consciousness  demonstrated  by  nationalist  movements
provided an argument for reasserting ancient lines of descent and reinstating claims
to the cultural property of the nation, thus appropriating the rhetoric of colonialist
archaeology and turning it against itself.

The success of the movement for Greek national self-determination,  which had
mobilised the support of western Europe’s phil-hellenic elite in its struggle against
the Ottoman `Other’ ,19 sparked off Greek irredentist movements throughout Asia
Minor and in Cyprus.20 In Cyprus, the same historic resources underpinning the
British  destiny  to  rule  were  also  claimed  by  a  vociferous  and  self-confident
indigenous  movement  as  authority  for  their  right  to  enosisÐ
the  union  of  Cyprus
with  Greece.  Both  the  Greek  nationalist  movement  and  the  British  colonial
authorities consciously made use of monuments, antiquities and museums in order
to manipulate ethnic identity and its associated political aspirations.21 Sir  Ronald
Storrs, the Governor of Cyprus from 1926 to 1932, wrote in his memoirs that the
historic record in Cyprus had been tampered with by the clandestine removal from
the  museum  in  Nicosia  of  all  Phoenician  artefacts  pre-dating  the  Mycenaean
colonisation: `. . . none has survived the determination of the Greek majority that
Cyprus shall possess proofs of none but Hellenic origin’.22 Storrs himself, on the
other  hand,  is  reported  to  have  been  ordered  to  `foster  a  sense  of  ª Cypriot
patriotismº  as a foil to Greek nationalism’ .23

According  to  Given,24 the  discovery  of  the  `Eteocypriots’ Ð

an  Iron  Age
`urcypriot’   ethnic  group  of  Anatolian  and  North  Syrian  originÐ
and  their
promotion  by  the  Swedish  archaeologist  Gjerstadt,  provided  just  such  an
opportunity.  By  imagining  a  significant  cultural  presence  in  Cyprus  pre-dating
a  presence,  furthermore,   of  hybrid,  eastern  composition,
that  of  the  GreeksÐ
unconnected  with  the  Hellenic  lineÐ
an  Eteocypriot   heritage  might  be  used  to
undermine the basis of irredentist nationalism in Cyprus. Indeed, the Eteocypriot
theory  appeared  to  provide  empirical  support  for  fusionist  theories  of  Cypriot
culture  as  applied  to  the  island’s  architectural  styles,  and  racial  theories  which
attempted  to:

18. Y. Hamilakis, `Through the looking glass: nationalism, archaeology and the politics of identity’ ,
Antiquity, Vol. 70, 1996, pp. 975± 978.

19. Y. Hamilakis & E. Yalouni, op. cit. (note 2).

20. P.M. Kitromilides, `Greek irredentism in Asia Minor and Cyprus’ , Middle  Eastern Studies, Vol. 26,
1990, pp. 3± 17.

21. M. Given, op. cit. (note 12); P. van Dommelen, `Between doubt and political involvement’ ,
Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology, Vol. 11, 1998, pp. 117± 121.

22. R. Storrs, Orientations, London: Readers’ Union, 1939, p. 488.

23. M. Given, op. cit. (note 12), p. 13.

24. Ibid.

104

Julie Scott

. . . pass off the Cypriots as a mÂelange of different races, neither wholly Eastern or
wholly Western, but an amorphous blend of the two without any original or essential
character . . . The mÂelange theory had little academic interest or archaeological
viability; above all, it was so unattractive to the Cypriots, both Greek and Turkish, that
it had no political weight whatsoever.25

Fusionist  or  mÂelange  theories  appealed  to  the  colonialist  authorities  for  the  very
same reasons they were rejected by nationalist movements: they presented a vision
of the island’s past as unshaped by a national consciousness, in complete contrast to
Greek  narratives  as  typified  by  the  following  extract  from  a  paper  linking  social
movements in Cyprus to cultural identity:

The most important historical events that were culturally significant in the evolution of
Cypriot society were the Mycenaean immigrations of 1400 BC . . . and the Byzantine
period, AD 300 to AD 1192. Mycenaean colonisation of Cyprus was significant because
Greek culture was established on the island. The language, art and religion of mainland
Greece were transmitted to Cyprus and no subsequent historical event succeeded in
changing this basic Hellenic cultural pattern.26

As  this  extract  makes  clear,  it  was  primarily  the  Hellenic  heritage  which
nourished  the  sense  of  the  `primordial’   and  `eternal’ ,27 which  is  such  a  strong
feature  of  narratives  of  Greek  national  destiny.  The  incorporation   of  the
Byzantine  heritage  was  a  belated  development,   the  new  Greek  state’s  resistance
to  the  non-classical   tradition,  with  its  oriental  associations,   being  finally  over-
come  by  the  Orthodox  Church  which  itself  had  its  roots  in  Byzantium.28 The
attraction  of  the  Hellenic  heritage  lay  not  only  in  its  high  status  with Western
elitesÐ
a  significant  factor  for  an  emerging  Greek  middle  class  seeking  to
consolidate   its  own  positionÐ but  also  in  its  `distinctive  temporality’ ,29 which
positioned  the  Greek  nation  in  the  realm  of  the  monumental  and  universal.  By
contrast,  other  ethnic  groups  and  national  movements  were  consigned  to  the
social  time  of  the  everyday,  the  mundane  and  the  contingent.  When  applied  to
Cyprus,  the  effect  of  this  totalising  narrative  was  to  establish  an  overarching

25. Ibid., p. 13.

26. K.C. Markides, `Social change and the rise and decline of social movements: the case of Cyprus’ ,
American Ethnologist, Vol. 1, 1974, pp. 309± 330.

27. Cf. R. Bryant, op. cit. (note 5), p. 901.

28. Y. Hamilakis & E. Yalouni, op. cit. (note 2), write that the Orthodox Church in Greece initially
opposed the adoption of the classical heritage by the new Greek state because of its secular
connotations, whilst initial rejection of the Byzantine heritage was such that a number of Byzantine
monuments were destroyed during the 19th century. The Byzantine heritage in Greece continues to
be an arena of contest between secular elements and the Church: cf. C. Stewart, `Who owns the
Rotonda? Church vs. state in Greece’, Anthropology Today, Vol. 14, 1998, pp. 3± 9.

29. Y. Hamilakis & E. Yalouni, op. cit. (note 2), p. 122.

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

105

Greek  identity  for  the  island,30 expressed  in  its  monumental  heritage,  whilst
other presences on the island were treated as transient intrusions,  and their traces
largely  ignored.  This  approach  to  the  island’s  past  was  bolstered  both  by
established   archaeological   theory  and  by  the  prejudices  of  its  practitioners.   As
Knapp  notes:

British-trained classical archaeologists were the first `professionals’  to work on Cyprus;
their negative attitude towards Turkey and the Ottoman Empire set in train a
long-standing philhellenic bias that has affected the structure of archaeological research
on the island.31

Contemporary   archaeological  values  thus  legitimised  a  hierarchy  of  heritage  in
Cyprus in conformity with the Greek national narrative, as  reflected in the poem
prefacing a local historian’s account of the town of Kyrenia:

In your name lies a memory of the Achaean League.
The temples of the Olympian GodsÐ whom you worshipped for so longÐ

have disappeared under the heels of posterity . . .

The presence of the Byzantine Empire is seen in the eyes of a Virgin, who

weeps for mankind set among the imperial colours: the gold, the purple
and blue . . .

The tyranny of the Frank is revealed in the piled up stones of the thick walls of

your Castle and in the reconstruction lines of the vanished ramparts
that joined the remains of your round towers.

The occupation by the Turks has left only a minaret and a white grave with a

turban in an obscure corner . . .32

The perception of Cyprus’s heritage expressed in Catselli’s poem perfectly captures
the  nature  of  the  split  between  monumental  and  social  time.  It  was  entirely
consistent with this split, and with the monumentalisation of the Hellenic and the
Byzantine in Cyprus, that the space left for the celebration of other identities on the
island should be largely that of vernacular heritage and ethnographic display.

The Heritage of `the Other’ in Cyprus: the place of Turkish
Cypriots
Although  physically  located  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean,   Cyprus  has  for
millennia occupied a shifting position in terms of the symbolic categories of east
and  west  which  frame  the  divisions  of  Christian  liturgy,  Islam  and  Christianity,

30. Y. Hamilakis, `Archaeology and the politics of identity in Cyprus’ , Journal  of Mediterranean
Archaeology, Vol. 11, 1998, pp. 107± 111.

31. A.B. Knapp (with S.O. Held & S.W. Manning) `The prehistory of Cyprus: problems and
prospects’ , Journal of World Prehistory, Vol. 8, 1994, p. 378.

32. R. Catselli, Kyrenia, a historical study, Kyrenia: Flower Show Edition, 1974, p. 7.

106

Julie Scott

Occident  and  Orient. With  the  Ottoman  defeat  of  the Venetians  in  1571,  four
centuries  as  the  easternmost   bulwark  of Western  Christendom   came  to  an  end.
For  the  next  300  years  the  island  was  a  province  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,
governed  according  to  the  millet system  which  granted  relative  autonomy  to  the
various  religious  communities   of  its  conquered  territories,   and  recognised  their
religious  leaders  as  spokesmen  and  representatives. 33 A  systematic  transfer  of
population  from  Anatolia  established   a  growing  Moslem  presence  on  the  island
alongside the Orthodox population,  and amongst the public building work which
took  place  was  the  construction   of  mosques,  mescid (prayer  halls),  medresse
(theological  schools) and tekke (religious lodging houses).34 Han (inns) were built
for the accommodation  of travellers and merchants; public bathhouses and water
fountains  also  became  part  of  the  urban  landscape,  and  the  southern  port  town
of  Larnaca  was  provided  with  a  fresh  water  supply  by  the  construction   of  a
massive  aqueduct  endowed  by  the  18th-century   governor  Abu  Bekir  Pasha. To
the pre-Ottoman   Islamic  shrines  on  the island  such  as  the tomb  of  Hala Sultan,
an  aunt  of  the  prophet  Mohammed  who  had  died  in  Cyprus  during  the  Arab
invasions  of  the 7th± 10th  centuries,  were  added  the  tombs  of  warriors  and  holy
people, which became popular places of pilgrimage for the Moslem population. 35
Whilst  the  Orthodox  churches  were  restored  to  the  Orthodox  population,   many
churches  of  the  defeated  Latins  were  converted  into  mosques  through  the
addition  of  minarets,  mihrap (niche  indicating  the  direction  of  Mecca)  and
mimbar (high  pulpit);  St  George  of  the  Latins  in  Nicosia  became  a  public
bathhouse,  and  the  church  of  St  Nicholas  was  transformed   into  the  covered
marketplace   of  Nicosia  known  as B edestan. 36 In  heritage  terms,  the  effect of  the
Ottoman  presence  was  to  create  a  palimpsest  of  styles,  usages  and  meanings,
reflected  in  multiple  layers  of  names  and  traditions  with  which  many  buildings
are  still associated.  Thus  in  Famagusta,  scene  of  a year-long  bloody  siege  by  the
Ottoman army at the time of the conquest, the Gothic Cathedral of St Nicholas,
where  the  Lusignan  kings  and  queens  were  crowned,  was  converted  into  a
mosque  and  renamed  the  Hagia  Sofia  of  Famagusta  (MaÆgusa  Ayasofyasõ ),  in
recollection  of the 6th-century basilica of Hagia Sofia in Istanbul. The name was
changed  again  in  1954,  at  a  time  of  intercommunal   tension  and  heightened

33. Cf. H. Luke, Cyprus under  the Turks 1571± 1878, London: Hurst, 1921; A. GazioÆglu, The Turks in
Cyprus: a province of the Ottoman Empire (1571± 1878), London: R 0ustem, 1990; R.C. Jennings,
Christians and Muslims in Ottoman Cyprus and the Mediterranean world, 1571± 1640, New York: New
York University Press, 1993; P.M. Kitromilides, op. cit. (note 20).

34. R. Hanworth, The heritage of north Cyprus, Nicosia: Ministry of Communications, Public Works
and Tourism of TRNC, n.d.

35. J. Scott, unpublished conference paper, `Tourism: Identities, Environments, Conflicts and
Histories’ , University of Central Lancashire, Preston, 21± 23 June 2001.

36. Z. Altan, Kuzey Kõ brisõ  Tanõ yalõ m Gezelim G 0orelim, Nicosia; Meral Tekin Birinci Vakfi, 1998; R.
Hanworth, op. cit. (note 34).

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

107

Turkish nationalism,  to Lala Mustafa Pasha Mosque, after the commander of the
Ottoman siege forces,37 but is still often referred to by Turkish Cypriot residents
of  Famagusta  as  `St  Nicholas’.

Any  sense  of  national  consciousness   or  ambitions  on  the  part  of  the Turkish
Cypriots  was  initially  discounted  by  both  British  colonial  rulers  and  Greek
nationalist  leaders.38 One  reason  for  this  was  the  Ottoman  tradition.  The
Ottoman  Empire,  as  the  seat  of  the  Caliphate,  had  combined  secular  rule  with
the  spiritual  rule  of  an  international   Moslem  community,  and  was  essentially
tolerant  and  cosmopolitan   in  its  institutions,   promoting  the  `. . .  vision  of  a
common  Ottoman  identity  based  on  the  equality  of  all  ethnic  groups  in  the
Empire’.39 Whilst,  as  Kitromilides   observes,  this  allowed  plenty  of  scope  for
oppositional   nationalisms  to  develop  unchecked  among  its  Christian  subjects,  it
provided  little  in  the  way  of  a  focus  or  ideological   basis  for  the  development   of
an  equivalent  Moslem  national  consciousness.   From  the  1920s  onward,  the
Turkish  Cypriots  had  the  example  of  the  new  Republic  of Turkey  before  them,
under  the  revolutionary   leadership  of  Mustafa  Kemal  Ataturk.  However,  as  a
model  for  Turkish  Cypriot  nationalism,   this  too  was  problematic.  The Turkish
national  project  had  entailed  a  radical  disengagement   from  its  Ottoman  past,
replacing  its  Islamic  institutions   with  a  far-reaching   secular  agenda,  and  its
traditions  of  cosmopolitanism   with  an  uncompromisingly   national  pride  in  the
new Turkish  identity.  In  the  Republic  of Turkey  this  was  framed  largely  by  the
contours  of  the  Anatolian  territory,  which  was  all  that  remained  of  the  former
Ottoman  Empire  and  that,  thanks  to  a  massive  mobilisation   effort  spearheaded
by Ataturk, the Turkish people had successfully  defended from further incursions
on  the  part  of  the  victors  of  the  First World War. The  historicity   promoted  by
Ataturk differed from conventional ethno-nationalist  narratives in that it emphas-
ised  the  plurality  of  histories  encapsulated   in  this  Anatolian  heartland,  and
subsequently   united  in  the  modern Turkey:  `Ataturk’s  view,  summoning  all  the
pasts  of AnatoliaÐ
as  national,  was  incorporated   in
the  ideology  of  the  modern  state.’ 40 The  problem  for  the  Turkish  Cypriots,
however, was rather different. Confronted with pro-enosis arguments based on the
essential  `Greekness’   of  Cyprus,  the Turkish  response  attempted  to  establish  a
countervailing   identity  which  was  both  Turkish  but  also  distinctively   `of  the
island’.  In  this  they  found  themselves  locked  in  an  `asymmetrical   contest’ 41 for
the  `authoritative  resources’42 of  the  island’s  past.

regardless  of  ethnic  originÐ

37. Z. Altan, op. cit.

38. R. Bryant, op. cit. (note 5).

39. P.M. Kitromilides, op. cit. (note 20), p. 9.

40. M.  0OzdoÆgan, `Ideology and archaeology in Turkey’ , in L. Meskell, op. cit. (note 10), p. 117.

41. Cf. J. Allcock, op. cit. (note 6).

42. Cf. Y. Hamilakis & E. Yalouni, op. cit. (note 2).

108

Julie Scott

The  1950s  and  1960s  saw  a  number  of  heritage-related  initiatives  to  raise  the
visibility of the Turks in Cyprus. Apart from the patriotic renaming of St Nicholas/
MaÆgusa Ayasofyasõ  and other historic buildings, two ethnographic museums were
opened, which assembled examples of Turkish Cypriot dress, handicrafts, agricul-
tural and household equipment, and documented the Turkish presence in Cyprus
since the 16th century through maps and engravings. The first of these was opened
in 1963 in the restored 17th-century  Dervish lodge (Mevlevi Tekkesi) in Nicosia.43
This was a significant choice of location for the first Turkish museum in Cyprus, for
in 1932 the question of the succession to the leadership of the lodge had posed a
problem which went to the heart of the dilemma of Turkish Cypriot ethno-national
identity.  Leaders  of  the Turkish  Cypriot  community  were  put  in  the  position  of
choosing whether, on the one hand, to stand up for local Turkish tradition and self-
determination by resisting the colonial authority’s attempts to take over control of
the  Dervish  lodge,  or,  on  the  other,  to  abandon  the  lodge  and  thus  position  the
Cypriot Turks with the secularising nationalism of the new modern state of Turkey,
where the Dervish sect, along with other mystical sects such as the Naskshibendi,
had been banned. Those who ultimately took up the case, such as the journalist and
lawyer  Con (pronounced `John’ )  Rifat,  may  secretly  have  shared  the  reservations
expressed in a memo by the Assistant Director of Land Registration and Surveys:

Is there any real necessity for a fraternity of 25 persons not connected with any
religious object except that they offer their prayers whirling (however charming their
whirling dances are) to have a Head, i.e. a Sheikh, at the expense of the State?44

the Masum

But the issue had become one of the rights of the Turkish community Ð
Millet (Innocent Nation) as the title of Con Rifat’s newspaper referred to them45Ð
to the ownership and control of their cultural heritage. Although the case mounted
by Con Rifat was successful, the British authorities maintained a tight control over
the  new  appointee  through  the  office  of  Evkaf,  such  that  the  Sheikh  was  able  to
function as no more than a puppet. The adherents of the Order eventually died out,
and the conversion of the lodge building to a secular heritage function enabled the
local  Dervish  tradition  to  be  safely  absorbed  into  the  developing  narratives  of
Turkish Cypriot identity.

The Division of the Island and the Renegotiation of Heritage
The  de  facto territorial   realignment  and  population  exchanges  of  1974/1975
represented a massive rupture in the lives of all Cypriots, not least in terms of the
spatial and temporal relations of the island. These were felt at the level of individual

43. Z. Altan, op. cit. (note 36); H. Fedai & M.H. Altan, Lefko‡cse Mevlevihanesi, Nicosia: Ministry of
Education, Culture, Youth and Sport of TRNC, 1997.

44. Memorandum on the Mevlevikhane in Cyprus, 1932, in Fedai & Altan, ibid., p. 124

45. Ibid., p. 44.

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

109

and family ties to land which had been developed over generations, as well as at the
collective level, in the loss of places of religious and cultural significance now out of
reach  on  the  other  side  of  the  dividing  line.  The  division  of  the  island  also
introduced  an  abrupt  transition into the national narratives  which  had Cyprus at
their centre. This presented a particular problem for Greek Cypriot historiography,
which  placed  the  historical  and  spatial  continuity  of  the  island  and  its  Greek
inhabitants  at  its  core.46 Turkish  Cypriot  narratives,  in  contrast,  sought  their
legitimacy  not  so  much  in  historical  depth  as  in  a  clear  and  programmatic
foundation  myth,  resulting  in  a  version  of  history  which  is  `. . .  pragmatic,
contingent, constructivist, based on claims of conquest and validation of the status
quo’ .47 Whilst  the  Greek  Cypriot  government  and  refugees  vowed  never  to forget
their  homes  in  the  north,  and  to  work  towards  their  eventual  return  and  the
reunification of Cyprus, the authorities in the north set about anchoring the Turkish
Cypriots in their new home and severing the ties which bound them to the south.
Claims  to  property  left  behind  in  the  south  were  formally  relinquished Ð both  to
family  property,  the  deeds  for  which  had  to  be  surrendered  in  order  to  receive
accommodation  and  land  in  the  north,48 and  to  national/cultural  property. This
included twenty-five historic monuments belonging to Evkaf in and around Nicosia,
Limassol, Paphos and Larnaca, among them the Hala Sultan Tekke, one of Islam’s
most important shrines.49

But whilst Turkish  Cypriots  lost  access  to Turkish/Moslem  cultural  property  in
the south, they also gained access to national heritage in ways which had previously
been  impossible.  Under  the  British,  the  Turkish  Cypriot  community  had  been
obliged  to  cede  control  of  Evkaf  and  its  cultural  properties  to  the  colonial
authorities;  during  the  independent  constitution  of  the  1960s  the  rare  Turkish
Cypriot  with  a  degree  in  archaeology  was  unable  to  find  employment  in  the
Department  of  Antiquities.50 After  1974, Turkish  Cypriots  found  themselves  in
control  of  the  part  of  Cyprus  which  contained  the  highest  concentration  of
archaeological excavations and known sites of significance on the island,51 but with
extremely inadequate resources, experience or expertise, and with no access to the

46. Y. Papadakis, `The politics of memory and forgetting’ , Journal of Mediterranean Studies, Vol. 3,
1993, pp. 139± 154.

47. R. Bryant, op. cit. (note 5), p. 901.

48. J. Scott, `Property values: ownership, legitimacy and land markets in Northern Cyprus’ , in C.M.
Hann (ed.) Property relations: renewing  the anthropological tradition, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998, pp. 142± 159; B. Morvaridi, `Demographic change, resettlement and resource use;
agriculture and the environment; social structure and social change’, in C.H. Dodd (ed.) The political,
social and economic development  of northern Cyprus, Huntingdon: Eothen, 1993, pp. 219± 268.

49. S. Andõ z, Kõ brõ s’ta Vakõ f Tarihi Eserler, Nicosia: Vakõ flar Genel M 0ud 0url 0uÆg 0u, 1990.

50. M. CSevketoÆglu, pers. comm.; cf. also M.  0OzdoÆgan, op. cit. (note 40) on the belated interest in
archaeology in Turkey.

51. A.B. Knapp & S. Antoniadou, op. cit. (note 10).

110

Julie Scott

documentation  or  records  stored  in  the  Museum  of  Cyprus  in  the  south. The
imposition of cultural boycotts and embargoes further hampered the acquisition of
knowledge, skills, and access to material resources.52

In 1976 a Turkish Cypriot Department of Antiquities was established under the
directorship of an archaeologist from Turkey, and began the work of compiling an
inventory of museum and church artefacts in the north. The department remains
seriously understaffed and under-resourced, as the Famagusta Regional Head of the
Department of Antiquities explained during an interview in his office. That office is
located at the heart of the medieval walled city of Famagusta, opposite St Nicholas
Cathedral/Lala  Mustafa  Pasha  Camii,  adjacent  to  the  remains  of  the  Venetian
Palace, and above the quarters where the celebrated Ottoman poet Namik Kemal
was lodged during his 19th-century exile in Cyprus. The Famagusta region extends
for more than 100 km to the end of the Karpaz Peninsula, and contains sites such
as the classical cities of Salamis and Carpasia, the Bronze Age settlement of Enkomi
and  fortress  of  Nitovikla,  numerous  early  Christian  churches,  the  Byzantine
Kantara Castle,  the monastery of  St Andrew and the monastery and shrine of St
Barnabas, as well as 249 listed houses and the Lusignan and Venetian monuments
of the city of Famagusta itself. With such a richly diverse heritage, the department
disposes a total of only fifty-one workers to cover the region, of which twenty-two
are night watchmen, and many sites are left exposed and unattended.53

In both parts of the island, heritage is used to write the `self ’  and the `other’  in and
out of the cultural landscape of Cyprus in specific ways. Guidebooks published in
northern  Cyprus  and  Turkey  focus  on  descriptions  of  Moslem  and  Ottoman
monuments,  which  `. . .  firmly  connect  . . .  [the]  history  of  north  Cyprus  with
Turkishness’ ,54 whilst  `various  ancient  sites  or  objects  that  are  used  by  Greek
Cypriots to signify the Greekness of the island are used by the Turkish to refer to
either Roman or Byzantium [sic] ages’ .55 Ottoman influences are similarly played
down  in  the  south.  A  permanent  exhibition  of  heritage  in  the  Mediaeval  Fort
(formerly known as the Turkish Fort) at the edge of the former Turkish quarter in
Larnaca strips away the layered accretions of the past to restore the original names
and functions of architectural epochs labelled Early Christian, Byzantine, Lusignan,

52. Contrast the economic viability of archaeology in the south, where, as Knapp records, fieldwork
by foreign archaeologists is externally financed, whilst virtually all of the antiquities recovered remain
in the country. He estimates that at any given time there are about twenty foreign teams working in
the south. Knapp et al., op. cit. (note 31).

53. The Department of Antiquities in the north does not assume responsibility for Moslem and
Ottoman property, which for the most part is in the ownership of Evkaf. Evkaf finances its
restoration and maintenance programme through income from its commercial properties and with
assistance from the Evkaf in Turkey (Director of Evkaf, pers. comm.).

54. K. Akay, `Tourism and nationalist discourse: the case of north Cyprus’ , in C. Fsadni & T. Selwyn
(eds) Sustainable tourism in Mediterranean islands  and small cities, Malta: MED-CAMPUS, 1996,
pp. 81± 93.

55. Ibid., p. 88.

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

111

Venetian, Gothic and Renaissance. The Ottoman contribution is represented by a
room kept in half-light, with green curtains closed, a scattering of cushions on the
floor  and  a  few  items  of  oriental  furniture,  labelled  `Divan  Room  18th ± 19th
Century AD’ . A  further  sign  on  the  wall  announces `Ottoman  Period  16th± 19th
Century AD’ . Representation of the Ottoman/Turkish heritage remains resolutely
rooted  in  social  timeÐ of  local  and  ethnographic  interest  rather  than  national  or
monumental, an approach consistent with that of the tourist maps of Larnaca which
show  the Turkish  street  names  of  the  neighbourhood  where  Cypriot Turks  once
lived, but not, generally speaking, the stuff of World Heritage inscription.

In  many  ways,  the World  Heritage  philosophy  sits  uneasily  with  the  political
complexities of heritage representation in Cyprus; yet at another level the case of
Cyprus  provides  a  graphic  demonstration  of  the  contradictory   and  symbiotic
relationship  between national  state  projects  on  the one  hand,  and  the  inscription
mechanisms and representational regimes of World Heritage on the other. Like the
New7Wonders Web  site  referred  to  above,  UNESCO  promotes  an  ideal  of  a
politically  neutral,  universal  heritage,  and  attempts  to  realise  that  ideal  through
provisions such as Article 11(3) of the World Heritage Convention, which states that
inscription of sites within a disputed territory is without prejudice to the claims of
the  parties  involved. Yet  it  is  in  precisely  such  situations  that  the  ideological  and
political aspects of heritage are likely to emerge with particular force. Despite the
concentration  of  archaeological  sites  and  heritage  treasures  in  the  north,  in  the
present  situation  none  will  be  designated  as  examples  of World  Heritage.  As  an
unrecognised state, the TRNC is not eligible to enter the process of nomination and
inscription. The Republic of Cyprus in the south is highly unlikely to nominate sites
in the north, because of the international visibility and legitimacy such a step would
confer. Furthermore,  a nomination by the Republic of Cyprus of a site in the north
would  inevitably  be  viewed  by  the TRNC  authorities  as  an  attempt  to  exercise
sovereignty  over  the  north,  and  so  rejected,  despite  the  fact  that  possession  of  a
WHS site would, in itself, be widely perceived as a desirable goal. Paradoxically, the
politics  of World  Heritage  have  constructed  a  place  for  Cyprus  within  the  global
heritage community from which Turkish Cypriots alone are excluded.

Citizenship and Heritage
The  dominance  of  the  nation-state  model  of  political  self-determination   has
encouraged  a  view  of  heritage  as  the  cultural  property  of  specific  ethno-national
groups. In Cyprus this has reinforced the primordiality of ethnic identification over
civil models of citizenship, locking Greek and Turkish Cypriots into an intractable
and uneven contest for legitimacy, framed in terms of the true cultural identity of
the island. Greek and Turkish Cypriots are differentially positioned in relation to the
authoritative resources of the island’s past, for which World Heritage inscription has
become the ultimate brand, and in a certain sense the current division of the island
could be viewed as the spatial expression of the temporal divide constructed through
conventional heritage discourse in Cyprus. The polemical terms of the international
debate over Cyprus have further entrenched existing positions. Whilst the Turkish

112

Julie Scott

Cypriots have, officially at least, renounced their claims to cultural property in the
south, the regime in the north faces accusations of theft, neglect, desecration and
plundering of Greek cultural property.56 Numerous high-profile cases of antiquity
smuggling, the removal of mosaics and icons, and the use of abandoned churches
for barns and stables, have been documented and publicised by pressure groups via
the World Wide Web as well as through international bodies such as UNESCO and
the interventions  of  scholars.57 The universal condemnation  of `the Turks’ in  this
regard generally fails to acknowledge the expressions of equal concern by Turkish
Cypriots  themselves,  as  well  as  the  resource  constraints  on  conservation  and
security  measures  in  what  is  by  any  standards  a  poor  country,  coupled  with  the
effects of the embargoes themselves on the ability to care adequately for heritage in
the north.58 In terms of non-material resources, the publication embargo on Turkish
Cypriot as well as international scholars working on archaeology in the north not
only  prevents  the  transfer  of  skills,  but  also  inhibits  the  emergence  of  a  cadre  of
young Turkish Cypriot archaeologists skilled in, and committed to, the conservation
of Cyprus’s heritage in its broadest sense;59 in the south, in contrast, resources are
continually invested in the development of the young archaeologists of the future.60
The current stalemate works to deepen existing imbalances, and further entrench
the exclusion of Turkish Cypriots from a sense of ownership of Cyprus’s heritage.
Ownership and property are, of course, culturally and politically constructed, 61
as  are  heritage,  inheritance  and  patrimony,  as  one  complex  of  ways  in  which
ownership  and  property  are  transmittedÐ
although  discourses  of  `the  nation’,
with  their  primordialist   categories,  tend  to  mask  the  ideological  content  and
contingency  of  these  terms.  Bazin62 has  pointed  to  the  convergences  between
ideas  of  public/national  heritage  and  the  concepts  of  private,  family  inheritance,
which  emerge  with  particular  clarity  when  a  family  inheritance  makes  the
transition  to  national  patrimony. This  is  a  process  which  has  also  been  explored
by  Sant-Cassia  in  the World  Heritage  city  of  Mdina,  Malta,  where  the  houses  of
the traditional elite have been incorporated into the arena of public, civic heritage.
Sant  Cassia  writes:

56. See, for example, P. Stylianou, The plundering  of the cultural  heritage in occupied  Cyprus, Nicosia:
Kipriaki Basiki Bibliothiki, 1987.

57. See, for example, A.B. Knapp & S. Antoniadou, op. cit. (note 10).

58. M. CSevketoÆglu, `The university involvements in cultural heritage in north Cyprus’ , unpublished
conference paper, Forum UNESCOÐ University and `Heritage: A Living World Heritage, the Shared
Ethical Responsibilities of Universities’ , Fifth International Seminar 2000, Byblos and Beirut, 11± 15
December.

59. Ibid.

60. A.B. Knapp et al., op. cit. (note 31).

61. C.M. Hann (ed.) Property relations: renewing  the anthropological tradition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.

62. C.-M. Bazin, op. cit. (note 13).

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

113

When individuals inherit ancestral property . . . they learn their family histories in
greater detail. They obtain this knowledge gradually throughout their lives because,
whilst they formally inherit properties at a single point in time, they often obtain de
facto disposal rights over them gradually. In inheriting properties jointly, individuals
develop multiplex social relationships and confabulate multiplex overlapping pasts.63

These  are  relationships  which  are  fraught  with  tension,  and  the  complex
negotiations over rights and duties  of ownership,  disposal  and  maintenance often
aggravate existing strains.

Amongst some sections of the Cypriot population, Greek and Turkish, there are
signs of a growing awareness of a joint inheritance, stimulating examinations of the
past which are producing new and innovative family histories. From explorations of
literature64 to folk culture65 and social history,66 attention has been drawn to the
shared cultural heritage of the island, the traditions of syncretism and the fluidity of
ethnic categories. This is a relationship which is still in the process of negotiation,
and which faces concerted opposition from several quarters.

The question is, what viable alternatives exist to the atavistic and exclusive models
of heritage as a symbolic resource for linking citizens with each other, the polity, and
the  world?  One  strategy  might  be  to  reconsider  the  concepts  of  stewardship  and
patrimony.  Bazin  argues  that  patrimony,  unlike  heritage,  is  essentially  future
oriented: `If one is talking of heritage or of an heir, the genealogy goes back from the
son to the father . . . If one is talking of patrimony, one’s attention is directed towards
the future, towards the son.’  (emphases in original)67 In Cyprus, with its tradition
of  bilateral  inheritance  (i.e.  property  passed  down  both  paternal  and  maternal
lines),  the  idea  of  a  patrimony,  with  its  focus  on  the  potential  fruit  of  a  future
understanding between Greek and Turkish Cypriot parts of the island, may provide
a  useful  corrective  to  the  backward-looking  emphasis  on  ancestry  implicit  in  the
notion  of  heritage. The  concept  of  patrimony  thus  encapsulates  hybrid  forms  of
identity which, it has been argued, challenge totalising, nationalist (and imperialist)
versions of the past, but leave unquestioned the basic principle of the descent-based
transmission of cultural property Ð
and the symbolic
link  between  such  cultural  property  and  politicised  representations  of  identity.
Stewardship,  on  the  other  hand,  directly  confronts  traditional  and  entrenched

albeit in a creolised form68Ð

63. P. Sant Cassia, op. cit. (note 14), p. 254.

64. M. Yashin, Step-mothertongue, London: Middlesex University Press, 2000.

65. Cf. Y. Hammilakis, op. cit. (note 30); B. Azgin & Y. Papadakis, `Folklore’ , in Klaus-Detlev
Grothusen, Winfried Steffani & Peter Zervakis (eds) S 0udosteuropa-Handbuch, Vol. 8, G Èottingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1998, pp. 703± 720.

66. H.M. G 0urkhan, Bir Zamanlar Kõ brõ s’ta (Tarih Yazõ larõ  1860± 1954), Nicosia: CYREP, 1986.

67. C.-M. Bazin, op. cit. (note 13), p. 121.

68. A concept dealt with in D.L. Long, `Cultural heritage management in post-colonial polities: not
the heritage of the other’, 114

Julie Scott

notions of property and its associated rights, with an alternative model of duties and
obligations that are not legitimated by property relations,69 and which substitutes
universal  values  for  particularistic  interests  and identities.  However,  although  the
stewardship  model  is  implicit  in  the  concept  of  World  Heritage,  and  has  been
explicitly mobilised by ecology movements on numerous occasions; active forms of
stewardship  are  in  fact  explicitly  excluded  from  UNESCO’s  remit  in  relation  to
WHSs.

Ultimately, the World Heritage philosophy operates at a level of abstraction which
has little to do with the messy relationships on the ground which are the outcome
of local and regional fragmentation, the imposition of cross-cutting boundaries of
ethnicity, religion, state and class, and the demands of coping with history at the
level  of  the  day  to day. At  the  same  time,  it has entered  into the representational
strategies of state and other bodies in ways which impact on real people, whether
conceived as individual citizens, ethnic minorities or nations. As an ideal, it offers a
model  for  the  pure  expression  of  world  citizenship,  but  of  the  type  which  can
possibly only be realised in cyberspace.

69. Cf. G. Welz, ` ª Contested naturesº Ð
an anthropological perspective on environmental conflicts’,
unpublished conference paper, Transformation, Inertia, Re-configurationsÐ A Critical Appraisal of
Anthropological Research in Cyprus, Nicosia, 14± 16 September 2001.

World Heritage as a Model for Citizenship

115


