Corporations and Commemoration: 
First World War Remembrance, 
Lloyds TSB and the National
Memorial Arboretum
Paul Gough

Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS100504.sgm
10.1080/1352725042000299054

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor & Francis Ltd

105000000December 2004This paper explores the role of corporations and financial organisations in maintaining a
memory  of  employees  who  have  served  during  the  wars  of  the  20th  century.  Focusing
initially on memorial schemes devised by finance houses in the commemorative era after
the Great War, the paper examines the emergence of a broader approach to organisational
memory and the social construction of collective memory. Taking the Lloyds TSB finance
group as a case study, the origins of the company’s war memorial in central London are
examined, and the recent attempts to re-locate a number of memorial objects and icons
accumulated during the expansion of the group. This case study indicates how the social
memory of an organisation might be understood through an appraisal of the monumental
furniture that lives, often invisibly, within an organisation. The paper concludes with a
number  of  questions  concerning  the  nature  of  organisational  memory  when  confronted
with a history of merger and acquisition, and the difficulties in finding a commemorative
site able to represent and safeguard these histories.

The Dialectic between ‘Known’ and ‘Unknown’

In his account of building the Menin Gate at Ypres, the architect Sir Reginald Blomfield
identified the single greatest problem in achieving an appropriate design for the war
memorial: ‘I had to find space for a vast number of names, estimated at first at some
40,000 but increased as we went on to about 58,600.’1 Yet despite spreading the names

Paul Gough, University of the West of England. Correspondence to: Paul.Gough@uwe.ac.uk

436 P. Gough

over 1,200 panels across walls, arches, columns and even the stairwells, Blomfield could
cram only 54,896 names into the elongated tunnel-like arch. Expediently, the names of
‘an excess of nearly 6,000’ were transferred to national burial sites nearby.2 Further
south following the line of the old Western Front, the design of the gigantic arch at
Thiepval was dictated by the need to display the names of 73,367 men with no known
resting place who had died during the Battle of the Somme in 1916. Designed by Edwin
Lutyens, the arch consists of 16 enormous load-bearing columns each faced by stone
panels carved to a height of some 6 m, the words never quite beyond legibility. It is, as
Geoff Dyer reflects, a monument to the ‘untellable’3 whilst also being a monument that
is  ‘unphotographable’:  no  image  can  capture  its  daunting  scale,  its  weight,  and  the
panorama  of  names,  ‘So  interminably  many’,  Stephen  Zweig  notes,  ‘that  as  on  the
columns  of  the  Alhambra,  the  writing  becomes  decorative.’4  It  is  also  unnervingly
precise  in  both  its  grammar  and  specificity:  individuals  who  may  have  served  (and
died)  under  assumed  or  false  names  are  listed;  common  names—Smith,  Jones,
Hughes—are  further  identified  by  their  roll  number;  the  memorial  also  features  an
Addendum and, indeed, according to Barnes, a Corrigendum.5 It is, as Middlebrook
and Winter intimate, a gargantuan roll of honour created in brick and stone.6

Figure 1 The Thiepval Memorial to the Missing, Thiepval, the Somme, France. Designed by Edwin Lutyens, inaugurated 1932. Photograph: Paul Gough.

In his short story Evermore, Julian Barnes draws a neat parallel between the monu-
ment as text and the annual visits to the Western Front by his storyteller Miss Moss, a
proof reader in a publishing house who demands of the cemetery authorities a constant
attention  to  grammatical  protocol  and  appropriate  funerary  procedures.  It  is  this
attention to detail—the assiduous ‘clip and mow and prune’, the precision in the act of
naming,  and  the  insistence  on  specificity  at  all  levels  that  makes  it  possible  for  the
Commonwealth war graves cemeteries to commemorate the dead without glorifying
war.7

Naming,  and  the  evocation  of  names,  was  central  to  the  cult  of  commemoration
after the Great War. It was a process that mirrored the complex bureaucracies devel-
oped by the industrial armies during prolonged total war that had seen the military
machine  become  ‘rationalised,  routinised,  standardised’8  in  a  parody  of  peacetime
social systems. Initial attempts, however, to co-ordinate the administration of death
were haphazard. In the British army in Flanders it was the zeal of Fabian Ware and his
graves registration unit that laid the foundations of a systematic audit of the dead and
their place of burial, where known.9 Once Ware had understood that bodies would not
be exhumed and repatriated he began to establish a method for graves registration and
a scheme for permanent burial sites. His other act was to photograph all graves so that
relatives might have an image and directions to the place of burial. By August 1915 an
initial 2,000 negatives, each showing four grave markers, had been taken. Cards were
sent in answer to individual requests, details included ‘the best available indication as
to the situation of the grave and, when it was in a cemetery, directions as to the nearest
railway station which might be useful for those wishing to visit the country after the
war’.10 Less than nine months later Ware’s makeshift organisation had registered over
50,000 graves, answered 5,000 enquiries, and supplied 2,500 photographs.11 Little over
a year later the work to gather, re-inter and individually mark the fallen had become a
state responsibility, and the dead, as Heffernan points out, were no longer allowed ‘to



437

Figure 1 The Thiepval Memorial to the Missing, Thiepval, the Somme, France. Designed
by Edwin Lutyens, inaugurated 1932. Photograph: Paul Gough.

438 P. Gough

pass  unnoticed  back  into  the  private  world  of  their  families’.  They  were  ‘official
property’ to be accorded appropriate civic commemoration in ‘solemn monuments of
official remembrance’.12

Lacquer has pointed out the epistemological shift that came out of Ware’s founding
work; here, a new era of remembrance commenced—the era of the common soldiers’
name. As the administration of death and grieving became ever more regulated so there
followed ‘a historically unprecedented planting of names on the landscapes of battle’.13
Indeed,  the  very  words  chosen  for  the  Stone  of  Remembrance  in  each  of  the  larger
cemeteries underline this fact: ‘Their name liveth evermore.’ A choice of phrase that
caused Lutyens to ask: ‘But what are names?’ For the bereaved, however, they were
often all that was left.

In Belgium and France, a sizeable administration continued to cater for the needs of
pilgrims and the bereaved after the war. In 1923, Longworth tells us, there was a staff
in the Imperial War Graves Commission of over 2,000 men, comprising 20 clerks of
work, nine travelling garden parties, eight nurseries, 200 motor vehicles and a catering
section that annually dispensed half a million meals.14 Perhaps of most value to visitors
was the production of registers, a copy of which was kept in each cemetery and memo-
rial. Without the register, a visitor would be baffled by the interminable rows of iden-
tical headstones; cemetery registers were also regarded as books of honour, mementoes
that often had to substitute for visits to distant burial grounds. Compilation of the final
register  was  exhaustive:  by  1930,  800,000  names  had  been  recorded  in  735  separate
register  parts,  and  by  this  date  over  a  quarter  of  a  million  copies  had  been  sold.15
Published as The War Graves of the British Empire, the final series numbered just under
1,000 published parts.

During the course of the war the names of the dead, missing and wounded became
a common part of the fabric of the war. In the heady days of recruitment long lists of
those who had volunteered appeared in local newspapers, house magazines, journals
and trade newspapers. The Studio arts magazine, for example, frequently printed page-
long lists of ‘artists who have joined the services’. Amongst the lists were such artists as
Eric  Kennington,  Paul  Nash  and  C.  S.  Jagger,  as  well  as  innumerable  others  with
pretensions (if not the talent) to be thought ‘artistic’.16 As those pages of volunteers
faded, so their reverse began to appear in the long lists of casualties that soon spread
across local newspapers.

Services Recruitment Patterns in Banking, Commerce and the Professions

Of especial significance in the story of Great War enlistment—and the persistent evoca-
tion of ‘names’—is the poignancy of the so-called ‘Pals Battalions’. Following his call
for  the  first  100,000  volunteers,  Field  Marshal  Kitchener  agreed  to  the  creation  of
battalions formed from men of a common background. Men were drawn from similar
occupations, professions, sporting associations, even youth groups such as the Boy’s
Brigade, or from the larger public schools. In late August, for example, Lord Derby
appealed  to  the  commercial  and  business  houses  of  Liverpool  to  enlist  and  serve
together  in  a  single  battalion  of  colleagues.  Within  three  days  over  2,000  men  had



439

responded to his call, thereby providing sufficient men to form two battalions. In a very
short time over 300 ‘Pals Battalions’ were formed, the majority from the northern cities
of England. Assimilated into the British Expeditionary Force, as ‘service’ battalions they
retained their unofficial status with such nicknames as the Hull Commercials, Grimsby
Chums, Accrington Pals. So many enlisted that the entire infantry of the 31st Division
was composed of ‘Pals’, although the Somme battles of 1916 brought these patriotic
fraternities to a sudden end.17

Banking,  commerce  and  business  communities  produced  distinct  bodies  of
volunteers.  In  Bristol,  the  Citizen’s  Recruiting  Committee  was  sanctioned  in  late
August 1914 to form a battalion of ‘better class young men’ and put out an appeal to
‘Athletic,  Mercantile  and  Professional  young  men’  to  be  sent  to  ‘Clubs  (Political,
Athletic and Social), Banks, Insurance Offices, Merchants, Manufacturers, Brokers and
large Retailers’ (although they later removed the word ‘Athletic’ from the appeal). In
less than a fortnight, 500 had been recruited and the battalion, the 12th Gloucester’s
(Bristol Own) was up to full strength by the end of September.18

In the north of England, the 12th battalion of the York and Lancaster Regiment was
comprised  for  the  most  part  of  commercial  and  university  workers  from  Sheffield.
Enlistment began at the Corn Exchange on 10 September; two days later a full comple-
ment  of  some  1,000  men  had  signed  up.  Official  regimental  historian  Sparling
described them as ‘£500 a year business men, stockbrokers, engineers, chemists, metal-
lurgical  experts,  University  and  public  school  men,  medical  students,  journalists,
schoolmasters, craftsmen, shop assistants, secretaries, and all sorts of clerks’.19

Known locally as ‘the Sheffield City Battalion’, it arrived in France in March 1916 after
a quiet posting in Egypt, and was soon positioned on the extreme left of the 15-mile
British offensive front on the Somme. In an abortive attack on the fortified village of
Serre on 1 July 1916 the original battalion was largely destroyed. When the remnants
were taken out of the line in the evening of 3 July, it had suffered terrible losses: of the
651 officers and men who went into action, 266 officers and men were killed or died of
wounds and 246 officers and men were wounded—a 79% casualty rate.20

Such  devastating  losses  soon  registered  at  home;  the  pages  of  the  Sheffield  news
sheets, regional newspapers and company newsletters were dense with ranks of names
of those killed, wounded and still missing. In time the systematic recitation and record-
ing of names would become an essential part in the diction of remembrance, entered
on rolls of honour and carved with great exactitude onto stone memorials. Uniquely,
the Sheffield City Battalion was remembered by the naming of a tract of battlefield near
Serre and a monument in that village.21

By comparison, the office workers of southern England were readily assimilated into
the dozens of territorial force and regular battalions that had long been established in
London and the Home Counties. Modelled on the regular army, but intended prima-
rily for home defence, territorial soldiers were not meant for overseas service, although
many subsequently volunteered. Like the ‘Pals Battalions’, groups were drawn from
local commerce. One of the first ‘Pals Battalions’ was the 10th service battalion of the
Royal Fusiliers and had the unofficial title of ‘the Stock brokers’. The 2/8th (City of
London) Battalion Territorial Force was sub-titled the ‘Post Office Rifles’, and the 26th

440 P. Gough

battalion was known as ‘the Bankers’ having been formed by the Lord Mayor and City
of London from bank clerks and accountants. At its peak the all-territorial London
Regiment consisted of 34 volunteer battalions, but in 1916 these units were affiliated
with regular regiments while retaining their unofficial titles.

Lloyds Bank was one of many commercial institutions whose workers volunteered
(or were later enlisted) into the armed services during the course of the First World
War. It is likely that many Lloyds men would have joined the 26th Service Battalion—
‘the Bankers’—of the Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment). Records show that
many of those commemorated on the Lloyds war memorial enlisted in a temporary
recruitment station set up in the churchyard of St Paul’s Cathedral.22

Established in 1785, Lloyds had become a truly national bank in the first decades of
the 20th century following a series of expansions and mergers. By 1910, the Lombard
Street office in the City of London was officially recognised as the centre of authority.23
As Booker24 points out, the transformation of English banks from small and discreet
private firms predicated on personal relationships to large, formalised institutions was
reflected  in  the  scale  and  grandeur  of  bank  architecture  that  soon  evolved  from  a
modest ‘in-house’ style to the monumental classicism of London offices. The Lombard
Street branch was a fine example of monumental scale and pretension. Designed by
Sir John Burnet—one of the select band of architects who had worked for the Imperial
War Graves Commission—it was constructed between 1927 and 1929 and replaced an
earlier  and  smaller  Victorian  building  on  the  same  site,  which  had  been  the  bank’s
headquarters since 1912.25

First World War Commemoration; Remembering ‘Office Workers’

At the end of the Great War the price paid by the various stakeholders had been great,
and the need to grieve and to commemorate all who had died in the conflict, rather
than  just  generals  and  politicians,  saw  an  unprecedented  groundswell  of  feeling.  As
Mosse and Winter relate, the acts of commemoration were many and various, ranging
from  the  temporal—the  Two  Minutes’  Silence—to  the  permanent  and  immutable;
these invariably took the form of statues, tombs and buildings.26 As Boorman records,
the Bank of England gave a particular lead to the financial professions when, in Febru-
ary 1919, it initiated a memorial scheme that embraced both reverential and secular
intent: a memorial service, the endowment of a hospital bed, and a memorial in the
Bank garden.27 Two months later at a ceremony in Southwark Cathedral the names of
those employees who had died in the war were read aloud from the steps of the altar.
These same 71 names are reproduced on three sides of the memorial pedestal that was
unveiled on Armistice Day 1921; nearby, a parallel memorial carries a list of those bank
employees who served during the war.

Large  financial  concerns  such  as  Lloyds  and  Prudential  Assurance  were  similarly
occupied with the process of corporate commemoration. Nationally, Lloyds Bank had
suffered the loss of 686 former employees and their names and places of work were listed
in a 137-page ‘Memorial Album, 1914–1918’ published shortly after the Great War.
Over 9,000 Prudential Assurance employees had served in the war, of whom 798 (8.6%)



441

died.  After  the  war,  Company  Directors  decided  that  a  Prudential  War  Memorial
should  be  erected  at  Head  Office  in  Waterhouse  Square  and  the  artist  Ferdinand
Blunstone created a bold, 20-foot high granite and bronze ensemble depicting (amongst
other scenes) a dying soldier in the arms of two magnificently winged angels. Unveiled
amidst grand ceremony in March 1922, the names of the Prudential dead occupy three
sides of the main base. At Lombard Street, headquarters of the Lloyds banking empire,
a rather more modest memorial plaque had been unveiled by Sir Richard Vassar-Smith
BT,  Chairman  of  Lloyds  Bank,28  on  8  February  1921.  Eight  years  later,  it  was  re-
positioned  overlooking  the  main  banking  hall  in  the  new  Burnet  building.  Like  its
counterparts in the Bank of England and Prudential Assurance, there was an emphasis
on accurately recording names and places of work. This is clearly emphasised in the text
that accompanies the list of Lloyds employees who died: 

The men of ours / at the call of the King / and country left / all that was dear / to them,
endured / hardness, faced danger, and finally passed out of the / sight of men by / the
path of duty / and self-sacrifice / giving up their / own lives that / others might live /
in freedom. Let those who come / after see to it / that their names / are not forgotten
/ 1914–1918

However, as we shall see, this rather modest tablet would have an active ‘afterlife’, as its
position, status and relevance changed over the following 90 years.

Figure 2 War memorial in the entrance hall, Lloyds Bank, Lombard Street, London. Photograph: Jonathan Hurford.

Orthodoxies of Commemoration and the ‘Afterlife’ of Memorials

Monuments  and  memorials,  although  durable  as  objects,  are  subject  to  a  constant
evolution  of  meaning.  More  often  they  are  ‘forgotten,  abandoned,  and  allowed  to
deteriorate’ as those who come after leave and die.29 Monuments, in particular those
empty tombs designed to commemorate mass death during the Great War, do develop
complex afterlives, retaining a social and human resonance even as their cultural and
political  meanings  alter  and  mutate.30  Various  interpretations  of  this  phenomenon
have been posited, suggesting on the one hand that sites of memory merely provide
convenient foci for the projection of anxieties and longings, or that they encapsulate a
continuous  state  of  ‘potentiality’.  Forster  captures  the  ‘fixture  and  flux’  of  these
mnemonic resonances in the phrase ‘durable-but-mutable’.31 For his part, Jay Winter
proposes a tripartite cycle in the afterlife of these lieux de mémoire: an initial, construc-
tive and creative phase, marked by monument building and the creation of ceremony.
Secondly, there is the grounding of ritual action through a process of institutionalisa-
tion  and  routinisation,  so  that  the  creative  form  adopts  a  temporal  mode.  This  is
followed by a final and crucial stage during which the sites of memory are either trans-
formed or disappear, a process that is largely contingent on whether a second genera-
tion of mourners inherits the earlier meanings attached to the place or event and is able
to add new meanings. As Winter concludes, without frequent re-inscription the date
and  place  of  commemoration  simply  fade  away  as  entropy  takes  over  and  memory
atrophies:  the  monument  loses  its  potency  to  re-invigorate  memory.  However,  the
manner of ‘re-inscription’ is quite crucial in this unfolding process of ownership and

442 P. Gough

Figure  2 War  memorial  in  the  entrance  hall,  Lloyds  Bank,  Lombard  Street,  London.
Photograph: Jonathan Hurford.

moral jurisdiction.32 It is known for memorials to be used for purposes for which they
were  never  intended  by  those  who  devised  them,  their  original  meanings  and
intentions distorted, forgotten and re-inscribed with other readings.

This complex process is most pronounced in the case of monuments to distant wars.
Here, as Inglis suggests, the terminological difference is significant: ‘Where the French
speak of monuments aux morts, the English say war memorials.’33 Memorial leaves open
the form of commemoration that may, or may not, be monumental. Commemoration,
essentially anti-entropic, draws on the suggestion that the ‘monument’ is a physical
force  that  arrests  the  effects  of  time;  it  might  be  considered  a  ‘single  point  [that]
continues in the present and into the future’34 By comparison, the German word for
monument, denkmal—literally ‘a means to thought’—offers a conceptual vehicle that
is more closely attuned to the idea that human perceptions shift and adjust, and that



443

monuments—like so much rhetorical topoi—can become irrelevant, invisible and, yet
also capable of arousing intense debate.35

Most corporate memorials in Britain lie dormant for the better part of the calendar
year,  awaiting  re-activation  (if  at  all)  in  the  approach  to  Armistice  Day  and/or
Remembrance  Sunday.  They  have  earned  the  invisibility  noted  by  Lewis  Mumford
who warned that public monumentalia would always blend back into the undifferen-
tiated  landscape  not  only  because  memory  is  profoundly  unstable  but  also  because
‘something has impregnated them against attention’.36 However, in the past decade
Britain has seen a renewed enthusiasm for ritual commemoration. Perhaps nowhere
has  this  has  been  more  evident  than  in  the  national  campaigns  to  record  public
artworks, especially war memorials. Since 1997, exhaustive schemes have been under-
taken by, amongst others, the Public Memorials and Sculptures Association (PMSA),
the National Inventory of War Memorials (NIWM) and the Local Heritage Initiative
(LHI). These schemes have been extraordinarily ambitious in their scope: the PMSA’s
‘National  Recording  Project’  was  established  to  catalogue  ‘every  piece  of  public
sculpture and every public monument in the British Isles’—a catalogue expected to
contain some tens of thousands of pieces of public art. Relying on a network of volun-
teer and amateur historians (underpinned by association with regional universities),
the recording project also aimed to establish and maintain a catalogue of images and
texts in digital form for public access.37

The National Inventory of War Memorials suggests that there may be over 54,000
war memorials throughout the UK. These take such diverse forms as lych gates and
church organs, as well as more common chapel windows, carved stones and reverential
monuments.  The  template  for  recording  the  details  of  each  memorial  runs  to  four
pages  and  the  project  has  expanded  from  its  millennium  ambitions  to  a  12-year
campaign  involving  three  full-time  and  five  voluntary  staff  and  over  500  volunteer
fieldworkers. A predilection for audit, enumeration and data gathering appears to have
been keenly stimulated by the reflective atmosphere of the ‘millennium’ period. It also
owes much to the ‘democratization of memory’38 and a fascination with local histories,
genealogy and family lore. Added to this is the interest in preserving the data and the
fabric of the actual monuments. Taking Winter’s model, it is clear that most of the
Great War civic memorials are re-inscribed each Remembrance Sunday, although most
have been freighted with additional meanings and martial memory that were clearly
outside their initial remit. Invisible for much of the year, city centre cenotaphs burst
like a floral aneurysm each November. Similarly, the corporate world has followed suit;
a  renewed  interest  in  memorials  located  in  banks,  insurance  companies  and  other
national  organisations  is  keenly  recorded  in  such  journals  as  that  published  by  the
Western  Front  Association.  An  orthodoxy  of  public-spirited  commemoration  (a
phenomenon described pejoratively as ‘recreational grief’39) has spread across British
corporations, and chief executive officers are expected to condone, indeed promote,
the rhetoric of commemoration. For example, the Group Chief Executive of Lloyds
TSB was required in November 2002 to explain to the national workforce ‘why wasn’t
a two minutes silence observed company wide?’ In his column, Peter Ellwood apolo-
gised and assured the business staff that Remembrance Day was taken very seriously

444 P. Gough

throughout the Group, adding that recent research showed that 92% of the general
public  favoured  the  permanent  re-instatement  of  the  two  minutes’  silence  on
11 November. He clarified policy by stating that, in future years, the Group would also
recognise the silence, adding that this token of respect would ‘not “break the bank”’.40

The Basis of Organisational Memory

Organisational memory is normally considered to reside entirely in the archives, and is
formed out of the histories of merger, acquisition, transaction and financial strategy.
Captured primarily by those who study information systems, the dominating line of
enquiry regards organisational memory as a repository for organisational knowledge,
or  rather  data.  There  are  several  understandings  of  what  constitutes  organisational
memory; it may be understood or framed as a static repository, as a dynamic, social
construct,  or  as  a  process.41  Much  of  the  present  preoccupation  of  organisations  is
concerned  with  how  such  repositories  may  be  set  up  and  maintained.  At  its  most
simple, organisational memory is defined as a ‘set of repositories of information and
knowledge that the organization has and retains’42 Here, ‘memory’ is often stripped of
any historical context, or, indeed, of much meaning: other, that is, than in a normative
way that suggests organisations might lose something of possible future use to them if
they do not maintain an archival memory.43 In their typology of corporate memory,
Nissley and Casey draw parallels between the static structures of the corporate museum
and the archival repositories of large organisations, describing them as little more than
‘warehouses of history’.44

Drawing on work undertaken by psychologists and social historians, research has
blurred the lines between an understanding of organisational memory as a means of
retaining  static  information,  to  a  more  complex  understanding  of  it  as  a  socially
constructed  and  mediated  process.  Recent  research  into  the  histories  of  corporate
symbolism in the USA has investigated how corporations use means such as theme
parks  and  corporate  museums  as  ‘strategic  assets  that  influence  organizational
actions’45 to manage their identity and, in part, to sanction and secure their corporate
memory.  Arguably,  the  nature  of  the  corporate  museum  is  deeply  political;  stories
selected for inclusion in these ‘warehouses of memory’ are employed strategically and
are  integral  to  the  management  and  development  of  corporate  brand  and  image.
Through  an  analysis  of  corporate  museums  in  the  USA  (amongst  them  the  Jack
Daniels’s  Distillery,  Hershey  Food  Corporation’s  Chocolate  World,  and  the  SPAM
Museum in USA), Danilov notes that they each seek to project a favourable image of
the company.46 Of course, the organisation of memory is also bound up in the politics
of memory, a phenomenon appraised by Yanow who first identified a complex fabric
of ‘textual silences’ while studying museum buildings as organisational and interpre-
tive narratives.47 Although outside the scope of the present paper, it is pertinent to note
that  organisations,  through  the  selection  of  artefacts  and  ‘stories’  contained  within
their corporate museums and theme parks, choose what to remember, but they also
choose what to forget—an ‘abuse’ of organisational memory that is examined by Walsh
and Ungson.48



445

As has been explored above, the politics of forgetting has been central to the ways
in which nations choose how to remember their part played in distant wars. Analyses
of  organisational  memory  in  Britain  tend  to  have  focused  on  the  interrelationship
between  economic  decline  in  manufacturing  industries,  the  demise  of  the  ‘factory
tour’  and  the  emergence  of  corporate  heritage  parks,  such  as  Cadbury  World  in
Bourneville.49

Less attention has been focused on how the social memory of an organisation can be
understood through an appraisal of the monumental furniture that lives, often invisi-
bly, within the estate of the organisation. The burden of memory that is embedded in
such  monumentalia  becomes  increasingly  important  as  larger  organisations  merge
with, or buy out, smaller companies, thus ‘acquiring’ their corporate memories.

Mergers, Acquisitions and the Strategic Use of Corporate Memory

As part of his commitment to the two minutes’ silence, Lloyds Group Chief Executive
Peter Ellwood noted in 2002 the ‘ongoing commemorative activity’ being done to keep
alive the corporate memory of those employees who had lost their lives in war: these
included an annual Remembrance Sunday ceremony, a newly printed Roll of Honour
and slate memorial stone to be installed at the new Gresham Street Group headquar-
ters, and the decision to refurbish and re-site a number of Lloyds Group memorials at
the National Memorial Arboretum (NMA) in Staffordshire.

Figure 3 Memorial book, Lloyds TSB building, Gresham Street, London.

Figure 3 Memorial book, Lloyds TSB building, Gresham Street, London.

446 P. Gough

Lloyds Group is unusual in that it has constantly sought to activate its commemora-
tive relationship to the wars of the last century. This is most evident in the number of
revisions that have been made to the original stone tablet installed in the Victorian
headquarters  and  unveiled  by  Sir  Richard  Vassar-Smart  in  February  1921.  An
illustration  in  the  March  1922  issue  of  Dark  Horse,  the  Lloyds  in-house  magazine,
shows the original configuration of the memorial: a bronze dedication plaque, flanked
by a pair of bronze plaques that comprise the ‘roll of honour’ listing the names of 686
bank employees killed in the Great War. These plaques were set in an ‘architectural’
stone  framework,  with  a  base  band,  top  cornice,  broken  segmental  pediment,  and,
unusually, a small bronze statuette—a female figure identified as ‘Britannia’—framed
within  the  pediment.  Eight  years  later,  the  entire  memorial  was  removed  and  posi-
tioned in the new Burnet building, occupying a key vantage point in the main banking
hall, centrally placed beneath a window on the half-landing leading to the mezzanine.
At this stage, it was already missing several of its original features: the central bronze
plaque had been replaced in stone, though with the same caption, and the statuette was
removed.50

Shortly  afterwards,  around  1930,  the  memorial  was  moved  and  altered  again,
possibly  to  allow  a  less  cramped  space  for  the  annual  Armistice  Day  ceremony.  Its
new position was also visually more prominent as it was now at the foot of the same
stairs at the west end of the banking hall, between a pair of ionic columns. The memo-
rial was incorporated into an existing low marble bench, the back of which was raised
so as to accommodate the pair of name plaques, which flanked the central inscribed
plaque as before. The raised back was topped by a dentilated strip and the statuette
was restored to the centre. The existing glass uplighters of the bench’s two flanking
lights were replaced by torch-like shades, presumably to resemble eternal flames—a
standard feature in the iconography of such reverential monumentalia.

The wish to commemorate Lloyds staff who died in the Second World War saw a
further need to enlarge the existing memorial. A bronze tablet, matching the existing
plaques and listing the dead of 1939–1945, was added to the top of the existing memo-
rial;  this  required  the  removal  of  the  dentilated  strip  and  the  addition  of  a  marble
scallop shell placed behind the statuette, perhaps to give it greater presence.51 However,
the additional height meant that the view of the main stairs from the banking hall was
obscured. Now commanding an even more pronounced role at the heart of Lloyds, the
enhanced memorial was unveiled on 11 November 1949, with Lord Balfour of Burleigh
officiating.

As already noted, little changed in the pattern of commemoration for the next 40
years.  However,  as  the  Lloyds  Group  expanded  its  global  operations,  it  absorbed—
through  acquisition  and  merger—a  number  of  other  banking  concerns.  Where  this
brought about the closure of offices and branches, a number of war memorial plaques
and  other  commemorative  objects  came  to  be  deposited  at  Lombard  Street.  These
included memorial plaques commemorating staff who died in both world wars from
the  Anglo-South  American  Bank  (UKNIWM  Ref.  21726),  British  Bank  of  South
America (UKNIWM 39032), London and River Plate Bank (UKNIWM 39033), and the
London  and  Brazilian  Bank52  (UKNIWM  390366).  A  set  of  memorial  gates  from



447

Lloyds Bank Sports Ground in Beckenham, Greater London (from Copers Cope Road,
Beckenham, Bromley)53 has, since September 1999 when the sports ground was sold,
also been stored at Lombard Street. Typical of many utilitarian memorials to the Great
War, each gate carried the ‘Black Horse’ emblem and the dates of each war.54

It is likely that, as the Lloyds Group continues to acquire or merge with other financial

institutions, it will also acquire the corporate memory of their respective histories.55

Expanding Corporate Memory—The Case of Lloyds TSB Group

With the heightened interest in audit, enumeration and data gathering that was stim-
ulated by the millennium, and a continued fascination with the local histories, geneal-
ogy and family legacies related to the great wars of the 20th century, came a recognition
by individuals within larger financial corporations that the ‘corporate past’ is an asset
that had to be preserved and promoted. As we have seen, sensitivities about how best
to remember had been raised within the multinational Lloyds Group. These concerns
were  furthered  during  2002–2003  as  the  Group  considered  how  best  to  house  its
archive  of  monumentalia  when  it  moved  from  its  historic  headquarters  building  in
Lombard  Street  to  a  striking  high-tech  building  in  Gresham  Street,  in  the  City  of
London, a multi-storey glass cube designed by Nicholas Grimshaw and Partners. In
discussion  with  the  National  Inventory  of  War  Memorials  it  became  clear  that  a
number of financial organisations faced a similar predicament. Royal and Sun Alliance
had  resolved  to  move  their  memorials  to  the  newly  devised  National  Memorial
Arboretum  in  Staffordshire,  a  decision  also  reached  by  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental
Navigation  Company  (P&O).56  Lloyds  Group  faced  two  problems:  whether  to
maintain some form of war memorial in a new building that lacked both space and
aesthetic flexibility; and how to house memorial plaques and gates that needed to be
properly and sympathetically located in some form of national scheme.

Between  March  2002  and  November  2003  a  working  group  of  Lloyds  employ-
ees,  chaired  by  a  deputy  chairman,  and  with  staff  representation  from  the  Royal
British Legion, set out to achieve both aims: an inscribed memorial slate stone that
was  compatible  with  the  Gresham  Street  building,  and  the  successful  refurbish-
ment  and  re-siting  of  the  memorial  plaques  and  gates  in  Alrewas.  Neither  scheme
was  without  its  problems.  As  has  long  been  the  issue  when  selecting,  funding  and
siting war memorials, the management (and indeed, the manipulation) of choice is
complex,  and  ridden  with  ambiguities.57  Funding  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the
four  areas  of  frequent  contention  encountered  when  siting  a  memorial  to  those
who  have  died  in  distant  war;  the  others  are  selection  of  design,  wording  of  text,
and  location.  At  Gresham  Street,  however,  the  main  problem  lay  in  producing  a
design that met the requirements of the building specification, and then in agreeing
the  text  to  be  inscribed.  Agreeing  a  final  text  was  also  problematic.  At  Alrewas,  it
was  an  issue  over  finding  a  suitable  site  for  the  memorial  gate  that  took  time  to
resolve.58

Figure 4

Inspecting possible site for the Lloyds TSB memorial gateway, National Memorial Arboretum, Alrewas, Staffordshire. Photograph: Paul Gough.

Given the presiding orthodoxy over issues of remembrance, it may seem perplexing
that icons of corporate reverence and remembrance such as a corporate war memorial

448 P. Gough

Figure  4
Memorial Arboretum, Alrewas, Staffordshire. Photograph: Paul Gough.

Inspecting  possible  site  for  the  Lloyds  TSB  memorial  gateway,  National

should still arouse lengthy debate. But this is to ignore the many debates about the way
in which memorials encapsulate and perpetuate memory. As Johnson tells us, the selec-
tion of locations as ‘lieux de mémoire’ (to borrow Pierre Nora’s construction of ‘sites
of memory’) are rarely arbitrary assignations: instead, they are ‘consciously situated to
connect or compete with existing nodes of collective remembering’.59 Containing and
conveying collective memory, war memorials exist not only as aesthetic devices but as
an  apparatus  of  social  memory,  a  phenomenon  Boyer  has  described  as  ‘rhetorical
topoi’ that have the power to extend our understanding of national and local heritage
and remind us of our public responsibilities.60 Equally, Bodnar has argued that the
actual  focus  of  commemoration  is  not  the  past  at  all  ‘but  serious  matters  in  the
present’.61 Drawing on his survey of the processes of ‘public memory’ in the USA, he
identifies  a  ‘dichotomy  of  intentions  and  interests  between  the  official  groups  who
institute commemorations and the various groups who make up the mass of partici-
pants and audience’.62 Bodnar further maintains that the very process of negotiation
between the many groups is in itself a unifying act, engendering a framework of under-
standing within which the participants locate, and then re-locate, their own particular
viewpoints. Indeed, these administrative and political acts become the very medium of
commemoration and are encouraged by the homogenising power of an official admin-
istration. At both Gresham Street and Alrewas the commissioning and situating of the



449

various Lloyds TSB memorials rehearsed in microcosm many of the arguments fought
between  rival  groups—the  bereaved,  relatives,  municipal  planners,  subscribers  and
donors—in the 1920s, and again in the late 1940s. However, the many layers of argu-
ment,  coercion  and  eventual  agreement—across  a  wide  spectrum  of  Lloyds  TSB
employees, from chief executive to ex-servicemen employees—tell us much about the
power of corporate memory and its recognition as a communicative and cohesive tool.
As  a  repository  of  national  memory—located  symbolically  at  the  very  heart  of
England—the National Memorial Arboretum (NMA) purports to be an index of the
nation’s  experiences  of  the  20th  century.  Uniformed,  martial  experience  predomi-
nates,  although  there  are  plots  set  aside  to  commemorate  a  diverse  range  of  non-
military national campaigns—the ‘Unborn Child’, ‘Campaign Against Road Deaths’,
National  Rotary  Clubs,  amongst  others.  As  archetypal  ‘theatres  of  memory’,  the
mnemonic  structure  of  the  garden  is  perfectly  matched  to  the  task  of  memorialisa-
tion.63 As dramaturgical space, the physical vulnerability and transience of the garden
is suggestive both of decay and renewal, an effect that further heightens the effort of
commemoration.  Garden-memorials  have  perhaps  the  unique  capacity  to  evoke
poignant analogies between human existence, the fragility of nature and ‘consolations
of cyclic regeneration’.64 These modes of signification are emphasised by the knowl-
edge that many gardens and arboreta will not achieve their intended design until long
after their designers have passed away.65 As the preferred venue for the collection of
Lloyds  TSB  Group  memorials,  the  NMA  location  met  the  criteria  dictated  by  the
working  group.  However,  by  November  2003  the  NMA  decided  that  their  site  was
‘full’, with no further room for organisations to create, donate or pay to maintain a
plot. Like most cemetery and other funerary environments, the NMA has had to ‘stop
the clock’, although this has less to do with creating the moment that is continually
eternal and rather more to do with the prosaic issues of site logistics, administration
and revenue. Initially, the Lloyds TSB Group (like P&O, and Royal and Sun Alliance
before  them)  agreed  terms  that  allowed  the  organisation  to  house  its  memorial
plaques. For Lloyds TSB, this required a major investment to design and build a stone
lych gate that could house the plaques (not all of which were found to be weather-
proof) and to support the two memorial gates. Designed by the Lloyds Group property
team, the memorial project offered an opportunity to design and build an edifice that
would  establish  higher  standards  of  memorial  architecture  than  had  been  achieved
elsewhere in the park. Based on historic models drawn from the neo-classical era of
post-Great War cemetery building, it was intended that the covered area of the gate
would  have  sufficient  space  to  house  the  plaques  and  panels  from  Lombard  Street.
Despite  its  considered  and  sensitive  design,  the  quality  of  the  build,  and  its  central
location in the arboretum’s overall layout, had it been built the gateway would have
compounded  the  slightly  muddled  design  aesthetic  of  the  arboretum.  The  NMA,
perhaps purposefully, eschews homogeneity and unified shape; its somewhat chaotic
disparity echoes what Foucault described as ‘the real spaces of society’ which he coined
as  ‘heterotopias’—places  that  have  the  power  to  create  discordant  juxtapositions,
divergent  memory  systems  and  collapsed  temporal  dimensions  in  a  single  utopian
space.66

450 P. Gough

Despite  an  executive  ruling  that  the  rituals  of  annual  remembrance  would  be
endorsed—an act that ‘would not break the bank’—and despite the prolonged efforts
of a working group, the Lloyds TSB Group was unable to agree the conditions for the
satisfactory  housing  of  its  corporate  memory  in  the  NMA—the  site  having  been
decreed as ‘officially full’. In 2004, after lengthy and persistent negotiation, the working
group devised a scheme to house the Lombard Street memorial in a corridor space at
the group headquarters in Canon’s House, Bristol, and to position the memorial gates
at  the  Group’s  training  facility  gardens  in  Solihull,  West  Midlands.  The  remaining
plaques will continue to be housed in the bank’s archive in London.67

Concluding Remarks

This paper has examined the role of corporations and financial organisations in main-
taining, even enhancing, the memory of its employees who served during the wars of
the 20th century. By first focusing on the heightened importance of evoking names, we
have  seen  how  the  great  recruitment  drives  of  the  first  part  of  the  Great  War
maintained, for a short period, the integrity of social and working groups. After the war
these  same  groups  were  remembered  through  the  creation  of  memorial  schemes,
wherein the recitation of names and their perpetuation was instrumental in shaping the
iconography of commemorative monumentalia.

The central section of the paper explored the progress of a campaign to enhance the
standing  of  major  corporations  through  a  programme  of  active  ‘memory-creation’.
This activity conformed with an orthodoxy of remembrance that has swept the country
in the last decade (stimulated possibly by such ‘nation-building’ events as the death of
the Princess Diana in 1997).68 This process has been made manifest in such schemes as
the  National  Memorial  Arboretum,  but  it  has  emerged  as  an  adjunct  to  the  role  of
larger financial companies in creating and enhancing a form of ‘corporate memory’.
This  process  is  especially  acute  during  periods  of  acquisition  and  merger,  whereby
dominant organisations ‘collect’ the latent memory (and its material manifestations)
and, in a process characterised by Bourdieu as one of ‘transubstantiation’, transform
economic power and capital into cultural capital. In the current climate of commem-
orative orthodoxy (recently described as ‘recreational grief’), corporations have been
able to become a part of ‘collective memory’ which could prove more durable than the
usual contributions through ethical investment or charitable donation.69

The paper concluded with a short case study that traces the challenge faced by one
multinational finance house—Lloyds TSB Group—to re-house a number of memorial
icons  accumulated  during  its  expansion.  Many  of  the  tensions  in  refurbishing  and
re-siting the various pieces replicate the situation across the country immediately after
the world wars of the last century. These tensions appear not to have been resolved by
the creation of a vast arboretum that purports to be the focus of national remembrance,
creating  a  ‘heterotopian’  space  of  discordant  juxtapositions  and  divergent  memory
systems. This case study is an indication of how one British corporation has understood
how the social memory of the organisation can be understood through an appraisal of
the  monumental  furniture  that  lives,  often  invisibly,  within  the  organisation.  The



451

burden of the extensive memory systems embedded in such monumentalia of conflict
becomes increasingly substantial as dominant organisations merge with, or acquire,
smaller companies both nationally and across the globe.

Acknowledgements

In preparing this paper I would like to express my thanks for the contribution of a
number  of  senior  staff  from  the  Lloyds  TSB  Group;  Malcolm  Beadle,  Phil  Curme,
Jonathan  Hurford,  Karen  Sampson,  and  to  colleagues  Iain  Biggs,  Keith  Jones  and
Patricia Passes.

Notes

1 [1] Blomfield, Memoirs of an Architect, 179.
2 [2] Cited in Longworth, The Unending Vigil, 96, 103. A decision was reached whereby the names
of those who had died (and had no known grave) after the Battle of Messines in 1917 would
be  inscribed  on  the  screen  walls  in  the  nearby  Tyne  Cot  Cemetery.  Of  the  54,986  names
engraved  on  the  walls  of  the  Gate  there  were  relatively  few  errors—78  minor  spelling
mistakes, 18 duplications on this or other memorials, and one man subsequently found to be
alive.

3 [3] Dyer, The Missing of the Somme.
4 [4] Lacquer, ‘Memory and Naming in the Great War’, 154.
5 [5] Barnes, ‘Evermore’, 98.
6 [6]

See Macdonald, The Somme; Brown, Imperial War Museum Book of the Somme; Middlebrook
and Middlebrook, The Somme Battlefields; Winter, Sites of Memory, Sites of Mourning.

7 [7] Barnes,  ‘Evermore’.  On  the  specificity  of  commemoration,  see  also  Paul  Shepheard,  The

Cultivated Wilderness, 227.

8 [8] Horne, The Great Museum, 228.
9 [9] Longworth, The Unending Vigil.
10[10] Ware, introduction to The Silent Cities, Sidney C. Hurst, London: Methuen, 1929: vii.
11[11] Longworth, The Unending Vigil, 17.
12[12] Heffernan, ‘For Ever England’.
13[13] Lacquer, ‘Memory and Naming in the Great War’, 152–53.
14[14] Longworth, The Unending Vigil, 124.
15[15] Longworth, The Unending Vigil, 127.
16[16]
17[17] For  a  history  of  the  Pals  phenomenon,  see  Simkins,  Kitchener’s  Army;  Middlebrook,  Your

See The Studio magazine on December 1914 and August 1915.

Country Needs You.

18[18] Citizen’s  Recruiting  Committee,  Minute  book,  Bristol  Reference  library  B11786.  J.  Lyes,

Bristol 1914–1919, Bristol Branch of the Historical Association, pamphlet no. 107, 2003.
Sparling, History of the 12th (Service) Battalion, York & Lancaster Regiment.

19[19]
20[20] Gibson and Oldfield, Sheffield City Battalion.
21[21] Middlebrook and Middlebrook, The Somme Battlefields, 70–80.
22[22] O’Neill,  Royal  Fusiliers  in  the  Great  War.  Records  of  enlistment  were  gathered  from  the
Commonwealth  War  Graves  Commission,  Maidenhead,  UK,  cross-referenced  with  the
record of ‘Soldiers who died in the Great War’ (CD-ROM produced by the Naval and Military
Press) and correlated with Lloyds service records compiled by Philip Curme.
Sayer, Lloyds Bank in the History of English Banking.

23[23]
24[24] Booker, Temples of Mammon; see also Winton, Lloyds Bank 1918–1966.

452 P. Gough

25[25] For an appreciation of Burnet as neo-classical architect, see Boyd Whyte, ‘The Neo-classical

Revival in Turn of the Century Britain’.

26[26] Mosse, Fallen Soldiers; Winter, Sites of Memory, Sites of Mourning.
27[27] Boorman, At the Going Down of the Sun, 30–31. The bed was endowed in the Astley Cooper
ward  of  Guy’s  Hospital,  London;  the  memorial  was  placed  in  the  garden  in  the  former
churchyard of St Christopher-le-Stocks.
Sir  Richard  Vassar-Smith  became  Chairman  of  Lloyds  Bank  in  1909  and  held  the  position
until his death in 1922.

28[28]

Inglis, ‘The Homecoming’.

29[29] Forster, ‘Creating a Tenemos, Positing “South Africanism”’.
30[30] King, Memorials of the Great War in Britain.
31[31] Forster, ‘Creating a tenemos’.
32[32] Winter, BBC History, November 2000, 22–25.
33[33]
34[34] Treib, ‘The Landscape of Loved Ones’, 82.
35[35] Gough and Morgan, ‘Manipulating the Metonymic’.
36[36] Mumford, The Culture of Cities, 435.
37[37] The National Recording Project was established to catalogue every piece of public sculpture
and every public monument in the British Isles and to maintain the resulting information in
digital form for public access. In early 2004 it was claimed that much of England and all of
Wales, plus Glasgow and Edinburgh, had been surveyed, amounting to 70% of Britain. The
exercise is managed from a network of Regional Archive Centres run mostly from academic
institutions. The information is conveyed to the National Archive Centre for collation, storage
and dissemination in digital form.

38[38] Gillis, ‘Memory and Identity’, 6.
39[39] West,  Conspicuous  Compassion.  The  phrase  is  reputed  to  have  been  coined  by  Ian  Jack  in
Granta magazine in December 1997 in an article about the events in London in the days after
Princess Diana’s death.

40[40] Ellwood, Talk Openly, Lloyds Group intranet, November 2002.
41[41] Huber,  ‘A  Theory  of  the  Effects  of  Advanced  Information  Technologies  on  Organizational
Design,  Intelligence  and  Decision  Making’;  Walsh  and  Ungson,  ‘Organisational  Memory’;
Casey, ‘Collective Memory in Organisations’.

Ibid., S39.

42[42] Huber, ‘Organisational Learning’.
43[43] Booth, ‘Does History Matter in Strategy?’
44[44] Nissley and Casey, ‘The Politics of the Exhibition’, S37.
45[45]
46[46] Danilov, A Planning Guide for Corporate Museums, Galleries and Visitor Centers, 57.
47[47] Yanow, ‘Space Stories’.
48[48] Walsh & Ungson, ‘Organisational Memory’.
49[49] Rowlinson, ‘Cadbury World’.
50[50] Registered  in  the  United  Kingdom  National  Inventory  of  War  Memorials  (UK  NIWM)  as

no. 11794.

51[51] UK NIWM 11795.
52[52] Anglo-South  American  Bank  (UKNIWM  Ref.21726),  British  Bank  of  South  America
(UKNIWM 39032), London and River Plate Bank (UKNIWM 39033), and the London and
Brazilian Bank (UKNIWM 390366).
53[53] Memorial gates (UKNIWM 40428).
54[54] Rason, Bromley War Memorials. Two further plaques—one representing the 1914–1918 staff
who worked at the Risbygate branch, Bury St Edmunds (UKNIWM 40428); and another from
the Trustee Savings Bank, Surrey Street, Norwich, remembering staff who died in the Second
World War (UKNIWM 20110)—have been left in storage at the respective branches.

55[55] Lloyds has been merging and acquiring since its establishment, a strategy that started with the
acquisition  of  the  Wilts  and  Dorset  Bank  in  1914,  to  the  1995  merger  between  Lloyds  and



453

TSB. The acquisition of Cheltenham and Gloucester had taken place earlier that year, that of
Scottish Widows in 2000.

56[56] Royal  and  Sun  Alliance  established  a  memorial  garden  in  London  as  a  repository  for  a
number  of  memorial  plaques  gathered  through  an  extended  period  of  organisational
restructuring.

57[57] King, Memorials of the Great War in Britain, 2–3.
58[58] The  text  of  the  left-hand  slate  panel  reads:  ‘We  will  remember  them’,  borrowed  from
Lawrence  Binyon’s  famous  poem  In  Flanders  Fields.  On  the  right-hand  panel:  ‘In  remem-
brance of all the employees of the Lloyds TSB Group who have given their lives in times of
conflict.’ The base plate of the memorial is inscribed with the line: ‘For your tomorrow. We
gave our today.’ These inscriptions were agreed after protracted discussions between senior
staff at Lloyds TSB, including Phil Curme, Jonathan Hurford and Malcolm Beadle. A book of
remembrance was commissioned by Hurford, typeset by Keith Jones and produced by Sarah
Bodman,  of  the  Centre  for  Fine  Print  Research,  Bristol.  Jones  replicated  the  typeface—
Trajan—from the Lombard Street memorial for the memorial book.
Johnson, ‘Cast in Stone’.

59[59]
60[60] Boyer,  The  City  of  Collective  Memory,  32;  for  further  reflections  on  the  issue  of  collective

memory, see Young, The Texture of Memory; Nora, Les Lieux de mémoire.

Ibid., 149.
See the collection of essays on these themes in Mosser and Nys, eds., Le Jardin.

61[61] Bodnar, Remaking America, 8.
62[62]
63[63]
64[64] Foster, ‘Creating a Tenemos, Positing “South Africanism”’.
65[65] Dixon Hunt, ‘“Come into the Garden, Maud”’, 20.
66[66] Foucault, ‘Of Other Spaces’, 422.
67[67] Work on positioning the Lombard Street memorial at Canon’s House, Bristol, is planned to
start in June 2004 with an official re-dedication, conducted by the Dean of Bristol Cathedral,
on 11 November 2004 (pers. comm. with Phil Curme and Karen Sampson, Group Archivist).
68[68] For an exploration of the events that followed the death of the Princess of Wales, see Richards

et al., eds., Diana.

69[69] My  thanks  to  Professor  David  James  for  his  thoughts  on  Bourdieu  that  are  raised  in  this

paragraph.

References

Barnes, J. ‘Evermore’. In Cross Channel. London: Jonathan Cape, 1995.
Blomfield, R. Memoirs of an Architect. London: Macmillan, 1932.
Bodnar,  J.  Remaking  America:  Public  Memory,  Commemoration,  and  Patriotism  in  the  Twentieth

Century. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.

Booker, J. Temples of Mammon: The Architecture of Banking. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,

1990.

Boorman,  D.  At  the  Going  Down  of  the  Sun:  British  First  World  War  Memorials.  York:  Derek

Boorman, 1988.

Booth,  C.  ‘Does  History  Matter  in  Strategy?  ‘The  Possibilities  and  Problems  of  Counterfactual

Analysis’. Management Decision 41, no. 1 (2003), pp. 96–104.

BoydWhyte, I. ‘The Neo-classical Revival in Turn of the Century Britain’. Edinburgh Architectural

Research 26, http://www.caad.ed.ac.uk/publications/ear/iain.html

Boyer, C. M. The City of Collective Memory. Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996.
Brown, M. Imperial War Museum Book of the Somme. London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1986.
Casey,  A.  ‘Collective  Memory  in  Organisations’.  In  Advances  in  Strategic  Management.  Vol.  14,
Organisational Learning and Strategic Management, series edited by P. Shrivatava, A. Huff and
J. Dutton, volume edited by J. Walsh and A. Huff. Greenwich: JAI Press: 111–51.

454 P. Gough

Danilov,  V.  A  Planning  Guide  for  Corporate  Museums,  Galleries  and  Visitor  Centers.  Westport:

Greenwood Press, 1992.

DixonHunt, J. ‘“Come into the Garden, Maud”: Garden Art as a Privileged Mode of Commemora-
tion & Identity’. In Places of Commemoration: Search for Identity and Landscape Design, edited
by Joachim Wolschke-Bulmahn. Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, 2001.

Dyer, G. The Missing of the Somme. London: Allen Lane, 1985.
Forster, J. ‘Creating a Tenemos, Positing “South Africanism”: Material Memory, Landscape Practice,
and the Circulation of Identity at Delville Wood’. Cultural Geographies 11, no. 3 (2004):  259–90.
Foucault,  M.  ‘Of  Other  Spaces:  Utopias  and  Heterotopias’.  Paper  presented  in  March  1967,  first
published  in  English  in  Lotus  International  48/49  (1985/86):  9–17,  reprinted  in  J.  Ockman,
Architecture Culture, 1943–1968: A Documentary Anthology. New York, 1993.

Gibson, R., and P. Oldfield. Sheffield City Battalion. Barnsley: Pen and Sword Books, 1990.
Gillis, J. R. ‘Memory and Identity: The History of a Relationship’. In Commemorations: The Politics of

National Identity, edited by J. R. Gillis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994: 6.

Gough,  P.,  and  S.  J.  Morgan.  ‘Manipulating  the  Metonymic:  The  Bristol  Cenotaph,  1919–1932’.

Journal of Historical Geographies (in press, 2004).

Heffernan, M. ‘For Ever England: The Western Front and the Politics of Remembrance in Britain’.

Ecumene 2, no. 3 (1995): 293–324.

Horne, D. The Great Museum: The Re-presentation of History. London and Sydney: Pluto Press, 1984.
Huber,  G.  P.  ‘A  Theory  of  the  Effects  of  Advanced  Information  Technologies  on  Organizational
Design, Intelligence and Decision Making’. Academy of Management Review 15 (1991): 47–65.
———.  ‘Organisational  Learning:  The  Contributing  Processes  and  the  Literatures’.  Organisation

Science 2, no. 1 (1991): 88–115.

Hurst, S. C. The Silent Cities. London: Methuen, 1929: vii.
Inglis, K. S. ‘The Homecoming: The War Memorial Movement in Cambridge, England’. Journal of

Contemporary History 27 (1992): 583–605.

Johnson, N. ‘Cast in Stone: Monuments, Geography and Nationalism’. Environment and Planning

D: Society and Space 13 (1995): 51–65.

King, A. Memorials of the Great War in Britain: The Symbolism and Politics of Remembrance. Oxford:

Berg, 1998.

Lacquer, T. ‘Memory and Naming in the Great War’. In Commemorations: The Politics of National

Identity, edited by J. R. Gillis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994: 154.

Longworth, P. The Unending Vigil. London: Leo Cooper, 1985.
Macdonald, L. The Somme. London: Michael Joseph, 1983.
Middlebrook, M. Your Country Needs You: Expansion of the British Army Infantry Divisions 1914–1918.

London: Allen Lane, 2000.

Middlebrook, M., and M. Middlebrook. The Somme Battlefields: A Comprehensive Guide from Crecy

to Two World Wars. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991.

Mosse, G. L. Fallen Soldiers: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wars. Oxford: Oxford University

Press, 1990.

Mosser, M., and P. Nys, eds. Le Jardin: art et lieu de mémoire. Besancon, 1995.
Mumford, L. The Culture of Cities. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1938.
Nissley, N., and A. Casey. ‘The Politics of the Exhibition: Viewing Corporate Museums through the
Paradigmatic  Lens  of  Organizational  Memory’.  British  Academy  of  Management  13  (2002):
S35–S45 (S37).

Nora, P. Les Lieux de mémoire. Paris, 1984–92.
O’Neill,  H.  C.  Royal  Fusiliers  in  the  Great  War,  original  published  in  1922.  London:  Navy  and

Military Press, 1999 (reprint).

Rason, P. Bromley War Memorials. Published privately, 1999.
Richards,  J.,  S.  Wilson,  and  L.  Woodhead,  eds.  Diana:  The  Making  of  a  Media  Saint.  London:

I.B. Tauris, 1999.

Rowlinson, M. ‘Cadbury World’. Labour History Review 67, no. 1 (2002): 101–19.



455

Sayer, R. S. Lloyds Bank in the History of English Banking. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957.
Shepheard, P. The Cultivated Wilderness: or, What is Landscape? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Simkins, P. Kitchener’s Army: The Raising of the New Armies, 1914–1916. Manchester: Manchester

University Press, 1988.

Sparling,  R.  History  of  the  12th  (Service)  Battalion,  York  &  Lancaster  Regiment.  Sheffield:

J. W. Northend, 1920.

Treib,  M.  ‘The  Landscape  of  Loved  Ones’.  In  Places  of  Commemoration:  Search  for  Identity  and
Landscape  Design,  edited  by  Joachim  Wolschke-Bulmahn.  Washington,  D.C.:  Dumbarton
Oaks, 2001: 82.

Walsh, J. P., and G. R. Ungson. ‘Organisational Memory’. Academy of Management Review 16, no. 1

(1991): 57–91.

West, P. Conspicuous Compassion. London: Civitas, March 2004.
Winter,  J.  Sites  of  Memory,  Sites  of  Mourning:  The  Great  War  in  European  Cultural  History.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Winton, J. R. Lloyds Bank 1918–1966. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Yanow, D. ‘Space Stories: Studying Museum Buildings as Organizational Spaces While Reflecting on
Interpretive  Methods  and  their  Narration’.  Journal  of  Management  Inquiry  7,  no.  3  (1998):
215–239.

Young, J. The Texture of Memory. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983.


