International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Sense Matters: aesthetic values of the Great
Barrier Reef

Celmara Pocock

To cite this article: Celmara Pocock (2002) Sense Matters: aesthetic values of the
Great Barrier Reef, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 8:4, 365-381, DOI:
10.1080/1352725022000037191g
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725022000037191g

Published online: 09 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 306

Citing articles: 12 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies,
Vol. 8, No. 4, 2002, pp. 365–381

Sense Matters: aesthetic values of the
Great Barrier Reef
Celmara Pocock

Abstract
This paper investigates the use of aesthetic value as a criterion by which the significance of
heritage places is assessed. It is argued that current heritage management practice has not
engaged with the extensive discourse relating to aesthetics, and therefore confines aesthetics
to a particular class and culture, and an inert view of only one of our sensory experiences.
Historical  records  relating  to  the  Great  Barrier  Reef  are  used  to  show  how  aesthetic
appreciation of the area has changed over time. The data suggest that the failure to recognise
an  aesthetic  that  is  primarily  non-visual  can  lead  to  changes  in  landscape  and  loss  of
associated value. It also suggests that aesthetic values change rapidly and are influenced by
social and technological factors.

Key  Words:  Australia;  Great  Barrier  Reef;  Landscape;  Aesthetics;  Heritage
Management; World Heritage List; Casuarinas

Heritage Assessments and Aesthetics
The  earliest  legislation  and  administration  governing  the  identification  and
protection of cultural heritage places was developed within Old World countries, and
exported to the New World in colonial contexts. The way in which heritage places are
identified and assessed around the world continues to share many features of this
colonial legacy, in spite of the diversity of cultural and social contexts in which they
operate.1 Many  of  the  conservation  frameworks  developed  under  these  regimes
include a series of criteria by which the significance of heritage places can be assessed.

1. H. Cleere, ‘World cultural resource management: problems and perspectives’, in H. Cleere (ed.)
Approaches to the archaeological heritage: a comparative study of world cultural resource management
systems, New Directions in Archaeology, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press,
1984; Henry Cleere, ‘Introduction: the rationale of archaeological heritage management’, in Henry
Cleere (ed.) Archaeological heritage management in the modern world, One World Archaeology, London:
Unwin Hyman, 1989; F.P. McManamon & A. Hatton, ‘Introduction: considering cultural resource
management in modern society’, in F.P. McManamon & A. Hatton (eds) Cultural resource management
in contemporary society: perspectives on managing and presenting the past, One World Archaeology,
London and New York: Routledge, 2000.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/02/040365-17 © 2002 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725022000037191

Although there have been some shifts in how criteria are interpreted and defined, the
underlying premises on  which  they  are  based  have  remained unchanged. This  is
clearly illustrated by criteria used to assess aesthetics of heritage places.

Many heritage-management systems make provision for the aesthetics of natural-
and  cultural-heritage  places  to  be  considered  in  deciding  significance  and
conservation measures. Like the heritage-conservation regimes, the philosophy and
judgement  of  aesthetics  emerged  within  the  Old World,  and  is  most  commonly
associated  with  the  visual  arts  of  Europe.  However,  the  study  of  aesthetics  is
controversial and complex. There is a broad and elaborate literature on aesthetics in
the  areas  of  philosophy,  psychology,  music,  art  history,  architecture  and  an
increasing number of studies relating to the aesthetics of the environment and the
everyday.2 A  significant  portion  of  the  debate  stems  back  to  Kant’s  Critique  of
judgement in 1790,  and the arguments are, to  some extent, exhausted.3 However,
they  are  in  no  way  conclusive  and  the  concept  is  constantly  challenged  and
expanded, contracted and reinstated.

In contrast, the issue of aesthetics is barely debated within heritage management,
even though decisions about aesthetic value continue to be made on a daily basis by
practitioners. It is not the intention of this paper to review or summarise the extensive
body  of  literature  on  the  subject  or  to  provide  an  overview  of  philosophical  or
psychological cognition of aesthetics. Rather, its purpose is to demonstrate that the
failure  of  heritage-management  practice  to  engage  with  theoretical  discourse has
produced inadequate assessment methods and processes. Through the consideration
of a case study, the paper illustrates how professional use of aesthetics, as a criterion to
assess  heritage  significance,  is  simplistic  and  subject  to  misrepresentation. The
example of the Great Barrier Reef is used to demonstrate how a lack of engagement
with philosophies and theories can result in na¨ve assessments and the loss of value.

2. See, for example, D. Inglis & J. Hughson, ‘The beautiful game and the proto-aesthetics of the
everyday’, Cultural Values, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2000; H. Grace, ‘Introduction: aesthesia and the economy of
the senses’, in H. Grace Kingswood (ed.) Aesthesia and the economy of the senses, Sydney: Faculty of
Visual and Performing Arts, University of Western Sydney, Nepean, 1996; A. Berleant, ‘Toward a
phenomenological aesthetics of environment’, in D. Ihde & H.J. Silverman (eds) Descriptions, Selected
Studies in Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy, Albany: State University of New York Press,
1985; A. Berleant, The aesthetics of environment, Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992; S.C.
Bourassa, The aesthetics of landscape, London and New York: Belhaven Press, 1991; P. Bourdieu,
Distinction:  a social critique of the judgement  of taste, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984; T.
Eagleton, The ideology of the aesthetic, Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1990; R. Lamb,
‘Advancing arguments for the conservation of valued landscapes’, Barton, ACT: Australian Heritage
Commission, 1994; R. Burton Litton, Jr, ‘Visual assessment of natural landscapes’, in B. Sadler & A.
Carlson (eds) Environmental aesthetics: essays in interpretation, Victoria, BC: University of Victoria,
1982; R.B. Riley, ‘The visible, the visual, and the vicarious: questions about vision, landscape and
experience’, in P. Groth & T.W. Bressi (eds) Understanding  ordinary landscapes, New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1997; J.D. Porteous, Environmental aesthetics: ideas, politics and
planning, New York: Routledge, 1996.

3. Grace, op. cit.

366

Celmara Pocock

Great Barrier Reef Heritage Listing
The Great Barrier Reef, off the northeast coast of Australia, is regarded by many as
one of the wonders of  the world. It is a place deemed to have superlative natural
attributes and is included in the World Heritage List. The Reef is also recognised by
the Commonwealth Government of Australia through its inclusion in the Register
of  the  National  Estate.  World  Heritage  and  National  Estate  processes  share
characteristics  with  other  heritage-listing  regimes  in  the  world,  including  their
capacity  to  assess  aesthetic  qualities  in  making  decisions about  significance. The
aesthetics of the Reef are considered to be an important contributor to the current
heritage  status  of  the  Reef  under  both  the  Australian  and  the  World  Heritage
systems.

World Heritage Listing
The Great Barrier Reef has been included on the World Heritage List since 1981.
It is listed, among other things, for its aesthetic qualities. At the time of listing, the
criterion used to  assess  aesthetic  values  stated  that World Heritage  places should
‘contain unique, rare and superlative natural phenomena, formations and features
and  areas  of  exceptional  natural  beauty’. The  Reef  was  hence  recognised for  its
natural  beauty,  including  its  ‘unparalleled  aerial  vista’  and  an  ‘abundance  and
diversity of shape, size and colour of marine fauna and flora in the coral reefs’.4

The criteria for assessing places for World Heritage listing have since changed. A
report by  Lucas et  al.,  to  expand and clarify  the  basis on which the  Reef can be
included  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  found  that  natural  heritage  attributes
contributing to  natural  beauty  and  aesthetics ‘were  the  poorest  documented and
least  known  set  of  attributes’.5 This  is  a  problem  that  continues  to  plague  the
assessment  of  aesthetic  values,  and  to  some  extent  is  a  result  of  the  criteria
themselves. The World Heritage Convention6 articulates separate criteria for natural
and cultural values, and both are defined to include aesthetic perspectives. The way
in which aesthetics are incorporated into each definition is quite different. In the
case  of  cultural  heritage,  defined  under  Article  1,  aesthetics  are  mentioned  in
relation to  sites, but in relation to  buildings and monuments it is art that  defines
aesthetic judgement. Sites are judged to be of outstanding universal value ‘from the
historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of view’, but monuments
and  buildings  must  have  outstanding  universal  value  ‘from  the  point  of  view  of
history, art or science’ (my emphasis). In contrast, natural heritage is defined in a

4. Environment Australia, ‘Great Barrier Reef World Heritage values’, available from
< http://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/awhg/worldheritage/sites/gbr/gbr.html > , accessed 25 April
2001.

5. P.H.C. Lucas, T. Webb, P.S. Valentine & H. Marsh, The outstanding  universal value of the Great
Barrier Reef World Heritage Area, Townsville: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority,  1997.

6. UNESCO, ‘Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage’,
available from  < http://www.unesco.org/whc/nwhc/pages/doc/main.htm > , accessed 25 April 2001.

Sense Matters

367

way  that  is  more  generally  inclusive  of  scientific  and  aesthetic  values  and  is
expressed as the ‘outstanding universal value from the aesthetic or scientific point of
view’  and  ‘from  the  point  of  view  of  science,  conservation  or  natural  beauty’.
Underlying this  division between cultural and  natural  aesthetic  criteria are  some
strongly held associations between fine art and beauty in a cultural context, and the
presupposed aesthetic qualities of the natural world.

The  operational  guidelines  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention  go  further  in
showing  these  two  distinct  approaches  to  assessing  aesthetic  value. The  cultural
assessment is clearly focused on the arts, citing monumental arts and architecture.
The word ‘aesthetic’ is absent altogether. On the other hand, the natural assessment
retains  its  inclusiveness  and  requires  that  sites  ‘contain  superlative  natural
phenomena or areas of exceptional natural beauty and aesthetic importance’.7 The
first indicates that cultural assessment is about established concepts of Western art;
the  second  that  natural  aesthetics  are  presumed  to  be  independent  of  cultural
influence. Both clearly indicate that UNESCO regards aesthetic values as existing
without  a  cultural  context  and  that  they  are  assessable  objectively. This  can  be
attributed to  the  emphasis  given  to  monuments in early  legislative  regimes,8 and
reflects the lag between cultural heritage practice and academic debate.

Lucas  et  al.  consider the  inclusion of  the  phrase ‘aesthetic  importance’  in  the
World  Heritage  criteria  since  1996  as  an  important  avenue  through  which  to
consider ‘the range of values which the community places on the Great Barrier Reef
World Heritage Area’.9 However, in the World Heritage operational guidelines this
phrase is included only in the context of natural heritage values. The interpretation
given to it by Lucas et al. highlights the nexus between cultural and natural heritage
values10 by recognising that communities may in fact attribute these values. Within
the current World Heritage framework, however, there is no scope to allow for the
intersection of cultural and natural values. The criteria lead directly to the problems
that the Lucas et al. report warns against, in particular that aesthetic qualities are
reduced ‘solely to visual amenity’, and that there is a lack of consistency in methods
used to document and assess aesthetic value.11

The  problems  of  assessment  and  documentation  of  aesthetics  highlighted  by
Lucas et al. result from a failure to regard aesthetics in a social context. Under some
legislative and management regimes in Australia, heritage places may be assessed

7. UNESCO, ‘Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention’,
available from  < http://www.unesco.org/whc/nwhc/pages/doc/main.htm > , accessed 25 April 2001.

8. H. Cleere, ‘The World Heritage Convention in the Third World’, in McManamon & Hatton, op.
cit.

9. Lucas et al., op. cit., pp. 52–53.

10. D. Lowenthal, ‘Environment as heritage’, in K. Flint & H. Morphy (eds) Culture, landscape and
the environment; the Linacre lectures 1997, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

11. Lucas et al., op. cit., p. 39.

368

Celmara Pocock

and listed for their social values. These are very broadly understood to be the values
attributed to places by communities and are much like the values Lucas et al. have
seen as arising out of aesthetic value. In some instances, social value is defined to
include aesthetics,  and in  others  social and  aesthetic  values are assessed through
separate criteria.

Australian Heritage Commission Listing
The Australian Heritage Commission is an Australian Commonwealth Government
statutory  authority  responsible  for  natural  and  cultural  heritage  places  of  sig-
nificance. It was established to identify, assess and list heritage places in the Register
of  the  National  Estate.  As  a  national  body,  it  has  been  a  leader  in  developing
guidelines, policies and practices for the  assessment and management of heritage
places. The Commission uses the same principal criteria to assess both natural and
cultural heritage  places  for  inclusion in  the  Register  of  the  National  Estate,  and
defines separate criteria for social and aesthetic values. However, the Commission
criterion used to assess aesthetics has some social context, and is less general than
the World Heritage criterion. Criterion E under the Australian Heritage Commis-
sion Act 1975  provides for a place to be included in the Register of the  National
Estate for ‘its importance in exhibiting particular aesthetic characteristics valued by
a community or cultural group’. This goes some way to recognising that aesthetic
appreciation is determined by cultural groups themselves, and thus partly addresses
research that demonstrates the interconnectedness of class, culture, education levels
and  aesthetic  judgement.12 While  a  diversity  of  aesthetic  appreciation  may  be
recognised through factors like class, gender, ethnicity and Aboriginality, the phases
of human lifecycles can have an equally important impact on aesthetic appreciation
and values. The Australian Heritage  Commission criterion for aesthetic value has
the capacity to consider and include the aesthetic values of cultural groups within
society brought about not only by historical change but also by the transformation
of individuals throughout their lives.

As an explanation of the formal criterion, aesthetic value is defined broadly by the

Australian Heritage Commission to include:

aspects of sensory perception (sight, touch, sound, taste, smell) for which criteria can
be stated. These criteria may include consideration of form, scale, colour, texture and
material of the fabric or landscape, the smells and sounds associated with the place and
its use.13

12. I. Hunter, ‘Aesthetics and the arts of life’, in Grace op. cit. (note 2); Bourdieu, op. cit.; Eagleton,
op. cit.; W.D. Lipe, ‘Value and meaning in cultural resources’, in Cleere, 1984, op. cit.; J.F. Weiner et
al., ‘1993 debate: aesthetics is a cross-cultural category’, in T. Ingold (ed.) Key debates in anthropology,
New York: Routledge, 1996; J. Coote & A. Shelton, Anthropology, art, and aesthetics, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1992.

13. Australian Heritage Commission, ‘Glossary of heritage terms’, available from
< http://www.ea.gov.au/heritage/infores/glossary.html > , accessed 25 April 2001.

Sense Matters

369

The definitions provided by  the Australian Heritage  Commission are inclusive of
cultural difference and a range of sensory experiences that may contribute to a sense
of  place.  However,  the  recognition  of  these  experiences  does  not  translate  into
practice in the assessment of heritage places. In the case of the Great Barrier Reef,
the Australian Heritage Commission’s statement of significance includes only visual
aesthetics in recognising that ‘[t]he reef is an area of exceptional natural beauty with
some of the most spectacular scenery on earth’.14

Aesthetic  assessment  has  remained  the  primary  domain  of  non-Indigenous,
historic  built  heritage  and  scenic landscapes. Only  the  most  cursory attention  is
given to aesthetics in other contexts. For example, it can be argued that  aesthetic
qualities  may  manifest  themselves  as  very  different  concepts  within  Aboriginal
society,15 but Aboriginal paintings and engravings are often superficially judged to
be of aesthetic importance by non-Aboriginal experts. The focus on built heritage
may  partly  be  attributed  to  the  appropriation  of  this  aspect  of  heritage  by
conservation architects,16 and the strong association of aesthetics with Western art
and particular social strata. Similarly, appreciation of landscapes is linked strongly
with Western landscape painting.17

The focus on the physical aspects of heritage places poses problems for heritage
management  in Australia  and  elsewhere in  the  world,18 and  the  assessment  and
management of aesthetic value is similarly restricted by this bias. Because aesthetic
values  are  assessed  separately  from  social  values,  heritage  practitioners  tend  to
regard aesthetics as a set of attributes that can be observed impartially by an expert,
at a distance and in isolation from other communities who may attribute values to
the place. Although seeing can be a tactile experience,19 the physical and emotional
distance required by the objectivity of heritage assessments restricts the considera-
tion of aesthetics to visual characteristics that are less ‘grossly sensuous’20 than other
aesthetic experiences.

14. Australian Heritage Commission, ‘Register of the National Estate’, available from
< http://www.ahc.gov.au/cgi-bin/register/site.pl?008320 > , accessed 21 January 2002.

15. See, for example, L. Taylor, The aesthetics of a Kunwinjku site, Barton, ACT: Australian Heritage
Commission, 1994; H. Morphy, ‘From dull to brilliant: the aesthetics of spiritual power among the
Yolngu’, in Coote & Shelton, op. cit. (note 12).

16. D. Byrne, H. Brayshaw & T. Ireland, Social significance: a discussion  paper, Sydney: Research Unit,
Cultural Heritage Division, NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service, 2001.

17. Bourassa, op. cit. (note 2).

18. Byrne, Brayshaw & Ireland, op. cit. (note 16); Cleere, ‘Introduction: the rationale of
archaeological heritage management’; Lipe, op. cit.

19. Berleant, 1985, op. cit. (note 1); M. Taussig, Mimesis and alterity: a particular history of the senses,
New York and London: Routledge, 1993.

20. Eagleton, op. cit., p. 3.

370

Celmara Pocock

The  assessment  of  aesthetic  values,  as  with  other  characteristics  of  heritage
places, is therefore reduced to fabric and material evidence significant to a restricted
number  of  individuals. This  objectifying  process  displaces  the  consideration  of
emotional  and  sensory  experience  and  knowledge  that  underpins other  people’s
attachment to place.21 The result is that aesthetic judgement remains the realm of
aesthetes for whom visual pleasure is pre-established and does not meet the broader
objective of aesthetic criteria as defined by the heritage profession. Aesthetic value
is also used as a generic criterion, to support arguments about ‘natural’ landscape
values  or  as  support  to  arguments  about  scientific  significance.  In  this  context,
aesthetic  value  is  sometimes  (sub)consciously  used  by  scientists  as  a  way  of
expressing  attachment  that  is  not  reflected  in  standard  identification  of  natural
attributes.

So in spite of the inclusive definitions of aesthetic value, which go some way to
recognising that  aesthetics are culturally constructed and that  smell, taste, touch,
and sound can all be strongly evocative of place, the predominant interpretation of
aesthetics is a visual one, constituted by a particular social construction.

The implications of this bias are that experiences of place go unrecognised and
unassessed. According to  established processes of Article 6 of  the  Burra Charter,
management of a heritage place ‘must be based on an understanding of its cultural
significance’.22 In  other  words,  the  values  must  be  assessed  before  they  can  be
managed. This principle is generally regarded as standard, if not best, practice in
Australian heritage conservation. In the case of aesthetics, it is apparent that only a
very narrow range of values is considered. Many additional aesthetic values, both
from different cultural and social perspectives, and those resulting from different
sensory experiences, are ignored. The aesthetic  experiences of  people of differing
abilities are also marginalised.

In  this  paper,  the  preliminary  results  of  research  into  changes  in  social  values
associated with the Great Barrier Reef are used to show how aesthetic appreciation
of the Reef has changed over time. It also explores how the failure to recognise non-
visual aesthetics has resulted in the loss of significant values.

Aesthetic Experiences of the Great Barrier Reef
Representations of  the  Great  Barrier Reef enter  people’s  lives  through  advertise-
ments, documentary films, television,  advertising,  posters, books,  magazines and
postcards. This material is overwhelmingly colourful, and images abound of  blue
seas,  green  islands, white  beaches  and kaleidoscopic underwater life. These  vivid

21. See, for example, J. Carles, F. Bern´aldez & J. de Lucio, ‘Audio-visual interactions and soundscape
preferences’, Landscape Research, Vol. 17, No. 2, 1992; S. Feld, ‘Waterfalls of song: an acoustemology
of place resounding in Bosavi, Papua New Guinea’, in S. Feld & K.H. Basso (eds) Senses of place,
Santa Fe: School of American Research Press, 1996.

22. Australia ICOMOS, ‘Burra Charter’, available from  < http://www.icomos.org/australia/ > ,
accessed 1 May 2001.

Sense Matters

371

visual images are readily accepted as representing an important aesthetic experience
of  the  Great  Barrier  Reef. As  discussed above,  these  scenic  visual  aesthetics  are
recognised as contributing to the heritage values of the Reef.

There  are,  however,  a  number  of  different  aesthetic  and  sensory  experiences
associated with the Great Barrier Reef that hold significance. In her book Reefscape,
Rosaleen Love23 explores a variety of spiritual and sensory experiences of the Reef,
both  beneath  and  above  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  in  that  intermediate  zone
between the  two  worlds. A  particularly  memorable description by  Love  is  of  the
unmistakable smell of a coral cay. Her description may be conspicuous because it
seems  unconventional  among  the  more  common  experiences  portrayed  in  Reef
advertising. It seems unlikely that  the ‘distinctive fertiliser smell of the  true coral
cay’24 would be used in contemporary promotion of the Great Barrier Reef.

The accounts of several people who spent a number of months camping on small
islands during Reef excursions in the 1920s and 1930s disclose distinctive elements
of the environment. Their encounters with the region are more holistic—evocative
of smell and tastes of food, water and air; skin sensations of heat, moisture, insects,
and sand; and of sounds of birds, insects and trees.

At  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  one  of  the  Great  Barrier  Reef’s  most
renowned long-term residents, E.J. Banfield, gave a lengthy account of the different
smells of Dunk Island in its various seasons and moods. For him the smells of the
island were a distinctive part of the experience of this place:

It has long been a fancy of mine that the island has a distinctive odour, soft and pliant,
rich and vigorous. Other mixtures of forest and jungle may smell as strong, but none
has the rare blend which I recognize and gloat over whensoever, after infrequent
absences for a day or two, I return to accept of it in grateful sniffs.25

A contemporary Reef experience is regarded as incomplete without a venture into
the underwater world. For many people the associated aesthetics are quite thrilling
and  unique. This is sometimes the  first  and  only time they  will dare to  immerse
themselves  in  the  ocean. They  float,  taste  salt  and  hear  underwater  sounds  as
completely new experiences. However, even these sensations are frequently reduced
to  the  two-dimensional visual reproductions found in the  mass of popular colour
images of the Reef.

In  early  20th-century  Reef  tourism,  underwater  experiences  were  not  only
impracticable  but  also  undesirable.26 It  was  a  long  time  before  large  groups  of

23. R. Love, Reefscape: reflections on the Great Barrier Reef, St Leonards: Allen & Unwin, 2000.

24. Ibid., p. 20.

25. E. Banfield, The confessions of a beachcomber, Sydney: Angus & Robertson, 1908, p. 14.

26. P. Harvey & G. Borschmann, ‘Interview with Perry Harvey, Great Barrier Reef tourist operator’,
Canberra: National Library of Australia, 1994.

372

Celmara Pocock

Figure 1. Before the advent of underwater  and colour photography, bleached coral specimens were
arranged to  illustrate the diversity of shape, texture and  size of corals. [Dene Fry, 1910, © State

Library of New South Wales.]

people snorkelled and dived on coral reefs. Although the 1930s were an important
period of expansion of Reef tourism,27 personal immersion in an underwater world
was not an important aspect of Reef experiences. Instead, the Reef was peeked at
through a waterscope or glass-bottomed boat. The experience was more voyeuristic
than participatory.

The brilliant colours for which the Reef is known are now taken as synonymous
with Reef images. However, in the historic past people would have had no notion of
the colours of the Reef except through direct experience. Photographs of the Reef
and its islands were in black  and white,  and the colours of  the underwater world
difficult to communicate. In writing of the living corals in the 1930s, Mel Ward says
that  the  ‘colours  are  elusive  and  frequently  indefinable’.28 Similarly,  in  her
reminiscence of a Reef holiday, Hilda Marks says, ‘No words can describe what we

27. T. Barr, No swank here? The development of the Whitsundays as a tourist destination  to the early 1970s,
Department of History and Politics in conjunction with Department of Tourism (ed.) Studies in
North Queensland History, Townsville: James Cook University, 1990.

28. C. Melbourne (Mel) Ward, ‘Papers of Mel (Charles Melbourne) Ward Lindeman Island’,
Australian Museum AMS 358 Box 4, Item 60, Sydney: n.d.

Sense Matters

373

saw.’29 Early  colour  reproductions  in  the  form  of  hand-tinted  photographs  and
postcards are pale and subtle in comparison with the photographic images of today.
Even in the 1960s it was difficult to re-create the colours of the underwater world,
and coral displays were a poor substitute. Coral samples quickly died out of water
and subsequently lost their colour. Bleached white specimens were hand painted to
re-create  the  colours  visible  underwater.  In  writing  to  the  Commonwealth
Government in support of her own skill in re-creating the colours of living corals,
coral artist Shirley Keong stressed that:

[O]verseas displays of coral should not be of the ‘icing sugar’ colourings, that have been
sent in past years, (to me it has been the worst form of false advertising in relation to
one of the worlds [sic] Greatest Wonders). Shirley Keong, 20 December 196530

Only those who had visited and viewed the Reef beneath the sea would have realised
and remembered the colours. Brilliant colour was therefore regarded more clearly as
only  one  aspect  of  a  broader  visual  aesthetic  experience,  and  the  textures  and
diversity  of  coral  shapes  were  prominent. Without  the  emphasis  on  underwater
ventures,  activities  on  the  Reef  more  readily  included  a  range  of  land-based
aesthetic experiences. Forms of trees and silhouetted shapes of people, mountains,
islands  and  boats  were  important  visual  images.  But  beyond  this,  people’s
experiences of sounds, smells and tastes were also given greater emphasis.

Sighing She-oaks
One  example  of  non-visual  aesthetics  that  stands  out  in  the  historic  texts  is  the
sound of Casuarina equisetifolia, also known as casuarinas or she-oaks, on islands of
the  Great  Barrier  Reef.  Elsewhere  I  have  presented  an  argument  about  the
transformation of Reef landscapes from Australian bush to generic ideal.31 Prior to
the transformation of environments around island resorts, many native species of
trees and bushes were present in areas frequented by visitors. Casuarinas are only
one such species. However, the  prominence of  these trees is notable in that  they
were identified primarily through a non-visual aesthetic experience.

Casuarinas are a  colonising tree of  coral cays,  and fringe the beaches of  Great
Barrier Reef islands. Although they are found and are valued elsewhere in the world,
she-oaks are distinctively Australian and bring with  them a  characteristic audible
aesthetic. In the experiences of early Reef visitors, casuarinas were not regarded as
particularly beautiful to look at, but they were frequently recalled for their sound. In

29. H.V. Marks, A Christmas holiday on the Great Barrier Reef, 1932–1933, Sydney: Harris & Sons,
1933, p. 14.

30. Prime Minister’s Department, ‘Expo 67-Great Barrier Reef Exhibit’, National Archives of
Australia (National  Office): A463/50; 1965/4559, Canberra: 1965–1966.

31. C. Pocock, ‘Australian landscape to tropical fantasy: Great Barrier Reef ’ (in preparation).

374

Celmara Pocock

Figure 2. Casuarinas surround  the ornithologists’ camp on Masthead Island, Great Barrier Reef,
1910. The sound of she-oaks ‘sighing’ in the wind was an important auditory experience for those

who camped on the Reef islands. [Dene Fry, 1910, © State Library of New South Wales.]

writing  of  Dunk  Island,  Banfield  describes  these  trees  as  ‘ever-sighing  beech
oaks’.32

The sound of the she-oaks on the Reef islands is one that is deeply impressive,
and  is  an  important  aesthetic  experience  of  early  Reef  visitors.  Mel  Ward,  a
naturalist who spent many months living on Reef islands, writes of being ‘[l]ulled by
the music of the sea and the sighing trees’ on Lindeman Island.33 The trees are part
of an experience of being on the Reef. In a newspaper article, Mel Ward recalls she-
oaks  as  ‘haunted  trees’.34 The  spiritual  quality  he  ascribed  to  the  trees  is  also
prominent in his other writing:

The . . . casuarinas at first appeared drab and even bedraggled in the daylight—their
forlorn foliage hanging in shreds but at night they seemed to become imbude [sic] with

32. Banfield, op. cit. (note 25), p. 9.

33. Charles Melbourne (Mel) Ward, op. cit., Box  3, Notebook 31, Sydney: 1939.

34. Mel Ward, ‘The grinding trees’, The Sunday Sun and Guardian, 10 February 1935.

Sense Matters

375

Figure 3. A group of tourists from the SS Katoomba picnic beneath casuarinas on Scawfell Island,
Great Barrier  Reef, 1933. Abundant  casuarinas provided  shade and  shelter to  early tourists  and

contributed to a sense of place. [R.M. Berryman,  1933, © National Library of Australia.]

some mystical spirit at first scarcely definable but as the inevitable nights followed each
other, this nameless presence claimed the imagination.35

The presence of casuarinas is visually testified in numerous newspaper and personal
photographs in the early part of the 20th century. In terms of visual qualities, the
casuarinas are not  given  particular attention, but  their abundance on Reef sands
assures them a place at the edges and in the background of many photographs of the
period.

In contrast, contemporary promotion rarely includes casuarinas as part of Great
Barrier Reef  depictions. Casuarinas  are still found in significant  numbers on  the
islands and along the coastline of the Great Barrier Reef. However, in hundreds of
Reef-related tourism brochures gathered at the 2001 Townsville Travel Show, only
two  include glimpses  of  these trees.  In  one  photograph,  small casuarina saplings
peek  out  of  the  sand,  and  in  the  other  the  casuarina  is  mostly  obscured  by  a
superimposed  image.  The  vegetative  framing  of  photographs  has  given  way
overwhelmingly to the palm.36

35. Ward, op. cit.

36. Pocock, op. cit.

376

Celmara Pocock

Figure 4. Casuarina branches frame this image, part of a series, used by the Australian government

to promote Heron Island, Great Barrier Reef. [© National Archives of Australia ca 1950.]

And  yet  for  Captain  Tom  McLean,  a  long-time  tourism  operator  in  the
Whitsundays from the mid-1940s to the 1980s, casuarinas were an important part
of a Reef experience:

From afar [the Reef islands] are outlines of green apparently suspended above the sea.
On closer approach they resolve into wooden humps indented with bays from which
shine curving crescents of white sand, often with the touch of a few coconut palms that
most people expect on a tropical island. The palms are not an essential part of the
enchantment for many a beach is shaded by the pine-like casuarinas known as she-oaks
in Australia. These have their own magic in the soft sigh the wind makes through them,
a sound infinitely more subtle than the rustle of palm fronds.37

This contrasts strongly with the permit provisions for tourist operators in the late
1980s,  who were prohibited from allowing their patrons to sit in the shade of the

37. G.T. McLean, Captain Tom, Mackay: Boolarong Publications, 1986, p. 2.

Sense Matters

377

sole remaining casuarina on Lizard Island.38 The heavy planting of palms around
tourist  areas  has  removed  casuarinas  from  the  environments  that  people  visit.
Although  present on  many  beaches of  the  Reef,  they  have  disappeared from  the
dominant discourse that frames Reef experiences.

Discussion
For Reef visitors in the early 20th century, casuarinas imparted a real sense of place
and  are  entwined  with  their  knowledge  of  the  region.  Unlike  many  elements  of
contemporary Reef experiences, she-oaks were valued through sound rather than
for  their  visual  attributes.  Although  casuarinas  persist  on  Reef  islands  and  cays
today, they are no longer a central conception of the Reefscape for visitors.

The Great Barrier Reef is renowned for its brightly coloured visual aesthetics, and
in this context casuarinas may not be particularly conspicuous. However, the sound
of  these  trees  was  an  integral  and  evocative  element  in  early  Reef  experiences.
Sound is at least as important as visual quality in the experience and appreciation
of place,39 but in the case of the Reef these values have been diminished. This can
be attributed, in  part,  to  the  way  in which aesthetics are  assessed and managed.
Without the recognition of the value of the sound in aesthetic experiences of place,
palms have displaced casuarinas40 and the continuity of visitor experiences has been
broken.  It  is  possible  that  if  a  full  range  of  aesthetic  values  were  identified,
casuarinas  may  have  been  more  carefully  managed  and  maintained  within  and
around the resorts of the Great Barrier Reef that are inundated with exotic palms
today. This may have maintained the value of the she-oak as an important aspect of
visiting the Reef.

While  the  Reef is  managed  and  conserved primarily for  natural  attributes,  the
failure  to  identify  social  aesthetic  values  has  led  to  the  loss  of  some  natural
attributes.  The  contemporary  management  regime,  with  its  focus  on  scientific
values, highlights the conservation needs of vegetation such as Pisonia trees that are
recognised as being at risk.41 The casuarina is not regarded as endangered or under
threat and is therefore overlooked in the management regime. Although the trees are
abundant  generally,  they  have  lost  their  place  in  the  environmental  and  social
contexts in which they were valued. In some instances this has in fact led to a loss
of natural attributes, as seen in the case of Lizard Island.

The data suggest not only that aesthetic values have been lost, but also they are
historically  constituted  through  both  social  and  technological  factors.  Visual

38. Personal communication with staff at the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Townsville.

39. Carles, Bern´aldez & de Lucio, op. cit. (note 21); Feld, op. cit. (note 21).

40. Pocock, op. cit.

41. D.R. Wachenfeld, J.K. Oliver & J.I. Morrissey, State of the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area
1998, Townsville: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, 1998, p. 29.

378

Celmara Pocock

appreciation is strongly tied with tourists’ experiences of places,42 and the ‘taking of
photographs seems almost obligatory to those who travel about’.43 Photography is
a  predominant force  in  contemporary  capitalist  societies44 and  provides a  literal
framing mechanism of contemporary Reef experience.

The Great Barrier Reef and its highly regarded aesthetics are closely linked with
the  role  of  the  camera  and  the  purposes to  which  it  has  been  put.  Photographs
provide a  means by  which  people  can  acquire knowledge and  experience.45 The
development of  new types  of technology made new forms of  knowledge available
and shaped people’s aesthetic experiences of the Reef. In the  early 20th  century,
photographs were black and white still images taken from above the water surface.
Technological development of underwater cameras, colour film emulsions, motion
film and macroscopic lenses gave people access to new experiences and aesthetics
and  impacted  directly  on  how  people  perceived the  Reef.  Before  colour photog-
raphy was available, people had to experience the colours of the Reef themselves or
not at all. Improvements in photographic  technology, particularly the advent and
improvement  of  colour  film  and  underwater  cameras,  have  focused  aesthetic
appreciation of the Reef to particular visual qualities. This has come at the expense
of other sensory experiences that contribute to a sense of place.

The  realisation  that  the  way  in  which  aesthetics  are  valued  changes  over  time
raises  some  interesting  questions  for  cultural  heritage  managers.  Heritage  vision
statements  and  definitions  inevitably  consider  the  value  of  places  in  an  inter-
generational  context.46 The  aim  of  heritage  management  is  to  conserve  and
maintain heritage in respect of the past, and for appreciation and use in both the
present and the  future. The implication of  historic change is that  aesthetics, as  a
criterion  to  assess  significance,  require  constant  reassessment and  re-evaluation.
The  values  are  constantly  changing  and  subject  to  the  influence  of  technology,
society  and  management.  It  is  therefore  worth  considering,  in  a  contemporary
heritage context, how these values might best be assessed so as to allow aesthetic
values  of  the  past,  present and  future  to  be  included in a  management  regime.

Conclusions
People construct places through sensual experience that is mediated by technology
and structured by society. There is a body of literature dealing with space and place
in  which  the  first  is  thought  to  exist  without  reference  to  people,  the  latter
constructed  through  human  knowledge.  Similar  arguments  have  been  made  in

42. J. Urry, The tourist gaze: leisure and travel in contemporary societies, London: Sage, 1990.

43. S. Sontag,  On photography, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1973, p. 162.

44. Ibid.

45. Ibid., pp. 155–156.

46. Cleere, op. cit. (note 1), p. 126; Lipe, op. cit., p. 10.

Sense Matters

379

relation  to  environment  and  landscape.47 However,  in  considering  non-visual
aesthetics,  heritage  professionals  seek  to  identify  sensations  that  are  evocative  of
place, rather than recognising that these sensations may in fact constitute the place.
While technology and society effect temporal changes in aesthetic appreciation, the
way in which heritage practitioners assess these values has remained static. This is
particularly  problematic 
that  are  multicultural  and
conflicting.

in  heritage  contexts 

Some  regimes  have  attempted  to  broaden  definitions  and  adjust  criteria  to
account for the greater diversity of situations in which they operate. For instance,
the strong emphasis given to monuments in very early legislation has been balanced
by broader definitions that include other types of sites and landscapes.48 However,
the colonial history of heritage legislation, and the association of aesthetics with a
Western tradition of fine art and architecture has left a strong bias in the types of
places listed for their aesthetic qualities. There is a further bias towards the visual
aspect  of  aesthetics  that  stems  from  the  dominance  of  the  visual  in  Western
philosophy,  and  the  objective  scientific  paradigm  in  which  cultural  heritage
management operates.

The contentious issue is that,  within heritage practice, assessment continues to
reinforce Western notions of natural and cultural aesthetics, and its bias towards the
visual.  Heritage  practitioners’  assessments  of  significance are  undertaken  uncrit-
ically, based on cultural prejudice and assumption. While aesthetics are regarded as
an  important  element  in  significance  assessment,  the  individuals  making  these
judgements  operate  in  isolation  from  the  debates  on  aesthetics.49 Aesthetics  are
assumed to be understood and unambiguous by heritage practitioners, whereas the
theoretical  literature  on  the  subject  suggests  this  is  anything  but  the  case. The
criterion is therefore poorly understood and used by most practitioners, particularly
in newer contexts of landscape and social assessment.

In  many  parts  of  the  world,  there  is  an  increasing  recognition  of  the  nexus
between cultural and  natural  heritage  values.  In  response to  this,  the  criteria  for
World  Heritage  listing  are  currently  under  review.  It  would  also  be  timely  to
disentangle  aesthetics  criteria  from  their  colonial  origin,  and  to  reconsider  the
elements that contribute to aesthetic values in a range of heritage contexts. This may
require the  use of  different terminology to  clarify the  role of  sensuousness in the
experience of place. It may only be once the term is understood within particular

47. B. Cunliffe, ‘Landscapes with people’, in K. Flint & H. Morphy (eds) Culture, landscape and the
environment; the Linacre lectures 1997, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

48. H. Cleere, ‘Cultural landscapes as world heritage’, Conservation and Management of Archaeological
Sites, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1995; Cleere, ‘The World Heritage Convention in the Third World’; Lipe, op. cit.

49. Many heritage practitioners have disciplinary backgrounds in archaeology, which similarly uses
aesthetics without theoretical context. See C. Gosden, ‘Making sense: archaeology and aesthetics’,
World Archaeology, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2001.

380

Celmara Pocock

heritage  conservation regimes that  it  will  be possible systematically  to  assess and
conserve these elements of heritage places.

Acknowledgements
This  research is  made  possible through  the  support of  the  Cooperative Research
Centre for the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area. I would like to thank Drs
David  Collett,  Shelley  Greer,  David  Roe  and  Marion  Stell  for  commenting  on
earlier versions of this paper.

Sense Matters

381


