Measuring Learning Outcomes in 
Museums, Archives and Libraries: The 
Learning Impact Research Project 
(LIRP)
Eilean Hooper-Greenhill

102000000May 2004
Taylor and Francis Ltd
rjhs10203.sgm
10.1080/13527250410001692877

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor & Francis Ltd

Museums, archives and libraries in Britain operate within an outcomes-driven political
climate, as do cultural institutions elsewhere. The need to demonstrate accountability and
social value has led to a demand to measure the impact and outcome of learning. How can
the complex and unpredictable character of learning be ‘measured’? This paper sets out the
policy context and the conceptual framework that underpins the development of a new
approach to the measurement of the outcomes of cultural learning. It has been developed
by the Research Centre for Museums and Galleries (RCMG) at the University of Leicester
for  the  Museums,  Archives  and  Libraries  Council  (formerly  Resource).  The  use  of  five
generic  learning  outcomes  (GLOs)  enables  both  the  quantification  and  the  in-depth
analysis and description of the results of learning.

Cultural organisations in Britain operate within an outcomes-driven political climate
and this position will be familiar to similar institutions in many parts of the world. The
need to demonstrate accountability and social value has recently led to a demand to
measure the impact and outcome of learning in museums, archives and libraries. How
can the complex and unpredictable character of learning be measured?

This paper sets out the policy context and the conceptual framework that underpins
the development of a new approach to the measurement of the outcomes of cultural
learning that has been developed by the Research Centre for Museums and Galleries
(RCMG)  at  the  University  of  Leicester  for  Resource:  the  Council  for  Museums,

Eilean Hooper-Greenhill, University of Leicester. Correspondence to: ehg@leicester.ac.uk

152 E. Hooper-Greenhill
Archives  and  Libraries.1  This  approach  seeks  to  acknowledge  and  respond  to  the
requirements  and  demands  in  respect  of  accountability  of  government  and  related
bodies such as Resource, while refusing to compromise over the complex character of
learning processes and learning outcomes.

Education and Social Inclusion; New Directions for Culture

The cultural and creative industries have become significant keystones of government
policy in England and, along with this, has come considerable change in the social role
of culture.2 The early 20th-century consensus of culture as a good in and of itself, with
government adopting an ‘arm’s length’ position towards cultural institutions, has been
replaced  by  powerful  demands  for  museums,  libraries,  archives  and  other  centrally
funded  cultural  organisations  to  acknowledge  and  adhere  to  government  policy.
Funding agreements are tied to the delivery of policy-related outcomes.3 Access, social
inclusion and education are high on the political agenda, with ‘cultural education’ and
‘more opportunities for the excluded’ identified as specific objectives.

With  the  establishment  in  April  2000  of  Resource:  the  Council  for  Museums,
Archives and Libraries, a new cultural configuration was drawn up.4 Museums, librar-
ies  and  archives,  hitherto  operating  as  quite  distinct  communities  of  practice,  with
distinct  identities,  purposes,  ways  of  making  meaning  and  ways  of  working  were
repositioned as a collective grouping charged by government5 with contributing to the
development of an inclusive learning society.

The demands of government have been consistent and unequivocal: 

Learning is at the heart of this Government’s agenda because it is the key to a rich life
for individuals and prosperity for the nation.6

We must place the learner at the heart of a new system. … Each library is a ‘street-

corner university’, with a vital place at the heart of its local community.7

The  Government  believes  that  education  is  central  to  the  role  of  museums

today …8

Education and learning are seen as integral to social inclusion: 

Learning can be a powerful agent in combating social exclusion by giving people the
abilities, skills and confidence to engage with society.9

Libraries,  museums,  galleries  and  archives  are  directed  to  develop  their  services
towards social inclusion: 

One of the Government’s highest priorities is to combat social exclusion. … Social
inclusion should be mainstreamed as a policy priority within all library and informa-
tion services.10

Combating  social  exclusion  is  one  of  the  Government’s  highest  priorities,  and  I
believe that museums, galleries and archives have a significant role to play in helping
us to do this.11

These requirements to respond to government priorities are not to be ignored: 

There have been some comments that it is not the business of museums, galleries and
archives to be involved in social regeneration by serving a wider and more diverse



153

audience. I cannot agree. … We believe that libraries, museums, galleries and archives
are only likely to be effective as agents as social change if they themselves are accessible
organisations, whose culture recognises the role that they, and all their staff, have to
play in providing services to all sections of the community.12

The  requirements  for  libraries,  museums  and  archives  are  matched  by  parallel
demands of other social institutions and all are expected not only to work towards the
twin policy objectives of education and social inclusion, but also to give evidence of
having done this effectively. In 1998, the Secretary for Culture, Media and Sport wrote: 

The Government has provided the resources and the will, but we know that we cannot
just  sit  back  and  hope  that  these  are  transformed  into  better  and  more  accessible
performances, sporting records, improved cultural education and more opportunities
for the excluded. We will give direction, we will set targets and chase progress; and
where  appropriate  we  will  take  direct  action  to  make  sure  that  our  objectives  are
achieved.13

A number of research projects have been undertaken since 1998 that indicate the chal-
lenges that exist for the delivery of these government agendas. These studies seem to be
particularly  numerous  in  relation  to  libraries,14  with  few  focusing  on  museums  or
archives. The potential and scope of the social impact of libraries has been identified15
but a survey of provision in 2000 suggested that: 

although public libraries are currently modernising their services, this modernisation
is unlikely to refocus the public library on excluded communities and social groups.16

A review of the collaboration between libraries and education concluded that: 

In many cases, collaborative projects do not yet possess a sophisticated understanding
of the needs and aspirations of learners and potential learners. Without this knowl-
edge, it is not possible for library managers to design and deliver services which are
focused on learners.17

While educational services are familiar within museums, it was confirmed in 2000 that: 

at present the provision of educational services by museums is patchy, ranging from
the outstanding to the mediocre.18

Information about learning in archives is very scarce, but the National Survey of Visi-
tors to British Archives in 2001 stated that: 

It is common for archives to undervalue the ways in which they inspire their users and
enrich their experience, concentrating primarily on providing intellectual and physi-
cal access to records. However, many users recognise the wider, more subtle, effects of
visiting an archive. Seventy-nine percent say that it is a useful and enjoyable learning
experience, 70% an important source of leisure enjoyment and personal satisfaction
and 62% that it stimulates or broadens their understanding of history and culture.19

It is clear that not all museums, archives and libraries see themselves as primarily or
even mainly focused on facilitating learning.20 Attitudes, experience and understand-
ing of education and learning vary across and within each of the three domains, as does
the level of provision. There is very little research into the potential or character of
learning  in  the  three  domains,  and  virtually  none  on  the  outcomes  or  impact  of

154 E. Hooper-Greenhill
learning.21 The challenges of delivering government priorities are, therefore, consider-
able.

Since  2000,  Resource  has  developed  broad  and  powerful  learning  agendas.  A
commitment to ‘develop a sector-wide education standard by April 2001’22 has been
followed by the report Using Museums, Archives and Libraries to Develop a Learning
Community: A Strategic Plan for Action23 and the introduction of Inspiring Learning for
All.24 Echoing the titles of many of the government reports on social inclusion that
have set the policy framework for museums, archives and libraries,25 Inspiring Learning
for All is a sector-wide initiative to assist museums, archives and libraries in prioritising
the learning experiences of their users. In order to gain commitment to this initiative,
an unprecedented level of consultation and piloting of the approach has been carried
out.26 On completion, this initiative will enable self-evaluation in relation to provision
for learning across the three domains.

Government  requires  museums,  archives  and  libraries  not  only  to  respond  to  its
priorities but also to present evidence of the impact of their work. In short, cultural
institutions are expected to demonstrate the outcomes and impact of their provision
for learning and thus their contribution towards social inclusion. The methodology for
measuring the impact of educational and social value has been less clear, although a
number of research reports have addressed this issue from a range of diverse perspec-
tives.27 None, however, has focused directly on the measurement of the outcomes and
impact of learning across the museum, archive and library sector as a whole.

The development of Resource’s Inspiring Learning for All was based on a vision of
learning-centred organisations; in order to demonstrate that learning was taking place,
a system of measuring the outcomes and impact of learning was required. RCMG (the
Research  Centre  for  Museums  and  Galleries)  at  the  University  of  Leicester  was
commissioned  to  develop  such  a  system,  and  this  paper  presents  the  approach  to
measuring  the  impact  of  learning  that  has  been  developed  by  the  Learning  Impact
Research  Project  (LIRP).28  Although  developed  in  relation  to  policy-based  impera-
tives, the work has a broader academic value.

The  Learning  Impact  Research  Project  was  developed  over  an  18-month  period
(from September 2001 to March 2003). During this period a conceptual framework
that  suggested  a  methodology  for  the  measurement  of  learning  across  the  three
domains was developed and piloted.29 Five generic outcomes for learning in archives,
museums  and  libraries  have  been  identified  based  on  the  multiple  dimensions  of
learning from culture. The generic outcomes of learning from culture are: 

an increase in knowledge and understanding;
an increase in skills;
a change in attitudes or values;
enjoyment, inspiration, creativity;
action, behaviour,30 progression.

Together,  these  GLOs  enable  the  identification,  measurement  and  description  of
learning in archives, libraries, museums and galleries. They can be used to map out a
broad picture of learning in museums, archives and libraries, and equally can shape an

●
●
●
●
●


155

in-depth study of cultural learning. The GLOs form a conceptual framework that iden-
tifies the dimensions of learning in libraries, archives and museums; these dimensions
enable the development of relevant research and evaluation studies and appropriate
research instruments. They can be used to focus research in individual organisations,
or to carry out research across the sector as a whole. The GLOs have been tested and
agreed as significant and useful across the sector;31 they provide a common structure
for  research,  evaluation,  planning  and  development  of  provision  for  learning  in
archives,  museums  and  libraries.32  In  addition,  the  articulation  of  an  approach  to
learning that can be recognised by other providers has enabled libraries, museums and
archive  to  establish  closer  links  with  their  colleagues  in  schools,  colleges  and  other
educational and cultural institutions.

Changing Definitions of Learning: From Learning as Mono-dimensional to 
Learning as Multi-dimensional

At  the  beginning  of  the  research  to  develop  an  approach  to  the  measurement  of
learning in museums, archives and libraries, it was considered vital to review both the
way in which professionals in these organisations understood learning, and the way in
which  learning  was  theorised  by  educationalists.  A  considerable  gap  exists  between
these two positions.

The meaning of learning has changed considerably in recent years,33 but older views
of learning still prevail and are particularly common in organisations that have not seen
education as their prime function. Where the provision of opportunities for learning
has become a new management priority, what counts as ‘learning’ needs to be reas-
sessed and re-evaluated.

From  a  traditional  point  of  view,  ‘learning’  is  understood  as  synonymous  with
‘scholarship’  or  ‘knowledge’.  From  this  perspective,  ‘learning’  is  a  result  or  product
rather  than  a  process.34  It  is  something  to  be  achieved,  rather  than  a  series  of
interlinked  and  continuous  activities.  This  view  suggests  a  meaning  for  ‘learning’
limited  to  ‘the  acquisition  of  facts  and  knowledge’,  which  is  achieved  through
exposure  to  high-quality  reliable  information  and  to  experts  who  have  already
attained  a  high  level  of  learning.  Knowledge  that  is  to  be  attained  is  understood  as
an  objective  and  truthful  body  of  material,  based  on  specific  subject  areas  or  disci-
plines  (history,  science),  and  able  to  be  transmitted  from  those  who  possess  it  to
those who do not.

This is a narrow and tightly prescribed view of learning. Implicitly, it is understood
as something that is produced within formal educational contexts and something that
is separate from everyday life. From this perspective, museums, archives and libraries
are  seen  as  offering  something  that  is  not  ‘learning’.  ‘Learning’  (the  acquisition  of
information, knowledge, understanding) may happen, but it is not really what is of
prime importance. For example, listen to Will Alsop, an architect, as he describes his
favourite museum as ‘the stuff of dreams’, but then goes on to describe learning as
something  with  ‘academic  connotations’,  something  other  than  what  museums  do
best: 

156 E. Hooper-Greenhill

Museums obviously have academic connotations, but on the other hand there is the
joy in seeing something extraordinary that’s not in day-to-day life. If you learn some-
thing en route, well that’s great, but it is not a prerequisite.35

The value of museums in offering joy and inspiration is appreciated by the speaker,
but  this  is  seen  as  other  than  learning  which  is  understood  as  synonymous  with
‘academic’; by implication, factual, formal, requiring effort, and not what he wants in
the museum.

This  traditional  and  mono-dimensional  way  of  thinking  about  learning  is  often
deeply embedded and not fully articulated or examined. It is taken for granted and,
precisely because of this, is very powerful. However, this way of thinking about learning
is outdated and needs to be challenged. Teachers and educational theorists now under-
stand learning processes much more deeply and recognise that the acquisition of facts
and information cannot be separated from the feelings, values, actions and locations
associated with those facts. In addition, motivation and self-awareness are now known
to be basic tools for learning; learning is understood to continue throughout life, with
one key outcome being the construction of personal identity.

Understanding ‘learning’ in a mono-dimensional way, limited to the acquisition of
facts and information, is deeply damaging to museums, archives and libraries. Much,
if not most, of the potential for learning within cultural organisations is excised and the
most  significant  elements  of  learning  from  culture  are  negated.  A  different  way  of
thinking  about  learning  enables  the  special  contribution  that  cultural  organisations
make to the learning society to be seen, to be made visible.

There is a change, therefore, in the way in which the word ‘learning’ is being used.
Today, ‘learning’ is not usually used to refer to knowledge or scholarship; ‘learning’ is
used to refer to learning processes. One way to grasp the difference between these two
ways of understanding learning is that the more contemporary approach is using the
word ‘learning’ as a verb (the act of learning), while the more traditional approach uses
‘learning’ as a noun (learning/scholarship). And implicit in the more recent interpre-
tations of ‘learning’ is the idea that learning processes can occur in many different kinds
of locations, and can be very diverse in character and in outcome. ‘Learning’ is now
understood as multi-dimensional.

Contemporary educational theorists may vary in the detail of their explanations of

learning, but all agree on the basic breadth of learning: 

We learn many different kinds of things. We accumulate facts and information and
digest this knowledge into opinions. We continue throughout life to develop know-
how: how to use new technology, how to tell a good story. We learn to make new
discriminations and learn new preferences. We develop new dispositions, learn new
roles and new aspects of character, and broaden our emotional range.36

Learning is described as encompassing the acquisition of new knowledge but is now
seen as much broader than that. It includes the acquisition of skills, the development
of judgement, and the formation of attitudes and values. It includes the emergence of
new  forms  of  behaviour,  the  playing  of  new  roles,  and  the  consolidation  of  new
elements  of  personal  identity.  In  addition,  even  when  concerned  with  knowledge,



157

learning does not always mean the acquisition of new facts; much of what we would
recognise as learning involves the use of what we already know, or half-know, in new
combinations or relationships or in new situations. Seeing things in new relationships
gives old facts new meanings.37

Learning is now viewed as a complex set of processes in which everyone is involved
in different ways and to different degrees throughout life. As learners, we are active in
seeking out what we want to know, whether this is something in the everyday world
(such as the way to the market) or something more rarefied (such as a theory of post-
structuralism). Learners do not always agree to act as the passive receivers of informa-
tion from experts, unless this suits their own intentions. Learning always involves the
use of what is known already, and this prior knowledge is used to make sense of new
knowledge and to interpret experiences. Attitudes, values, and self-confidence affect
learning processes. Cognitive knowledge (information, facts) cannot be separated from
affective knowledge (emotions, feelings, values).

The understanding of learning as a series of complex and lifelong processes entails
an emphasis on the experience of learners and on both what they learn and how they
learn it. The active meaning-making work that learners do in order to make knowledge
their own is recognised. It is acknowledged that ‘Learners construct meaning on their
own terms no matter what teachers do.’38

As a result, knowledge is no longer seen as a body of facts that may be transmitted
without change from one person to the next. Knowledge is understood as that which is
known by people. Facts are interpreted, or made meaningful in different ways by differ-
ent people. People build up different perspectives on the world and inflect facts and
information in different ways—they pick out different parts of bodies of knowledge to
remember and to adopt. The brain never merely absorbs new information; it always
processes  it.  This  processing  is  done  on  the  basis  of  prior  knowledge,  individual
biographies,  cultural  positioning,  gender  and  other  matters.  Because  people  are  all
different, each person will process knowledge in a different way.39

Contemporary  understandings  of  learning  describe  it  as  being  as  crucial  and
fundamental as breathing or as being alive.40 Learning is seen to play an integral part
of our everyday lives.41 This raises the issue of what is not learning, and indeed it is
very difficult to draw the line between ‘learning’ and ‘not learning’. We can say with
confidence that we are natural problem-solvers throughout life, and have to learn in
order  to  solve  problems:  ‘Learning  is  what  you  do  when  you  don’t  know  what  to
do.’42

Learning includes learning new things, using prior knowledge in new situations, and
reinforcing what is already known. Learning may relate to formal education, or may be
focused  in  the  everyday.  For  many  people,  unless  effort  is  involved,  learning  is  not
happening. But for educational theorists, learning does not necessarily have to be hard
work.  In  addition,  learning  is  not  always  positive—we  can  learn  to  be  afraid,  or  to
undervalue ourselves, or to misunderstand facts and their implications. Learning can
be irregular and patchy, with ideas implanted when very young remaining to guide
opinions  much  later  in  life.43  Finally,  learning  can  sometimes  happen  without  our
being aware of it.

158 E. Hooper-Greenhill

Contemporary theories explain learning as multi-dimensional. It is not only multi-
dimensional in scope, it occurs through multi-dimensional processes, and it will result
in a diverse and multi-faceted range of outcomes.

Measuring the Outcomes of Learning from Culture

Museums, archives and libraries have immense resources that offer the possibility of
innumerable and diverse experiences, many of which have the potential to enrich or
change  lives.  They  can  justifiably  make  powerful  claims  about  their  potential  for
learning.  However,  archives,  libraries  and  museums  are  required  to  do  more  than
merely make claims about their value; they are required to produce evidence of these
claims. Libraries, archives and museums are expected to be able to measure the impact
and outcome of learning, and show that public funds are being well used and thereby
that social value can be demonstrated.

The idea of measuring the outcomes of learning in cultural organisations is not new.
In  the  USA,  the  Institute  of  Museum  and  Library  Services  (IMLS)  has  developed
sophisticated guidelines for what they call outcome-based evaluation, or OBE.44 This
is described as a tool for effective management, and it has become a requirement for
their funded programmes. The debate over OBE is a lively one, as was demonstrated at
the  American  Association  of  Museums  conference  in  Dallas  in  May  2002,  and  a
number of papers have been published which discuss the value of OBE.45 The approach
taken by Resource through the Learning Impact Research Project (LIRP) differs from
that of the IMLS in that its scope is wider. IMLS grantees obtain funding for workshops,
programmes  and  events,  and  it  is  the  outcomes  of  these  specific  events  with  their
particular  clearly  identified  target  audiences  that  are  measured  through  the  OBE
system. Outcomes for learners are specified in advance in measurable terms as part of
the design and planning of a workshop or event. The system that has been developed
by LIRP is designed to apply to all or any of the users of museums, archives and librar-
ies.  Users  include  those  who  visited  specific  locations,  virtual  users  and  those  who
might be in receipt of cultural products send out from specific venues, such as museum
loan boxes.

There is considerable debate in the educational world about the (im)possibility of
‘measuring’ learning, especially in relation to informal learning or what are sometimes
called the ‘soft outcomes’ (attitudes, key skills, learning skills, etc.). The language of
‘measurement’ is awkward—it sits very uncomfortably in relation to learning because
of its associations with positivist science.46

The dictionary definition does not offer much reassurance: 

Measure: verb—1. To determine the size, volume etc of, usually with a specially made
instrument or by comparing it to something else; 2. To be a specified size; 3. To mark
or divide something into units of a given size, etc. 4. To set something in competition
with something else.47

The language of learning outcomes can also sometimes be a little daunting when think-
ing about multiple and diverse users of museums, archives and libraries: 



159

Learning  outcomes  should  flow  from  a  needs  assessment.  The  needs  assessment
should  determine  the  gap  between  an  existing  condition  and  a  desired  condition.
Learning outcomes are statements which described a desired condition—that is, the
knowledge, skills, or attitudes needed to fulfil the need.48

The approach suggested here, which requires the pre-establishment of observable and
measurable actions to be taken by the learner, is clearly quite inappropriate in relation
to most of the users of cultural organisations. Most people have their own individual
reasons for using museums, archives and libraries and they are not normally expected
to disclose them. Nor are they expected to act in accordance with pre-specified require-
ments.

Learning outcomes are routinely required in formal education. In schools, colleges
and universities, the identification of learning outcomes by the teacher/lecturer forms
an  essential  element  of  curriculum  design,  planning  and  assessment,  with  specific
learning  outcomes  being  drawn  up  in  advance  for  each  unique  lesson,  module  or
programme  of  study.  Learning  outcomes  are  generally  produced  on  the  basis  of
detailed understanding of the prior knowledge or experience of the specific group of
learners, and they set out the standards and the skills, knowledge and experience that
learners are expected to achieve at the end of any period of study.

Learning  outcomes  are  expressed  in  terms  of  ‘can  do’  verbs;  they  suggest  what  a

student should be able to do at the end of a programme of study: 

Compile a list of recognised approaches to …

Compare and contrast two different …
Plan a small-scale investigation to …
Assess the relevance of …
Recognise the phases of …

The development of learning outcomes, along with the selection of learning materi-
als and their effective delivery, is seen as the responsibility of the lecturer/teacher and
part of effective course design. Learning outcomes provide a standard against which
both teachers and learners can measure progress. The achievement of some or all of the
pre-established learning outcomes is measured by formal examination systems where
external  levels  of  achievement  and  standards  are  set.  Some  learners,  of  course,  are
judged not to have achieved to a high enough level, and fail.

Learning outcomes are also used in relation to the non-accredited learning sector,
and research is being carried out into how learning outcomes might be measured or
assessed  in  this  sector.  Learning  outcomes  for  leisure-learning  or  non-accredited
programmes  are  generally  proposed  at  the  beginning  of  a  programme  of  study  by
teachers or group leaders, and are then negotiated and agreed by learners. There are no
formal assessments, but learner self-assessment and peer assessment are highly valued,
as  the  NIACE  Learning  Outcomes  Project  demonstrated.49  The  Learning  and  Skills
Council in England has been working for some time on developing a systematic and
robust way of recognising and recording progress and achievement in non-accredited
learning. The LSC Position Paper50 produced in January 2003 points out many of the
same problems in measuring learning that can be identified in the museum, archive
and library sector.

160 E. Hooper-Greenhill

In reviewing what might be a useful way of conceptualising learning outcomes for all
visitors  to  and  users  of  libraries,  archives  or  museums,  a  comparison  with  learning
outcomes in the formal and non-accredited sector enables the location of a number of
difficulties. The ways in which learning outcomes are conceptualised and developed in
these  sectors  do  not  fit  cultural  organisations,  especially  when  the  experience  of  all
users needs to be encompassed. It is difficult to identify a moment that can be regarded
as an end-point in learning and therefore an appropriate moment for measuring this
learning.  It  is  not  appropriate  for  organisations  to  be  prescriptive  about  levels  of
learning achievement, as users have their own criteria for what counts as successful
(museums, archives and libraries do not expect to have to ‘fail’ their users). In addition,
unexpected  outcomes  may  occur,  and  in  fact  these  surprises  may  provide  the  most
profound  learning.  In  libraries,  archives  and  museums,  it  is  inappropriate  to  set
informal leisure-learners specific learning standards to achieve. And, having no base-
line,  museums,  archives  and  libraries  cannot  make  judgements  about  how  far  their
general users have moved forward in their understanding and abilities (although users
themselves can and do make these judgements).

The development of learning outcomes to relate to all users of museums, archives
and libraries is more difficult than the development of learning outcomes for those
on  formal  educational  programmes  or  non-accredited  learning  programmes.  In
open,  informal  and  flexible  learning  environments  such  as  museums,  archives  and
libraries, learning is much less under the control or management of the organisation
than in formal or even non-accredited sectors. Approaches to learning are very vari-
able  and  diverse,  and  are  dependent  on  the  intentions  and  agendas  of  users.  The
outcomes of learning may be ‘anticipated’ by organisations, and possibly ‘expected’,
but cannot be ‘required’. While some users of museums, archives and libraries may
look  for  workshops  or  programmes  of  study,  where  desirable  learning  outcomes
might be identified and specified, equally, many users will not wish to focus quite so
intently  on  specific  learning  achievements.  A  different  way  of  thinking  about  the
outcomes  of  learning  is  needed  if  it  is  to  be  useful  for  all  users  of  all  museums,
archives and libraries.

In the development of an approach to the measurement of the outcomes and impact
of learning in museums, archives and libraries, a three-year research project carried out
by NFER (the National Foundation for Educational Research) for the Royal Society of
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce on the effects and effectiveness of arts education in
schools  presented  an  interesting  model.51  This  project  was  based  on  extensive
classroom case-study research, which generated claims by teachers and others about
the effects of arts education. These claims were categorised by the researchers as ‘Effects
on  pupils’,  ‘Effects  on  the  school’,  ‘Effects  on  the  community’,  and  ‘Art  itself  as  an
outcome’. These categories emerged from the 52 interviews that were carried out and
were therefore grounded in and arose from the data. The approach taken by LIRP has
been different. The GLOs are categories into which data may flow. The GLOs act as a
conceptual framework that can be used to link together research from the many diverse
organisations across the three domains and which can be used in a number of ways.
These include: to structure educational provision; to gather and interpret evidence of



161

the impact and outcomes of educational provision; and to present evidence from across
the three domains using a common system.

The NFER research was exploratory and open-ended in asking: ‘What is the range of
effects and outcomes that are attributable to school-based arts education?’ The brief for
LIRP  was  more  instrumental  and  policy  related—to  find  a  way  to  measure  the
outcomes of learning of users of libraries, archives and museums. The GLO system
enables  the  identification  and  categorisation  of  learning  in  museums,  archives  and
libraries.  It  enables  the  description  and  analysis  of  the  properties  of  each  type  of
outcome and each (or all) may be compared and contrasted. Across the three domains,
organisations work in different ways, operate at different levels of understanding of
learning, and are likely to produce different kinds of reports about diverse and multiple
outcomes of learning for different purposes. An over-arching conceptual framework
that can be used to shape research into the outcomes of learning serves to unify these
disparate elements into a meaningful whole.

Specific and Generic Learning Outcomes

Specific  learning  outcomes  are  a  key  element  of  educational  provision  in  formal
education, developed in relation to specific programmes of study. However, they are
generally  framed  by  GLOs  that  are  laid  down  within  formal  education  systems  to
structure  and  articulate  large-scale  programme  specifications  and  assessments  in
schools and higher education. Generic learning outcomes can be found, for example,
in large-scale teaching programmes such as Education for Citizenship and the Teaching
of Democracy in Schools52 and educational research programmes such as the Economic
and  Social  Research  Council  Teaching  and  Learning  Research  Programme  (ESRC-
TLRP).53

The ESRC—TLRP specifies the GLOs as follows: 

● Development of positive learner identities.
● Acquisition of qualifications.
● Acquisition of skill, understanding and bodies of knowledge.
● Development of attitudes and values relevant to a learning society.
● Broader values and commitments relevant to individual and community develop-

ment and civic concern.54

The  concept  of  generic  outcomes  is  also  used  by  the  Quality  Assurance  Agency  for
Higher Education. The QAA Subject Review Handbook for higher education institu-
tions suggests that each subject (e.g. history, chemistry) should provide appropriate
opportunities for the achievement of learning outcomes in terms of: 

● Knowledge and understanding.
● Cognitive skills.

Subject-specific skills (including practical/professional skills).

● Key (transferable) skills.

Progression to employment and further study.
Personal development.55

●
●
●
162 E. Hooper-Greenhill

In  some  instances  GLOs  are  very  detailed;  one  example  is  the  Open  University
approach  that  lists  the  generic  claims  that  students  might  be  able  to  make  about
complex learning achievements, including: 

exploring and creating opportunities;
action planning;
networking;
coping with uncertainty;
transferring learning from here to there;
team-working;

● managing others;

critical analysis;

● working under pressure;

imagination and creativity;
self-management;
communication;
understanding how to learn.56

The  distinction  between  specific  and  generic  learning  outcomes  is  that  the  specific
outcomes  are  tied  to  particular  skills,  attitudes  or  knowledge,  while  the  generic
outcomes consist of broad general categories. For example, a specific learning outcome
might state that at the end of a course of study of Tudor England, students would be
able to: 

list the names of three Tudor monarchs;
discuss the fate of Lady Jane Grey.

The generic learning outcome would be: 

an increase in knowledge and understanding.

A second example might be that at the end of six workshops on photography, students
would be able to: 

load a film into a camera;
choose appropriate film for various lighting conditions;
successfully expose and develop film.

The generic learning outcome would be: 

an increase in skills.

Generic learning outcomes focus on the broad dimensions of learning such as knowl-
edge and understanding, key skills, how to learn, subject-specific skills, and the devel-
opment  of  a  positive  learner  identity.  These  broad  categories  of  learning  provide  a
framework within which specific programmes of study can develop their own specific
learning outcomes.

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●


163

The concept of GLOs provides a way forward for the cultural sector. Following a
learning experience or event, people talk about what has happened to them and what
they  feel  about  things  in  an  individual  way.  These  individual  accounts  (individual
learning outcomes) are susceptible to categorisation into GLOs. An agreed set of GLOs
for learning within museums, archives and libraries provides a common framework for
measuring learning across the sector.

Generic Learning Outcomes in Libraries, Museums and Archives

The  Learning  Impact  Research  Project  has  resulted  in  a  set  of  GLOs  for  museums,
archives and libraries. They provide a common approach to the research and analysis
of  evidence  of  learning,  based  on  the  theory  of  learning  that  is  discussed  above.
Generic learning outcomes are used to shape the planning, delivery and assessment of
learning  in  formal  educational  systems;  the  GLOs  provide  a  parallel  framework  for
learning in museums, archives and libraries. The cultural GLOs have been developed
to accommodate and demonstrate the strengths of learning in cultural organisations;
there is more emphasis on inspiration and creativity than is normally to be found in
GLOs in the formal sector, and there is increased scope for identifying attitudinal and
value change.

In drawing up a set of GLOs there is no attempt to prescribe or limit the learning
experiences of users. It is recognised that learners within museums, archives and librar-
ies have a multitude of purposes for learning, and may be immersed in learning for
variable amounts of time. They may be using diverse modes of attention and differen-
tiated learning styles, and will make their experiences personally meaningful according
to a variety of biographical and other factors. They will learn across a broad range of
dimensions  involving  knowledge,  skills,  aesthetic  responses  and  emotions.  The
outcomes of learning might be short term or long term, intense or shallow. Outcomes
of learning may involve a deep experience such that awareness increases, and attitudes
and perceptions are changed. Or, and this is likely to be more frequent, the outcomes
of  learning  in  museums,  archives  and  libraries  may  confirm  learners  in  what  they
already know (however mistaken others might feel this to be).57

The five GLOs for museums, archives and libraries are: 

increase in knowledge and understanding;
increase in skills;
change in attitudes or values;
enjoyment, inspiration, creativity;
action, behaviour, progression.

This is the minimum number of generic outcomes of learning that are needed; they are
placed at the highest level of generalisation. Five categories of GLO have been found to
be adequate and it also proved feasible to distinguish clearly between each of the GLOs.
During the pilot phase of LIRP, 15 museums, archives and libraries of variable charac-
ter  were  involved  in  testing  the  GLOs  to  see  if  they  were  useful,  adequate  for  their
purpose and flexible to use. Evidence was found for all five GLOs, and all were found

●
●
●
●
●
164 E. Hooper-Greenhill

to be necessary. The GLOs were used in various ways by the pilot organisations. This
included  analysis  of  the  data  that  had  already  been  collected  from  users  (such  as
comment cards or teachers’ evaluation sheets); structuring questions for new tools for
collecting data (children’s response sheets, questionnaires and interview guides); and
analysing the data generated from the newly designed tools. Each pilot site produced a
report on the work they carried out.

Each GLO covers a very broad span of potential sub-categories of learning outcome,
which enables subtle and in-depth discussion of each main category. At the same time,
having  a  very  small  number  of  GLOs  enables  the  easy  quantification  of  evidence
through the counting up of numbers of occurrences in each category.

An increase in knowledge and understanding might include learning new facts or
information, or using prior knowledge in new ways; coming to a deeper understand-
ing.  Knowledge  and  understanding  involves  knowing  ‘what’  or  knowing  ‘about’.  It
includes  learning  facts  or  information  and  grasping  meaning  more  firmly.  Well-
known information may take on a new relevance or be made meaningful in a new way
during  a  museum,  archive  or  library  visit.  Knowledge  and  understanding  might  be
subject  specific.  For  example,  after  a  visit  to  Warwickshire  Museum  a  child  wrote
back  to  the  museum:  ‘When  you  went  to  sketch,  that  rock  did  look  very  like  a
sandwich. I can remember their names, they are Hook Norton Limestone and clypeus
grit’.58

Equally, knowledge and understanding might result in making connections between
or  across  subject  areas.  It  may  also  include  learning  more  about  everyday  life.  The
Library  Service  in  Poole  carried  out  research  to  show  the  link  between  reading  and
learning. A discussion of the book Massive by Julia Bell, which confronts the issues of
eating disorders, was organised by the Literacy Liaison Officer with 10 teenage girls. It
is clear from the ensuing discussion that the girls had absorbed information that was
new to them, but they had also been able to empathise with the characters in the book
and relate this experience to their own situations: 

I gained an insight into life in major cities and how it is different to my life.

I have learnt that the issue of physical appearance is a big one in families today.
An eating disorder can be affected by your environment mainly, especially family

life.

The book gave me an insight into the sorts of feelings that Carmen has—depression,

confusion etc.

I have learnt about challenges between mother and daughter and made me appre-

ciate mine.59

Knowledge and understanding includes the development of a more complex view of
self, family, neighbourhood, or personal world. It can also include finding out more
information  about  how  museums,  archives  or  libraries  operate:  ‘We  thoroughly
enjoyed our visit and learnt a lot of what you do and how we can benefit if we want to
research anything ourselves’ wrote one user of Somerset Record Office.60

An increase in skills may involve intellectual, practical, social or professional or other
skills. Having a skill means knowing ‘how to’ do something. There are many different
ways that skills are described: 



165

intellectual skills (reading, thinking critically and analytically, being able to present
a reasoned point of view, weighing up different forms of evidence);
key skills (numeracy, communication, use of ICT, learning how to learn);
information management skills (locating information, using information manage-
ment systems, evaluating information);
social  skills  (meeting  people,  being  friendly,  introducing  others,  remembering
names, showing an interest in the concerns of others, team working);
emotional skills (managing intense feelings such as anger, channelling energy into
productive outcomes, recognising the feelings of others);
communication skills (writing, speaking, listening, giving a presentation, making a
TV programme);
physical skills (running, dancing, manipulating materials to make things).

There is ample evidence of skills outcomes in museums, archives and libraries. Follow-
ing Essex Libraries Big Summer Read programme a parent wrote: ‘It does have an effect
on  reading,  certainly  with  my  son,  it  maintains  his  fluency  and  familiarity  with
words.’61  A  13–14-year-old  school  student  wrote  after  a  visit  to  the  Imperial  War
Museum: ‘I have learnt to look at the exhibits and reflect on why they are there and
their importance.’62 A teacher’s school visit evaluation form at Prescot Museum stated:
‘Literacy,  design  and  speaking  and  listening  skills  were  all  enhanced  in  a  practical
way.’63

Change in attitudes and values may involve change in feelings, perceptions, or opin-
ions about self, other people and things, and the wider world. It includes being able to
give reasons for actions and personal viewpoints. This category of learning outcome
may include an increase in empathy, capacity for tolerance or increased motivation.
Values and attitudes are an integral part of learning: new experiences and information
change or reinforce perceptions, opinions and feelings. Values underpin actions and
behaviour, even though they are frequently unexamined. Attitudes and values that are
especially relevant within museums, archives and libraries include: 

attitudes towards self;
attitudes towards others;
attitudes towards the organisation.

The use of museums, archives and libraries can result, for example, in more positive
attitudes to learning. ‘I feel much happier about requesting and getting hold of infor-
mation’ said a distance-learning postgraduate student after information-management
skills  training  at  the  University  of  Leicester  library.64  Empathy  makes  an  important
contribution to the development of values and attitudes, as well as understanding: ‘It
was really scary and it felt like you were in a real Victorian classroom’ a child said after
a visit to a Victorian classroom reconstruction at St. John’s Museum in Warwick.65

Enjoyment,  inspiration,  creativity  (EIC)  as  outcomes  of  learning  includes  having
fun, or pleasure while using a library, archive or museum. EIC also includes innovative
thoughts, actions or things, and exploration, experimentation and making. All of these
can happen as a result of successful learning. Enjoyment adds to the quality of life: ‘I’m

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
166 E. Hooper-Greenhill
retired  and  I  read  for  pleasure  as  a  hobby’,  said  one  library  user.66  Enjoyment  in
learning leads to motivation. A young visitor to the Women’s Library in east London
drew herself in the archive and wrote: ‘I loved the dewey numbers and I learned a lot.’67
Motivation  facilitates  success,  creativity,  invention  and  innovative  ways  of  thinking
and doing.

Visiting a museum, archive or library may result in feeling inspired. A young teen-
ager visiting the Holocaust exhibition at the Imperial War Museum in London was
inspired  by:  ‘Martin  Luther  King  and  how  he  was  brave  enough  to  stand  up  to
America.’68 The experience of museums, archives and libraries can result in creativity.
A  teacher  wrote  after  a  visit  to  Warwickshire  Museums:  ‘Almost  without  exception
the children thoroughly enjoyed the day—one particularly hard to please pupil claim-
ing it was the best trip he has ever been on! It inspired some excellent recounts of the
day prompting some to write more than ever achieved in class!’69 A parent wrote after
the  Big  Summer  Read  at  Essex  Libraries:  ‘Rachel  and  Nathan  enjoyed  the  Reading
Planet  very  much.  Rachel  made  her  own  paper  and  took  a  sample  of  it  into  the
library.’70

New  actions,  forms  of  behaviour,  or  progression  (to  further  learning  or  employ-
ment) may result from learning. This category of learning outcome may include what
people  do,  intend  to  do  or  have  done.  This  may  involve  the  way  in  which  people
balance  and  manage  their  lives,  including  their  work,  study,  family  or  community
contexts. Activity can be observed or people may report what they did. A visitor to an
exhibition at Leeds Art Gallery, which included sound as an interpretive tool, described
how this changed their behaviour in the gallery: ‘I think the sound makes the viewer
use all the senses. I found myself more involved in actually stopping and looking …’71
One outcome of learning may be the intention to act. An e-mail to Essex Record Office
stated: ‘Thank you for your excellent reply. I am thoroughly impressed by the speed,
depth and clarity of your response. The information is wonderful and I will be follow-
ing  up  on  all  your  suggestions.’72  Sometimes  learning  can  result  in  what  is  called
‘progression’, which may include increased use of libraries, for example, or visits to
related  sites  such  as  museums  based  on  writers.  Learning  may  sometimes  result  in
profound change in the way in which people manage or shape their lives.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the  processes  and  the  outcomes  of 
learning. Although there are overlaps, and it is difficult to identify the end-point of
learning, there are helpful conceptual differences between what might count as a learn-
ing process or activity, and what might be seen as an outcome of learning. Enjoyment,
for example, might not always be seen as ‘learning’ but it can clearly be recognised as
one of the outcomes of learning. Is inspiration ‘learning’? It can most definitely be the
result of a learning experience. Borrowing a book is not really a learning activity, but it
certainly represents the outcome of learning—and complex learning at that. In order
to borrow a book from a library, you have to understand the purposes of a library,
know how to manage the cataloguing system, be able to negotiate the social relation-
ships involved, assess and satisfy your own needs. You also need a grasp of your own
responsibilities as a borrower, including how to look after a book and when to return
it. These activities represent considerable learning over time.



167

Measuring Learning Outcomes and Impact in Archives, Museums and Libraries

The GLOs enable the identification, capture, categorisation and discussion of learning
in  museums,  archives  and  libraries.  Through  the  use  of  GLOs,  learning  may  be
researched using either quantitative or qualitative methods and standard good research
practice.73 The GLOs may be used to structure (or pre-code) research studies or tools,
or may be used to categorise (or post-code) what people say about their learning expe-
riences. References and comments pertaining to each of the GLOs may be counted and
compared in relation to the others and the GLOs may be compared across time and/or
compared between organisations, thus presenting a broad survey of learning. The data
that result from in-depth interviews or focus group discussions about the impact of
learning may be sorted into themes that expand and explore the generic outcomes of
learning  in  detail  and  complexity,  thus  giving  a  deep  description  of  learning.  Both
depth and breadth may be linked.

The GLOs do not offer new methods of carrying out research—surveys, interviews,
focus  groups,  observations  and  the  analysis  of  the  products  of  learning  (drawings,
creative  writing,  drama,  discussion,  etc.)  will  all  continue  to  be  used,  together  with
other ways of gathering evidence. The GLOs do offer a new set of concepts that can be
used across the three domains to frame research questions, to shape research tools and
to analyse the evidence of the impact of learning. The choice of method or tool will
depend on the research question, the nature of the evidence required, and the level of
resources available to do the work.

The  GLOs  provide  a  robust  approach  to  measuring  the  impact  of  learning  in
archives, libraries and museums. But they cannot, of themselves, obviate the need for
two vital developments that are required before libraries, archives and museums are
able to respond fully to the demands placed upon them by government.

The first is the development of a much deeper and more complex understanding of
learning  from  culture,  especially  on  the  part  of  the  senior  staff  and  the  directors  of
cultural organisations. It is difficult to plan for and evaluate provision for learning, and
to act as a convincing advocate for the power of learning in museums, archives and
libraries if learning is not well understood. In tandem with this is the need for more
resources,  including  staff  positions,  dedicated  to  learning.74  This  is  the  agenda
addressed by Resource’s Inspiring Learning for All.75

The second is the development of the skills to evaluate and research the impact of
learning. At present, there is a considerable lack of expertise across the sector. Selwood
has argued that the collection of data across the sector has been: 

a  relatively  spurious  exercise  …  [because  of]  credibility  as  to  the  validity  of  the
evidence and its analysis [which] is undermined by the absence of such details as the
number  of  participants  surveyed;  how  the  data  were  collected;  what  techniques  or
procedures were used; and the presentation of detailed results.76

Claims about the impact of learning must be supported by describing accurately who
the research participants were, and how they relate to the general pattern of users of the
organisation. Detailed, truthful and verifiable examples of what users said about the
outcomes of their learning should be presented, along with the context of its production.

168 E. Hooper-Greenhill

The strategies used to gather the data must be described, examples of the tools used
provided,  and  the  analysis  and  interpretation  of  the  evidence  must  be  discussed.
Researchers will need to make judgements about which statements (spoken, written or
visual) relate to which of the GLOs; there are decisions to be made about this, and where
more than one researcher is involved there are issues of consistency. Transparency in
relation to the decisions made will enable readers of the research reports to come to a
view about the value of the research. There is much to be learnt across the sector about
research and evaluation, and about the strengths and weaknesses of quantitative and
qualitative approaches when gathering evidence of learning.

The GLOs provide an agreed and common conceptual framework for understanding
learning and for developing a picture of the dimensions of learning in libraries, archives
and museums. They provide the language and the analytical armoury for the powerful
claims  that  cultural  organisations  can  make  about  their  social  value.  Learning  in
cultural organisations has enormous potential: it is experiential and holistic, involving
knowledge together with emotions, feelings, skills and actions. Learning in archives,
libraries and museums is rich and multi-dimensional; people make their own mean-
ings  of  their  experience,  and  the  outcomes  of  their  learning  contribute  to  building
individual  and  collective  identities.  Museums,  archives  and  libraries  form  a  vast
reservoir of learning opportunities. For this reservoir to be used to its full potential for
socially inclusive learning, a more comprehensive theory of learning from culture must
become  embedded  across  the  sector  and  adequate  resources  must  be  deployed  to
provide  learning  opportunities;  new  professional  skills  are  needed  to  provide  valid
evidence of the impact of this learning.

Notes

[1] As this paper goes to press, Resource is about to change its name to Museum, Library and

Archive Council.

[2] Definitions  of  culture  are  multiple.  Some  of  these  are  reviewed  in  Hooper-Greenhill,
Museums and the Interpretation of Visual Culture, where some of the cultural shifts that have
occurred in museums over the last 200 years are discussed. ‘Culture’ is used in this paper to
refer to cultural institutions, and especially archives, libraries and museums.

[3] Selwood, The UK Cultural Sector, 1–3.
[4] The Department for Culture, Media and Sport gave notice of the creation of a new national
strategic  body  for  museums,  libraries  and  archive  to  replace  the  Museums  and  Galleries
Commission  and  the  Library  and  Information  Commission  in  its  policy  statement  A  New
Cultural Framework.
In the UK, the vast bulk of funding for libraries, archives and museums is provided by govern-
ment, either at the local level through local authority structures, or from central government.

[5]

[6] DCMS and DfEE, The Learning Power of Museums, 3.
[7] David  Blunkett,  Secretary  of  State  for  Education  and  Employment,  June  1999:  quoted  in

Education and Libraries Task Group, Empowering the Learning Community, 1.

[8] DCMS and DfEE, The Learning Power of Museums, 4.
[9] DCMS, Centres for Social Change, 7.
[10] DCMS, Libraries for All, 4–5.
[11] DCMS, Centres for Social Change, 3.
[12] DCMS, Libraries, Museums, Galleries and Archives for All, 6.



169

[13] DCMS, A New Cultural Framework, n.p.
[14] Williams and Wavell, The Impact of the School Library Resource Centre on Learning; Proctor

and Bartle, Low Achievers–Lifelong Learners.

[15] Matarasso, Learning Development; Matarasso, Beyond Book Issues; Allison and Coalter, Realis-
ing the Potential of Cultural Services: The Case for Museums; Coalter, Realising the Potential of
Cultural Services: The Case for Libraries.

[16] Muddiman et al., Open to All?, ii.
[17] McNicol et al., Collaboration between Libraries and Education, 9.
[18] DCMS and DfEE, The Learning Power of Museums, 7.
[19] Pick, National Survey of Visitors to British Archives, n.p.
[20] Education  and  Libraries  Task  Group,  Empowering  the  Learning  Community;  Anderson,  A
Common  Wealth:  Museums  and  Learning  in  the  United  Kingdom;  A  Common  Wealth:
Museums in the Learning Age; DCMS and DfEE, The Learning Power of Museums; Muddiman
et  al.,  Open  to  All?;  McNicol  et  al.  Collaboration  between  Libraries  and  Education;  Pick,
National Survey of Visitors to British Archives.

[21] There is a great deal of research into learning in museums in the USA, but very little in the
UK:  see  Hooper-Greenhill  and  Moussouri,  Researching  Learning  in  Museums  and  Galleries
1990–1999.

[22] Resource, Resource Manifesto, 16.
[23] Resource, Using Museums, Archives and Libraries to Develop a Learning Community.
[24] Resource, Inspiring Learning for All.
[25] DCMS, Libraries for All; Centres for Social Change; Libraries, Museums, Galleries and Archives

for All.

[26] Resource, Annual Review 2001/02.
[27] Brophy, The Evaluation of Public Library Services; Hannon et al., Research, Cultural and Sports

Policies; Bryson et al., Social Impact Audit.

[28] The  cross-domain  team  consisted  of  Eilean  Hooper-Greenhill,  Jocelyn  Dodd,  Theano
Moussouri,  Marlene  Morrison,  Chris  Pickford,  John  Vincent,  Catherine  Herman,  Richard
Toon  and  Ceri  Jones.  Francois  Matarasso  was  part  of  the  team  for  the  first  phase  of  the
research.

[30]

[29] Two papers that give the conceptual and academic framework for the GLO system by Profes-
sor  Hooper-Greenhill  and  Dr  Moussouri  were  posted  on  the  Resource  website  during
summer 2002. See Hooper-Greenhill, Learning Impact Research Project; Moussouri, A Context
for the Development of Learning Outcomes. A third end-of-project report can also be found on
the  Resource  website;  see  Hooper-Greenhill  et  al.,  Measuring  the  Outcomes  and  Impact  of
Learning in Museums, Archives and Libraries.
‘Behaviour’ does not imply an acceptance of behaviourist learning theory. From a behaviour-
ist perspective, learning is that which results in a change of behaviour as a result of an experi-
ence, and, this behaviour can be observed and measured. The model of learning and teaching
that underpins most forms of behaviourism is a stimulus–response model, which is no longer
regarded as an adequate way of describing learning. See Jarvis et al., The Theory and Practice of
Learning;  Sotto,  When  Teaching  Becomes  Learning.  The  broad  and  holistic  way  in  which
learning  is  presented  in  this  paper  is  underpinned  by  interpretivist  social  and  educational
theory. See Hooper-Greenhill, The Educational Role of the Museum; Museums and the Inter-
pretation of Visual Culture. However, this is not to deny that observed and reported behaviour
can be used as an indicator of learning; it can, and it is especially useful if it is supported by
evidence gathered using other methods such as interviews.

[31] The second phase of LIRP (April 2002—April 2003) focused on piloting the GLOs with 15
diverse museums, archives and libraries. For a list of pilot sites please see Hooper-Greenhill et
al., Measuring the Outcomes and Impact of Learning in Museums, Archives and Libraries.

[32] Resource  has,  of  course,  funded  the  project  throughout  its  entirety,  and  has  been  fully

involved in the intellectual development of its approach.

170 E. Hooper-Greenhill

Jarvis et al., The Theory and Practice of Learning.

[33]
[34] Falk and Dierking, Learning from Museums, 9–10.
[35] Heywood, ‘My Favourite Museum is’, quoting Will Alsop.
[36] Claxton, Wise-up, 7–8.
[37] >Sotto, When Teaching Becomes Learning, 75.
[38] Richardson, Constructivist Teacher Education, 62.
[39]
[40]
[41] Wenger, Communities of Practice.
[42] Claxton, Wise-up, 11.
[43] This what Howard Gardner refers to as ‘the unschooled mind’. See Gardner, The Unschooled

Sotto, When Teaching Becomes Learning, 75.
Jarvis et al., The Theory and Practice of Learning, vii; Claxton, Wise-up, 6.

Mind.

[44] Motylewski, New Directives, New Directions.
[45] Weil,  ‘Transformed  from  a  Century  of  Bric-a-brac’;  Ansbacher,  ‘What  are  we  Learning’;

Dierking et al., ‘Broadening our Notions of Free-choice Learning Experiences’.

[46] Denscombe, Ground Rules for Good Research, 14–22.
[47] Robinson, Chambers 21st Century Dictionary, 851.
[48] American Association of Law Libraries, Writing Learning Outcomes.
[49] Watters and Turner, Proof Positive.
[50] Learning and Skills Council, LSC Position Paper.
[51] Harland  et  al.,  The  Effects  and  Effectiveness  of  Arts  Education  in  Schools;  Arts  Education  in

Secondary Schools.

[52] www.qca.org.uk/ca/subjects/citizenship/crick_report_1998.pdf (accessed June 2003).
[53] www.tlrp.org/manage/pdf/Phase111Specification.pdf (accessed April 2003).
[54] Economic  and  Social  Research  Council,  The  Teaching  and  Learning  Research  Programme—
Specification  for  Phase  III,  1  (available  online  from  http://www.ex.ac.uk/ESRC-TLRP/
phase3spec.htm).

[55] QAA, Subject Review Handbook September 2000 to December 2001, 24.
[56] The  Open  University:  Centre  for  Outcomes-based  Education,  www.open.ac.uk/vqportal/

content/vqcent.htm

[57] Ohta, ‘“Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory”’, 48–58; Hooper-Greenhill and Moussouri, Making

Meaning in Art Museums 2, 24.

[58] Rice, ‘What do School Children Learn on a Museum Visit?’
[59] Williams, ‘Developing New Tools and Approaches to Measuring the Impact of Learning’.
[60] Mayberry et al., ‘Somerset Archive and Record Service: Report on the LIRP Research Project’.
[61] Tarrant, ‘Report on Essex Libraries LIRP Pilot Project’.
[62] Heywood, ‘Learning Impact Research Project’.
[63] Arnold, ‘Toolkit Pilot’.
[64] Aitkins, ‘An Investigation of the Use of an Email Semi-structured Interview Guide to Establish
the  Learning  Outcomes  for  an  Information  Skills  Session  Delivered  to  Distance  Learning
Students, University of Leicester Library’.

[65] Rice, ‘What do School Children Learn on a Museum Visit?’
[66] A comment to one of the LIRP researchers at Buxton Museum, November 2002.
[67] Written on one of the response sheets following a school visit to the Women’s Library.
[68] Heywood, ‘Learning Impact research Project’.
[69] Rice, ‘What do School Children Learn on a Museum Visit?’
[70] Tarrant, ‘Report on Essex Libraries LIRP Pilot Project’.
[71] Miller and Phillips, ‘Labelling Learning’.
[72]
[73] Denscombe, Ground Rules for Good Research; Robson, Real World Research.
[74] Renaissance  in  the  Regions  (Resource)  sets  this  out  clearly  for  regional  museums.  And,
following the success of the Education Challenge Fund which had the objective of capacity

Stead, ‘LIRP Pilot Project Report’.



171

building in museum education (see Hooper-Greenhill and Dodd, Seeing the Museum through
the Visitors’ Eyes), Resource has provided funds for the appointment of staff with expertise in
learning  in  the  newly  established  Regional  Agencies  which  will  give  advice  to  regional
museums, archives and libraries.

[75] Resource (now known as the Museum, Library and Archive Council) is establishing a Web
site to disseminate the Inspiring Learning for All vision, and this will include information on
measuring learning. The specific URL is unknown at the time of writing, but will be accessible
through the general Web site.
Selwood, Measuring Culture, Spiked Culture, 1, 10.

[76]

References

Aitkins, J. ‘An Investigation of the Use of an Email Semi-structured Interview Guide to Establish the
Learning  Outcomes  for  an  Information  Skills  Session  Delivered  to  Distance  Learning
Students, University of Leicester Library’. Unpublished research report, 2003.

Allison,  M.,  and  F.  Coalter.  Realising  the  Potential  of  Cultural  Services:  The  Case  for  Museums.

Research briefing twelve point two. London: Local Government Association, 2001.

American  Association  of  Law  Libraries.  Writing  Learning  Outcomes.  Professional  Develop-
ment Committee  American  Association  of  Law  Libraries,  2003.  Available  from  http://
www.aallnet.org/prodev/outcomes.asp

Anderson,  D.  A  Common  Wealth:  Museums  and  Learning  in  the  United  Kingdom.  A  report  to  the

Department of National Heritage, Department of National Heritage, London, 1997.

———. A Common Wealth: Museums in the Learning Age. London: Department for Culture, Media

and Sport, 1999.

Ansbacher. T. ‘What are we Learning? Outcomes of the Museum Experience’. Informal Learning: The

Informal Learning Review 53 (March–April 2002): 3–7.

Arnold, S. ‘Toolkit Pilot: Route 1, Knowsley Museum Service’. Unpublished research report, 2003.
Brophy, P. The Evaluation of Public Library Services: Measuring Impact, 2002. Available from http://

www.peoplesnetwork.gov.uk/impact/index.asp

Bryson, J., B. Usherwood, and D. Streatfield. Social Impact Audit. Taunton: South West Museums,

Libraries and Archive Council, 2002.

Clarke, A., J. Dodd, E. Hooper-Greenhill, H. O’ Riain, L. Selfridge, and F. Swift. Learning through
Culture:  The  DfES  Museums  and  Galleries  Education  Programme:  A  Guide  to  Good  Practice.
Leicester: Research Centre for Museums and Galleries and DfES, 2002 (DfES/0159/2002).
Claxton, G. Wise-up: The Challenge of Lifelong Learning. London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 1999.
Coalter, F. Realising the Potential of Cultural Services: The Case for Libraries. Research briefing twelve

point one. London: Local Government Association, 2001.

Denscombe, M. Ground Rules for Good Research: A 10 Point Guide for Social Researchers. Buckingham:

Open University Press, 2001.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS). A New Cultural Framework. London: DCMS,

1998.

———. Libraries for All: Social Inclusion in Public Libraries—Policy Guidance for Local Authorities in

England. London: DCMS, 1999.

———. Centres for Social Change: Museums, Galleries and Archives for All: Policy Guidance on Social
Inclusion for DCMS Funded and Local Authority Museums, Galleries and Archives in England.
London: DCMS, 2000.

———. Libraries, Museums, Galleries and Archives for All: Co-operating across the Sectors to Tackle

Social Exclusion. London: DCMS, 2001.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport and Department for Education and Employment (DCMS
and DfEE). The Learning Power of Museums: A Vision for Museum Education. London: DCMS,
2000.

172 E. Hooper-Greenhill

Dierking, L., M. K. Jones, M. Wadman, J. Falk, M. Storksdieck, and K. Ellenbogen. ‘Broadening our
Notions  of  Free-choice  Learning  Experiences’.  Informal  Learning:  The  Informal  Learning
Review, 55 (July–August 2002): 3–7.

Economic and Social Research Council. The Teaching and Learning Research Programme—Specification
from  http://www.ex.ac.uk/ESRC-TLRP/

for  Phase  III,  2002:  6–7.  Available  online 
phase3spec.htm

Education and Libraries Task Group. Empowering the Learning Community. Report of the Education
and  Libraries  Task  Group  to  the  Secretaries  of  State  for  Culture,  Media  and  Sport  and  for
Education and Employment, Library and Information Commission, London, 2000.

Falk,  J.,  and  L.  Dierking. Learning  from  Museums:  Visitor  Experiences  and  the  Making  of  Meaning.

Walnut Creek, Lanham, New York, and Oxford: Altamira Press, 2000.

Gardner, H. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. London: Paladin, 1985.
———.  The  Unschooled  Mind:  How  Children  Think  and  How  Schools  Should  Teach.  London:

Fontana Press, 1991.

Hannon, V., M. M. Joubert, and M. Kogan. Research, Cultural and Sports Policies. A report to the
Quality,  Efficiency  and  Standards  Team  of  the  Department  for  Culture,  Media  and  Sport,
Centre for Evaluation of Policy and Practice, Brunel University, 2001.

Harland, J., K. Kinder, J. Haynes, and I. Schagen. The Effects and Effectiveness of Arts Education in

Schools, Interim Report 1. Slough: NFER, 1998.

Harland, J., K. Kinder, P. Lord, A. Stott, I. Schagen, J. Haynes, L. Cusworth, R. White, and R. Paola.

Arts Education in Secondary Schools: Effects and Effectiveness. Slough: NFER, 2000.

Heywood,  F.  ‘My  Favourite  Museum  is:  The  Shell  Museum,  Glandford,  Norfolk’.  Interview  with

Will Alsop. Museums Journal 103, no. 4 (2003): 58.

Heywood,  S.  ‘Learning  Impact  Research  Project:  Report  on  the  Pilot  Project  by  Imperial  War

Museum (route 2)’. Unpublished research report, 2003.

Hooper-Greenhill, E., ed. The Educational Role of the Museum. London: Routledge, 1999.
———. Museums and the Interpretation of Visual Culture. London: Routledge, 2000.
———. Learning Impact Research Project, 2002. Available online from http://www.resource.gov.uk/

action/learnacc/lirp.asp

Hooper-Greenhill,  E.,  and  J.  Dodd.  Seeing  the  Museum  through  the  Visitors’  Eyes:  The  Evaluation
of  the  Education  Challenge  Fund.  Leicester:  Research  Centre  for  Museums  and  Galleries,
2002.

Hooper-Greenhill, E., J. Dodd, T. Moussouri, C. Jones, C. Pickford, J. Vincent, C. Herman, and R.
Toon. Measuring the Outcomes and Impact of Learning in Museums, Archives and Libraries: The
Learning  Impact  Research  Project  End  of  Project  Paper,  2003.  Available  online  from  http://
www.resource.gov.uk/action/learnacc/lirp.asp

Hooper-Greenhill, E., and T. Moussouri. Making Meaning in Art Museums 1: Visitors’ Interpretive

Strategies at Wolverhampton Art Gallery. Leicester: RCMG, University of Leicester, 2001.

———.  Making  Meaning  in  Art  Museums  2:  Visitors’  Interpretive  Strategies  at  Nottingham  Castle

Museum and Art Gallery. Leicester: RCMG, University of Leicester, 2001.

———. Researching Learning in Museums and Galleries 1990–1999: A Bibliographic Review. Leicester:

RCMG, University of Leicester, 2002.

Jarvis,  P.,  J.  Holford,  and  C.  Griffin.  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Learning.  London:  Kogan  Page,

1998.

Learning and Skills Council. LSC Position Paper on Recognising and Recording Progress and Achieve-

ment in Non-accredited Learning, 2003. Available online from http://www.lsc.gov.uk

Matarasso, F. Learning Development: An Introduction to the Social Impact of Public Libraries. London:

Comedia/British Library Board, 1998.

———.  Beyond  Book  Issues:  The  Social  Potential  of  Library  Projects.  London:  Comedia/British

Library Board, 1998.

Mayberry, T., S. Berry, I. Andrews, and J. Tall. ‘Somerset Archive and Record Service: Report on the

LIRP Research Project’. Unpublished research report, 2003.



173

McNicol, S., G. Matthews, D. Kane, K. Lancaster, S. Thebridge, and P. Dalton. Collaboration between
Libraries and Education: Supporting the Learner. London: Resource: the Council for Museums,
Archives and Libraries and Department for Education and Skills, 2002.

Miller,  C.,  and  A.  Phillips.  ‘Labelling  Learning:  Report  of  Leeds  Museums  and  Galleries  for  the

Learning Impact Research Project’. Unpublished research report, 2003.

Motylewski, K. New Directives, New Directions: Documenting Outcomes in IMLS Grants to Libraries
and Museums. Washington, DC: Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2001. Available
from http://www.imls.gov or kmotylewski@imls.gov. See also IMLS, Perspectives on Outcome-
based Evaluation for Libraries and Museums, n.d.

Moussouri,  T.  A  Context  for  the  Development  of  Learning  Outcomes,  2002.  Available  online  from

http://www.resource.gov.uk/action/learnacc/lirp.asp

Muddiman, D., S. Durrani, M. Dutch, R. Linley, J. Pateman, and J. Vincent. Open to All? The Public
Library  and  Social  Exclusion.  Vol.  1,  Overview  and  Conclusions.  Library  and  Information
Commission Research Report 84. London: Resource: the Council for Museums, Archives and
Libraries, 2000.

Ohta, R. J. ‘“Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory”: Visitor Experience at a Controversial Flag Exhibition’.

Current Trends in Audience Research and Evaluation 11 (1998): 48–58.

Pick,  G.  National  Survey  of  Visitors  to  British  Archives.  London:  Public  Services  Quality  Group

National Visitors Survey Working Party, 2001.

Proctor, R., and C. Bartle. Low Achievers—Lifelong Learners: An Investigation into the Impact of the

Public Library on Educational Disadvantage. London: Resource, 2002.

QAA.  Subject  Review  Handbook  September  2000  to  December  2001.  Gloucester:  Quality  Assurance

Agency for Higher Education, 2000.

Resource. Resource Manifesto. London: Resource: the Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries,

2000.

———. Using Museums, Archives and Libraries to Develop a Learning Community: A Strategic Plan

for Action. London: Resource: the Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries, 2000.

———.  Renaissance  in  the  Regions:  A  New  Vision  for  England’s  Museums.  London:  Resource:  the

Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries, 2001.
———. Annual Review 2001/02. London: Resource, 2002.
———. Collaboration between Libraries and Education: Supporting the Learner. London: Resource,

2002.

———.  Inspiring  Learning  for  All:  A  Framework  for  Museums,  Archives  and  Libraries,  2003:  3.

Available online from www.resource.gov.uk

Rice,  J.  ‘What  do  School  Children  Learn  on  a  Museum  Visit?—Using  the  “Generic  Learning
Outcomes”  to  Investigate  the  Learning  Experience  for  Children  and  Teachers  at  St.  John’s
Museum, Warwick’. Unpublished research report, 2003.

Richardson,  V.,  ed.  Constructivist  Teacher  Education:  Building  a  World  of  New  Understandings.

London: Falmer Press, 1997.

Robinson, M. Chambers 21st Century Dictionary. Edinburgh: Chambers, 1996.
Robson, C. Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioners. 2nd ed. Oxford:

Blackwell Publishing, 2002.

Selwood, S., ed. The UK Cultural Sector: Profile and Policy Issues. London: Cultural Trends and Policy

Studies Institute, 2001.

Selwood, S. Measuring Culture, Spiked Culture, 2002. Available from http://www.spiked-online.com
Sotto, E. When Teaching Becomes Learning: A Theory and Practice of Teaching. London: Cassell, 1994.
Stead, M. ‘LIRP Pilot Project Report: Essex Heritage Services’. Unpublished research report, 2003.
Tarrant, M. ‘Report on Essex Libraries LIRP Pilot Project’. Unpublished research report, 2003.
Watters, K., and C. Turner. Proof Positive: A Report on Research into Learners’ Views on Approaches to
Identifying Achievement in Non-accredited Learning. NIACE, November 2001. Available from
http://www.niace.org.uk/projects/LearningOutcomes/
Proof%20Positive%20Final%20Report.pdf

174 E. Hooper-Greenhill

Weil, S. ‘Transformed from a Century of Bric-a-brac’. In Perspectives on Outcome Based Evaluation
for Libraries and Museums, edited by B. Sheppard. Washington, DC: Institute of Museum and
Library Services, n.d.: 4–15.

Wenger, E. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, 1998.

Williams, D., and C. Wavell. The Impact of the School Library Resource Centre on Learning. Library

and Information Commission Research Report 112. London: Resource, 2001.

Williams,  F.  ‘Developing  New  Tools  and  Approaches  to  Measuring  the  Impact  of  Learning:  Final

Report’. Unpublished research report, Borough of Poole, 2003.


