Managing Small Heritage Sites with
Interpretation and Community
Involvement
Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

Abstract
In heritage site management, there is often a strong reliance on preservation, sometimes to
the exclusion of contemporary use. The result is a tendency to remove heritage sites from the
experience  of  the  community  who  `owns’   the  heritage.  At  the  site  level,  heritage
management  does  not always  use  the full  range  of available tools; largely  because of  the
emphasis on preservation. Case studies from rural Queensland, Australia, show that even
relatively recent industrial and historical archaeology sites can be conserved and presented
to benefit both the sites and local communities.

There  are  several  components  to  ultimate  success,  broadly  encompassing  a  broader
recognition  of  site  values,  pragmatic  management  and  pro-active  presentation.  Smaller
heritage sites may be modest in appearance, but they are still worthy of conservation. They
may  not  attract  large  numbers  of  visitors  like  Stonehenge  or  the Acropolis  but  they  are
capable  of  providing  socio-economic  advantages  for  local  communities  and  transferring
knowledge of the past to future generations.

Key  words:  Australia;  Cultural  Heritage;  Heritage  Management;  Queensland;
Interpretation; Rural Archaeology

The English author Somerset Maugham wrote:

Nothing in the world is permanent, and we’re foolish when we ask anything to last, but
surely we’re still more foolish not to take delight in it while we have it.1

Cultural heritage  sites are  non-renewable resources that  are fascinating links to a
diverse past.  Historically  significant  places  can  be  restored to  something of  their
former glory, but ultimately the original fabric will disappear. Therefore, heritage
management is directed towards conserving heritage places for as long as humanly
possible.  Total  protection  and  severe  restriction  of  visitation  is  a  widely  used
management approach. However, what is the value in preserving such places for the
future, if people are not permitted to enjoy them today and to marvel at the efforts

1 S. Maugham, The Razor’s Edge, London, 1948.

of  their  forebears?  Often  heritage  places  are  subjected  to  well-orchestrated
conservation and restoration actions, but  the  crucial element of  presentation and
interpretation to visitors, both local residents and tourists is absent.2

Without  the  opportunity of  actively  promoting public visitation,  local commu-
nities  are  also  denied  possible  economic  benefits  that  may  otherwise  accrue.
However, the wider society risks a greater loss. Without suitable presentation and
appreciation of what is being conserved, cultural heritage sites potentially become
meaningless, and understanding of human history is lost. In heritage significance
assessments it is rare that all values of a place are identified. Emphasis is placed on
the fabric as a reminder of times past, while what the site signifies, its relevance to
contemporary society, and how past events have affected those that are now being
experienced are left undefined. As Sullivan3 points out, heritage assessors tend to be
more comfortable with assessing fabric, giving it emphasis over cultural process.

This  paper  is  predicated  on  the  assertion  that  permanency of  the  values  of  a
heritage place is achieved not solely by conservation activity but by giving the place
meaning within the life of contemporary communities. As such we strongly endorse
the World Heritage  Convention which  requires the  adoption  of  `a  general  policy
which  aims  to  give  the  cultural and  natural  heritage  a  function in  the  life  of  the
community . . .’ .4 Article 27  expands  on  this  need by  requiring States  Parties  to
assist in strengthening the local and global communities’  appreciation and respect
for natural and cultural heritage. We suggest that there is no valid reason why similar
requirements should not apply to places of lesser significance.

The main examples used in this paper are Australian sites, dating from the time
of  permanent settlement by  Europeans and Asians. In northern Australia, that  is
quite recent, from the mid- to late 19th century. While the age of these sites may be
short  by  world  standards,  like  all  heritage,  they  partly  reflect  who  and  what
Australians are and have  become as  a  nation. To this extent, we contend that  the
position we  take  has  universal application.  Some may  be quick to  point  out that
Australia  is  not  regarded  as  a  developing  country  and  will  thus  question  the
applicability of the Australian experience. However, rural Australia, in particular,
shares  many  of  the  problems  of  developing  countries:  isolation,  lower  levels  of
essential  services,  population  outflow  to  the  cities,  lower  skill  levels,  unemploy-
ment,5 and political and bureaucratic lack of practical understanding of day-to-day

2 B. Carter & G. Grimwade, `Balancing use and preservation in cultural heritage management’ ,
3 S. Sullivan, `Cultural values and cultural imperialism’ , Paper presented at the Historic Environment:
Australia ICOMOS Conference, Sydney, 1992, pp. 54± 62.

4 UNESCO, `The International Convention for the Protection of the World Culture and Natural
Heritage’ , UNESCO 1971 General Conference. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), 1992, Article 5(a).

5 R.A. Holmes & A.F.M. Shamsuddin, `Short- and long-term effects of World Exposition 1986 on US
demand for British Columbia  tourism’, Tourism Economics, Vol. 3, 1997, pp.  137± 160.

34

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

issues faced by rural communities.6 They often have a distinctive social structure, a
culture, ever susceptible to  the  influences of  socio-political forces of  more urban
areas.7 In these  ways,  rural Australia,  and  that  includes most  places  outside  the
major cities and towns, parallels developing nations.

The Value of Smaller and Mundane Heritage Places
The  world is  endowed with  numerous, small archaeological  sites. Australia is no
exception. It  is  partly  the  richness and diversity of  these sites that  make them so
interesting and significant. Age is certainly relevant, but there are other factors that
merit  consideration  when  determining  significance.  There  is  little  debate  that
prehistoric sites are highly significant; just as are grand examples of architecture and
the  more elaborate expressions of  human achievement of  more recent times. Yet,
between prehistoric times and today, it is as if the common people played no role in
the development of society and culture. Small occupation and activity  sites of the
plebeian  society  are  often  under-valued or  ignored. Yet  places  that  exemplify  life
processes can be equally significant and extremely useful in explaining the past and
events that shaped the future. Through interpreting such sites a truer understanding
of history can be developed.8

As argued by Berry & Holloway,9 our work has generally shown there is strong
public interest in low-level, historically accurate, presentations focused at  smaller,
less-spectacular sites. It seems to highlight that many larger, more impressive sites
are  recognised  because  their  values  are  obvious.  However,  such  places  often  lie
outside  the  personal  experience  of  most  observers.  In  contrast,  smaller,  more
mundane  sites  often  reflect  the  lives  of  most  people.  Few  people  can  really
appreciate the lives of kings and queens in the context of grand palaces. However,
we can identify much easier with the `Ice-Man’  found in the Otztal Alps,10 or with
a  lone  miner  who  left  behind  ceramic  shards  and  eating  utensils11 or  a  simple
market  gardener’s  dwelling.12 The  aristocrats  may  get  overt  recognition  from

6 J.G. Robinson & K.H. Redford, `Measuring the sustainability of hunting in tropical forests’ , Oryx,
Vol.  28, 1994, pp.  249± 256.

7 R. Stokes, `Psychosocial, environmental, and economic factors relevant to farm tourism supply’ ,
Australian Psychologist, Vol. 26, 1995, pp.  183± 187.

8 G.W. Sharpe, Interpreting our environment, New York: John Wiley, 1982.

9 S. Berry & C. Holloway, `From mundane to memorable: changing perceptions through the
promotion of the cultural past’ , in M. Robinson,  N. Evans & P. Callaghan  (eds) Tourism and cultural
change, Sunderland, UK: Centre for Travel and Tourism in association with Business Education
Publishers Ltd, 1996, pp.  13± 24.

1 0 K. Spindler, The man in the ice, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1994.

1 1 N.A.  Ritchie, `Archaeology and history of the Chinese in southern New Zealand during the
nineteenth century: a study of acculturation, adaptation,  and change’ , Unpublished  PhD thesis,
Dunedin: University of Otago.

1 2 F. Tilden, Interpreting our heritage, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1957.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

35

history, but the life of the not so illustrious made their achievements possible. We
find that this perspective holds interest more readily than the grand. This should be
of little surprise because Freeman Tilden alerted the world to this point forty years
ago, when in his first principle of interpretation, he said:

any interpretation that does not somehow relate what is being displayed or described to
something within the personality or experience of the visitor will be sterile.1 3

We contend that this equally applies to small and large heritage sites. Yet this is a
value  of  small  heritage  sites  that  elevates  their  significance  beyond  the  values
inherent in their extant fabric. It is a value that merits clear identification in heritage
assessment.

The Value of Heritage Places to Rural Communities
Sites  are  best  cared  for  through  well-planned  conservation  and  interpretation
actions. There is also a compelling reason for protecting and presenting them in this
world  driven  by  economic  rationalism:  local  communities  can  use  them  as  a
contemporary economic resource.14 Economic gain should not, of course, be seen
as the primary goal of conservation but it is, none the less, a worthy secondary aim.
The  primary goal  must  always  be  retention  for  the  heritage  values  of  the  place.
Economic  use  of  sites  may  not  turn  local  business  people  into  millionaires
overnight,  but  well-conserved and presented sites  have  the  potential  to  stimulate
local economies.

Fostering a sense of pride in local heritage and working out how to `show it off ’
is  as  important  as  the  conservation works  and  the  significance  assessments that
precede this  action. Several case  studies outlined later  in  this  paper  demonstrate
what can be done at the local level. They are, deliberately, not all success stories for
each has had particular challenges and the  outcomes can rarely be claimed to be
entirely successful. The main point is that they provide opportunities to learn and
develop better management practices. Costly and lengthy conservation projects will
be criticised if they do not provide the community with any immediate and tangible
benefitsÐ
a  fundamental  principle  of  community  development.1 5 As  Pearce16
argues,  tourism  can  and  does  enhance  environmental  appreciation  by  changing
people’s  attitudes  and  enriches  the  social  and  cultural  environment  of  host
communities. However, benefits need not be of a direct economic nature. Projects
that incorporate site presentation have a key ingredient for success: the community
has  something  it  can  show  pride  in  to  others  or,  at  least,  that  the  community

1 3 Ibid.

1 4 P.L. Pearce, Tourism and the environment  in  tourism Ð
Tourism Industry Association, 1990.

setting  the agenda, Canberra: Australian

1 5 T.R. Batten, Communities and their development, London: Oxford University Press, 1957.

1 6 Pearce, op. cit., note 14.

36

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

understands what is being conserved and why. This can act as a catalyst to further
community development processes and retention of cultural individuality. On the
other hand, it can also be the stimulus for creating new cultural values derived from
misreading the factual evidence.

The  key  issues  for  participants  in  conservation  and  presentation  of  cultural

heritage are:

recognising cultural heritage resources as positive attributes;
devising  a  practical  conservation  and  interpretation  plan  that  consider  both
community-based issues and the technical needs of a specific site;
developing  a  sound  working  relationship  between  community  and  heritage
professionals;
demonstrating a commitment to implementing a conservation strategy;
appreciating the need for sensitive utilisation of archaeological resources;

d managing security and minimising vandalism;

identifying and acquiring adequate financial support;
staffing and staff training;
providing suitable visitor access;

d marketing the resource; and
d maintaining the site.

These are discussed under three broad headings: broader recognition of site values,
pragmatic management and pro-active presentation.

Community Recognition and Acknowledgement of Values
During  our early  schooling most  of  us  learn about  the  world’s  greatest  archaeo-
logical treasures, such as Stonehenge, the Pyramids, the Acropolis, the Great Wall
of  China, Mayan  and South-east Asian temples. Less often do teachers focus on
local heritage places or raise sensitivity and appreciation of value of these smaller
sites.  It  is  almost  as  if  to  say  `big  is  beautiful’   and,  by  extension,  small  is
inconsequential!

The  appearance  of  the Temple  of  Hou Wang  in Atherton, north  Queensland,
belies its significance. It was built in 1903 by expatriate Chinese, used extensively
for about 30 years and gradually allowed to fall into disrepair until 1979.17 The term
`temple’  is possibly misleading for it is simply a corrugated iron structure of modest
size, bearing more resemblance, externally, to a farm-shed than a place of worship
(see figure 1). The property’s significance was finally recognised by a member of the
National Trust of Queensland in the late 1970s. The Trust acquired both the temple
and  the  adjacent,  abandoned, Chinatown  site  by  donation from  the  owners, the
Fong On family.

1 7 G. Grimwade, `Of gods, timber and maize: cultural heritage management at Cedar camp, Atherton
Chinatown,  Queensland’, in P.  McGregor (ed.) Histories of the  Chinese in Australasia and the South
Pacific, Melbourne: Museum of Chinese History, 1995.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

37

d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
Figure 1. Temple of Hou Wang, Atherton. The appearance of the temple belies its significance to the

residents of the Chinatown in the early 1900s. [Photograph: Gordon Grimwade].

Subsequent research established that the building was internationally significant
for its rarity and intactness, the quality of the carved wooden fittings, its research
value, and its association with a particular ethnic group of pioneer Australians. The
Temple  is  one  of  about  four,  world-wide,  dedicated  to  Hou Wang,  bodyguard
commander to the Last Emperor of the Southern Sung dynasty. It is the only one
known outside modern China. However, what is truly impressive is that it contains
virtually  all  the  original  artefacts:  from  the  clapperless bell  cast  in  1897,  to  the
ornately carved wooden altar front panel and resplendent with gold leaf finish and
backed by sheet mica mirrors.18,19

Over the  past  two  decades, efforts have  focused on research, conservation and
initial interpretation of the temple and the Chinatown, which was once home for
about 400 people. While the site has received professional recognition as one of high
significance, local acceptance has been slower. This is partly due to over-familiarity
with the `old temple’ . To many residents it is a childhood playground where, up until
30 years ago, you could incur the wrath of the caretaker simply by trying to sneak
into the dimly lit interior and strike the bell or clash the cymbals. It also suffers from
a subconscious lack of interest in the activities of a minority society, most of whose
members have  long  since  left  the  district,  and  the  widely  held,  entrenched bias
towards the grand.

1 8 Ibid.

1 9 M. Lillie, `Hou Wang Miau: Atherton Chinatown,  Queensland’ , Unpublished report to the
National Trust of Queensland, Brisbane, 1997.

38

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

Another  reason  is  of  greater  concern  and  reflects  misjudgement  and  a
professional  preservationist  paradigm.  When  the  National  Trust  acquired  the
property, its  management was  controlled from head office in Brisbane, 1,800 km
away.  The  Trust’s  local  branch  was  encouraged  merely  to  raise  funds  and
occasionally  open  the  doors.  There  was  local  resentment. The  Atherton-based
branch lost interest and disbanded and, for several years, local participation in the
site’s operation was negligible. More recently, efforts have been made to correct the
situation; a committee of Friends of Hou Wang Temple has been formed to assist
with  site  maintenance and  staffing.  It  undertakes  regular  maintenance  and  now
opens the temple to the public each month. A local management committee, giving
even  greater  local  empowerment, has  also  been suggested20 but  not  yet  formed.
Gradually  these  steps  are  resulting  in  the  re-establishment  of  a  sense  of  local
`ownership’  and affiliation.

Management of Small Heritage Sites
Organisation and Staffing
As with any new or ongoing initiative, there are numerous management issues to
consider.  These  may  be  broadly  categorised  as  organisational  and  physical.
Obviously,  each  site  will  have  specific issues  to  be  addressed. Broadly,  however,
organisational issues involve devising a functional management structure. In some
cases, it seems simple, for example, where the site is owned by the local council: but
is it really that simple?

Because a council or a heritage agency owns a property, protection and presentation
is not necessarily assured. Improved outcomes might require a sharing of management
responsibility.  Cultural  heritage  sites,  like  museums,  are  rarely  able  to  be  self-
supporting. They  need ongoing  aid. They  need grants  and in-hand contributions.
What they do provide for a community is an added resource base that also helps to
build a sense of identity.21 They are often the `national flags’  of rural communities.
Such communities have a stake in the heritage and often demand an active say in its
management. If this outlet for expressing ownership and a commitment to protecting
their heritage is not permitted, unchecked vandalism can result.

Some  local  councils  may  be  adequately  stimulated  to  manage  heritage  places
directly. However, even they need to develop a chain of management responsibility.
Cook  Shire,  which  includes  much  of  Cape  York  Peninsula,  achieved  this  by
designating one of its senior staff  as the `Heritage Officer’ . This was not simply a
bland labelling process. The officer concerned had already demonstrated interest in
the role through his efforts to implement recommendations of the Heritage Study

2 0 C. Cooper, A. Lockwood & P.C. Reynolds, `Impacts of tourism on indigenous communitiesÐ
Australian case’ , Progress in Tourism, Recreation  and Hospitality Management, Vol. 4, 1992,
pp.  113± 119.

the

2 1 J. Knox, `Resident± visitor interactions: a review of the literature and general policy alternatives’ , in
F. Rajotte (ed.) The impact of tourism development  in the Pacific, Ontario: Environmental and Resource
Studies Program, Trent University, 1982.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

39

for  Cooktown.22 He  was  also  given  oversight  of  heritage  management  issues  in
municipal  works,  which  sometimes  leads  to  conflict  with  others  in  Council.
Personal  commitment  is  essential  to  effective  management.  Identification  of
someone  as  being  responsible  and  given  appropriate  authority  and  support  is  a
necessary corollary to personal commitment. Support must include local commu-
nity representation and, ideally, local professional input.

Vandalism
Physical aspects of site conservation are central to any management role. Mowing
the  grass, cleaning the  building, arranging repairs are the  essential but  mundane
issues  faced.  Recognising that  even  these  basic  issues  may  have  special  needs is
essential. Mowing is basically the same the world over: or is it? On an archaeological
site simply racing over it with a ride-on mower, or worse, a tractor and slasher can
be devastating to the fabric. Operators need to know where damage could occur and
how  to  avoid  such eventualities. Repairs to  buildings must be in accord with  the
basic conservation principles.2 3

Management also includes dealing with issues as diverse as vandalism and fund
raising. With respect to vandalism, the approach can be, and often is, reactionary
and defensive, or pro-active and inclusive. For example, vandalism is a problem at
Green  Hill  Fort,  Thursday  Island.  An  abandoned  fibro-cement  meteorological
services hut on the fort has recently been smashed with rocks. The remainder of the
site is subjected to waves of vandalism ranging from littering during drinking binges,
to reckless car driving around the ramparts. Clearly, some people do not recognise
or  respect  the  heritage  values  of  the  site  as  perceived  by  the  majority  of  the
community. They see it more as a place to sate more basic human needs.

The Management Committee’s response has not been to rely on law enforcement
or chain-wire fencing. They are well advanced in discussing with the local military
commanders the opportunity to involve the  local cadet corps in site conservation
works,  maintenance of  the  six-inch  breech-loading guns,  repairs  to  the  drainage
system and painting works. The idea is not that the cadets will be a source of cheap
labour. Rather, the intention is that  cadet action will foster a  commitment to the
site.  Initially  this  might  be  simply  to  protect  the  efforts  of  their  labour,  but
eventually it may lead to an appreciation of the site’s significance. In any case, the
intent is that  commitment will be associated with peer pressure on those who are
committing the vandalism.

In  contrast,  the  National  Trust  faces  minor,  but  related,  problems  with  the
Temple of Hou Wang. In the past, bored children have sought to force entry into the
Temple `for fun’ . For various reasons implied earlier, the Trust has adopted a more

2 2 G. Grimwade & A. Meiklejohn, `Cooktown heritage study’ , Vol. 1, Unpublished report to Cook
Shire Council by Resource Consulting Services Pty Ltd, Cairns, 1993.

2 3 Australia ICOMOS, `The Australia ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural
Significance (The Burra Charter)’ , Sydney: ICOMOS, 1981.

40

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

defensive  approachÐ
security.  An  electronic  security  and  fire  alarm  have  been
installed. The flashing  blue lights  and high-pitched wailing  siren are perceived as
adequate  deterrents.  While  we  strongly  advocate  the  pro-active  approach  to
vandalism,  we  also  acknowledge  that  in  some  circumstances,  enforcement  and
barriers are justified. However, choice of management tool needs to be evaluated in
terms  of  immediate  and  long-term  effectiveness,  rather  than  a  response  to  the
immediate urgency of  the  problem. In this case, identifying the  underlying cause
may be vital to reducing the physical damage.

Funding
Another key management issue is obtaining sufficient funds to undertake the range
of necessary conservation activities, including presentation. In Australia, and many
other countries, government grant programmes are the main sources.24 These are
often  associated with  perceived milestone celebrations or  other special  events. In
Australia, we saw 1988  as  the bicentennial of  colonial settlement. With it came a
plethora  of  commemorative  programmes.  As  2001  approaches,  Australians  are
again `gearing up’  with a range of funding programmes.

Finding out what grant opportunities exist is a major feat. Often, knowledge of
funding opportunities is received via advertisements in the  local press or through
word  of  mouth via  colleagues. Successful applications  are  those  that  address the
criteria,  have  realistic  budgets,  and  can  demonstrate  support  from  the  wider
community. Typically, funding agencies want to ensure their grant moneys are well
spent, that they will gain kudos and ideally that their funding will act as a seed for
complementary  action.  Meeting  these  requirements  is  easier  said  then  done.
Applying for funds is almost an  art  form. Experienced heritage managers should
have little difficulty in this regard, but the process works against those community
groups with limited experience in preparing applications. They are more likely to
benefit by contracting someone to prepare the grant submission. Where resources
are tight,  it  is often possible to  have  this  work done on a `success fee’   basis. If  a
professionally prepared grant application can be supported by evidence of existing
community commitment, success is more likely.

Two examples highlight the subtleties in seeking grant funds: one heritage related,

the other in land use.

A  remote,  small,  but  active,  historical society  in  Far  North  Queensland has  a
museum in a heritage-listed 19th-century fort. An application was prepared for  a
substantial Federation Funds grant. Their success in gaining a portion of what they
sought was attributed to the involvement of two people, well versed in grant funding
applications, preparing the  proposal. Their failure to  secure the  full  amount was
apparently due to their not having a proven record of handling government grants
rather than  the  merits of the application! Funding is becoming more like seeking
finance. You need a credit rating.

2 4 J.S.  Kerr, The conservation plan: a guide  to the preparation of conservation plans for places of European
cultural  significance, Sydney: National Trust of Australia (NSW),  1995.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

41

Two  Landcare  groups  in  Queensland  sought  Federal  government  grants  that
stemmed from initiatives towards biodiversity conservation. Both projects involved
restoration of creek-banks with native rainforest species. Only one was successful.
This had nothing to do with limitations to funding. Rather, one group couched their
project in terms of contributing to biodiversity, the other described their project in
terms of minimising erosion. Since the latter, in Australia, is a State responsibility
(not directly covered by an International Convention), the Federal funding agency
had  no  direct  power  to  support  such  a  project.  Consequently,  the  biodiversity
project won the funding. It is not necessarily what you do, but why you say you are
doing it that often counts.

A  somewhat  unorthodox source of  funding,  which  is  often  overlooked,  is  the
`joint venture’ . Probably the easiest to arrange is to work with local service clubs.
Rotary, Lions and Apex Clubs look to support high-profile, community projects. At
Cooktown, the local Lions Club paid for one of a number of interpretive signs being
prepared  by  Cook  Shire  Council (see  figure  2).  Signage  standards  prepared  for
Council strongly interlink graphic elements. It is to the Council’s credit that, despite
their investment in the standards, there is a willingness to share them so that  the
message can be conveyed to visitors and townsfolk alike. In this case, only the Lions
Club logo appears on the sign.

Another source of  funding  is  the  corporate  sector,  especially  where  there  is  a
direct link between the heritage site and their core business. In the mining industry,
for example, many projects involve re-working now-deserted mine sitesÐ places of
cultural heritage significance. Traditional views of the mining industry are that they
hold cultural heritage in scant regard. In some quarters that view is changing. Many

Figure  2. Orientation sign at the Cooktown  Botanic Gardens. The interpretive signs explain how,
in the early 1900s, botanic gardens were a focal point for recreational activity. [Photograph: Gordon

Grimwade].

42

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

companies  in  recent  years  have  seen  value  in  heritage  conservation.  Personal
interest,  high  public  relations  value,  and  recognition  of  a  need  to  comply  with
government regulations with  some degree of enthusiasm, are obvious reasons for
this attitudinal change.

At remote sites the possibility of a joint venture for heritage site management and
interpretation offers real opportunities. Mine personnel are on the spot. They know
the technology, and many are forward thinkers who see value in being seen to be
taking a more co-operative role in heritage issues.25

At  two  major  projects  underway  in  north-west  Queensland,  companies26 re-
working old sites have willingly adopted sound heritage-management plans. These
companies have senior staff interested in cultural heritage. Both are committed to
profitable operations, but they are also keen to provide interpretation at their sites
to enhance visitor experience. In a cynical sense, this is subtle advertising. Even so,
these opportunities are worth exploiting. What is better: to leave a heritage place to
deteriorate virtually unknown, vandalised and ignored, or to present it, in whole or
in part, and to prevent continuing vandalism by a committed on-site management
presence?

If  interpretation is to  be an effective  management tool, particularly for remote
sites,  there  is  a  need  to  employ  all  resources  available.  Expanding  visitor
opportunities  may  be  the  answer  for  some  under-utilised  sites.  In  other  cases,
discouraging  visitors  may  be  appropriate,  not  only  to  minimise  infrastructure
damage  but  also  to  preserve  site  ambience.  Australia  has  major  problems  in
managing isolated heritage sites. There is a need to think laterally and change much
dogma.  Sound  management  includes  effective  communication. This  will  mean
taking the risk of seeking aid from hitherto unorthodox sources. Only then can we
hope to maintain, and present irreplaceable cultural heritage places.

Presentation
Effective  presentation  is  focal  to  the  ongoing  use  of  any  cultural  heritage  site.
Physical  conservation,  effective  management,  and  adequate  seed  funding  are
important. Getting the message across is crucial. Unfortunately, this view is often
not  widely  endorsed  by  heritage  professionals.  In  a  recent  publication  of  the
Australian  Heritage  Commission, it  is  indicated  that  a  conservation  plan  should
include the following `essential elements’ :

a description of the place and a statement of significance;
an assessment of conditions;
a statement of conservation principles and policies;
the conservation process and strategies, including resource needs;

2 5 G. Grimwade, `Heritage management plan, Mt Cuthbert’, Unpublished report to Murchinson
United Pty Ltd, Cairns, 1995.

2 6 Majestic Resources at Kuridala and Murchinson United at Mt Cuthbert.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

43

d
d
d
d
controls on research; and
people responsible for implementing the plan and timing for review,27

Interpretation should not be seen as an end productÐ

The only element considered `non essential’   is `recommendations for making the
significant  values  understood (interpretation)’ .28 If  this  somewhat  elitist  view  is
pursued, the ongoing destruction of archaeological sites of significance is assured.
the final phase in heritage
place management action. Excellent interpretation opportunities exist as soon as a
place  is  identified  as  having  significance.  The  advances  made  in  the  UK  in
presenting on-site interpretation during archaeological excavations is a commend-
able example.29 In many ways, it parallels efforts by museum display departments
that provide `peep show views’  of display areas undergoing refurbishment.

Interpretation  of  heritage  sites  is  primarily  about  explaining  significance  and
meaning. It requires research, planning and strategic consideration of what are the
best  media  forms  to  use  and  the  principal  messages  to  be  conveyed  to  targeted
audiences.3 0 It must present the meaning behind the artefact, or site, which creates
value and significance. This requires a structured programme that builds on a series
of information contacts and experiences (see figure 3). Establishing the background
information and context should be the  basis of  pre-visit communication. On-site
interpretation  should  assist  and  encourage  observation,  self-interpretation  and
stimulate further enquiry. Tilden’s fourth principle of interpretation `the chief aim
of  interpretation  is  not  instruction  but  provocation’   is  certainly  applicable  to
cultural place interpretation.31

The  greatest  risks  of  presenting  small  rural  heritage  sites  relate  to  who  is
responsible for management. If, at  the local level, inappropriate conservation and
presentation  by  a  well-intentioned  but  inadequately  skilled  local  community  is
possible. If management is directed by agencies remote from the site, the potential
exists that there will be a loss of a local sense of `ownership’  or identity with the site
as outsiders usurp that role, intentionally or unintentionally. Cultural heritage sites
can  be  conserved and  presented to  advantage,  provided a  few  crucial  issues  are
addressed. While there will always be sites where the mere presence of people can be
detrimental, such as the cave paintings of Lascaux in France, there are always ways

2 7 Australian Heritage Commission,  Protecting  local heritage places: a guide  for communities, Canberra,
1998.

2 8 Ibid., p. 63.

2 9 G. Binks, J. Dyke & P.  Dagnall, Visitors welcome: a manual on the presentation  and interpretation  of
archaeological excavations, London: English  Heritage, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1988.

3 0 M. Hockings, F. Leverington & B.  Carter, `Public contact planning  for conservation management’ ,
Department of Management Studies  Occasional Paper, University  of Queensland  Gatton College Vol. 3,
1995, 43 pp.

3 1 F. Tilden, Interpreting our heritage, Chapel Hill, NC:  University of North Carolina Press, 1957.

44

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

d
d
Figure 3. Structure of an interpretation programme.3 2

that quality presentations associated with those sites can be developed and the above
dangers avoided.

At the Temple of Hou Wang and associated Chinatown, funding does not permit
employment of staff. The management decision to be made is: `How can this valuable
site be made available for use, without a supervisory presence and without risking the
loss of archaeological artefacts?’  The solution lies in a combination of interpretation
and the positive provision of access.33 Volunteers open the Temple for visitation on a
regular basis and for special events such as Heritage Week. In such cases, control and
interpretation is provided by the supervising volunteer. However, most of the time, a
series of A2 signs provide the interpretation and site management. Since there is only
one extant structure on the site, interpretation is based on creating an image of what
life was like during its Chinese occupation, and to an extent directing attention away
from the  temple. Signs  were chosen as  the  interpretive medium because of  their
permanency when an on-site presence is not possible.

An example of using interpretation to deflect potential management problems is
given  by  the  signage  for the Temple. Rather  than  focus on the  existing  contents,
emphasis is on religion in the life of Chinese. The aim is to tell part of the story by

3 2 Adapted from B. Carter & G. Grimwade, `Managing  cultural heritage places’ , in R.W. Carter & A..
Ross (eds) Promoting and preserving public places, Gatton College, Queensland: Department of Natural
and Rural Systems Management, UQG.

3 3 B.  Carter & G. Grimwade, `Cedar Camp, Atherton Chinatown,  interpretation concepts’,
Unpublished report to the National Trust of Queensland, Brisbane, 1993.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

45

creating  a  context  without  drawing  attention  to  the  valuable  heritage  artefacts
inside. These items remain available for face-to-face contacts. While the artefacts are
spectacular, it is the belief system of the Chinese and the practice of religious rites
that influenced the lives of the early Chinese community in Atherton.

One Community’s Response to Heritage Interpretation
The  mouth  of  the  Endeavour  River  is  a  site  where  much  of  Queensland  and
Australian heritage and history focused. The Koko-yimidjir initially used this area
for  its  rich  estuarine resources. Many  of  the  first European explorers of  the  east
coast of Australia entered the `port’ . It was where the crew of the Endeavour first
encountered the kangaroo, dingo and crocodile. It was once a port to rival Brisbane
and, in the  1880s,  served a  population five times the  existing  shire population of
around 6,000. Most of the population in those early days were Chinese; few of their
descendants remain in the area. What does remain is a unique collection of buildings
and other evidence of wealth, which reflects changing prosperity within a setting of
a near-pristine river.

In 1997, Cook Shire Council installed interpretive signs at strategic historical and
archaeological  sites  throughout  Cooktown. They  included Grassy  Hill  where,  in
1770,  James  Cook and Joseph Banks had noted the  complexity of navigating  the
Great  Barrier  Reef  on  which  they  had  severely  damaged  their  ship,  Endeavour.
Cooktown’s  19th-century  wharf  precinct,  the  botanical  gardens  and  the  streets
themselves were also incorporated in the signage project (see figure 4). For heritage
managers,  the  extant  fabric  is  significant.  For  interpretation it  is  what  the  fabric
reflects that is important. The interpretive approach adopted was not to excessively
focus on specific sites and their characteristics, but rather to use sites, streetscapes
and settings to explain the history and significance of the township and its role in the
growth of Australia. The aim was to increase visitor appreciation of the natural and
cultural heritage of the area. In this way, an informal linkage between diverse places
was effected; but how effective was the project?

Surveys of tourist service providers (n =  10), visitors (n =  45) and local residents

(n =  27) were conducted concurrently late in 1997.34 In summary:

96% of residents and all service providers were aware of the signs;
after reading the signs 38% of visitors and 48% of residents actively sought more
signs to read;
no one surveyed ignored the signs if they saw them;

d when given opposing positive and negative words to describe the interpretation

fewer than 10% of visitors and residents chose negative words.

Most  visitors  (68%)  indicated  that  the  signs  had  increased  their  enjoyment  of
their  visit  and  73%  commented  that  the  signs  helped  them  to  understand

3 4 S. Pinwell, `Evaluating  the effectiveness of the Cook Shire interpretive signage’ , Unpublished
undergraduate report to the University of Queensland, Gatton College, 1997.

46

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter

d
d
d
Figure  4.  Interpretive sign  at Grassy Hill,  Cooktown. The signs at Cooktown use extant fabric to

explain context.  [Photograph: Gordon  Grimwade].

Cooktown’s heritage. Resident response reflected these results with 48% express-
ing  the  opinion  that  the  signs  increased  tourist’s  enjoyment  of  their  visit,  with
81%  having  the  opinion  that  the  signs  increased  visitors’   understanding.  Most
residents  (59%),  but  only  40%  of  tourist  service  providers,  considered that  the
signs  encouraged  tourists  to  stay  longer.  However,  there  was  strong  agreement
(91%  of  residents and  80%  of  tourism service  providers)  that  the  signs  were  an
asset  to  Cooktown.

Of particular relevance to this paper is the response of both residents (78%) and
tourist service providers (80%) that the signs had increased their own appreciation
of Cooktown’s heritage values. Further, all tourist service providers considered that
the signs were definitely becoming an important part of tourist itineraries, although
they had yet to identify a change in the length of visitor stay in the town. While such
a response cannot be construed as community commitment to protecting the town’s
heritage sites, we certainly argue that it is evidence of increased awareness and pride
in  the  town’s  heritage.  It  also  suggests  recognition  of  the  value  of  conserving
heritage elements and places.

Managing Small Heritage Sites

47

Conclusion
Fundamental to  the  conservation of  heritage  sites is giving  them meaning to  the
community, both local and visiting. This means actively explaining their values and
significance. While the grand heritage sites of the world face the problem of being
appreciated  to  obliteration,  the  smaller  archaeological  sites  of  everyday  human
existence risk decimation through neglect and lack of an appreciation of the heritage
story they can tell. Recognition of the potential value of rural archaeological sites
provides opportunities for communities threatened by continuing migration to the
cities. Such sites are ready-made tourism products. They just need to be correctly
conserved  and  presented  creatively  and  accurately.  We  do  not  claim  that  the
presentation  of  cultural  heritage  sites  will  solve  the  economic  woes  of  rural
communities. However, we do suggest that it is a latent opportunity that will help,
and in the process, foster wider appreciation of rural life and the challenges faced by
our forebears.

The basis for effective heritage management lies in developing a sound, practical,
achievable  conservation  plan.  That  plan  must  provide  opportunity  for  local
communities to work in partnership with heritage professionals and set clear goals.
Ultimately the goal must be to share small rural heritage sites with others. After all
`nothing in the world is permanent and we are foolish when we ask anything to last,
but surely we are still more foolish not to take delight in it while we have it’ .

48

Gordon Grimwade and Bill Carter


