Hammams and the contemporary city: the case of Isfahan, Iran

J. Sarmentoa,b* and Z. Kazemia,c

aDepartment of Geography, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal; bCentre for
Geographical Studies, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; cDepartment of Tourism
Management, University of Sheikh Bahaei, Isfahan, Iran
(Received 22 February 2012; ﬁnal version received 1 October 2012)

Hammams, or public baths, are an essential part of the social life in urban
Islam. Often, they have a rich and inspiring architecture. In Iran and, in particu-
lar, in Isfahan – a large and historic city in central of Iran – numerous hamm-
ams were built since the Safavid dynasty (1501–1722). Social and urban
changes have resulted in a signiﬁcant decline in the number of hammams over
the years. This paper starts by describing the multiple dimensions of hammams,
such as their main architecture features, their role in health, society and culture.
This is followed by an analysis of hammams in Isfahan, using a modiﬁed ver-
sion of Büyükdigan categories for Ottoman baths: (i) ‘baths in ruins’; (ii) ‘baths
continuing their original functions’; and (iii) ‘baths readjusted for new uses’.
Anecdotal evidence from a survey conducted in 15 hammams is used through-
out this paper. The main conclusions relate to the rapid deterioration of hamm-
ams in daily life, coupled with the lack of detailed documentation, which would
allow proper planning and development, and the deﬁcient use of some of these
magniﬁcent buildings and places for tourism development.
Introduction
Hammam, ‘spreader of warmth’ in Arabic, also named ‘Garmabeh’ in Persian
which literally means ‘hot water’, became synonymous with steam baths and bath-
ing. Hammam is not only a speciﬁc type of building with distinctive architectural
features, relying on the use of abundant amounts of water, but also a critical site for
hygiene and health care, and an important place for social and cultural relationships
and performances (Kilito 1992). Due to the quick changing patterns of urban life in
Iran, hammams have been going through rapid transformations and many struggle
to continue functioning (Bakhtiar 1974). Numerous hammams have closed down
and are mere ruins, while others have been transformed, having various new public
or private functions. This paper aims at contributing to the discussion of the con-
temporary role of hammams, and at stimulating the debate of the possibilities of
uses of hammams in Isfahan, Iran. Firstly, it provides a brief account of the various
dimensions of hammams and attempts to introduce public baths and the develop-
it builds on Büyükdigan’s
ment of hammams in the Islamic world. Secondly,
(2003) work on the new functions of Ottoman baths, and uses three different

*Corresponding author. Email: j.sarmento@geograﬁa.uminho.pt

Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis



139

categories to discuss hammams’ present uses and possibilities of change in the con-
temporary city of Isfahan, Iran. While this is done based on a survey of 15 hamm-
ams in Isfahan, the paper does not intend to describe them in detail. Visits to all
hammams described here were made between February 2010 and 2012. These visits
included observation of the spaces, transect walks and regular visits, photographic
registration, and whenever possible, informal conversations with hammam owners,
managers, workers and users. In brief, the paper argues that hammams are a key
part of contemporary Islamic cities and may have an important social, cultural and
touristic role to play, if properly planned and developed.

Hammams
Hammams have existed since the Hellenistic period and ﬂourished with the Romans
and Byzantines (Sibley 2006). Whereas the bathing tradition died out in the west, it
continued in the Levant after the arrival of Muslim Arabs, and the period following
the rise of Islam witnessed a rapid development in public baths and some modiﬁca-
tions from Roman to Islamic bathing. Hammams were mostly established within
the framework of a charitable endowment – Waqf – with personal property to serve
the needs of Muslims. Established during Safavid times and cloaked as a religious/
charitable act, this is a system that supports perpetual charitable activities through
the periodical revenues generated from ﬁxed assets such as buildings (Habashi
2008), and used primarily as an economic development stimulus. The spatially gen-
dered nature of hammams acquired a great signiﬁcance during the Islamic period.
Yet, while structurally the majority of them have two baths with ‘gendered quarters
or men’s and women’s hours’ (Aksit 2011, p. 1), and are often symmetrically built
and organised, the complexity of the gender dimension in hammams goes well
beyond this materiality. Cichocki (2005), for example, argues that hammams have
historically been thought of as a public masculine space where revolts and other
subversive actions were planned. Aksit (2011) explains how women’s quarters of
the historical hammams run contrary to the deﬁnition of public spheres that are
associated with men and rational dialogue, and are characterised by being spaces
where women formulate discussions on urban contexts and history. Water is the cru-
cial element in hammams in countless ways. It is central in hygiene, in health, in
the sacred and the sublime (Anderson and Tabb 2002), at times in the propagation
of diseases (Afkhami 1998) and has an important social role. Ancient medicine was
strongly connected to ideas about water and to the equilibrium it provided to any
system, religious or physical (Kosso and Scott 2009); religion not only shapes the
ways in which people transform space and construct meaningful places (Mazumdar
and Mazumdar 2004), but also embeds them with speciﬁc practices. Major and
minor ablutions bring Muslims to hammams at certain moments.

Generally, Iranian hammams have a threefold structure, spatially and function-
ally sequential: the Sarbineh (the dressing room), the Miyandar (a connecting corri-
dor) and the Garmkhaneh (the hot bathing room). Sarbineh has a polyhedral base
(octagon, hexagonal, rectangular or quadrilateral), which includes a duplicate base
inside it. Normally, the platforms around Sarbineh are the places to change clothes
and relax. Spaces under these platforms serve to deposit shoes. In some cases, there
are several fountains around the Sarbineh, which people use to wash their feet
before moving to the next compartment. In addition, several stone pillars are located
under the Sarbineh’s central dome and some lower ceilings also cover the side

140

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

the Garmkhaneh can be divided in various bathing rooms,

platforms. The Miyandar exists to reduce the heat waste and to avoid direct views
into the bath. Finally, the Garmkhaneh is the hot washing room with a polyhedral
base, which is generally divided into different parts by stone pillars. In fact, on the
centre of the Garmkhaneh, there is usually a dome with stone pillars. In larger
hammams,
like
Khazineh, Khalvat and Chal Howz. Khazineh, a small pool used for ablution, is
usually located in front of the entrance to the Garmkhaneh. Also in some cases,
adjacent to the Garmkhaneh, there is a Khalvat room, or solitude room, which is
used by the owner or special guests. Chal Howz refers to a swimming pool inside
the big Garmkhaneh (Rohol Amini 2007, Neyestani and Amirhajloo 2010). In some
hammams, there are two large and two small baths connected to each other, which
aim at reducing heat waste. All different parts of the bathhouse have geometrical
bases. Often, the entrance to the small bath is located on the opposite side of the
hammam. In addition, next to many hammams, there is a long corridor – Gavro –
leading to a well, from which an ox pulls water buckets. Foot-operated wells were
also found in smaller buildings. Apart from these common structural features, varia-
tions in design and decoration are immense, and hammams constitute a rich heri-
tage.

Dumreicher (2008) has illustrated how hammams are a vital part of the Islamic
city and are normally well embedded in the historic urban fabric. Their position is
never prominent, with blind facades, and with discreet entrances often in a back
lane (Sibley 2006). Usually, the women’s entrance, often a much smaller door than
the men’s entrance, is even more unnoticeable (Aksit 2011). Hammams are conspic-
uous when viewed from the air, since their vaulted dooms are impossible to over-
look. Due to their central location, hammams can be desirable development sites,
and newly designed hammam facilities may develop from traditional ones. These
developments may ﬁnd expression in the architectural solutions chosen to accom-
modate the additional activities to the core function of the hammam. Hence, many
newly developed bathhouse complexes are designed using local materials (such as
bricks and stones) for the structure and incorporate the distinctive domes and vaults,
as seen in traditional historical practice. Sibley (2006) conducted a survey within
historical hammams in Damascus and Fez. First, she established a guide for design-
ing hammams based mainly on the dynamics of transformation within Islamic soci-
ety. Secondly, she highlighted the characteristics of this building type not only as a
sustainable urban facility which promotes social interaction, but also as a support
for a rich intangible heritage. In fact, hammams’ intangible heritage relates to urban
narratives and experiences. It is lodged in conversations, in social life, in the gen-
dered nature of the space it produces and reproduces, in the secrets and intrigues it
conceals and in the compliance with beauty norms. As Destino and Sibley (2012,
p. 55) argue, ‘The living heritages of the hammam are echoes of earlier voices,
songs, and images, not only of voices heard in the childhood but also of the rever-
berations of ideas through cultural history’. Thus, transformations in hammams –
their demolition, their closure, the changing of function, etc. – not only alter cities
structurally, but also socially and culturally.

Sibley’s study suggested that

the few surviving hammams in Damascus are
located near the touristic historic areas. These have been physically restored and
new functions such as massage rooms, showers and pools were introduced. Other
hammams have changed function and are used for storage or as workshops. Most
of those still operating have ceased to receive women, closing their doors to the



141

few remaining female users and contributing to the disappearance of a rich intangi-
ble heritage associated with their usage. How the changing function of hammams is
impacting women’s lives (in Isfahan, for instance) is an important subject that social
scientists still have to address. Thus, hammams’ functions may change as they are
bound to the social setting in which they are placed. In Fez, Morocco, as in many
other cities in the Maghreb, the existence of a densely populated medina – where
traditional modes of life are still taking place – is tightly connected to the mainte-
nance and functioning of most historical hammams (Sibley 2006). Nevertheless,
they mostly cater for the poor, since poverty rates in the medina (just like in other
Moroccan medinas) are signiﬁcantly higher than the urban average (Tagemouati
2012).

Hammams can also be understood as key sites through which culture travels.

Historically, as Gandy (2004, p. 180) argues:

the rediscovery of the pleasures of bathing in the eighteenth century carried with it an
erotic charge and often drew on Orientalist conceptions of sensuality derived from
European travelers’ encounters with the hammams of North Africa and the Middle
East.

Baths were central to western displays of Oriental ways of life in World Fairs
(Çelik 1992), together with the mosque, the fountain and a residence (pavilion).
Hammams remain a utopian space in the European imagination (Sibley 2008), sus-
tained in a complex and multilayered dialectic by references that rely heavily on
nineteenth-century legacies which include paintings, quietness, sensuality and plea-
sure (Çelik 1992).

Currently, many hammams in the western world are a central social and cul-
tural piece within dislocated communities, such as Turkish emigrants in Germany.
Here, hammams serve as a meeting place for immigrants, and where certain cul-
tural practices and traditions of their home countries are occasionally re-enacted.
By contrast, other hammams also in the west have been appropriated by western
behaviour and by the tourism industry. Two examples are the Iranian Yasmin ham-
mam in Paris, open since 1975, and the Turkish private Sultan hammam in Berlin,
open since 1999, which cater for Turkish and Iranian communities in these coun-
tries, but also for a western population that is attracted by the exotic and sensual
idea of the east. Finally, it is also important to mention hammams that have been
tourists. Cağaloğlu and Çemberlitas,
developed to cater solely for international
both in Istanbul, are good examples of what have become extremely commodiﬁed
places.

Hammams in Isfahan

In Iran, some of the most important material heritage dates back to the Safavid
dynasty (1501–1722), the longest lasting Persian dynasty in the past 1000 years.
The dynasty is considered by many scholars to have created some of the most
important architecture in Iran, the city of Isfahan being a particular example of the
architectural achievements of this period. It united the successor states of the Arab
empire into a Persian state and introduced Shia as the state religion, either because
of the preponderance of Shia Islam in Persian’s territory or to counter the Sunni
Islam of their rivals, the Ottoman empire (Foran 1992, Lewis 1997). Few hammams
dated before the Safavid dynasty remain, since Mongol and Timurid empires

142

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

destroyed most heritage buildings (Tabasi et al. 2007). With the Safavid dynasty,
Mongol superstitions related to washing the head and body were replaced by a con-
duct of cleanliness, and hammams acquired a new importance for the Shia Muslims
(Tabasi et al. 2007, p. 52).

After losing Baghdad to the Turks, and fearing for the safety of the old capi-
tals, Tabriz and Qazvin, which were considered too close to the Ottoman
Empire, Shah Abbas (1587–1629), one of the most renowned Safavid monarchs,
chose Isfahan as his capital. Dating from Sasanid times, the city on the banks of
River Zayandih was the capital of the Seljuk dynasty from 1051, but was laid
waste by Tamerlane in 1388. Shah Abbas’ outward looking agenda, epitomised
by an energetic foreign policy, created a freshly inviting political and economic
environment centred on a new, resplendent capital Isfahan (Matthee 2009). This
situation coincided with, and was partly responsible for, an active European
interest
religious, commercial and strategic opportunity.
Chardin, a French traveller in the Safavid period in Iran, counted 273 hammams
in Isfahan in his travelogue (in Smolijaninovaite 2007, see also Lambton and
Sourdel-Thomine 2007).

in Iran as a land of

Once, being one of the most important cities in the world (Lambton and Sour-
del-Thomine 2007), Isfahan is located on the main north-south and east-west routes
crossing Iran, it is the capital of Isfahan province and has a population of over 1, 6
million people (Statistical Centre of Iran 2012). It is Iran’s third largest populated
city after Tehran and Mashhad, and it is also one of the main tourist centres, if not
the most important, of the country (Assari and Mahesh 2011). Presently, 16 build-
ings are registered in Isfahan as traditional hammams: Ali Gholi Agha, Darb Emam,
Dardasht, Ghazi, Haj Banan, Haj Kazem, Janat, Jarchy, Khosro Agha, Roghani,
Shah Ali, Shah, Shahzadeha, Sheikh Alsalam, Sheikh Bahaei and Vazir (list pro-
vided by the Isfahan ofﬁce of the Iran’s Cultural Heritage, Handicrafts and Tourism
Organisation (ICHHTO)1). This is not a comprehensive list, and some traditional
hammams, such as Rehnan or Jolfa, are not included. Presently, many of the func-
tioning hammams in Isfahan are also endowed, and their ownership remains with
the Ministry of Religious Endowments.

Büyükdigan (2003) has provided a critical analysis of the new functions of
Ottoman baths. For the purpose of this paper – the analysis of the situation of
hammams in Isfahan – we have used two of the four categories established by
Büyükdigan (2003): (i) ‘baths in ruins’ and (ii) ‘baths continuing their original
functions’; and combined two of his categories – ‘baths misused as shops, depots
(warehouses), small factories, etc.’ and ‘baths re-arranged for a new use’ (2003, p.
620) – into (iii) ‘baths readjusted for new uses’. The justiﬁcation for the combina-
tion of Büyükdigan’s categories lies in the difﬁcult practical distinction between
the concepts of misuse and rearranged,
the former seen as carrying negative
impacts to the baths present use and the latter as having positive gains. We have
also encountered several examples of baths being under renovation. Therefore, in
this paper, our analysis is constructed upon the condition of 15 hammams: one
presently in ruins (Khosro); four continuing their original function (Gharchaghe,
Haj Banan, Zafarani and Kohanestan); six transformed for new uses (Sattari,
Aﬁyat, Ali Gholi Agha, Vazir, Dardasht and Jolfa); and four being repaired at the
moment (Shah, Shahzadeha, Ghazi and Jarchy). Some hammams may fall
into
more than one category.



143

Disused baths in ruined conditions
Similar to many other cities in the Levant – see Fadli and Sibley (2008) and El Ker-
dani (2008) on Cairo and Sibley (2006) on Damascus – many hammams in Isfahan
have been bulldozed into oblivion, victims of urban dynamics or urban neglect (very
little has been published or can be found regarding this obliteration process). Count-
less others are in ruins. We may attempt to sketch the causes for the decline of
hammams in Isfahan in three main points. Firstly, Islamic cities – just as Islamic
societies – must be understood as changing spaces that in this sense do not differ
much from European examples. In Iran, in particular, the historic centres of the lar-
ger cities went through signiﬁcant transformations under Reza Shah (1925–1941).
Unlike the urban principles of colonial rule in British India or in French Morocco,
his urban reforms, inspired by a combination of Haussmann and Ataturk (Mazumdar
2000), followed the path of a close and intimate amalgamation of traditional and
modern urban forms (Ehlers and Floor 1993). New streets and avenues dissecting
the historic core led to numerous demolitions in the urban fabric, including hamm-
ams, and a sharp urban growth took place. Between 1930 and 1941, the total popula-
tion in Isfahan increased from 80,000 to more than 200,000 (Ehlers and Floor 1993,
p. 262), and this trend continued in the following decades, with population increas-
ing six- fold between 1956 and 2006 (Assari and Mahesh 2011, p. 465). Thus, in
Iran, and in the Middle East, urban renewal of the old city centres led to a juxtaposi-
tion of the old and the modern fabric (Ehlers and Floor 1993, Sibley 2008), which
was not the case in many of the Maghreb cities. More recently, the accelerated urban
growth, and semi-processes of gentriﬁcation in some areas of the city, notably along
the riverfront, has been responsible for numerous urban morphology changes. These
recent urban changes accentuated the situations, where several hammams – that were
once surrounded by traditional old quartiers and by inhabitants who have been using
hammams for generations – are now encircled by newer urban blocks, inhabited by
people who do not use or need to use hammams. These transformation processes are
in tune with what is happening in other Islamic cities, such as Cairo (El Kerdani
2008, Fadli and Sibley, 2008), Damascus (Sibley 2006) and Istanbul (Cichocki
2005; Smolijaninovaitė 2007). Secondly, in the early twentieth century, in Isfahan,
as in many other large Iranian cities, water was supplied by shallow wells distributed
by open air canals (Ehlers and Floor 1993), which together with poor housing in the
historic centre meant that the hammam was a key urban site, with plenty of clientele.
With the improvement of housing and sanitary conditions within the context of
Reza’s urban reforms, the hammam became less prominent. At the same time, Reza
Shah, who did not rely on the traditional sources of political legitimacy – religion
and tribe – promoted secular ideas, reviving and generating a pre-Islamic collective
memory (Grigor 2004) and stressing anti-clericalism. His son, Mohammad Reza,
who ruled from 1941 to the Islamic revolution in 1979, continued to focus on the
modernisation and westernisation of the country.2 Based upon the widespread of dis-
eases in Iran – nineteenth century Iran was a fertile ground for the fatal spread of
cholera (Afkhami 1998) – a strong discussion regarding unhealthy conditions in
hammams was gradually spread. Under severe complaints by Islamic clergy, some
hammams were ordered to close down, while others were forced to renovations,
introducing showers and other modern infrastructure.

Thirdly, despite the religious nature of the city, nowadays going to the hammam
is seen as a backward social practice, and reveals traditional ways of life that are,

144

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

according to a younger generation, incompatible with modern, international and cos-
mopolitan behaviours. Younger generations have new understandings of cleanliness
and dirt, having established discourses that declared hammams as unhygienic. It is
perhaps important to mention that although the central districts of the city have a
higher age average than the total city, over 20% are less than 15 years old and only
about 5% are over 65 years of age (Assari and Mahesh 2011). Younger and middle-
class generations are more enthusiastic about the growth of spas in many hotels and
the development of health and medical tourism throughout the country and abroad.
Thus, the hammam as an intergenerational social space tends to disappear.

Figure 1. Khosro Agha hammam. Source: Authors, January 2012.



145

While it is not possible to use a ruined hammam for its original purpose, the site
should not be regarded as an unusable place. Khosro Agha hammam, presently no
more than a Safavid ruin (Figure 1), was demolished in the mid-1990s. At the time
(1995), local people protested and discontentment was evident in several newspa-
pers, but the urban forces to build a new car parking were stronger than conserva-
tion issues. Nowadays,
the site is obviously an embodiment of a past and a
physical reminder of what has vanished, a sign of cultural and religious beliefs, of
past sanitation realities. However, Khosro Agha, as well as other ruined hammams,
does not need to be a site of disregard, abandonment or a document to damage.
Following Edensor’s (2005) ideas, ruins can be spaces in which involuntary memo-
ries may be stimulated. The focus should not be on the inert remains but on their
reconﬁguration (see, e.g. Stoler 2008). In contrast to the conscious use, transmission
and representation of the past – such as in a museum – ruins can be ambivalent in
their meaning and can invoke memories. They are emblematic sites of the inevita-
bility of life passing, and can tell us a lot about wider social and cultural processes
across urban space. Therefore, Khosro Agha allows us to think of how a spatialisa-
tion of memory and heritage could be developed in Isfahan. On-site explanations,
the assemblage and display of iconographic material in various dynamic and inter-
active forms, the establishing of perceptible connections to other parts of the city,
and physically constructing memoryscapes is a possibility that can be part of a lar-
ger strategy for reconsolidating hammams in the city. A ruin may not be much on
itself, but if part of a network of sites of memory may acquire a meaning beyond
its physical entity. At various places, the traditional imprinting of memory in the
city, which is often done through conservation policies that privilege reconstruction
of sites and which imply signiﬁcant costs, can be achieved through creative inter-
ventions in ruins, highlighting as well the intangible nature of hammams heritage.

Baths continuing their original functions
Despite a clear decline, hammams in Isfahan are still important, both from a social
as well as from a religious perspective, especially in the more traditional areas of
Isfahan (see, e.g. Gharchaghe, Haj Banan, Zafarani and Kohanestan hammams).
They are centrally associated with the celebration of important life events such as
births, circumcisions and weddings, and numerous traditions and rituals, which are
transmitted from one generation to another and still alive today, and, therefore, they
represent rich intangible elements of urban heritage. Clearly, they are more present
in the lives of older and traditional people who have been using these sites since
childhood. However, they are also associated with the daily life of many people of
lower income. Foreign workers (notably Afghan), low budget tourists and people
who have no bathroom at home use them. Others use it since water and gas prices
have increased sharply in the last years. From our survey, it was possible to register
that no more than 15 or 20 people daily use most hammams. While this is a vital
public service available to them, it means fragile economic viability.

Two distinct situations arise when assessing functioning hammams. One con-
cerns buildings of historical value. While in Isfahan, there are some hammams clas-
siﬁed by the ICHHTO, the vast majority of functioning hammams in the city is not
from the Safavid dynasty, and is much more recent. A complete documentation of
urban heritage and of these buildings – in particular – is still to be conducted, and
there is no clear strategy of planning and administration or integrated plans for

146

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

restoration. This is, in part, the consequence of the existence of various entities
responsible for this heritage (e.g. private owners,
local authorities, endowment
authorities, etc.). Without a doubt, historical hammams need to be preserved from
demolition and decay, either continuing their original function or changing into new
uses.

The other issue relates to hammams which are key sites of traditional practices
in a public place, ‘sweeting, scrubbing, and socialising’, as in the title of a CNN
article (Sterns 2009), despite not having an intrinsic historical value. These practices
are both fragile and resilient (Skounti 2009), and their malfunctioning and decline
pose a threat for people of lower income, and for women in particular. As Aksit
(2011, p. 279) argues ‘historically the hammam has served to vindicate women’s
right to walk around the city and, to the same extent, today it serves to connect
them with their historically-legitimated public existence’. Hammams have been for
a long time counter spaces that allow women to escape the dominant masculine
sphere and to reconﬁgure the relationships between women and their bodies (Simon
2007). These two worlds of material and intangible heritage, a sociocultural heritage
in the words of Kolb and Dumreicher (2008), should meet and be protected (see,
for instance, Sibley 2006 and the case of Damascus). Maintaining adequate levels
of cleanliness and contemporary standards of health and safety, which Kolb and
Dumreicher (2008) mention to be hard to ﬁnd on their case studies, is vital to pre-
serve these sites functioning. But ultimately, the hammam can only be successful if
a more encompassing rehabilitation takes place, at least at the residential quarter
scale (Figures 2 and 3).

Baths readjusted for other uses
Büyükdigan (2003) argues that new functions of old baths can be passive or active.
The former refers to baths used as museums or art galleries. In this case, not only
the institutional use attracts people, but also the activity is an important product of
this type of conversion. In his view, these are the most suitable functions for reus-
ing old baths, assuring a good degree of proper restoration. They are often in public
hands. The latter refers to baths used as shopping centres, department stores, night

Figure 2. Gharchaghe hammam Big Sarbineh and Big Garmkhaneh. Source: Authors,
September 2011.



147

Figure 3. Gharchaghe hammam Big Sarbineh and Big Garmkhaneh. Source: Authors,
September 2011.

clubs, art galleries,3 ofﬁces,4 (Figures 4 and 5) restaurants and teahouses, and
despite being a better solution than leaving buildings to decay, it entails a certain
danger of ill-informed renewal or functioning.5 In the case of Iran, restaurants and
teahouses are some of the most common uses of old hammams. According to Majd-
edin Rahimi, an archaeologist concerned with the rehabilitation of Iranian historic
cities, more than 95% of traditional hammams in Iran were either completely
destroyed or are used as traditional coffee shops (Entekhab 2011). At times, they
have a remarkable tourism role. The Lonely Planet guide to Iran (2008, p. 80) notes
that the restaurant Sofrekhane ye Sonnati Ebrahimabad, a former hammam, is ‘rea-
son enough to visit Ardabil’. Jolfa and Jarchy are two good examples of Isfahan
hammams converted into restaurants. While the former is located near the Big
Bazaar and will be a traditional restaurant, signiﬁcantly, the latter is located in the

Figure 4. Sattari hammam Ofﬁce in Sarbineh. Source: Authors, January 2012.

148

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

Figure 5. Aﬁyat hammam Sarbineh. Source: Authors, November 2011.

Armenian quarter, popularly known as ‘little Paris’, a neighbourhood distant from
the old city centre and the bazaar, and one of the most modern and lively parts of
the city (see Vivier-Muresan 2007). Here, we ﬁnd one of the most vibrant parts of
the city, which is characterised by high property prices and a dynamic economy that
translates into various cafés and restaurants, a predominantly Christian population,
and a proximity to some of the most gentriﬁed quarters of the city (on the south
riverside).

Taking advantage of the tourism potential of Isfahan, Ali Gholi Agha hammam
is a good example of a careful restoration, undertaken in 2002, and which trans-
formed a ruined hammam into a museum of bathhouses (Figures 7 and 8). Here,
tourism and heritage merge. In the Garmkhaneh, visitors can read information in
Farsi and English from a large panel and can roam freely or be guided by English-
speaking interpreters. A CD with a detailed account of the hammam and a virtual
3D visit is also available. This is one of the key sites that make up the tourist cir-
cuit in Isfahan, and is mentioned in most guide books. Trip Advisor, for example,
classiﬁes this hammam as one of the top 20 attractions of the city, and, excluding
the ﬁrst month of Spring6 when over 11,000 people visited Ali Gholi Agha, avail-
able statistics tell us that the hammam received 4000 visitors per month on average
in 2011 (Figure 6). Over 95% of these visitors are residents in Iran, which is in line
with the overall dominance of domestic tourism in the country and with the rela-
tively low number of international tourists. While tourism is likely to remain a
minor industry in relation to oil and gas, it has an important contribution to make
with respect to job creation. Perhaps, here lies one of the possibilities for hammam
transformation into tourism sites. Yet, not all hammams can or should be trans-
formed into museums.

Looking into more detail to the museum, we see a static representation of tradi-
tional scenes of the public bath in Safavid times, displaying men in massage, smok-
ing nargilah or just relaxing and waiting, while also displaying many artefacts. The
architecture, painted titles, carved stucco domes and wonderfully decorated domes
representing the sky and heaven, illustrate well the richness of past times and a
hammam for the wealthy and powerful. Ali Gholi Agha is a social representation of



149

Foreign

free & 1/2 price

Iranian

14000

12000

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

Figure 6. Visitor numbers in Ali Gholi Agha, 2011.

Figure 7. Ali Gholi Agha hammam (scene from the museum). Source: Authors, January
2011.

150

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

Figure 8. Ali Gholi Agha hammam (repairing tiles). Source: Authors, January 2011.

a hammam that highlights the ways in which powerful men used the building, and
it neglects other spaces of the hammam, for instance, where women moved and
where workers traced their paths to serve the powerful. As Smith (2008) argues,
heritage is gendered, and, here, we clearly see a male-centred story. The ways in
which women moved and used the hammam are neglected in the presentation pro-
vided to visitors.

Lastly, we want to introduce an example of an active functioning hammam.
After being restored by the Urban Development and Revitalization Corporation of
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Vazir hammam opened in 1993
(Leslie 2001) as the Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and
Young Adults.7 The décor was changed in order to create an environment that is
suitable for children and their creative imagination (the Sarbineh is used as a
library, the adjacent Garmkhaneh serves as a play and reading area, while other
smaller and intimate spaces are now used for art lessons, and art exhibitions also
occur). Tabasi and Ansari (2007) are quite critical about this restoration and use,
pointing to some problems related to the reconstruction and adaptation, signalling
the erasure of some of the critical hammam identity features and the integrity of the
twin structure of the hammam, among others. Gender separation has been main-
tained: boys on odd days and the girls on even days, but other aspects of the social
functioning of the hammam have been lost and are not documented or visible
(Figures 9–13).

Conclusion

Hammams have been a key piece in the Islamic urban structure for many centuries
(Lambton and Sourdel-Thomine 2007, Dumreicher 2008, Sibley 2008). In the last
decades, changes in the urban structure, in society, in the quotidian way of life and
in the economy, have been the principal reason behind the closure, demolition or
reduction in use of hammams. In addition, the lack of a coherent revitalisation pro-
gramme and urban policies towards the preservation of hammams contributes to this
negative cycle. This paper points to the need for a thorough investigation of hamm-
ams in the city of Isfahan. This would include not only a survey and documentation
of existing buildings, their characteristics and uses, but also the views of their pres-
ent users. Most of the functioning hammams described here are poorly restored or



151

Figure 9. Vazir hammam – Garvro. Source: Authors, February 2012.

Figure 10.

Jolfa hammam Sarbineh. Source: Authors, November 2011.

poorly maintained buildings that overwhelmingly cater for lower income users,
which often include marginalised groups such as Afghans migrants. These hamm-
ams still sustain a tradition of bathing and health care, but struggle to be economi-
cally viable. Many have only a few users per day, although it is impossible to
establish accurate ﬁgures. While hammams have always been socially fractured –
allowing the rich to isolate themselves from the poor – they are failing to provide
attractive experiences for contemporary younger generations. On the one hand,
structural changes must be made in many hammams, such as changing old systems
of supplying water, renewing old toilets, baths and facilities and engaging with
renewable energies, but on the other hand,
is the whole image and idea of

it

152

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

Figure 11. Shah hammam Sarbineh. Source: Authors, November 2011.

Figure 12.
2011.

Jarchy hammam Big Garmkhaneh and Gavro. Source: Authors, November

hammams that must be changed. The transition from traditional spaces, which pro-
vided a wide range of services, from massage, waxing, hairstyling to nail polishing,
to modern societies has created a backward image of the hammam as an anachro-
nistic institution, which is hard to change. As Atassi (2012, p. 32) points out in



153

Figure 13.
2011.

Jarchy hammam Big Garmkhaneh and Gavro. Source: Authors, November

relation to hammams in the Mediterranean, ‘further work is required to raise aware-
ness towards a sustainable rehabilitation’.

With the exception of Ali Gholi Aga (transformed into a museum), hammams in
Isfahan are also not attractive to the majority of tourists. Not only have they failed
to modernise their facilities, but also as they are generally concealed they play a
small role in the tourismscapes of the city and in heritage tourism. Rehabilitated
functioning hammams can play an important role in the re-enactment of collective
memories for tourists visiting their home towns, providing new personal experi-
ences and contributing to a reimagination of the past.

For many of the ruined hammams, the future is uncertain, since the lack of plan-
ning and funds together with other urban development logics prevents restoration.
One possible solution to avoid disappearance or alienation is to understand these
buildings as ruins, and to open them up to visitors as such, with adequate informa-
tion and creativity, with appealing narratives of the past that provide new experi-
ences, as long as safety is guaranteed. Their very fragility and risk can be
transformed into their own charm.

Simultaneously, other hammams have been converted or are being converted
into passive or active uses according to Büyükdigan (2003), such as museums (Ali
Gholi Agha), child centres (Vazir), centres for cultural activities and restaurants
(Jarchy and Jolfa). If properly planned and developed, some hammams may regain
an important
livelihood of
neighbourhoods, being part of people’s daily lives, and reclaiming a focal point in
the Islamic city. At the same time, tangible and intangible heritage aspects of some

contributing to the

in the

social

city,

role

154

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

hammams may be fully respected and preserved. Only a careful examination of
their possibilities will allow a better understanding of the changing nature of the
public sphere in Isfahan.

Notes
1. The ICHHTO is a governmental body aiming to protect, introduce, preserve and restore

the country’s historic-cultural legacy as well as to promote the tourism industry.

2. While some would argue, he largely disregarded religion (Fazeli 2006), this issue is
rather complex, and the Pahlavi state helped to form a national religious morality, espe-
cially through education and in many instances acted almost in total contrast to their
Turkish counterparts (for a further discussion, see Moazami 2008).

3. Aﬁyat hammam, now Ferdosi art gallery, is a twin bath used as a gallery for the exhibi-
tion of traditional art of Isfahan and as an art education place. Signiﬁcantly, unlike in
functioning Hammams, courses are for men and women simultaneously.

4. Sattari hammam is presently used by a computer and Internet service company.
5. Vakil hammam in Shiraz closed down as a restaurant as the kitchen was damaging the

structure of the building. It opened later as a carpet museum.

6. Twenty-ﬁrst March, on Noruz, or the New Year in the Persian calendar.
7. As part of the larger project ‘New Life for Older Structures’, this restoration was the

recipient of an Aga Khan award for architecture in 1993.

Notes on contributors
João Sarmento is an assistant professor in the Geography Department of the University of
Minho, Portugal and a senior researcher in the Centre for Geographical Studies, University
of Lisbon, Portugal. His work revolves around the themes of culture, heritage, tourism,
identity, memory and post-colonialism, particularly in Africa and Asia. His latest book is
Fortiﬁcations, postcolonialism and power: ruins and imperial legacies (Ashgate, 2011).

Zahra Kazemi is a doctoral student in the Geography Department of the University of Minho,
Portugal. Her work focuses on the perceptions and practices of modern and traditional places
of health in the contemporary world. She is also a part-time lecturer at the Department of
Tourism Management in Sheikh Bahaei University, Iran and cooperates with the Department
of Entrepreneurship and Tourism of the Art University of Isfahan, Iran. She is the author of
the book Lives of nations: cultures, customs and life styles (Chahar Bagh, 2009).

References
Afkhami, A., 1998. Disease and water supply: the case of cholera in 19th century Iran. In:
J. Coppock and J. Miller, eds. Transformations of middle eastern natural environments:
legacies and lessons. New Haven, CT: Yale University Bulletin Series No.103, 206–220.
Aksit, E.E., 2011. The women’s quarters in the historical hammam. Journal of Gender, Place

and Culture, 18 (2), 277–293.

Anderson, S.C. and Tabb, B.H., eds., 2002. Water, leisure and culture. Oxford: Berg.
Assari, A. and Mahesh, T.M., 2011. Demographic comparative in heritage texture of Isfahan

City. Journal of Geography and Regional Planning, 4 (8), 463–470.

Atassi, S., 2012. The hammam in the mediterranean region: architectural, urban and social
In: H. Dumreicher, R.S. Levine, and

dimensions – a multidimensional approach.
M. Sibley-Behloul, eds. Hammam rehabilitation reader. Austria: Sonderzahl, 25–33.

Bakhtiar, A., 1974. The royal bazaar of Isfahan. Iranian Studies, 7 (1/2), 320–347.
Büyükdigan, I., 2003. A critical look at the new functions of Ottoman baths. Journal of

Building and Environment, 38 (4), 617–633.

Çelik, Z., 1992. Displaying the orient: architecture of Islam at nineteenth-century world’s

fairs. Berkeley, CA: California University Press.

Cichocki, N., 2005. Continuity and change in Turkish bathing culture in Istanbul: the life

story of the Çemberlitas hammam. Turkish Studies, 6 (1), 93–112.



155

Destino, T. and Sibley, M., 2012. The hammam living traditions – between tangible and
intangible heritages. In: H. Dumreicher, R.S. Levine, and M. Sibley-Behloul, eds. Ham-
mam rehabilitation reader. Austria: Sonderzahl, 49–64.

Dumreicher, H., 2008. The hammam: scenarios for a sustainable future. In: F. Hassan, A.
Trafford, and M. Youssef, eds. Cultural heritage and development in the Arab world.
Egypt: Bibliotheca Alexandrina, 229–242.

Edensor, T., 2005. Industrial ruins: spaces, aesthetics and materiality. Oxford: Berg.
Ehlers, E. and Floor, W., 1993. Urban change in Iran, 1920–1941. Iranian Studies, 26 (3/4),
El Kerdani, D., 2008. Hammām folklore dynamics in Cairo: lessons from operation to regen-

251–275.

eration. International Journal of Architectural Research, 2 (3), 29–41.

Entekhab, 2011. Entekhab. Available from: www.entekhab.ir [Accessed August 2011].
Fadli, F. and Sibley, M., 2008. The historic hammams of Cairo: safeguarding a vanishing

heritage. Journal of Architectural Conservation, 14 (3), 59–80.

Fazeli, N., 2006. Politics of culture in Iran: anthropology, politics and society in the twenti-

eth century. London: Routledge.

Foran, J., 1992. The long fall of the safavid dynasty: moving beyond the standard views.

International Journal of Middle East Studies, 24 (2), 281–304.

Gandy, M., 2004. Water, modernity and the emancipatory city. In: L. Lees, ed. Emancipatory

urbanism. London: Sage, 179–191.

Grigor, T., 2004. Recultivating ‘good taste’: the early Pahlavi modernists and their society

for national heritage. Iranian Studies, 37 (1), 17–45.

Habashi, A.E., 2008. Monuments of functioning buildings: legal protection over ﬁve case-
study historic hammams in the mediterranean. International Journal of Architectural
Research, 2 (3), 42–55.

Kilito, A., 1992. Architecture and the sacred: a season in the hammam. Research in African

Literatures, 23 (2), 203–208.

Kolb, B. and Dumreicher, H., 2008. The hammam – a living cultural heritage. International

Journal of Architectural Research, 2 (3), 17–28.

Kosso, C. and Scott, A., eds., 2009. The nature and function of water, baths, bathing and

hygiene from antiquity through the renaissance. Leiden: Brill.

Lambton, A.K.S. and Sourdel-Thomine, J., 2007. Isfahan. In: C.E. Bosworth, ed. Historic

cities of the Islamic world. Leiden: Brill, 167–180.

Leslie, J., 2001. New life for older structures: Isfahan and Yazd. Technical Review Summary
[Accessed

[online]. Available from: http://www.akdn.org/architecture/pdf/2578_Ira.pdf
January 2012].

Lewis, B., 1997. The middle east: a brief history of the last 2,000 years. New York, NY:

Simon & Schuster.

Lonely Planet, 2008. Iran. Victoria: Lonely Planet.
Matthee, R., 2009. The Safavids under western eyes: seventeenth-century european travelers

to Iran. The Journal of early modern history, 13 (2), 137–171.

Mazumdar, S., 2000. Autocratic control and urban design: the case of Tehran, Iran. Journal

of Urban Design, 5 (3), 317–338.

Mazumdar, S. and Mazumdar, S., 2004. Religion and place attachment: a study of sacred

places. The Journal of Environmental Psychology, 24 (3), 385–397.

Moazami, B., 2008. The ulema and the nationalization of religious morality in Iran, 1925–

63. Critical Middle Eastern Studies, 17 (1), 41–61.

Neyestani, J. and Amirhajloo, S., 2010. The analysis of factors affecting the architecture of
Isfahan bathes from Safavid to Qajar via SPSS. International Journal of Humanities, 17
(1), 109–125.

Rohol Amini, M., 2007. Public bath within society, culture and literature in the past: atti-

tudes and demographic research. Tehran: Ettelaat.

Sibley, M., 2006. The historic hammams of Damascus and Fez: lessons of sustainability and
future developments. The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture,
Geneva, Switzerland, 6–8 September 2006 School of Architecture, University of Liver-
pool, UK.
Sibley, M., 2008. Editorial: special issue on traditional public baths – hammāms in the Med-

iterranean. International Journal of Architectural Research, 2 (3), 10–16.

156

J. Sarmento and Z. Kazemi

Simon, A., 2007. Foucault au hammam: Le Panoptisme Chez les Romancières algériennes

contemporaines. Contemporary French and Francophone Studies, 11 (3), 417–426.
Skounti, A., 2009. The authentic illusion: Humanity’s intangible cultural heritage,

the
Moroccan experience. In: L. Smith and N. Akagawa, eds. Intangible heritage. London:
Routledge, 74–92.

gate research companion to heritage and identity. Aldershot: Ashgate, 159–178.

Smith, L., 2008. Heritage, gender and identity. In: B. Graham and P. Howard, eds. The Ash-
Smolijaninovaitė, K., 2007. A study on historic hammams in Istanbul: changing aspects of
cultural use and architecture. Unpublished Master Thesis. Brandenburg University of
Technology.

Statistical Centre of Iran, 2012. Census 2011 [online]. Available from: http://www.amar.org.

ie [Accessed September 2012].

Sterns, O., 2009. Sweating, scrubbing and socializing in Mideast’s historic hammams
[online]. Available from: http://articles.cnn.com/2009–12-30/world/ [Accessed 30 Decem-
ber].

Stoler, A.L., 2008. Imperial Debris: reﬂections on ruins and ruination. Cultural Anthropol-

ogy, 23 (2), 191–219.

Tabasi, M. and Ansari, M., 2007. Study of the revival plan of Vazir hammam. The Iranian

journal of engineer message, 37, 95–103.

Tabasi, M., et al., 2007. Recognition of physical features of the Safavid period in Iran bath.

The journal of Beaus-Arts in Iran, 29, 49–58.

Tagemouati, N.L., 2012. A business model for the management of a cultural hammam the
case of hammam Seffarine in Fez. In: H. Dumreicher, R.S. Levine, and M. Sibley-Beh-
loul, eds. Hammam rehabilitation reader. Austria: Sonderzahl, 123–134.

Vivier-Muresan, A.-S., 2007. Communitarian neighborhoods and religious minorities in Iran:

a comparative analysis. Iranian Studies, 40 (5), 593–603.


