International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Dracula's castle in Transylvania: Conflicting
heritage marketing strategies

Alexandra Muresan & Karen A. Smith

To cite this article: Alexandra Muresan & Karen A. Smith (1998) Dracula's castle in Transylvania:
Conflicting heritage marketing strategies, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 4:2, 73-85, DOI:
10.1080/13527259808722223
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259808722223

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 545

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Key Words
Romania
Marketing
Heritage
Tourism
Dracula

1.  T. Ross & S. Roche,

Doing Business in
Romania, London:
Kogan Page, 1992.

Dracula's Castle in Transylvania:
conflicting  heritage  marketing
strategies
Alexandra  Muresan  and Karen A. Smith

Abstract
Transylvania, situated beneath the Carpathian mountains, is one of the travel frontiers
of  Europe  and  the  most  romantic  province  of  Romania.  To  most  of  its  visitors,
Transylvania is  associated with  haunted castles and  vampires, thanks  to  the  literary
character Dracula. Even  though  Bran  Castle appears to form  the perfect home for  a
vampire  count,  this  heritage  destination  is  surrounded  by  debate  because of  the
conflicting  marketing  strategies  adopted  by  various  organisations for  the specific
purpose  of  increasing the  profits  made from  tourism.  This paper  explores issues of
marketing, policies for  interpretation and the  understanding of heritage sites  within  a
formerly  socialist society  in  transition  to  a  market  economy.  It  analyses potential
promotional,  advertising and  interpretive strategies  which  could  be applied to  Bran
Castle, and offers solutions  to produce a  better understanding of  the  role of heritage
tourism  in a transitional economy.

Heritage  tourism  is  forming  an  increasingly  significant  element  of  the  tourism
product  offered  by transitional  countries  such  as Romania.  The marketing  of a
heritage site plays an important part in forming visitors' expectations and in the
eventual  success  of an  attraction.  Many  attractions  and  destinations  base  their
tourism product and marketing strategy around literary and film representations
of fictional and  historical  characters,  or figures that  are  a  mix  of fiction and
reality. Bran Castle, in the Romanian province of Transylvania, is an example of
an  attraction  with  an  image based  around  a  legendary  character,  in  this  case
Count Dracula. Although  Dracula  provides visitors with  an  image of the  castle
and  is  used  by  private  sector  enterprises  to  promote  their  businesses  and  the
castle, the Romanian state authorities have so far failed  to build on this. Instead
they offer  a conflicting  marketing strategy and a presentation of the castle based
on  strict  historical  facts.  This  paper  examines  the  obstacles  that  transitional
economies face due to the legacy of the former  Communist regime, and explores
the  dilemmas  presented  by  contrasting  marketing  strategies  and  suggests  how
the situation  can be resolved.

Post-revolutionary  tourism in  Romania
The  1989  Romanian  Revolution  marked  the  transition  from  a  centralised
regime, with an  economy based on collectivism,  agriculture  and  manufacturing
industry, to a democratic system promoting privatisation  and  services. With the
collapse  of  the  40-year-old  socialist  era  and  the  democratic  move  towards  a
market-oriented  economy, the new Romanian Government developed interest in
consolidating  the  mechanisms  of  the  market1  and  attracting  foreign  currency

IJHS 4 (2) 73-85 © Intellect Ltd 1998

73

2.  B. Deacon,  The New

Eastern Europe,
London: Sage, 1992.

3.  S.S. Nello. The New

Europe:  changing
economic  relations
between  east and west,
Hertfordshire:  Simon
& Schuster
International  Group,
1991.

4.  I. Istrate  et al,

Economia turismului si
mediului  inconjurator,
Bucharest:  Editura
Economica, 1996.

5.  Government of

Romania,  Governance
programme 1997-
2000,  (on-line at:
http//www.guv.ro/),
1996.

6.  I. Istrate  op.cit  (note

4)

7.  Ibid.

8.  J. Hunt,  'Foreign

investment  - Eastern
Europe  Travel
Industry',  Travel and
Tourism Analyst, Vol.
3,  ETU, 1993; I.
Istrate op.cit.  (note
4).

9.  B. Rafaelsen,

Investment promotion,
export development  and
tourism, European
Commission, 1995.

10. F.W.  Carter  & D.

Turnock,
Environmental
problems in Eastern
Europe, London:
Routledge, 1993.

l l . C.  Franck,  'Tourism

investment  in Central
and  Eastern  Europe',
Tourism Management,
Vol  11(4),  December,
1990.

into  the country.  The leadership  saw these  as  imperative  determinants  for
progress, to overcome the economic crisis and challenge Western  competition.2
In the service sector,  tourism, Romania's  largest  service industry,3 was seen-
as a quick way of attracting foreign  currency into the country, alongside foreign
sponsorship and aid. Romania's tourist industry had been operating  throughout
the socialist regime. However, the country's economic priorities and its policy of
rejecting  foreign  interference  in its domestic  affairs  meant  that  the structure of
its tourism industry was designed to cater for domestic rather than  international
tourists.4  The post-revolutionary  Romanian  leadership  became  aware  of the
importance of this service sector to the national  economy, and of the fact  that
the tourist  industry  could  contribute to reducing unemployment  and attracting
international  attention  to the country  as a new destination.  The Ministry of
Tourism  developed  a  ten-year  Strategy  for  Restructuring,  Consolidating and
Developing  Tourist  Demand,  encouraging  privatisation  and foreign  capital
investment  into  the Romanian  tourism  industry.5  However,  in the attempt to
raise the tourism industry to Western  standards, the following  constraints were
encountered:
• 
• 
•  domestic political  uncertainty,8
•  poor investment in tourism  infrastructure,9
•  poor environmental image,10
• 
•  unstable currencies and rising prices,12
• 
• 

the country's lack of experience in attracting foreign  currency,6
the country's lack of experience in marketing and promoting its exports,7

lack of staff  training programmes throughout the tourism  industry,13
lack of an appropriate  supporting legal framework  for tourism.14

the-low quality of services compared to Western  expectations,11

While the constraints regarding financing, training and quality were handled
more  or less  successfully  by the Ministry of Tourism,  little  effort  was made to
change the 'largely negative image' Romania had after  the Revolution15  and to
market  Romanian  tourist  destinations  nationally  and internationally.  There is
still no visible evidence of collaboration  between private tourism  agencies16 and
local or national tourism bodies in promoting national identity and new tourism
forms,  such  as heritage,  rural  and ecological  tourism,  although  the process of
privatisation  in tourism  started  in Romania  in  1990.17  Effective  marketing of
Romania  as  a  tourist  destination  is  essential  in  increasing  domestic  and
international tourist numbers.

Tourism resources and new destinations in  Romania
Romania  has  enormous  potential  for  year-round  tourism,  with  extremely
favourable  climatic  and topographical  conditions.18  Almost  one third  of the
country  comprises  mountains  and one quarter  of the land  area  is covered by
forests.  The Black  Sea Coast  line  has approximately  70 km of sandy  beaches
which are ideal for recreation,  and a deltaic zone at the mouth  of the Danube,
which  hosts  'one of Europe's most  distinctive  ecosystems'.19  Romania possesses
rich  resources  of mineral  water  and therapeutic  mud, with  over  160 spas as
well  as one-third  of all European  sources  of thermal  waters.  Other  attractions

74

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

include  unique  cultural  assets,  many of which  lie close to the major,  tourist
resorts, especially in the Carpathian  zone which has long been acknowledged as
the  cradle of the Romanian  nation.20 There is indisputable  potential for further
development  of the Romanian  tourism  industry,  despite a recent  decrease in
arrivals  to Romania  (Figure  1) and the  ongoing  legacy  of the  Communist
regime.  Some of the most  beautiful  Romanian  churches  and monasteries are
now included in the World Heritage List while others,  such  as Dracula's  Castle
and Peles Castle, are included in almost all package tours to Romania. Also, the
promotion of new historic and cultural  sites and private accommodation,  where
small  groups of tourists  experience  Romanian  traditions, is being  adopted as
potential  tool  for ensuring  long-term  tourism  development  in the  country.
Tourism in Romania  now has a new cultural  dimension,  which had not been
exploited  before  the  Revolution.  The new  Government,  therefore,  needs to
refocus  the old marketing  strategies,  which  targeted  mass  tourism, and
concentrate  on attracting  and serving  the continuously  increasing  number of
independent  tourists coining to Romania.

Tourists trends to Romania
The number of tourist  arrivals in Romania  increased from  2.3 million in 1970
to  6.7 million in 1980 and then  experienced a massive 215 % decrease in the
1981-1991  period,  due to the  country's  unattractive  social,  economic and
political environments. Before the Revolution, international  tourists to Romania
came  mainly  from  European  countries  such  as  Poland,  Yugoslavia,
Czechoslovakia,  the  German  Democratic  Republic  and  the  United  Kingdom.
When  the Iron  Curtain  opened  up in 1990, the number  of tourist  arrivals
dramatically  increased  from  4.9 million in 1989 to 6.5 million  the subsequent
year  (Figure  1). The country of origin  of the international  tourists to Romania
changed,  arrivals from the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine, Italy, Turkey, Canada
and  the United  States becoming  more  numerous.21 The advantageous  business

Figure 1. International arrivals in Romania  1970-1990.

7 -,

6 -

5 -

4 -

.3 -

2 -

1 -

0

-|—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—r

"i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i—i

oo 

oo  oo  O\  ON  ON ON

year

12. S. Medlik,  'Focus on

Eastern  Europe',
Tourism  Management,
Vol.  11(2), June.
1990.

13.1strate  op.cit.  (note
4);  World Tourism
Organization,  Budgets
and marketing plans of
national  tourism
administrations: a
World Tourism
Organisation,  Madrid:
WTO, 1995.

14. Ross & Roche,  op.cit.

(note  1); I. Istrate
op.cit.  (note 4).

15. D. Light &M.
Andone, The
Changing  Geography
of Romanian
Tourism', Geography,
Vol 81, no.3,  1996,
p.201.

16. National  Commission
for  Statistics, Tourism
in Romania,
Bucharest  National
Commission for
Statistics, 1997.

17. Istrate  op.cit.  (note

4).

18.D.R.  Hall, Tourism in

Eastern  Europe,
Wallingford :  CAB
International, 1991.

19. D. Turnock,

'Romania'  in D.R.
Hall,  Tourism  and
Economic Development
in Eastern Europe  and
the Soviet Union,
London: Pinter, 1991,
p.203.

20. D. Stanley, Eastern

Europe on a
Shoestring, London:
Lonely  Planet, 1991.

Dracula's Castle in Transylvania

75

21. National  Commission

for  Statistics,
Romanian  Touristic
Yearbook, Bucharest:
National  Commission
for  Statistics, 1995.

22. M.  Constantinescu,

Istoria Romaniei,
Bucharest  Editura
DidacHca si
Pedagogica, 1969.

23. Ministry  of Tourism,

Romania, come as a
tourist, leave as a
friend, EU/Phare,
Paris: Barry  Maybury
Conseil, 1995.

24. A. Muresan, "The

Fortified  Church of
Biertan
(Transylvania)'  in M.
Shackley  (ed) Visitor
Management - Case
studies from World
Heritage Sites, Oxford:
Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1998,
pp.26-45.

25. B. Stoker, Dracula,

Penguin  Popular
Classics Edition,
London:  Penguin
Books, 1994.

26. D. Farson,  The Man

Who  Wrote Dracula: a
biography of Bram
Stoker, London:
Joseph.  1997:  E.
Denize,  "Vlad Tepes,
Matia  Corvin si
Venetia', Magazin
lstoric, Bucharest
Magazin  lstoric
Cultural  Foundation,
Vol.6, June, 1997.

27. The Academy of

Economic  Studies -
Bucharest, Dracula,
History and Fiction ,
on-line at  http://info-
cib.ase.ro/bran.html,
1998.

deals  offered  by Romania  to foreign  investors  in  1992 raised  the number of
tourist arrivals by 1 million compared to the previous year. However, once these
deals  ceased  to  be  available,  less  business  and  transit  tourists  entered  the
country.  The official  statistics  show  an  alarming  decrease  in  tourist  arrivals
between  1993 and 1996, to a level even below the 1991 figures, a sign of the
poor quality of services and the lack of effective  and targeted tourism marketing.
After  the  Revolution  many  changes  were  seen  in  Romania's  approach  to
tourism:  new forms  of tourism  were  developed;  laws  encouraging  small  scale
privatisation  were  enacted;  major  foreign  hotel  chains  and many  foreign  fast
food  franchises  opened;  and  TAROM  Airlines  expanded  its  number  of
international  destinations.  However,  despite  this,  there  seems  to be a  lack of
strategy in attracting  international  as well as domestic tourists.

Transylvania - Homeland of Dracula
Transylvania, the 'Land beyond the forest',  from the Latin trans silva22  is one of
the  travel  frontiers  of Europe. It is the most  romantic  of the three  Romanian
provinces  and the richest in natural  resources,23  with  dramatic  scenery  and a
wealth of cultural  attractions including Peles Castle and the Fortified  Church of
Biertan,  a World Heritage Site.24 Despite this abundance  of attractions, to most
potential visitors Transylvania is known primarily as the home of Dracula.

Bram  Stoker's  chilling  horror  novel25  of the now legendary  vampire  Count
Dracula,  was first  published  in  1897. The opening  chapters,  presented  in the
form of Jonathan Harker's Journal, describe the young solicitor's travels through
Transylvania  to the Count's  cliff-top  home  of Castle  Dracula.  These  chapters,
and  those  at  the  end  of the  novel  when  the  story  returns  to  the  Count's
homeland,  strongly evoke the scenery, customs and people of the region. Stoker
refers  to actual  places,  such  as the Borgo Pass, throughout  his descriptions of
Transylvania;  however,  as  will  be  discussed,  the  central  location  of  Castle
Dracula is an imaginary place.

Origins of Dracula's  myth
Dracula is a fictional character but Stoker is thought  to have taken  inspiration
from  a  number  of  sources,  amongst  them  two key historical  east  European
figures, Vlad Tepes and Countess Erszebet  'Elizabeth'  Bathory. Vlad Tepes born
in  1431 in the Romanian  fortress  of Sighisoara, was a fifteenth-century prince
of  Wallachia,  one of the three  Romanian  provinces. He was renowned  for his
barbaric  punishments  even  in  the  Middle  Ages,  a  period  notorious  for its
violence.  Although  there  are no  doubts  over  his inhuman  cruelty  -  'Tepes'
means  'the Impaler'  -  there  is no evidence  to link  Vlad  to the vampirism for
which the fictional Dracula is famous. Romanians are most likely to regard Vlad
Tepes  as a  nationalistic  hero  who fought  against  the Turks26  and freed  the
country from the rule of the Ottoman Empire. There is debate over the meaning
of  the  name  'Dracula'  in  its  association  with  Vlad  Tepes.27  Bram  Stoker
discovered the name and its meaning in William Wilkinson's An Account of the
Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia while  on holiday  at Whitby  in  1890.28

'Drac' means 'devil' in Romanian; 'ul' is the definitive article; and so 'Dracul',
the name by which Vlad's father, Vlad II, was known, literally means 'the devil'.

76

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

The  'ulea'  ending  means  'son of  and so 'Draculea',  converted  by Stoker  into
'Dracula', means 'the son of devil'. Not all sources agree with this interpretation
and  point  to the fact  that  an alternative  translation  of the Romanian  'drac' is
'dragon'29.  Vlad  Tepes'  father,  who  was  appointed  military  governor  of
Transylvania  by the Emperor  Sigismund,  was a  member  of the Order  of the
Dragon, an order dedicated to fighting the Turks, and so Dracula can also mean
'Son of the Dragon'.

Another  of Stoker's  historical  inspirations  was Countess  Erszebet  'Elizabeth'
Bathory,  whose  story  he  found  in  Sabine  Baring-Gould's  The  Book of
Werewolves.30 The Hungarian  Countess  (1560-1614)  became  known  as the
'blood  countess'  when  610 victims  were  found  listed  in  a  notebook  in her
room. No evidence was taken  regarding her alleged bloodbaths and vampirism;
however,  according  to sworn  testimony,31  she took  pleasure  in torturing her
servants  and young  peasant  girls,  in the belief  that  bathing  in the blood of
virgins would keep her beautiful  and give her immortality.32

As an author of fiction, Stoker may have drawn on these and other figures to
create  his imaginary  character  of  Count  Dracula.  Despite  the tenuous  links
between Dracula and Vlad Tepes, elements of the real-life Vlad's biography have
been  associated  with  the fictional  Dracula.  The novel  itself  does  not dwell on
these  associations.  However,  it is not only  from  the original  book  that  people
form  an image of Dracula  and his homeland. There are numerous  examples of
fusion  between  Vlad  and Dracula  both  in  print33  and on the screen.34  Most
recently,  Francis  Ford  Coppolla's  1993 blockbuster  film  Dracula35 has been
commended for its attempts to remain faithful  to Stoker's original novel.36 It also
reinforces  the connections between  Vlad Tepes and Dracula by inserting a new
prologue that directly links the two characters in an attempt to give the story an
historical grounding.

Dracula  - an  example  of literary and film tourism
Dracula  tourism  is ah  example  of literary-  and film-tourism. Heritage  tourism
based on literary places can encompass both the real world of the writers' lives,
and  the landscapes  that  provide the setting  for their  novels.37 Literary  tourists
may  desire  to see the places  connected  with  an author  or explore the literary
associations  of an area. Fiction is a poor  documentary  source for reality,38 yet
visitors attempt to search it out. When authors such  as Stoker write descriptive
passages of what are essentially fictitious  landscapes, the reader may believe that
theymust portray the actual landscape. In setting their work in real landscapes,
authors  are imposing  unnecessary  restraints  on  themselves  and which may
leave  the  reader  frustrated  and  unsatisfied  when  they  later  discover  the
inconsistency  in the writing;  'there  is nothing  so trying  as a real  topography
redrawn'.39  Pocock's  work  on  a  number  of  literary  landscapes,  including
Haworth40  and Catherine  Cookson  Country,41  suggests  that  as the result of
writings  by  and  about  particular  authors, 
'certain  localities  or  literary
landscapes may be approached in a heightened  state of expectation'.42

In  more  recent  years  literary  tourism  has been  supplemented  by film and
television  tourism,  based  on  the  on-screen  appearance  of  places.  In  their
discussion of the effect  in film on visitor numbers to screened locations Tooke &

28. S. Wieland, Interview

2,  (on-line at
http://www.ucs.mun.
ca/~emiller/int2 .txt)
1997.

29. R. Porter, The

Historical Dracula:
Vlad Tepes UI, 1431-
1476,  on-line at
http://www.nat.vu.nl/
~radu/vlad.html,
1992:  B. Belford,
Bram Stoker.a  biogra-
phy  of the author of
Dracula, London:
Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, 1996.

30. E. Miller,  'Vampires:

Search  for the Truth',
television, the
Learning  Channel in
Back to Basics: Re-
examining  Sources for
Dracula  on-line at
http://www.ucs.mun.
ca/~emiller/icfa.txt,
1997a.

31. C. Adams,  Did Dracula

Really Exist?  on-line
at
http://www.tcnj .edu/
~fradella/dracula.htm,
1997.

32.D.F. Glut,  The Truth
About  Dracula,  New
York: Stein and Day,
1975.

33. E. Miller,

'Introduction'  in J.
Kalogridis, Lord of the
Vampires, on-line at
http://www.ucs.mun.
ca/kalo.txt,  1997b.

34.  Bloodlines: making

Coppola's Dracula, tele-
vision,  directed by
J.Werner. USA:
Columbia  Pictures,
1992.

Dracula's  Castle in Transylvania

77

35. Bram Stoker's  Dracula,

film, directed by F.F.
Coppola, USA:
Columbia  Pictures,
1992.

36. R. Dyer,  'Dracula and

desire'. Sight and
Sound. Vol.3, no.l
(NS),  1993, pp.8-12.

37. D.T.Herbert,

'Heritage  as Literary
Place'  in D.T. Herbert
(ed) Heritage,  Tourism
and Society, London:
Mansell,  1995,  pp.32-
48.

38.D.G.D. Pocock.

'Introduction:  imagi-
native  literature and
the  geographer' in
D.G.D. Pocock (ed)
Humanistic Geography
and Literature,
London: Croom  Helm,
1981.  pp.9-19.

39.J.H.  Paterson&E.

Paterson,  'Shropshire:
reality  and symbol in
the  work of Mary
Webb' in Pocock,
op.cit(note 38)
p.209.

40. D.G.D. Pocock,
'Haworth: the
Experience of a
Literary Place', in
W.E. Mallory & P.
Simpson-Housley
(eds) Geography  and
literature,  NewYork:
Syracuse UP,  1987,
pp.135-142.

41. D.G.D. Pocock,

'Catherine  Cookson
Country:  tourist
expectation  and expe-
rience', Geography,
Vol.77. 1992.
pp.125-143.

42. D. Pocock,  1987,  op.

cit,  (note 40) p.135.

Barker43  use the example  of the television  adaptation  of Ellis  Peter's  Cadfael
Chronicles,  and the subsequent  increase  in visitors  to Shrewsbury.  The novels
are set in the town and since their publication visitors have been attracted as a
result of the books. The television series resulted in a further  increase in visitors
even though filming actually took place in Hungary.

'It seems that if the film location is the true setting, the visitor visits the
location; if the film location represents a fictional setting, the visitors go to the
location; but if the film location represents a different  actual setting the visitors
go to the place represented.44

Mass media in all forms are a determinant of tourist behaviour45 and visitors
to  Transylvania,  motivated  by  literary  and  film  references  to  Dracula,  are
seeking a landscape which is a mix of fictions and realities.

Bran Castle - the reality
The  Transylvanian  village  of Bran,  situated  in the Carpathian  Mountains  27
kilometres46 from Brasov, is dominated by its Castle (Figure 2).  Bran Castle was
built by the citizens of Brasov on a rock, sixty metres high, between the Piatra
Craiului  and  the  Bucegi  Mountains,  some  of  the  highest  in  Romania. The
original purpose of the Castle was to serve as a gate between Transylvania and
Wallachia  and  an  obstacle  against  foreign  invasion.  At  the  end  of the
seventeenth century, when the Union of Transylvania and Wallachia took place,
the Castle gradually lost its military and strategic role. As a consequence of the
Great  Union  of  the  three  Romanian  provinces,  Transylvania,  Moldova  and
Wallachia,  in 1920, Brasov Town  Council donated  the Castle to Queen  Maria.
After restoration work the castle became the summer residence of the Romanian
Royal  Family.  When  the Romanian  monarchy  was abolished  in  1948, their
property  became  state-owned  and the
castle  was  neglected  for  eight  years
before  opening  as a museum  in 1956.
The  museum  is now administered by
the Romanian Ministry of Culture.

Figure 2.  The Bran  Castle, Transylvania,
Romania.

Bran Castle has become the focus of
the  tourist  exploitation  of the Dracula
myth  despite its tenuous  links to both
Dracula  and  Vlad  Tepes.  Vlad  Tepes
probably visited the Castle at Bran and
he was briefly held there as a prisoner;
however  he  was never  in  residence.
Vlad  Tepes  did build  a  castle  not at
Bran  but at  Poienari.  This  is now a
ruin  and in  a  far  less  dramatic and
accessible  location  than  Bran.47  It is
unclear why Stoker chose to locate his
story  in Transylvania,  although  some
of  his  inspirations  for  the  central

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

43.N.  Tooke&M.  Baker,

'Seeing is Believing:
the  Effect  of Film on
Visitor  Numbers to
Screened  Locations',
Tourism  Management,
Vol.17, no.2, 1996,
pp.8 7-94.

44. Ibid. p.93.

45. J. Swarbrooke, 'The
Future  of the Past:
Heritage Tourism  into
the  21st Century1 in
A.V. Seaton  et al.
(eds),  Tourism:  the
state of the art,
Chichester:  Wiley,
1994,  pp.222-229.

46. KINA,  Bran  Castle,

Milano: ABA,  1997.

47. C. Waterfall,  'Reality

Bites', The
Geographical Magazine,
February 1997,
pp.34-35.

48.Beirord  op.cit.  (note

29).

49. Ibid, and H. Ludlam,

A  Biography of
Dracula: the life  story
of  Bram  Stoker,
London:  Foulsham,
1962.

50. B. Stoker,  op. dt,
(note  25) p.442.

Dracula  character,  particularly  Vlad  Tepes,  are inextricably  linked  with  the
region. Although he had travelled in Europe, Stoker had never visited Romania
or  Transylvania48  and  sought  background  material  from  various  written
sources.49  Stoker  did not use one location  as the inspiration  for his fictional
Castle Dracula, although the castle at Bran and the surroundings, if not the true
model, certainly fit the imaginary description of the vampire's home:

...the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under the
hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian
mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur, perched a thousand
feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with seemingly a great gap between
it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side.50

Across the world the name Transylvania  conjures  up images of Dracula and
his sinister  homeland.  Visitors have flocked  to the area in search  of the legend
and  Bran  Castle  has become  the focus  of Dracula  tourism  for  a  number of
reasons: Bran is an accessible location  near to the resort of Poiana Brasov, and
if  not the real  Dracula's  Castle,  it fits the image  and looks  as if it  should  be
Dracula's Castle.

rapidly 

to  the  western 

Marketing, interpretation  and  guiding  at Bran Castle
Since  the 1989 Revolution,  Romanian  and foreign  private-  and state-owned
tourism organisations have promoted Bran Castle as being the Home of Dracula.
Ghost  and vampire  tours  have  been  developed  as a  means  to stimulate the
business  and  tourism  growth  in  the  Brasov  region.  The  local  community
adapted 
invasion  and  opened  catering  and
accommodation  businesses  to  suit  tourists  of  all  nationalities,  although  the
majority  come from  Britain,  Germany,  Holland,  Austria,  France,  Italy,  Turkey,
Greece and Israel. There are no official  records of the number  or nationality of
arrivals to Bran, before  or after  the Revolution,  as there is no requirement for
visitors  to register  on entering  the village.  The only  records  available  to the
authors  were ticket  sales at the Castle grounds. However,  these are incomplete
as only adult admissions are recorded and those arriving as part of an organised
tour  are excluded.  The estimations  in Figure  3 were  based  on  approximations
made by staff at the site.

Prior  to the Revolution,  Dracula  did not figure in the State's  promotion of
Bran,  and any link between  the national  hero Vlad Tepes and vampirism was
denied  in  official  literature.  Lately,  faced  with  the uncontrollable  increase  in
tourists to Bran, the Romanian Ministry of Tourism has included information on
the  legend  of  Dracula  in  its  promotional  written  literature  on  Romania.
However,  a  clear  distinction  is made  between  Bran  - the historic  castle, and
Dracula  - the fiction character,  denying  any possible  connection  between the
two. In the official  tourist  literature  on Romania,  Bran  is still presented  as a
significant  national  heritage  attraction.  Tourists  arriving  at Bran  are therefore
exposed  to  two  contradictory  marketing  strategies:  the  Government's  fact-
oriented  policy  and the  travel  agencies  and  local  private  enterprise fiction-
oriented  approach.

Dracula's  Castle in Transylvania

79

16  ,

12 -
10 -
8 -
6  -
4  -
2  -
0

•c
s
o
*-»
o
u

s

Seasonalify of Tourism at Bran Castle

c

I

tx>

—r~

CO

o
O

month

I

Figure 3. Seasonalittj  o/ tourism  at  Bran Castle.

The  promotional  strategy  of  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  is  based  on  national
identity  and  the  history  of Bran,  including:  the  royal  and  garrison  rooms,  the
customs and traditions  of Romanian peasants, as well as the Royal Guesthouse,
the  Mediaeval  Wall  and  Customs,  and  the  Chapel  of  Queen  Maria.  From  this
point  of  view,  visitors  to  Bran  will  not  find  any  written  interpretation  of  the
legend  of  Dracula  In  the  castle  grounds,  although  there  is  multilingual
interpretation  of  the  Ethnographic  Museum  of  the  Village  of  Bran,  situated  in
the grounds. The Museum  and  the  Castle are presented  as  a mix  of mediaeval
custom  functions,  a  collection  of reconstructed  houses  illustrating  the  lifestyles
of  Romanian  peasants  living  in  the  region,  and  the  early  twentieth  century
royal residence with  its maze of very small rooms suggesting its initial  military
purpose.

This  approach  can  be  contrasted  with  the  strategy  of  the  travel  agencies,
which  is based  solely  around  the  image of Dracula  as  a reason  for  visiting  the
castle. Some companies have used themes such as ghosts and vampirism as part
of  their  advertising  strategies  to  attract  more  tourists.  Locals  have  initiated  a
market  in  the  parking  area  near  to the  entrance  to  the  Castle  grounds,  where
tourists  can  buy  virtually  anything  from  traditional  artefacts  to  Dracula
merchandising.

The Ministry  of Tourism  and  its representatives  at Bran  Castle seem to lack
clear  targeted  marketing  strategies  for  place  promotion,  tourism  growth  and
income  generation  at  this  important  heritage  site.  Moreover,  there  is  a
continuous  lack  of  managerial  interest  and  effort  towards  rebuilding  this
heritage  site  for  tourism  by  creating  the  necessary  facilities  for  tourists,  e.g.
drinking water supplies and toilets. During the visit to the site, serious gaps were
identified  in  the  provision  of  on-site  information,  services  provided  by  travel
agents  and  the  organisation  of  guided  tours. The  castle  itself  does not  employ
any guides and the casual method of 'there is always someone wanting to make

80

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

51. Nottinghamshire
County  Council,
Welcome to the  Official
Visitor's Guide  to
Nottinghamshire - the
Home of Robin Hood ,
on-line at
http://www.nottscc.go
v.uk/tourism/index.ht
m, 1997.

52. G. Ashworth  & B.
Goodall, Marketing
Tourism  Places,
London: Routledge,
1990.

53. Herbert  op.dt,  (note

37) p.33.

54. M. Wright,  Prim

Dracula's  Homepage!
On-line at
http://www.dracula-
castle.com/ 1997.

money  who can show  you around  the castle'  (Castle  employee)  is  a  severe
weakness taking into account the large number of Romanian and international
independent  tourists  to  the  castle.  Authorised  guides  only  come  with  the
organised  tours.  Even  under  these  circumstances,  there  is a  total  lack  of tour
management on the part of the local administration at Bran during the summer
periods. As the castle  is permanently  overcrowded,  the quality  of  information
provision  and thus  visitor  experience  is  lowered.  Other  factors  also  serve to
contribute to lowering the visitor experience: restoration and construction  work
are  carried  out in the middle  of the tourist  season  making  it  impossible for
tourists to take pictures of the entire  castle; the entrance policy obliges tourists
to  show  proof  of payment  for  admission  with  cameras  and video  recording
facilities  throughout  the castle;  there  is a  lack  of sanitary  facilities  for tourists
and  a  shortage  of parking  space  due to the designated  area  being  used  as a
market,  and a  shortage  of official  literature,  maps,  guides  and merchandising
about the castle and the legend of Dracula at the point-of-sale.

This discussion  of the marketing  of Dracula  can be compared  to the British
legend  of Robin  Hood. Like Dracula,  Robin  Hood,  an outlaw  with  links  to the
City of Nottingham  and Sherwood Forest, is a legendary  character  whose roots
are  based  on historical  facts.  In contrast  to Romania's  approach  to marketing
Dracula,  local  and regional  organisations,  including  Nottingham  City  Council
and the English Tourist Board, have built a complex marketing strategy  around
Nottingham as being the 'Home of Robin Hood'.51

In  the  case  of  the  Bran  Castle,  it  is  universally  acknowledged  that
Transylvania  is the homeland of Dracula, yet the Romanian  Government seems
unwilling to acknowledge and take advantage of this free international publicity.
With  the increase  in  competition  worldwide,  this  destination  and its historic
attractions  have  to  be  sold  more  effectively,  with  greater  emphasis  put on
marketing  techniques  such as positioning and branding.52  Herbert supports the
view that  there has been a:

broadening of the perceived range of places which can be marketed. This range
now extends beyond places with more obvious environmental qualities to others
with claims as heritage attractions which rest on their connections with people
and events rather than on the intrinsic qualities of the place.53

The continuous denial on the part of Romanian  anthropologists  could  influence
tourism  in  this  country  negatively,  by  creating  international  ambiguity and
inauthenticity  as well  as potential  claims  for 'the Home  of Dracula'  by other
countries, such as Germany.54

Tourists motivations  for visiting Bran Castle
As a result of the contradictory marketing strategies in Romania, the perception
of the Castle by both  Romanian  and international  tourists has changed.  Sixty-
three  short interviews were carried out at the site in August  1997 revealing a
mix  of expectations  amongst  tourists  about  the links  between  the Castle and
Dracula:
• 

tourists who knew that there was no association between the legend and the

Dracula's  Castle in Transylvania

81

55. H. Pitt,  'living  in  the

Shadow  of  Count
Dracula1,  The Times,
January  4th,  1997.

56. M. Shackley,  'When

is the  Past?
Authenticity  and  the
Commodization  of
Heritage', Tourism
Management, Vol.15,
no.5,  1994, pp. 396-
397.

castle  previous  to  arriving  at  Bran,  but  were  happy  to  visit  the  Castle
anyway;
tourists who knew that there was no association between the legend and the
castle but  expected  to  see on-site  information  and  souvenirs  suggesting  the
legend;
tourists who expected to be greeted by a Dracula look-alike at the Castle and
found  it surprising  to experience the opposite.

• 

• 

The majority  of visitors were aware that Dracula was a legend with no solid
links  to  the  castle;  however  they  were  divided  over  whether  or  not  the  castle
should  exploit  the  Dracula  myth.  Many  expressed  solid  disappointment  that
there was nothing  to  explain  the  Dracula  legend  and its links, or otherwise, to
the  castle  and  the  area  in  general.  There  was  an  overwhelming  feeling  from
visitors  that  if  the  castle  did  develop  the  Dracula  theme,  it  should  be  done
'tastefully'  and the castle should not  'falsify'  its image.

There was absolutely nothing about the Dracula legend in the castle...I expected
at least a little bit of mystery about the castle and there was nothing. I am so
sorry as, even though I know about the legend and the real story of the castle, I
hoped that there would be something there that would at least mention the
name Dracula. [Romanian female, late twenties]

I knew that there was no connection with Dracula. I read a lot about Romania
and Transylvania. It will become a bit tacky, cheap, if they went on about
vampires; it is better without that image. [British male, middle twenties]

Empirical evidence,  therefore,  supports  the  suggestion  that  a  disparity  exists
between  the  strategies  of  the  organisations  in  charge  of  the  marketing  and
management  of Bran Castle. The image promoted by the Romanian  Ministry of
Culture  is  contrasted  with  the  more  organised  private  tourist  industry  which
focuses  on  the Dracula  associations  of the  area,  and  the image  of the  castle as
the mythical Dracula's home. Tourists  coming by road  may spend the night  at
the  'Count Dracula' Motel  and Restaurant  situated nearby, may taste  Dracula's
Red Wine, and whether or not they believe in the legend, 'one look at the castle
is enough  to convince  even  the  most  doubting  that  sometimes  fact  and fiction
do well to go hand-in-hand'.55

Tourists are presented with a series of confusing  and often  conflicting  images
of the castle and consequently the visitor's actual experience is a mix of positive
and negative emotions. This disparity must be bridged if Bran is to succeed  as a
sustainable  tourism  destination.  Whilst  is  important  not  to  falsify  Romanian
culture  in  respect  of  the  Dracula  connections,  the  castle's  management  are
failing  to meet  the  expectations  of many  visitors,  and  are  leaving  visitors  with
unclear  messages. The lack of historical  fact  should  not be seen  as  a  barrier  to
the  development  of  Dracula-based  tourism  at  Bran.  A  survey  of  visitors  to
Nottingham,  the  'Home  of  Robin  Hood',  found  that  visitor  expectations  were
actually  exceeded  because  visitors  did  not  expect  any  historical  foundation  for
the myth and were therefore  agreeably surprised by the fact that some existed.56

82

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

57. E. Miller,  Interview 1,

on-line at
http://www.ucs.mun.
ca/~emiller/intl .txt,
1997;  P. Gosse,
Interview 4,  on-line
at
http://www.ucs.mun.
ca/~emiller/int4.txt,
1997.

58.  Ibid.

59.  G.R. Foxall. Consumer
Behaviour: a  Practical
Guide, Corbridge:
Retail & Planning,
1977.

60.  Transylvanian  Society

of Dracula,  World
Dracula Congress on-
line at
http://www.vaca tion-
station.com/romania/
dracula.html, 1997.

By presenting  tourists with the whole picture surrounding Dracula's links to the
Castle,  they  would  be better  educated  about  the Castle,  its history  and the
Dracula  legend and consequently  they  could  draw  their own conclusions  about
the  extent to which  Bran  Castle was 'Dracula  Castle'.

Almost  every  culture has a version of the vampire  myth  suggesting  that the
archetype  activates  motivation  factors57  such  as: the attraction  to the dark  side
of human  natures; the fascination  with  what  is forbidden;  the desire for eternal
youth  and  immortality  and  the  centrality  of  blood  in  a  religious  sense.
Moreover,  Miller58  believes  that  sexual  seductiveness  and power  have  come to
be  a  part  of  the  vampire  image  thus  creating  a  potent  combination. The
interviews  carried  out at the site  revealed  the fact  that,  despite the lack  of on-
site  information  on  the  legend  of  Dracula,  all  the  tourists  had  heard  of
Transylvania  as being  'the place  where  Dracula  came  from'  (Australian  male,
early  twenties; Dutch  woman,  late  forties;  Israeli  woman,  late fifties). Although
some  tourists  were  not keen  on seeing  impressions  of vampires  at the Castle,
they  could  not help  themselves  from  buying  souvenirs  of Dracula  from  the
market.

It is a must if you are a tourist in Romania. You cannot leave the country
without taking home with you something  about Dracula. The whole world
knows about Dracula's Castle and this Castle really looks just like in the vampire
films. Unbelievable.' (Japanese Male, early forties).

Despite the fact  that tourists were aware of Dracula before  their visit to Bran,
Foxall59  argues  that  the  awareness  of  a  phenomenon  need  not  necessarily
precipitate  purchase of a product  or service. He believes that  the act of decision
requires something else, be it a motive or goal designed to satisfy the individual's
particular  need. His argument is partly confirmed  in the case of the Bran Castle.
On  one hand,  the international  tourists  interviewed  came  on organised  tours
and  visited  the site  as  part  of one or  several  circuits  throughout  Romania;
coming  to Dracula's  Castle  was not their  main  priority.  On the other  hand,
Romanian  tourists  represented  mostly by families  travelling  in cars,  stopped at
the  castle for the sole purpose  of visiting  it. In their  case,  however,  the pricing
policies constituted the main  concern when  choosing  this  heritage  destination.

Marketing  outcomes
The association of Bran  Castle with the myth of Dracula  raises two main issues:
can  Bran  Castle  consolidate  its international  customer  base  regardless  of the
association  with  Dracula,  and can the village  of Bran  attract  more  tourists
without  a complex  marketing  strategy  involving  local and national  private and
state-owned  organisations?  The myth  of  Dracula  and the  vampirism  theme
provide  Bran  and Romania  with  an adaptable  and internationally  recognisable
image.  Attention  and interest  towards  Transylvania  and  Romanian  culture
generated by worldwide literature, films and annual  world  Dracula  congresses60
will  always  raise  curiosity  and interest  in Transylvania  and Romanian  culture.
Moreover,  means  of communication  such  as Internet,  satellite  and television
have  a  direct  impact  on  people's  desire  to  explore  new  destinations. The

Dracula's  Castle  in Transylvania

83

61.S.V. Ward&J.R.

Gold,  Place Promotion:
the use of publicity  and
marketing to sell towns
and regions, New
York: John  Wiley,
1994.

62. Romanian  Television,

The Golden  Stag
Festival on-line  at
http://www.vsat.ro/st
agfest/index.htm,
1997.

63. R.  Butler,  'The

Concept  of a  tourist
area  cycle of
evolution:
implications  for  man-
agement  or
resources',  Canadian
Geographer,  Vol.24,
1980,  pp.5-12.

64. G. Hovinen,  "Visitor

cycles: outlook  for
tourism  in  Lancaster
County',  Annals of
Tourism  Research,
Vol.9,  1982. pp.565-
583.

65. GJ.  Ashworth  & H.
Voogd,  'Marketing
and  Place  Promotion',
in  Ward  & Gold,
op.cit  (note  61).

abundance  of  free  publicity  afforded  to  the  Dracula  myth  through  these
channels may eventually contribute to a change in the Romanian Government's
marketing policy regarding Bran Castle.

The adoption of simple advertising tools such as slogans, themes and images,
could  be  adopted  in  the  case  of Bran,  as these  methods  are  often  employed  to
transform  heritage  sites  into  profit-making  commercial  entities.61  Sign-posting
and  the  interpretation  of  visual  displays  could  be  improved  in  order  to  keep
tourists interested throughout their visit. A cheaper alternative could be to insert
Bran  Castle  in  the  advertisements  of  annual  local  or  international  cultural  or
sports  events  such  as  the  Annual  International  Golden  Stag  Popular  Song
Festival62  which  takes  place  in  Brasov.  To  reduce  the  financial  burden  of
advertising  on  the  part  of  the  state-owned  tourism  bodies,  local  sponsorship
could be encouraged  to participate in promoting  the  castle. Their  advantage  as
direct  beneficiaries  of  the  results  could  be  stressed,  so  that  the  resident
population  can  become  aware  of  the  social  and  economic  advantages  which
heritage tourism could bring to their small community. At present there is little
communication  between  the  County  Council,  the  Ministries,  and  local  private
entrepreneurship  or  any  other  form  of responsible national  tourism  association
over the marketing  and management of Bran Castle as a significant  historic site
and  home  of  the  internationally  recognised  Dracula.  Unless  this  changes,
tourists  will continue  to  be  confused  by different  guiding  and  promotion  tools.
Promoting  the  castle  has  to  be  understood  as  a  combination  of  image
communication, public policy and marketing.

The village of Bran has  other  advantages which  could be exploited,  such  as
its  location  near  Brasov,  the  second  largest  tourist  destination  of  Romania.
National  and  international  awareness  of  the  area  has  already  been  created
independently  of any advertising on the part of the Romanian Government,  and
there  is  a  strong  international  tourist  base  at  Bran  and  throughout  the
neighbouring  County  of  Brasov.  In  order  to  develop  the  site  further  the
Ministries  of  Culture  and  of  Tourism  need  to  agree  upon  a  common  strategy
that puts Romanian  and international  tourists  and  their needs as a priority.

This heritage  site  is situated  somewhere  between  the  consolidation  and  the
development stages of a destination life-cycle,  and  according to Butler's63 model
this could lead to stagnation  or decline followed by rejuvenation.  In Hovinen's64
opinion,  the  size  and  significance  of  a  potential  decline  is  linked  to  three
interrelated  factors:  relative  location  and  accessibility,  diversity  of  the  tourism
base, and effectiveness  of ameliorative planning. International tourists need to be
targeted  and  attracted  and  the  lack  of  experience  on  the  part  of  the  new
Governmental  leadership  is  an  inheritance from the  previous  government  who
based  their  strategies  on  Romanian  tourists'  needs.  The  reorientation  of
marketing Bran Castle and its surrounding historic and natural sites needs to be
considered  as a priority for the immediate future.  The Ministries of Culture  and
Tourism  and  the  administration  of  Bran  Castle  need  to  make  a  distinction
between  the  three  elements  of marketing  (Figure  4):  consumers,  market  and
producers,65  in  building  a  comprehensive  marketing  strategy  for  this  heritage
site.

An element  of satisfying  tourists' needs is the development of souvenir shops

84

Alexandra Muresan and Karen A. Smith

to 

in  Bran, 

throughout 

themed  around Dracula,  as a means of
increasing  awareness  of the  Castle and
tourist  expenditure.  These  should  be
situated 
the
Brasov  region,  in  tourist  information
centres  nationwide  and  at  entrance
points 
the  country.  Promotion
requires  product  development,  such  as
good 
is  part  of
destination  image building  on  the part
of  tourists.  Drawing  national  and
international 
analysis
charts  could  be  very  useful 
in
developing  new  strategies  for  Bran
Castle.

facilities,  which 

competition 

POPULATIONS

needs / wishes / demands

CUSTOMERS  (CONSUMERS)

CHOICE OF MARKETING  STRATEGIES

66. D.C. Bojanic,  'The  Use

of Advertising  in
Managing  Destination
Image', Tourism
Management, Vol.12,
no.4,  December,
1991.

MARKETING  STRATEGIES

67. C. Gunn,

MARKETING  MEASURES

Promotional 

Spatial/functional 

Organiiatioial

PRODUCT  /ORGANISATIONSTRATEGIES

PRODUCT

Vacationscape,  Bureau
of Business  Research,
Austin: University of
Texas,  1972.

68. Waterfall,  op. cit,

(note  47)  p.35.

to 

COMMODIFICATION

RESOURCES

improve 

the  Figure 4.  Elements in place marketing process.

At  governmental  level,  marketing
heritage  sites is  not  yet  understood  as
a  means  by  which 
image  of the  country,  and  Romania  is
still  advertised  mainly  through  its  economic  business  advantages.  Although
changing  a  country's  image  is  a  long-term  process,  it  is  possible  to  build  an
image around unique attributes that provide the heritage sites with some kind of
international  competitive  advantage.66  Advertising  plays  an  important  role  in
the  transition  process  because  it  provides  the  most  efficient  means  by which  a
country  can  convey  its  image  to  potential  travellers.  This  marketing  tool  has
been shown  to be valuable in creating and managing a product's image.67

A robust strategy for marketing Bran Castle, both as a significant  Romanian
historic  site  and  the  Home of Dracula,  will have  to  avoid  falsifying  Romanian
culture or creating ambiguity. The vampiric Dracula may not be based on pure
historical fact, but the legend is inextricably linked to the region and its cultural
heritage.  By  attempting  to  explain  the  truth  and fiction behind  the  Dracula-
Transylvania-Bran  Castle relationship,  the  authorities  would  also be improving
visitors'  understanding  of  the  region  and  its  history.  Dracula  Tourism  is  'a
market  for  sensationalist  tourism  and  when  history  is  falsified  it  denies  people
their true past'.68 Dracula is not alone in being a character steeped in myth and
legend  who  also  had  links  to  actual  historical  events  and  people.  Other
characters  whose  origins  are  a  mix  of fiction and  reality  but  around  whom  a
successful  destination  marketing  strategy  has  been  based  include  the  Little
Mermaid and Copenhagen,  Don Quixote and La Mancha,  and Father  Christmas
and Lapland. These and  other  sites have translated  their  famous figures into  a
successful  tourism  identity,  and  they  are proof  of the  potential  for  a  successful
marketing  strategy  based  on  Dracula.  Success  relies  on  the  post-revolutionary
Romanian  Government and  the Ministries in charge to eliminate the remains of
the  previous  regime,  acknowledge  the  importance  of  national  heritage  in
building  a  positive  international  image  of  the  country,  in  attracting  foreign
expenditure in the country  and support tourism  development in Romania.

Dracula's  Castle in  Transylvania

85


