International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Heritage: Pride or passion, product or service?

Gary Edson

To cite this article: Gary Edson (2004) Heritage: Pride or passion, product or service?,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 10:4, 333-348, DOI: 10.1080/1352725042000257366
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725042000257366

Published online: 17 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 3050

Citing articles: 46 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 333  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 10, No. 4, September 2004, pp. 333–348

Heritage: Pride or Passion, Product or 
Service?
Gary Edson

104000000September 2004
GaryEdson
gary.edson@ttu.edu
Taylor & Francis Ltd
RJHS10401.sgm
10.1080/1352725042000257366
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor and Francis Ltd

Concerns about cultural, natural, tangible, and intangible heritage have caused govern-
ments  to  enact  protective  legislation,  courts  to  impose  penalties,  and  organisations  to
conduct awareness campaigns. Heritage has become an important economic attraction that
draws hundreds of thousands of visitors and billions of dollars into communities around
the world, but what is the heritage that is being protected and promoted? This paper is a
commentary on the theoretical basis of heritage. The questions posed and the ideas offered
are not intended to condone the unregulated movement of cultural or natural materials
(heritage) in any form. The plunder of archaeological sites, the theft of cultural and natural
objects and specimens, and the destruction of structures and locations for profit or during
times of conflict are heinous acts. These activities incite the spoilage of history, deplete tradi-
tional values, and degrade the basic notion of human decency. Nevertheless, the question
remains: ‘what is heritage?’

Keywords: Heritage; Culture; Heritage Industry; Cultural Tourism; Illicit Trafficking; 
Heritage Management; Heritage Attractions

Symbols and myths come from such depths that they are part and parcel of the human
1
being.
 However, ‘the distinction between myth and history [heritage] has become an
increasing  problem  for  western  societies  throughout  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth
centuries as scholars have become increasingly aware of the ways in which actual events
2
can be interpreted to produce different meanings for different people’.

Where does the myth end and heritage begin? Perhaps they are the same, and if they
are, then the notion requires no further explanation. However, the question acquires a
different patina if, when the myth ends, the commerce (in the broadest sense of the
concept) begins. The history of humankind is filled with interesting examples of myths

Gary Edson, Museum of Texas Tech University. Correspondence to: gary.edson@ttu.edu

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725042000257366

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 334  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

334

G. Edson

evolving through heritage to commercialisation. The examples, old and new, include
beliefs, practices, and invented traditions. In most instances, the event or circumstance
moved through two or more of these stages to find full endorsement as commercial
ventures clocked in the trappings of heritage.

‘One particular phenomenon that has exercised critics in the past few years has been
the  proliferation  of  representations  of  the  past  that  have  come  to  be  termed  “heri-
3
tage”.’
 This statement, written over a decade ago, proclaims a query that surpasses
social, economic, political, and geographical explanation. What is heritage, and why
has it become a commodity to discover, preserve, and exploit in communities around
the world?

The  ubiquitous  nature  of  the  ‘heritage’  phenomenon,  although  a  source  of  some
wonderment, has a socio-psychological basis that has reasserted itself as the demands
of contemporary life have escalated. Ergo, whenever humankind has ‘looked for some-
thing solid on which to found their lives, they have chosen, not the facts in which the
4
world abounds, but the myths of an immemorial imagination …’

Assuming that heritage is something delineating the psychology, customs, or ideals
of  society,  and  that  it  is  passed  down  from  preceding  generations  in  a  tangible  or
intangible form, then it is, to paraphrase Eric Hobsbawm, those activities and events
that establish or symbolise social cohesion or the membership of groups, real or artifi-
5
cial communities.
 It is possible to identify many activities that were created for social
or religious purposes and evolved into a form of ‘heritage industry’. However, rather
than go into detail about individual items of invented heritage, a few representative
examples may suffice: Christmas was invented in the fourth century to eclipse a festi-
6
val  of  a  rival  religion.
  Since  that  time  is  has  become  the  single  most  important
commercial  occurrence  in  the  USA  and  it  is  rapidly  gaining  a  similar  reputation  in
other countries of the world. Bastille Day was popularised, ‘to transform the heritage
of the Revolution into a combined expression of state pomp and power and the citi-
7
zens’ pleasure’.
 One further example of invented tradition is the ‘sports club’. These
organisations depend on invented tradition to develop and sustain a loyal following. A
good  representation  of  this  approach  is  the  Dallas  Cowboys  football  team—often
called ‘America’s Team’.

However, it is important not to get lost in the example and forget the basis for the
issue  of  fabricated  heritage.  It  is  the  intention  of  this  paper  to  present  a  theoretical
assessment of heritage and to consider its relationship to human perception. Because
of social, cultural, and political factors and the evolving role of the heritage industry,
this  appraisal  seems  appropriate.  In  part,  the  need  to  examine  heritage  authenticity
reflects  the  intuited  loss  of  individual  and  group  identity  associated  with  cultural
homogenisation. Identity, social values, and personal integrity are acknowledged casu-
alties of the transpositional arrangement that results in loss of generally undefined but
commonly lamented heritage. Perhaps because of these assumed losses, a great deal of
attention has been given to the significance of heritage and what it means in the context
of social identification. Concerns about cultural, natural, tangible, and intangible heri-
tage have caused governments to enact protective legislation, courts to impose penal-
ties, and organisations to conduct awareness campaigns.

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 335  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

International Journal of Heritage Studies

335

The US Congress declared that an 

advanced civilization must not limit its efforts to science and technology alone, but
must  give  full  value  and  support  to  other  great  branches  of  scholarly  and  cultural
activities in order to achieve a better understanding of the past, a better analysis of the
present, and a better view to the future’.

8

This 1965 statement can be construed to apply to all aspects of heritage from Mount
Rushmore to Benjamin Franklin’s spectacles, but are all such items representative of
individual or group heritage, or simply oddities that are showcased to attract and enter-
9
tain the curious?

The concept of historic preservation, one part of the heritage equation, has become
an international cynosure. The US government enacted various laws to protect and
preserve heritage including the Antiquities Act (1906), the National Historic Preserva-
tion Act (1966), the Endangered Species Act (1973) and the Native American Graves
Protection  and  Repatriation  Act  (1991).  The  Canadian  government  established  the
non-profit organisation Heritage Canada to conserve historic areas through recycling
and adaptive reuse. Similarly, countries in Europe have organisations devoted to the
preservation of cultural heritage. For instance, the British National Trust was estab-
lished in 1895 to administer historically significant homes, properties, and scenic areas,
and the National Heritage Act was enacted in 1983. Historic preservation is a priority
in Russia and many of the former Eastern bloc countries, and in China and Japan (the
Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties), ancient shrines, palaces, and gardens
have  been  preserved.  Egypt  has  the  Antiquities  Protection  Law  and  several  African,
Middle Eastern (as an example, the Ottoman Decree on Antiquities adopted in Turkey
in 1874), and South American nations (the Cultural Heritage Act enacted in Ecuador
in 1979) have agencies and laws to protect and preserve heritage.

10
 

Culture consists of patterns, explicit or implicit, of and for behavior acquired and
transmitted by symbols, constituting the distinctive achievement of human groups,
including  their  embodiments  in  artifacts;  the  essential  core  of  culture  consists  of
traditional (i.e., historically derived and selected) ideas and especially their attached
values …

11

Many of the laws and decrees address the protection of ‘cultural heritage’ because,
for a number of years, countries used the word ‘culture’ as an inclusive term intending
to identify anything and everything that humans made, gathered, or recognised, and in
most  instances  the  concern  was  for  tangible  heritage  only.  That  viewpoint  caused
culture to be defined as ‘the way of life of a group of people’.
 This perspective is being
revised to consider both cultural and natural heritage as separate but conjoined aspects
of human existence, and to give equal attention to intangible elements such as song,
dance, languages, and culinary practices to name the most obvious. The following defi-
nitions produced by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organi-
sation (UNESCO) reflect this consideration.

12

The UNESCO definition of ‘cultural heritage’: 

G

monuments:  architectural  works,  works  of  monumental  sculpture  and  painting,
elements or structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, cave dwellings and

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 336  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

336

G. Edson

G

G

G

G

G

combinations of features, which are of outstanding universal value from the point
of view of history, art or science;
groups of buildings: groups of separate or connected buildings which, because of
their  architecture,  their  homogeneity  or  their  place  in  the  landscape,  are  of
outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
sites: works of man or the combined works of nature and man, and areas including
archaeological  sites  which  are  of  outstanding  universal  value  from  the  historical,
aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of view.

The same document defines ‘natural heritage’ as: 

natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups of such
formations, which are of outstanding universal value from the aesthetic or scientific
point of view;
geological  and  physiographical  formations  and  precisely  delineated  areas  which
constitute  the  habitat  of  threatened  species  of  animals  and  plants  of  outstanding
universal value from the point of view of science or conservation;
natural  sites  or  precisely  delineated  natural  areas  of  outstanding  universal  value
from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.

13

In addition, the UNESCO Web site defines intangible heritage as: 

embracing all forms of traditional and popular or folk culture, i.e. collective works
originating in a given community and based on tradition. These creations are trans-
mitted orally or by gesture, and are modified over a period of time through a process
of  collective  recreation.  They  include  oral  traditions,  customs,  languages,  music,
dance,  ritual,  festivals,  traditional  medicine  and  pharmacopoeia,  the  culinary  arts,
and all kinds of special skills connected with the material aspects of culture, such as
tools and the habitat.

14

These definitions are extensive, inclusive, and formulated to appeal to the interna-
tional community, thus reflecting the role and responsibility of UNESCO. However, it
is possible, or probable, that people simply believe in things (heritage) because they
want to and need to, and that what they believe in has minimal inherent value and
limited socio-political or cultural pertinence. ‘[T]hings stabilize our sense of who we
are; they give a permanent shape to our views of ourselves that otherwise would quickly
dissolve in the flux of consciousness.’
 This assumption does not deny the importance
of specific objects, specimens, structures, locations, or activities, but it suggests a differ-
ent reason for defining heritage and heritage assignment. It also suggests that the heri-
tage  of  individuals  and  groups  may  be  disassociated  with  history  but  assigned
importance  by  means  of  social  interchange  (communication  and  diffusion)  and
assumed need.

15

Heritage, in most communal situations, is something that is partly material, partly
human, and partly spiritual on which humans often rely to cope with circumstances—
specifically challenges that face them. It is more than customs, ideas, and tradition.
 It
often includes belief that is not necessarily limited to sacred considerations. Therefore,
heritage is most often a set of conditions adopted by a cultural grouping to meet the

16

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 337  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

International Journal of Heritage Studies

337

basic requirements of that group. However, owing to the scattered nature of contem-
porary society, primary group identity has been replaced by the general assimilation of
social  conditions  that  reflect  the  need  for  individual  validation.  These  routines  are
transmitted by means of imitation, social conditioning, and teaching. The use of these
secondary practices is reinforced as they are transmitted from one generation to the
next. This integration of non-tradition-based activities alters the coherent whole of the
group  and  challenges  the  validity  of  uncorroborated  practices  (heritage)  allegedly
based on cultural history.

The New Museology

The heritage ‘industry’ often promotes a vicarious experience that depends on using
objects or locations as means of entering into or living in the past. Ludmilla Jordanova
wrote in 
: ‘Visitors are required to assent to the historical authen-
ticity  and  reality  of  what  they  see,  while  they  simultaneously  recognize  its  artificial,
fabricated nature.’ ‘We understand the past, not by spuriously re-experiencing it, but
by turning over many different kinds of evidence relating to it and by generating from
this  an  understanding  which  inevitably  has  a  strong  intellectual,  that  is,  abstract
component.’

17

Reflecting on the nature of objects of all kinds, Spencer Crew and James Sims wrote: 

The mendacity of objects is all too familiar to makers of collections and exhibitions:
once  removed  from  the  continuity  of  everyday  uses  in  time  and  space  and  made
exquisite  on  display,  stabilized  and  conserved,  objects  are  transformed  in  the
meanings  that  they  may  be  said  to  carry:  they  become  moments  of  ownership,
commodities.

18

This reference may be read as a challenge to the integrity of all objects or questioning
only those that can be removed from the time and space continuum in which they were
created. This dichotomy may be considered a critical issue for heritage resources. The
reality of heritage can be altered by disassociation. Is a traditional song the same when
it is recorded and replayed in a concert hall? 
 values are different and
may (probably) cause the object, building, monument, or other heritage resources to
send different messages.

In situ

ex situ

 and 

In the publication 

Introduction to Museology

 by Ivo Maroevic, the statement is made
that: ‘heritage intensely acts on the system around it, because it stimulates its own inter-
pretation, and the formulation of messages and their use’.
 In addition, he concludes
that  historic  buildings,  historic  urban  centres,  natural  reserves,  and  national  parks
reside  under  a  certain  system  of  limited  use  to  preserve  their  qualities  as  forms  of
presentation  and  representation  of  knowledge.  The  time  and  place  of  the  heritage
resource, in this context, affords a level of associational reference and consequential
validation.

19

No  view  of  history  is  absolute.  Every  consideration,  no  matter  the  perspective  or
predilection, assigns a personal value to each element of the historical process. Cultural
patrimony is often aligned with the consensus view of historical events and tends to
focus  on  commonly  recognised  heroes,  battles,  and  institutions  (transformational
activities).  Most  assessments  are  subjective  and  based  on  perspectives  that  are  far
removed from the actual events. It is generally believed, however, that spatio-temporal

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 338  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

338

G. Edson

20

continuity is a necessary condition for the identity of physical objects—the tangible—
and the same might be said of the intangible. Similarly, the spatio-temporal continuum
is associated with the history of a people and, therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that
historical affiliation and collective memory are means for people to orient themselves
to their past.
 Frequently, history and heritage are assumed synonymous; however, the
idea of heritage has greater symbolic meaning than the object, time, or place, that is, the
historical reference. The dramatic and representative values of heritage expressions are
often  subordinate  to  symbolic  or  mnemonic  allusions.  However  vague  or  personal
these  references  may  be,  they  stimulate  a  response  that  implies  understanding.  The
heritage in most circumstances can be regarded as identity through time and, if so, that
identity (individual or group) verifies something (heritage) as being important. When
a person or group has that time/space relationship (memory), there is an innate notion
of identity, and with that identity the related heritage has validity. Real or imagined
heritage manifestations are viewed as elements of continuity, and ‘one reality lives at
the expense of countless others’.

21

Because  human  behaviour  is  either  learned  or  modified  by  social  conditions,  the
fulfilment  of  desire  is  often  the  motive  for  assimilated  or  invented  heritage.  This
approach reinforces group agreement on the value of its members as a part of the phys-
ical or natural environment. Consequently, it may be assumed that many aspects of
heritage are to address specialised group needs instead of maintaining historic priority.
Psychological continuity is an important criterion of identity and a primary ingredi-
ent in the notion of heritage. There is, however, an illogical nature to the notion of
continuity in reference to time and place. This concept requires that the place remain
consistent for an extended identifiable time. This requirement is often addressed by
associating the persisting heritage concept with an object or system of objects embod-
ied  in  a  place.  Thus,  any  consideration  of  continuity  includes  persisting  places  or
objects  that  establish  a  frame  of  reference.  This  qualification  gives  credence  to  the
notion of cultural and natural heritage as places and objects that are relevant to the
continuity of identity within the time/space continuum.

To define the cultural identity (heritage) of a group requires a comparative assess-
ment that views a particular culture in universal terms. This comparison is necessary to
demonstrate the uniqueness of the reference group’s heritage. Verification of cultural
values  (heritage)  also  requires  communication  and  the  diffusion  of  belief.  Further-
more, and possibly most importantly, the identity of each culture has to be recognised
as containing a value that is universal. John Rajchman addressed this concept in his
1995 publication on culture and identity: 

Cultural identity is often described as being what expresses the singularity of ‘groups,’
people and societies, what forbids conflating them in a uniformity of thought and
practice or purely and simply erasing the ‘borders’ that separate them and that trans-
late  the  at  least  tangential  correlation  between  linguistic  facts,  facts  of  kinship,
aesthetic facts in the broad sense (for there are styles of life just as there are musical
and literary styles) and political facts.

22

This point of view suggests that what is arbitrary in heritage identification is that a
specific  manifestation  of  ‘heritage’,  and  not  another,  is  given  a  level  of  reality  for  a

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 339  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

International Journal of Heritage Studies

339

specific individual or group according to circumstances that are understood and appre-
ciated by that individual or group only. The heritage presents itself as a unity of discrete
and functional meanings. The underlying fact about heritage (and identity) is that it
seldom persists unaltered through circumstantial change unless it is maintained in a
non-contextual environment, much as an artefact in a museum. For many, heritage is
a simulacrum of social memory or myth. There was probably never a time in the history
of humankind when heritage was not subject to invention, restoration, or adaptation
to meet the social, political, spiritual, or financial requirements of the subject commu-
nity. The illusion of having already experienced something being experienced for the
first time is an essential part of reconstructed or invented heritage. The creation of heri-
tage includes a process of ‘formalization and ritualization, characterized by reference
to  the  past,  if  only  by  imposing  repetition’.
  The  extant  community  may  have  no
recollection of the heritage resource being endorsed, and often there is no sense of 
déjà
.  The  group  that  experienced  the  event  no  longer  exists  and  there  is  little,  or  no,
vu
empirical data to identify them or to verify their existence. Yet the feeling persists.

23

People  having  common  ancestry  may  share  a  sympathetic  association  with  past
events or objects even though the current generation had no direct connection with the
heritage  resource.  Nevertheless,  the  association  is  firmly  embedded  in  the  collective
memory,  and  it  is  possible  to  recall  in  detail,  activities,  events,  or  objects  that  are
described, identified, or defined by others. There are many examples of this phenome-
non, and among the most common are those found in self-perpetuating ceremonies
such  as  religious  ceremonies,  fraternal  organisations,  and  procedural  affirmations.
These elements, though generally intangible and generic to most societies, are aspects
of the collective memory and routinely associated with cultural heritage.

Though human responses to heritage issues may be described as the spontaneous
effect of circumstantial conditions, the implanted attitudes have a socio-cultural basis.
Assuming that all human behaviour that is not reflex is due to a combination of the
agents including experience or lack of experience, understanding or absence of under-
standing, judgement or failure to judge, and decision or refusal to decide,
 then the
recognition of heritage as a ‘true’ manifestation of essential values and heritage as a
social invention becomes a complex issue. Individual and group assessment is made
more difficult by memory, advocacy, communication, and diffusion. It is also quite
likely that social position and affluence have a direct effect on individual and group
perspective of heritage. The human capacity to assimilate group memory is expansive
and directly influenced by the spatial and temporal continuum in which the person
resides.

24

25

The Collective Memory

There are two pasts to the past: ‘the temporal one that passes and is gone, and the
metaphorical “past” that is held in the memories and traditions of a society and its
surroundings’.
 Maurice Halbwachs included a related concept in his 1980 publica-
tion 
. He noted that a person has two aspects to the memory
process—one individual (personal) and one collective (social). Halbwachs proposes
that  individual  memory  is  reinforced  when  others  remember  the  same  or  similar
objects, events, or activities. This collective recognition of past circumstances allows the
individual to reconstruct a body of memories that is recognisable. The person has one

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 340  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

340

G. Edson

26

memory  process  that  reinforces  individuality,  and  a  second  process  that  ‘maintains
impersonal remembrances of interest to the group’.
 In all probability, the two memo-
ries  converge  at  that  time  when  the  individual  locates  himself  or  herself  within  the
collective present by evoking his or her past. The social memory can be relied upon to
fill the gaps in individual recollection when needed. Various organisations fulfil this
role. As examples: the Mayflower Society and the Daughters of the Republic of Texas
are organisations of selected individuals who come together for mutual acknowledge-
ment and to aid selected societal activities. The history of the individuals may not be
invented but the significance of the association has been traditionalised and glorified.
Many people have had the experience of relating to events and objects not by what
is seen or remembered but by undefined elements that were allied with the concerns of
those people offering the objects for view. These encounters promote borrowed memo-
ries based on the testimony or attitudes of others who may draw their inspiration from
a  more  distant  generation  of  impressions.  Nevertheless,  these  remembrances,  no
matter how arbitrarily encountered, often have a profound influence on the heritage of
a people and a nation.

Heritage invention and adaptation take place when transformation of social patterns
outgrows the practices and institutions of the past, thus affirming the need for a new
scheme of socio-cultural interaction. This change occurs in all societies as a reflection
of the collective identity. It is promoted as the emotional essence of a community and
as a part of the human continuum. Expressions of the adapted heritage can contain
multiple and contradictory assertions; there can be more than one message with essen-
tial or accidental qualities because societies are fabricated from a mixture of attitudes
and experiences.

The Aristotelian thesis that objects have both essential and accidental qualities rein-
forces  the  tentative  nature  of  heritage  resources.  Those  resources  that  remain
unchanged are described as the object’s essential properties. The accidental qualities, in
contrast, are those characteristics that change in various ways—time, space, circum-
stance, and condition. Though Aristotle probably did not have heritage in mind when
he formulated this hypothesis, the concept has applicability to those things that are
assigned heritage value. Undoubtedly, the assigned value should be more than how a
thing presents itself to the human observer in his or her immediate life-world.

In  an  evolving  cultural  context,  circumstantial  conditions  may  stimulate  identity
criteria (memory and character), including the relationship between objects and situa-
tions that acknowledge or verify the difference between groups of seemingly similar
cultures. Random diffusion of an idea may instil derivative values by embedding one
condition or phenomenon in place of another. Therefore, it is possible to view society
as  a  world-making  activity
—self-perpetuation—in  the  sense  that  it  creates  or  re-
creates and communicates values within the limits imposed by the group—a circum-
stantial reality. The human environment is that peculiar set of communicational reali-
ties  that  distinguish  one  culture,  one  people,  and  in  some  instances  one  individual,
from all others.

27

When a public, large or small, attempts to define an event of heritage proportions, it
is necessary to assign its various portions to the delineation of collective time. Such

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 341  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

International Journal of Heritage Studies

341

temporal apportionments are imposed upon the public because the event as a heritage
 This measure of social time is external
resource does not reside in any single memory.
to  the  lived  duration  of  contemporary  society  and  beyond  the  grasp  of  individual
memory. A situation of this nature differs from an historical event that has distinct
temporal demarcations.

28

Heritage  may  refer  to  the  human-made,  natural,  and  historical  character  of  the
material  and  symbolic  elements  of  life  as  well  as  the  intrinsic  productivity  of  social
action.  Heritage,  viewed  from  this  perspective,  is  a  means  by  which  human  beings
orient themselves to their past, and many of the elements of the past—both real and
imagined,  cultural  and  natural,  tangible  and  intangible—are  organised  chronologi-
cally. They are also identified as happening before or after a particular occurrence, and
where actual time/space markers do not exist, reference points are created.
 There are
numerous  examples  of  these  ersatz  markers—‘in  the  beginning’,  ‘before  enlighten-
ment’, ‘prehistoric’, ‘post-Edwardian’, ‘Medieval’, and ‘pre- or post-Columbus’. These
indicators tend to be ‘place-bound’, and have no inherent points of reference. They
imply  that  they  represent  a  time/space  condition  that  came  either  before  or  after
another  time,  but  the  contextual  reference  is  unstated.  However,  these  divisions  in
circumstance (and time) divide the human process into phases or parts. In most cases
the markers are not imposed artificially but exist, albeit of lesser consequence within
the socio-cultural or political process,
 and are given enhanced or celebratory status.
The purpose of the markers is to codify history, and in many cases they are to provide
a conceptual basis for heritage. 

30

29

Compulsive anniversaryism now seems characteristic of ‘the heritage age’ in which we
live;  1990  witnessed  dozens  of  past-related  celebrations  nationally  and  countless
others at the local level, and many such have already been announced for 1991. We
celebrate ourselves, our organizations, our places, our heroes, sometimes our authen-
tic, and significant history, we even celebrate celebrations and commemorate disas-
ters. That deemed worthy of official national celebration comes from a very filtered
sort of history, essentially patriotic, conservative, and suitable for the national history
curriculum.

31

The notion of cultural identity as a reference to heritage in some sense reflects upon
itself in the privileged dimension of time.
 With or without explicit reference to the
pertinence of this notion in the context of historical temporality, and with or without
any  association  with  the  historicity  of  the  culture,  it  is  possible  to  identify  certain
cultural attributes. Nevertheless, cultural identity and the associated heritage change
are transformed, which is a requirement of ‘culture’.

32

‘The things of the world have the function of stabilizing human life.’

 They address
the metaphysical question about the relationship of mind and body and hold an essen-
tial position of the concept of personal and group identity. When the parallel tracks of
mind, body, history, and need converge, a heritage phenomenon emerges. However,
that union may satisfy the need of only one person. To promote the larger sense of heri-
tage, selected elements are endorsed and ‘explained’ to those people seeking the secu-
rity of socio-cultural reference. ‘Objects give concrete evidence to one’s place in a social
network as symbols (literally, the joining together) of valued relationships.’
 As an

34

33

RJHS10401.fm  Page 342  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

342

G. Edson

example, the Ku Klux Klan was an organisation formed as a social club by a group of
Confederate Army veterans in Pulaski, Tennessee, around 1865. The group adopted the
name Ku Klux Klan from the Greek word 
, meaning circle, and the English word
clan. The group shared a common agenda. The name and symbols remained while the
organisation evolved into a social action group outside the mainstream of society.

kuklos

35

Such  organisations  are  designed  to  promote  individual  self-worth  by  establishing
relationships  with  other  similar-thinking  people.  Fraternal  orders  exemplify  this
concept of brotherhood or sisterhood as unions of like thinkers endorsing invented
heritage.

Perhaps there is no creditable basis for individual or group heritage, and maybe that
should not be an issue. This conjecture reflects on the nature of reality, or at least on
the correctness of thought about the nature of reality,
 as an examination that goes
beyond  the  confines  of  a  philosophical  enquiry  into  the  authentic  basis  of  heritage
resources. The investigation may begin with the Parmenidesian theory that ‘thought
and being are the same’,
 and with that hypothesis there is the concept that identity is
the basis of unity—the unity of heritage or purpose.

37

36

Since the 16th century, the objects of cultural and natural heritage have found their
way  into  museums.  They  are  objects  (artefacts)  of  pride,  prestige,  and  common
wealth.  In  some  instances,  as  with  the  Louvre,  Smithsonian,  or  Victoria  and  Albert
Museums,  the  artefacts  and  often  the  museums,  as  associated  places,  are  viewed  as
part of the identity of the nation and the people. The artefacts are considered not only
for their assigned cultural, scientific or historic values but also for what they signify
(personal, philosophical, or associational). Museums are generally most interested in
the  identity  of  the  object,  while  the  cultural  and  natural  heritage  structure,  site,  or
activity is generally more concerned with the identity of those people associated with
that heritage. That societal connection is necessary to validate the object as ‘heritage’.
The museum depends on relevant didactic panels as complementary elements to tell
the  story  of  the  artefact,  while  for  heritage  the  information  is  often  required  to
identify the structure, site, or activity. In the museum the information supplements
the  object,  but  for  cultural  and  natural  heritage  the  information  defines  (identifies)
the object. These issues of communication are associated with issues of context and
verification.

For cultural and natural heritage resources, communication is required to determine
‘what is’ from ‘what seems to be’. There is a need to differentiate between appearance,
reality,  and  ‘story’.  To  address  these  questions,  governments,  societies,  clubs,  and
special-interest groups publish catalogues of protected heritage items that range from
the inclusive to the exclusive.
 These lists are intended to inform people about the
things that are protected or restricted from change, destruction, or removal. The lists
define heritage according to socio-political definition, and establish heritage identifica-
tion by disseminating the relevant information (communication + diffusion).

38

39

Much of the world heritage was pre-coded—fixed in time and place—by the mid-
19th  century,
  and  in  some  locations  the  encoding  occurred  earlier.  Many  of  the
thoughts and ideas that guide contemporary human relationships and socio-cultural
attitudes were fixed before Isaac Singer devised the continuous-stitch sewing machine

RJHS10401.fm  Page 343  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

343

or Jenny Lind, the ‘Swedish Nightingale’, toured the USA under the management of
P. T. Barnum. With this encoding process in mind, it may be better to view heritage not
as a historical truth (fact) but only as conditional and hypothetical reasoning calculated
to explain the nature of things (and people), and not to determine the origins of tradi-
tions or practices. If it is assumed that heritage has no empirical reality, then the process
of identification is greatly altered and simplified.

Heritage as a social phenomenon is difficult to define and to explain without over-
lapping into fields of behavioural science and psychology. There are, however, certain
considerations  to  be  pondered,  particularly  the  apparent  contradiction  between  the
finality or individuality of information and the formal or abstract character generally
associated  with  heritage  resources.  The  explanatory  value  of  heritage,  as  it  is  often
conceived and promoted, is low when it comes to investigating the conditions of social
stability  or  identity  validation.  To  analyse  the  societal  implications  of  heritage,  it  is
necessary to examine how resources of signification are used to legitimate the special
interests of hegemonic groups. ‘[L]ack of clarity and rigour has led both public sector
and commercial managers (in, for example, public enquiries or sponsorship discus-
sions) to regard heritage as a “soft” field lacking in professionalism.’

40

Merriman  describes  the  term  ‘heritage  industry’  as  pejorative,  and  states  that  the
popular addiction to the past reflects the ‘failure of modern society to face the future
after the decline of industry’, and that ‘society is looking back to a more glorious past,
but  this  past,  as  portrayed  in  displays  led  by  marketing  policies,  is  a  romanticized
fiction’.  Merriman  also  notes  that  ‘heritage’  can  have  very  positive  connotations  as
well  as  negative  ones,  and  can  play  a  crucial,  creative  role  in  the  lives  of  different
communities.

41

To be meaningful to a responding audience, a heritage resource requires the specifi-
cation of a logical meaning, a time and a space relationship, and a direction. Without
the identifiable heritage resource (material body) or logical subject, recognition is not
describable. Furthermore, the heritage unit must be thought of as maintaining its iden-
tity during the process of change.
 The heritage exists so long as it retains its sameness
or identity. When it loses its sameness, it ceases to exist as a heritage resource and subse-
quently cannot be in any associational process, nor can it change or remain unchange-
able.  The  procedure  of  change  may  include  a  sense  of  direction  that  indicates  the
process of movement from one place, status, or condition to another. The concept of
direction  can  be  measured  in  various  terms  including  time,  space,  duration,  and
context.

42

43

Heritage as a phenomenal aspect of social existence may be unique or recurring. The
uniqueness or recurrence of the heritage resource may, however, have different forms
or degrees.
 Stonehenge can be viewed as unique because it happened only once (as
far  as  we  know)  in  one  location,  and  it  has  remained  the  same  during  a  process  of
change. On the other hand, the spoken language of a group is essentially similar. Differ-
ent people repeat the same words and phrases for generations, and in that process the
words change in pronunciation and meaning. In this example, the heritage changes in
time and space and may be regarded as non-specific. This is not to say that language is
not unique to the group, rather that it is a recurring phenomenon that has evolved

RJHS10401.fm  Page 344  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

344

G. Edson

through the time/space continuum. It is representative, but not always indicative, of its
socio-cultural origin.

Undoubtedly, there is a difference of perception about time and space in different
eras and different cultures. The time/space continuum is a relative concept that rein-
forces or weakens ideological as well as sociological points of view. However, the affix-
ing of traditional values and experiential associations can occur almost immediately
with  the  aid  of  communication,  and  the  assigning  of  traditional  values  and  the
appraisal of those values as they relate to heritage must consider the difference between
the absolute and relative meaning of the circumstances that precipitated the tradition.
The unconditional and objective value of a heritage resource is absolute, while that
which is heterogeneous and culturally related is relative. The acknowledgement of this
differentiation casts doubt on the validity of socially verified tradition as the underpin-
ning of heritage. Traditional values must have components that are recognised for their
symbolic  reference  to  acquire  heritage  status.  Invented  traditions,  those  that  lack
symbolic  reference,  are  viewed  as  practices  normally  governed  by  overtly  or  tacitly
accepted rules of a ritual, which seek to inculcate certain values and norms of behaviour
by repetition. These activities suggest continuity with the past. In fact, where possible,
they normally attempt to establish continuity with a concordant historic past.

44
 

As long as the unit [heritage] which is in process is identifiable, the process continues
to exist in spite of all the changes in its directions. When the unit [heritage] is changed
to such an extent that it becomes unidentifiable, the process ends. The moment when
the identification of the unit [heritage] becomes impossible is the point at which the
process ends. The moment when we observe the emergence of a new unit [heritage]
45
which, so far as our knowledge goes, did not exist before, a new process is started.

The Representation of the Past

Much of the heritage fascination is based on an institutionalised rationalisation of
the past that is relevant to a few people but designed to appeal to many cultural tourists.
In 
, Kevin Walsh notes that ‘The past has been severed
from the daily experiences of people, and mediated as a neutered essence which, in its
institutionalised  form,  is  often  employed  to  legitimate  the  ideas  of  modernity  and
progress.’
  Probably,  as  Walsh  states,  this  process  of  legitimising  the  past  began  in
museums, and continues to be an integral part of musealising objects of cultural and
natural significance. Like the museum, the heritage resource attempts to promote the
notion of national or group identity—a status group—at a time when many peoples
feel threatened by the loss of distinctiveness.

46

Every group requires an element of identity, and in every society people act or react
according to the examples given to them by their history and the characteristics of their
social order. This is true for the economic, social, political, and cultural life of a people.
(The status group is not the same as an economic or political group in that the status
group is aligned by factors outside individual control, whereas the economic and polit-
ical groups are affiliated by factors determined by individual decision making.) For a
people or a country, the act of preserving heritage resources (real or imagined) is an
expression of resilience. It is a cumulative effort to save humanity and its allied history,
natural  surroundings,  and  technological  and  creative  endeavours.  This  concept  can
relate to all humans and all locations equally. Undoubtedly, heritage plays an incisive

RJHS10401.fm  Page 345  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

International Journal of Heritage Studies

345

role in the formation of a national consciousness, in national unity, and in economic
and social development.

Objects, places, and other physical and ideological manifestations reinforce identity,
but may not in themselves constitute a true element of cultural or social validation.
Every social group develops its own heritage, beliefs, customs, values and usage, which
the incumbent population continually re-creates. The projected heritage of the group
is a mix of pride, unity, ethnic loyalty, and nostalgia. As the world’s cultural and natural
heritage diminishes, social values change and historic indicators become expendable.
Much of the world has experienced the phenomenon of disposable history that is the
symbolic  aspect  of  social  life.  Most  societies  and  individuals  have  a  short  cultural
memory, and that which remains is often modified by subjective and selective recollec-
tion. ‘[S]ymbolic culture is a product of past social action although its producers are
not always easily identified.’
 When myth is more interesting (or entertaining) than
reality, the myth is remembered and transmitted.

47

Concordant  with  the  notion  of  abandoned  history  is  the  idea  of  rediscovered  or
redefined heritage. The unpredictable difficulty with rediscovered heritage is that it has
no referential place in the past and no evidentiary essence. Often the official account is
a mixture of fact and fiction formulated to validate a general theme. Not only is the
concept of heritage often not absolute and the resource not permanent but also the
conception and association of the resource is subject to historical mutability. Although
the concept of rediscovered heritage is vague and inconsistent with historic precedent,
people tend to act or react according to the examples given to them by their history
(absolute or relative) and the characteristics of their social order (absolute or relative).
This is true for the economic, social, political, and cultural life of a people.

Heritage, in the best of circumstances, enfranchises the emotionally and culturally
disenfranchised. It allows humankind to transcend individual destiny to achieve conti-
nuity.  The  heritage  resources  have  extraordinary  emotional  and  intellectual  appeal
since they evoke a feeling of prestige and, therefore, a sense of pride. They help to gener-
ate an environment where the people can acquire an awareness of the continuity that
exists in human creation, glimpse a past that they receive with admiration and grati-
tude, and project the future to which they will transmit the results of their own endeav-
ours. The danger lies in assigning social or cultural values to simulacra of a marginally
defined past. The consequence of such misalignment is cultural entropy.

When Marxist theory is applied, heritage resource commodities have two forms, ‘a
physical  or  natural  form,  and  a  value  form’.
  Where  does  the  worth  of  heritage
resources lie—in the physical form or the value form? To assign a ‘value’ to a heritage
resource, there must be an equivalent measure against which to judge that worth or
meaning. To assign a physical or natural worth to heritage is a notion that reduces the
object, location, or event to materiality.

48

Marilyn  Phelan’s  book  on 
The  Law  of  Cultural  Property  and  Natural  Heritage:
Protection, Transfer and Access
 makes the statement that ‘cultural property constitutes
one of the basic elements of civilization and national culture and that its interchange
increases  the  knowledge  of  the  civilization  of  man,  enriches  the  cultural  life  of  all
people, and inspires mutual respect and appreciation among nations’.
 Perhaps the

49

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

RJHS10401.fm  Page 346  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

346

G. Edson

capacity to make socio-cultural identity meaningful lies in the concept of heritage, and
the actual value of heritage may lie not so much in its convergence with individual or
group identity, as in the identification of the immeasurable differences that separate
one individual or group from others. The past can only be represented if it is first estab-
lished in the group imagination as a place with identifiable features.

Notes

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

, 2.

, 9.

Beyond the Glass Case

Myth and History
, 8.

Images and Symbols: Studies in Religious Symbolism

[1] Eliade, 
[2] Holm and Bowker, 
[3] Merriman, 
[4] Campbell, ‘The Historical Development of Mythology’, 20.
[5] Hobsbawm and Ranger, 
[6] Panati, 
[7] Hobsbawm and Ranger, 
[8] Phelan, 
[9] As  a  note,  the  faces  on  Mount  Rushmore  were  originally  planned  to  be  Kit  Carson,  Jim
Bridger, and John Colter, not the four famous Presidents of the USA. The carvings were to be
a tourist attraction to draw money to South Dakota. Panati, 
Extraordinary Origins of Everyday
Things

The Law of Cultural Property and Natural Heritage
.

Extraordinary Origins of Everyday Things

The Invention of Tradition

The Invention of Tradition

, 271.

, 282.

, 67.

, 9.

The Law of Cultural Property and Natural Heritage

, 20–23.

10

11

[10] Phelan, 
[11] Kroeber and Kluckhohn, 
[12] Barnouw, 
[13] UNESCO, 

12

13

Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions

, 156.

Culture and Personality
Conservation Concerning the Protection of the World Culture and Natural Heritage
,

, 6.

Articles 1 and 2.

18

17

16

15

14

A Scientific Theory of Culture

Jordanova, ‘Objects of Knowledge: A Historical Perspective on Museums’, 25.

[14] http://www.unesco.org
[15] Csikszentmihalyi, ‘Why We Need Things’, 23.
[16] Malinowski, 
, 36.
[17]
[18] Crew and Sims, ‘Locating Authenticity: Fragments of a Dialogue’, 159.
[19] Maroevic, 
[20] Goudsblom et al., 
[21] Ames, ‘Introduction’, 160.
[22] Both the quote and the material in the previous paragraph are from Rajchman, 

The Course of Human History
.

Introduction to Museology

, 142.

19

20

21

22

The Identity in

Question

, 174.

30

29

28

27

26

25

24

23

, 4.

, 2.

Ibid.
Sorokin, 

Stone and Molyneaux, 

The Invention of Tradition

The Nature of Aesthetic Value

, 26.
The Presented Past

The Collective Memory
, 50.
, 24.
Cultural Analysis
The Collective Memory
.

[23] Hobsbawm and Ranger, 
[24] Maynell, 
[25]
[26] Halbwachs, 
[27] Wuthnow et al., 
[28] Halbwachs, 
[29]
[30]
31[31] Fowler, The Past in Contemporary Society: Then, Now, 44.
32[32] Rajchman, The Identity in Question, 175.
33[33] Arendt, The Human Condition, 13.
34[34] Csikszentmihalyi, ‘Why We Need Things’, 23.
35[35] http://www.geocities.com
36[36] Oderberg, The Metaphysics of Identity Over Time, 2.
37[37] Heidegger, Identity and Difference, 7.

Social and Cultural Dynamics
.

RJHS10401.fm  Page 347  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

38[38] The  World  Heritage  List  maintained  by  UNESCO  includes  754  properties  located  in  129

International Journal of Heritage Studies

347

national states (http://whc.unesco.org/heritage.htm).

39[39] Thayer, On Communication, 46.
40[40] Alfrey and Putnam, The Industrial Heritage, 88.
41[41] Merriman, Beyond the Glass Case, 3, 4.
Sorokin, Social and Cultural Dynamics.
42[42]
43[43]
Ibid.
44[44] Hobsbawm and Ranger, The Invention of Tradition.
45[45]
Sorokin, Social and Cultural Dynamics, 61.
46[46] Walsh, The Representation of the Past, 176.
47[47] Fardon, Power and Knowledge, 157.
48[48] Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, 55.
49[49] Phelan, The Law of Cultural Property and Natural Heritage.

References

Alfrey,  J.,  and  T.  Putnam.  The  Industrial  Heritage:  Managing  Resources  and  Uses.  New  York  and

London: Routledge, 1992.

Ames, K. ‘Introduction’. In The Colonial Revival in America, edited by A. Axelrod. Wilmington, DE:
Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum, 1985: 7, quoted in Karp, I., and S. Lavine, eds.,
Exhibiting Cultures. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1991: 160.

Arendt, H. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958.
Barnouw, V. Culture and Personality. Homewood, IL: The Dorsey Press, 1973.
Campbell, J. ‘The Historical Development of Mythology’. In Myths and Mythmaking, edited by H. A.

Murray. New York: George Braziller, 1960.

Crew, S., and J. Sims. ‘Locating Authenticity: Fragments of a Dialogue’. In Exhibiting Cultures, edited

by I. Karp and S. Lavine. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1991.

Csikszentmihalyi,  M.  ‘Why  We  Need  Things’.  In  History  from  Things:  Essays  on  Material  Culture,
edited by S. Lubar and W. D. Kingery. Washington, DC and London: Smithsonian Institution
Press, 1993.

Eliade,  M.  Images  and  Symbols:  Studies  in  Religious  Symbolism.  Translated  by  Philip  Mairet.  New

York: Harvill Press, 1961.

Fardon, R., ed. Power and Knowledge: Anthropological and Sociological Approaches. Edinburgh: Scot-

tish Academic Press, 1985.

Fowler, P. The Past in Contemporary Society: Then, Now. New York and London: Routledge, 1992.
Goudsblom, J., E. Jones, and S. Mennell. The Course of Human History. New York and London: M.

E. Sharpe, 1996.

Halbwachs, M. The Collective Memory. Translated by Francis J. Ditter Jr and Vida Yazdi Ditter. New

York: Harper Colophon Books, 1980.

Heidegger, M. Identity and Difference. Translated and Introduction by Joan Stambaugh. New York

and London: Harper & Row, 1969.

Hobsbawm, E., and T. Ranger. The Invention of Tradition.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

1983.

Holm, J., and J. Bowker. Myth and History. London and New York: Pinter, 1994.
Jordanova, L. ‘Objects of Knowledge: A Historical Perspective on Museums’. In The New Museology,

edited by P. Vergo. London: Reaktion Books, 1991.

Kroeber, A. L., and C. Kluckhohn. Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions. New York:

Vintage Books, 1963.

Malinowski, B. A Scientific Theory of Culture. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944.
Maroevic,  I.  Introduction  to  Museology:  The  European  Approach.  Munich:  Verlag  Dr.  Christian

Müller-Straten, 1998.

RJHS10401.fm  Page 348  Friday, August 13, 2004  10:17 AM

348 G. Edson

Marx, K. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, edited by Frederick Engels. New York: The Modern

Library, 1936.

Maynell, H. The Nature of Aesthetic Value. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1986.
Merriman,  N.  Beyond  the  Glass  Case:  The  Past,  the  Heritage  and  the  Public  in  Britain.  Leicester:

Leicester University Press, 1991.

Oderberg, D. S. The Metaphysics of Identity Over Time. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993.
Panati,  C.  Extraordinary  Origins  of  Everyday  Things.  New  York  and  London:  Perennial  Library,

Harper & Row, 1987.

Phelan, M., ed. The Law of Cultural Property and Natural Heritage: Protection, Transfer and Access.

Evanston, IL: Kalos Kapp Press, 1998.

Rajchman, J., ed. The Identity in Question. New York and London: Routledge, 1995.
Sorokin, P. Social and Cultural Dynamics. 2nd ed. Boston: Extending Horizons Book-Porter Sargent

Publishing, 1957.

Stone, P. G., and B. Molyneaux, eds. The Presented Past. London and New York: Routledge, 1994.
Thayer, L. On Communication. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1987.
UNESCO. Conservation Concerning the Protection of the World Culture and Natural Heritage. Paris:

UNESCO, 1972.

Walsh, K. The Representation of the Past. London and New York: Routledge, 1992.
Wuthnow, R., J. Hunter, A. Bergesen, and E. Kurzweil. Cultural Analysis. Boston and London: Rout-

ledge & Kegan Paul, 1984.


