Heritage transactions at the Festival of Paciﬁc Arts
Rosita Henry* and Lawrence Foana’ota

School of Arts and Social Sciences, James Cook University, Townsville, Australia
(Received 11 July 2013; ﬁnal version received 14 April 2014)

The Festival of Paciﬁc Arts, hosted by a different Paciﬁc Island state once every
four years, is a prime site for the reproduction of the global discourse on heri-
tage. Drawing on ethnographic research conducted at the festival, this paper
focuses on how the concept of heritage is employed at the festival as both an
instrument of statecraft and a tool for the assertion of grass-roots political and
economic agency. We conclude that heritage in the context of the festival is a
form of cultural practice involving relationships of power and inequality,
expressed in transactions of ownership and value transformations that have
become over determined by economic logic and the concept of property.
Introduction
The Festival of Paciﬁc Arts (FOPA) is a major regional event hosted every four
years by different Paciﬁc Island states that are members of the Council of Paciﬁc
Arts and Culture (CPAC).1 The ﬁrst festival was held in 1972 in Fiji and the last
(the 11th festival) in Solomon Islands (2–12 July 2012). The next festival is to be
hosted by Guam in 2016. The festival brings together people from across the Paciﬁc
to showcase cultural performances, the visual arts, traditional healing practices, navi-
gational skills and other examples of local or indigenous knowledge and practice
that are deemed iconic in terms of cultural heritage.
Since the inaugural FOPA over 40 years ago,

there has been a remarkable
political process of state-building in the region in which the festival has played a
signiﬁcant role. The festival has provided a forum for newly forged independent
nation-states to showcase ‘cultural
identity’
(Stevenson 2012, 1). At
there has been increasingly aggressive
expansion of global capital, with large-scale investment by powerful transnational
corporations in the extraction of natural resources (logging, mining and commercial
ﬁshing), as well as the inﬂux of global commodities, and the rapid adoption and
innovative use of digital communication technologies. This has been accompanied
by new conﬁgurations of power that have led to movement away from nation-states
to ‘corporate state assemblages’
(Kapferer 2010, 130) where the institutional
organisation of power is decentred and redistributed to other agencies, such as
transnational
banks, churches, non-government environmentalist organisations,

traditions as symbols of national

the same time,

*Corresponding author. Email: Rosita.Henry@jcu.edu.au

© 2014 Taylor & Francis

134

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

corporations, charitable organisations and other bodies,
heritage agencies.

including international

Much has been written on past Paciﬁc Arts Festivals in terms of issues of
identity politics and now well-debated ideas about ‘the invention of tradition’
(Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983) and the ‘authenticity’ of cultural performances (e.g.
Hereniko 1980; Kaeppler 1987; Stevenson 1993, 1999; Lewis-Harris 1994; Moulin
2003, 2005; Konishi 2006; Kempf 2011). There has been some recent commentary
on how the festival draws people into global ﬂows of production and transnational
capital (e.g. Glowczewski and Henry 2011), but relatively little has been written
about it as a site of power in Oceania. In this paper, we explore the festival in rela-
tion to the role it plays in the production, uptake and transformation of ‘heritage’,
not only as a concept but also as a form of discursive practice. Our analysis is based
on ethnographic ﬁeld research involving participant observation of staged perfor-
mances, attendance at cultural workshops and other meetings, as well as open-ended
interviews with delegates and ofﬁcials from participating countries. While our focus
is on the most recent festival in Solomon Islands, we have conducted comparative
ﬁeld research at two earlier festivals (in Palau in 2004 and American Samoa in
2008). In addition, one of the authors, Lawrence Foana’ota, brings to the discussion
a deep knowledge and understanding gained from his role as an ofﬁcial member of
the Solomon Islands delegation at these and earlier festivals. He was a member of
the Paciﬁc Arts Council representing Solomon Islands during meetings that were
held in preparation for the festivals in French Polynesia (1985), Townsville (1988)
and Solomon Islands (2011). He was the head of the delegation that participated in
French Polynesia, where he also performed in the pan-pipe group as a replacement
for one of the performers who became sick; he was deputy head of delegation for
the Townsville festival and an ofﬁcial
in the delegations at Palau (2004) and
American Samoa (2008). Regarding the Solomon Islands festival, Foana’ota (2011)
was also a member of the organising subcommittee responsible for the contingents
from the different provinces of the Solomons Islands who were participating at the
festival. His ﬁrst-hand experience as an ofﬁcial and performer on the festival stage
constitutes an interpretive lens for the data collected through participant observation
on the production and value transformation of the concept of heritage as both an
instrument of statecraft and grass-roots political intention in the Paciﬁc.

Heritage as a global discourse
Deﬁnitions of heritage and their limitations have been well debated as part of a
global discourse fostered and reproduced in a plethora of conventions, charters, dec-
larations, statements, principles and guidelines that have been initiated, adopted and
promulgated by international organisations such as UNESCO and ICOMOS. As
Ahmad (2006, 294) notes, UNESCO and ICOMOS have been at the forefront ‘in
deﬁning common terminology and scope of heritage over the past 40 years, since
the adoption of the Venice Charter in 1964’.

On the Australian front, a Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural
Signiﬁcance was adopted in 1979 at a meeting in the historic South Australian min-
ing town of Burra. This document was last revised in 1999. Now commonly known
as the ‘Burra Charter’, it has proved highly inﬂuential in informing the development
of deﬁnitions of heritage and heritage policy not only in Australia but also in other
jurisdictions. It focuses on ‘place’ and provides a framework and guidelines for



135

assessing the ‘cultural signiﬁcance’, synonymously deﬁned as ‘heritage signiﬁcance’
or ‘cultural heritage value’ of places. According to Section 1.2 of the Burra Charter
‘Cultural signiﬁcance means aesthetic, historic, scientiﬁc, social or spiritual value
for past, present or future generations’. Waterton, Smith, and Campbell (2006), who
have analysed the discursive construction of heritage as expressed in the Burra
Charter, argue that the construction of terms such as ‘cultural signiﬁcance’ privileges
the position of heritage professionals over other stakeholders by attributing ﬁxed
meanings to these terms, so that ‘cultural signiﬁcance becomes something that
non-experts have to understand rather than contribute to’ (2006, 350).

In Australia, many scholars, particularly those working closely with Indigenous
peoples (e.g. Byrne 1991, 1996; Greer 1996; Greer, Harrison, and McIntyre-Tamwoy
2002; Pocock 2003; Harrington 2004; McIntyre-Tamwoy 2004), have grappled with
the concept of ‘heritage value’. They have criticised the limitations of deﬁnitions of
heritage and how heritage has been conceptualised in both the national and interna-
tional arenas. Today, as Ahmad (2006, 299) notes, in Australia as well as in the inter-
national arena, the scope of heritage and its deﬁnitions has ‘broadened considerably
from mere concern for individual buildings and sites to include groups of buildings,
historical areas, towns, environments, social factors and, lately, intangible heritage’.

In popular parlance ‘heritage’ is often used in an unreﬂective way as synony-
mous with ‘culture’, without attention to the baggage the term carries and the fact
that a whole industry has developed around its management and protection. Some
scholars, however, have taken a critical interest in this global discourse, which Smith
(2006) refers to as the ‘Authorised Heritage Discourse’, in terms of the political and
economic agendas and powerful corporate and nation-state interests that it serves
(e.g. Graham 2002; Bendix, Eggert, and Peselmann 2012; Bertacchini and Saccone
2012). Other scholars, in particular from the ﬁeld of anthropology, have begun to
explore how this discourse is adopted at the local level and the way heritage may be
differently conceptualised and operationalised in different cultural contexts (e.g. see
papers in van Meijl 2009; chapters in Hviding and Rio 2011; papers in Silva and
Santos 2012; Silva 2013).

Heritage as a form of value transaction
As a concept, heritage is inherently tied to the concept of value, not only because of
the classiﬁcatory scheme or typology of values (scientiﬁc, historic, aesthetic, social
and so on) created by the heritage industry for the assessment of heritage signiﬁ-
cance, but because heritage as a transactable resource is harnessed to processes of
value transformation. According to Strathern (2004, 87):

A transaction entails both an acknowledgement that it is possible to substitute for one
set of values another set and a process of computation whereby each party measures
the values against one another. This move encompasses emergent values (values are
not necessarily given in advance but may be created in the course of the transaction)
and emergent spheres of convertibility or substitution (people test out new possibilities,
new resources).

Such processes of value transformation are observable at the FOPA, particularly in
relation to transactions involving practices and performances that have been show-
cased as ‘culture’ but at more recent festivals are increasingly being referred to as
‘cultural heritage’.

136

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

Heritage is ‘a new mode of cultural production in the present that has recourse
to the past’ (Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998, 149). According to the United Nations
Special Rapporteur in the ﬁeld of Cultural Rights, Shaheed (2011, 4): ‘Cultural heri-
tage links the past, the present and the future as it encompasses things inherited from
the past that are considered to be of such value or signiﬁcance today, that individuals
and communities want to transmit them to future generations’. As many others have
argued, the concept of heritage while referring to the past, really only has meaning
in terms of values in the present (e.g. Greer 1996; Tunbridge and Ashworth 1996;
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998; Lowenthal 1996; Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge
2000). What then are these values?

Heritage values, we submit, are not to be found in the typology of values inform-
ing the heritage industry and enshrined in international conventions and local char-
ters such as Australia’s Burra Charter, but in the dynamic transactions in which the
heritage concept is actually produced and employed. Culture is transformed into her-
itage via a series of evaluative transactions between different parties along the value
chain. What is important is the nature of the relationships between the various
agents involved in these transactions. As Strathern (2004, 101) notes, ‘it is relation-
ships that render items transactable and present conversions have past relationships
built into them’.

Who are the agents, the transactors, in these relationships? Who are the brokers
in the game of cultural heritage in the Paciﬁc? Heritage transactions inevitably
involve relationships of power as those who work to transform cultural things into
heritage are generally ‘already in positions of relative power, especially politicians,
while the management of heritage is likely to be handled by experts such as archi-
tects, archaeologists and museum curators’ (Silva and Santos 2012, 439). Much of
the game tends to play at the international level, where most resources for heritage
protection and preservation are located. For example, Bertacchini and Saccone
(2012) demonstrate that in relation to the whole period of activity of the World
Heritage Convention, political and economic factors played an important role in the
nomination and selection process of sites for the World Heritage List.

Yet, while the heritage industry is controlled by transnational and national elites,
it is increasingly also dominated by local power brokers. As Scher (2002, 456)
argues:

Control over national or ethnic patrimony works to sustain power in the sense that
those controlling the production and dissemination of culture are in a position to medi-
ate between local constituency and the global agents of change, economic hegemony,
or cultural imperial might.

Through international instruments such as the World Heritage Convention, and agen-
cies such as UNESCO, World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) and the
SPC, nation-states draw on heritage discourse to craft internationally endorsable
national identities. Heritage has value for states, or agents of the state, because it
serves as a tool of power. It also signiﬁes potential economic and status value to
those who can secure elite positions along the value chain. As Silva and Santos
(2012, 438) note, ‘heritage always breeds from power – the ability to create heritage
and the ability to make it belong to some and not to others’.



137

Heritage as ‘culture industry’
Recent years have seen the development of the ﬁeld of ‘cultural economy’ or
‘creative economy’, the focus of which is the potential contribution of cultural activ-
ities to economic growth (Howkins 2007). Within this framework, culture is deﬁned
as an industry and the aim is to assess how various ‘cultural industries’, including
the heritage industry, might operate as a vector for development. But what is, or are,
the creative industries? The topic has generated much ideological debate about the
labels ‘cultural’ and ‘creative’ and whether it is appropriate to term such activities
‘industries’. Some prefer ‘cultural industries’, others ‘creative industries’, and there
has been increasing circulation of terms such as ‘cultural producers’, ‘creative
entrepreneurs’ and the ‘creative class’ (Pratt 2008; Miller 2009). UNESCO has
weighed-in with an attempt to develop a common understanding by deﬁning creative
industries as ‘… the cycles of creation, production and distribution of goods and
services that use creativity and intellectual capital as primary inputs’ (UNCTAD
2010, 8). In its Creative Economy Report 2010, UNCTAD notes that the creative
industries involve the interplay of various ‘creative sectors’ which ‘range from activ-
ities rooted in traditional knowledge and cultural heritage such as art crafts, and
cultural festivals, to more technology and services oriented subgroups such as audio-
visuals and the new media (2010, 1).

The rise of the creative industries, including the heritage sector, has been accom-
panied by increasing international attention to notions of intellectual property and
legal and administrative frameworks to ensure protection of the rights of ‘cultural
producers’. In other words, the increasing attention being paid to the development
of the creative economy has given rise to a tendency to focus on the maintenance
and protection of reiﬁcations of culture and the development of regimes of ‘property
rights’ rather than on cultural beliefs and practices as ‘the ways of life of the inhabit-
ants’ of places (Miles 2008, 109).

The concept of ‘creative economy’ has been accompanied by an expansion of
arts/heritage bureaucracies, the growth of managerialism and the proliferation of
entrepreneurs and intermediaries, often employed on a consultancy basis, to provide
advice to state agencies on how best to represent, protect and market artistic produc-
tion as national cultural heritage. For example, in the lead up to the FOPA in
Solomon Islands, a rash of reports was commissioned by various transnational agen-
cies (e.g. Janke 2009; Leahy, Yeap-Holliday, and Pennington 2010; Roberts 2010;
Lidimani 2011; Teaiwa and Mercer 2011). As Foana’ota and White (2011, 282)
argue, international donors, actors and institutions and ‘a complex array of global
inﬂuences’ make a signiﬁcant contribution to ‘cultural activities’ in the Paciﬁc. They
stress ‘the strategic importance of transnational relations for national culture in the
postcolonial era’.

Transnational interlocutors play an important role not just in initiating cultural
projects in the Paciﬁc but also in promoting and circulating particular understand-
ings of cultural heritage that deﬁne it in terms of a requirement for ‘authenticity’. At
the request of the SPC, the WIPO2 undertook a scoping mission to report on intel-
lectual property and traditional cultural expression management for the festival.
Indigenous Australian lawyer, Terri Janke was employed as a consultant to produce
the report. One of Janke’s (2009) recommendations was that the festival organisers
prepare to combat the sale of ‘inauthentic arts and craft’ … or of ‘fake craft’ made
overseas, by promoting the sale of ‘authentic craft and products’ via a FOPA brand,

138

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

or registered trade mark, owned by the Council of Paciﬁc Arts. Janke also recom-
mended that, as there was no law speciﬁcally enacted to protect Solomon Islands
cultural heritage (although Western Province and Makira Province have Cultural
Preservation Ordinances that include provisions for respecting traditional objects,
taboo sites and sacred sites3), Solomon Islands should amend its Copyright Act as
well as introduce a new law based on the Paciﬁc Model Law. The Model Law for
the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture in the Paciﬁc
Islands is a draft model law developed under the aegis of WIPO and UNESCO for
Paciﬁc Island countries wishing to enact their own legislation. The model law was a
topic of discussion at a symposium and workshops at the festival in American
Samoa (2008). Pigliasco (2011) provides an insightful discussion of how it is being
revised, particularly in Fiji, to take into account local, grass roots realities and
struggles.

The concept of heritage as ‘cultural property’ is built on economic principles and
is part of a discourse that generally takes place at the level of experts, lawyers, econ-
omists, social scientists and others consultant advisors, often from the dominant lar-
ger Paciﬁc Rim countries, such as Australia and New Zealand. While they may be
inspired by social justice motives and see themselves as committed to helping cul-
tural producers, these interlocutors are also, whether intentionally or not, agents in a
game of statecraft in the Paciﬁc that involves complex transactions in heritage as a
cultural industry. As Hirsch and Strathern (2004) and others who have engaged with
debates concerning the concept of ‘cultural property’ have argued, culture has
increasingly been rendered transactable by being redeﬁned as heritage. As heritage it
becomes cultural property and is thereby, on the one hand, harnessed to state pro-
jects of bureaucratic management and, on the other, commodiﬁed and rendered sub-
ject
in their
introduction to Made in Oceania, there are frictions or ‘inherent tensions in Paciﬁc
nations between the concerns of the state and the emergent or performative qualities
of cultural heritage’. At
is being increasingly
adopted as a means of pursuing the recognition of local struggles in the face of
national and global agendas (Henry 2011).

to economic forces. Yet, as Rio and Hviding (2011, 7) point out

the grassroots level

this concept

Heritage as performance
The FOPA provides a fertile ground, not only for transactions in heritage at the level
of global intervention in statecraft in the Paciﬁc, but also at the level of emergent
grass-roots political action, where the power of heritage discourse is tested out as a
new resource. Past Festivals of Paciﬁc Arts have seen workshops on intellectual
property rights and legislative regimes for both tangible and intangible heritage pro-
tection, with much debate among participants on how cultural expressions might be
at one and the same time shared, exchanged and protected from unauthorised repro-
duction.

These workshops abound with visiting experts in full performative mode, there
to provide advice and to impart knowledge about legal and bureaucratic techniques
for heritage protection and management. For example, at the Traditional Knowledge
Symposium at the festival in American Samoa there was a session on ‘Festival
Management Rights and Cultural Protocols’. Concern was expressed about cameras,
videos and cell phones around the festival. ‘100,000s of images are circulating the
globe as we speak’, said one participant.



139

Figure 1. Arpaka Dance Company, Torres Strait Islands, Australia, on Stage at the FOPA,
Solomon Islands, 10 July 2012.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.

Yet, performers from the various national delegations attending the festival can
also be observed meeting to share ideas and talk about how they constitute and cho-
reograph their contemporary dance productions, installations and other art works,
how they build them from many different elements and inﬂuences, with apparently
little angst about whose ‘cultural property’ particular forms might be, but with great
respect for the relationships that are developed through such transactions in cultural
forms. Festival participants engage in a dynamic process of cultural composition and
performance, which entails the diplomatic development of relationships that chal-
lenge attempts by the corporate state to control dynamic cultural practices by captur-
ing them within a heritage regime. We include in our deﬁnition of cultural
performance the verbal presentations by festival participants in the programme of
workshops and symposia that are organised as part of the festivals. The workshops
and other meetings held at the festival are in themselves performative acts, just as
much as the performances on stage (Figure 1). The Paciﬁc Arts Festival held in
2012 in Solomon Islands provides a case in point. Skilful diplomacy was required in
transactions not only among Solomon Islanders themselves, to enable them to suc-
cessfully stage the festival, but also in transactions among the visiting delegates as
they attempted to question cosmopolitan concepts of culture, cultural heritage, cul-
tural industries, cultural rights and so on, and strategically reinterpret them according
to their own paradigms and aspirations.

The FOPA in Solomon Islands
In spite of being deeply marked by political, social and economic stresses following
the outbreak of armed violent conﬂict between militia groups (the Malaita Eagle
Force and the Isatabu Freedom Movement) and the civil unrest between 1998 and

140

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

2003, during the 9th FOPA hosted by the Republic of Palau in 2004, Solomon
Islands bravely submitted a bid to host the 11th FOPA in 2012 (Solomon Islands
2004). The bid was spontaneously prepared by ofﬁcials from the Solomon Islands
delegation in attendance at the festival in Palau.4 Its success was announced with
great fanfare at that festival, while the ofﬁcial ﬂag was handed over to Solomon
Islands at the following festival in American Samoa in 2008.

In contrast to the bids by other countries, the Solomon Islands document was
simple, without photographs or fancy plans. The bid was successful for a number of
reasons. Among these was that, in terms of regional relations in the Paciﬁc between
Micronesia, Melanesia and Polynesia, it was deemed diplomatic to give a country in
Melanesia the chance to host the festival. Solomon Islands and Vanuatu (which did
not put in a bid) were the only two countries in Melanesia that had not yet hosted
the event. Additionally, the representatives from Fiji and Papua New Guinea on the
Arts Council supported the bid by offering to host the festival if Solomon Islands
proved unable to do it. Thus, the Arts Council decided to approve the bid from the
Solomon Islands delegation, even though the country had only just begun to recover
from years of civil war.

Each FOPA has a different theme chosen by the host country. Solomon Islands
chose the theme ‘Culture in Harmony with Nature’. Interestingly, given the recent
history of conﬂict in Solomon Islands, the theme emphasised the threat of natural
disaster caused by outside global forces and the need for people to reconnect harmo-
niously with nature. It did not reference the civil unrest or the possibility that the
festival might serve as a way for Solomon Islanders to reconnect harmoniously in a
socio-political sense. Perhaps a focus on environmental threats provided a means for
diplomatically externalising social tensions. Certainly, hosting the festival was seen
as an opportunity to represent Solomon Islands in a positive light to the world. The
Prime Minister at that time, Danny Philip,5 commented that ‘hosting the Festival
will help eliminate the negative image of the country to the outside world after the
troubles we have gone through as a nation’ (Solomon Star 28 July 2012).

It is clear that organising the festival required careful ﬁelding of continuing ten-
sions, and skilful diplomacy on the part of all those involved. Solomon Islands had
hosted the First Melanesian Arts and Cultural Festival in June 1998 just a few
months before violent armed conﬂict broke out between Guadalcanal and Malaita
Islanders. If the Melanesian Arts and Cultural Festival served to transform ‘ethno-
cultural differences into aesthetic differences on stage’, as Kupiainen (2011, 187)
contends, then this effect did not last long. While any festival may indeed have this
effect, there is also always the potential (particularly given the stresses of organising
such a complex event) for a festival to foster rather than neutralise inter-group
conﬂict.

Diplomacy and statecraft
The Festival ostensibly celebrates unity,6 but also great diversity. For Solomon
Islands with its nine provinces (and the Capital of Honiara which forms a 10th
administrative district), within each of which there are different islands, political
units and languages, organisation of the Festival was a mammoth task. Solomon
Islands had eight years to put together its plans for hosting the 11th FOPA after
winning the bid in 2004. Unfortunately, the Chief Cultural Ofﬁcer, Mr Isa, who was
responsible for planning and taking the lead in the preparations, retired from



141

government service in 2005. As a result, preparations for the festival were left unat-
tended. In 2006 after a new government was formed, Robert Au was recruited to
supervise the selection of cultural groups and lead the Solomon Islands delegation at
the 10th FOPA in American Samoa, with a view to him also overseeing arrange-
ments for the 11th Festival in Solomon Islands.

However, although there was great excitement amongst members of the Solomon
Islands contingent upon their return from the 10th festival in American Samoa, prep-
arations for the next festival were again delayed due partly to the unsuccessful appli-
cation by Robert Au for the position of Chief Cultural Ofﬁcer of the Solomons and
partly to the national general election held in August 2010, which resulted in a
change of government. The new government appointed Samuel Manetoali as Minis-
ter for Culture and Tourism, replacing Seth Gukuna, who had been involved in the
country’s participation at the 10th FOPA in American Samoa and had received the
festival ﬂag during the closing ceremony.

Increasing public criticism and scepticism arose concerning the ability of the
new members of the Culture Division of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism to lay
the groundwork for the festival. A key concern was whether Solomon Islands had
the necessary funds to cover the cost of the festival and whether it had the infra-
structure to host such a major event. It was not until 2011 that the Ministry eventu-
ally selected and appointed a festival director, organising committee and secretariat.
This delay caused intense pressure, and public anxiety was exacerbated by the lack
of funds for the activities of the various sub-committees. Their tasks included, but
were not limited to, provincial visits to identify and select cultural groups, prepara-
tion of plans for the venues, identiﬁcation and selection of contractors, upgrading of
accommodation facilities, improving the transportation system in the capital, organ-
ising the catering and obtaining local materials for the construction of traditional
houses at the festival venues (Figure 2).

Figure 2. FOPA Village, Solomon Islands, July 2012.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.

142

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

In the light of the history of civil unrest and in order to be seen to be inclusive,
the organising committee decided that the location of the festival should not be con-
ﬁned to Honiara but should include a satellite site at Auki on Malaita. Eventually, it
was also decided to build several other satellite sites, including at Gizo in the Wes-
tern Province, Tulagi in the Central Islands Province and at Doma in Guadalcanal,
not far from Honiara. However, late during the preparation period, tensions erupted
as reports circulated that Malaita had been axed as one of the satellite hosts: ‘This
has been described by a source as a slap on the face of the people of Malaita’
(Solomon Star, 13 January 2012). Just six months before the festival, the premier of
Malaita province, Edwin Suibaea, was concerned about whether his province would
actually be co-hosting the festival as he had received no response from the organ-
ising committee to the Malaitan delegation’s submission of a budget of forty million
dollars. The Chair of the organising committee, Doreen Kuper, eventually revealed
to the Solomon Star that the committee had only been able to approve two million
dollars for Malaita. Malaita festival coordinator, Mr Leaburi, was reported as saying:

Malaita province is prepared to co-host and showcase true Malaita and its unique cul-
tures and people to the region. And display the true festival theme rather than just arti-
ﬁcial preparations like what’s done in Honiara … This is golden opportunity to keep
the mass population of Malaitans back on their Island rather than traveling to Honiara
to cause other associated problems. (Solomon Star, 2 February 2012)

Clearly, the very process of organising of the festival, accompanied by the difﬁculty
of sourcing adequate funds, places great pressure on any Paciﬁc Island state that has
volunteered to host it, and more so a nation-state recovering from civil war. Much
diplomacy is required not only in managing delicate balances of power and repre-
sentation within the nation-state itself, but also in ﬁelding the external interests of
other Paciﬁc states and of the larger nation-states of the Asia-Paciﬁc rim willing to
provide ﬁnancial support to the festival host in the service of their own agendas.7
As well as the delicate internal political diplomacy required to select which prov-
inces and which groups would represent Solomon Islands at the Festival and to sat-
isfyingly fund the different provinces hosting the satellite sites,
the festival
organising committee also needed skills to negotiate with external cultural brokers
and heads of delegations from the different Paciﬁc nation-states to ensure that the
visitors were suitably housed and cared for during the festival and that correct cul-
tural protocols were followed.

Deﬁning culture and heritage in festival workshops
In addition to delegations from each participating country, the state that is staging
the Paciﬁc Arts Festival is expected to host a programme of workshops and sympo-
sia proposed by various government and non-government agencies and community
interest groups. For example, during the festival in Solomon Islands, workshops and
symposia included: ‘Building a Creative Economy’, ‘Art and Business’, ‘Youth,
Heritage and Memory of the World’, ‘Arts for a Better Future’, ‘Filmmaking in the
Paciﬁc’ and ‘Literary Arts’. In addition, the SPC ran a Symposium on Cultural
Rights (Honiara, Solomon Islands, 9–11 July, 2012) at which heritage was a key
topic. The key note speaker, United Nations Special Rapporteur in the ﬁeld of Cul-
tural Rights, Shaheed, presented a paper to ofﬁcial delegates of the different Paciﬁc
Island States, discussing issues concerning cultural rights and access to heritage.



143

This was followed by presentations from other experts and by representatives from
Paciﬁc states. For three days, the participants discussed deﬁnitions of cultural rights,
how they ﬁt in with other human rights, how they can be promoted and how they
relate to intellectual property and traditional knowledge. The Solomon Islands
Minister of Culture and Tourism, the Hon Samuel Manetoali, in opening the sympo-
sium commented that ‘cultures become commercial entities through the process of
globalisation and expressed his concern for the disadvantage Paciﬁc people face
in sharing the beneﬁts of this commercialisation’ (Cultural Rights Symposium
2013, 1). The Minister cited the case of a lullaby from the Baegu people of Malaita
that had been recorded by the band Deep Forest. He noted that the recording had
made ‘a signiﬁcant amount of money with no beneﬁt to the Baegu people’ (Cultural
Rights Symposium, 2013, 1).

Yet, while experts and state bureaucratic elites take the lead, Festival workshops
and symposia also provide a forum and opportunity for participants not only to
consider concepts of ‘cultural rights’ in terms of ‘property rights’, but also to chal-
lenge the taken-for-granted assumption by the various brokers that the way to claim
ownership of and the right to care for heritage is necessarily (or only) through pro-
cesses of state level legislation, branding and bureaucracy. For example, at a number
of festival events, we observed people reﬂecting upon and questioning the meaning
of the terms that UNESCO and ICOMOS and other international experts and
state-level elites use (heritage, culture, property and rights). What do these concepts
actually mean at the local/grassroots level?

At the Cultural Rights Symposium, the presenter from Palau, (Myjolynne Kim,
CEO, Chamber of Commerce, Federated States of Micronesia) questioned assump-
tions about the notion of culture and how it is deﬁned in the debates about cultural
property (Cultural Rights Symposium 2013, 9–11). She said that the Palauan transla-
tion of the word ‘culture’ is éreni. During a Micronesian Cultural Studies course at
the College of Micronesia, Chuuk Campus, when she had asked students what came
to mind when they heard the word ‘culture’, the response was, ‘the food that you
eat, the clothes and jewellery that you wear, traditional dances, traditional music’
but when she asked them what came to mind when they heard the word éreni the
answer was ‘respect’. She then cited the deﬁnition of culture by Palauan scholar
Joakim Peter:

There is something in the cultural identities that sustain a group people as well as the
individuals … Sometimes we confuse cultural expressions and cultural performances
which are the outcomes of culture and what is truly cultural because people will start
looking for the physical manifestations of culture and focus on that as if that is the cul-
ture. More than anything else, culture is inside the people, it’s deep within the soul of
person and then it comes out in expressions, objects that we create out of that deep
connection.

Similarly, at the forum on ‘Building the Creative Economy’ facilitated by the Paciﬁc
Institute of Public Policy at the festival, a participant from Malaita in the audience
stood up and stressed a distinction between kastom8 and culture that anthropologists
have long noted in the Paciﬁc (e.g. see papers in Keesing and Tonkinson 1982; Jolly
and Thomas 1992; Lindstrom 1993; White 1993; Kupiainen 2000, 2011; Akin 2004;
Dalsgaard and Otto 2011). He said (to paraphrase): ‘During the festival we use our
culture but not our kastom. In the beginning we used to live our culture with our
kastom, now we turn our culture into our arts to give away, to share, but we hold on
to our kastom’.

144

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

The FOPA brings intellectual debates about culture and heritage to the grass-
roots, allowing people to ponder over how such concepts might be taken up, local-
ised and tactically used in addressing their own struggles to foster stronger
collective identities and deal with the demands of the global ‘culture industry’.
Henry (2008) discusses this process in the context of cultural festivals in Australia
and Dalsgaard and Otto (2011) have described it in relation to a cultural festival in
Manus Province, Papua New Guinea. Dalsgaard and Otto (2011, 142) argue that cul-
ture (kalsa) and kastom ‘refer to different domains of action and valuation’ and that
political struggle is ‘intrinsic to deﬁning culture as heritage’. Deﬁning culture as her-
itage fosters ‘the intrusion of ideas of property into previously uncommodiﬁed areas
of peoples’ lives’ (Busse 2009, 357). Fear about the loss of culture and tradition is
pervasive at the FOPA and feeds a discourse of property rights that increasingly
treats culture as heritage and renders it a transactable economic resource, in spite of
a widely held view among Paciﬁc Islander delegates at the Festival that cultural
practice and its material manifestations are, by deﬁnition, inalienable.

At the grassroots: heritage alienability and the marketplace
Outside the context of the formal workshops and symposia, the festival is alive with
people going about their business, participating in performances and engaged in
transactions at the grassroots level, as if oblivious to the debates occurring among
intellectual and bureaucratic elites and social reformers, whether they are conceptua-
lised as agents of the state or parties ‘beyond the state’ (Li 2005). For example, the
festival provides opportunity for marketing handcrafts that tend not to be recognised
as cultural heritage in the ofﬁcial discourse, particularly if they do not feature in
trade or economic statistics. Yet, such marketing practices sustain local knowledge
and skills. The way distinctions are drawn between ‘marketplace’ goods and items
exhibited and sold as ‘ﬁne art’ at the festival, and how people distinguish things that
are for sale from things they say ‘should not be sold’, has much to tell us about the
political economy of heritage and how heritage value is constituted in practice. At
the Solomons festival, many of the Paciﬁc Island delegations distinguished between
the goods they had brought for sale and goods that were ‘for display only’
(Figure 3). The delegation from Niue included a group of women who identiﬁed
themselves as ‘multi-talented’ handcrafters. According to Rupina Morrisey (personal
communication, 3 July 2012), only some of the things they were making at the festi-
val would be put on sale. There was a ti vae vae (bedspread) on display at the Niue
stall that would not be sold but would be taken back to Niue, because a ti vae vae is
‘special’, made in the style ‘introduced by the Christian missionaries’ as ‘a gift of
value’, not usually a commodity for sale. In fact, such a bedcover, made from natu-
rally died cotton fabric with an appliquéd design representing the large leaves of the
breadfruit tree, was among Niue’s gifts to its Solomon Islands host at the festival
opening ceremony.

Nevertheless, many of the performers, who attend the festival as part of the ofﬁ-
cial delegations, rely on selling arts and crafts on the side to supplement their travel
and living expenses at the festival and also to make some money to take home. In
addition, artists and handcrafters from the host country ﬂock to the festival to sell
their wares. At the Solomon Islands festival, an ofﬁcial art and craft market was set
up in the grounds of the National Art Gallery but there were also many unofﬁcial
street stalls (Figure 4). The handcrafters saw the festival as an opportunity to



145

Figure 3. Objects for ‘Display Only’, Nauru Stall, FOPA, Solomon Islands, 3 July 2012.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.

Figure 4. Street Stall, FOPA, Solomon Islands, July 2012.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.

146

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

Figure 5. Artefacts for sale, FOPA market, Solomon Islands.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.

develop trade networks and personal connections with international dealers willing
to purchase and market their goods overseas. It is often the transnational handcraft
dealers who advise the producers what will sell, materials and colours to use, how
to adapt their products to what tourists will buy (e.g. the creation of miniatures of
objects so that they can ﬁt into a back pack or suitcase). It is also such brokers who
advise people on how to access trade networks in ‘heritage’ objects. At the Solomon
Islands festival, there were several stallholders selling artefacts (Figure 5). An ‘arte-
fact dealer’ at the Art Gallery Market, emphasised, however, that he was only selling
replicas of objects. He had with him some traditional weapons belonging to his
grandfather which he had separated from the replicas with tape, noting that they

Figure 6. Young spectators, Festival Village in Auki, Malaita, Solomon Islands.
Note: Photograph by Rosita Henry.



147

were just for display. A practical process of classiﬁcation and valuation of objects
according to syncretic conceptions of heritage informed partly by global heritage
discourse but also by local values was observable in the festival village stalls and at
various market sites. It is clear that while the Festival is harnessed to practices of
statecraft, it also fosters rhizomic practices and processes of grassroots political
action and economic production that strain against codifying and regulating projects
of the state. Yet, at the same time such rhizomatic practices themselves contribute to
the reproduction of culture as heritage and, in turn, heritage as transactable property.
Grassroots practices and performances often work to unravel and resist universalistic
deﬁnitions of heritage and the accompanying proposals for legislative and adminis-
trative protection regimes, but they eventually also become subject to ‘the hegemony
of property’ (Busse 2009, 362).

Conclusion
While the FOPA continues to foster the production of heritage in the service of
nation-state identities, recent festivals have increasingly begun to support new cor-
porate-state assemblages, where the market dominates and where ‘the economic
inhabits all modes of existence’ (Kapferer 2010, 127). Thus, even though heritage
value may not be conceived in overtly economic terms, and the economic may even
be actively resisted in terms of deﬁnitions of heritage (as evidenced by the signs at
the festival speciﬁcally classifying certain items as ‘not for sale’), heritage has
become subject to the hegemony of property. In concert with the ‘creative indus-
tries’, heritage has come to ‘teleologically exemplify an economic logic or principle’
(Kapferer 2010, 127).

The 11th FOPA had a tremendous impact on the lives of Solomon Islanders who
attended, whether as participants or spectators (Figure 6). Many of the artists, carv-
ers, dancers and musicians today still talk about how much they enjoyed the festival
and the new ideas they picked up at the event. For them the festival was not merely
a showcase or display of heritage in terms of inherited cultural forms. It was also a
forum for the imaginative, creative and innovative value transformation of such
forms.

Signiﬁcantly, hosting the Festival required ﬁnely tuned skills of diplomacy to
enable Solomon Islanders to pull together and overcome differences, tensions, mis-
understandings and conﬂict between parties and to represent a strong collective iden-
tity to the rest of the Paciﬁc and to the world. Transactions in culture (cultural
property, cultural heritage, cultural industry and cultural rights) play no small part in
the process of statecraft among cosmopolitan elites at the FOPA, but also visible are
transactions in heritage at the grassroots, with local artists, carvers, weavers, musi-
cians, dancers and others at the performative frontline, not only ﬁelding tensions
between kastom and culture but also skilfully navigating contradictions between
culture as the lived practice of everyday life, culture as heritage and heritage as
property.

Acknowledgements
The collaboration between the joint authors of this paper was fostered by our participation in
the international collaborative research project ‘Paciﬁc Alternatives: Cultural Heritage and
Political Innovation in Oceania’ convened by Edvard Hviding and Knut Rio (Department of

148

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

Social Anthropology, Bergen Paciﬁc Studies Research Group, University of Bergen). We are
deeply grateful for the opportunities and resources that the ‘Paciﬁc Alternatives’ project
provided for us to engage with a vibrant network of colleagues all working in the Paciﬁc
region on research concerning cultural heritage. We also acknowledge the support of the
School of Arts and Social Sciences and the Cairns Institute, James Cook University, which
provided funds for Lawrence Foana’ota to travel from Solomon Islands and spend time
during 2011 and 2012 collaborating with Rosita Henry and other colleagues at James Cook
University, where he holds an adjunct position as a Senior Research Fellow. We developed
the paper for presentation at
the
University of Queensland, Brisbane, 26–28 September 2012. We are grateful
to the
convenors of the session Kirsty Gillespie, Graeme Were and Ian Lilley. We also thank
the anonymous reviewers for their critical insights and very helpful suggestions on how to
improve the paper for publication. Most importantly, we thank the many participants in our
research at the Festivals of Paciﬁc Arts for generously sharing their perspectives on heritage
in the Paciﬁc.

the Australian Anthropological Society conference at

Funding
This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway [Grant No. 185646] and by
The Cairns Institute, James Cook University.

Notes
1. The CMAC consists of 22 Paciﬁc Island countries and territories that are members of the
Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Community (SPC) as well as Hawaii, Easter Island, Norfolk
Island and Australia and New Zealand (who were founding members). The Human
Development Programme of the SPC serves as the Secretariat for the CPAC.

2. A United Nations Agency with headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. The WIPO was
established by international convention in 1967. Its primary role is to administer interna-
tional treaties concerning intellectual property and to provide advice to party nations
(about 161) with regard to formulation of their domestic intellectual property laws. The
WIPO administers a number of different treaties. Among these is the Berne Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1886, Stockholm Revision, 1967; Paris
Act 1971).

3. According to the Western Province Preservation of Culture Ordinance 1989 it is also

illegal to buy and sell traditional artefacts.

4. Lawrence Foana’ota compiled the document in collaboration with the-then Chief Cultural
Ofﬁcer, Henry Isa, Lindsay Kaua who was the Tourism Ofﬁcer at that time, the late
Charles Manata, the Chief Curator of the National Art Gallery, and Linda Keumi, an Art-
ist from the Solomon Islands Artists Association. These were among the Ofﬁcials that
were part of the Solomon Islands contingent at the Festival. The bid was written while
the Solomon Islands delegation, accompanied by the Minister for Culture, Tourism and
Aviation, Honourable Alec Bartlett, was already in Palau participating at the Festival. It
was put together and typed up with the help of the Palau Festival Secretariat only a few
days before it was presented by the Minister at the Arts Council Meeting.

5. The current Prime Minister is Gordon Darcy Lilo. He has served since 16 November

2011.

7.

6. The theme song for the Solomons Festival is entitled ‘One United Paciﬁc’, composed by

by Kadiba Alu.
‘A total of SB$39.5 million was allocated for preparatory work this year of which SB
$13.3 million was donated by the Republic of China and the rest from the Solomon
Islands Government’ (Solomon Star, 20 June 2011).

8. As Akin (2004, 300) deﬁnes it: ‘Kastom is a Melanesian Pijin word (from English ‘cus-
tom’) that, at its most basic, refers to ideologies and activities formulated in terms of
empowering indigenous traditions and practices, both within communities of varying
levels of inclusivity, and as a stance toward outside entities. Kastom has long been an



149

inﬂuential concept in Melanesia, especially island Melanesia, where in places it has been
a key political concept and symbol for well over 50 years’.

Notes on contributors
Rosita Henry is currently serving as head of the Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
and Sociology, at James Cook University, Australia. Her research concerns relationships
between people, places and the nation-state in Australia and the Paciﬁc as expressed through
heritage and the politics of cultural festivals and other public performances. She is author of
the book Performing Place, Practicing Memory: Indigenous Australians, Hippies and the
State (Oxford and New York: Berghahn Books, 2012) and of several papers on the performa-
tive politics of heritage, including ‘Performing Tradition: The Poetic Politics of Indigenous
Cultural Festivals’ in The Arts and the State edited by Judith Kapferer (Oxford: Berghahn
Books 2008) and co-editor with Barbara Glowczewski of the book The challenge of Indige-
nous Peoples: Spectacle or Politics? (Oxford: Bardwell Press 2011).

Lawrence Foana’ota started work at the Solomon Islands National Museum in 1972 and was
appointed as director in 1983. At the end of 2009, he retired as director of after serving in
the Solomon Islands Government for a total of 38 years. He holds a Museum Management
Certiﬁcate from the East-West Centre, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawai’i, a
BA Degree in Anthropology from the University of Auckland in New Zealand and an MA
Degree in Material Culture (Research) from James Cook University, Townsville, Australia.
He was one of the founding members and the ﬁrst Chairman of the Paciﬁc Islands Museums
Association (PIMA) Executive Board. He was honoured for the long and dedicated services
to the Solomon Islands National Museum and the nation with the Order of the British Empire
Medal by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on 12 June 2010. He was a member of the interna-
tional research team Paciﬁc Alternatives in collaboration with the Bergen University in Nor-
way and James Cook University, Australia. He has written a number of articles on cultural
issues that have been published and others awaiting publication. Currently, he is working as
administration manager for Lion Heart Company, a private locally owned company. He cur-
rently is an honorary member of PIMA Executive Board, a commissioner of Oaths in Solo-
mon Islands Government and an adjunct senior research fellow at James Cook University,
Australia.

References
Ahmad, Yahaya. 2006. “The Scope and Deﬁnitions of Heritage: From Tangible to Intangible.”

 12 (3): 292–300.

Akin, David. 2004. “Ancestral Vigilance and the Corrective Conscience: Kastom as Culture

in a Melanesian Society.” Anthropological Theory 4 (3): 299–324.

Bendix, Regina F., Aditya Eggert, and Arnika Peselmann, eds. 2012. Heritage Regimes and
the State. Göttingen Studies in Cultural Property, Vol. 6. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag
Göttingen.

Bertacchini, Enrico, and Donatella Saccone. 2012. “The Political Economy of World Heritage.”

Accessed May 2012. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1757864

Busse, Mark. 2009. “Epilogue: Anxieties About Culture and Tradition – Property as Reiﬁca-

tion.” International Journal of Cultural Property 16 (3): 357–370.

Byrne, Denis. 1991. “Western Hegemony in Archaeological Heritage Management.” History

Byrne, Denis. 1996. “Deep Nation: Australia’s Acquisition of an Indigenous Past.” Aboriginal

Cultural Rights Symposium. 2013. (Honiara, Solomon Islands, 9–11 July 2012). Suva: Secre-

and Anthropology 5: 269–276.

History 20: 82–107.

tariat of the Paciﬁc Community.

Dalsgaard, Steffen, and Ton Otto. 2011. “From Kastam to Kalsa? Leadership, Cultural
Heritage and Modernization in Manus Province, Papua New Guinea.” In Made in
Oceania: Social Movements, Cultural Heritage and the State in the Paciﬁc, edited by
Edvard Hviding and Knut Rio, 141–160. Wantage: Sean Kingston.

150

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

Foana’ota, Lawrence. 2011. “Development and Management of the Arts in Solomon Islands.”
Paper presented at the Varilaku: Paciﬁc Arts from the Solomon Islands exhibition and
forum held at the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra, April 16–17.

Foana’ota, Lawrence, and Geoffrey White. 2011. “Solomon Islands Cultural Policy? A Brief
History of Practice.” In Made in Oceania: Social Movements, Cultural Heritage and the
State in the Paciﬁc, edited by Edvard Hviding and Knut Rio, 273–299. Wantage: Sean
Kingston.

Glowczewski, Barbara, and Rosita Henry. 2011. “Dancing with the Flow: Political Undercur-
rents at the 9th Festival of Paciﬁc Arts, Palau 2004.” In The Indigenous Challenge: Spec-
tacle or Politics?, edited by Barbara Glowczewski and Rosita Henry, 159–175. Oxford:
Bardwell Press.

Graham, Brian. 2002. “Heritage as Knowledge: Capital or Culture?” Urban Studies 39 (5–6):

1003–1017.

Graham, Brian, G. J. Ashworth, and J. E. Tunbridge. 2000. A Geography of Heritage: Power,

Culture and Economy. London: Arnold.

Greer, Shelley. 1996. “The Accidental Heritage.” PhD diss., James Cook University.
Greer, Shelley, Rodney Harrison, and Susan McIntyre-Tamwoy. 2002. “Community-based

Archaeology in Australia.” World Archaeology 34 (2): 265–287.

Harrington, Jane Therese. 2004. “‘Being Here’: Heritage, Belonging and Place Making: A
Study of Community and Identity Formation at Avebury (England), Magnetic Island
(Australia) and Ayutthaya (Thailand).” PhD diss., James Cook University.

Henry, Rosita. 2008. “Performing Tradition: The Poetic Politics of Indigenous Cultural Festi-
vals.” In The State and the Arts: Articulating Power and Subversion, edited by Judith
Kapferer, 52–69. Oxford: Berghahn Books.

Henry, Rosita. 2011. “Dancing Diplomacy: Performance and the Politics of Protocol in Aus-
tralia.” In Made in Oceania: Social Movements, Cultural Heritage and the State in the
Paciﬁc, edited by Edvard Hviding and Knut Rio, 179–193. Wantage: Sean Kingston.

Hereniko, Vilsoni. 1980. Art in the New Paciﬁc. Suva: Institute of Paciﬁc Studies.
Hirsch, Eric, and Marilyn Strathern, eds. 2004. Transactions and Creations: Property

Debates and the Stimulus of Melanesia. Oxford: Berghahn Books.

Hobsbawm, Eric, and Terence Ranger, eds. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

London: Penguin Books.

Howkins, John. 2007. The Creative Economy: How People Make Money From Ideas.

Hviding, Edvard, and Knut Rio, eds. 2011. Made in Oceania: Social Movements, Cultural

Heritage and the State in the Paciﬁc. Wantage: Sean Kingston.

Janke, Terry. 2009. Intellectual Property Issues and Arts Festivals: Preparing for the 11th
Festival of Paciﬁc Arts Solomon Islands 2012. Geneva: World Intellectual Property
Organization.

Jolly, Margaret, and Nicholas Thomas, eds. 1992. “The Politics of Tradition in the South

Paciﬁc.” Oceania Special Issue, 62 (3).

Kaeppler, Adrienne. 1987. “Paciﬁc Festivals and Ethnic Identity.” In Time Out of Time:
Essays on the Festival, edited by Alessandro Falassi, 162–170. Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico Press.

Kapferer, Bruce. 2010. “The Aporia of Power: Crisis and the Emergence of the Corporate

State.” Social Analysis 54 (1): 125–151.

Keeing, Roger, and Robert Tonkinson, eds. 1982. “Reinventing Traditional Culture: The Poli-

tics of Kastom in Island Melanesia.” Special Issue of Mankind 13 (4).

Kempf, Wolfgang. 2011. “The First South Paciﬁc Festival of Arts Revisited: Producing
Authenticity and the Banaban Case.” In The Challenge of Indigenous People: Spectacle or
Politics? edited by Barbara Glowczewski and Rosita Henry, 177–186. Oxford: Bardwell.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. 1998. Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage.

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Konishi, Junko. 2006. “Performance and Mediation: A Historical View of Traditional Music
and Dance Presented in the Festivals of Paciﬁc Arts 1972–2000.” In Art and Identity in
the Paciﬁc: Festival of Paciﬁc Arts, edited by Matori Yamamoto, 111–132. Osaka: Japan
Center for Area Studies, National Museum of Ethnology. JCAS Area Studies Research
Reports No. 9.



151

Kupiainen, Jari. 2000. Tradition, Trade and Woodcarving in Solomon Islands. Højberg: Inter-

vention Press.

Kupiainen, Jari. 2011. “Kastom on Stage is not Staged Custom: Reﬂections on the First
Melanesian Arts and Cultural Festival.” In The Indigenous Challenge: Spectacle or
Politics?, edited by Barbara Glowczewski and Rosita Henry, 187–203. Oxford: The
Bardwell Press.

Leahy, Joycelin, Joyce Yeap-Holliday, and Bill Pennington. 2010. Evaluation of the Festival

of Paciﬁc Arts. Noumea: Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Community.

Lewis-Harris, Jackie 1994. “The Sixth Paciﬁc Arts Festival.” Paciﬁc Arts 9 and 10: 10–20.
Li, Tania Murray. 2005. “Beyond ‘the State’ and Failed Schemes.” American Anthropologist

107 (3): 383–394.

of the Paciﬁc Community.

Lidimani, David B. 2011. Cultural Mapping Report: Solomon Islands. Noumea: Secretariat

Lindstrom, Lamont. 1993. “Cargo Cult Culture: Toward a Genealogy of Melanesian

Kastom.” Anthropological Forum 6 (4): 495–513.

Lowenthal, David. 1996. Possessed by the Past: The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of His-

tory. New York: Free Press.

McIntyre-Tamwoy, Susan. 2004. “Places People Value: Social Signiﬁcance and Cultural
Exchange in Post Invasion Australia.” In After Captain Cook: The Archaeology of the
Recent Indigenous Past in Australia, edited by Rodney Harrison and Christine William-
son, 171–190. Walnut Creek: Altamira Press.

van Meijl, Toon, ed. 2009. “Paciﬁc Discourses About Cultural Heritage and Its Protection.”

Special Issue of the International Journal of Cultural Property 16 (3).

Miles, Malcolm. 2008. “The Creative Industries: Symbolic Economies and Critical Prac-
tices.” In The State and the Arts: Articulating Power and Subversion, edited by Judith
Kapferer, 98–112. Oxford: Berghahn.

Miller, Toby. 2009. “From Creative to Cultural Industries.” Cultural Studies 23 (1): 88–99.
Moulin, Jane F. 2003. “Words of Tomorrow: ‘Spectacle’ and the Festival of Paciﬁc Arts.”

Paciﬁc Arts 25: 23–30.

Moulin, Jane F. 2005. “Oltobed a Malt (Nurture, Regenerate, Celebrate): The Ninth Festival

of Paciﬁc Arts in Koror, Palau.” Contemporary Paciﬁc 17: 512–516.

Pigliasco, Guido Carlo. 2011. “Are the Grassroots Growing? Intangible Cultural-Heritage
Lawmaking in Fiji and Oceania.” In Made in Oceania: Social Movements, Cultural Heri-
tage and the State in the Paciﬁc, edited by Edvard Hviding and Knut Rio, 321–337.
Wantage: Sean Kingston.

Pocock, Celmara Anne. 2003. “Romancing the Reef: History, Heritage and the Hyper-real.”

PhD diss., James Cook University.

Pratt, Andy C. 2008. “Creative Cities: The Cultural Industries and the Creative Class.” Geog-

raﬁska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 90 (2): 107–117.

Roberts, Rhoda 2010. 11th Festival of Paciﬁc Arts, Solomon Islands: Festival Scope. Report
prepared for the Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Community. Noumea: Secretariat of the Paciﬁc
Community.

Scher, Philip. 2002. “Copyright Heritage: Preservation, Carnival and the State in Trinidad.”

Anthropological Quarterly 75 (3): 453–484.

Shaheed, Farida 2011. Report of the Independent Expert in the Field of Cultural Rights.
Human Rights Council, Seventeenth Session. United Nations General Assembly, A/HRC/
17/38.

Silva, Luís. 2013. “The Two Opposing Impacts of Heritage Making on Local Communities:
Residents’ Perceptions: A Portuguese Case.” 
1–18. doi:10.1080/13527258.2013.828650.

Silva, Luís, and Paula Mota Santos, eds. 2012. Ethnographies of Heritage and Power.

Special Issue of the  I8 (5).

Smith, Laurajane. 2006. The Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Solomon Islands. 2004. “The Solomon Islands Government Submission to Bid for the Hosting
of the 11th Paciﬁc Arts Festival in 2012.” The Department of Culture and Tourism, Com-
merce and Tourism, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Honiara, Solomon Islands.

Stevenson, Karen. 1993. “The 6th Festival of Paciﬁc Arts.” Paciﬁc Studies 6: 67–69.

152

R. Henry and L. Foana’ota

Stevenson, Karen. 1999. “Festivals, Identity, and Performance: Tahiti and the 6th Paciﬁc Arts
Festival.” In Paciﬁc Performance and Society, edited by Chris Anderson and Barry
Craig, 29–36. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Stevenson, Karen. 2012. The Festival of Paciﬁc Arts Celebrating 40 Years. Suva: Secretariat

of the Paciﬁc Community.

Strathern, Marilyn. 2004. “Transactions: An Analytical Foray.” In Transactions and
Creations: Property Debates and the Stimulus of Melanesia, edited by Eric Hirsch and
Marilyn Strathern, 85–109. Oxford: Berghahn.

Teaiwa, Katerina, and Colin Mercer. 2011. Paciﬁc Cultural Mapping, Planning and Policy

Toolkit. Noumea: Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Community.

Tunbridge, John E., and Gregory John Ashworth. 1996. Dissonant Heritage: The Manage-

ment of the Past as a Resource in Conﬂict. Chichester: J. Wiley.

UNCTAD. 2010. Creative Economy Report 2010. Geneva: UNCTAD and UNDP.
Waterton, Emma, Laurajane Smith, and Gary Campbell. 2006. “The Utility of discourse
Analysis to Heritage Studies: the Burra Charter and Social Inclusion.” International Jour-
nal of Heritage Studies 12 (4): 339–355.

White, Geoffrey. 1993. “Three Discourses of Custom.” Anthropological Forum 6 (4): 475–494.


