Our land: creative approaches to the redevelopment of London’s
Docklands

Loraine Leeson

Fine Art Department, Middlesex University, London, UK

ABSTRACT
Large-scale re-development of post-industrial sites can easily railroad
over the needs or wishes of its existing inhabitants, or at best involve
them in peripheral consultation. However, when a community is highly
organised and also collaborates with others to gather expertise and
develop eﬀective means of communication, it has the ability to re-envi-
sion a future that can meet the needs of all concerned. In the 1980s The
Docklands Community Poster Project engaged with a cluster of water-
front communities, which used the arts to inﬂuence the regeneration of
the London Docklands. Close collaboration between local people, acti-
vists and artists led to a range of interventions implemented over a ten
year period that included a series of large-scale photo-murals, travelling
initiatives and events such as the People’s Armadas to
exhibitions,
Parliament and the People’s Plan for the Royal Docks. The article makes
an argument for how and why art can be an eﬀective tool in social
transformation and highlights its role in documenting and making visible
the intangible cultural heritage of the communities it serves.

A role for art in social transformation
A ‘situated’ art practice is one which is able to engage in the politics of speciﬁc circumstance, and
extend out from there. This paper contributes critical reﬂection on how artist intervention can
support communities going through socio-economic change and regeneration. In so doing it can
help bring the voice of that community into the public domain, often building on hitherto hidden
aspects of cultural heritage to support processes of envisioning alternative futures.

This echoes a process outlined by Hamdi (2004) on the way that changes starts from where one
is, and developed from there can rival the sweeping political changes of those holding political
power. Mouﬀe (2005, 39) has furthermore described how the political erupts in very diﬀerent
places and not only through democratic structures. With reference to Ulrich Beck’s theory that
society should no longer look for the political in the traditional arenas of parliament, political
parties and trades unions, she has asserted that it is necessary to stop the equation between politics
and the political system. Mouﬀe pointed instead to a series of new resistances that are grass roots-
oriented, extra parliamentary and no longer linked to classes or to political parties. She claimed
that these demands have been taking place through a variety of sub-systems on issues that cannot
be expressed through traditional political ideologies, and are shaping society from below. In their

l.leeson@cspace.org.uk

CONTACT Loraine Leeson
There has been a lot of talk about land, land for this, land for that. But Docklands is not about land, it’s about people. And the
birthright of the people is being sold oﬀ. Although the people have never owned the land, they’ve lived on it, worked on it, died
on it. It is their heritage – it should be their future.
(Pat Hanshaw, Chair of the Association of Wapping Organisations, circa 1983)
© 2018 Loraine Leeson. Published with license by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

366

L. LEESON

Third Text article of 2008 ‘Whither Tactical Media’, Gene Ray and Gregory Sholette highlighted a
similar need for cultural activism to shift its emphasis to recognise a new social order that is
calling for a ‘do it yourself’ form of tactics. These strategies are reﬂected in two distinct and
sometimes overlapping forms in the community-based work of the artists’ subsequent practice.
Both were originally learned through the engagement with the activists of the Docklands
Community Poster Project during the 1980s, and other campaigning projects of that time.

The ﬁrst tactic has been that of ‘giving voice’, one of the key remits of community arts, and
articulated by Fitzgerald (2004, 79) as ‘the question of power and the right of people to contribute
to and participate fully in culture, the right to have a voice and the right to give voice’.1 Art oﬀers
an eﬀective means of creating platforms in the public domain where these voices can better be
heard, while targeting those who need to listen. Simply being heard can have a transformative
eﬀect as noted by Paolo Freire (1970, 119), who referred to the inward realisation of his ‘educands’
of their own inherent power to change both themselves and what is around them. The second
main strategy has been the creation of alternative models, as in The People’s Plan for the Royal
Docks described below, which the communities of the London Docklands found to be more
eﬀective than oppositional campaigning. This put forward options signiﬁcantly more beneﬁcial to
the local community than the proposed London City Airport, taking lesson from the plans drawn
up a decade earlier by the shop stewards combine at Lucas Aerospace (Wainwright and Elliott,
1983). This countered the ‘instant mix’ recipe for regeneration described by Brownill (2013, 45)
that came to typify the regeneration of post-industrial waterfronts from that time forward. Both
the cultural campaigning strategies indicated here brought the practices, knowledge and skills of
local people into the wider social sphere so that the political, social and cultural experience of
those least heard in society, could enter and aﬀect public discourse through expression of their
intangible heritage.

A waterfront community
Redevelopment of the urban environment might be led by those with political power, but ‘own-
ership’ of land runs deeper. When the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) was
established in the early 1980s by a newly elected Conservative government led by Margaret
Thatcher, local people were outraged. It was not only that a new act of parliament enabled this
government quango to ‘vest’ the land surrounding the East London waterfront from democrati-
cally elected local authorities and other public bodies (Brownill 2013, 48), but it also oﬀered no
plans for homes, jobs or services to the many thousands of existing inhabitants. Furthermore, its
decision-making took place behind closed doors, it failed to engage in public consultation or
involve representatives from the local community,2 and instigated major schemes such as the
Canary Wharf development without subjecting them to the rigours of planning permission.

The area now known as the London Docklands extends eight miles downriver from Tower
Bridge eastwards to the Royal Docks, and was regarded by the government simply as highly
lucrative real estate. It incorporated land used by docks, warehouses and related industries as well
as the housing and public amenities of the communities already living there. In this respect the
London Docklands diﬀered in nature to other dockside redevelopment areas in the UK, such as
Liverpool, where development mostly covered defunct or derelict riverside sites. When the LDDC
moved into its Isle of Dogs oﬃces in the early eighties there were nevertheless still working docks
in the area, many small industries and a population of 56,000 people, mainly living in high-rise
council tower blocks with poor amenities.

The people of Docklands have a history of social and workplace organisation since its
inhabitants have always been subject to the changing needs of trade routes. From the 1850s
onwards its populace lived through major upheavals resulting from each successive rebuilding and
extension of the docks. By the mid 1960s, having won rights in security of employment and
decasualisation of labour, most of the docks were closed and once again this working class



367

community was at the mercy of the market. This time their labour was not needed for the newly
containerised cargo, and their physical presence became both an inconvenience and an embar-
rassment. Keen to fulﬁl the new Thatcherite vision of the 1980s, the LDDC projected Docklands
as a ‘virgin’ site for development and Reg Ward, ﬁrst Chief Executive of the LDDC, speaking at a
local meeting in 1982 went so far as to describe the Docklands as ‘a blank canvas upon which we
can paint the future’.

Proximity to water was a key element in inﬂating land values and maximising proﬁt. As luxury
housing became a prominent feature of the development, a new politics of ‘the view’ entered the
frame. Those who had spent a large amount of money on their river vista did not want this
marred by the sight of crumbling tenement blocks and unsightly council estates. Their case was
powerfully stated in the theatrical production A View of the River, written by East End playwright
Alan Gilbey and professionally performed in 1986 with a cast of local people in the warehouses of
Canary Wharf prior to its demolition.

Ironically the vast Canary Wharf oﬃce development became one of the factors that eventually led
to the downfall of the LDDC. The ultimate in privatisation (Brownill 2013, 49), the then tallest
tower in Europe was ﬁnanced from across the Atlantic. It was planned into a scenario which had no
current need for oﬃces, insuﬃcient transport infrastructure and was opposed by major voices in the
City of London who had no desire to see London’s ﬁnancial centre move eastward. Canary Wharf’s
developers failed to pre-let even one oﬃce space prior to the signing of the master build3 agreement.
Once built, it took ten years for Canary Wharf to get oﬀ the ground, despite its skyward tendencies.

The Docklands Community Poster Project
Before the government’s new plans were fully formulated, the highly politicised communities of
these waterfront zones had already formed themselves into organisations representing the tenants
and action groups of each local neighbourhood. With support from the Labour controlled Greater
London Council, these organisations established the Joint Docklands Action Group with a
management committee of local representatives. Professionals in the ﬁelds of planning, commu-
nications and community organising were then employed by this organisation to research and co-
ordinate the community ﬁghtback. It was not common at that time for artists to be involved in
such endeavours. However Dan Jones, a trades council representative on the Joint Docklands
Action Group was familiar with the work of myself and artist Peter Dunn, who had had already
worked for several years with trades unionists in East London disseminating information on local
health issues through posters and other cultural means. He invited us to produce a poster that
would alert local people to what was to come. Since the local communities were so well organised
they were able to undertake a period of consultation with representative groups to clarify what
was needed, and it soon became clear that a single poster design was not going to be enough.
Posters were indeed wanted, but ‘large ones’ to match the scale of the proposals, plus design work
to help with individual campaigns, documentation of the area before it changed and a record of
each battle as it was fought. There was also a need for easily accessible information that examined
key issues such as housing and other aspects of the development in more depth.

Without funding at this stage, we developed a plan that would deliver art and design work for these
key areas, and to deliver this ambitious scheme we founded the Docklands Community Poster Project
in 1981. Central to the functioning of this organisation was a steering committee formed of
representatives from each riverside area, which met regularly to report on local developments, agree
issues to be represented, and consider the audiences that the artwork should serve. A small amount of
funding was raised from local boroughs and the regional arts board, ﬁnally matched by a signiﬁcant
grant from the Greater London Council. The Docklands Community Poster Project eventually became
a community co-op with staﬀ4 employed to fulﬁl roles of administration, design and technical support.
An arts project that began as a request for a poster evolved into the cultural arm of an extraordinary
campaigning community over a period of ten years. The images produced during the course of the

368

L. LEESON

Figure 1. Photo-mural in situ, Southwark Bridge.
Photo © Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, Docklands Community Poster Project,circa 1983. One of eight 18ft x 12ft (5.49m x
3.66m) photo-murals constructed in and around the London Docklands.

project became the currency via which information about the events in Docklands was disseminated
across the world.

The photo-murals

Large-scale posters were the ﬁrst aspect of the work to be developed in response to the action groups’
request. The Docklands Community Poster Project steering group considered carefully who the main
audience for these should be – whether to direct their messages to the developers, explain issues to
outsiders, or primarily to disseminate information amongst the Docklands communities themselves. It
was decided that the latter group were the most important. Most local people were unaware of what
was going on, although familiar with the miles of corrugated iron then surrounding what was left of
the docks, and all too aware that they had been left stranded in poor housing with few facilities.

The siting of these large images was also important (Figure 1 and Figure 2). Commercial
billboards, aimed at communicating a simple brand name, are often situated in locations where
they can best attract the attention of passing motorists. However, since the information was aimed
at local people, it was decided that the posters should be located where they could be seen over
time by pedestrians. To this end the organisation contracted the building of the structures itself.
The ﬁrst was constructed opposite a health centre in Wapping, then over subsequent years with
further funding from the Greater London Council, seven more were built in and around the
Docklands area. Some were temporary, though at any one time six sites were in operation.

The images themselves were developed with these multiple billboards in mind. They were
designed to change gradually through replacement of individual sections and develop a narrative
rather like a slow motion animation. In practical terms this meant the images could be transferred
from one site to another, enabling the story of the Docklands to unfold through time and space.
The name ‘photo-mural’ was ﬁrst used to describe this work by critic Richard Cork, then coined
by Alan Tompkins, cultural activist and Arts Policy Oﬃcer for the Greater London Council. Since
then it has become a generic descriptor for this art form.



369

The project steering group initially met on a monthly basis to feedback on issues of the
campaigning, any action that was needed, the siting of the photo-mural structures, and to identify
the messages to be conveyed. We then worked to represent these themes, bringing imagery back
to the group to check how well it conveyed its meaning, although the visual representation itself
remained entirely their own. This process of decision-making and co-operation enabled a
combination of diﬀerent skills and experience to be focused on the work, contradicting the
‘design by committee’ criticism often directed by the artworld at collectively produced artwork
of the time. The hub of creative energy generated in this way sustained the project throughout its
ten-year duration and laid the foundations for much subsequent collaborative work.

First photo-mural sequence
The ﬁrst sequence of photo-murals dealt with the issue at the forefront of local people’s minds. What
was going on behind their backs? Years of consultation by the Labour led boroughs had been rejected
by the newly appointed LDDC in favour of the practical enactment of Thatcherite policy. The ﬁrst
photo-mural sequence followed the nature and concerns of the campaigning, commencing with a
question and then considering the scenario that people could see being enacted around them. ‘Big
money is moving in and is pushing out local people’, explained a trades unionist speaking at a public
meeting in Wapping in 1981, so naming the next image of the sequence. A member of The Docklands
Community Poster Project would attend every meeting of each campaigning group during that period
to familiarise themselves with the issues. At these events activists were often heard to express their
ideas through visual metaphor, and these frequently provided inspiration for the imagery. The visual
representation of these issues produced by the group also followed the development of ideas. For
example, although fear of being thrown ‘on the scrap heap’ was clearly expressed, local response to the
ﬁrst draft of the image depicting this was indignant. The ‘scrap heap’ was seen as the developers’
design on Docklands, not where the communities saw themselves. As a result, this image sequence
unfolded to reveal that this scenario truly was a ‘design’ and not a reality. The nature of the
campaigning itself was transforming and found new strength in a pro-active approach. The ﬁnal
image in the sequence (Figure 2) referenced the relationship of portraiture to land ownership often
found in 18th century painting,5 where aristocracy were depicted against the landscape they owned.
This image instead constituted a portrait of those concerned in the Docklands campaigning, incor-
porating documentation of recent campaigns against their own cityscape. The caption was a procla-
mation by the chair of the Association of Wapping Organisations about the land being the heritage
and birth-right of local people, reﬂecting the new strength through solidarity being developed by the
campaigning communities and making visible their essential ‘ownership’ of the land.

Housing sequence

Of all the issues aﬀecting those living in the Docklands, housing was the most fundamental to
people’s lives, and the steering group felt it warranted a photo-mural sequence of its own.
However, it was diﬃcult to portray the present day housing conditions of the area without a
context explaining the historical events that formed them, and it was therefore decided that
housing and history should be combined. This led to an immediate diﬃculty of representation.
Despite visual material for current issues being readily available from the project’s own archives,
historical visuals were embedded with the ideology of the context that had led to their recording.
For example, most photos of the housing of the area had been taken to promote reform – to bring
better conditions to the poor and destitute. However, those depicted as ‘victims’ in the photo-
graphs were no less than the forerunners of the resilient and highly organised East Londoners of
the present, the very people who had fought against the odds and forged the qualities of
community cohesion of which East Londoners remain so justly proud. The imagery produced
for this second sequence of photo-murals served as a reminder of this heritage, ﬁrst depicting the

370

L. LEESON

Figure 2. First Photo-mural Sequence – ﬁnal image.
© Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, Docklands Community Poster Project, 1982-85. A series of eight 18ft x 12ft (5.49m x 3.66m)
photo-murals were created that explored issues surrounding the re-development of the London Docklands from the viewpoint
of local communities.

tasks carried out by local inhabitants in their lives, then turning them around to help in with their
demands for better living and working conditions. Men are initially shown unloading goods from
the ships, while women and children are doing laundry, sewing and undertaking other piecework
from home. In the next image (Figure 3) the dockworkers are attending a rally at which Ben Tillet
is speaking and the Chinese community is building it’s own association, while women are sewing
banners, producing broadsheets and spreading information about the day nursery provision set
up by the East London Federation of Suﬀragettes.

To help depict these issues and convey a reality that remained invisible in the photography of
the earlier period, we used drawing as a counterpoint to photography, taking inspiration from the
engravings of Gustav Doré’s London: a Pilgrimage. In this way photographic montage and
drawing were combined, with black, white and sepia used to reveal layers of reality. The second
strategy concerned use of text, and a caption was developed for this historical material that
acknowledged the role of East Londoners in not only surviving, but also in changing their lot – a
hallmark of both their past and present struggles: The people of Docklands have always had to ﬁght
to make the best of appalling conditions – and to change them (Figure 2).

The People’s Armadas to Parliament

Docklands campaigning was co-ordinated by the Joint Docklands Action Group, set up in 1975 by
representatives of the diﬀerent riverside neighbourhoods. This covered a substantial area however
and each location would initiate its own campaigns around speciﬁc issues. Our initial consultation
with these local groups had resulted in repeated requests for a photographic record of the actions
taking place, and constituted one of the Docklands Community Poster Project’s central activities.
There were many small campaigns during this period that they documented to create a negative



371

Figure 3. Housing.
© Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, Docklands Community Poster Project,1984-86 Third image from the second sequence of
photo-murals dealing with issues behind lack of adequate housing for local people. 18’ x 12’ (5.49m x 3.66m) photo-mural.

archive of material for publicity, publication and an ongoing record of events. One of the larger
and more signiﬁcant initiatives however was the People’s Armada to Parliament (Figure 4).

The Armada serves as one of the best examples of the use of cultural campaigning during this
period to bring the concerns of the Docklands communities into the wider public domain. It is
also an exemplar of the collaboration that was able to take place between local, professional,
statutory and voluntary groups. During the campaigning of the eighties, in addition to inviting
representatives to our own meetings, representatives of both the Joint Docklands Action Group
and Docklands Community Poster Project would attend the diﬀerent meetings of the federated
tenant and action groups around the Docklands area. A comment was made at one such event,
that it was time to take another petition to parliament to challenge the imposition of the
government appointed LDDC, which had eﬀectively removed powers from the democratically
elected local authorities.

Another delegate pointed out that, since both Docklands and parliament were situated on the
river, this oﬀered a potential route for delivery of the petition. Someone else spoke up to say that
he was a lighterman in Wapping, and owned a barge – an appropriate means of transport for such
a journey. There was a further proposal that this barge could be decorated. The idea was taken up
by the Joint Docklands Action Group and introduced at the meetings of other Dockland groups,
and in this way grew from a petition to a major event. People from each Docklands location
wanted to take part, so the hiring of pleasure cruisers was proposed. There were also plans for
what such a large number of people could do when they arrived at parliament. The Greater
London Council were approached and provided funding for the event as well as use of Jubilee
Gardens close to the pier opposite parliament where the pleasure boats could discharge their
passengers.

Delegates from the Joint Docklands Action Group and North Southwark Community
Development Group organised the event, while the Docklands Community Poster Project co-
ordinated East London arts groups to provide imagery, design and publicity. The main barge was

372

L. LEESON

decorated with a large banner for which we created an image that was to become the emblem of
the community ﬁght back – a dragon in the shape of the river as it runs through Docklands. The
symbol caught the imagination of local groups and a wealth of ephemera was generated that
included t-shirts, mugs, letter headings, badges, balloons, and posters.

The Basement Arts Workshop printed neighbourhood banners for the barge and pleasure boats.
However, ﬁrst the main vessel had to be prepared. This was co-ordinated by Cultural Partnerships,6
who worked with young people to re-paint the entire vessel, hoist the banners, ensure their safety on
the voyage and provide tannoy and music. In April 1984 a thousand people took to the river and
sailed to parliament broadcasting their message, accompanied by music and songs. It was a moving
moment for all involved to hear the Armada’s progression up river, cheered on by crowds identiﬁ-
able by their banners and balloons in the blue and red of the dragon banner, that had come to
symbolise the Docklands ﬁghtback (Figure 6). At Jubilee Gardens more music, dancing and banners
welcomed those who disembarked at an event that combined arts festival with political rally. Ken
Livingstone, Leader of the Greater London Council, delivered a welcome speech, and members of
the Labour shadow cabinet were asked to explain how they would address the issues aﬀecting the
people of Docklands from day one of coming to power. Each politician was presented with a copy of
the People’s Charter for Docklands, reminding them of their pledge.

Three People’s Armadas to Parliament took place between 1984 and 1986. By this time a host of
poems and songs had been written about the issues and at the second and subsequent armadas
Cultural Partnerships co-ordinated a barge of musicians, whose sound heralded its progression
upriver. Their pyrotechnics expertise ensured that the ﬂotilla of boats that circled at North
Woolwich by the LDDC oﬃces did so to the sound of cannon ﬁre. These were emotionally
moving events involving thousands of people from diﬀerent generations and backgrounds who
would not have otherwise participated in political campaigning, but who continued to do so in an
unprecedented way. Labour and Liberal politicians continued to speak in support of
the
Docklands communities. Miners’ leaders from the UK strike of 1984–85 held meetings with the
Docklands groups, and launched a campaign entitled Don’t let the Mines go the same way as the
Docks. Impressed with the Docklands dragon, they created their own ‘pit dragon’ as a massive
carnival costume worn by young people, which accompanied the Armada celebrations.

Although events such as this were not able on their own to create the major shift in political focus that
only a change in government would bring, much was achieved on the way. The Armadas also marked a
shift from activism to pro-activism in the Docklands political campaigning, an approach that became a
hallmark of this movement. This was similarly exempliﬁed in such initiatives as the People’s Plan for the
Royal Docks (Figure 5), and signiﬁcantly informed subsequent work of the artists. It also marked a
moment where the artists’ cultural interventions had moved from the margins to the centre of an agenda
of resistance.

The People’s Plan for the Royal Docks

Initial redevelopment issues in the Docklands began at the Western end of the designated land.
The easterly lying Royal Docks remained largely untouched throughout the eighties. However,
plans for one major development in this area were put into motion – a new airport for London,
the runway for which would use the stretch of land between these docks and surrounding areas
for airport buildings and parking. As with all LDDC initiatives within the development zone, local
people had not been consulted. The area was renowned for its lack of amenities, jobs and
transport, while most residents were squeezed into shabby tower blocks in urgent need of
rebuilding. An airport would meet none of these needs, save for a few jobs for ground staﬀ and
cleaners, and would certainly not be providing the kind of transportation so urgently required
(Newham Docklands Forum and GLC Popular Planning Unit 1983, 5–6).

As in the other Docklands areas, Silvertown residents were highly organised – a necessity for
survival in such challenging conditions – with tough campaigners from all generations. On



373

Figure 4. The ﬁrst People’s Armada arrives at Parliament.
Photo © Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, Docklands Community Poster Project, 1984.

hearing of the development corporation’s plans for the airport, the activists of this area created
their own organisation, the People’s Plan Centre, which operated from a local shop staﬀed by
volunteers. They approached the Greater London Councils’ new Popular Planning Unit for
support. This unit employed key political strategists on its staﬀ, including Sheila Rowbotham
and Hilary Wainwright, co-authors of the 1980 publication Beyond the Fragments: Feminism and
the Making of Socialism. Together they took on the Royal Docks case, helping local people to
conduct their own research and consultation, access expert input and draw up a comprehensive
document. The idea of an alternative plan as an eﬀective oppositional tool was introduced by
Hilary Wainwright, who had witnessed the plans drawn up by the shop stewards’ combine at
Lucas Aerospace, in the previous decade as part of their pioneering proposals for for ‘socially
useful production’. In a similar way, the People’s Plan for the Royal Docks detailed how the same
area of land could meet local needs including those of housing, childcare, the elderly, shopping
facilities, transport, leisure and recreation, education and health. The Plan addressed the means
through which this approach would create jobs and boost the economy while providing the local
resources so urgently needed. The Joint Docklands Action Group was centrally involved, while the
Docklands Community Poster Project designed posters, helped stage events, provided a shop sign,
promotional board for the centre and design work for the published plan, which was ﬁnally
distributed by Newham council to every home in the area. There was no comparison between the
social beneﬁts of the airport proposal and those of the People’s Plan, and Silvertown residents
were successful in forcing the issue to public inquiry. Unfortunately, while this recognised the
value of the People’s Plan, and particularly the jobs it would generate in the area, it nevertheless
upheld the authority of the LDDC and the airport went ahead.

The Docklands Roadshow

The LDDC was one of the ﬁrst major urban development corporations to be established by the
Thatcher government following their return to power in 1979. It was regarded as a test bed where

374

L. LEESON

Figure 5. The People’s Plan for the Royal Docks.
Photo © Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, Docklands Community Poster Project, 1983.

conservative policies could be enacted without recourse to local democratic processes. Requiring a
special act of parliament, this was ﬁnally passed through both parliamentary houses after much
deliberation in 1980. New Urban Development Corporations were being set up all over the country,
and as the London re-development progressed, the communities of Docklands decided to send a
warning and the beneﬁt of their campaigning experience to other regions facing a similar situation.
To this end, late in the eighties, we organised the exhibitions, photo-murals, photographs,
posters, banners, leaﬂets, articles, plans and other documents produced during the course of the
Docklands campaigning together under the banner of the Docklands Roadshow. A package was
oﬀered to other locations where development corporations were due to be imposed. As part of
this an exhibition of the work of the Docklands Community Poster Project, accompanied by
speakers including community activists and professionals, could be hired to bring relevant advice
and information from a community perspective to other locations. The Docklands Roadshow
toured in various combinations. In 1988 the visual material was shown at the annual conference of
Shelter in Nottingham and at the Future exhibition at Dock Warehouse in Amsterdam. The
following year it went to Bethnal Green Library, followed by an extensive event at Stratford Town
Hall in Newham, and ﬁnally exhibited as part of Urban Renewal in England at the Technische
Universität, Berlin and Barbican Centre, London in 1989.

* * *

The Docklands Community Poster Project did not set out to create legacy, however it is so
often the cultural artefacts that are left to relate hidden histories. Posters and ephemera from the
campaigning are now housed in the Museum of London Docklands, and the archive of photo-
graphic negatives that was originally created as a resource for local people and the media is now
the only record that the museum holds documenting the Docklands campaigning from a com-
munity perspective. The gathering of artefacts at the time of the redevelopment had been quite a
radical act, though subsequent governance of the museum rather undermined the way this came
to be used. Despite the fact that the Museum’s 1980s display does not adequately express the



375

including the cultural

highly organised campaigning that took place, it has been valuable that some evidence of those
activities,
intervention of the Docklands Community Poster Project,
remains on public view. The museum still holds in its archives a substantial amount of material
from the work we did there and in subsequent years provided a welcoming venue for projects that
I ran with young people.

Thirty years on, documentation and versions the photo-murals continue to be exhibited and
discussed at a variety of events, and the few remaining copies of the People’s Plan for the Royal
Docks have become widely valued as a model of eﬀective community-led consultation. Most recently it
has been featured in an article entitled ‘The People’s Plan: Participatory and Intellectual Democracy’
published by the architectural practice We Made That (Martin 2016, 10–11).

The people’s story of the growth of the London Docklands is not however the major visible narrative
of this area in the present day, where historical references have been reduced to a scattering of cranes and
bollards between soaring oﬃce blocks, apartments and riverside restaurants. Despite its ‘alternative’
status, the people’s story7 of the resistance in Docklands is nevertheless resilient and spreading. A growing
spirit of activism, particularly amongst younger generations, is seeking to excavate earlier models of
organisation and dissemination, and to re-invent these for new circumstances. At the same time a greater
acceptance of art as a social tool is supporting cultural forms that can help bring the voice of communities
into the public domain. The Docklands dragon in the shape of the river – an image that we originated as
an emblem of the People’s Armadas, which was reproduced many times over on letterheads, badges and
ephemera – became an apt symbol for this community’s ﬁghtback. The dragon is a personiﬁcation of all
the elements, an embodiment of primordial power and in our own culture has been used represent the
underworld against the state, as in the tale of Saint George and the dragon. The use of the imaginary and
the cultural forms which hold and communicate the ideas – the photomurals that played out a
community’s concerns and vision, the armadas that reminded locals and others of the power of collective
action – have a role to play in making these issues tangible so that others may engage with them. The arts
are a medium well equipped to give form to ideas and vision and in that process are also able to make
visible the way that aspects of the past inform the present, as in the photo-mural Housing sequence.
Revealing hidden cultural heritage is therefore one way that artists can support communities struggling to
survive and assist the process of re-envisioning our cities’ futures.

If art is a purveyor of meaning, then the cultural work supporting this campaign helped locate
the meanings of this development for both local people and a wider society. More people joined
the cultural events8 than would have otherwise taken part in demonstrations, exempliﬁed by the
thousands who took to the river for the People’s Armadas to Parliament. The imagery also gained
a currency that saw it repeatedly reproduced through the media. At the time it was, for example,
used to illustrate ‘Bleeding Docklands Dry’ published by the Joint Docklands Action Group in The
Chartist (1983) and London Labour Brieﬁng in 1984. It was also used in textbooks featuring
Docklands development such as Geography Today and People in the Urban Landscape, a GCSE
Geography text book, published by Collins in 1987 and 1989. The images have continued to be
used for similar purposes, and as recently as 2016 the No Airport in Newham poster was featured
by Oxford University Press in A Level Geography for Edexcel.

The Docklands Community Poster Project oﬀers an example of how art can support commu-
nities and act as a political force to provoke reform. In the London Docklands local people from
three London boroughs in eﬀect took on central government9 to oppose, and then provide
workable alternatives to turning a site where generations of working class people had lived and
worked, into real estate to be sold oﬀ to the highest bidders. Theirs was not a simple message to
communicate however. The campaign adopted more sophisticated strategies to that of being
straightforwardly oppositional, and proposed ways of developing the area that would include local
needs and infrastructure. There was also awareness of how this massive development would
engage with the wider global economy of the capital, and the visual strategies therefore had to not
only reﬂect this complexity, but also communicate the issues in diverse ways for various audi-
ences. In order to achieve this, the artistic practice needed to be embedded in ongoing dialogue

376

L. LEESON

Figure 6. Dragon Banner from the People’s Armadas to Parliament.
© Peter Dunn and Loraine Leeson, 1984.

with the activists, community members and professionals involved, a process that eventually led to
a programme of photo-murals, graphics, travelling exhibitions, events and photographic docu-
mentation. The art did not lead the campaign, but it became an increasingly important part of it,
disseminating information amongst local people and to a much wider public. Indeed, the eﬀect of
the community ﬁghtback, of which the project’s images served as a mouthpiece, inﬂuenced public
perceptions of regeneration from that time onwards. While this campaigning did not stop major
developments in Docklands it did impact on wider debates about policy and future policy
directions. Despite the LDDC’s attempt to mitigate their increasingly negative image by imple-
menting a funding stream for community projects towards the end of their regime, the develop-
ment it managed came to typify the lack of social engagement that later regeneration schemes
strove to avoid. Three decades on the London Legacy Corporation, setting out its plans for
Olympic Park Legacy promised in its ten-year plan (2016, 6) that it would be ‘developing
exemplary community engagement and supporting communities in determining how their
neighbourhoods are managed’.

In the decades following the Docklands development, the East End of London, became an arena for
successive governments to enact their vision for change and the notion of redevelopment in the UK
became replaced with one of regeneration, to ideally embrace concepts of culture, community,



377

participation and sustainability. Artists were wholeheartedly embraced within these schemes to deliver a
range of desired regeneration outcomes at comparatively little cost, a process that still continues. Belﬁore
and Bennett (2008, 7) reported how in 1999 the Policy Action Team 10 (PAT10)10 argued that
participation in the arts and sport should eﬀectively contribute to neighbourhood renewal by improving
communities’ performance in four key areas of health, crime, employment and education.11 A prolifera-
tion of ‘impact studies’ justiﬁed the ’usefulness of the arts’ in relation to government priorities. In 2003 the
Cultural Policy Collective described how UK governments had identiﬁed cultural industries as sources of
urban regeneration and cultural activity as instruments of social change, appearing to be democratic but
fundamentally market led and tokenistic. They described various forms of co-option as being the order of
the day. I warned in an article for Engage (2005, 17) that the arts were being seen as a necessary
component to the agendas of most regeneration agencies and that, despite their best intentions, many
artists were ﬁnding themselves pawns in a game being played at a much higher level and with large
contracts at stake. I was concerned how, under such circumstances, and particularly for the less
experienced, this gave rise to some artists having diﬃculty in ascertaining to which agenda they were
working, and indeed whether these were ones they would choose to support. While the widespread
involvement of artists in regeneration can be positive, this process is often undermined both through the
way it is done and the resources it oﬀers, or as the Cultural Policy Collective put it, ‘combating serious
structurally-induced social problems with miniscule resources and no external support’ (2003, 11).

So why continue to engage as an artist with regeneration? My own interest comes through recognition
of the power of ‘local intelligence’ of the kind referred to by Hamdi – a concept that the ‘local’ not only
matters but can create repercussions of a far greater magnitude. The arts are also well placed to draw out
and assist the communication of direct experience to ensure that planning and design meet real need.
Regeneration remains a fundamental force of change in the lives of East London communities, and
requires addressing rather than ignoring – there are nevertheless many ways of doing this other than
through agency-led commissions.

It is always diﬃcult to assess the social impact of arts projects. Even the most sensitive qualitative
evaluation cannot account for those moments when some active involvement by a young person bears
fruit in later life, or when a community in London or Brazil is inspired by learning of the experiences of
the other. Proof is perhaps more the concern of academics, policy makers and funding agencies, since one
can only really tell experientially how wide the ripples of a project may have spread. Catherine Wilson
(2008, 6) commented that the possibility of artists inﬂuencing wider actions and thinking is as inﬁnite as
the creative process itself, noting particularly that social outcomes rely on nodes of interaction in the
wider public realm that the artist does not control.

If the campaigning over the London Docklands were to be judged in terms of the ﬁnal redevelop-
ment as a whole, it would not necessarily be deemed as successful.12 Its strategy for cohesive
community activism involving the arts is nevertheless one that is frequently referenced as a model,
and would have certainly made impact on a much greater scale, had it not been for three successive
terms of a Conservative government. A signiﬁcant shift can however be seen in the cultural work over
this period. The artistic intervention in the Docklands resistance gradually came to be regarded as a
key tool in the campaigning strategy, and the process of taking a cultural approach to demonstration
and events became accepted as the norm. As with the Lucas Aerospace plan, it has seemed to gain an
after-life as the artwork continues to be exhibited and published, revealing the intangible cultural
heritage of that era, enabling others to draw on the knowledge gained and re-use it to inform future
initiatives. Art cannot necessarily make change, but it can take vision to the brink of where change is
possible.

Notes

1. It has been argued that ‘giving voice’ is somewhat of a misnomer, since communities are often very clear

about what they want, it is rather if or how they are listened to that is more the issue.

378

L. LEESON

2. In its latter days, in an attempt to address it’s appalling standing amongst local residents, the LDDC
employed Peter Wade, a local activist, to advise on administering a small fund for community projects.
His appointment was felt to be ‘window dressing’ by many local people and highly controversial.

3. The Canary Wharf development was master-planned by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill for the Canadian
company Olympia & York, with Yorke Rosenberg Mardall as their UK advisors. The ﬁrst buildings were
completed in 1991

4. Docklands Community Poster Project staﬀ comprised lead artists/co-ordinators Peter Dunn and Loraine
Leeson, graphic designer Sandra Buchanan, administrators Belinda Kidd and Roberta Evans, with other
input from Sonia Boyce, Sara McGuinness, Tony Minnion, Keith Piper and Donald Rodney.

5. Docklands Community Poster Project staﬀ comprised lead artists/co-ordinators Peter Dunn and Loraine
Leeson, graphic designer Sandra Buchanan, administrators Belinda Kidd and Roberta Evans, with other
input from Sonia Boyce, Sara McGuinness, Tony Minnion, Keith Piper and Donald Rodney.

6. Graham Downes of Hackney based arts organisation Cultural Partnerships coordinated preparation of the
barge, undertaken with staﬀ and volunteers of that organisation. He accompanied it on Armadas and
provided pyrotechnics for its later voyages.

7. While this campaigning was not particularly focused on the safeguarding of diverse cultures, these issues

were addressed through subsequent work with The Art of Change (for more see Leeson 2017).

8. The cultural work for this campaign was not just carried out by the Docklands Community Poster Project.
Other individuals and organisations produced songs, poems and theatrical performances, took photographs
and turned political rallies into community festivals.

9. The London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) was appointed to oversee the re-development of
the London Docklands by the 1979 Conservative government, to which it was directly answerable. Under a
new act of parliament the land was transferred to their control from the Labour controlled local authorities,
which received no recompense.

10. Policy Action Team 10 and 17 other Policy Action Teams were set up by the Labour government in 1998 to
look in an integrated way at the problems of poor neighbourhoods. Each team was made up of oﬃcials from
Government Departments, experienced practitioners and academics. PAT10 focused on the contribution
that sport and the arts could potentially make toward neighbourhood renewal.

11.
12. Despite falling short of its main objectives, the Docklands campaigning achieved a number of small but
signiﬁcant victories including preventing destruction of the heart of Wapping by a trunk road, achieving
housing for rent along the riverside at Cherry Gardens in Southwark, saving the Mudchute City Farm from
destruction and forcing the issue of the proposed airport to public enquiry through production of the
Peoples Plan for the Royal Docks

Acknowledgments

This article draws on a larger research project, concerning socially engaged art practice in which I worked through
various versions of my thinking on artists’ engagement with communities in the context of post-industrial heritage
and regeneration. This work is featured in my book Art:Process:Change – Inside a Socially Situated Practice (2017).

Disclosure statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor

Dr. Loraine Leeson is a visual artist particularly known for her socially engaged work with East London commu-
nities. Her projects have won a Media Trust Inspiring Voices award and Olympic Inspire Mark, The Catch public
artwork involving 300 children became a London 2012 Landmark while Active Energy received Regen SW’s Arts
and Green Energy award. Loraine is director of cSPACE, chair of Arts for Labour and runs an MA in Art and Social
Practice at Middlesex University. 2017 saw her 1970s photomontage work in support of health campaigns exhibited
at the ICA and publication of her book Art:Process:Change – inside a socially situated practice. In a current project
Jal! she is working with environmental and social scientists to use the arts to help address issues of water
conservation in rural India.



379

References

Belﬁore, E., and Bennett. 2008. The Social Impact of the Arts. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave and MacMillan.
Brownill, S. 2013. Just Add Water., New York, London: Routledge.
Cultural Policy Collective. 2003. Towards Cultural Democracy. Scotland. www.culturaldemocracy.net.
Fitzgerald, S., ed. 2004. An Outburst of Frankness: Community Arts in Ireland. – A Reader. Dublin: Tasc at New Island.
Freire, P. 1970. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Penguin.
Hamdi, N. 2004. Small Changes. London and Sterling VA: Earthscan.
Cockram, J., and L. Leeson. 2005. “Re-Generation.” In Engage, edited by Karen Raney. Vol. 17, 17. London.
Leeson, L. 2017. Art: Process: Change – Inside a Socially Situated Practice. New York and London: Routledge.
London Legacy Development Corporation. 2016. Ten Year Plan 2015/16-2024/25.
Martin, H. 2016. “The People’s Plan: Participatory and Intellectual Democracy.” The Unlimited Edition 5: 10–11.
Mouﬀe, C. 2005. On the Political. Oxford and New York: Routledge.
Newham Docklands Forum and GLC Popular Planning Unit. 1983. The People’s Plan for the Royal Docks. London.
Ray, G., and G. Sholette. 2008. “Whither Tactical Media.” Third Text 22 (5): 519–524. London: Routledge.

doi:10.1080/09528820802439989.

Rowbotham, S., L. Segal, and H. Wainwright. 1980. Beyond the Fragments: Feminism and the Making of Socialism. London:

Merlin Press.

Wainwright, H., and D. Elliott. 1983. The Lucas Plan: A New Trade Unionism in the Making? Allison and Busby:

London.

Wilson, C. 2008. “Community Engagement.” In Collections. Newcastle upon Tyne: a-n The Artists Information Company.


