Tales from the Riverbank:
place-marketing and maritime heritages
David Atkinson, Steven Cooke and
Derek Spooner

Abstract
Although place-marketing and image-enhancement are increasingly common elements  of
Western  urban  policy,  when  applied  to  specific  locales,  these  abstract  theories  have  to
negotiate local  conditions  and  contexts. This paper discusses  the  ways  attempts  to place-
market  the  city  of  Hull,  England,  prompted  debates  surrounding  questions  of  place,
memory  and  heritage. Despite  being Britain’s leading  fishing  port  in  the  20th  century,
Hull’s place-marketing strategy elided this past in favour of a sanitised vision of a modern,
post-industrial  city. These  debates  crystallised  around  a 1999 planning inquiry  over the
proposed redevelopment of the erstwhile fishing dock. While the proposals contained some
reference to the dock’s role as a site of place-memory, this was deemed insufficient by local
protest groups and politicians who argued for a more appropriate memorial to Hull’s fishing
community.  Eventually,  the  redevelopment  proposals  were  accepted,  but  not  before
attendant  debates  exposed  both  the  depth  of  local  sentiments  over  place-memories  and
fishing  heritage,  and  also  the  difficulties  of  negotiating  inclusive  and  plural  heritage
landscapes.

Key  Words:  Heritage;  Place-marketing;  Fishing;  Hull;  Place-memory;   City-
image

Introduction: a fishy city
Doleful Hull poet Philip Larkin frequently grumbled about the city’s fishy smells; in
1955,  for  example,  he  wrote:  `Hull  smelt  revoltingly  of  fish  this  morning;  my
secretary said that meant it was going to rain. And it did.’ 1 This casual association
was  also  reproduced  elsewhere:  a  1952  Manchester  United  football  programme
derided  the  visiting  Hull  team  for  smelling  of  fish.  And  as  if  to  emphasise  the
longevity  of  the  joke,  a  rare  FA  Cup  run  for  Hull  City  in  1999  prompted  the
Guardian newspaper to publish the cartoon again.2

1. A. Thwaite (ed.) Selected  letters of Philip Larkin, London: Faber and Faber, 1992, p. 174; D.
Spooner, `Reflections on the place of Larkin’ , Area, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2000, pp. 209± 216.

2. Guardian, 2 January 1999, p. 23.

Figure  1.  Cartoon  from  Manchester  United  Football  Programme,  1952,  re-published  in  the

Guardian, 2 January 1999.

Yet  by  the  1990s  such  popular  humour  was  rendered  more  poignant  by  the
decline of the local fishing industry. In the inter-war period Kingston upon Hull, a
medium-sized city on England’s east coast, claimed to be the world’s largest distant-
water  fishing  port.  And  although  fishing  was  only  one  of  many  maritime-related
activities  in  the  city  and  its  pre-eminence  in  the  local  economy  was  often
exaggerated,  Hull  nevertheless  remained  Britain’s  premier  fishing  port  into  the
1960s.  However,  rising  fuel  costs  and  over-capacity  began  to  impact  on  Hull
fishermen in this period. Above all, their exclusion from the rich Icelandic waters
from 1976 ensured that their massive distant-water fleet could not survive on the
restricted catches and limited fishing grounds of the European Union (EU).3 Hull
trawler numbers shrank from around 160 to single figures in less than a decade and,
as  landing  figures  fell,  the  decline  was  mirrored  by  major  job  losses  among

3. C. Lazenby & D.J. Starkey, `Altered images: representing the trawling in the late twentieth
century’, in D.J. Starkey, C. Reid & N. Ashcroft (eds) England’s  sea fisheries: the commercial sea fisheries
of England  and Wales since  1300, London: Chatham, 2000.

26

David Atkinson et al.

fishermen and associated employment sectors.4 The remnants of the fleet moved to
Albert Dock in 1975, and the closure of St. Andrew’s Dock, home to the trawlers
since 1883, was a symbolic and defining moment of this collapse.

These  problems  were  compounded  by  the  contemporary   decline  of  other
elements  of  Hull’s  port  traffic,  and  by  the  wider  deindustrialisation   afflicting  the
British  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  In its  attempts  to absorb  these  shocks,
Kingston upon Hull City Council initiated a series of regeneration strategies from
the 1980s onwards to reinvigorate the local economy, attract inward investment and
transform  disused  waterfront  spaces.  One  strategy  aimed  to  identify  and  counter
what was perceived as Hull’s unfavourable image in Britain and further afield. This
is a city unusually sensitive to its image; wary of being stereotyped as home to an
unfashionable, smelly industry and tired of being the butt of popular humour.5 The
creation and promotion of  a  new image  and identity for Hull therefore became a
topic  of  significant  debate;  particularly  as  the  fishing  industry  has  been  largely
excised  from the new  civic image. The paper outlines this process with particular
emphasis  upon  the  controversies  surrounding  development  plans  for  the  former
fish-dockÐ
a  site  where  abstract  debates  about  place-marketing,  heritage  and
memory were materialised.

Place-marketing and Heritage
Place-marketing and urban boosterism have become staple features of contempo-
rary  urban  policy.6 These  abstract  economic  strategies  circle  the  world,  being
implanted  and  renegotiated  by  each  different  locality  eager  to  foster  and  sustain
economic  growth.  According  to  Short,  there  are  two  distinctive  aspects  to
boosterism  and  place-marketing  discourse.7 The  first  concerns  the  positive
promotion  of  the  city  wherein  those  aspects  of  the  locale  deemed  attractive  to
investors,  consumers  and  tourists  are  identified  and  mobilised  for  promotional
purposes.  The  modern  city  is  marketed  as  a  site  of  cleanliness,  leisure  and
consumption, but one marked by distinctive historic buildings or quarters, notable
leisure or sporting facilities, or natural features or landscapes. Thus, to ensure future

4. R. Robinson, Trawling: the rise and fall of the British trawl industr y, Exeter: Exeter University Press,
1996.

5. J.A. Burgess, `Image and identity’ , Occasional Paper in Geography 23, Hull: Department of
Geography, University of Hull, 1978; D. Spooner, T. Karran, M. Elliott-White & N. Davidson, The
image of Hull: a research profile, Hull: University of Hull, 1995; D. Spooner, `Eliminate the negative:
image enhancement in a northern British city’, paper presented at the Regional Studies Association
Conference `Regional Potential in an Integrating Europe’, Bilbao, 1999.

6. G. Kearns & C. Philo (eds) Selling  places: the city as cultural  capital, past and present, Oxford:
Pergamon, 1993; J. Gold & S. Ward (eds) Place promotion: the use of publicity and marketing to sell towns
and  regions, Chichester: Wiley, 1994.

7. J.R. Short, `Urban imagineers: boosterism and the representation of cities’, in A.E.G. Jonas & D.
Wilson (eds) The urban growth machine: critical perspectives two decades  later, Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1999, pp. 55± 72.

Tales from the Riverbank

27

economic well-being and social harmony, the message is `accentuate the positive’.
Short’s second element of place-marketing is the urge to identify the `shadow’ , or
the  dark,  unattractive  aspects  of  the  city. To  attract  the  investors,  residents  and
tourists who will gravitate towards the post-industrial city, `shadow’  elements have
to  be  contained,  controlled  and  disguised. This  strategy  works  through  silence.
Particular aspects of local identity, history or economic activity are marginalised and
suppressed  due  to  their  negative  connotations.  For  cities  scarred  by  derelict
industrial  quarters,  the  legacies  of  declining,  traditional  heavy  industries  charac-
terised by manual labour, grimy production and pollution, the message from place-
marketeers is to `eliminate the negative’  and focus attention elsewhere, away from
these spaces.

However,  like  all  abstract  dualisms,  Short’s  distinction  is  complicated  on  the
ground  by  numerous  other  categories,  including  in  this  case,  problematic  and
contested  questions  of  heritage  and  memory.  From  the  1980s  onwards  the
transformation  of  erstwhile  industrial  districts  has  played  a  central  role  in  the
regeneration  strategies  of  numerous  cities  in  Europe  and  North  America. These
strategies  rely  upon  the  perceived  historic  `character’   of  industrial  buildings  and
their capacity to host new residential, retail or leisure functions. Yet former mills or
warehouses, although stripped of their industrial functions and sanitised as clean,
modern spaces, nevertheless serve as symbolic reminders of the original industrial
functions of the locality and, consequently, of the distinctive history and identity of
their city. For example, in decaying seaports from Bristol to Liverpool and Boston
to  Baltimore, the theme of maritime heritage  has  been particularly  seductive and
widely exploited. The ubiquitous  conversion of redundant harbours, dock basins,
warehouses  and  waterfronts  into  business,  leisure,  retail  and  residential  accom-
modation evidences not only the celebration of a maritime past, but also efforts to
mobilise  this  history  and  commodify  memories  for  contemporary   economic
development.

In addition, there are pronounced geographical consequences to such practices.
The  shift  from  landscapes  of  production  to  landscapes  of  consumption  has  seen
these  elements  of  the  urban  landscape  incorporated  into  networks  of  tourism.8
Former  industrial  features  become  nodes  within  new  landscapes  of  leisure:
consumer spaces constructed by `tourist gazes’ .9 Yet as Lowenthal, Wright, Hewison
and  Graham  et  al. remind  us,  the  creation  of  heritage is  inherently  selective.1 0 A
celebration of certain versions and elements of the past, it  often consoles us with

8. G. Waitt & P.M. McGuirk, `Making time: tourism and heritage representation at Millers Point,
Sydney’ , Australian Geographer, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1996, pp. 11± 29.

9. J. Urry, The tourist gaze: leisure and travel in contemporary societies, London: Sage, 1990.

10. D. Lowenthal, The heritage crusade and the spoils of history, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996, and others such as P. Wright, On living in an old country: the national  past in contemporary
Britain, London: Verso, 1985; R. Hewison, The heritage industry: Britain in a climate of decline,
London: Methuen, 1987; B. Graham, G.J. Ashworth & J.E. Tunbridge, A geography  of heritage: power,
culture  and economy, London: Arnold, 2000.

28

David Atkinson et al.

sanitised tradition and elides aspects of history deemed inappropriate or uncomfort-
able. `Heritage’  frequently selects and clarifies certain pasts and infuses them with
present purposes. It lends cultural capital and value to historic places that may have
lost their value otherwise, and it offers a `hereness’ that reproduces stable, historic
identities,  allowing  places  to  enhance  their  distinctiveness  and  identity  in  the
globalising  world.11 Of  course,  these  are  socially  constructed  and  negotiated
identities, selected by strategic  planning and local officials to fix and reproduce  a
desired  image.  In  many  cities,  therefore,  the  promotion  of  particular  heritage
identities  and  place-images  entails  the  selective  representation  of  a  singular  past,
performed in discrete heritage spaces.

Unsurprisingly,  applying  abstract  theories  of  image-creation  often  proves
contentious and contested on the groundÐ
especially among voices that celebrate
more plural senses of the city or different versions of history from that offered by
the  marketeers.1 2 Waitt  and  McGuirk  suggest  that  the  typical  heritage  strategies
for  marking  the  urban  landscape  often  cannot  reanimate  social  conditions  and
local  memory  as  they  are  `not  grounded  in  the  built  environment’ .13 Similarly,
Hayden  has  explored  how  built  environments  might  be  reinvested  with  memory,
including  `dissonant’   episodes,  and  contestations  over  the  use  and  `memorifica-
tion’  of  urban  landscapes.14 She  argues  that  it  is  not  sufficient  to  `add-in’
previously marginalised groups, such as women and ethnic minorities. Rather, the
concept  of  place-memory   and  a  new  sense  of  identity  in  the  urban  landscape
needs  to  be  reworked  fundamentally  to  engage  with  larger  themes  such  as
migration,  diaspora  and  the  flows  of  peoples  and  cultures.15 Clearly  there  is
potential  for  conflict  between  the  roles  of  urban  landscapes  as  repositories  for
social  memories,  and  the  needs  of  place-promoters   to  remake  and  re-image  the
city. And despite much controversy, such strategies are an increasingly ubiquitous
element  of  our  modern  world.

Hull’s Place-marketing and a Fishing Heritage
For  the  last  seven  years,  Labour-controlled  Hull  City  Council  (in  collaboration
with  its  `urban  renaissance’   partner,  CityVision  Ltd)  has  sought  to  counteract

11. R. Samuel, Theatres of memory, Vol. 1. Past and present in contemporary culture, London: Routledge,
1994.

12. See C. Philo & G. Kearns, `Culture, history, capital: a critical introduction to the selling of
places’, in G. Kearns & C. Philo (eds) Selling  places: the city as cultural  capital, past and present,
Oxford: Pergamon, 1993.

13. Waitt & McGuirk, op. cit., p. 21.

14. D. Hayden, The power of place. Urban landscapes  as public history, Cambridge and London: MIT
Press, 1995, but see also J.E. Tunbridge & G.J. Ashworth, Dissonant  heritage: the management of the
past as a resource in conflict, Chichester: Wiley, 1996.

15. Hayden, op. cit.

Tales from the Riverbank

29

Hull’s  perceived  negative  or  neutral  image  with  a  sustained  series  of  place-
marketing  strategies  and  high-profile  image-enhancement  campaigns.16 The  most
recent  initiative  saw  international  image  consultants Wolff  Olins  advise  Hull  to
market  itself  as  `the  pioneering  city’ ,  drawing  upon  individual  and  corporate
pioneers of the past, from William Wilberforce and Amy Johnson to James Reckitt
and  Kingston  Communications  to  suggest  that  the  city  remains  a  centre  of
initiative  and  progress.17 Two  years  later,  in  1999,  the  city  augmented  this
initiative  with  the  `Hull  Brand’,  a  highly  visible  marketing  strategy  with  a  `cog’
logo  representing  the  five  core  values  of  the  `pioneering  city’ ,  namely  leading,
challenging,  discovering, creating and innovating. This `city branding’ is the latest
attempt  to  `accentuate  the  positive’   and  define  Hull  as  a  distinctive  and  vibrant
locality.

This  vision  of  the  pioneering  city  does  reserve  a  role  for  Hull’s  maritime
heritage.  However,  this  refers  primarily  to  a  romantic,  historic  age  of  sail.
Proposals  to build  a replica  of The Bounty in the shipyard  where the original  was
constructed  receive  support,  and  the  memory  of  Robinson  Crusoe  is  invoked
because his  fictional  voyage  departed  from Hull.18 Yet  although the  distant-water
fisheries  are  arguably  the  most  distinctive  element  in  the  port’s  compositionÐ
and  one  `replete  with  danger,  excitement,  distance  and  elemental  force’  that
might suit Hull’s branding requirementsÐ
fishing has been largely ignored by the
place-marketeers. 19 Despite  their  economic  and  social  significance  to  the  city’s
history,  fishermen  are  excluded  from  the  list  of  pioneers  and  have  no  place  in
the  distinctive  identity  proposed  by  the  Hull  brand.  For  example,  launching  an
image-enhancement  campaign  in  1996,  City  Council  leader  Patrick  Doyle
announced  that  `while  we  are  proud  of  our  heritage,  we  must  put  the  city’s
dominant  fishy  image  behind  us  once  and  for  all  and  move  forward  into  a  new
era  of  pride  and  prosperity’ .20 Similarly,  the  only  reference  to  fishing  in  Wolff
Olins’  1997  strategy  is  the  following,  sweeping  observation  reproduced  from The
Financial Times:

. . . there is an apparent reluctance among male teenagers to take schoolwork
seriouslyÐ
access to unskilled work in docks and fisheries . . . These jobs areÐ mostlyÐ

an attitude that perhaps has its roots in the inherited memories of easy

gone but

16. Spooner et al., op. cit., 1995; Spooner, op. cit., 1999.

17. Spooner, op. cit., 1999. Wilberforce, pivotal in the campaign to abolish slavery in the British
colonies, was born in Hull and was local MP from 1780 to 1784; Johnson was also Hull-born and
became the first woman to fly solo from Britain to Australia; James Reckitt was a local
pharmaceutical entrepreneur and philanthropist; and Kingston Communications is the local
telecommunications company, which until 1999 was solely owned by the City Council.

18. Hull Daily Mail, 26 April 1999.

19. Lazenby & Starkey, op. cit. (note 4).

20. City of Kingston upon Hull News Release, 10 July 1996.

30

David Atkinson et al.

their legacy is an instinctive preference for the male world of physical activity and a
mistrust of the education which these days is an essential qualification for access to
work.2 1

Thus, according to the place-marketeers,  even the legacies of fishing and dock-work
still resonate in the city’s economic problems. Fishing was interpreted as `a primitive
industry which depended on the supply of old-fashioned  fish and chips to a cloth-
capped  working class clientele’ ;  it entailed an  unattractive heritage  with  connota-
tions of smelly, dirty, dangerous, unskilled labour in a failing industry.22 Fishing and
the  problems  it  bestowed  was  thus  granted  little  recognition  in  the  pioneering
city.

The Place of Fishing Heritage: St Andrew’s Dock
Inevitably,  the  destruction  of  Hull’s  trawler  fleet  and  the  closure  of  St Andrew’s
Dock trailed a social aftermath of unemployment and broader economic declineÐ
especially  within  the  close-knit  and  distinctive  fishing  community  of  the  Hessle
Road area (see figure  2). The fishing community  was always  strongly localised  in
West Hull, although it began to be dispersed through urban redevelopment schemes
from  the  1950s. Yet  while  place-marketeers  marginalise  fishing  in  their  efforts  to
forge  a  new,  official  image  for  Hull,  voices  within  this  community  have  raised
questions surrounding  the memory,  commemoration,  history and heritage of this
passing industry, its workers, and the places where they laboured.

In  1999  these  questions  crystallised  around  planning  applications  for  the  St
Andrew’s  Dock  siteÐ much  of  which  lies  derelict  alongside  the  primary  western
approach road to Hull. By 1990, the western section of the dock had been reclaimed
as  the  `St  Andrew’s  Quay  Retail  and  Leisure  Park’   that  now  comprises  undis-
tinguished  buildings  housing  a  multi-screen  cinema,  a  bowling  alley,  and  various
bars,  restaurants  and  warehouse-retail  stores.  This  is  largely  an  `anyplace’
development by corporate chains, devoid of any connections with the site’s history
save  for  the  conversion  of  one  original  building,  a  former  chandlery,  into  the
`Sailmakers Arms’. The eastern part of the dock together with the lock pit remains
derelict, silted and overgrown. A cluster of deteriorating buildings edges this section
of  the  dock,  most  prominently  the  imposing  late  1940’s  Lord  Line  building  that
once  housed  trawler  company  offices  and  a  net  factory.  Although  awarded
Conservation Area status somewhat belatedly in November 1990, they are mainly
abandoned and derelict.

The  site  remained  the  property  of  Associated  British  Ports  (ABP)  after  the
closure  of  the  fishing  dock.  In  1997  Grosvenor Waterside,  the  property  develop-
ment  arm  of  ABP,  put  forward  proposals  for  the  redevelopment  of  the  site,

21. W. Olins (1997) `A strategy for image enhancement’, paper prepared for CityVision Image Group,
unpublished; a recent Financial Times survey on Hull (24 October 2001) reiterates the emphasis upon
improving Hull’s image and challenging wider perceptions of a derelict fishing port.

22. Lazenby & Starkey, op. cit.

Tales from the Riverbank

31

Figure  2. St. Andrew’s Dock and Hessle Road. [Cartography: Keith Scurr.)

32

David Atkinson et al.

consisting of mixed-use leisure, retail and office spaces. The planning applications
went  before  the  city’s  Development  Control  Sub-committee   (DCSC)  in  June
1998.23 The  city  authorities  found  themselves  in  an  ambivalent  position.  St
Andrew’s  Dock  was  a  critical  site  for  developmentÐ
a  `Geographical  Priority
Area’  in  the  city’s  regeneration  strategy  and  regarded  by  many  as  an  eyesore  on
the  main  route  into  Hull.24 Economic  development  officers  and  the  city’s
regeneration  partnership  were  thus  anxious  to  encourage  its  redevelopment,  and
for  the  proposals  to  be  eligible  for  central  government  funding  under  the  Single
Regeneration Budget scheme. However, the DCSC was also concerned about the
quality  of  the  planned  development  and  the  lack  of  detail  in  Grosvenor
Waterside’s proposals. Similarly, some local councillors were keen to represent the
views  of  the  former  fishing  community  which  were  generally  hostile  to  the
development  for  various  reasons.  Despite  the  proposed  inclusion  of  a  memorial
garden  and  heritage  centre,  a  local  pressure  group,  the  St  Andrew’s  Dock
Heritage  Park  Action  Group  (STAND),  also  campaigned  vigorously  against  the
plans  on  the  grounds  that  the  development  would  prove  an  inadequate  and
inappropriate  site  of  remembrance.

Given  this  opposition,  the  planning  applications  were  deferred  by  DCSC
meetings  in  June  and  September  1998  at  the  request  of  Grosvenor Waterside  so
that  the  concerns  of  the  council  and  STAND  could  be  addressed.  In  October
1998,  the  applications  were  reported to  the  DCSC  with  an  officer  recommenda-
tion  for  approval.  However,  members  of  the  committee  deferred  determination.
Grosvenor Waterside  appealed  against  this  non-determination   in  December  1998
and  the  proposals  were  re-submitted  in  March  1999,  again  with  an  officer
recommendation  for  approval.  At  this  meeting  the  DCSC  members  refused  the
applications because they favoured the retention and re-use of the buildings given
that  St  Andrew’s  Dock  was  all  that  remained  of  the  fishing  industry.  In  turn,
Grosvenor Waterside appealed  against the decision under Section 78  of the Town
and Country Planning Act 1990. The resultant planning inquiry was held in June
1999. A number of interested parties provided Proofs of Evidence to the inquiry,
including  members  of  Hull  City  Council,  Grosvenor  Waterside  and  STAND.
Their  positions  illustrate  the  contestations  over  the  site  and  its  redevelopment,
and the ways that questions of place, heritage and identity were negotiated in this
particular  context.  The  inquiry  considered  two  main  issues:  first,  whether  the
proposal  was  acceptable  in  land-use  terms  with  regard  to  national,  regional  and
local  planning  policy;  and,  second,  the  impact  of  the  proposed  development  on
the  St Andrew’s  Dock  Conservation Area.25

23. There were two planning applications: one requested outline planning permission for the
redevelopment of St. Andrew’s Dock basin; the other requested conservation area consent for the
demolition of certain structures.

24. CityVision Ltd, Kingston  upon Hull  City regeneration  strategy, Hull: CityVision, 1998.

25. Appeal Decision, 26 August 1999.

Tales from the Riverbank

33

Heritage, Authenticity and Uniqueness
Grosvenor Waterside’s plans for St Andrew’s Dock were not immune to questions of
heritage. They made frequent reference to the site’s `unique’ historical significance
and its role as a particular place of memory. Its plans included the restoration of the
eastern section of the basin as a decorative area of open water, to be surrounded by
restaurantsÐ
and various enter-
tainment  facilities.  Office  buildings  occupied  by  Sea  Fish  Industries  and  Marr  &
Sons  would  be  retained,  but  the  Lord  Line  building  would  be  demolished  and
replaced  by  a  modern  hotel,  thereby  removing  the  site’s  dominant  structure.26
Nevertheless, the relationship between the site’s history, some extant buildings and
the  redevelopment  was  made  explicit  in  the `Talking  Book’  Grosvenor Waterside
produced to sell its vision. Thus,

including,  ironically,  a  fish  and  chip  restaurantÐ

[t]he retention of these buildings is an important generator for the scheme which is
essentially derived from looking to the past for the inspiration and structure of
development of the future. The existing building and dockside infrastructure and the
memory of the past informs the strategy for this development.2 7

The proposals sought to `recreate the mass, form, texture, scale and atmosphere of
the  existing  buildings  to  provide  a  basis  and  layer  of  historic  context  for  the
development’ .28 Moreover,  the  `uniqueness’   of  the  site  was  commodified  as  a
potential benefit, a resource from the past to be used within the new landscape. The
developers saw the  dock  as `. . . an attractive, interesting and useable  feature and
catalyst for what could be a unique place’; further: `The ª realº  dock shape reflects
the  essence  and  the  traditions  of  the  place.’ 29 To  this  end,  the  new  architecture
would also be informed by a `modern maritime informed aesthetic’ .30

In addition to the commercial incentives of developing this `unique place’, several
memorial  elements  were  proposed  as  integral  components  of  the  design.  Such
concessions were designed to placate potential opposition from STAND. Formed in
1989 in reaction to the `progressive loss of the city’s fishing heritage’ , STAND has
campaigned  for  the  restoration  of  St  Andrew’s  Dock  in  a  manner  befitting  its
heritage  and  role  as  the symbolic  site  in  the  collective  memory  of  Hull’s  fishing
community.31 Support has grown steadily and STAND organises an annual service

26. D.M. Piercy, Proof of evidence on behalf of Grosvenor Waterside Group plc, St. Andrew’s Dock
Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

27. Grosvenor Waterside and Piercy Design Partnership, 1999.

28. Piercy, op. cit.

29. Piercy, op. cit.

30. Piercy, op. cit.

31. A.D. Fowler, Proof of evidence, St. Andrew’s Dock Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

34

David Atkinson et al.

of remembrance at the small memorial at the `bullnose’ lock-entrance to the former
dock. The  event  attracts  over  1,000  people  to  commemorate  the  approximately
8,000  local  trawlermen  lost  at  sea,  thus  demonstrating  local  support  for  a  more
substantial and material memorial to the fishing industry. Given all this, the plans
included a heritage centre in the former Pumphouse, and proposed to `[d]evelop the
concept  of  a  memorial  garden  in  conjunction  with  STAND  to  produce  a  site  of
special  significance  [and]  Heritage  [for  the]  fishing  industry  and  the  people  of
Hull’.3 2 The `Talking Book’ located the memorial garden on the opposite side of the
lock  gates  to  the  `bullnose’ :  a  central  location  at  the  symbolic  heart  of  the
redevelopment,  as  `a 
fishing
community’ .33

focus  and  tribute  to  Hull’s 

fitting  central 

Yet  despite  reference  to  the  memorial  garden  and  the `uniqueness’   of  the  site,
Grosvenor Waterside’s  proposals  were  rejected  by  the  City  Council  and  STAND
due to an insufficient sensitivity to Hull’s fishing heritages and the dock’s role as the
repository of these memories. Councillor Tom McVie argued that memory of the
fishing  industry  was  `embedded  in  the  psyche  of  a  large  proportion  of  Hull’s
community, particularly  the  past  and present Hessle Road community’ .34 But  he
emphasised  that  while  traditional  industries  like  coal  and  steel  production  left
tangible remains to be re-worked within heritage landscapes, because much of the
fishing  industry  took  place  offshore,  dockside  `elements  that  are  left  take  on  a
significance  far greater than their  stature on  the ground would suggest’.35 McVie
also  doubted  Grosvenor Waterside’s  assurances  that  the  site’s  specific  `heritage’
would be central to the re-planned dock, and damned the proposals as featureless:
`[t]he illustrative scheme was anonymous. The elements of uniqueness would have
been destroyed.’ 36

A  further  submission  also  invoked  the  site’s  uniqueness  to  argue  against
Grosvenor Waterside’s proposals. On behalf of the City Council, planner Douglas
Jennings  referred  to  local,  regional  and  national  planning  and  policy  guidance
documents  to  suggest  that  the  redevelopment  failed  to  accord  with  the  aims  of
urban regeneration, employment and tourism. He argued that contrary to PPG15
(Planning  and  the  Historic  Environment)  guidelines,  the  proposals  placed
`inappropriate  emphasis  on  redevelopment  rather  than  regeneration  through  the
nurturing  of  the  historic  environment  and  the  local  community’s  links  with  the
past’ .37 Further, these plans would also impact upon the tourist potential of the site:
its  attractiveness  as  a  destination  would  diminish  if  references  to  the  past  were

32. Piercy, op. cit.

33. Piercy, op. cit.

34. T. McVie, Proof of evidence, St. Andrew’s Dock Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

35. Ibid.

36. Ibid.

37. D.T. Jennings, Proof of evidence, St. Andrew’s Dock Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

Tales from the Riverbank

35

removed  from  the  urban  environment.38 Again,  the  specific  history  of  the  dock
prompted calls for its preservation, rather than a redevelopment that threatened to
dilute its distinctiveness.

Other  calls  for  the  appropriate  commemoration  of  local  fishermen  were
articulated in forceful and highly emotive terms. Michael Hills, priest of the parish
that contains the dock, employed and subverted the attempts to re-brand Hull as a
`pioneering’  city to argue that:

The fishermen of the city were the pioneers of their time: they built an industry and a
community and Hull prospered on their skills, their effort and their sacrifice. How has
the city (or council) celebrated their contribution to all our past? Where are the
memorials, the museums, the theme parks, the re-creations and celebration of a proud
and rich heritage?3 9

And despite focusing less on the material structures of the dock than on `something
more intangible, about who the people are, the spiritual values that shape and define
them, and how we respect and honour their lives’ , Hills nevertheless acknowledged
the  importance  of  the  built  environment  as  a  repository  of  place-memory.40 For
Hills, the lack of a heritage landscape in Hull and St Andrew’s Dock symbolised the
treatment  of  the  Hessle  Road  fishing  community:  `derelict,  un-cared  for,  unre-
garded, unvalued by this city and its public servants’.41

The  use  of  `the  past  in  the  present’  was  also  central  to  another  key  symbolic
struggle  over  the  redevelopment:  the  future  of  the  Lord  Line  building.  At  the
inquiry  the  debate  was  couched  primarily  in  economic  terms.  To  Grosvenor
Waterside,  the  Lord  Line  building  was  a  barrier  to  redevelopment  due  to  the
prohibitive cost of renewal, whereas Arthur Credland of Hull’s Maritime Museum
saw  the  retention  of  the  building  as  offering  potential  benefits  as  a  generator  of
heritage and tourism. He argued:

The loss of the Lord Line building would irreparably damage the historic aspect of the
dock and would be a waste of potentially useful construction. The whole could be the
nucleus of a high-quality development mixing office, retail and leisure elements
enhanced by and `feeding off ’  the heritage aspect of the site.4 2

He continued:

Fishing  is  still  very  much  in  the hearts  and  minds  of  Hull people  above all other
aspects  of  the  great  maritime  heritage  of  the  port,  and  is  what  most people know

38. Ibid.

39. M. Hills, Proof of evidence, St. Andrew’s Dock Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

40. Ibid.

41. Ibid.

42. A. Credland, Proof of evidence, St. Andrew’s Dock Inquiry (unpublished), 1999.

36

David Atkinson et al.

Figure 3. St. Andrew’s Dock and the Lord Line building.  [Photography:  Derek Spooner.)

about  and  can  point  to  some  member  of  the  family  having  been  involved. It  would
be  tragic to  lose  the  opportunity  to  preserve and  revitalise  the  Lord  Line  building,
a  major  element  in  the  last remaining  group  of  structures  which  together  comprise
the  last  major  fragment  of  Hull’s  fishing  heritage  as  presented  by  the  built
environment.4 3

The proposed demolition of the Lord Line building also drew comment in the local
press. The building was constructed by many as a primary component within the
landscape  of  St Andrew’s  Dock,  and  the  symbolic  capital  of  lost trawlermen  was
used to argue for its retention.44 For example

Please wake up you boys and girls who are responsible for allowing the Lord Line
building to disappear from the face of the earth. What can you be thinking of to deprive
future generations of citizens (and tourists) of the sight of this single piece of our
fishing heritage? I am all for brightening things up and new developments [but it]
breaks my heart to think that anyone has the right to insult the memory of our
fishermenÐ
perfect opportunity to incorporate the Lord Line building into your plans for the future
by turning it into a hotel by all means and perhaps a section of it being shown as a
working living museum manned by the remaining fishermen still with us, so they could
pass their wisdom on.4 5

the salt of the earthÐ many of whom did not come home. You have the

43. Ibid.

44. B. Hodgins & J. Crimlis, to Hull Daily Mail, 28 October 1999.

45. B. Roper, to Hull Daily Mail, 9 September 1999.

Tales from the Riverbank

37

Another  correspondent,  an  ex-fisherman,   articulated  anxieties  over  the  lack  of
community influence over the dock’s transformation into a heritage landscape. He
argued that the demolition of the Lord Line building would compromise the site’s
ability  to  communicate  memories  of  Hull’s  fishing  community  to  future  genera-
tions, and its loss would be symbolic of the wider erasure of this heritage:

As we sit and wait, others are deciding our history and heritage, some are trying their
best on our behalf. Others, with large amounts of capital, wheel in top QCs and
attorneys to argue for total destruction. Their remit appears to have no compassion or
feeling, just do the job. If we sit and wait, nothing will be left. Imagine 20± 30 years
ahead, the Lord Line Building gone, St. Andrew’s Dock is now a renamed site, say
Grosvenor’s Wharf. The child of 20± 30 years ahead asked the question, what is your
family’s history? Heaven forbid. The answer would be I don’t know. It was all destroyed
20 or 30 years ago.4 6

Yet  as  the  debate developed,  the  Lord Line building became a  more  problematic
symbol. Set against the ongoing dispute over compensation for fishermen laid off
after the `Cod wars’, a further correspondent to the Hull Daily Mail argued against
the retention of the building:4 7

the vast majority of fishermen, past and present, that pass through Memory Lane do
not wish to see the Lord Line Building preserved to the trawler owners, who they are in
dispute with over their claim for compensation. The suggested alternative is a
completely new memorial depicting the arduous life of a trawlerman at sea on one face
and a widowed wife of a trawlerman braiding nets on the other and sited at the
Humber entrance of St. Andrew’s Dock.4 8

To some, then, the building did not simply represent Hull’s fishing past but, more
specifically, it symbolised the trawler management (who were compensated for their
losses).4 9 It  is  doubtful  whether  the  trawlermen  and  their  families  would  have
considered the building as `their space’, and this point complicates still further the
memories of this landscape.

The Appeal Decision
In August  1999  the  inquiry  found  in  favour  of  Grosvenor Waterside  and  granted
planning permission for the development.5 0 It approved the demolition of the Lord

46. T. Start, to Hull Daily Mail, 23 July 1999.

47. Guardian, 26 October 2001.

48. K. Jackson, to Hull Daily Mail, 14 October 1999.

49. Guardian, 26 October 2001.

50. See Appeal Decision Nos T/APPV2004/A/98/1014500/P7 and T/APP/V2004/E/98/1014499P7 by
N.A.C. Holt, Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the
Regions, 26 August 1999.

38

David Atkinson et al.

Line building and its replacement with a new structure. Although acknowledging St
Andrews Dock `as a special place and a tangible reminder of an industry that played
so important a part in their lives’ , the planning inspector found the objections of the
City Council and STAND unsustainable in terms of planning and policy guidance.
Similarly, he determined that the proposals would not have a detrimental effect on
the character and appearance of the Conservation Area (which he noted had been
designated against the advice of English Heritage):

Whilst there was historic interest in the dock area based on its importance as a deep sea
trawling base, there was little of architectural interest in the area and it was difficult to
define a character or identify [sic] that should be preserved or enhanced.5 1

And speaking of the Lord Line building, he continued:

It is not in my opinion an attractive structure or a building of architectural merit. It is
utilitarian in appearance and a style somewhat out of date when it was constructed in
1949.5 2

In the autumn of 1999, Grosvenor Waterside sold the site to Capital and Regional
Investments. No details are available at the time of going to press as to the future
development  of  St  Andrew’s  Dock  but  it  is  clear  that  contestations  over  its
redevelopment  revolved  around  different  conceptions  of  the  value  of  the  site,
particular  buildings, and their roles in  place-memory. Ultimately, elite notions  of
`heritage’ , conservation value and economic development outweighed the value that
the  local  community  placed  on  the  site  as  a  location  of  collective  memory  and
mourning.

Conclusions
It would be too simplistic to read this conflict as a straightforward struggle between
developers’  attempts to erase local memory and the resistance of an embattled `local
community’ .53 Rather, as in  all  such  cases,  the contested notions  of  authenticity,
uniqueness, memory and place need to be analysed once they have been grounded
and contextualised. 54 This case study has highlighted the problems that arise when
local  `heritage’   fails  to  fit  the  demands  of  modern  place-marketing.  For  while

51. Appeal Decision, para. 9.

52. Appeal Decision, para. 17.

53. Another example of a community attempting to `forget’  its past concerns the contestations over
preserving the landscape of Jewish Manchester, especially around Cheetham Hill; see: B. Williams,
`Heritage and community: the rescue of Manchester’s  Jewish past’ , in T. Kushner (ed.) The Jewish
heritage in British history. Englishness  and Jewishness, London: Frank Cass, 1992.

54. E. Laurier, `Replication and restoration. ways of making maritime heritage’ , Journal of Material
Culture, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 21± 50.

Tales from the Riverbank

39

developers  and  place-promoters   celebrate  `unique  places’  and  sell  them  as  safe,
controlled, commodified spaces of leisure and attract tourists, they also risk losing
sight  of  the  specificities  of  place  and  the  heritage  associations  of  local  commu-
nities.55 The questions of heritage and local identity materialised in the contestation
over St Andrew’s Dock demonstrate how the heterogeneity of local identities can sit
uneasily  within  the  kinds  of  heritage  landscapes  that  portray  a  homogenised  and
sanitised past.

Other  east-coast  towns  like  Lowestoft  and  Grimsby  celebrate  their  fishing
heritages in place-marketing strategies.5 6 By contrast, the promotion of a maritime
heritage in Hull has been a selective process. While a distant and romantic age of sail
is invoked by a series of `maritime spectaculars’  and festivals, the fishing industry
has been largely elided because its connotations are deemed unhelpful to Hull’s new
image  as  a  post-industrial,   `pioneering’   city.57 Hull’s  place-marketing  strategies
therefore re-inscribe the `shadow’  upon the city’s image by failing to acknowledge its
fishing past. The city’s physical regeneration in the 1990s found no place for a major
memorial or museum to the fishing industry. In official pronouncements and most
policy initiatives, Hull seems reluctant to address fishing as a significant aspect of its
heritage. The `heritage’  that attracts post-industrial investors, business and tourists
is not the same `heritage’  that is revered by local communities. But negotiating this
tension,  and  materialising  an  appropriate,  more  acceptable  and  plural  sense  of
heritage in the landscape proves a contentious and continuing task.

Acknowledgements
Versions of this paper were presented at the Association of American Geographers
Annual  Conference,  Pittsburgh,  2000;  and  the  Institute  of  British  Geographers
Annual  Conference,  Plymouth,  2001 Ð
our  thanks  to  those  audiences  for  their
comments.

55. D. Atkinson & E. Laurier, `A sanitised city? Social exclusion at Bristol’s 1996 International
Festival of the Sea’, Geofor um, Vol. 29, No. 2, 1998, pp. 199± 206; C. Chivallon, `Bristol and the
eruption of memory: making the slave-trading past visible’, Social and Cultural Geography, Vol. 2, No.
3, pp. 347± 363; D. Atkinson, I. Cook, E. Laurier & C. Nash, `Bristol’s International Festival of the
Seas and a postcolonial politics of containment’, Conference paper presented at the Imperial Cities
Conference, Royal Holloway, University of London, 1997.

56. Lazenby & Starkey, op. cit.

57. A number of `Maritime heritage spectaculars’  are now annual events in Hull, on these matters
see: C. Nash, `Historical geographies of modernity’ , in B. Grah20am & C. Nash (eds) Modern
historical geographies, London: Pearson, 2000.

40

David Atkinson et al.


