International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Conserving Hong Kong’s Heritage: The Case of
Queen’s Pier

Joan C. Henderson

To cite this article: Joan C. Henderson (2008) Conserving Hong Kong’s Heritage: The
Case of Queen’s Pier, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14:6, 540-554, DOI:
10.1080/13527250802503282
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250802503282

Published online: 05 Nov 2008.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 1822

Citing articles: 24 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 14, No. 6, November 2008, pp. 540–554

Conserving Hong Kong’s Heritage:
The Case of Queen’s Pier
Joan C. Henderson

146000000November 2008
JoanHenderson
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_350496.sgm
10.1080/13527250802503282
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

ahenderson@ntu.edu.sgThe case of Queen’s Pier in Hong Kong provides the context for a discussion of conceptions
of heritage, the purposes it serves and the dilemmas surrounding conservation in modern
Asian  societies  committed  to  economic  growth.  Efforts  to  save  the  historic  pier  from
destruction are recounted and the perspectives of those with an interest are examined. Built
heritage is shown to have socio-cultural, political and economic functions and its contribu-
tion  to  defining  identity  is  especially  important  in  times  of  change  and  uncertainty.
Circumstances in Hong Kong reflect its unique history and current status, but the issues
emerging  from  the  analysis  have  a  wider  relevance.  The  fundamental  tension  between
development and conservation is highlighted, together with the challenges of reconciling
these two forces in a satisfactory manner.

Keywords: Heritage Conservation; Identity; Hong Kong; Queen’s Pier

Introduction

This paper examines selected characteristics of heritage, its interactions with identity,
the difficulties surrounding conservation and the stakeholders involved with specific
reference to Hong Kong. The focus is on Queen’s Pier, which the government recently
decided should be demolished in the face of popular protests and calls for protection
of the historic site. Hong Kong is an appropriate and interesting context within which
to explore questions of heritage because it is a former British colony, which reverted to
China in 1997 yet maintains a distinct status, where debate about heritage has intensi-
fied and been fuelled by incidents such as that of the pier.

Accounts of Queen’s Pier and the perspectives of those involved in the dispute about
its fate are considered after a summary of the main issues addressed in the paper. Key
emergent themes are analysed in the discussion and the conclusion offers some general

Joan C. Henderson, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to ahenderson@ntu.edu.sg.

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250802503282

International Journal of Heritage Studies

541

comments of wider applicability derived from the particular example. A case study was
chosen as the most appropriate approach and findings are based on an evaluation of
material  in  the  public  domain,  supplemented  by  data  collected  during  fieldwork.
Extensive quotations convey the opinions of and positions adopted by the principal
actors in what can be described as the drama of Queen’s Pier.

Heritage Issues

Heritage serves many purposes and is a form of social, economic and political capital,
which can be expended in various ways by assorted parties. It has a role in defining and
symbolising  a  people’s  identity,  which  can  be  felt  and  understood  at  a  group  and
national  level.  Socio-cultural  identities  are  fluid  and  subjective,  but  encompass  the
physical and emotional ties that connect individuals and endow them with a sense of
fellowship.1 One strong link is a common past and memory, represented by historic
events and experiences, as well as feelings of a collective destiny. Such a legacy consti-
tutes a heritage which acquires a special significance in relatively new societies exem-
plified  by  colonies  attaining  independence2  where  authorities  and  citizens  have  to
come  to  terms  with  colonial  occupation.  Decisions  have  to  be  made  about  how  it
should be narrated to audiences of insiders and outsiders in a contemporary setting and
buildings and other physical structures are visible reminders which have to be dealt
with, one option being annihilation.3

However, the value of tangible and intangible heritage in helping all communities
and their members to comprehend and appreciate how they arrived at their current
situation  and  perhaps  assist  them  in  coping  with  future  trials  is  a  persuasive  argu-
ment in favour of its conservation.4 It can also cultivate civic pride and emotions of
attachment  and  belonging,  fostering  unity  and  averting  discord.  Other  powerful
reasons for protection are economic, heritage increasingly perceived as a generator of
income  which  extends  to  its  function  as  a  tourist  attraction  and  item  of  leisure
consumption.5  Heritage  has  evolved  into  a  business,  much  to  the  dismay  of  some
critics  who  caution  about  over  commercialisation  and  commodification.6  Protests
can  be  vehement  and  community  and  indigenous  agitation  against  perceived
misappropriation  of  heritage  is  not  unknown.7  Such  opposition  and  the  actual  and
potential socio-cultural and financial contributions of heritage are inevitably of inter-
est  to  governments,  which  may  additionally  seek  to  exploit  it  for  political  gain  and
hegemonic ends.8

These attributes mean that there are multiple meanings and applications of heritage
and heavy demands can be made of it, certain of which are competing and conflicting.
Heritage is at risk from numerous threats ranging from destruction to manipulation
and distortion in its presentation by dominant public and private groups in pursuit of
their  own  agendas.  Resisting  such  hazards  and  accommodating  and  reconciling  the
many users and uses of heritage in a satisfactory manner are clearly critical, but daunt-
ing tasks. The dilemmas are demonstrated by the experience of Hong Kong, which has
a complex heritage as part of the Chinese and British empires before being designated
a Special Administrative Republic (SAR) of the Communist People’s Republic of China

542

J. C. Henderson

in 1997. Queen’s Pier can be seen as a theatre for the articulation of differing notions
of  heritage  and  the  enactment  of  ensuing  conflicts  in  a  manner  which  is  recounted
below.

A History of Queen’s Pier

Queen’s Pier opened in 1954 on the harbour front of Hong Kong’s Central District and
replaced the original, which dated from 1924 and had been named after Queen Victo-
ria. Land reclamation at Victoria Harbour had necessitated the demolition of the old
structure and its successor formed part of the new waterfront. The architectural style
was labelled modern utilitarian and the pier was u-shaped with an open-sided super-
structure of modest appearance.9

The earlier pier had an important function as the place of arrival and departure for
notables such as the British royal family and Governors of Hong Kong and as a venue
for ceremonial events. This role was then filled by the second pier, which was the point
of embarkation of the last Governor on the return of the territory to China, but it was
also  popular  for  public  recreation.  Residents  visited  for  socialising,  romantic  trysts,
fishing  and  setting  sail  in  pleasure  craft  and  migrant  workers  congregated  in  their
leisure time. Its proximity to the City Hall and public space nearby also made it suitable
for civic gatherings and demonstrations.

Reclamation  continued  in  the  harbour  and  there  was  speculation  that  the  1989
Central Reclamation Project would affect Queen’s Pier, although this was not formally
acknowledged. The wisdom of extensive reclamation has been consistently disputed,
but it was announced that the pier would close in April 2007 and be demolished so that
the  third  phase  of  the  Central  scheme  could  proceed.  The  plan  was  to  utilise  the
reclaimed ground for a four-lane highway, improving east–west communications on
Hong Kong Island, and commercial property development.

The news and confusion about whether, where and when the pier might be rebuilt
met with strong protests and demolition was postponed at the beginning of 2007. The
explanation was that the government was desirous of entering discussions and estab-
lishing consensus, but it adhered to its original decision following the re-election of the
incumbent Chief Executive in March. Four alternative strategies were put forward by
the  authorities,  but  two  related  to  in  situ  preservation  were  dismissed  as  unviable
because of technical difficulties, the damage to the structure from construction work
and heavy costs. A third of rolling ‘in situ reinstatement’ was ‘doubtful’ while the final
option of preserving the superstructure as far as possible and storing it for ‘reassembly
in  close  proximity  to  its  original  location  or  at  another  appropriate  location’  was
deemed ‘technically feasible’ and a ‘practical way forward’.10 An official claimed that
the  administration  was  open-minded  about  the  final  harbour  front  design  and
welcomed public ideas and participation.11

The pier was awarded the highest grade 1 rating for historic buildings in May by the
Antiques Advisory Board (AAB),12 although there was internal disagreement about its
historic and social merits. The Home Affairs Secretary opined that saving the pier could
not  be  justified13  and  an  absence  of  ‘historical,  archaeological  or  palaeontological

543
significance’ prohibited it from qualifying as a protected monument.14 The designation
and failure to grant monument status sparked controversy within and beyond Hong
Kong’s Legislative Council, but funding of HK$50 million for the pier’s demolition was
approved by the assembly in the same month.15

International Journal of Heritage Studies

There was some consultation with professional associations and interest groups and
public forums were organised, yet the Secretary for Development was emphatic at one
of two open meetings in late July that the pier must be removed. She did, however,
promise that some open spaces would always be accessible to the public within the new
Central  planning  zone,16  and  that  there  would  be  no  more  reclamation  of  Victoria
Harbour, which belonged to the people.17 The Development Bureau, charged with both
development and conservation responsibilities, released a paper which anticipated that
dismantling  of  the  pier  would  be  completed  by  November  and  any  reconstruction
might not be finished until 2012.

Protestors had gathered at the pier on the closure date and a small group, three of
whom were on hunger strike, were still camping there on 30 July when the government
ordered them to leave. About 200 took part in a candlelight vigil before police moved
in on 1 August to clear the 30 or so remaining. The operation involved more than 300
policemen and six harbour patrol boats and lasted ten hours. It was accompanied by
some scuffles and a number of activists had to be forcibly carried away.

On 30 July, protestors applied for a judicial review on the basis that the former Home
Affairs Secretary’s behaviour in not declaring Queen’s Pier a monument was ‘unrea-
sonable, irrational and arbitrary’.18 The application was granted and a week’s respite
allowed due to public interest in the outcome, but the judge ruled that the government
had acted within its authority and thus gave the go-ahead for the demolition,19 which
occurred in early 2008. The protestors described the judgement as symptomatic of the
deficiencies of Hong Kong’s heritage conservation policy, calling for new procedures,20
and their stance on the above events and that of the other protagonists is assessed in the
section below.

Perspectives on the Conservation of Queen’s Pier

Government and Politicians

Heritage assumed a higher political priority in Hong Kong in 2006 when the Star Ferry
Pier, also of historic note, was demolished in January 2007 after an unsuccessful rescue
bid.  A  modernised  version  was  erected  on  reclaimed  land,  prompting  widespread
public criticism of the government. The Chief Executive spoke in a radio broadcast of
the occasion as marking a ‘sea change in public opinion’, which was attaching much
greater importance to ‘collective memory’. He promised that the administration would
‘keep pace with public sentiment’ on heritage matters, enter into a second dialogue
with residents following the first in 2004 and strive for greater transparency. However,
citizens  were  reminded  that  conservation  could  not  come  before  growth,  which
demanded expenditure on infrastructure and the replacement of new buildings with
old.  Sustained  economic  success  made  heritage  preservation  possible,  Hong  Kong

544

J. C. Henderson

could not afford to lose its competitive advantage against rival cities and a ‘new mode
of thinking about the old issue of heritage’ must be engendered.21

The Secretary for Development confirmed that endeavours would be made to meet
the Chief Executive’s undertakings and ‘balancing development with heritage preser-
vation’  could  be  achieved  by  a  ‘concerted  effort  with  trust  and  understanding’.22
Nevertheless, she was adamant that Queen’s Pier had to be sacrificed in accordance
with  the  HK$3.5  billion  reclamation  project,  which  had  been  legally  approved.  A
Development  Bureau  paper  had  earlier  warned  that  delays  to  the  pier’s  demolition
would  hold  up  reclamation  and  infrastructure  work,  leading  to  very  expensive
compensation payments. The populace would ultimately benefit from all the changes
which aimed to ‘enhance a distinct and high quality central business district image and
to create a world class waterfront that is vibrant, attractive and belongs to the public of
Hong Kong’.23

A somewhat contradictory position was taken by a member of both the AAB and
Town and Country Planning Board who reflected that ‘perhaps Hong Kong has not got
the right culture to preserve its heritage sites properly. We focus so much on making
money and we have to pay a price for that. There’s nothing to regret. It’s a money-
driven city and that is our identity’.24 Although not an official spokesperson, it seems
probable that his opinion was shared by others inside government circles.

Political  opponents  accused  the  government  of  an  inability  to  understand  and
respond to popular feelings about heritage and voiced varying degrees of disappoint-
ment about the demolition. The Chief Executive was also attacked for trying to make
political  capital  out  of  heritage  prior  to  the  elections.  There  were  some  heated
Legislative  Council  exchanges  about  the  fate  of  Queen’s  Pier  and  the  motion  on
demolition funding was closely fought. It was finally passed with the support of pro-
government legislators, ten members voting in favour and seven against. There was
one absence, one abstention and two members walked out, including the representa-
tive of the architectural, surveying and planning constituency which he claimed was
split between surveyors who welcomed redevelopment and architects who preferred
preservation.25

Professional Bodies and Interest Groups

As well as providing feedback at the government’s request, many organisations made
public  statements  about  Queen’s  Pier.  The  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Architects
contended that the government had ‘failed to exercise responsibilities reflected in the
award of grade 1 status to seek to preserve the pier’. It opposed dismantling and reit-
erated a belief that ‘in situ preservation’ was ‘technically feasible’.26 The President had
previously  admitted  that  ‘architecturally,  it  is  not  a  significant  masterpiece  by  any
stretch of the imagination … but it has a legacy. If we forget about Queen’s Pier then
there is no relationship between Hong Kong and its history. It needs to be explained
to  future  generations  that  Hong  Kong  is  different  to  other  cities  in  mainland
China’.27 In contrast, the chairman of the Hong Kong Institute of Surveyors observed
that the high price of the pier’s preservation might not be worth paying. There were

International Journal of Heritage Studies

545

also suggestions of a rift amongst other professionals and divergent opinions within
their organisations.28

A total of 17 ‘concern groups’ advocated that Queen’s Pier be preserved, many on
the grounds that it was the ‘people’s public space’.29 One of the more prominent was
the Conservancy Association, a spokesperson for which said the Star Ferry and Queen’s
Piers played ‘important roles in the collective memories of Hong Kongers’ and asked
‘if we demolish historical buildings simply because they cause inconvenience to urban
development,  will  we  have  any  heritage  left  in  the  future?’30  Natural  and  cultural
heritage were lauded as an ‘invaluable social asset’, including historic buildings which
‘help  to  shape  our  sense  of  identity,  increase  social  cohesion  and  can  enhance  our
cultural  life’.  Government  should  stop  engaging  in  meaningless  public  consultation
and  install  a  better  and  more  generously  funded  conservation  regime  which  was
benchmarked against international standards.31

The Civic Exchange think tank postulated that heritage is ‘economically, culturally
and socially important’ and ‘our true competitive advantage’, condemning the govern-
ment  for  its  obsession  with  revenue  maximisation.  A  leader  commented  that  ‘the
people who make decisions about what the city should look like are completely discon-
nected with how people actually feel. Hong Kong people actually feel extraordinarily
attached to places which represent collective memory and history for them. But our
government has just assumed that this is something not worth keeping’.32

Hostility  to  the  pier’s  removal  originated  in  enthusiasm  for  a  ‘distinctive  local
culture’ according to the Hong Kong People’s Council for Sustainable Development
which pointed out the disparity between government spending of HK$90 billion and
HK$90 million on infrastructure and heritage respectively.33 The Hong Kong Federa-
tion of Students urged the democratisation of Hong Kong city planning,34 and Friends
of the Harbour and Society for the Protection of the Harbour berated the government
for being motivated by profit rather than the public good.35 These sentiments were
echoed by the Director of the Maritime Museum who bemoaned the loss of one more
‘little piece of Hong Kong’s history’ and the alterations to the waterfront which were
obscuring the sea trade, once fundamental to Hong Kong’s existence and critical to an
appreciation of its history.36

Protestors and the Public

The above agencies were often represented at protest meetings, many of these held at
the pier itself. Protestors commonly argued that Hong Kong did not ‘need more high
rises’,  government  policy  was  ‘too  much  in  favour  of  land  developers’  and  ‘public
access to free, uncommercial space’ should be defended.37 Development had resulted
in the obliteration of ‘so many pieces of history, of so many cultures’ and it was time to
‘tell the government enough is enough’.38 The notion of having colonial sympathies
was vehemently denied and the pier was hailed a ‘testimony of colonial rule’, a tyranny
which should never be forgotten and vigorously resisted. A recurring complaint was the
peremptory way in which the government acted, overriding and ignoring the wishes of
the people.39

546

J. C. Henderson

At the forefront of the protests was a grouping known as Local Action, followers of
which were the last to leave the pier. They complained of exclusion from formal deci-
sion  making  and  asserted  that  ‘we  just  don’t  want  the  pier  to  vanish’.40  One  spoke
about retaining the pier so that the story of the civil rights activity associated with it and
nearby Edinburgh Place could be properly remembered and related in forthcoming
years.  A  letter  to  the  Secretary  for  Development  was  written  in  the  blood  of  some
activists, imploring her not to ‘repeat past mistakes’.41

Writers, artists and academics were among those who also visited the pier and some
seemed more eager to show solidarity with the demonstrators, especially the hunger
strikers during the latter stages, than endorse the conservation cause. Such a sentiment
was displayed by an unemployed youth who acknowledged ‘I am not a conservationist.
I joined the campaign because I get along well with other people there. The education
system in Hong Kong is a waste of my time’.42

Other residents of Hong Kong held assorted views, a spectrum of which was quoted
in the media. These ranged from censure of the government for ‘continuing to destroy
its own treasures’,43 such as the pier which was a ‘part of our lives’,44 through indiffer-
ence to agreement that the pier should give way to development and was an ugly and
unwanted  relic  from  colonial  days.45  Nevertheless,  the  demise  of  Queen’s  Pier  did
evoke unusually strong negative feelings in normally practical and conservative Hong
Kong.  It  symbolised  the  ‘unrelenting  development,  environmental  degradation  and
disregard of heritage sites’, which was unacceptable to civil society organisations and
much of the citizenry who were growing more confident about speaking out.46

These emotive reactions inspired by Queen’s Pier highlight the personal, social and
cultural roles of heritage while the government’s orientation was more pragmatic and
determined  by  economic  and  political  applications.  Both  politicians  and  protestors
turned  to  heritage  to  score  political  points  and  advance  political  arguments,  some-
times only indirectly related. The latter often allied themselves with the pro-democ-
racy  movement,  complaining  that  the  government  was  intent  on  implementing  its
own  programmes.47  Professionals  seemed  to  see  heritage  as  an  impediment  to  the
practice of their profession or an asset which they were bound to protect while heritage
was a concept without much apparent meaning for some, not least individuals who
were attracted to the Queen’s Pier crusade for the rewards of affiliation with fellow
dissenters.

Discussion

Heritage and Identity in Hong Kong

The Queen’s Pier affair is best understood against the background of the wider debate
about heritage and identity in Hong Kong. Hong Kong has belonged to Imperial China
and the British Empire and at present occupies a place in a Communist China under-
going dramatic social and economic change in which it is permitted some liberty. Its
history  and  resultant  heritage  has  implications  for  identity,  giving  rise  to  complex
influences and outcomes. The population is largely ethnic Chinese, but this dominant

International Journal of Heritage Studies

547

culture had to adapt to colonisation by a Western power alongside modernisation and
globalisation. One consequence has been that Hong Kong society has tended to define
itself in relation to economic achievement.48

Signs of a shift in thinking were observed as early as the 1960s when ‘people began
to take pride in their Hongkongness. Hong Kong society no doubt was strongly Chinese,
yet it was also uniquely Hong Kong’.49 Questions were asked about identity,50 answers
to which required ‘negotiating the mutations and permutations of colonialism, nation-
alism and capitalism’.51 Such a trend can be seen as one component of advancement
towards a more aware and civil society, which esteemed ‘belonging, self-expression and
the quality of life’ as much as ‘physical sustenance and safety’.52 The imminent resto-
ration of Chinese rule in the mid 1990s added urgency to arguments about Hong Kong
identity53 and exposed the dilemmas inherent in its conceptualisation.54

Although  sharing  the  same  racial  background  and  elements  of  cultural  heritage,
natives of Hong Kong and mainland China were and remain socially different with
contrasting living standards, education and values. They speak different languages on
the whole and have few of the common attributes seen as essential for the adoption of
an all-embracing national identity.55 While the people of Hong Kong acquired Chinese
nationality in 1997, there has not been assimilation and those born in Hong Kong still
conceive of themselves apart from mainlanders about whom they often have unflatter-
ing views.56 Strict immigration controls also constitute practical barriers between the
two communities and reinforce ideas of ‘otherness’.57

Heritage has thereby become a marker of difference and the importance attached to
it by residents and officials is inextricably linked to interest in identity, itself provoked
by political developments. Awareness of facets of Hong Kong heritage, embodied in
sites such as Queen’s Pier, has been stimulated alongside appreciation of the urgent
need for conservation. Built heritage is no longer expected always to take second place
to commercial imperatives of land reclamation, road building and the construction of
office and residential blocks, shopping malls and hotels. There may be some danger of
over-estimating the extent of popular engagement in these matters, however, and it
must  be  remembered  that  agitation  over  Queen’s  Park  was  restricted  to  a  relatively
small  number  of  the  total  population.  The  scale  and  depth  of  feelings  aroused  by
threatened heritage is thus an avenue for further research.

Official Attitudes to Conservation

Official statements about Queen’s Pier convey some sympathy with the above ideas and
a professed desire to satisfy the wishes of citizens and tackle the overall problem of the
impacts of urban redevelopment on Hong Kong’s heritage. The approach is indicative
of evolving attitudes whereby conservation has come to be regarded more positively as
government  realise  that  it  can  be  harnessed  to  political  objectives  in  addition  to
economic and social agendas.

Reforms to heritage management introduced reflect these changes and a Leisure and
Cultural Services Department, under the Home Affairs Bureau, assumed supervision
of the Antiquities and Monuments Office (AMO) in 2000. The AMO is responsible for

548

J. C. Henderson

archaeological and built heritage incorporating monument designation, restoration,
site  excavation  and  education  and  dedicated  to  ‘protect  and  hand  on  to  our  future
generations the cultural heritage which is diverse, sustainable, accessible and makes a
direct contribution to our quality of life’. A total of 82 monuments and 495 historic
buildings had been listed by 2007,58 government being legally bound only to protect
the former. The AAB was established at the same time as the AMO and is helmed by
the Secretary for Development.

Heritage is integral to a more comprehensive cultural policy, which embraces the
arts and advocates heritage conservation to ‘help citizens understand their historical
origin and cultural identity’.59 A Cultural Heritage Commission (CHC) was formed in
2000 to counsel government and the recommendations contained in its 2003 report
were  accepted.  The  document  advises  that  heritage  should  be  a  core  ingredient  in
urban planning, historic buildings should be converted into cultural activity centres
and cultural tourism should be promoted. It notes that the ‘contrast between tradi-
tional Chinese buildings and western architecture, old buildings and modern skyscrap-
ers is a unique feature of the Hong Kong landscape. When preserved, these buildings
will bear witness to the unique history of Hong Kong and will help enhance the sense
of belonging of Hong Kong citizens’.60

More recently, the Development Bureau which was established in 2007 put forward
plans for a Heritage Commissioner’s Office. It will oversee the revitalisation of historic
buildings, economic incentives for privately owned properties, publicity, research into
overseas practices and the heritage environmental impact assessments which are now
required from developers. A partnership scheme invites non-governmental agencies to
submit proposals for the future of selected heritage resources and there is an official
website dedicated to conservation.61 Nevertheless and as in the instance of Queen’s
Pier, government also emphasises that its responsibilities are not confined to the field
of heritage and any decisions must take vital economic growth strategies into account.

Conservation Policies under Criticism

At  the  same  time  as  conservation  initiatives  have  been  launched,  there  have  been
complaints about the speed with which built heritage is disappearing. Arguments over
Queen’s Pier suggest that critics are not readily convinced of the veracity of the ratio-
nale proffered by government and the effectiveness of its policies. Intense development
pressures, aggravated by the shortage of land in the city and its dense population as well
as  planning  inadequacies  are  all  blamed.62  The  CHC  report  also  comments  on  the
insufficient  official  attention  given  to  heritage  conservation,63  and  some  argue  that
‘Hong  Kong  cannot  claim  to  a  “world  city”  without  a  much  better  conservation
policy’.64 Another organisation criticises consultation exercises, the findings of which
are rarely made available or acted upon.65

The authorities are accused of having little real comprehension of what constitutes
heritage  and  spending  heavily  on  artificial  attractions,  which  include  Ancient
Garden—a reproduction of a Tang Dynasty garden—and the Ngong Ping Cable Car
‘Heritage Village’—which hosts a convenience store and international coffee chains.66

International Journal of Heritage Studies

549

Meanwhile,  the  authentic—such  as  Lee  Tung  or  Wedding  Card  Street  and  Graham
Street Market—is knocked down or put in danger. The former Marine Police Station
is already being developed privately and the Central Police Station and Victoria Prison
complex lies empty as planners, conservationists and developers quarrel over its fate.67
These circumstances illuminate the inherent tensions and uneven relationship between
development and heritage in a highly urbanised city state committed to unrelenting
economic growth.

Despite development priorities, Hong Kong is still keen to ‘package and present a
view of itself which stresses its own unique and distinctive heritage’.68 Representations
are principally targeted at locals and tourists,69 but have an indirect message about the
SAR’s individuality for the wider world, not least mainland officials anxious that its ties
with the motherland should be tighter. Nevertheless, Hong Kong’s Chinese roots and
the continuity of ancestral civilisation influences are celebrated and showcased.70 They
are also a central theme of the cultural policy, which is founded on the premise that
‘Hong Kong people’s cultural identity should start from local culture, be grounded in
Chinese cultural traditions and possess a global vision’.71

Historic venues such as Queen’s Pier may not easily fit into the model and those with
British associations recall humiliating aspects of the colony’s history. The British Navy
took possession of Hong Kong Island in 1841 after the first Anglo-Chinese War and
land on the Kowloon Peninsula was added in 1860 at the end of the second Opium
War. In 1898, Britain negotiated a 99-year lease of northern Kowloon, the area beyond
known  as  the  New  Territories  and  over  230  small  islands.72  The  arrangement  was
deeply humiliating for China and a cause of great resentment, appeased only in 1997
when it resumed sovereignty.

Looking  ahead,  the  central  government’s  adherence  to  obligations  to  safeguard
dimensions of Hong Kong’s independence agreed under the 1984 Joint Declaration
and implicit in the theory of one country two systems73 is unclear. Hong Kong’s polit-
ical system is evolving and local legislative decisions affect social and economic life, but
its politicians are constrained by Beijing’s might and many are wary of confrontation.
Ambiguities persist in relations between the two entities in various spheres, which will
only be resolved over time, but any ambitions to retain and assert a separate identity in
all its manifestations must be tempered by the realities of bonds with China.

Conclusion

Heritage is thus a socio-cultural resource which the Hong Kong citizenry is drawing
on to help define an identity, both connected to and distinct from mainland China.
A sense of identity is important to individuals and society at large, nurturing feelings
of  anchorage  and  kinship  which  are  especially  valuable  in  times  of  uncertainty  and
actual and perceived external threats. Physical structures from the past, not necessar-
ily monumental, can be repositories and powerful symbols of heritage and identity.
Their  loss  erodes  personal  and  social  memories,  recollection  of  which  assists  in
binding  a  people  together  and  affords  the  historical  frame  vital  to  appreciation  of
contemporary life.

550

J. C. Henderson

Politicisation of heritage is evident in internal struggles between governments and
interested groups and citizens and exchanges within and outside formal institutions.
The unusual and sensitive relationship between Hong Kong and China imbues heritage
with  an  additional  political  significance  whereby  it  is  employed  as  a  tool  to  build
bridges as well as delineate boundaries. Selective representations may also communi-
cate  formally  sanctioned  interpretations,  making  heritage  a  potential  propaganda
medium. Heritage is therefore an area of policy making, a vehicle for pursuing other
policies  and  a  means  of  garnering  and  perhaps  losing  electoral  support.  Official
conceptions and expectations do not always conform to those of other stakeholders
and clashes of a verbal and violent nature can ensue, posing a test for authorities who,
in Hong Kong, are fearful of civil disorder and the disruptive effect of steps towards
greater democratisation.

In terms of economics, the capacity of heritage to earn revenue is widely recognised
by governments, which frequently favour adaptive reuse to enable historic buildings to
serve a commercial purpose in the modern world. The same rationale underlies the
promotion of cultural tourism to domestic and overseas visitors. Nevertheless, there is
an awareness of the economic limitations of heritage as an industry and form of land
use. These disadvantages are heightened in states such as Hong Kong and Singapore
which are guided by the ethos that survival depends on sustaining economic growth in
a fiercely competitive market place and where prime land is extremely expensive and
scarce. Conflicts between development and heritage conservation are thus inevitable
with the requirements of the former frequently taking precedence.

The ways in which the phenomena of heritage, conservation and development inter-
act  and  generate  constructive  and  destructive  tensions  demonstrated  by  the  case  of
Queen’s Pier and Hong Kong have a resonance beyond the territory. Mainland China
is undergoing unprecedented growth and cities such as Beijing and Shanghai are in
danger of losing their heritage in the rush towards modernisation.74 The process is also
apparent in other South Asian capitals,75 such as Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta where the
experience of colonisation and dealing with its legacy comes into play for countries on
the road to nationhood and full development status. There are especially close parallels
between Hong Kong and Singapore,76 rulers of the latter similarly striving to combine
strategies  for  economic  progress  with  guardianship  of  historic  urban  landscapes.
Authorities  in  Dubai  too  appreciate  the  need  to  retain  some  visual  reminders  of  its
Arabic history for the benefit of nationals and visitors,77 yet space allocated is strictly
circumscribed in futuristic visions of the emirate.

Governments emerge as leading figures in decisions about heritage conservation, but
they  can  be  challenged  by  other  parties  involved  and  must  endeavour  to  reconcile
multiple interests, at least in part. The impact of popular opinion should not be over-
looked and there seems to be a growing willingness among sections of communities
worldwide to voice concerns, although this may not be matched by official receptivity
and responsiveness. While there is much talk about securing a balance, such an accom-
modation requires commitment, cooperation and compromise, which may be elusive
and  unrealistic.  It  is  too  late  now  to  save  Queen’s  Pier,  but  the  discussion  is  set  to
continue in Hong Kong and will be informed by the events outlined in the paper and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

551

their aftermath. What lessons have been learnt by the protagonists remains to be seen
and the subject is one for ongoing study in Hong Kong and elsewhere. The findings of
such research will improve understanding of the place of heritage in modern Asian
societies and the dynamics and demands of its conservation.

Notes

Jacobs, Edge of Empire.

1 [1] Anderson, Imagined Communities.
2 [2]
3 [3] King, Colonial Urban Development; Western, ‘Undoing the Colonial City’.
4 [4] Palmer, ‘Tourism and the Symbols of Identity’.
5 [5] Graham et al., A Geography of Heritage.
6 [6] Hewison, The Heritage Business; Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage.
7 [7]
8 [8] Philp and Mercer, ‘Commodification of Buddhism’.
9 [9] Hong Kong Government, ‘A Historical and Architectural Appraisal of Queen’s Pier, Central’,

Silverman and Ruggles, Cultural Heritage.

available from http://www.amo.gov.hk [accessed 6 August 2007].

10[10] Hong  Kong  Information  Services  Department,  ‘Pier  Preservation  Plan  Proposed’,  available

from http://www.news.gov.hk [accessed 6 August 2007].

11[11] The Standard, ‘Harbour Option for Queen’s Pier’, 4 May 2007.
12[12] The Standard, ‘Antiquities Backing to Save Queen’s Pier’, 10 May 2007.
13[13] The Standard, ‘Pier Drama Extended as Court Bid Offers Delay’, 1 August 2007.
14[14] The Standard, ‘Pier Demolition Cash Bid Gets Nod’, 24 May 2007.
15[15] The Standard, ‘Queen’s Pier to be Cut Up and Stored at Month’s End’, 19 July 2007.
16[16] The Standard, ‘Lam Scores Well in Heated Debate’. 30 July 2007.
17[17] The Standard, ‘Death Knell on Pier’, 30 July 2007.
18[18] The Standard, ‘Court Challenge as Tussle Looms on Pier’, 31 July 2007.
19[19] BBC,  ‘Hong  Kong  Can  Demolish  Colonial  Pier’,  10  August,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

20[20] The Straits Times, ‘Legal Bid to Save Hong Kong’s Colonial Pier Fails’, 11 August 2007.
21[21] D. Tsang, ‘Letter to Hong Kong: Heritage Preservation’, Press Release, 28 January 2007.
22[22] The Standard, ‘Pier Vigil Comes to Dramatic End’, 2 August 2007.
23[23] The Standard. ‘Harbour Option for Queen’s Pier’, 4 May 2007.
24[24] CNA, ‘Heritage at Centre of Hong Kong’s Search for Post-Colonial Identity’, 26 June 2007,

available from http://www.channelnewsasia.com [accessed 16 August 2007].

25[25] The Standard, ‘Pier Demolition Cash Bid Gets Nod’, 24 May 2007.
26[26] Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Architects,  ‘Statement  of  the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Architects  in
Response to Approval of Funding for Dismantling and Reassembling Queen’s Pier by LegCo
Public Works Sub-Committee’ at its meeting held on 23 May 2007, 7 June 2007.

27[27] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Builds  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

28[28] The Standard, ‘Pier Demolition Cash Bid Gets Nod’, 24 May 2007; The Standard, ‘Death Knell

on Pier’, 30 July 2007.

29[29] The Standard, ‘Antiquities Backing to Save Queen’s Pier’, 10 May 2007.
30[30] The International Herald Tribune, ‘Not Even Hong Kong’s Star Ferry can Face Down Develop-

ers’, 10 November 2006.

31[31] Conservancy Association, The Conservancy Association’s Position.
32[32] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Build  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

33[33] The Standard, ‘Protect Heritage and Growth Urges Tsang’, 29 January 2007.

552

J. C. Henderson

34[34] The Standard, ‘Protestors Spend One Last Night at Queen’s Pier’, 1 August 2007.
35[35] The Standard, ‘Groups Accused of Backtracking on Queen’s Pier’, 23 April 2007.
36[36] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Builds  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

37[37] The Standard, ‘Groups Accused of Backtracking on Queen’s Pier’, 23 April 2007.
38[38] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Builds  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

39[39] The International Herald Tribune, ‘Placid Hong Kong Rallies to Save Historic Pier’, 30 July

2007.

40[40] The Standard, ‘Protestors Spend One Last Night at Queen’s Pier’, 1 August 2007.
41[41] The Standard, ‘Death Knell on Pier’, 30 July 2007.
42[42] The South China Morning Post, ‘Quotes of the Week’, 4 August 2007.
43[43] The Standard, ‘Lam Scores Well in Heated Debate’, 30 July 2007.
44[44] The Standard, ‘Groups Accused of Backtracking on Queen’s Pier’, 23 April 2007.
45[45] The Standard, ‘Death Knell on Pier’, 30 July 2007.
46[46] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Builds  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

47[47] BBC,  ‘Hong  Kong’s  New  Activists  March  On’,  26  June  2007,  available  at  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 6 August 2007].

Ip, ‘Development of Civil Society in Hong Kong’, 167.

48[48] Lau and Kuan, The Ethos of the Hong Kong Chinese.
49[49]
50[50] Lau, Hong Kong’s Colonial Legacy.
51[51] Abbas, Hong Kong, 15.
52[52]
Inglehart, Cultural Shift, 66.
53[53] Chan, Culture and Identity.
54[54] Matthews, ‘Heunggongyahn’.
55[55] Chan, ‘Defining Fellow Compatriots’
56[56] Culture and Heritage Commission, Policy Recommendations Report.
57[57] Chan, ‘Defining Fellow Compatriots’
58[58] Antiquities  and  Monuments  Office,  ‘Frequently  Asked  Questions’,  available  from  http://

www.lcsd.gov.hk [accessed 10 August 2007].

59[59] Home  Affairs  Bureau,  ‘Cultural  Policy’,  available  from  http://www.hab.gov.hk/en/policy

[accessed 16 August 2007].

60[60] Culture and Heritage Commission, Policy Recommendations Report.
61[61] Development Bureau, ‘Government Launches Campaign to Promote Heritage Conservation’,
http;//www.devb.gov.hk.en/secretary/press/

available 

2008, 

January 

15 
from 
press20080115b.htm [accessed 10 May 2008].

62[62] Ng, ‘Urban and Regional Planning’.
63[63] Culture and Heritage Commission, Policy Recommendations Report.
64[64] Hong Kong Democratic Foundation, ‘Review of Built Heritage Conservation Policy’, available

from http://www.hkdf.org [accessed 16 August 2007].

65[65] Conservancy Association, The Conservancy Association’s Position.
66[66] BBC,  ‘Pier  Pressure  Builds  in  Hong  Kong’,  6  August  2006,  available  from  http://news-

vote.bbc.co.uk [accessed 11 August 2007].

67[67] CNA, ‘Heritage at Centre of Hong Kong’s Search for Post-Colonial Identity’, 26 June 2007,

available from http://www.channelnewsasia.com [accessed 16 August 2007].

68[68] Cheung, ‘Remembering through Space’, 9.
69[69] Cheung,  ‘The  Meaning  of  a  Heritage  Trail’;  Henderson,  ‘‘Heritage,  Identity  and  Tourism’;
Hong  Kong  Tourism  Board,  ‘Discover  Hong  Kong:  Heritage’,  available  from  http://
www.discoverhongkong.com [accessed 10 August 2007].

70[70] Henderson, ‘Heritage, Identity and Tourism’.
71[71] Culture and Heritage Commission, Policy Recommendations Report, 13.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

553

72[72] Walsh, A History of Hong Kong.
73[73] Den Xiaoping, On the Question of Hong Kong.
74[74]
75[75]
76[76] Henderson, ‘Attracting Tourists’.
77[77] Boussaa, ‘Dubai’.

Sofield and Li, ‘Tourism Development’.
Shaw and Jones, Contested Urban Heritage.

References

Abbas, A. Hong Kong: Culture and the Politics of Disappearance. Minneapolis: University of Minne-

sota Press, 1997.

Anderson, B. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism. London:

Verso, 1991.

Boussaa, D. ‘Dubai: The Search for Identity’. In People, Places and Sustainability, edited by G. Moser,

51–60. Seattle: Hogrefe and Huber, 2003.

Chan, E. ‘Defining Fellow Compatriots as “Others”: National Identity in Hong Kong’. Government

and Opposition 35, No. 4 (2000): 499–512.

Chan, H. M. ‘Culture and Identity’. The Other Hong Kong Report (1994): 443–468.
Cheung, S. ‘The Meanings of a Heritage Trail in Hong Kong’. Annals of Tourism Research 26, No. 3

(1999): 570–588.

———. ‘Remembering through Space: The Politics of Heritage in Hong Kong’. International Journal

of Heritage Studies 9, No.1 (2003): 7–26.

Conservancy  Association.  The  Conservancy  Association’s  Position  on  Hong  Kong’s  Built  Heritage

Conservation Policy. Legislative Council Paper CB(2) 1599/06–07(05), 2007.

Culture  and  Heritage  Commission.  Policy  Recommendations  Report.  Hong  Kong:  Culture  and

Heritage Commission, 2003.

Graham, B., G. J Ashworth and J. E. Tunbridge. A Geography of Heritage. London: Arnold, 2000.
Henderson, J. C. ‘Attracting Tourists to Singapore’s Chinatown: A Case Study in Conservation and

Promotion’. Tourism Management 21 (2000): 525–534.

———. ‘Heritage, Identity and Tourism in Hong Kong’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 7,

No. 3 (2001): 219–236.

Hewison, R. The Heritage Business: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London: Methuen, 1987.
Inglehart,  R.  Culture  Shift  in  Advanced  Industrial  Society.  New  Jersey:  Princeton  University  Press,

1990.

Ip, P. ‘Development of Civil Society in Hong Kong: Constraints, Problems and Risks’. In Political
Order  and  Power  Transition  in  Hong  Kong,  edited  by  P.  Li,  159–186.  Hong  Kong:  Chinese
University Press, 1997.

Jacobs, J. M. Edge of Empire: Postcolonialism and the City. London: Routledge, 1996.
King, A. D. Colonial Urban Development: Culture, Social Power and Environment. London: Routledge

and Kegan Paul, 1976.

Lau,  C.  K.  Hong  Kong’s  Colonial  Legacy:  A  Hong  Kong  Chinese  View  of  the  British  Heritage.  Hong

Kong: Chinese University Press, 1997.

Lau,  S.  K.  and  H.  C.  Kuan.  The  Ethos  of  the  Hong  Kong  Chinese.  Hong  Kong:  Chinese  University

Press, 1988.

Matthews, G. ‘Heunggongyahn: On the Past, Present and Future of Hong Kong Identity’. Bulletin of

Concerned Asian Scholars 29, No. 3 (1997): 3–13.

Ng, M. K. ‘Urban and Regional Planning’. In From Colony to SAR: Hong Kong’s Challenges Ahead,

edited by Y. S Cheng and S. H Lo, 227–260. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1995.

Palmer, C. ‘Tourism and the Symbols of Identity’. Tourism Management 20 (1999): 313–321.
Philp,  J.  and  D.  Mercer.  ‘Commodification  of  Buddhism  in  Contemporary  Burma’.  Annals  of

Tourism Research 23, No. 2 (1999): 21–59.

554

J. C. Henderson

Shaw, B. J. and R. Jones. Contested Urban Heritage: Voices from the Periphery. Aldershot: Ashgate,

1997.

Silverman, H. and D. Ruggles. Cultural Heritage and Human Rights. New York: Springer, 2007.
Sofield,  T.  and  S.  Li.  ‘Tourism  Development  and  Cultural  Policies  in  China’.  Annals  of  Tourism

Research, 25, No. 2 (1999): 362–392.

Tunbridge, J. E. and G. J Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage: The Management of the Past as a Resource in

Conflict. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

Walsh, F. A History of Hong Kong. London: Harper Collins, 1993.
Western, J. ‘Undoing the Colonial City?’ The Geographical Review 75 (1985): 335–357.
Xiaoping, D. On the Question of Hong Kong. Hong Kong: New Horizon Press, 1993.


