An Unwanted Past: contemporary
tourism and the heritage of communism
in Romania
Duncan Light

Abstract
This paper considers how the legacy of communism and revolution has become the focus of
interest  among Western tourists  in  post-communist  Bucharest. It  argues  that `communist
heritage’  tourism Ð
the consumption of key sights and sites associated with the Ceausescu
regime and its overthrowÐ
has emerged as a particular form of cultural or heritage tourism
for  special  interest  tourists. However,  this is  a heritage which is  defined  and  constructed
entirely  outside  Romania. Within  Romania  itself  there  is  understandably  little  desire  to
remember the period of communist rule, and the legacy of this period is powerfully dissonant
with the country’s post-communist aspirations. Consequently, as a consideration of two case
studies  illustrates,  there  is  no  concern  to  interpret  the  legacy  of  communism  for  tourists;
instead there is an attempt to deny  or airbrush out this period of the country’s history.

Within  recent academic debate  on  post-communist Central  and  Eastern  Europe
(CEE)  the  main  focus  of  attention  has  been  on  the  processes  of  political  and
economic reform, particularly the establishment of a plural democracy and market
economy. However, there are many other aspects of post-communist change which
have been overlooked. One issue, of particular relevance to heritage studies, is the
changing understandings and evaluations of the past in the post-communist period.
Verdery1 has  argued  that,  in  post-communist  countries,  time  itself  is  being
`reconfigured’   through  the  widespread  revision  and  rewriting  of  history.  Conse-
quently, the meanings and appropriations of heritage are also in a state of flux. For
example, Tunbridge has examined a variety of ways in which heritage is the focus of

1. K. Verdery, The political lives of dead bodies: reburial and post-socialist  change, New York: Columbia
UP, 1999.

competing  and  conflicting  nationalist  interpretations  in  post-communist  CEE
which raises considerable potential for `dissonance’ .2

One issue of particular resonance for the former communist countries of CEE is
the ways in which these countries have confronted their recent communist past. In
most CEE countries the period of communist rule is now regarded as an aberration
which  they  are eager  to  erase  from  collective  memory.  Hence, as  these countries
have attempted to remake themselves since 1990, they have  faced the dilemma of
how  to  come  to  terms  with  this  period  of  their  history,  a  process  which  is
multifaceted  and  contested.  But,  any  attempt  to  draw  a  line  under  this  era  is
frustrated  by  the  distinctive  material  legacy,  the  heritage,  of  four  decades  of
Communist Party  rule  which  will,  whether  or  not  the  CEE  countries  desire  it,
endure long after the transition to democracy and a market economy is complete.
Yet  this  legacy  is  powerfully  dissonant  with  these  countries’   post-communist
aspirations.

The situation is further complicated by the fact that some aspects of this legacy
are of considerable interest to tourists. Western Europeans have flocked to the post-
communist countries of Central Europe in huge numbers in the 1990s3 and many,
although  certainly not all, who remember the Iron Curtain have  some interest in
learning more of  the  former communist regimes. Indeed, writing  in  1991,  Hall4
speculated  on  the  emergence  of  a  new  heritage  industry  in  CEE,  based  on  the
physical legacy of state socialism. One of the best examples is the Berlin Wall (which
indeed  was  one  of  Berlin’s  major  attractions  before  1989).  Although  the  city
authorities  are  reluctant  to  remember the  division  of  Berlin,  the  few  remaining
sections  of  the  former Wall  are  firmly  established  on  the  city’s  tourist  trail. The
former course of  the Wall  is  clearly  marked  in  much  of  the  city  centre allowing
tourists to explore the legacy of the city’s division. Similarly, the Checkpoint Charlie
guardhouse is  now  preserved  in  a  nearby  museum.5 In  other  Central  European
capitals  the  heritage  of  communism has  been  more  deliberately  turned into  the
focus  of  the  tourist  gaze.  Perhaps  the  best  example  is  Budapest’s  statue  park
(Szoborpark). In 1990 the city council decided to remove over forty political statues
dating from Hungary’s communist era to a park on the edge of the city which was

2. J.E.Tunbridge `Whose heritage? Global problem, European nightmare’, in G.J. Ashworth & P.J.
Larkham (eds) Building  a new heritage: tourism, culture  and identity  in the new Europe, London:
Routledge, 1994, pp.  123± 134. J.E. Tunbridge & G.J. Ashworth, Dissonant  heritage: the management of
the past as a resource in conflict, Chichester: Wiley, 1996. J.E. Tunbridge, `The question of heritage in
European cultural conflict’ , in B. Graham (ed.) Modern Europe: place, culture, identity, London:
Arnold, 1998, pp. 236± 260.

3. D.R.  Hall, `Tourism change in Central and Eastern Europe’, in A. Montanari & A.M. Williams
(eds) European tourism: regions, spaces and restructuring, Chichester: Wiley, 1995, pp.  221± 244.

4. D.R.  Hall, `Contemporary challenges’  in D.R.  Hall (ed.) Tourism and economic  development  in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, London: Belhaven, 1991, pp.  281± 289.

5. D. Light, `Gazing on communism:  heritage tourism and  post-communist  identities in Germany,
Hungary and Romania’, Tourism Geographies (forthcoming).

146

Duncan Light

opened to visitors in 1993.6 Today it is one of Budapest’s most celebrated tourist
attractions.7

However, for the CEE countries this interest in their communist past may be far
from  welcome  and  can  raise  various  tensions  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the
imperative to construct distinctly post-communist identities (in which there is little
desire to  remember the  communist past)  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  desire to
maximise the economic benefits of tourism. In addition the whole issue of how to
tell the story of, or interpret, the communist era for tourists is problematic and, in
some countries, unresolved. Yet, such issues have received little attention despite a
growing interest both in the  development of cultural/heritage tourism in Europe8
and  the  changing  nature  of  tourism in  CEE.9 However,  as  part  of  an  emerging
debate on the relationships between tourism and identities10 there has been some
attempt to examine how such issues are worked out in CEE. For example, Morgan
and Pritchard1 1 have examined how the CEE countries have been engaged in the re-
presentation of history (and particularly the promotion of a pre-communist past) as
part  of  the  process both  of  rebranding themselves  as  tourist  destinations and  of
affirming their post-communist national identities.

This  paper  aims,  then,  to  explore  the  highly  equivocal  relationship  between
tourism and the legacy of communism in contemporary Romania, with particular
reference  to  the  capital,  Bucharest.  Before  1989,  Romania  experienced  an
especially  harsh  form  of  totalitarian  rule.  In  the  1980s  the  decision  of  the
megalomaniac president, Nicolae Ceausescu, to pay  Romania’s foreign debt early
resulted  in  severe  austerity  and  a  dramatic  slump  in  living  standards,  while  the
activities  of  the  all-pervasive  internal  security  services  (Securitate)  resulted  in
increasing repression and denial of human rights. Ceausescu was overthrown and
executed  in  the  violent  revolution  of  December  1989,  and  Romania  has  since
attempted to  draw a  line under the  years of  his dictatorship and  rebuild itself as

6. B. Dent Blue guide  Budapest, London: A & C Black, 1996.

7. D. Light `Gazing on communism’  op. cit.

8. G. Richards `Developments in European cultural tourism’ , in A.V. Seaton, C.L. Jenkins, R.C.
Wood, P.U.C.  Dieke, M.M. Bennett, L.R.  MacLellan & R.Smith (eds) Tourism: the state of the art,
London: Routledge, 1994, pp 366 ± 376. G. Richards (ed.) Cultural tourism in  Europe, Wallingford:
CAB International, 1996. G. Richards `Production and consumption of European cultural tourism’ ,
Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 23, 1996, pp.  261± 286.

9. Hall 1995, op. cit.; D.R.  Hall, `Tourism development and sustainability issues in Central and
South-east Europe’ , Tourism Management, Vol. 19, 1998, pp.  423 ± 431.

10. See, for example, G.J. Ashworth & P.J. Larkham (eds) Building  a new heritage: tourism, culture  and
identity  in the new Europe, London: Routledge, 1994; M. Lanfant, J.B. Allcock & E.M. Bruner (eds)
International tourism: identity  and  change, London: Sage, 1995; C. Palmer, `Tourism and the symbols
of identity’ , Tourism Management, Vol. 20, 1999, pp.  313± 321.

11. N. Morgan & A. Pritchard, Tourism promotion and power: creating  images, creating  identities,
Chichester: Wiley, 1998.

An Unwanted Past

147

a  `new’ ,  post-communist country.  In  this  context,  the  physical  legacy  of  Ceau-
sescu’s  rule is  an  unwelcome reminder of  a  period of  history  which  Romania  is
attempting  to  forget.

This  discussion considers two  themes. The  first  section  considers the  ways  in
which Bucharest’s legacy of communism and revolution has become the focus of the
tourist  gaze  in  the  post ± 1989  period.  In  particular,  the  paper  argues  that
`communist heritage’  tourismÐ
the consumption of sites and sights associated with
the former regime and its downfallÐ has emerged as a distinctive form of special
interest, post-modern tourism among Western visitors to Romania. In the second
section, some responses to this form of tourism are examined. With reference to two
case  studies, some of  the  strategies  which  have  been adopted for  presenting and
interpreting Romania’s communist past for tourists are considered.

`Communist Heritage’ Tourism in Bucharest
In  the  last  years  of  communism  Romania  was  an  unattractive,  even  repellent,
destination  for  tourists,  and  arrivals  of  foreign  visitors  had  steadily  declined
during the  1980s.1 2 However,  the  Romanian  revolution  of  December 1989  and
the violent overthrow of Ceausescu proved to be a considerable tourist attraction.
Sometimes described as the world’s first televised revolution, the drama of events
in  Bucharest was  witnessed by  television viewers  around the  world. In  the  same
way  that  visitors  flocked  to  Berlin  to  experience  the  atmosphere  in  the  city
following  the  opening  of  the  Berlin Wall,  large  numbers  of  Westerners  visited
Bucharest  in  1990  once  the  fighting  had  ceased  and  something  approaching
normality  returned  to  the  city.  In  1990,  3.1  million  people  were  recorded  as
visiting Romania for the purpose of holidays, an increase of 67% on the previous
year. While  many  of  these  were  residents of  neighbouring states  who  visited  for
the purposes of petty trading or to meet relatives, over half a million such visitors
were  from  countries of  the  then  European Community.13 Independent travellers
took  the  opportunity  to  see  for  themselves  the  sites  and  sights  of  Eastern
Europe’s  most  violent  revolution,  while  travel  companies  hastily  arranged  pack-
ages  for  visitors  wanting  to  see  the  locations  associated  with  the  collapse  of
communism.14 Romanians,  quick  to  spot  the  opportunities  offered  by  such
visitors,  responded  by  arranging  guided  tours  of  sites  associated  with  the
revolution  and  overthrow  of  Ceausescu.  Similarly,  soon  after  the  revolution,
tourists  were  able  to  go  on  a  trail  of  former  Securitate buildings.1 5 This  is  an

12. D. Light & D. Dumbraveanu, `Romanian  tourism in the post-communist period’ , Annals of
Tourism Research, Vol. 26, 1999, pp. 898± 927.

13. Comisia Nationala pentru Statistica, Anuarul Turistic al Romaniei 1995, Bucuresti: Comisia
Nationala pentru Statistica, 1995; Comisia Nationala pentru Statistica Turismul in Romania 1997,
Bucuresti: Comisia Nationala pentru Statistica, 1997.

14. S.H. Greenberg, `Freedom trail’ , Newsweek , 14 May 1990, pp.  12± 17.

15. J. Sweeney, The lives and evil times of Nicolae Ceausescu, London: Hutchinson, 1991.

148

Duncan Light

example  of  an  emerging  phenomenon  which  Foley  and  Lennon  have  labelled
`dark  tourism’ ,1 6 of  which  the  most  common form is,  as  Seaton  observes, travel
to  witness  the  sites  of  individual or  mass  deaths.17 In  this  way  Piata  Revolutiei
(Revolution  Square)  became  firmly  established  as  one  of  the  city’s  new  tourist
`sights’ .  Through  television,  the  revolution  itself  had  been  constructed  as  a
`spectacle’ 18 and in  its  aftermath  became  the  focus of  the  tourist gaze.

Although the  initial boom of  interest in the Romanian revolution soon passed,
tourists’  interest in the legacy of communism has not entirely diminished. Even a
decade after  the  collapse  of  communism, Romania remains closely  linked in  the
popular imagination with both the tyranny of Ceausescu and the violent events of
his overthrow.19 The result has been the emergence of a particular form of special
interest  tourism  which  could  be  labelled  `communist  heritage’   tourism.  Conse-
quently,  a  number  of  sites  in  Bucharest  associated  with  communism  and  the
revolution have become tourist attractions. To some extent this may simply reflect
the  fact  that  central  Bucharest  has  relatively  few  conventional  tourist  `sights’ .
However, of equal importance is the unique cityscape of central Bucharest which
is unmistakably  the  product of  totalitarianism  and  revolution.

Central  to  Bucharest’s  `communist  heritage’   industry  is  the  Casa  Poporului
(House of the  People),  one of  the  largest  political-administrative buildings in the
world.  Constructed  during  the  1980s,  it  covers  an  area  of  6.3h a,  has  facades
276 m  long,  is  86 m  in  height  and  contains  over  1,000  rooms.  It  reflects
Ceausescu’s  desire  to  rebuild  Bucharest  as  a  modern  socialist  city  (part  of  the
process  of  creating  a  `new  socialist  man’ )  and  reflects  Ceausescu’s  desire  to
stamp  permanently  his  authority  on  the  capital.20 It  was  intended  to  be  the
centrepiece  of  a  planned `Civic  Centre’ ,  the  construction of  which  involved  the
razing  of  5 km2 of  central  Bucharest  and  the  displacement  of  40,000  people.
Following  Ceausescu’s  overthrow  there  was  considerable debate  over  the  build-
ing’s  future;  it  is  probably  the  most  contested  structure  in  Romania.  Many
Romanians would happily  have  seen it  torn down as  a  highly  visible reminder of
Ceausescu’s  dictatorship.  Others  were  more  sympathetic  towards  the  building
since it was constructed entirely by Romanians from Romanian materials. Various
proposals  for  the  building’s  future  were  put  forward  including  plans  to  turn  it

16. M.Foley & J.J.  Lennon, `JFK and dark tourism: a fascination with assassination’ , International
Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 2, 1996, pp. 198± 212.

17. A.V. Seaton, `Guided by the dark: from thanatopsis  to thanatourism’, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, Vol. 2, 1996, pp.  232± 244.

18. See P. Shurmer-Smith  & K. Hannam, Worlds  of desire: realms of power, London: Arnold, 1994.

19. T. Gallagher, Romania after Ceausescu, Edinburgh:  Edinburgh UP, 1994.

20. M.B.U. Cavalcanti, `Urban reconstruction and autocratic regimes: Ceausescu’s Bucharest in its
historic context’ , Planning  Perspectives Vol. 12, 1997, pp.  71± 109; D. Deletant, Ceausescu  and the
Securitate: coercion  and dissent  in Romania, 1965 ± 1989, London: Hurst, 1995.

An Unwanted Past

149

into  a  casino  or  museum of  communism.21 Eventually  Romania’s  post-commu-
nist  government  (dominated  by  former  communists  who  perhaps  were  more
sympathetically  disposed  towards  the  building)  decided  to  move  the  Romanian
parliament  into  the  building,  which  was  renamed  Palatul  Parliamentului  (the
Parliament Palace).  Part  was  also  opened as  an  international conference centre.
In  the  post-communist  period  this  building  has  become  Bucharest’s  biggest
tourist  attraction.22 This  is  hardly  surprising  since  a  building  of  this  size  would
always draw tourists to marvel at it. However, for tourists interested in the legacy of
communism the House of the People is perhaps the defining symbol of the tragedy
of totalitarianism in Central and Eastern Europe. For much of the post-communist
period the building was closed to visitors, despite their obvious interest in it. Only
in 1997  were guided tours of  a  small part  of  the  interior introduced, which now
attract around 25,000 visitors annually.23 A visit to the building is now included in
many holiday itineraries in Bucharest. Moreover, one Western company developed
an exclusive Millennium Night  package  involving a  banquet in the  House of  the
People.

In addition, the House of the People is attaining wider significance as a tourist
site. Along with  Bran Castle in Transylvania (promoted as Dracula’s castle24) the
House is one of the most commonly used images to feature in Western promotional
material  of  Romania.  Even  the  Romanian  Ministry  of  Tourism  has  reluctantly
acknowledged the  appeal  of  the  building and  its  recent promotional material  for
Bucharest  features  a  prominent  image  of  the  building  (under  the  name  of  the
Parliament Palace). During the 1990s this building has become a `sign’  to represent
Romania itself to tourists.

Another important location of `communist heritage’  tourism is Piata  Revolutiei
(Revolution Square) the centre of many of the key events of the 1989 revolution. Here
Ceausescu gave his last speech from the balcony of the Communist Party Central
Committee building, reportedly the most popular sight in the city in 1990.25 He later
fled  by  helicopter  from  the  roof  of  the  building  as  it  was  stormed  by  crowds.
Subsequently the square was the scene of intense fighting between forces loyal to and
opposed to Ceausescu, which left almost all the surrounding buildings pock-marked
with bullet holes. Indeed, the picture of tanks in the square in front of the burning
university library building is one of the iconic images of the Romanian revolution.

21. R. Salecl, `The state as a work of art: the trauma of Ceausescu’s Disneyland’ , in N. Leach (ed.)
Architecture  and revolution:  contemporary perspectives on Central and Eastern Europe, London: Routledge,
1999, pp.  92± 111.

22. see T. Burford & D. Richardson, Romania: the rough guide, 3rd edn, London: Rough  Guides,
1998.

23. This figure was provided by a manager of the building.

24. A. Muresan & K.A. Smith, `Dracula’s castle in Transylvania:  conflicting heritage marketing
strategies’, 25. Greenberg, 1990, op. cit.

150

Duncan Light

Today  there  is  little  reminder  of  these  past  dramas  in  Revolution  Square.
However,  in  the  post-communist  period  the  square  has  attained  considerable
symbolic importance as a site of  anti-communist resistance. The square has  been
constructed as a `space of memory’  and contains various statues of pre-communist
leaders. Revolution Square continues to draw visitors; tourist groups are a familiar
site  during  the  summer and  a  visit  to  the  square  is  part  of  organised  itineraries
arranged  by  foreign  companies. The  square  still  allows  tourists  to  gaze  upon
surrounding  bullet-scarred  buildings  (although  these  are  progressively  being
repaired) along with various monuments and memorials to those who died in the
fighting of 1989. Yet despite its significance as the central location associated with
the overthrow of communism there is no attempt to interpret the square for foreign
tourists, and indeed it does not feature in Romanian-produced tourism promotional
material for the city.

Central to the emergence of `communist heritage’  tourism in Bucharest has been
the  role  of  travel  guidebooks  published  outside  Romania.  In  Romania  there  is
understandably little desire to draw attention to the country’s communist past and
consequently  no  attempt  to  promote  it  for  tourism;  indeed,  the  official  tourist
promotion of Romania in the post-communist period has focused on the country’s
pre-communist  rural  traditions.26 However,  travel  guides  written  for  Western
tourists have been instrumental in promoting Bucharest’s legacy of communism and
revolution for the gaze of Western visitors.

This  point  can  be  illustrated  through  an  examination  of  the  content  of  four
English-language  travel  guides,  all  published  in  1998.27 The  Rough  Guide  to
Romania 28 gives  considerable  prominence  to  communism  and  the  revolution;
indeed, discussion of sites associated with these themes accounts for approximately
23% of the text in the main guide to the city’s sights. A similar emphasis is apparent
in the Lonely Planet guide to Romania and Moldova29 in which around 25% of the
text on the sites of Bucharest deals with aspects of communism or the revolution. In
a boxed feature, seven highlights of a visit to Bucharest are listed and four of these
(following  the  trail  of  the  1989  revolution,  and  visits  to  Ceausescu’s  grave,  the
Parliament  Palace  and  an  abandoned  statue  of  Lenin)  focus  on  an  aspect  of
Bucharest’s  legacy  of  communism or  revolution. The  Let’s  Go  guide  to  Eastern
Europe30 contains less detail on Romania and the  guide to  Bucharest is  relatively
short.  However,  around  15%  of  the  discussion  deals  with  sites  associated  with

26. See Morgan & Pritchard, op. cit.

27. see also D. Light, `Tourism and Romania’s communist past: coming to terms with an unwanted
heritage’ , in D. Light & D. Phinnemore (eds) Post-communist  Romania: coming to terms with transition,
Basingstoke: Macmillan,  2000.

28. Burford & Richardson, op. cit.

29. N. Williams,  Romania and Moldova, Hawthorn, Australia: Lonely Planet, 1998.

30. R. Halikman (ed.) Let’s go  Eastern Europe 1998, London: Macmillan, 1998

An Unwanted Past

151

communism or the revolution. The Europe by Train Guide 199831 contains a short
chapter on Romania, but Bucharest’s communist legacy features prominently in the
discussion of the capital’s sights; readers are advised to visit the Parliament Palace
and the bullet-scarred television centre. It is also apparent that these travel guides
are  signposting  parts  of  Bucharest’s  communist  past  which  tourists  might  not
otherwise have known of or been able to find. Such sites include Ghencea cemetary
(which contains the graves of the Ceausescus), Belu Cemetery (where the heroes of
the  revolution  are  buried)  and  Mogosoaia  Palace  (where  abandoned  statues  of
Lenin and another communist leader are to be found).

Although  none  of  these  guides  directly  uses  the  label  `heritage’   to  refer  to
Bucharest’s communist past their importance in constructing particular sights from
the city’s recent past as the focus of the tourist gaze is clear. Of equal importance,
is what the inclusion of such sights in these guides tells us about the interests and
expectations of their readers: all assume that visitors to Bucharest will be interested
in such sights  and that  it  is appropriate  to  direct their  gaze  towards such places.
Clearly,  in  post-communist Bucharest, the  legacy  of  communism and  revolution
have become the focus of interest for a particular form of special interest tourist.
This phenomenon can be conceptualised in the wider context of  recent debate
over the changing nature of tourism and tourists. Various authors3 2 have argued that
over  the  past  three  decades there  has  been a  significant  change  in  the  nature of
capitalism  from  an  emphasis  on  mass-production  and  consumption  (Fordism)
towards  more  flexible  and  differentiated  economic  processes (post-Fordism).  In
particular the nature of consumption has changed; consumers show an increasingly
diverse  range  of  preferences, a  growing  desire  for  more  individual  and  `quality’
(rather than mass-produced) products, increasing discretion and volatility  and an
increasing  search  for  novelty  and  fashion. As  a  result  producers are  increasingly
consumer  oriented,  in  developing  new  products  and  experiences  to  meet  their
consumers’  demands.

Tourism  has  closely  followed  these  trends.33 In  particular,  there  has  been  an
increasing move away  from mass tourism and package  holidays to what  has been
termed `post-modern’   tourism.34 Such tourism is  characterised by  a  rejection of
many established forms of tourism,especially mass tourism. For the post-modern
tourist the pursuit of  new destinations and experiences is paramount. As a  result
there has  been a  proliferation of new destinations in recent years, along with  the

31. K. Wood, Europe by train 1998, London: Ebury Press, 1998.

32. For example, S. Lash & J. Urry, The end  of organised  capitalism, Cambridge: Polity,  1987; D.
Harvey, The condition  of postmodernity, Oxford: Blackwell, 1989; J. Urry, The tourist gaze: leisure and
travel in contemporary societies, London: Sage,  1990.

33. R. Sharpley, Tourism, tourists and society, Huntingdon: ELM, 1994; Urry, 1990, op. cit.; J. Urry,
`Cultural change and contemporary tourism’, Leisure Studies, Vol. 13, 1994, pp.  233± 238.

34. I. Munt, `The `other’ postmodern tourism: culture, travel and the new middle classes’ , Theory,
Culture and Society, Vol.  11, 1994, pp.  101± 123; G. Richards, `Production and consumption  of
European cultural tourism’ , Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 23, 1996, pp.  261± 286.

152

Duncan Light

development of an increasing diversity of tourist experiences, including `alternative’
tourism, `special  interest’   tourism,  ecotourism, heritage  tourism,  green  tourism.
Dark tourism has also been identified as a form of post-modern tourism.35

Central to these trends is the changing tourism preferences of the middle class, a
group known also variously as the `new’  middle class, the `service’  class or the new
petit bourgeoisie.36 For this group tourism is an important part of the process of
both self-definition and differentiation from other social groups. In particular, being
relatively low on economic capital, new-middle-class tourists seek holiday and travel
experiences which  enhance  their  cultural capital.37 This  group  has  most  actively
rejected mass tourism in favour of alternative forms of tourism (particularly cultural
and  heritage  tourism),  preferring the  label `traveller’   to  tourist. In particular this
group  seeks  individualised,  and  increasingly,  independent  holidays,  frequently
spatially  differentiated from  the  main  tourism circuits, and  with  an  emphasis on
`other’ ,  non-Western  destinations.  They  place  an  emphasis  on  authenticity,
truthfulness,  contact  with  indigenous  peoples,  environmental  concern  and  the
desire to  partake  in  sustainable travel  experiences. They  also  show  an  increasing
tendency to intellectualise holidays, with an emphasis on study and learning;38 for
heritage  tourists,  in  particular,  informal  education  is  an  increasingly  important
requirement of their leisure time.3 9

As  a  particular  form  of  special  interest  tourism,  and  a  subset  of  heritage
tourism,  `communist  heritage’   tourism  can  be  identified  as  one  form  of  post-
modern tourism.40 Bucharest’s legacy of communism offers a range of sights and
experiences  which  accord  well  with  the  travel  requirements of  the  new  middle
class,  whether  those  with  a  particular  interest  in  Romania’s  communist past,  or
heritage tourists with a more general interest in the country’s history. As a former
communist  country  Romania  offers  such  tourists  the  experience  of  a  `non-
Western’   culture and  the  opportunity to  gaze  upon the `other’ .41 The  country is
easily accessible from Western Europe, but at the same time it is far removed from
established  mainstream  tourist  circuits. Bucharest  is,  therefore, an  ideal  destina-
tion for those travellers who seek an escape from mass tourism. For those tourists
who are particularly seeking to appreciate and understand the former `communist
bloc’ ,  Bucharest’s  particularly  harsh  experience  of  totalitarianism,  and  the

35. see Foley & Lennon, op. cit.; C. Rojek, Ways of escape, Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1993.

36. Munt, op.  cit.; Urry, 1990, op.  cit.; K. Walsh, The representation  of the past: museums and heritage in
the post-modern world, London: Routledge, 1992.

37. Munt, op.  cit.; cf. P. Bourdieu, Distinction:  a social critique of the judgement  of taste, London:
Routledge, 1994.

38. Munt, op.  cit.

39. D. Light, `Heritage as informal education’, in D.T. Herbert (ed.) Heritage, tourism and society,
London: Mansell, 1995, pp.  117± 145.

40. Light, `Gazing on communism’ , op.  cit.

41. Ibid.

An Unwanted Past

153

revolution which ended it,  have  endowed the  city  with  a  unique set  of  resources
for  tourism. The  city  offers  many  different  and  highly  unusual sights;  few  cities
contain  buildings  the  size  of  Palatul  Parliamentului,  or  have  involved  such
widescale  urban  remodelling  as  Ceausescu’s  Civic  Centre.  Similarly,  few  cities
allow  visitors  to  follow  the  trail  of  a  violent  revolution,  without  any  significant
personal  risk.  Bucharest  also  offers  unique  challenges  for  those  travellers  who
actively  seek  insight  and  understanding  from  their  holiday-taking.  The  role  of
guidebooks  published  outside  Romania  in  defining  and  signposting  Bucharest’s
communist  heritage  has  already  been  noted;  indeed,  Munt  argues  that  travel
guides  such as  the  Rough  Guide  and  Lonely  Planet  series can  be  considered as
post-modern travel  guides for  post-modern tourists.4 2

Thus, Bucharest’s  legacy  of  communism and revolution has  been  constructed,
and is being consumed, as heritage, by a particular type of contemporary tourist.
This  is  an  externally  defined  heritage,  constructed  outside  Romania  for  non-
Romanians, in which English-language travel guides play a key role. However, this
is  a  strongly  contested  heritage  and  has  very  different  meanings  for  Romanians.
These  meanings,  and  the  consequent response to  the  emergence of  `communist
heritage’   tourism, are  examined in the  following section.

Denying the  Communist  Past
Although  Romania’s  communist past  is  an  object  of  interest for  curious Western
tourists,  Romanians  see  this  period  of  their  country’s  history  through  very
different eyes. Given their especially harsh experience of totalitarianism, economic
austerity and systematic repression, most Romanians are understandably eager to
draw  a  line  completely  under  the  communist  period.  Political  discourse  since
1990  has  been dominated by reform and the construction of  a `new’  Romania, a
process  which  involves  the  establishment  of  a  market  economy  and  multi-party
democracy,  the  rebuilding  of  civic  society  and  a  `return  to  Europe’ .  Even  if
Romania’s post-communist direction has at times appeared uncertain (particularly
as  former  communists  were  dominant  in  political  life  until  1996),  one  of  its
defining  characteristics  has  arguably  been  a 
rejection  of  Ceausescu’s
dictatorship.43

Accordingly, there has  been little  concern with  retaining the material legacy  of
the  communist period. For  Romanians  this  was  an  unwelcome reminder of  the
former regime. Instead, in the early post-communist period there was a concerted
effort to  erase  the  physical  traces, as  far  as  was  possible, of  Ceausescu’s  regime.
Some of  the  most  obvious examples include the  removal  of  banners on  factories
praising  Ceausescu,  the  toppling  of  statues  of  communist  leaders,  and  the
widespread  renaming  of  both  individual  streets  and  entire  settlements  whose

42. Munt, op.  cit.

43. Although  it should  be noted that the uncertainties and dislocation of the `transition’  period have
produced a degree of nostalgia for the former regime, particularly among  older Romanians.

154

Duncan Light

names  were  a  reminder  of  the  previous  regime.44 The  material  legacy  of
communism represented the  very  antithesis  of  Romania’s  future  aspirations  and
the  country’s  efforts  to  present  to  the  wider  world  a  distinctly  post-communist
face.

Indeed, in the  post-communist period there has been a widespread reappraisal
of history itself. In Romania, as elsewhere in Central and Eastern Europe, the re-
working  and  re-presentation  of  history  is  central  to  the  process  of  constructing
new, post-communist national identities.45 The result has been a `veritable orgy of
historical  revisionism,  of  writing  the  communist  period  out  of  the  past’ .46 The
communist  period  is  now  regarded  as  an  historical  aberration;  thus,  post-
communist  Romania  requires  a  new  national  history.  Such  a  treatment  of  the
national  past  is  not  in  itself  new;  indeed  communist  authorities  engaged  in
widespread rewriting  of  history  in  order to  legitimate  and  reinforce Communist
Party  rule.47

For  much  of  Romania’s  post-communist  period  the  desire  to  extirpate  the
communist  era  from  collective  memory  meant  that  the  1947± 1989  period  was
treated as if it had simply never happened. Even if this period could not be erased
from  individual memories it  was  airbrushed out  of  all  official  representations of
Romanian  history  (such  as  museums  and  history  books).  As  Verdery  notes,48
history  itself  has  taken  on  a  new `shape’   in  the  post-communist world. The  pre-
communist 1940s and the post-communist 1990s become directly joined in a new
time  line  in  which  the  intervening  forty  years  of  communism  have  simply
disappeared. Only in the last few years has the communist period begun to make
a  reappearance  as  some  Romanian  historians  have  cautiously  started  to  address
this  period.

Unsurprisingly,  such an  attitude  to  the  communist past  is reflected in  the  way
that  Romanian  history  is  presented  to  tourists.  In  many  European  countries,
museums  and  other  heritage  attractions  are  used  as  a  means  of  presenting
national  history  to  both  tourists  and  their  own  citizens  as  a  means  of  affirming
and reinforcing national identity.49 However, in Romania an important part of the
national  story,  four  decades  of  communism,  is  cloaked  by  collective  amnesia.
Consequently, while Western tourists may be increasingly interested in the history

44. I. Nicolae, `Changes of Romanian  place names during the communist era’ , in D. Light & D.
Phinnemore (eds) Post-communist  Romania: geographical perspectives, Liverpool: Liverpool Hope Press,
2000.

45. Morgan & Pritchard, op. cit.

46. Verdery, op. cit., p. 112.

47. See, for example, K. Verdery, National ideology  under  socialism: identity  and cultural  politics in
Ceausescu’s Romania, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.

48. Verdery, 1999 op. cit.

49. Cf. F. McLean, `Museums and the construction of national identity: a review’ , International
Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 3, 1998, pp. 244± 252.

An Unwanted Past

155

of communist Romania there is little concern to interpret this period for them. To
illustrate  this  point  the  following  section  considers  the  way  in  which  the
communist past  is  presented to  visitors at  two  tourist attractions  in  BucharestÐ
the  National  History  Museum, and  the  House of  the  People.

The National  History  Museum was  opened in  1972  on  Ceausescu’s  initiative.
Inevitably,  it  was  soon  put  to  service  to  glorify  the  dictator  and  a  permanent
exhibition  was  opened in 1978  containing a  collection of  over  20,000  gifts  given
as  `evidence  of  the  love,  high  esteem  and  profound  appreciation  enjoyed  by
President  Nicolae  Ceausescu  and  Comrade  Elena  Ceausescu,  of  the  wide
relations  of  friendship  and  collaboration  between  the  Romanian  people  and
peoples  of  other  countries’ .50 Following  Ceausescu’s  overthrow,  the  National
History  Museum  (in  common  with  all  other  museums  in  the  country51)
immediately closed the  galleries which dealt  with  Ceausescu and  the  communist
period. The  museum  currently  receives  around  22,000  visitors  a  year,  most  of
whom are  from outside Romania.5 2

In  its  coverage  of  Romanian  history  the  museum  clearly  illustrates  the
contemporary  desire  to  erase  the  memory  of  the  communist  period.  The
presentation  of  Romanian  history  stops  abruptly  in  the  1920s  and  there  is  no
attempt  to  interpret  later  events. A  spokesman  for  the  museum53 acknowledged
that many tourists were interested in the history of the communist period, but was
more ambivalent  when  asked  if  the  museum had  a  role  to  present and  interpret
the  1947± 1989  period (for both  Romanians and foreign tourists).  He recognised
that  a  display  on  the  communist period could be  a  major  attraction  for  tourists
but  suggested that  it was inappropriate for  the museum to give  undue priority to
one period of Romania’s history. Instead, all periods of the country’s history were
regarded as being of equal importance and it was appropriate for the museum to
reflect this. The spokesman also suggested that  the time was not yet right  for  the
museum  to  attempt  to  interpret  the  communist  period.  He  argued  that  since
history  had  been  so  effectively  distorted  and  rewritten  during  that  time  it  was
necessary to allow a period of time to  pass in order for professional historians to
research  and  produce  a  more  balanced  narrative  of  the  period.  Only  then,  he
suggested,  would  the  museum  be  in  a  position  to  address  this  period  in  its
displays.

It  is  apparent  that  the  National  History  Museum  is  unwilling  to  address
Romania’s  communist past  and is  adopting a  strategy  of delay and prevarication.
The  interpretation of  the  1947± 1989  period is  regarded  as  currently `somebody

50. S. Bonifaciu (ed.) Romania tourist guide, Bucuresti: Editura Sport-Turism 1985.

51. C. Sandu, `Romanian  museums: idioms and boundaries’ , Museum Management and Curatorship,
Vol.  11, 1992, pp.  296± 312.

52. This information was supplied by a spokesman for the museum.

53. In an interview in Easter 1998. The spokesman was interviewed in an official capacity but wished
to remain anonymous.

156

Duncan Light

else’s  role’ ,  and  other  organisations  and  institutions  are  regarded  as  being  in  a
better  position  to  do  this.  Indeed,  given  the  extent  to  which  the  Museum was
used  to  glorify  Ceausescu  before  1989  it  is  unsurprising  that  it  shows  some
reluctance to approach the subject in the post-communist period. The communist
period is regarded as an opportunity to be addressed at an unspecified time in the
future.

A similar attempt to deny the communist past is apparent in the presentation of
Palatul Parliamentului to tourists. Here the guided tours are virtually silent on the
origins of the building and Ceausescu’s role in its construction.54 Instead, guides
give considerable prominence to other themes seemingly designed to satisfy visitors’
curiosity about  the  building and  divert  their  attention  away  from its  associations
with  the  former  regime.  The  sheer  size  and  dimensions  of  the  building  are
emphasised and the  tour takes  in some of  the  largest  and most ornate rooms. In
addition the Romanian-ness of the building is stressed. Visitors are informed that
the building was built entirely by Romanians, using indigenous materials; as such it
represents the  very  finest of  Romanian craftsmanship. And in a  direct attempt to
negate  the  building’s  communist  associations,  visitors  are  told  of  how  the
architectural  style  of  the  building  links  to  traditional  (and  thus  pre-communist)
styles from Romania,5 5 and from Western Europe.

However,  the  interpretation  of  the  building  for  visitors  is  more  than  simply
denying  its  communist  past:  the  building’s  managers  have  also  attempted  to
construct  a  new  narrative  which  is  consistent  with  Romania’s  post-communist
identity.  Hence,  the  building  is  presented  as  the  centre  for  Romania’s  post-
communist, democratic parliament. The building is interpreted as a contemporary
political  institution  and  the  guided  tour  informs  visitors  of  the  workings  of  the
parliament. To reinforce this narrative the tour includes a small museum, recently
opened  within  the  building,  which  records  the  development  of  parliamentary
democracy  in  Romania.  Indeed,  a  spokesman  for  the  building56 was  eager  to
emphasis that the guided tours were a public relations medium, designed to inform
visitors of the workings of Romania’s parliament, rather than attempting to cater for
tourists’  interest in the building and its origins.

However,  this  attempt  to  inscribe  the  building  with  a  new  meaning  is  only
partially successful. There appears to be some discordance between what visitors are
expecting  from  the  building,  and  what  its  managers  are  presenting  to  them.  In
particular many visitors seem to want to appropriate the building as a monument to
Ceausescu and the absurdities of his rule, a narrative which differs radically from
that  offered by  the  guided tour. Several guides have  told me  that  visitors display
considerable interest in Ceausescu’s connection with the building. Since the former

54. I have taken the guided tour on seven occasions between 1997 and 1999.

55. A. Ioan, Power, play and national  identity, Bucharest: Romanian  Cultural Foundation,  1995.

56. Interviewed in Easter 1998. The spokesman also represented the building  in an official capacity
and also wished to remain anonymous.

An Unwanted Past

157

president had  many  luxurious  villas  throughout  Romania  it  is  unsurprising that
some visitors assume that Palatul Parliamentului was one of them. Hence, one guide
told me that the most commonly asked question was whether Ceausescu slept in the
building;  she  added  with 
incredulity  that  `they  all  want  to  know  about
Ceausescu’ .

Discussion and Conclusions
This paper has illustrated the ambivalent and highly contested nature of the recent
past  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  Heritage  and  national  identity  are  closely
related,57 but the process of nation-building is often `as much about forgetting the
past as commemorating it’ .58 For Romanians the material heritage of communism
is a reminder of a period of history which there is little current desire to remember:
as such it is powerfully dissonant with the country’s post-communist identity and
aspirations. This  legacy  could  be  termed  an  unwanted  heritage59 although  few
Romanians  would  regard  the  material  legacy  of  communism  in  such  terms  as
heritage and indeed would be incredulous at the suggestion. But while Romania is
eager to forget its communist past, it appears that Western tourists are unlikely to let
it  do  so.  Instead,  as  the  earlier  analysis  has  shown,  Bucharest’s  legacy  of
communism and  revolution is  increasingly  being  constructed as  heritage  for  the
gaze  of curious Western tourists. These tourists, whether general cultural/heritage
tourists  or  those  with  a  specific interest  in  communism, are  largely  independent
travellers  who  actively  seek  out  unusual  destinations  and  sights  and,  in  seeking
learning and understanding from their holiday activities,  make wide use of  travel
guides. This then is a heritage which is defined by its consumers.

In  a  number  of  ways  `communist  heritage’   tourism illustrates  the  exploitative
nature  of  relations  between  tourists  and  local  people.60 Romania’s  legacy  of
communism has become exoticised for the gaze of outsiders wanting an experience
of Western Europe’s `other’ .61 Yet  these  tourists may  have  little  understanding of
what  communism meant for  Romania, or of  why  Romanians are so  unwilling to
address this period of their history. For Romania, the interest of these tourists in the
communist past is far from welcome since it directly confronts the country’s efforts
to  remake itself after  the  period of  communist hegemony as  a  modern, pluralist,

57. G.J. Ashworth, `From history to heritage-from heritage to identity: in search of concepts and
models’ , in G.J. Ashworth & P.J. Larkham (eds) Building  a new heritage: tourism, culture  and identity  in
the new Europe, London: Routledge, 1994, pp.  12± 30; D. Light & D. Dumbraveanu-Andone,
`Heritage and national identity: exploring the relationship in Romania’ , International  Journal of
Heritage Studies, Vol. 3, 1997, pp.  28 ± 43.

58. B. Graham, `The past in place: historical geographies  of identity’ , in B. Graham & C. Nash (eds)
Modern historical geographies, Harlow: Pearson, 2000, pp.  70± 99. Quote from p. 77.

59. Cf. A. Ashworth & G. Ashworth, `Frank McCourt’s Limerick: an unwelcome heritage?’ ,
60. See Shurmur-Smith  & Hannam, op.  cit.

61. Cf. Morgan & Pritchard, op. cit.

158

Duncan Light

post-communist democracy. By directing the gaze of tourists to what Romania was
rather  than  what  it  is (and  seeks  to  become),  `communist  heritage’   tourism
frustrates Romania’s efforts to draw a line under the recent past. And as Romanian
political life is increasingly dominated by the discourse of greater integration with
Western  Europe,  `communist  heritage’   tourism  has  the  converse  effect  of
emphasising how Romania’s recent history has been different from that of Western
Europe.

Moreover,  communist  heritage  tourism  does  little  to  increase  mutual  under-
standing  between  Romanians  and  Western  Europeans.  Many  Romanians  are
frustrated  that  Westerners view  their  country  in  terms  of  stereotypes  (the  most
obvious  being  Dracula)  and  overlook  the  many  other  facets  of  the  culture  and
heritage.  The  promotion  of  the  communist  past  for  tourists  reinforces  another
unwanted stereotype of RomaniaÐ
that of a country associated with totalitarianism
and hardshipÐ
and increases the likelihood of Romanians believing that visitors do
not understand their country. But while the promotion of  its communist past  for
Western  tourists  may  be  highly  unwelcome,  Romania  is  able  to  exercise  little
influence on this process, since the publicising and promotion of this heritage takes
places beyond its borders (the Rough Guide and Lonely Planet series are published
in  the  UK  and Australia respectively).  In  this  sense Romania has  little  power  to
resist the forces of globalisation within tourism.

There is evident uncertainty in Bucharest about how to respond to the interest of
foreign tourists in the  recent communist past.  Given the  traumas of  Ceausescu’s
dictatorship Romania evidently needs a period of time in which to come to terms with
its  recent  history,  and  to  date  there  has  been  little  concern  to  re-evaluate  the
1947± 1989 period. Certainly, there is considerable reluctance to provide any sort of
interpretation  of  the  communist past  for  tourists. This  is  best  illustrated  by  the
Natural History Museum which has chosen to be silent on much of Romania’s 20th-
century history. The museum has chosen to delay addressing the communist period
until other professionals (particularly historians) have taken a lead in re-interpreting
this period. In presenting Palatul Parliamentului to tourists a similar strategy of denial
has been adopted. Hence, the context or circumstances of the building’s construction
are excluded from the narrative offered to tourists. Instead, the building’s managers
are attempting to present it as the seat of a democratic parliament, a working public
institution to which visitors are allowed limited access.

Clearly, the desire to forget the period of Ceausescu’s rule overrides any concern
to produce a balanced interpretation. whether for Romanians or foreign visitors, of
what  communism meant for Romania. But this means that  Romania is currently
missing  an  opportunity  to  tell  foreign  visitors,  who  would  undoubtedly  be
interested, of the way in which the country was misruled before 1989. Perhaps, their
awareness of  the  blatantly  propagandist  role of  museums under socialism makes
Romanian museologists wary of using museums for any sort of public relations role
in the post-communist period.

However, elsewhere in Romania the first signs of a critical engagement with the
communist period are becoming apparent. In 1997 the International Centre for the

An Unwanted Past

159

Study of Totalitarianism opened in Sighetu Marmatiei in the extreme north of the
country. This is located in a former prison, used by the communist authorities in the
1940s  and  1950s  to  hold  political  prisoners (including  the  leaders  of  many  of
Romania’s  prewar  democratic  parties).  Today,  the  museum  (which  has  been
declared `an assemblage of national interest’  by the Romanian parliament) contains
displays  on communist Romania immediately after  the  war,  and  on  some of  the
former inmates of the prison. Although intended as a resource for Romanians, the
museum  attracts  a  steady  number  of  foreign  tourists.  However,  this  is  not  an
attempt  to  generate  revenue  from  Romania’s  communist past,  and  the  museum
does not charge for entry (although visitors have the opportunity to make a donation
to  its  work). Yet,  while  representing  a  concern  to  interpret  for  Romanians  the
horrors of the early communist era there is, even here, no attempt to address the
period of  Ceausescu’s  misruleÐ
a  period which is evidently still regarded as `off-
limits’.

All  the  former  communist  countries  of  CEE  have  faced  the  process  of
reconciliation with  the  recent  past  and  have  gone  about  this  at  different  paces.
Some, perhaps Hungary is the best example, have largely succeeded in putting their
communist  past  behind  them.  In  Romania  the  process  has  been  far  more
problematic, and the `ghosts’  of the recent past still haunt the present. But since the
interest of Western tourists in  the  country’s  recent communist past  is unlikely to
diminish, Romania  will  at  some  stage  have  to  confront  the  challenge  of  how  to
address its communist legacy. Indeed, the way it does so will be an indication of its
emerging  maturity  as  a  post-communist  democracy.  However,  rather  than  be
allowed to  reconcile itself with  its  recent past  at  its  own  pace Romania faces the
prospect of being `bounced’  into it by the demands of Western tourists.

Acknowledgements
I  would  like  to  thank  spokesmen  at  the  National  History  Museum and  Palatul
Parliamentului for generously granting me interviews, and Daniela Dumbreveanu
of the University of Bucharest for her assistance with interviewing and translating.
I would also like to thank my colleagues Teresa Ploszajska and Janet Speake for their
comments on an earlier version of this paper.

160

Duncan Light


