The politics of wetlandscape: fishery heritage and natural 
conservation in Hong Kong
Sidney C.H. Cheung*

Anthropology Department, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong

Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_524004.sgm

(Received 4 June 2010; final version received 16 August 2010)

171000000January 2011
SidneyCheung
sidneycheung@cuhk.edu.hk
10.1080/13527258.2011.524004

1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2010Taylor & Francis

The north-western part of Hong Kong is a marsh with traditional freshwater fish
farming; however, this brackish area has been agriculturally diversified to include
cultivation of red rice, reeds, shrimp and fish, and has only largely concentrated
on  freshwater  fish  farming  starting  from  the  1960s.  By  looking  into  the
geographical and social changes that have taken place in the brackish area, I will
explain  how  the  coastal  landscape  was  changed  in  the  1910s  through  the
introduction of large-scale rice production in Tin Shui Wai which has turned into
a  high-density  residential  new  town,  and  the  wetland  conservation  of  Mai  Po
marshes. This article aims at understanding the meanings of intangible as well as
agricultural/fishery heritage and the local politics among indigenous communities,
conservation groups, the government and developers in post-handover Hong Kong
society. Inland freshwater pond cultivation was actually a major industry in the
1970s since it supplied most of the freshwater fish for the local market. Nowadays,
the industry is shrinking because of lack of manpower and high operation costs
compared to the mainland. With various kinds of social, economic and physical
pressures,  the  local  communities  which  are  located  at  the  buffer  areas  of  the
wetland  in  Mai  Po  are  actually  facing  the  tremendous  dangers  of  losing  those
fishponds;  most  importantly,  the  fishponds  have  been  serving  not  only  as
mitigation  zone  and  source  of  a  traditional  local  food  but  also  as  a  major  food
supplier  for  migratory  birds,  adding  to  the  conservation  value  of  the  Mai  Po
marshes and Inner Deep Bay in Hong Kong at large.

Introduction
A wetland can be defined as a transition area in which two sets of ecological or envi-
ronmental characters coexist and interact with each other in areas such as a marsh,
swamp, bog, etc. Besides its ecological characteristics, the wetland can also be consid-
ered  a  rich  landscape  for  understanding  changing  lifeways  (in  terms  of  influx  of
migrants, formation of fishery villages on the marsh, relations with traditional South
Chinese lineage settlements, communal livelihoods of former fishermen) in relation to
coastal resource management from the local perspectives. Furthermore, I would like
to emphasize that the investigation of the ‘wetlandscape’ along the coastal areas is not
that of an entirely natural landscape, since the wetland has been cultivated by local
people and turned into agricultural land for various social and political reasons. In the
case of Inner Deep Bay, the coastal areas was changed according to the needs of Hong

*Email: sidneycheung@cuhk.edu.hk



 37

Kong society; therefore, I would argue that the socio-cultural aspects of the wetland
should  not  be  neglected  and  that  the  politics  involved  in  the  development  from
agricultural usage to other types of usage has to be discerned in the context of the fast-
changing society.

The Inner Deep Bay, situated in the north-western part of Hong Kong, currently
contains: (1) the Mai Po marshes – an internationally renowned wetland zone as well
as Ramsar site (see the Ramsar Convention); (2) major local freshwater fish farming
grounds; and (3) residential areas with both old and new dwellings. In this article, I
will draw attention to the Inner Deep Bay in order to rethink the competition between
agriculture,  fishery  heritage  management  and  environmental  conservation.  In  other
words, I would explain the historical development of the three co-existing components
in the coastal wetland area and in light of it suggest reconsideration of the importance
of fishery heritage in the context of wetland conservation.

In the Inner Deep Bay, there are traditional lineage settlements which can be traced
back  around  800  years  and  the  relevant  agricultural  (rice  cultivation)  practices  are
supposed to have lasted for several hundred years. Besides those inland agricultural
areas, in the beginning of the last century a major conversion of coastal wetland into
agricultural  land  took  place  in  Tin  Shui  Wai,  which  went  through  different  stages
including mudflat, rice paddy, reeds field, shrimp pond and fishpond; and finally some
part of the wetland area has been kept for a reserve (Mai Po Marshes Nature Reserve)
and  public  park  (Hong  Kong  Wetland  Park)  while  the  rest  are  modern  public  and
private residential areas (Tin Shui Wai, etc.) and fishpond areas which are maintained
as farming grounds by senior fishers with an average age of over 60. There is no doubt
that ecological characteristic of Mai Po wetlands have received special attention since
1976,  when  they  were  designated  as  a  reserved  site  as  well  as  a  resting  place  for
migratory  birds  travelling  between  Siberia  in  the  North  and  Australia  in  the  South.
However, the fish farming communities lying along the buffer zone areas have been
neglected because of their migration backgrounds and the shrinking primary industry
in contemporary Hong Kong society.

Agriculture is definitely not the major industry in contemporary Hong Kong soci-
ety; however, it does not mean that we do not have to pay attention to understanding
or maintaining it for other purposes than its economic contributions. As the history of
fishery reflects the social development and cultural change in Hong Kong, it is impor-
tant to strive for a holistic understanding of the industry in the past and the present.
With  less  than  300  fishing  households,  the  fishing  communities  which  are  mostly
located at the buffer areas of the wetland in Mai Po are actually facing tremendous
changes, in particular as these fishponds serve not only as a mitigation zone and source
of a traditional local food but also as a major food supplier for migratory birds, raising
the conservation value of the Mai Po marshes and Inner Deep Bay in Hong Kong at
large. Apart from the emphasis upon traditional industries as a kind of cultural heritage
among  scholars  since  the  1940s  (Lin  1940,  1940  [1967],  Morton  and  Wong  1975,
Ward 1980, Chan 1989), the debate on heritage conservation has successfully drawn
the attentions of urbanites who consider traditional industries as an important part of
their  collective  memory  of  the  society  (Cheung  2003,  Henderson  2008,  Leung  and
Soyez 2009). I would like to make use of the case in Hong Kong to question how the
balance of heritage and environmental conservation can be defined and maintained.

Here, let me quote from the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) regarding
the meanings and significances of agricultural heritage. As it is mentioned on their
website: 

38

 S.C.H. Cheung

In order to safeguard and support world’s agri-cultural heritage systems in 2002 FAO
started an initiative for the conservation and adaptive management of Globally Important
Agricultural  Heritage  systems  (GIAHS).  The  initiative  aims  to  establish  the  basis  for
international recognition, dynamic conservation and adaptive management of Globally
Important  Agricultural  Heritage  Systems  (GIAHS)  and  their  agricultural  biodiversity,
knowledge systems, food and livelihood security and cultures throughout the world.

The GIAHS initiative has identified pilot sites in Peru, Chile, China, Philippines, Tunisia,
Algeria, Kenya and Tanzania. In these pilot systems dynamic conservation management
approaches will be developed and implemented, to assist national and local stakeholders
in  the  conservation  and  adaptive  management  of  the  systems  and  their  components.
(http://www.fao.org/nr/giahs/giahs-home/home-more/en/ [Accessed 16 August 2010])

According to the FAO website, China has three out of eight GIAHS pilot systems
including:  the  rice-fish  system  in  Qingtian  county  in  Zhejiang,  Hani  rice  terraces
system,  and  Wannian  traditional  rice  culture  system,  which  demonstrate  thoughtful
and  outstanding  examples  of  keeping  the  balance  among  ecological,  economic  and
social benefits in our societies; even though the landscape of Hong Kong’s wetland is
mostly recognized for its conservation purposes, the agricultural backgrounds in rela-
tion to the local knowledge should not be overlooked.1

Early coastal development in the Inner Deep Bay, Hong Kong
Generally speaking, the continuity of coastal development in the north-western part of
Hong  Kong  has  undergone  three  phases.  The  first  phase  in  the  emergence  and
commercial development of fishpond farming began in the 1910s and continued until
the  1950s  when  there  was  a  rapid  growth  of  population  after  the  two  immigration
influxes from the mainland. The end of this phase was marked by the conversion of
farmland into fishponds as a result of the high demand for fish in the local market,
which was also brought about by suspended importation of food from the mainland.
This second phase was marked by the rapid growth of fishpond areas until the 1970s.
The third phase began in the late 1970s when the establishment of the Mai Po reserve
was decided upon. The awareness of wetland conservation, an increase in fish impor-
tation after China’s economic reform since 1978 and residential property development
in the New Territories enabled more people to live a better life and need more land for
housing development. The increasing demand of parking space for trucks and storage
was also one of the major reasons for illegal fishpond reclamation.

Mudflat to rice paddy
Located at the Pearl River Delta area, it is fairly common to have mudflats along the
coastal area of Inner Deep Bay; yet the traditional freshwater fishing industry only
dates back to the 1920s while most of the agricultural land was rice paddies which
included white rice cultivated by freshwater and red rice cultivated in the brackish area
(Da Silva 1977). Before the commercialisation of freshwater fish farming, fishponds
originated as fung shui ponds located in many local villages; grown fish were caught
and  shared  among  lineage  members.  Lineage  members  refer  to  those  who  identify
themselves with the same ancestor and used to live in the same village with a common
ancestral hall for the practice of worship, and can be commonly found in most of the
traditional settlements in South China. There were around 100 hectares of fishpond
land in 1940 (Lin 1940), while the brackish fishpond area was also small before the



 39

1940s. Starting from the mid-1940s, Inner Deep Bay became the main site for culti-
vating shrimp, grey mullet, snakehead and other freshwater fishes and it has continued
to be the major source of freshwater fish for domestic consumption. By the late 1960s,
some areas were converted from paddy fields to fishponds; however, the information
about the local development in these areas is incomplete and few details are known.
Here, I would like to highlight the fact that about 450 hectares of stream screening
ponds in Tin Shui Wai were paddy field before being converted into commercial fish-
ponds; of course, this area is now only recognised for its New Town appearance. The
history of Tin Shui Wai is interesting, even though there is not much data about its devel-
opment from mudflat to residential areas. Tin Shui Wai is located in Ping Shan, but the
land was owned by the Chiu family – founder of the Luen Tak Fish Farm – and not the
Ping  Shan  Tangs,  whose  family  settled  there  several  centuries  ago  (Cheung  2007).
According to a source working for the management company of Luen Tak Fish Farm,
Tin Shui Wai was developed as rice field in the 1910s, which contained white rice culti-
vation in the upper river and red rice cultivation near the coast. With the water gateway
control (locally called gei wai) for red rice cultivation, fish fry and shrimp fry were intro-
duced and caught while sea water flowed in to maintain the salinity for red rice culti-
vation. With the decline of red rice production, these red rice paddies were turned into
shrimp farms, which were mostly converted into fishpond in the 1970s (Cheung 2004).
According to Da Silva’s doctoral dissertation completed in 1977, we know that the
reclamation did reflect some special socio-political backgrounds of the British colony.
It has been written that: 

In 1911 the reigning dynastic government of Ching China collapsed, and China became
a  republic.  In  the  wake  of  unrest  following  the  founding  of  the  republic  a  substantial
number of moneyed families sought refuge in relatively stable British Hong Kong. …
The  Hong  Kong  Government  saw  in  the  reclamation  proposal  submitted  by  the  Chui
brothers the opportunity to weaken further the power of the Tang lineages, especially
that  of  Ha  Tsuen  village.  …  The  Hong  Kong  authorities  acceded  to  the  reclamation
proposal  submitted  by  the  Chiu  brothers.  An  agreement  was  drafted  in  1916  between
Luen Tak Company and the Hong Kong Government whereby, for only a token rental,
lease title for reclaiming four hundred and ninety and a half hectares of Ha Tsuen Wan
was given to the company. (Da Silva 1977, pp. 50–52)

In other words, the British government anticipated the resistance from local lineages
and the necessity for a long-term stable administration in the New Territories, so it
chose to weaken the possible alliances among local villages by bringing in outsiders
and  building  a  police  station  to  control  the  area;  the  hostile  relations  between  the
government  authorities  and  local  lineages  can  still  be  seen,  for  example,  after  the
establishment of the heritage trail at Ping Shan (Cheung 2003). Nowadays, we are not
able  to  see  the  landscape  of  the  rice  field  or  the  fishpond,  and  the  southern  side  is
mainly  for  residential  settlement  while  the  northern  side  is  the  present  Hong  Kong
Wetland Park which has been very popular since its opening in 2006.

Gei wai shrimp and wild caught grey mullet fry
I mentioned earlier the rice paddy mechanism which combines white rice and red rice
in the upper and lower areas of Ting Shui Wai. Gated ponds in the brackish water,
locally known as gei wai, were built to capture river water coming down from the upper
level while it could introduce sea water for the red rice paddies. As shrimp farmers did
not feed the shrimp, the operating cost was very low. Some farmers told me that they

40

 S.C.H. Cheung

did not need to do much work but merely had to control the water quality through the
operation of the water gateway. Yet with this natural method of cultivation the size of
the gei wai is large and density of shrimp kept inside is low. The operation is basically
dependent on the availability of shrimp fry on the coast, which are taken into the gei
wai during the high tide (with a low water level inside the gei wai), where the shrimp
fry  would  be  kept  and  fed  for  about  nine  months  until  they  are  big  enough  to  be
harvested. Farmers harvest the shrimp in the evening when they come up from the
bottom, and water in the gei wai would be drained during the low tide (or when the
inside water level is higher than outside); thus shrimp will be caught in the net set at
the gateway. Since these shrimp grow in the gei wai, Hong Kong people call them gei
wai shrimp with the understanding that they grow in the brackish water. Besides the
gei wai, the farming operation looks very natural; however, my informant told me that
they used to reduce the density of the mangroves outside the gateway by cutting them
in order to allow a smooth flow of shrimp fry into the gei wai.

Also important in the early fishery is grey mullet fry caught on the coast. Accord-
ing to my informants, the grey mullet fry are usually found in the entries of rivers with
fertile water where the sea water meets river water, carrying ‘organic’ drainage water
accumulated  from  human  settlements  as  well  as  local  villages.  During  the  last  few
years,  I  have  observed  them  being  caught  in  small  streams,  gullies  (former  rivers
turned into drainage) and shallow coasts in the New Territories. The size of the fry
varies in different areas, commonly ranging from 2cm to 4cm. Those found at the end
of a gully are generally small while those on the coast are bigger. Nowadays, some
places are reclaimed, some have been turned into water drainage, some are diverted
and some are prohibited from entry because of private property development.

Technically speaking, neither shallow water nor water over one foot deep is suit-
able for catching fry. My informant said one must know how to read the water flow,
as small fish forage for food close to the shore or downstream near the sea at high tide,
which is the best time to catch them. Starting from the last month of the lunar calendar,
mature grey mullet lay eggs in water near the shore for two to four months. The fry
that are caught by fishermen during this period are named according to their time of
birth, such as Little Chill, Big Chill, Jiaochun (Spring) and Fanhua. These names may
sound strange to lay persons, but for fishermen the income of the next year depends
on the birthday of the small fish. Those which are born earlier are usually stronger and
have a higher survival rate so that fishermen are often willing to buy at a high price
for these early-born fry. Fishermen are also willing to pay more in order to make sure
they have an adequate number of fry to utilise fish ponds. My informant is also aware
of the weather changes, especially the wind direction and seasons. As Hong Kong is
located in a sub-tropical area, the north-easterly monsoon brings cold and dry weather
in winter while the south-westerly monsoon brings warm and humid weather to the
territory. The calm atmosphere in between the two periods is the time when fish in the
sea reproduce and are born, and, as fishermen say, ‘no fish fry when the west winds
blow. We have to wait for the north wind to come next year’.

Large-scale freshwater fish farming
Large-scale fishpond farming probably began after the Second World War, when the
increasing demand for fish was paralleled by the rapid increase in land for fishpond
cultivation. Grant (1971, p. 36) reported that the fishpond area rose from 500 to 2000
acres between 1958 and 1968. Furthermore, according to Fung (1963, p. 78): ‘During



 41

1954–55 period when the Chinese Government in the Mainland restricted export of
any kind of fish fry to Hong Kong, attempts had been made to stock Tilapia instead
of  Chinese  Carp  in  the  New  Territories  ponds.’  Therefore,  the  replacement  of
imported fish by the expansion of local cultivation might be an explanation for the
rapid increase in fishpond areas during that period.

In  1941,  Hong  Kong  was  recorded  to  have  had  a  population  of  1,600,000;
however, the population was reduced to 600,000 in 1945 because of the three-year and
eight-month Japanese occupation of Hong Kong. This was mostly due to emigration
back to China. After two large-scale immigration waves during 1945–47 and 1949–
52, the population of Hong Kong had risen again to 2,340,000 by the end of 1954.
These  two  massive  influxes  included  both  Hong  Kong’s  former  residents  who  had
previously fled the Japanese occupation and Chinese mainlanders who left China after
the Communist revolution in 1949. This sudden rise of new population was consid-
ered the primary cause for the formation of large squatter settlements, including roof-
top huts, houseboats and overcrowding of existing tenements in the early 1950s. Yet,
the  influx  of  postwar  migrants  coming  from  the  Pearl  River  Delta  area  helped  the
development  of  gei  wai  and  fishponds  (which  had  originated  as  rice  paddies)  and
earned their living by cultivating gei wai shrimp, grey mullet, snakehead and other
freshwater fish; for decades, this has been the major supply of freshwater fish in Hong
Kong. Inland freshwater pond cultivation was actually a major industry in the 1970s
since it supplied most of the freshwater fish for the local market.

With  similar  geographical  characters  and  development  background  as  Tin  Shui
Wai, Wu Shan Wai was developed into Palm Spring – a low-density private housing
estate, with some of the fishpond area and one village remaining. Wu Shan Wai was
originally an area with paddy fields but was converted in the late 1960s into fishponds
because the profit from rice cultivation was insufficient for farmers to keep pace with
the rising living standards in Hong Kong and fish cultivation was more profitable. Tai
Shan  Wai  was  also  developed  in  the  1970s  into  the  present  Fairview  Park,  a  low-
density private housing estate.

Beginning in the 1970s, fishpond land was also sold to private developers, who
were not interested in a sustainable fishing industry but in more profitable development
proposals. However, most of these proposals were rejected at the very beginning and
in the absence of concrete development plans, fishponds were leased to local farmers
(some of whom were former owners of those fishponds), who sustained the fish farm-
ing industry in the area. In order to understand the fish cultivators’ network in the north-
western part of the New Territories, it is helpful to examine the fish cultivators and
their  backgrounds.  While  perhaps  not  a  typical  neighbourhood  or  traditional  local
community, nevertheless the drawing power of people involved in the same industry
did exist since the early 1950s, when a fishermen association was formed to unite them.

The arousal of international awareness of the Mai Po wetland
The Hong Kong Bird Watching Society (HKBWS), founded in 1957, was to facilitate
its members’ bird watching activities by organising field outings and a ranging scheme
which began in 1965. HKBWS has kept a close affiliation with the Hong Kong Natural
History  Society  and  the  Conservancy  Association.  On  average  more  than  10  field
outings were organized twice a month with a summer break between June and July,
mainly in Mai Po marshes in 1970. Though it had heavy reliance on Mai Po marshes,
some other sites of wet grassland and reed beds around Ping Shan, Tin Shui Wai and

42

 S.C.H. Cheung

Mong Tseng which used to be a habitat for birds had been developed into fishponds
or rural shanty land. In the early 1970s, Cantonese speaking tours were first introduced
to cater for local Chinese members. The frequency of field outings increased with time,
but there was a slight drop in attendance in some years, probably due to too much focus
on a few bird watching locations. Since the late 1970s, HKBWS was able to diversify
with more new outing sites from Mai Po marshes such as Sai Kung, Fanling, and Tai Po.
Apart from field outings and conservation projects, HKBWS has been playing the
role of pressuring the Hong Kong government on its conservation of the countryside
almost since it was founded. Again, HKBWS kept a close eye on illegal wildlife trade
in Hong Kong with particular concern for conservation of birds of prey. It urged the
government to action by keeping the issue alive, and even brought it to international
attention  by  sending  members  to  attend  overseas  conferences  such  as  the  World
Conference of the International Council for Bird Preservation in 1974. Starting from
1991, HKBWS has actively attempted to sell the Bird Report in Europe and set up a
project fund in order to give financial support to the building of another Mai Po board-
walk,  which  was  completed  in  1996,  together  with  the  establishment  of  the  ‘Hong
Kong Bird Watching Society China Conservation Fund’. Regarding the interactions
between HKBWS and the public, I was told that: ‘It was not until the 1980s that the
HKBWS took on an advocacy role on conservation, following their first environmen-
tal  campaign  to  save  the  major  bird  watching  hotspot  against  the  construction  of  a
large-scale private housing estate – Fairview Park occupying 12.5 million square feet
on the Inner Deep Bay Ramsar site and Mai Po in Tai Shan Wai, Yuen Long.’ My
informant added that: ‘In order to raise the public’s concern, HKBWS cooperated with
WWF to present the data that had been collected previously over many years by their
members so as to prove Mai Po marshes an important wetland habitat for migratory
birds and other wildlife species, that subsequently led to the designation of the rest of
the  area  as  a  nature  reserve  area  as  a  consequence.’  Therefore,  on  one  hand,  these
green  groups  understand  the  importance  of  traditional  fishponds  for  the  migratory
birds; on the other hand, they are totally against the farmers trapping the birds that
feed off the fish in the ponds – which the farmers do to maintain their living.

In the last decade, the numbers and types of migratory birds found in the wetland
areas have been widely reported in local Chinese newspapers. As we have seen, the
localisation of HKBWS, which used to be expatriate-dominated, is well reflected by
the emergence of the Chinese version of the newsletter; local Chinese membership has
now reached 60–80% of the total. In fact, one of the recognized membership drives
resulted from the Long Valley campaign,2 and organising regular field outings for the
public. Over the past almost 50 years of operation in the Yuen Long area, there has
been  very  little  direct  interaction  and  conflict  of  members  with  the  local  villagers.
Even on the sensitive land issues, it turned to be an issue between the landowners and
HKBWS because most of the villagers’ land has now been sold to property develop-
ment companies; thus the Society is able to maintain a neutral relationship with the
local people (Cheung 2008).

Mai Po Marshes Nature Reserve and Wildlife Education Centre
Today, Mai Po is an internationally renowned reservation area as it is an important
stopover  place  for  the  migratory  birds.  It  is  situated  in  the  north-western  corner  of
Hong  Kong.  It  is  an  environmentally  significant  site,  which  over  50,000  migratory
waterfowl  (with  the  maximum  record  of  68,000)  visit  during  winter,  including  12



 43

globally  endangered  species;  and  it  is  a  popular  rest  and  refuelling  station  for
migratory birds during spring and autumn. The Mai Po marshes received special atten-
tion in 1976, when it was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest. In 1984,
WWF Hong Kong took over active management of the reserve land which was let in
short term leases by the government and started the Mai Po Marshes Nature Reserve
and Wildlife Education Centre. (A short term licence is granted for one year and there-
after is renewable on an annual basis for a fee of HK$1 – about US$0.13 – each year.)
In 1995, the 1500 hectares wetland of Mai Po marshes, including the neighbouring
Inner Deep Bay area, was designated as a Wetland of International Importance under
the Ramsar Convention.3 It is the seventh Ramsar Site in China, which possesses the
sixth largest remaining stand of mangrove forest along the coast of China, and one of
the largest reedbeds in Guangdong Province.

Each year, over 40,000 school students and members of the general public visited
the wetland. Since Mai Po is a restricted area managed by WWF-HK, entrance is permit-
ted only to those who apply for guided tours in advance, or to individuals with special
permits. Guided tours are available for the general public during weekends and public
holidays with payment of a tour fee. However, special guided school tours are fully
sponsored by the Hong Kong Government Education Department and are offered free
of charge during weekdays. The demand is great, and visits are often booked several
months in advance. In order to enhance the promotion of education and public awareness
of wildlife and the natural environment, some part-time interpreters are trained and hired
as guides for public tours. They are usually graduates or undergraduates from one of
the universities of Hong Kong. In addition, volunteer groups of WWF-HK members
are organised twice a month to work with field staff on particular projects at weekends.
The management of the area involves several parties. Overall the managing body
is WWF-HK. It is one of the non-governmental organisations (NGOs) which is dedi-
cated  to  work  on  conservation  and  environmental  education  in  Hong  Kong.  It  was
established in 1981, and is an independent part of the international WWF network; that
is, it is responsible for its own expenses and income. WWF-HK manages the area in
close  cooperation  with  the  governmental  body  presently  responsible  for  it,  the
Agriculture,  Fisheries  and  Conservation  Department.  WWF-HK’s  responsibility
within the Ramsar site is that of the overall conservation management and enforcement
of the regulations including the issuing and checking of permits. The local community
members can also participate in the management of the area. They help in the tradi-
tional shrimp farming and fishponds preserved in the area both for research and educa-
tional purposes. In other words, wetland conservation helps to promote and facilitate
community  involvement  in  all  aspects  of  management,  as  a  means  to  enhance  its
effectiveness in conservation.

Located  at  the  northern  part  of  Tin  Shui  Wai,  the  HK$520  million  Hong  Kong
Wetland Park (HKWP) has a 10,000 square metre indoor visitor centre and a 60 hect-
are  outdoor  area  similar  to  Mai  Po  Marshes  Nature  Reserve  which  is  nearby.  The
interest in wetland tourism has grown in recent years for domestic and international
visitors alike. In order to preserve the wetlands in the Mai Po Marshes Nature Reserve,
we should inform the rising number of visitors of the significance of environmental
conservation by disseminating conservation ideas through outdoor activities. With its
display of artefacts, a photo exhibition on the process of wetland conservation, inter-
active models demonstrating the ecological system, and a theatre area showing films
of  worldwide  wetland  characteristics,  HKWP  has  successfully  attracted  the  local
residents and reached the annual target of 500,000 entries in less than six months.

44

 S.C.H. Cheung

Conclusion
Therefore, with the development of Inner Deep Day over the last 80 years, we can
see there is a big change in the wetland area. We can no longer see any rice paddy
but fishponds and conservation land; we cannot even taste the local gei wai shrimp,
but have a Ramsar Site for both research and education purposes. In the future, we
might  see  the  disappearance  of  freshwater  fish  farming  and  the  wetland  area  will
mainly be used for natural conservation and residential development. However, I do
not  think  we  can  ignore  the  agricultural  roots  of  the  wetland,  which  is  not  entirely
naturally created. With the awareness of heritage, we can definitely understand tradi-
tional  agriculture  as  a  kind  of  intangible  heritage  involving  the  knowledge  system
inherited  from  the  past,  as  well  as  a  set  of  environmental  friendly  practices  which
local people should treasure in terms of their cultural significance and sustainability.
Yet in the case of Inner Deep Bay in Hong Kong, I suggest that responsible social
development can only be possible with the awareness of balancing how (i) Mai Po
Marshes  Nature  Reserve  should  be  continuously  maintained  under  the  concept  of
bio-diversity, converting the artificial farming ground back to wildlife habitat, and at
the same time, (ii) it can be considered a kind of cultivation system operated by local
farmers/fishers so that traditional agricultural/fishery technique can be inherited and
Hong Kong people can also enjoy the food from that unique and local environment.
Obviously,  there  is  no  one  answer  for  the  above  environmental  development,
however, the agricultural/fishery use in the landscape concerned should not be over-
looked.

Acknowledgements
This research for this article was made possible by the CERG Earmarked Research Grant for
the research project entitled ‘The Threat of Obsolescence to the Freshwater Fish Farming in
Hong Kong’ (#2120231). An earlier version of this paper was presented at the International
Conference  on  Intangible  Heritage  –  ‘Sharing  Cultures  2009’,  held  at  Pico  Island,  Azores,
Portugal, 29 May–1 June 2009.

Notes
1. The importance of the rice-fish system in Longxian village is described as follows: 

Ecological  symbiosis  exists  in  the  traditional  rice-fish  agricultural  system:  fish
provides  fertilizer  to  rice,  regulates  micro-climatic  conditions,  softens  the  soil,
disturbs the water, and eats larvae and weeds in the flooded fields; rice provides
shade and food for fish. Furthermore, multiple products and ecological services
from the co-ecosystems are beneficial to local farmers and the environment. The
high  quality  food  of  fish  and  rice  are  helpful  to  maintain  farmers’  nutrient  and
living standard: the reduced cost and labour increases the productive efficiency,
and, especially by reducing the use of chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbi-
cides for insect and weed control, helps in agro-biological conservation and field
environmental  protection. 
(http://fao.org/nr/giahs/piloy-system/pilot/rice-fish-
agriculture/rice-fishagriculture-summary/en/ [Accessed 16 August 2010])

2. Long Valley campaign was the second milestone in the stage of development, with which
HKBWS  became  wider  locally  and  even  internationally  known,  especially  for  nature
conservation  work,  bringing  along  with  membership  growth,  funding  opportunities,  the
change of institutional status into a charitable group, and hiring of the first paid staff.

3. The background of Ramsar Convention is described as follows: 



 45

The Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar, Iran, 1971) – called the ‘Ramsar Conven-
tion’  –  is  an  intergovernmental  treaty  that  embodies  the  commitments  of  its
member  countries  to  maintain  the  ecological  character  of  their  Wetlands  of
International Importance and to plan for the ‘wise use’, or sustainable use, of all
of the wetlands in their territories. Unlike the other global environmental conven-
tions,  Ramsar  is  not  affiliated  with  the  United  Nations  system  of  Multilateral
Environmental Agreements, but it works very closely with the other MEAs and is
a full partner among the ‘biodiversity-related cluster’ of treaties and agreements.
(http://www.ramsar.org/cda/en/ramsar-about-about-ramsar/main/ramsar/1-
36%5E7687_4000_0_/ [Accessed 16 August 2010])

Until  August  2010,  there  are  presently  160  Contracting  Parties  to  the  Convention,  with
1896 wetland sites, totalling 185.5 million hectares, designated for inclusion in the Ramsar
List of Wetlands of International Importance.

Notes on contributor
Sidney  C.H.  Cheung  is  Professor  and  Chairperson  of  the  Department  of  Anthropology  and
concurrently  Associate  Director  of  the  Centre  for  Cultural  Heritage  Studies,  the  Chinese
University of Hong Kong. His research interest include visual anthropology, tourism, heritage
studies, and food and identity; his co-edited books include Tourism, Anthropology, and China
(White Lotus 2001), The Globalization of Chinese Food (RoutledgeCurzon 2002), and Food
and Foodways in Asia: Resource, Tradition and Cooking (Routledge 2007).

References
Chan, K.Y., 1989. Joss stick manufacturing: a study of a traditional industry in Hong Kong.

Journal of the Hong Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 29, 94–120.

Cheung,  S.C.H.,  2003.  Remembering  through  space:  the  politics  of  heritage  in  Hong  Kong.

, 9, 7–26.

Cheung, S.C.H., 2004. Keeping the wetland wet: how to integrate natural and cultural heritage

preservation. Museum International, 56, 29–37.

Cheung,  S.C.H.,  2007.  Fish  in  the  marsh:  a  case  study  of  freshwater  fish  farming  in  Hong
Kong’. In: S.C.H. Cheung and C.B. Tan, eds. Food and foodways in Asia: resource, tradi-
tion, and cooking. London and New York: Routledge, 37–50.

Cheung, S.C.H., 2008. Wetland tourism in Hong Kong: from birdwatcher to mass ecotourist.
In: J. Cochrane, ed. Asian tourism: growth and change. London: Elsevier Science, 259–267.
Da Silva, A.M., 1977. Native management of coastal wetlands in Hong Kong: a case study of
wetland  change  at  Tin  Shui  Wai  agricultural  lot,  New  Territories.  Unpublished  PhD
dissertation. University of Hawaii, Hawaii.

Fung, Emily W.Y.E., 1963. Pond fish culture in the New Territories of Hong Kong. Unpub-

lished BA thesis. Department of Geography and Geology, University of Hong Kong.

Grant, C.J., 1971. Fish farming in Hong Kong. In: D.J. Dwyer, ed. The changing face of Hong

Kong. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 36–46.

Henderson, J.C., 2008. Conserving Hong Kong’s heritage: the case of Queen’s Pier. Interna-

tional Journal of Heritage Studies, 14, 540–554.

Leung,  M.W.H.,  and  Soyez,  D.,  2009.  Industrial  heritage:  valorising  the  spatial–temporal
dynamics of another Hong Kong story. , 15, 57–75.
Lin, S.Y., 1940. Fish culture in ponds in the New Territories of Hong Kong. Journal of the

Hong Kong Fisheries Research Station, 1, 161–193.

Lin, S.Y., 1940 [1967]. Salt manufacture in Hong Kong. The Hong Kong Naturalist, 10, 34–
38. Reprinted in Journal of the Hong Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 7 (1967),
138–151.

Morton, B. and Wong, P.S., 1975. The pacific oyster industry in Hong Kong. Journal of the

Hong Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 15, 139–149.

Ward,  B.E.,  1980.  Rediscovering  our  social  and  cultural  heritage  in  the  New  Territories.

Journal of the Hong Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 20, 116–124.


