International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Pilgrimage, devotional practices and the
consumption of sacred places in ancient Egypt and
contemporary Syria

Troels Myrup Kristensen

To cite this article: Troels Myrup Kristensen (2015) Pilgrimage, devotional practices and the
consumption of sacred places in ancient Egypt and contemporary Syria, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 21:4, 354-368, DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2014.914560
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2014.914560

Published online: 07 May 2014.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 601

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2015
Vol. 21, No. 4, 354–368, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2014.914560

Pilgrimage, devotional practices and the consumption of sacred
places in ancient Egypt and contemporary Syria

Troels Myrup Kristensen*

Classical Studies, Department of Culture and Society, Aarhus University, Jens Chr. Skous Vej
5, Aarhus, Denmark
(Received 2 October 2013; ﬁnal version received 5 April 2014)

Pilgrimages are often messy affairs, not only leaving all sorts of material detritus
behind, but also in many cases severely damaging or even destroying the sites
that are visited as part of journeys to a sacred place. As such, this immensely
popular religious tradition constitutes a social practice that is deeply tied to the
landscapes and places that are considered to be holy and thus principally worthy
of preservation (at least by many deﬁnitions of heritage), but which also in many
cases ultimately consumes them over time, sometimes in very direct ways that
immediately affect their physical state. This paper explores the contemporary
and historical dimensions of this paradox, and considers the wider implications
of seemingly destructive uses of sacred space by investigating the social and
religious signiﬁcance of so-called ‘pilgrims’ gouges’ observable at numerous
pilgrimage sites in the Eastern Mediterranean. It, thereby, sheds light on the
connections between the religious experience of pilgrimage and the material
consumption of sacred places by juxtaposing cases from contemporary Islamic
Syria and ancient Egypt, providing a long-term perspective on the use and
consumption of sacred places. Lastly, it discusses the potential ramiﬁcations of
the gouges for current approaches to heritage management and conservation.

Keywords: Egypt; Syria; pilgrimage; devotional practices; gouging

Introduction
Pilgrimage, deﬁned as a journey to a place of religious or spiritual importance,
forms an integral part of the religious imagination, both in the past and in the pres-
ent. Indeed it continues to hold a particular grip on the public’s interest within a
variety of different religions and cultures. The literature on the subject is conse-
quently vast, encompassing both scholarly tomes within a range of academic disci-
plines (e.g. Coleman and Elsner 1995), learned catalogues accompanying large-scale
exhibitions (see Porter 2012 for a recent example at the British Museum) and, just
as signiﬁcantly, a multitude of popular guidebooks intended for ‘spiritual travellers’
(e.g. Westwood 2003). It is not surprising then to learn that pilgrimage sites across
the globe are visited by millions of people each year, in many cases putting tremen-
dous strains on the physical and natural environment within which they are located
(on the problems of managing pilgrimage destinations, see Shackley 2001,
101–123). This popularity raises important concerns about the sustainability of many
pilgrimage sites in a long-term perspective, especially in the globally connected

*Email: klatmk@cas.au.dk

© 2014 Taylor & Francis

International Journal of Heritage Studies

355

world of today where pilgrims are just as likely to arrive by plane as they are by
foot or boat. The tension between pilgrimage and preservation is, for example, very
clear in the current construction boom at Mecca where sacred monuments and
objects have been destroyed in order to build accommodation, shopping and infra-
structure. Yet, there are further challenges related to heritage preservation (and its
opposite) that are attested in the case of pilgrimage sites and thus worthy of discus-
sion, not least because they raise questions about the popular uses of sacred space –
and how they should or should not be regulated by authorities.

In the contemporary heritage schemes that structure how many pilgrimage sites
are managed, we generally ﬁnd a modernist ideology of preservation. This ideology
is manifested in such inﬂuential documents as the UNESCO convention which stres-
ses that ‘the deterioration or disappearance of any item of the cultural or natural heri-
tage constitutes a harmful impoverishment of the heritage of all the nations of the
world’ (my emphases). ‘Long-term preservation’ is furthermore an active goal for
all members of the Society for Historical Archaeology, according to their Ethics
Statement, thus emphasising that the consumption of heritage is an undesirable prac-
tice that is incompatible with the archaeological code of conduct (www.sha.org/
about/ethics.cfm; and see Holtorf, this volume). In recent literature, the origins of
this preservationist agenda have been traced back to the beginnings of European
modernity and thus constitute a demonstrable Western mode of fashioning heritage
(Holtorf and Fairclough 2013). Accordingly, non-destructible vision has been privi-
leged in most scholarship on heritage and tourism, such as in inﬂuential work on the
‘tourist gaze’ (Duke 2010; Urry and Larsen 2011).

In contrast, in this paper, I shall investigate a devotional practice that has been
referred to as gouging and that can be observed at a wide range of pilgrimage sites
that belong to different cultural contexts and very different periods in time. The
presence of the so-called ‘pilgrims’ gouges’ that bear testimony of this devotional
practice provides important insights into the consumption of sacred places in both
contemporary and ancient contexts, but could without closer consideration of its cul-
tural and religious signiﬁcance be labelled as destructive or even as a form of van-
dalism, in line with the preservationist agendas outlined above. The interpretation of
the pilgrims’ gouges offered here will, on the other hand, stress how crucial the
materiality of sacred places is to the religious experience of pilgrimage, sometimes
justifying that pilgrimage sites are ‘used up’ in the process. This challenges the pol-
icy of preservation that has been implemented at many heritage sites around the
world, in line with the kind of disciplinary ethics and heritage legislation mentioned
above. Only now are we seeing an emergent change in the way that heritage man-
agement is conceptualised and understood by its practitioners with profound impli-
cations for the devotional practices under scrutiny here.

As I will show, pilgrims’ gouges must be understood as a particular use of sacred
space that blurs many distinctions between ‘destruction’ and ‘devotion’ that are
commonly upheld in prevalent deﬁnitions of cultural heritage, and that are safe-
guarded on an everyday practical level by heritage institutions across the world. The
argument presented here is in line with a series of relatively recent studies on the
consumption of heritage sites in the present (Holtorf 2005), non-visual uses of
archaeological sites in the past (Ouzman 2001), as well as ethnographic studies of
contemporary religious practices in non-Western cultures that make the argument for
a more inclusive approach to heritage (Wijesuriya 2001, 2005). Insights from these
studies and the example of the pilgrims’ gouges also have broader implications for

356

T.M. Kristensen

the ways that we approach the use of sacred space. Here, these studies are given a
broad, long-term historical and social context by way of two case studies, one from
contemporary Syria, and the other from ancient and post-Antique Egypt.

Contemporary devotional practices at Khoros, Syria
I begin with the contemporary case of Khoros (ancient Cyrrhus) in northern Syria.
Khoros is situated in the remote region of Kurd Dagh, 76 km north-west of Aleppo
and only 2 km from the Turkish border. This region is mostly inhabited by Kurds
who belong to the Sunni branch of Islam but are also deeply inﬂuenced by Suﬁ tra-
ditions. The Kurds have in many respects been marginalised in Syrian society, some-
thing that has also become sadly evident in the country’s ongoing and tragic civil
war (Tejel 2009).

Ancient Cyrrhus was a large Hellenistic, Roman and early Mediaeval site which
today constitutes a vast ruin ﬁeld stretching across a landscape that is only scarcely
settled in a semi-nomadic fashion and where only limited site management has been
implemented. The site does not attract many visitors, and there is practically no tour-
ist infrastructure in Khoros or its vicinity, nor is there a ticket ofﬁce or a site guard.
The attractions for the visitors that do come here include a large theatre, several pub-
lic buildings and late antique Christian churches that were excavated by French
archaeologists in the period from 1952 to 1980 (see Burns 2009, 91–93 for an
overview). Since 2006, a Lebanese–Syrian team has taken up new archaeological
ﬁeldwork in the city and its hinterland (Massih, Benech, and Gelin 2009; www.
cyrrhusexcavations.com).

What is of special interest to the present study is a re-used Roman hexagonal
tomb that lies 300 m outside the ruined city of Cyrrhus, today known as Qabr
an-Nabi Huri after an Islamic holy man who was buried here in the fourteenth
century (Figure 1; Fartacek 2003, 133–137). Of this legendary ﬁgure, practically

Figure 1. Khoros (Syria), the pilgrims’ complex of Qabr an-Nabi Huri. The re-used Roman
tomb is clearly visible in the centre, the cemetery to the right (photo: author).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

357

nothing is known today, and pilgrims to the site describe Huri only in the most
general of terms as a saint or prophet who chose to live an ascetic life in this region
(Fartacek 2003, 136). Huri’s monumental tomb forms one corner of a later enclo-
sure, at least partially made up of re-used material from the settlement at Cyrrhus,
and a small mosque that has been erected next to the tomb. The enclosure is par-
tially landscaped with trees, providing shade for pilgrims in the blazing heat. An
expansive cemetery, attracted by the proximity of the holy man’s sanctuary, is situ-
ated immediately outside the enclosure.

Qabr an-Nabi Huri is one of a number of such small pilgrimage sites in rural and
relatively remote parts of Syria that has received an increasing number of visitors in
recent decades. Pilgrims visit the shrine in order to obtain some of the sacred inﬂu-
ence (baraka) that is ascribed to Huri. While maintaining a thoroughly low-key feel
and being primarily of regional signiﬁcance this sacred place attracts many pilgrims,
especially on Fridays when animals are ritually sacriﬁced inside the enclosure, but
there is a small, continuous stream of visitors everyday (Fartacek 2003, 135–137).

The tomb, dating to the second- or third-century CE, comprises a two-storey
structure, of which the lower vaulted room has been appropriated for Huri’s burial
chamber. The rite of tying ribbons and pieces of cloth or plastic to tombs or other
sites of religious signiﬁcance, for good luck or help to conceive a child, can be
observed on the fence that bars entry to the burial chamber. This tradition is com-
mon in many parts of the Muslim world, even if is generally not considered to be
part of acceptable Islamic behaviour in Syria. It is, furthermore, a form of leaving
something behind as a way of commemorating the visits of individual worshippers,
although it does not leave any permanent marks on the site (cf. Finn 1997).

As such, it has a rather different character than the most important attraction for
pilgrims at Qabr an-Nabi Huri. This is the practice of gouging which takes place on
the mosque’s northern outer wall, right next to the entrance to the holy man’s tomb
(Figure 2). These gouges are round or oblong slits of varying lengths and depths that

Figure 2. Qabr an-Nabi Huri, gouges on the wall of the mosque, state as of October 2008
(photo: author).

358

T.M. Kristensen

are carved directly into the stone fabric of the wall. They are concentrated in the
areas where the plaster (which apparently would not produce the desired effect) has
been removed and the stone wall of the mosque stands free. Direct engagement with
the fabric of the building is clearly what is intended by the pilgrims here. Visiting
the site today, one may ﬁnd locals eager to demonstrate how these gouges work
(and even to invite visitors to participate in the practice themselves). Pilgrims pick
up a small stone and then rub it against the wall, creating a small gouge in the pro-
cess. They then leave the stone behind in lieu of a personal wish or hope for the
future. The soft and sticky limestone ensures that the pebble stays in place after use
– at least for some time. When the pebble stays on the wall, it is taken to mean that
the wish will be fulﬁlled by Nabi Huri (Fartacek 2003, 135). It may be the case that
the practice of gouging is only acceptable at Qabr an-Nabi Huri since the site at
present receives relatively few visitors – and, furthermore, does not directly damage
the Roman tomb, but only the much later and rather modest mosque. If the site were
to attract an increasing number of foreign visitors it is entirely possible that the atti-
tude towards this particular practice may change.

What would be the best way of describing this practice of gouging at Khoros? In
light of the fact that this is a practice that over time will disintegrate the buildings
that are being gouged, one could (wrongly) classify it as a form of simple vandal-
ism. An (in)famous sign at the tourist entrance to the Athenian Acropolis lists all
sorts of prohibitions and reminds visitors not to damage, remove or scratch any
antiquities, and gouging would certainly be considered deeply offensive at many
heritage sites (see also Hamilakis 2009). Yet, clearly vandalism would be an entirely
inappropriate term in the context of this particular site where pilgrims are encour-
aged and openly invited to participate in the practice, even if gouging ultimately
consumes the fabric of worship, at least if it takes place within an unregulated set-
ting. It certainly does not ﬁt into the form of heritage management schemes that we
have become so accustomed to and which are also increasingly being implemented
at sites across the Middle East where the income from Western tourists frequently
carry more weight than the needs of the local populations, or where particular pasts
are privileged over others for political reasons (El-Hay 2003). To the pilgrims who
visit Khoros, gouging constitutes a devotional practice which is an important part of
paying visit to the site, and allows them to make direct physical contact with the
sacredness of the site.

Gouging the wall of Huri’s mosque and the desire to receive his blessing is a
popular and living devotional practice whose history we currently cannot trace in
closer detail. Yet, the practice of gouging walls and images at sacred places has a
deep history, extending thousands of years back to the context of ancient Egypt,
thus, giving it an intriguing time depth. In the following, I shall turn to the extensive
evidence for pilgrims’ gouges from Egypt that is suggestive of a long-term historical
trajectory in which the physical engagement with sacred places has been crucial to
the religious experience of pilgrimage.

Pilgrims’ gouges and popular worship in ancient Egypt
The study of ancient Egyptian temples has traditionally focused on aspects related to
their construction and importance during the Pharaonic period. Much less attention
has been paid to evidence that is suggestive of secondary use in subsequent periods
(Shaw 2004; El Daly 2005). However, such evidence provide important glimpses

International Journal of Heritage Studies

359

into the perception of these monuments in the post-Pharaonic as well as the post-
Antique periods. One group of this particular kind of evidence consists of gouges
that are commonly found at a very large number of Egyptian temples, and which in
many cases are strikingly similar to those found at Qabr an-Nabi Huri; although they
have not received as much attention, as their frequent occurrence perhaps would
lead one to believe.

The Egyptian gouges are predominantly vertical but also occasionally horizontal
and oblong slits, measuring up to 40 cm in length and usually around 5 cm deep,
that have been scraped into temple walls, on both those adorned with relief decora-
tion and those without (Junghaendel 1891, 861; Nautin 1967, 33). A very rough esti-
mate of their total number would be in the tens of thousands, and it is clear that the
tradition of gouging was particularly widespread in Egypt, both in the Nile Valley
and in the oases. The gouges are extremely common in easily accessible areas of
sanctuaries (Figure 3). They are, therefore, likely to be considered as a form of pop-
ular worship or devotional practice that is similar to what was observed in the above
case of Khoros. Their shape is, furthermore, extremely homogenous, not only at sin-
gle sites such as Dendara, but also across several sites, for example, at Elephantine,
Philae, Karnak and in the Theban mortuary temples, several of which were the focus
of pilgrimage activities (Rutherford 2012). The common shape and dimensions of
the gouges hint at a similar function at these different sites, although there may, of
course, have been local differences in practice and use that are difﬁcult for us to
reconstruct today.

In the majority of cases, the gouges are located within reach from the ground.
They are, furthermore, often found in close vicinity to each other, and clusters of
them can be found in distinct parts of certain sanctuaries, often concentrated on the
exterior walls and around doorways. There are cases where the entire surface has

Figure 3. Gouges at Karnak (Egypt) (photo: author).

360

T.M. Kristensen

been covered with gouges, for example, in the façade of the Temple of Khnum at
Syene, modern Aswan (Hölbl 2004, 39) and an undecorated wall in the Temple of
Arensnuphis at Philae (Frankfurter 1998, 21), but usually they are found in smaller
clusters in different parts of sanctuaries.

The gouges are by their very nature extremely difﬁcult to date. An early study
believed that the majority dated to Late Antiquity and speculated that they were con-
nected to the sprinkling of holy water during Christian ceremonies. The author of
that study, Max Junghaendel also noted some ethnographic comparanda, such as the
presence of gouges and grooves on columns in mosques in Cordoba and Cairo, sug-
gesting that the practice could still have been active in later periods, perhaps up to
the late nineteenth century in the latter case (Junghaendel 1891). I have not observed
anywhere in Egypt where gouging continues to be a vital tradition. If it did survive
up until that time, it certainly would have died out with the advent of mass tourism
and large-scale site management by the Egyptian authorities which had already
began in the late nineteenth century and which since has experienced an increased
process of both professionalisation and commercialisation under the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Council of Antiquities (Reid 2003).

The practice can be traced further back in time than Late Antiquity. This is
apparent from evidence, such as blocks with gouges that were reused as spolia in
the construction of later buildings, thus providing a terminus ante quem, as in the
case of the West Coptic church at Philae constructed in the sixth-century CE
(Bernand 1969, 98). Evidence for pre-Roman gouging also comes from Elephantine,
where relief-decorated, gouged blocks from Pharaonic buildings were reused in the
construction of a Roman-period embankment (Bagnall and Rathbone 2004, 239).
Also at Elephantine, a gouged block was reused during Late Antiquity in the con-
struction of a small structure near the ruins of the Temple of Khnum (Arnold 2003,
196; Taf. 31b).

In other cases, the location high up on the walls suggests that the gouges date
back to the time when the temples had gone out of use and the walls were covered
with sand up to that height. Other pieces of evidence suggest that many can at least
be dated generally to Late Antiquity or later, indicative of the persistent religious
importance of Egyptian temples in the longue durée. At Luxor, two tetrastyla offer
further evidence for the continuity of the practice into Late Antiquity. The Luxor
Temple was converted for secular use as a military camp in the reign of Diocletian,
and the tetrastyla are epigraphically dated to 301 (tetrastyle 1) and late 308/early
309 (tetrastyle 2) (El-Saghir et al. 1986, 11–12). Both monuments (and their datable
inscriptions) have been extensively gouged, and it is noteworthy that the memory of
the gouging tradition survived the ‘desecration’ of the Luxor temple when a military
camp was established there in the early fourth-century CE (El-Saghir et al. 1986).

The Triconch church at Dendara provides further important evidence for the con-
tinuity of the gouging tradition into Christian times. The church has been dated by
Peter Grossmann to the early sixth-century CE (Grossmann 2002, 443–446;
McKenzie 2007, 282–283). Numerous gouges are found in the church, both on the
inside and the outside of its walls (Figure 4). While the church was constructed of
reused sandstone blocks, the gouges certainly relate to their in situ context. The
Christian identity of gougers may, furthermore, be conﬁrmed by occasional hints to
the practice in Coptic literature (Nautin 1967, 33). The impact of the pilgrim’s
gouges in the religious imagination of Egypt is thus demonstrated by the longevity
of the phenomenon.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

361

Figure 4. Dendara (Egypt), Church, gouges on exterior of north wall (photo: author).

These gouges, found at numerous ancient Egyptian pilgrimage sites, are testi-
mony to a use of sacred space that causes damage to and ultimately consumes its
physical fabric, very similar to what was observed in the contemporary context at
Khoros, at least in their outcome. In spite of this, it is very unlikely that those who
gouged these walls would have perceived their actions as even remotely destructive.
In the Egyptian context, the practice of touching and gouging sacred items had a
long history going back to Pharaonic times, not least in healing cults (Frankfurter
1998, 46–52) and in relation to the religious experience of pilgrimage (Nautin 1967,
33). Stelae and statues were perceived to hold magical powers that could be
accessed through touching them. Water poured over magical stelae could also be
collected for use as a ‘blessed liquid’ in cures of diseases. At sites such as Dendara,
the practice developed in the Roman period into entire pilgrimage industries where
‘blessed liquid’ was distributed through elaborate hydraulic systems and purpose-
built shrines that were open to devotees (Daumas 1957). Junghaendel saw the
gouges as part of this very old tradition in Egyptian society that had been appropri-
ated by Christian popular worship.

The connection between pilgrimage and materiality is even more intriguing,
when we consider the use of the gouged material from the Egyptian temples. As in
pre-Christian rituals connected to the ‘blessed liquid’, it was not only the act of
gouging itself that was important but also the material that had been scraped from
the temple. In the early Christian context, a group of moulds for ceramic ampullae
produced at Syene have been linked to the gouging activities at Philae, an important
pilgrimage site in southern Egypt (Nautin 1967, 33; Ballet and Mahmoud 1986;
MacCoull 1990, 160; Rutherford 2012). It has been suggested that the material
scraped from the walls was mixed with water and carried away from the site in the
ﬂasks that were made nearby and presumably sold on-site; as such, it was part of a

362

T.M. Kristensen

pilgrimage industry. Several of the ﬂasks bear the name of the local bishop
Theodoros who founded the ﬁrst church at Philae. The Egyptian ampullae are com-
parable to sixth-century pewter examples that arrived in Europe as souvenirs from
journeys to the Holy Land (Grabar 1958; Elsner 2005). Comparable ampullae linked
through their motifs to the early Christian pilgrimage centre of Abu Mina have been
found at several Egyptian sites, for example, in the Polish excavations at Kom
el-Dikka in Alexandria (Kiss 1989), but most studies have focused on their
iconography and typology instead of their use.

Using ethnographic comparanda, David Frankfurter has suggested that the use of

the ampullae and their contents:

should be compared to that of hnana, the mixture of holy oil with dust gathered from
the environs of living or enshrined saints in Christian Syria: medicinal drinks and sal-
ves, protection when carried or applied to walls, and fertility when imbibed or sown in
the ground. (1998, 51)

Similar attention to the collection of sacred dust is also known from the cult sur-
rounding St Demetrios in Thessaloniki, Greece (Bakirtzis 2002). As in Egypt, the
material collected here was carried by pilgrims in small ﬂask-like ampullae known
as koutronia. This behaviour, involving both a journey to a sacred place and the col-
lection of sacred material, is what Turner and Turner have referred to as ‘questing’
(1978, 196–197). Questing revolves around an individual’s longing to possess a
piece of the sacred. As such,
to understand the links
between materiality and the individual agency of pilgrims that can be observed
through the practice of gouging.

the concept is important

Gouging in Egypt thus appears to be part of a religious tradition relating to pil-
grimage that existed for several centuries, if not millennia. An inﬂuential anthology
on Graeco–Roman and early Christian pilgrimage carries the subtitle Seeing the
Gods (Elsner and Rutherford 2005), implying that this was the primary motive to
undertake sacred journeys in these contexts. Yet, worshippers who visited Philae,
Dendara and other sacred places in Egypt, as well as those who continue to visit
Khoros in the present, clearly did not only come to see the gods, but desired a more
direct form of engagement through gouging and thus the consumption of the materi-
ality of these sacred places. In their case, touching rather than seeing is believing.
The mediation of the sacred came through other senses than sight, as the physical
engagement with the sacred place that the gouges represent must have been an
important component of the sacred journey. While the length and duration of a jour-
ney to the sacred place may vary considerably, a pilgrimage thus constitutes much
more than the journey to a sacred place where the pilgrim passively observes at a
distance.

Previous scholarship has pointed to the existence of gouging in a range of other
historical contexts, and, as we saw, it can even be seen today in the shrines of cer-
tain Muslim saints, for example, at Khoros. Clearly there are many other cases
which would add further additional layers of cultural and religious context to our
understanding of the practice. Yet, with the introduction of heritage management
schemes that have strongly privileged Pharaonic archaeology for the sake of national
identity and for the beneﬁt of Western tourists, the tradition has come to an end and
is today positively discouraged. In the following section, I shall discuss the implica-
tions of this development and place them within a long-term perspective.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

363

Devotion, heritage and consumption in a long-term perspective
The Egyptian and Syrian gouges discussed in the above two sections in many ways
can be equated with the effects of other devotional practicess (many of which are
connected with pilgrimage), such as kissing and rubbing on the feet of statues of
saints and the Virgin Mary as well as the touching of holy relics in Catholic
churches. These also affect the physical state of sacred objects and monuments, at
least if they are sustained over a longer period of time, such as in the case of Qalat
Seman (Kristensen 2012b, 109–110). The gouges in that way testify to one among
several important links that exist between materiality, ritual practices and the reli-
gious experience of pilgrimage that will over time ‘use up’ or consume a particular
monument or site.

Although situated within an entirely different cultural context, an important par-
allel case to the gouging practice that is particularly revelatory can be found in
recent work by Sven Ouzman on non-visual aspects of religious practice at rock art
sites in southern Africa (Ouzman 2001). At these sites, various marks on decorated
rocks have been identiﬁed as evidence of practices that show similar links between
religious experience and materiality to those observed in ancient Egypt and contem-
porary Syria. In his work, Ouzman describes how many rock art sites used by San
communities show traces of human rubbing of so-called touchstones (2001,
244–248). The engravings on the rocks were understood by worshippers as a means
of accessing the world of the spirits. Access to this Spirit World came through mate-
rial engagements that have left small, visual traces of what could mistakenly be
interpreted as vandalism or destruction. In the eyes of the worshipper, this seemingly
destructive act opened up aspects of the religious experience that were not accessible
by other means. The particular practice of ‘ﬂaking’ observed by Ouzman at rock art
sites in southern Africa may be especially comparable to the Egyptian pilgrim
gouges (Ouzman 2001, 248–251). This involved the removal of small ﬂakes from
painted rocks, but yet again these actions should not be understood as purely
destructive, but rather as a method of harvesting potency and as a way of acquiring
transportable relics through direct engagement with the material fabric of sacred
places.

Both the practices of ﬂaking and gouging indeed make it necessary for us to
reﬂect on the role of touch and potentially also sound in the religious experience of
pilgrimage and personal piety. Through touch and physical removal, sacred places
can be possessed and even consumed by worshippers in acts of questing that were
important to a pilgrim’s sense of identity and individual agency. The Egyptian and
Syrian gouges may be seen as similar interfaces between the world of the living and
the world of the sacred. Just as cult statues in the folkloristic traditions of the
Greco–Roman world were believed to be more than simple representations (Gordon
1979; Stewart 2007), temples and other sacred places in Egypt embodied divine
power. Pilgrims could access and possess some of this power through sensual
engagements with the materiality of the temples and ritual practices, such as goug-
ing. The power of the sacred place was thus not dependent on its completeness or
inviolability; rather, a seemingly destructive act was required to access it in the ﬁrst
place. The devotional practice of gouging is in this perspective best seen as a
renewal of the sacred power of the pilgrimage places, rather than as acts of destruc-
tion or vandalism.

364

T.M. Kristensen

What are then implications of the practice of gouging for our understanding of
pilgrimage and popular devotion, as well as how the use of pilgrimage sites should be
regulated (or not)? How can we incorporate this perspective into current discussions of
the role of heritage in contemporary society (see Smith, Messenger, and Soderland
2010 for an overview)? Throughout history, objects and places have clearly been
broken, transformed and ‘consumed’ in many different ways that do not necessarily
ﬁnd parallels in contemporary society and that require considerable translation to
understand the cultural context of. Consideration of alternative ways of experiencing
materiality and sacred places have also recently been claimed to challenge the modern-
ist conservation ethic surrounding archaeological sites in the West (Holtorf 2005;
Colwell-Chantaphonh 2009). In discussions of authenticity, Siân Jones observes that
materialist perspectives (in which properties of authenticity are seen as inherent in
objects themselves) have dominated Western approaches to heritage (Jones 2010). She,
furthermore, emphasises that we instead need to focus on the social value of authentic-
ity and the networks that are created between people and material culture which make
heritage valuable to the present. Discrepancies between heritage practices and contem-
porary lived traditions that see past and present as a continuum have also been explored
in cases from south-east Asia by Byrne (2007). It is thus clear that, both historically
and philosophically, heritage management in the Western tradition and the devotional
practices of pilgrimage and other forms of religiosity have fundamentally different
backgrounds and very different perceptions of what is valuable (and thus preserved)
and what is allowed to perish (and thus to be consumed by visitors).

In the Egyptian case, the practice of gouging was shown to have been a potential
issue of social contestation that seems to have come to an end with the introduction
of site management schemes and systematic archaeological ﬁeldwork in the late
nineteenth century, although other factors may also have been responsible for the
disappearance of the phenomenon. Early archaeological work, largely carried out
within a colonial context, sought to privilege the presentation of the Pharaonic past
over the needs of the present. This is a practice that has continued to this day, where
recently several villages on the Theban West Bank have been destroyed in order to
make room for an enlargement of the archaeological area that is open to tourists
bringing in much needed cash for the Egyptian state, and to better be able to pre-
serve the many tombs that are scattered throughout the region but simultaneously
uprooting large numbers of people (Meskell 2000). The same form of privileging
the past over the present is apparent in the irony that the ‘pilgrim’s gouges’ are now
beginning to be appreciated as remains of past practices, whereas any modern
instances of the phenomenon surely would be discouraged or even prosecuted.
Indeed, as I write, a recent case of grafﬁti on the Luxor Temple has caused interna-
tional controversy and went viral on various social media platforms (Coonan 2013).
However, the case closely mirrored a long Western tradition of leaving such grafﬁti
at Pharaonic monuments that extends back in time at least to the nineteenth century.
While this tradition is not local in character (and thus different from the gouges), it
does demonstrate a distinctive gap between, on the one hand, what heritage institu-
tions have to offer and, on the other, how tourists would like to engage with monu-
ments and sites. Perhaps it would be worthwhile to set up walls intended for grafﬁti
or commemorative artwork at such sites, thus allowing visitors to leave something
behind (but without damaging the monuments). This is indeed a practice that is
encouraged at various pilgrimage sites around the world, such as, Meryemana in
modern Turkey (Kristensen 2012a; Yasin 2012, 269).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

365

In the case of Khoros, where there are very few visitors and where the fabric of
the Roman heritage is not being directly affected by the practice of gouging, there
exists a much more easy relationship between the pilgrims and the desire of archae-
ologists or heritage practitioners to preserve the site. The practice of gouging at Qabr
an-Nabi Huri is certainly an integral part of what makes this remote place a living
community, and any institutional interference with the practice should take this into
account. Given the current state of civil war in Syria, the future of Qabr an-Nabi
Huri remains unknown, but the modus operandi before the war (i.e. the acceptance
of gouging on the mosque building without any damage to the Roman tomb) may
provide us with a case of best practice, where both heritage conservation and the
religious practices of the pilgrims are allowed to co-exist. If tourists are going to
return to Syria in the future, the archaeological remains of the Roman city will hope-
fully provide the local Kurdish community with a source of income.

In light of the two discussed cases, we may wonder on a more fundamental level
whether there are other instances where the slow obliteration and eventual erasure of
a monument or even an entire site can be considered to be justiﬁed or encouraged.
This has been, for example, the fate of many parts of the Berlin Wall that have
ended up in numerous locations around the world where they embody the human
condition of the divided city, and fragments (placed on purpose-made wall mounts)
are still available for sale on the internet (www.berlin-wall.net; and see Ladd 1997,
7–12).

The long-term perspective on the use of sacred space that has been provided here
suggests that there is a need and indeed potential beneﬁt from re-aligning heritage
not as something distant, fenced-off and far removed from society and individuals.
This argument has been professed by other scholars in the past (e.g. Meskell 2000),
but it still inspires controversy and has repercussions for how heritage is managed at
an everyday level. Theorists of conservation politics have come to understand that
the value of a particular heritage site lies not in the material properties themselves
but rather in the ways in which it engages its intended audiences (Muñoz Viñas
2005). The argument, furthermore, follows the historical development from the
materialist approach towards authenticity and conservation that can be observed in
the Venice Charter of 1964 to the constructionist attitudes observable in the Nara
Document formulated 40 years later (Larsen 1995). We could go one step further,
however, and approach some aspects of heritage as a form of consumption that must
be self-regulated by its users for the beneﬁt of local communities, such as the Kurds
of northern Syria who frequent Qabr an-Nabi Huri. I have argued here that the prac-
tice of gouging constitutes a particular kind of consumption related to popular wor-
ship and pilgrimage which justiﬁes that certain heritage sites and monuments are
used up in the process. As seen from the case of Khoros, gouging is a living tradi-
tion that is a vital component of the religious experience of visiting pilgrimage sites
in the present and the past. By outlawing or regulating the practice, the very nature
of the site would be altered, consequently becoming not only less authentic, but also
less valuable and meaningful to its users, i.e. the pilgrims.

Conclusion
This paper has investigated the so-called pilgrims’ gouges in both contemporary and
historical contexts in order to give some sense of the long-term historical trajectory
in which the engagement with materiality has been crucial
to the religious

366

T.M. Kristensen

experience of pilgrimage. We have thus looked at gouging in two different contexts,
one where it continues to be a living tradition (Khoros), and one where it has seem-
ingly died out, not least as a consequence of the increased professionalisation of the
disciplines of archaeology and cultural heritage management (Egypt). The pilgrim’s
gouges also add to our understanding of the relationship between the consumption
of sacred spaces and pilgrimage in a cross-cultural perspective, as it does not appear
to be limited to the cultural sphere of the ancient Egyptian world, nor indeed to the
contemporary Syrian context. In conclusion, the long-term historical and archaeolog-
ical perspectives presented here question our contemporary use of sites and places
considered to be sacred and part of our heritage. Closer consideration of the social
and religious context of the gouges indeed helps us to understand the multifaceted
relationships that exist between materiality and the consumption of sacred places,
both in the past and in the present, with important implications for the way that heri-
tage sites are approached and managed.

Acknowledgements
The ﬁeldwork upon which this paper is based was funded by an EliteForsk travelling fellow-
ship from the Danish Ministry of Science that I held in 2008–2009. It forms part of a bigger
research project that I currently direct: ‘The Emergence of Sacred Travel: Experience, Econ-
omy and Connectivity in Ancient Mediterranean Pilgrimage’ (www.sacredtravel.dk), funded
by the Danish Research Council’s Sapere Aude career programme (2013–2017). I thank Cor-
nelius Holtorf for his comments and enthusiasm in the endeavour of organising the ‘Heritage
Erasure’ session at the Kalmar conference and for putting this paper together, as well as the
three anonymous reviewers of my manuscript.

Notes on contributor
Troels Myrup Kristensen is an associate professor of Classical art and archaeology at Aarhus
University. His research interests include iconoclasm, pilgrimage and visual culture. Among
his publications are Making and Breaking the Gods, Christian Responses to Pagan Sculpture
in Late Antiquity (Aarhus University Press 2013), Ateliers and Artisans in Roman Art and
Archaeology (Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplementary Series 2012) and The Material
Culture of Roman and Early Christian Pilgrimage (Leuven University Press 2012). He is
currently writing a book on the archaeology of sacred travel.

References
Arnold, F. 2003. Elephantine XXX. Die Nachnutzung des Chnumtempelbezirks [Elephantine

XXX. The Afterlife of the Temple of Khnum Precinct]. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.

Bagnall, R. S., and D. W. Rathbone. 2004. Egypt from Alexander to the Copts: An Archaeo-

logical and Historical Guide. London: The British Museum Press.

Bakirtzis, C. 2002. “Pilgrimage to Thessalonike: The Tomb of St. Demetrios.” Dumbarton

Oaks Papers 56: 175–192.

Ballet, P., and F. Mahmoud. 1986. “Moules en terre cuite d’Eléphantine (Musée Copte).
Nouvelles données sur les ateliers de la region d’Assouan, à l’époque Byzantine et aux
premiers temps de l’occupation arabe [Terracotta Moulds from Elephane (Coptic
Museum). New Data on Workshops in the Region of Aswan, from the Byzantine Period
to the First Period of the Arab Occupation].” Bulletin de l’Institut Français d’Archéologie
Orientale 87: 53–72.

Bernand, É. 1969. Les Inscriptions Grecques de Philae. II. Haut et Bas Empire [Greek
Inscriptions from Philae II. High and Late Empire]. Paris: Éditions du Centre National de
la Recherche Scientiﬁque.

Burns, R. 2009. Monuments of Syria. 3rd ed. London: I.B. Tauris.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

367

Byrne, D. 2007. Surface Collection: Archaeological Travels in Southeast Asia. Lanham, MD:

AltaMira Press.

Coleman, S., and J. Elsner. 1995. Pilgrimage: Past and Present: Sacred Travel and Sacred

Space in the World Religions. London: The British Museum Press.

Colwell-Chantaphonh, C. 2009. “The Archaeologist as a World Citizen: On the Morals of
Heritage Preservation and Destruction.” In Cosmopolitan Archaeologies, edited by
L. Meskell, 140–165. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Coonan, C. 2013. “Chinese Schoolboy, 15, Exposed as Egypt’s Ancient Temple Grafﬁti
Vandal.” The Independent. Accessed March 11, 2014. http://www.independent.co.uk/
arts-entertainment/art/news/chinese-schoolboy-15-exposed-as-egypts-ancient-temple-grafﬁti-
vandal-8633556.html.

Daumas, F. 1957. “Le sanatorium de Dendara [The Sanatorium of Dendara].” Bulletin de

l’Institut Français d’Archéologie Orientale 56: 35–57.

Duke, P. 2010. The Tourists Gaze, the Cretans Glance: Archaeology and Tourism on a Greek

Island. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.

El Daly, O. 2005. Egyptology: The Missing Millennium. Ancient Egypt in Medieval Arabic

Writings. London: Routledge.

El-Hay, N. A. 2003. Facts on the Ground. Archaeological Practice and Territorial Self-

fashioning in Israeli Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

El-Saghir, M., J.-C. Golvin, M. Redde, H. el-Sayed, and G. Wagner. 1986. Le Camp Romain
Institut Français d’Archéologie

de Louqsor [The Roman Camp at Luxor]. Cairo:
Orientale.

Elsner, J. 2005. “Piety and Passion: Contest and Consensus in the Audiences for Early Chris-
tian Pilgrimage.” In Pilgrimage in Graeco-Roman & Early Christian Antiquity: Seeing
the Gods, edited by J. Elsner and I. Rutherford, 411–434. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Elsner, J., and I. Rutherford, eds. 2005. Pilgrimage in Graeco-Roman & Early Christian

Antiquity: Seeing the Gods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fartacek, G. 2003. Pilgerstätten in der syrischen Peripherie [Places of Pilgrimage in the

Syrian Periphery]. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Finn, C. 1997. “Leaving More than Footprints: Modern Votive Offerings at Chaco Canyon

Prehistoric Site.” Antiquity 271: 169–178.

Frankfurter, D. 1998. Religion in Roman Egypt: Assimilation and Resistance. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

Gordon, R. 1979. “The Real and the Imaginary: Production and Religion in the

Graeco-Roman World.” Art History 2 (1): 5–34.

Grabar, A. 1958. Ampoules de Terre Sainte [Ampoules from the Holy Land]. Paris: Librairie

Grossmann, P. 2002. Christliche Architektur in Ägypten [Christian Architecture in Egypt].

C. Klincksieck.

Leiden: Brill.

Hamilakis, Y. 2009. The Nation and its Ruins: Antiquity, Archaeology, and National Imagi-

nation in Greece. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hölbl, G. 2004. Altägypten im Römischen Reich. Der römische Pharao und seine Tempel II.
Die Tempel des römischen Nubien [Old Egypt in the Roman Empire. The Roman Pha-
raoh and his Temples II. The Temples of Roman Nubia]. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.

Holtorf, C. 2005. “Iconoclasm: The Destruction and Loss of Heritage Reconsidered.” In Art
in the Age of Terrorism, edited by G. Coulter-Smith and M. Owen, 228–239. London:
Holberton.

Holtorf, C., and G. Fairclough. 2013. “The New Heritage and Re-shapings of the Past.” In
Reclaiming Archaeology: Beyond the Tropes of Modernity, edited by A. González-Ruibal,
197–210. Abingdon: Routledge.

Jones, S. 2010. “Negotiating Authentic Objects and Authentic Selves: Beyond the Decon-

struction of Authenticity.” Journal of Material Culture 15: 181–203.

Junghaendel, M. 1891. “Rillen an aegyptischen Tempeln [Gouges on Egyptian Temples].”

Zeitschrift für Ethnologie 23: 861–864.

Kiss, Z. 1989. Alexandrie V. Les ampoules de Saint Ménas découvertes à Kôm el-Dikka
(1961-1981) [Alexandria V. The Ampoules of Saint Menas Discovered at Kôm el-Dikka
(1961–1981)]. Warsaw: Éditions Scientiﬁques de Pologne.

368

T.M. Kristensen

Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Academy of Sciences 925: 146–169.

Heinemann.

Kristensen, T. M. 2012a. “The Material Culture of Roman and Early Christian Pilgrimage:

An Introduction.” HEROM 1: 67–78.

Kristensen, T. M. 2012b. “Textiles, Tattoos, and the Representation of Pilgrimage in the

Roman and Early Christian Periods.” HEROM 1: 107–134.

Ladd, B. 1997. The Ghosts of Berlin. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Larsen, K. E., ed. 1995. Nara Conference on Authenticity in Relation to the World Heritage

Convention. Nara, Japan 1-6 November 1994. Trondheim: Tapir Publishers.

MacCoull, L. S. B. 1990. “Christianity at Syene/Elephantine/Philae.” Bulletin of the Ameri-

Massih, J. A., C. Benech, and M. Gelin. 2009. “First Results on the City Planning of Cyrrhus

can Society of Papyrologists 27: 151–162.

(Syria).” ArchéoSciences 33: 201–203.

McKenzie, J. 2007. The Architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 BC to AD 700. New

Meskell, L. 2000. “The Practice and Politics of Archaeology in Egypt.” Annals of New York

Muñoz Viñas, S. 2005. Contemporary Theory of Conservation. Oxford: Elsevier Butterworth

Nautin, P. 1967. “La conversion du temple de Philæ en église chrétienne [The Conversion of
the Temple of Philae into a Christian Church].” Cahiers Archéologiques: Fin de
l’Antiquité et Moyen Age 17: 1–43.

Ouzman, S. 2001. “Seeing is Deceiving: Rock Art and the Non-visual.” World Archaeology

33 (2): 237–256.

Press.

Porter, V., ed. 2012. Hajj. Journey to the Heart of Islam. London: The British Museum

Reid, D. M. 2003. Whose Pharaohs? Archaeology, Museums, and Egyptian National Identity

from Napoleon to World War I. Cairo: American University of Cairo Press.

Rutherford, I. C. 2012. “Travel and Pilgrimage.” In Oxford Handbook of Roman Egypt, edi-

ted by C. Riggs, 701–716. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shackley, M. 2001. Managing Sacred Sites: Service Provision and Visitor Experience.

London: Thomson.

Shaw, I. 2004. Ancient Egypt. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, G. S., P. M. Messenger, and H. A. Soderland, eds. 2010. Heritage Values in Contem-

porary Society. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.

Stewart, P. 2007. “Gell’s Idols and Roman Cult.” In Art’s Agency and Art History, edited by

R. Osborne and J. Tanner, 158–178. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Tejel, J. 2009. Syria’s Kurds: History, Politics and Society. London: Routledge.
Turner, V., and E. L. B. Turner. 1978. Image and Pilgrimage in Christian Culture.

New York: Columbia University Press.

Urry, J., and J. Larsen. 2011. The Tourist Gaze 3.0. London: Sage.
Westwood, J. 2003. On Pilgrimage: Sacred Journeys Around the World. Mahwah, NJ:

HiddenSpring Books.

Wijesuriya, G. 2001. “Pious Vandals: Restoration or Destruction in Sri Lanka?” In Destruc-
tion and Conservation of Cultural Property, edited by R. Layton, P. G. Stone, and J. Tho-
mas, 256–263. London: Routledge.

Wijesuriya, G. 2005. “The Past in the Present. Perspectives in Caring for Buddhist Sites in
Sri Lanka.” In Conservation of Living Religious Heritage. Papers from the ICCROM
2003 Forum on Living Religious Heritage: Conserving the Sacred, edited by H. Stovel,
N. Stanley-Price, and R. Killick, 30–43. Rome: ICCROM.

Yasin, A. M. 2012. “Response: Materializing the Study of Late Antique Pilgrimage.”

HEROM 1: 261–275.


