ARTICLE

29

Dr No in trade mark country: a Dutch point
of view
Paul Reeskamp*

‘Dr No’

‘Dr No’ is the title of the ﬁrst ‘James Bond’ ﬁlm and the
name of one of the main characters featured in this
movie.
therefore serves to distinguish this
James Bond movie from other James Bond movies. For
that reason, ‘Dr No’ identiﬁes the artistic origin of that
movie and not the commercial origin. ‘Dr No’ was used
as a reference which is descriptive of the goods, indicat-
ing to the consumers that the ﬁlms, comic books, and
the like for which this sign was used is about the charac-
ter of ‘Dr No’. Thus, ‘Dr No’ cannot be considered a
trade mark. The signs ‘007’ and ‘James Bond’ on the
other hand do identify the commercial origin of these
movies and may be considered valid trade marks. In
short, this is what the Court of First Instance held in its
recent ‘Dr No’ ruling of 30 June 2009.1

The Dutch courts initially took an even stricter
stance as to the trade mark protection of titles of books
or ﬁlms or characters featured in them. For example,
according to the District court of Amsterdam in 2004,2
‘Suske and Wiske’3 did not qualify as a valid trade
mark since they are the names of the main characters
in the ‘Suske and Wiske’ comic series, and will there-
fore not be perceived as an identiﬁcation of origin by
the public but as part of the comic and/or the title.
The fact that the ‘Suske and Wiske’ comics comprise a
large series of comics did not alter the view of the
Amsterdam Court. The Amsterdam Court of Appeal,
however, has taken an approach in line with the ‘Dr
No’ decision. In 2001, this appeal court accepted that

Key issues
† Why treat ‘Dr No’ differently than ‘Pepsi Cola’?
† Can ﬁlm titles and names of characters be trade

mark protected?

† Are ﬁlm titles and featured characters free for all

after expiration of copyright protection?

‘Tarzan’ can be a trade mark, since it identiﬁed a series
of comics, and in 2003 it came to a same conclusion
for ‘Harry Potter’.4

In my view, not only ‘James Bond’ but ‘Dr No’ can
be considered as valid trade marks. The same applies to
ﬁlm titles, book titles—whether or not part of a
series—and names of pop bands. Whether indications
of this kind qualify for protection under trade mark
law, in turn, poses further questions. Does the public’s
familiarity with Mickey Mouse imply that this charac-
ter is widely known as a trade mark? And what about
the cumulative aspects of copyright law? Is there trade
mark infringement when ‘Harry Potter’ is put on a
lunch box? The practical relevance of these questions is
mainly a concern for
the merchandising industry,
where character merchandising is big business invol-
ving substantial sums. It is estimated that 2003 turn-
over in entertainment merchandise amounted to no
less than E16 billion.5 However, there are also less

Lawyer at Allen & Overy (Amsterdam).

*
1 Court of First Instance 30 June 2009, ‘Dr No’(T-435/05).
2 Amsterdam District Court, 28 July 2004, Standaard/Het Gele Teken et al.,
AMI (Dutch Journal for copyright, Media and Information Law) 2005-2,
no. 3 annotated by Visser. A similar decision was made by the President
of the Amsterdam District Court, 29 April 1982, Suske and Wiske
parodies, AMR (Dutch Journal for Copyright and Media Law) 1982,
pp. 83 – 84. See also The Hague District Court, 20 May 1998, Glen Miller
Band, BMMB (Benelux Trade mark, Designs, and Models Law Bulletin)
1998, no. 82, p. 23, The Hague District Court, 16 February 2000, Fa
Mulan/Disney’s Mulan, BIE (Dutch Journal for Intellectual Property)
2001, no. 36, The Hague District Court, 2 August 2000, Teletubbies, IER
(Dutch Journal for Intellectual Property and Publicity Rights) 2000, no.
62 (set aside by The Hague Court of Appeal, 31 March 2009).

3 The Flemish comic characters Suske and Wiske are very well-known in
Belgium and the Netherlands. The English variety of this comic, Spike
and Suzy, is far less widely known in the UK. In this article, the author
refers to a number of comic characters strongly rooted in continental
European culture in connection to Dutch judgments in trade mark cases.
In most instances, the original names of these characters have been
maintained throughout this article in order to remain true to the author’s
intention.

4 Amsterdam Court of Appeal, 26 July 2001, Tarzan, AMI 2002-1, p. 16;

Amsterdam Court of Appeal, 6 November 2003, Harry Potter/Tanja
Grotter, IER 2004, 20, with notes by De Cock Buning. See also the
judgments of lower courts cited in T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit.,
p. 138, note 82.
International Licensing Industry Merchandisers’ Association (LIMA),
www.ﬁlmreference.com.

5

# The Author (2009). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

30

ARTICLE

titillating questions in this context, such as the question
as to whether ‘Mickey Mouse’ is a valid trade mark for
caps and pencils, and whether the Dutch standard
work ‘200 House Plants in Colour’
is a descriptive
mark for a book about 200 house plants in colour.6
Naturally, the answer to these questions is afﬁrmative.
I therefore refrain from discussing such issues in more
detail here.

Dik Trom7
In the Netherlands, the issue whether the title of a
work (a book or ﬁlm) can also be a trade mark for that
work is in nearly all instances linked to the Dik Trom
the Dik Trom
case. Kluitman—the publisher of
books—ﬁled the ‘Dik Trom’
trade mark with the
Benelux Trade mark Ofﬁce in 1978 in an apparent
attempt to use trade mark law as a means to prevent
the Dik Trom books from reverting to the public
domain upon lapse of the copyright protection on
1 January 1982 (50 years after the death of the author
C. Joh. Kieviet). This caused quite a stir in Dutch poli-
tics and copyright law circles.8 At the time, discussion
revolved around the issue as to whether it is desirable
to seek protection through the back-door of
trade
mark law when it is not (or no longer) possible to
obtain protection through the front door of copyright
law, although ‘discussion’ is perhaps an overstatement
in this context. Indeed, ever since Verkade approved
the judgment of the Amsterdam court in preliminary
relief proceedings in Suske and Wiske in 1985,9 the
opinion that comic ﬁgures, characters in novels, ﬁlm
titles, etc. cannot be regarded as a trade mark because
they are part of the work and are therefore descriptive
has been reiterated in the literature, but never seriously
elaborated in greater detail.10 However, as soon as a
title (eg The Financial Times) or a main character (eg
Harry Potter) is used for a series of newspapers, books,
or ﬁlms,
the prevailing doctrine leans towards the
possibility of granting protection under trade mark
law.11 The decisive argument is that the title or the

name of the comic hero does not initially refer to the
substance, but rather to a common root. As mentioned
above, this ‘series argument’ has also been reﬂected in
judgments of higher courts.

The opinion that the name of a literary hero linked
to a book/ﬁlm in which this hero plays a main part
cannot be regarded as a trade mark for these books/
ﬁlms, seems to be dictated by the desire to avoid the
possibility of extending the term of copyright protec-
tion of the Dik Trom books and other works by means
of applying trade mark law. However, I believe that this
could justify imposing restrictions on the protective
scope of title and character trade marks, but that this is
no argument
for disqualiﬁcation as a trade mark.
While the view that titles, main characters, etc. cannot
constitute a trade mark because they form part of the
work has been frequently reiterated, remarkably it has
hardly ever been elaborated in the literature or
case law.

Unsound reasoning
If we examine the merits of this opinion, the only poss-
ible conclusion is that it is unsound, being based on
the false assumption that the key issue is whether—for
instance—Harry Potter is a valid trade mark for books
and ﬁlms about Harry Potter. Although the reasoning
that Harry Potter is descriptive of Harry Potter books is
understandable, this reasoning is incorrect from a trade
mark law perspective. By the same reasoning, one can
argue that Mars is descriptive of Mars bars or that
7 Up is descriptive of 7 Up soft drinks.

These examples illustrate the false inference that the
species (for example, the adventures of Harry Potter) is
regarded as the genus (the generic class), whereas the
generic class is not Harry Potter as such, but the enter-
tainment embodied in the books and ﬁlms. The correct
answer from a trade mark law perspective is found by
asking whether Mars is distinctive for chocolate bars, 7
Up for soft drinks, and Harry Potter for stories about
an adolescent wizard.

6 President of the Arnhem District Court, 30 October 1967, BIE 1969, no.

15.

7 Dik Trom is the main character in a series of Dutch children’s book by

8

9

the same name published 1891 –1931.
For more details, see H Cohen Jehoram, NJB (Netherlands Law Journal)
9 January 1982, Part 2, pp. 50 –51, J Bruin, note commenting on the
judgment of the Haarlem District Court 25 January 1983, Dik Trom,
AMR 1985, pp. 12 – 13, and Verkade in ‘Het werk als merk, en het merk als
werk [The work as trade mark, and the trade mark as work]’ (AMR 1982,
pp. 141 –144). See also more recently Van Woensel (thesis), Merk, God en
Verbod [Trade Mark, God and Commandment], Chapter 6 (de Lex,
2007).
In his article in AMR (footnote 8) Verkade said: ‘I hold that a literary
hero trade mark is unsuitable as a trade mark or distinctive mark in

respect of the products (books, ﬁlms, etc.) in which he plays a signiﬁcant
part. Cf. legal consideration 9 of the judgment of the President of the
Amsterdam District Court in the Suske & Wiske case’.

10 See Gielen/Wichers Hoeth, Trade Mark Law, Zwolle 1992, no. 371; Visser,

comment on the judgment of the Amsterdam Court of Appeal, 26 July
2001, Tarzan, AMI 2002, pp. 15 – 16; Gielen in Kort Begrip van het
Intellectuele Eigendomsrecht [Explanatory Summary of Intellectual
Property Right], 9th print, 2008, p. 213 and T. Cohen Jehoram/Van
Nispen/Huydecoper, Merkenrecht [Trade Mark Law], Deventer 2008, no.
5.3.4.1.

11 See Gielen/Wichers Hoeth, op. cit., no. 371, Gielen in Kort Begrip, p. 213;

Visser, comment on the judgment of the Amsterdam District Court, 28
July 2004, Standaard/Het Gele Teken et al., AMI 2005-2, pp. 63 –64; and
T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit., 5.3.4.2. and 5.3.4.3.

Paul Reeskamp . Dr No in trade mark country

ARTICLE

31

This question can undoubtedly be answered in the
afﬁrmative. The Harry Potter trade mark is equally suit-
able to distinguish this form of entertainment from
that originating from authors other than J.K. Rowling,
just as the trade mark Mars is for setting apart this
chocolate bar from those of other confectioners. The
public expects particular subject matter and quality in
respect of
the reading entertainment contained in
books marketed under the trade mark Harry Potter,
just as the public expects a certain taste in respect of
bars marketed under the trade mark Mars. In this
sense, the trade mark Harry Potter serves as a guarantee
of origin. Similarly, the comic characters in the French
comic Asterix and Obelix12 symbolize a certain form of
entertainment. As such, they are a distinctive mark for
fans of the adventures of those brave Gauls. It is this
speciﬁc form of entertainment which constitutes the
service offered under the trade marks Asterix and
Obelix. This is not basically different for titles of one-
off editions, such as the album Achtung Baby by U2.
Comic books, CDs, and DVDs endowed with a speciﬁc
title enable consumers to distinguish them from other
entertainment products. All these signs therefore have
an essential trade mark function—as described, inter
alia, by the European Court of Justice in Arsenal—
serving as a guarantee for consumers in respect of the
identity of the origin of the trade marked entertain-
ment products, so that consumers can distinguish
those entertainment products from those originating
from others without the likelihood of confusion.13

In ‘Dr No’, the Court of First Instance disqualiﬁed
the title ‘Dr No’ as a trade mark on the ground that it
served to distinguish one James Bond movie from
other James Bond movies. Thus, ‘Dr No’ was an identi-
ﬁcation of the artistic source and did not—unlike the
signs ‘007’ and ‘James Bond’—refer to its commercial
origin.14 I dare to criticize this reasoning. First, it is dif-
ﬁcult to see what, from a trade mark law point of view,
is the essential difference between the artistic origin
and the commercial origin. As the court held in Dr No,
commercial origin enables the consumer to repeat a
purchase in the case of a good experience and to avoid
it when the experience is bad. If I recommend a friend
of mine to rent ‘Dr No’, I use this identiﬁcation to
enable my friend to enjoy what I have enjoyed. It is
true that Dr No also serves to distinguish it from other
James Bond movies, but that ignores the fact that it
also distinguishes this movie from all other movies,

whether James Bond movies or not. Second, one might
even hold that
the artistic source is more directly
linked to the quality of a product than is the commer-
cial source. It is fair to assume that the average consu-
mer of literature is more interested to know who is the
author of a book than who is the publisher. Third, if
one takes a look at the decisions of the ECJ one sees
that the highest European court refers to ‘origin’ in
general without stressing whether it refers to commer-
cial origin.15 The distinction between ‘artistic’ and
‘commercial’ origin therefore seems to be artiﬁcial.

Obviously, titles can also be unsuited as trade marks
if they are descriptive of the subject matter of the book,
like the 200 House Plants in Colour for the book about
200 house plants depicted in colour. There the title
describes the subject matter and cannot serve to dis-
tinguish one book about 200 house plants
from
another. In contrast, Dr No as such is not descriptive
of action ﬁlm entertainment: it is just as little part of
the ‘Dr No’ movie as 7 Up is part of 7 Up soft drinks.

There is therefore—succinctly put—no reason what-
soever to discriminate between Dr No and 7 Up when
it comes to trade mark law.

Consumers do not perceive
it as a trade mark
The fact that The Discovery of Heaven is primarily con-
ceived as the title of the novel by the same name of
Dutch author Harry Mulisch and not as a sign
intended to identify the origin of the novel does not
disqualify the title as a mark. Fanta also is the common
name of the soft drink by the same name and does not
primarily refer to the origin of this soft drink (The
Coca Cola Company). When it comes to products of
this kind, nobody is bothered that the trade mark pri-
marily identiﬁes the product while the manufacturer’s
brand (such as Unilever) informs consumers directly
about the origin of the product. Quite properly a trade
mark is not required to inform consumers about the
exact origin of a product of service.16 For consumers, it
is sufﬁcient to know that products or services offered
under the same trade mark are always from the same
source. Consumers who order The Discovery of Heaven
from their bookstore on the recommendation of
their neighbour assume that this book possesses the
recommended literary quality. It is not required that
consumers be aware that a particular indication is

12 A widely known series of comic books created by Rene´ Goscinny and

15 Eg ECJ Arsenal, Point 51 and ECJ 25 January 2007, Opel-Adam v Autec,

Albert Uderzo.

13 ECJ, 12 November 2002, Arsenal/Reed, point 50.
14 Point 25, Dr No.

point 21, ECJ 30 June 2009, L’Ore´al v Bellure, point 58.

16 T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit., p. 41 and p. 162.

32

ARTICLE

intended as a trade mark. For consumers, it sufﬁces to
be able to distinguish one soft drink from another on
the basis of an indication17 or—if we retain our
example—to be able to distinguish one book from the
other on the basis of its title. As such, the title has a
function of indicating the origin. The fact that a title of
a book or a ﬁlm, or the name of a comic character, is
primarily regarded as the generic name of this particu-
lar book/ﬁlm/comic character is therefore irrelevant
from the perspective of trade mark law.

The ‘series argument’
The ‘series argument’ was brieﬂy discussed above. An
example of this argument can be found in paragraph
2.18 of Tarzan (Amsterdam Court of Appeal)18:

In this manner it has been made sufﬁciently plausible for
now that the trade mark TARZAN is a generic term by
which a series of ﬁlms and books with ever changing sub-
stance is being indicated. Consequently, the trade mark is
used in such a way that it should not be regarded as part
of the product, but as suitable for distinguishing the pro-
ducts from other products.

The Court of Appeal used the series argument in this
instance in order to overcome the hurdle of ‘part of the
product’. This is an unnecessary argument because it is
based on the false assumption that TARZAN is descrip-
tive of comic books about Tarzan (species), whereas the
point of departure should be that Tarzan is descriptive
of
the entertainment embodied in books or ﬁlms
(genus). While this is no longer basically relevant, it is
also a false argument because Tarzan is neither less nor
more part of one or ten comic books about Tarzan.19
Upon closer inspection, the series argument also is a
peculiar argument. After all, when we look at Coca
Cola, who would ever attach the condition that this
soft drink must be available in various ﬂavours?

Next to being unnecessary, false, and peculiar, the
series argument is also undesirable. An example: suppose
that J.K. Rowling stopped after her ﬁrst Harry Potter
book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone. Then
suppose that Vincent Vinegar (ﬁctitious name) wrote
Harry Potter and the Bursting of the Dike, having just one
common feature, to wit, that this Harry Potter also is a

student wizard. This is then neither copyright infringe-
ment nor infringement of
the name ‘Harry Potter’,
because Potter is a common English surname. Due to the
mere fact of writing just one book, the series argument
would leave J.K. Rowling with empty hands vis-a`-vis
Vincent Vinegar from a trade mark law perspective. The
fact that ‘Harry Potter’ is used for similar services (enter-
tainment), with identical signs and that there is (indirect)
likelihood of confusion would—in the eyes of advocates
of the series argument—be a mere case of ‘tough luck’.
‘Then she should have written more Harry Potter books.’
I believe that this is an inherently unreasonable and there-
fore undesirable outcome of application of the series
argument. The fact that Rowling may succeed in an
action against Vinegar on account of an unlawful act20 is
at most cold consolation, but no justiﬁcation to exclude
her from any rights under trade mark law.

In short:

the series argument

fails. There is no
reason to disqualify the title of a one-off edition (book,
ﬁlm, or CD) as a valid trade mark for entertainment
embodied in that particular edition. The series argu-
ment serves as an argument to extend the protective
scope of titles and characters,21 but not as a condition
for acknowledgment as a trade mark.

United States
Whereas Dutch literature and case law sufﬁce with the
bare standpoint
titles, comic characters, etc.
cannot be a trade mark because they form part of the
product, American literature provides more extensive
analyses, such as in the American bible on trade marks
McCarthy on Trademarks.22,23

that

American case law also regards one-off editions as
unsuitable to pass as a trade mark because allegedly
they are descriptive of the substance of the work. Only
if a title has acquired secondary meaning does protec-
tion under trade mark law come into sight. The argu-
ment supporting this is that each ﬁlm, book, comic
character, etc. is unique and, as such, does not compete
with other work of
the
assumption that a title or character is regarded as a
generic name. Just as in Benelux literature,
‘species’
and ‘genus’ are thus categorized together.

that kind. This explains

17 Gielen, Kort Begrip, p. 214 and T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit., p. 162.
18 Amsterdam Court of Appeal, 26 July 2001, AMI 2002; the Court of First

Instance also used this series argument in Dr No (see point 25).

19 As conﬁrmed by Visser in his notes in AMI commenting on Tarzan, who

adds the consequence that even the series argument should not provide
trade mark protection for character trade marks. Yet in a later note from
2004 in AMI commenting on Suske and Wiske in the Amsterdam District
Court, Visser retracted his ‘Tarzan opinion’ in favour of the ‘series
argument’.

20 See (older) legal precedents on the protection against unlawful acts as

referred to by Martens, Onrechtmatige Daad [Unlawful Act] (old, loose
leaf), VI, no. 135 note 5.

21 Cf. T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit., about serial trade marks in 5.3.2.
22 McCarthy on Trademarks, Thomson Reuters (March 2009) Chapter 10,

Literary, Artistic and Entertainment rights.

23 On trade mark law protection of titles and characters in a large number
of European countries see Character Merchandising in Europe (ed. Heijo
Ruijsenaars), Kluwer Law International (2003).

Paul Reeskamp . Dr No in trade mark country

ARTICLE

33

In the USA, this approach has encountered criti-
cism.24 McCarthy fails to appreciate the trade mark
logic of this doctrine:

The problem is in explaining why a title of a single book
or movie serves more like the generic name ‘soup’ and not
just like a trade mark such as ‘Campbell’s’.25

He also points out that the assumption that each work
is unique in its kind and therefore does not constitute
competition with other works is unrealistic:

Obviously, the publishing and motion picture trade might
regard this rule of law as hardly reﬂecting the economic
facts of laws of their professions.

Indeed, everyone who has ever picked a ﬁlm for a
night out at the cinema or who has nosed about in a
bookshop looking for a decent read can concur with
this. The ‘part of the product argument’ appears to be
based solely on theoretical assumptions. Apparently,
these assumptions are just as much rooted in the USA
as they are in the Netherlands, because it seems an
almost irrebuttable presumption, McCarthy sighs. Given
the American approach that the title or main character
of a one-off edition can be identiﬁed with the work
itself and is therefore descriptive in nature, it is logical
that the series argument has also been broadly reﬂected
in US case law.26 Another parallel with the Dutch
approach is that the reluctance to protect titles of one-
off editions as trade marks is based on the fear that
trade mark law would provide an essentially inﬁnite
extension of the limited copyright protection.27

Principle: cumulative protection
is possible
Neither the Dutch Copyright Act nor the Benelux
Treaty on Intellectual Property speciﬁcally legislate for
the concurrence of copyrights and trade mark rights.28
However, Dutch case law does: under Dutch law, it is,
in principle, possible to protect a certain object under
both trade mark and copyright law.29 So the Starbucks
logo can be protected both as a work of copyright and

as a trade mark.
Supreme Court ruled:

In Benetton/G-Star,30

the Dutch

The basic assumption is that a holder of both a trade mark
right and a copyright can maintain both rights next to
each other, provided that the titleholder has an interest in
the protection vested in both rights (Article 3: 303 Dutch
Civil Code).

This is also referred to as ‘concurrence’. The possibility
of concurrence is logical given that the object of pro-
tection under copyright law is different from the object
of protection under trade mark law. Copyright law pro-
tects an original work against unauthorized publication
and duplication, while trade mark law protects the dis-
tinctive feature of a brand against the likelihood of
confusion and, if it is a known brand, also against the
likelihood of dilution. Where trade mark law provides
more extensive protection than copyright law, or vice
versa,
the titleholder can in principle invoke the
broader protective regime of the two.31 For instance,
whereas Heineken as a trade mark owner cannot
oppose the mere fact that someone makes a thousand
copies of the Heineken logo, Heineken can proceed
against this multiplication in its capacity as copyright
owner. Conversely, suppose that the copyrights on the
Heineken logo have expired; Heineken would still be
able to oppose the acts of another brewery afﬁxing the
Heineken logo to bottles containing its own beer on
the basis of its trade mark right. Although concurrence
is possible in principle, it is not unlimited. In Bigott/
Doucal, the Dutch Supreme Court32 set limitations to
concurrence if ‘the tenor of one of these regulations
expressly constitutes the opposite’.

Cumulation during the term
of copyright protection
I will now discuss the cumulation issues which may
arise during the term of copyright protection of works
if the titles and/or the featured (depicted) characters
are also protected as a trade mark. This discussion will
demonstrate that copyright and trade mark protection

24 See eg JL Vana, Single Work Titles and Group Artist or Author Names;

29 BenGH 16 December 1998, Dior/Evora II, NJ [Netherlands Jurisprudence]

Registrability Revisited, 88 Trade mark Reporter 250 (1998).

25 McCarthy, op. cit., Chapter 10, p. 9.
26 McCarthy, op. cit., Chapter 10, pp. 11 –14.
27 See Vana, loc. cit., p. 8.
28 The Community Trade Mark Regulation enables the original copyright

owner to oppose registration (Art 8 paragraph 4 in conjunction with Art
42 paragraph 1 sub c resp. in conjunction with Art 52 paragraph 1 under
c and Art 52 paragraph 2 under c) or the use (Art 106 paragraph 1 in
conjunction with Art 52 paragraph 2 under c) of a junior trade mark
comprising this owner’s work. However, this only relates to cases in
which the copyrights and the trade mark rights are owned by different
holders.

2001, 133 with notes by Spoor (NJ 2001, 134), Dutch Supreme Court 16
April 1999, Bigott/Ducal, NJ 1999, 697 with notes by Hugenholtz. See for
a more elaborate discussion of concurrence of copyrights and trade mark
rights, T Cohen Jehoram et al., op. cit., Chapter 19, including further
references to the literature.

30 Dutch Supreme Court, 8 September 2006, Benetton/G-Star, NJ 2006, 492.
31 I assume that the copyrights and trade mark rights vest in the same title

holder (subjective cumulation). If they are owned by different holders,
other problems arise which I will not address here. See in this respect T
Cohen Jehoram loc. cit., op. cit., 19.2 and 19.3.

32 Dutch Supreme Court, 16 April 1999, Bigott/Doucal, NJ 1999, 697 with

notes by Hugenholtz.

34

ARTICLE

can coexist peacefully and that, in some instances, their
regimes are complementary.

function of the trade mark, ie guaranteeing the
origin of the product, is unaffected;36

of

case

copyright

For as long as the work in question and the charac-
ters featured (or depicted) in it33 are protected by
copyright, the need for additional trade mark right
protection is generally less urgent. An image of the
comic character Asterix on a t-shirt constitutes a
straightforward
infringement.
However, during the copyright term, it may be useful
to possess trade mark rights as additional back-up
cover (see the example of Vincent Vinegar publishing
Harry Potter and the Bursting of the Dike mentioned
above). Moreover, in legal practice it is less complicated
to produce evidence pursuant to a trade mark regis-
tration than to prove one’s status as copyright owner
(statement of creation, chain of title issues, etc.). It is
also generally simpler to comply with the trade mark
law requirement of distinctiveness than to meet the
originality requirement
for copyright, which must
involve ‘creative choices’.34 As stated earlier, the name
‘Harry Potter’ lacks sufﬁcient originality to qualify as a
work under copyright protection, but is sufﬁciently dis-
tinctive as an indication for the exciting adventures of
a student wizard (or wizard’s son, as connoisseurs will
say). The same applies to ‘James Bond’.

law such as the quotation right,

The concurrence of copyright and trade mark rights
may cause some brain-racking where the one regime
allows acts that the other regime may prohibit. This
primarily involves the various exemptions under copy-
the private
right
copying exemption,
the
parody exemption, and the exhibition exemption for
the purpose of sale of the original work.35 May the
holder of a trade mark ignore these limitations of copy-
right? I believe that Dutch legal precedents and Dutch
trade mark law offer sufﬁcient room for ﬂexible sol-
utions to any cumulation issues:

the educational exemption,

(i) in the majority of the cases mentioned above, the
holder of a trade mark will not be able to oppose
essential
the

limitations

copyright

since

the

(ii) in many instances, it will not involve a case of ‘use

in the course of trade’;37

(iii) it is sometimes possible to invoke the doctrine of

a ‘due cause’;38

(iv) or the freedom of speech—especially in the case
of the parody exemption—another example of a
due cause;39

(v) exhaustion of the trade mark right, especially rel-
evant to exhibition exemptions for the purpose of
sale of the original work;40

(vi) and ﬁnally the anti-cumulation rule as formulated
by the Dutch Supreme Court in Bigott/Doucal if
‘the tenor of the copyright expressly constitutes
the opposite’.

When a work under a copyright is parodied—eg a
the Suske and Wiske comic41—its
porn version of
assessment on the basis of the trade mark law criterion
of likelihood of confusion (in the case of a strong
resemblance of the parody with the original work) or
of likelihood of dilution, and more speciﬁcally in the
sense of affecting the reputation of the trade mark and/
or beneﬁting from the trade mark’s reputation in an
unjustiﬁed manner, will conceivably have an outcome
other than the parody exemption of copyright as con-
tained in Article 18b of the Dutch Copyright Act. After
all, the parody exemption is intended to allow the
socially and culturally accepted phenomenon of persi-
ﬂage, pastiche, or caricature, unless the hidden purpose
of the parody is the realization of commercial proﬁt.42
Protection under trade mark law has a different per-
spective, being usually intended to protect the repu-
tation of the trade mark, as becomes apparent from
Article 5(2) Trade Mark Directive. Sometimes,
the
reputation of a product has to put up with being paro-
died. However, one may doubt whether the varying
perspectives of copyright and trade mark law lead to
essentially different outcomes in practice.

33 Incidentally, I am not referring to the copyright protection of characters

38 See Art 5, paragraph 2 Trade Mark Directive, Art 2.20, paragraph 1,

as such. See in respect of this obstinate issue, Spoor/Verkade/Visser,
Auteursrecht [Copyright Law] (Kluwer, 2005), no. 3.4.7.

34 Dutch Supreme Court, 30 May 2008, Endstra tapes, NJ 2008, 556.
35 See Arts 15, 15a en 16a (right to quote), 16b and 16c (privacy copy) and
16 (education exception), Art 18b (parody-exception) and Art 23 (seller’s
exception) of the Dutch Copyright Act.

36 See, inter alia, ECJ, 14 May 2002, Ho¨lterhoff, EC CoJ, 12 November 2002,

Arsenal, ECJ, 25 January 2007, Opel/Autec, and ECJ, 12 June 2008 (O2/
Hutchinson).

37 Required for a successful opposition against the likelihood of confusion

(Art 5, paragraph 1 EC Trade mark Directive) and the likelihood of
dilution (Art 5, paragraph 2 EC Trade Mark Directive).

under d BTIP, and Art 6, paragraph 1 Trade Mark Directive.

39 Art 10 ECHR, see in this regard WC van Manen, Grote merken vangen

veel wind [Large Trade marks Catch Much Wind], BIE 1985, p. 206, and
see JL Jansen, Over geldige reden en parodierend merkgebruik [About due
cause and parodying trade mark use], IER 2007, pp. 85 –95 and T. Cohen
Jehoram loc. cit., op. cit., p. 369 and 612.

40 Dutch Supreme Court, 20 October 1995, Dior/Evora, NJ 1996, 682 with

notes by Spoor.

41 Dutch Supreme Court, 13 April 1984, Suske and Wiske, NJ 1984, 524

with notes by Wichers Hoeth, in which the porn version was prohibited
as unallowable parody.

42 See for more details Spoor/Verkade/Visser, op. cit., 5.5.3.

Paul Reeskamp . Dr No in trade mark country

ARTICLE

35

The above list illustrates that during the copyright
term, there are no serious cumulation issues in the
sense that the holder of trade mark could be able to
prohibit any acts allowed under copyright law. The
same applies if
it is acknowledged that ‘Suske and
Wiske’ is a valid trade mark for comic books in which
they are the main characters.

In respect of the subject matter of this article—the
protection of characters, titles, etc. under trade mark
law—the reverse question,
ie whether owners of a
copyright can prohibit any acts allowed under trade
mark law, is less interesting. The objections expressed
in the literature against granting trade mark protection
to titles and characters are mainly prompted by the
fear of improperly stretching the protective scope or
even extending the term of protection of the copyright
on the basis of trade mark law, and not vice versa, ie
extending the protective scope of the trade mark on the
basis of the copyright. Indeed, the Dutch Supreme
Court ruled in BMW v Blok that any attempt to apply
copyright for this purpose is defective on account of
the lack of an independent copyright interest.43 In
keeping with the position that concurrence or cumu-
lation is possible as formulated by the Dutch Supreme
Court in Bigott/Doucal, there will be no objection to
opposing unauthorized multiplication on the basis of
copyright law, if such opposition is impossible under
trade mark law.44 Within the context of competition
law, the European Court of Justice ruled in Dior/Evora
that the free movement of goods cannot be restricted
on the basis of copyright law in a way which trans-
gresses the restrictions provided for by trade mark
law.45

Trade mark protection after lapse
of the copyright term
To my knowledge, Dutch courts have never been asked
to consider whether a title of a work (book or ﬁlm) of
which the term of copyright protection has lapsed, can
still be protected as a trade mark.46 This indicates that
the fear of extending copyright protection by means of
trade mark law is more of an academic problem. This

is hardly surprising in view of the fact that only a few
comic and literary characters, or book titles—at least of
Dutch origin—are still
‘cashable’ 70 years after the
author’s death to the extent that they can be exploited
in a commercially viable manner. However, this is not
the case for many American comic characters. Mickey
Mouse, Donald Duck, Popeye, etc. are true evergreens.
Illustrative in this regard is an article I read about Elzie
Segar, the creator of Popeye47 who died in 1938. Seeing
that Segar died more than 70 years ago, Popeye is now
‘outlawed’ from copyright protection. However, King
Features, the titleholder to the character of ‘Popeye’,
immediately ﬁred a number of warning shots: ‘Beware,
we still have trade mark rights!’ This is fortunate
because it demonstrates that the problem is less aca-
demic than assumed above.

formulated by
that

The prevailing opinion in the Netherlands is that it
is undesirable that works
reverting to the public
domain after lapse of the term of copyright protection
be subsequently ‘re-monopolised’ under trade mark
law.48 In this respect, Spoor/Verkade/Visser49 follow the
the Dutch
anti-cumulation rule
Supreme Court
cumulation
should, in principle, be possible unless the tenor of the
legal rule in question ‘expressly’ constitutes the oppo-
site. I concur with this opinion. Considering that the
protective term of copyright law has been limited in
time for various different, yet well-considered reasons,
it would be a legally ‘schizophrenic’ situation if this can
be made undone by the mere registration of a trade
mark.

in Bigott/Doucal

However, at issue here is whether this argument of
undesirability justiﬁes the fact that titles and names of
characters cannot be trade marks because they form
part of the product. I believe that this is not the case.
The key to the undesirability of ‘artiﬁcial extension’ of
the copyright by means of trade mark law does not lie
in the categorical dismissal of title and character trade
marks, but
legal
means—the protective scope of trade marks in such a
way that
this extension is avoided. As previously
suggested, both Benelux and Community trade mark
law are ﬂexible enough to ﬁnd a way to do so. Invoking

in restricting—by

available

all

43 Dutch Supreme Court, 6 February 1989, BMW/Blok, NJ 198, 569 with

notes by DWFV.

District Court, 2 March 1982, RvdW [Legal Precedent of the Week] /KG
[Preliminary Relief Proceedings] 1982, 39 (Dik Trom).

44 See in this respect footnotes 25 and 26, and BenGH, 16 December 1998,

Dior/Evora, NJ 2001, 133 with notes by Spoor under NJ 2001, 134.

47 Shieldmark.Zacco News Letter, March 2009, no. 44.
48 See Cohen Jehoram, loc. cit., footnote 4, Verkade loc. cit., footnote 4,

45 ECJ, 4 November 1997, Dior/Evora, NJ 2001, 132 with notes by Spoor

under NJ 2001, 134.

46 According to reports, Dik Trom publisher Kluitman did not venture to
invoke trade mark infringement in preliminary relief proceedings before
the court of Zutphen. See Verkade, Het werk als merk, en het merk als
werk, AMR 1982, p. 142 with reference to the President of the Zutphen

Spoor/Verkade/Visser, op. cit., p. 410. Others: Van Woensel (thesis.), op.
cit., pp. 349– 354, who rightly points out that neither the Copyright Act
nor trade mark law contain a rule obstructing trade mark law protection
of works formerly protected by copyright.

49 Spoor/Verkade/Visser, p. 410: Artiﬁcial extension of a copyright lapsed by

time through title protection under trade mark should be rejected.

36

ARTICLE

the doctrine of due cause provides relief when it comes
to using a title protected as a trade mark (Dik Trom) in
respect of, for instance, a book no longer protected by
copyright. However,
‘outlawing’ titles and names of
main characters from protection under trade mark law,
as advocated by Verkade in 1982,50 is exaggerating
matters. This is not required for avoidance of any
undesired ‘artiﬁcial extension’ of the copyright. Next to
being unnecessary, it is also sometimes unreasonable.

Taking again the James Bond ﬁlms as an example.
Until now, 22 James Bond ﬁlms have been made. The
ﬁrst was made in 1962 (Dr No, starring Sean Connery),
the last one 2008 (Quantum of Solace with Daniel
Craig). Assuming a term of copyright protection of
70 years, ‘James Bond’ would also be ‘outlawed’ from
protection under trade mark law in 2033. Does that
mean that everybody would then be allowed to release
ﬁlms starring the character of ‘James Bond’? Without
prejudice to everybody’s right to supply Dr No to the
public in 2033, I hold that merely from a consumers’
perspective alone it is undesirable that any ﬁlm whatso-
ever can be labelled as a ‘James Bond’ ﬁlm. Protection
under trade mark law in respect of, inter alia, main
characters as advocated here, would prevent this.

However, I also hold that it is far from self-evident
that everybody is free to cash in on the popularity of a
character—such as Popeye—as soon as this character is
no longer protected under copyright law,51 for instance,
by means of registering the character as a trade mark
for various forms of merchandizing. I think it is not
unreasonable if the former titleholders and/or their
heirs have a post-copyright allowing them to cash in
on the current popularity of this character as a trade
mark. After all, during the copyright lifespan of this
title or character, they have also managed to make the
title or character known as a trade mark for the form
of entertainment in question. As long as the brand
name is known, and assuming the absence of any aban-
donment issues, it should be possible to protect the title
or character as a trade mark too. Consequently, in such
a case, I fail to see how the release of copyrights in old
Popeye cartoons would constitute a permit for smart
businessmen to register Popeye as a trade mark for
shoes or spinach. In practice, this problem will not be
encountered regularly in the case of popular characters,
seeing that the titleholder is likely to have built a
strong trade mark portfolio to secure merchandizing
during the copyright lifespan of this character already.

In doing so, it is possible to avoid ‘occupation’ of copy-
right as soon as this is called for.

In short, the undesirability of the artiﬁcial extension
of protection under copyright indeed constitutes an
argument for restricting the protective scope under
trade mark law, but not for dismissing title and charac-
ter trade marks altogether.

The doctrinal advantage of title
and character trade marks
On 31 March 2009, the Dutch Court of Appeal in The
Hague rendered a judgment which is interesting for the
merchandising industry.52 This case revolved around
the question whether Ragdoll,
the
popular television show ‘Teletubbies’ and holder of the
‘Teletubbies’ trade mark for a variety of products and
services, could oppose the registration and use of the
‘Teletubbies’ brand name by a certain Mr Jadnanansing.
The latter ﬁled a registration for the brand name of pro-
ducts and services which had been ignored by Ragdoll.
In the action that followed, the District Court of The
Hague53 provided him with an escape route, ruling:

the creator of

there are no registrations ﬁled for similar products, the use
of the name ‘Teletubbies’ for merchandising purposes does
not constitute use as a trade mark, and the fact that the
‘Teletubbies’ television series is widely known does not
reveal
familiarity with
TELETUBBIES trade marks as such.

the public’s

anything

about

However, The Hague Court of Appeal came to the rescue
of Ragdoll in ruling that ‘use of the “Teletubbies” brand
name for merchandising purposes in principle qualiﬁes
as use of the trade mark, now that the public assumes
that these merchandising goods are marketed with the
permission of the titleholder so that, in the disputed situ-
ations, the name “Teletubbies” also has the function of
guaranteeing the origin of the products.’ So far, so good.
However, the Court of Appeal then stated that,

seeing that Ragdoll also uses ‘Teletubbies’ as the brand
name for its merchandising at issue, the Court of Appeal
holds that the public’s familiarity with the word Teletubbies
also implies familiarity with the Teletubbies trade mark, on
account of the fact that the public does not make any such
distinction.

So, according to the Court of Appeal, it was irrelevant
whether this familiarity was the result of the name and
fame of the television series.

50 Verkade, Het werk als merk, het merk als werk, Dutch Copyright Law/

52 The Hague Court of Appeal, 31 March 2009, Teletubbies, B9 7763, appeal

AMR, 1982, p. 142.

from a judgment 9 years earlier.

51 Cf in this sense for the United States, Vana, loc. cit. (footnote 19).

53 The Hague District Court, 2 August 2000, Teletubbies, IER 2000, no. 62.

Paul Reeskamp . Dr No in trade mark country

ARTICLE

37

I

this

that

suspect

line of

Although this outcome is satisfactory, the reasoning
behind it is contrived because the Court of Appeal was
apparently reluctant—although the claimant may also
have failed to adduce this54—to consider ‘Teletubbies’
as the trade mark for the television series by the same
reasoning was
name.
prompted by the assumption that
the ‘Teletubbies’
brand name was descriptive of a television series about
the ‘Teletubbies’. And here we have it, the part of the
product argument. As already argued, that argument is
based on the false inference that ‘Teletubbies’ is the
generic name for this form of children’s entertainment.
However, the service at issue here is not ‘Teletubbies’ as
such, but children’s entertainment. If ‘Teletubbies’ had
been acknowledged as a trade mark for the television
series, the Court of Appeal would also have been able
to include the public’s familiarity with this television
series in its assessment in a manner which is ‘natural’
to trade mark law.

In assuming the public’s familiarity with the ‘Tele-
tubbies’ brand name for the television series, the ‘dis-
cussion of similarity’ raised here loses much of
its
relevance in that it would let Ragdoll invoke the pro-
tection regime for well-known trade marks directly.55
The circumspect manner of reasoning of the Court
of Appeal, allowing it to consider the public’s famili-
arity with the ‘Teletubbies’ trade mark via the word
‘Teletubbies’ would thus have been unnecessary.
If
one is prepared—like me—to assume that ‘Teletub-
bies’ is equally distinctive for children’s entertainment
on television as ‘Mars’ is for chocolate bars, one can
protect titles of television programmes in a perfectly
natural manner within the doctrinal tenets of trade
mark law. In legal practice, the fact that the public’s
familiarity with a title or character may also be
included in the assessment whether a third party
derives unjustiﬁed beneﬁt from the reputation of the
trade mark. Public familiarity with ‘Harry Potter’ as
the main character of the ﬁlms by the same name is
then also relevant to whether the holder of the Harry
Potter trade mark can oppose unauthorized use of
‘Harry Potter’ signs on lunch boxes, without the need
for
to invoke derivative familiarity
which may have been obtained through the (author-
ized) sale of Harry Potter caps.

the titleholder

judgment of

A further possible problem is that it is harder for
owners of well-known title/character trade marks to go
to court if a third party does not use the title or char-
acter as a trade mark. For instance, the public is more
likely to regard ‘Harry Potter’ signs afﬁxed to a lunch
box as a reference to ‘Harry himself ’ than as a reference
to the trade mark for the lunch boxes in question.
However, this problem has been largely discarded by
the Arsenal
the European Court of
Justice,56 in which it was assumed that the use of ‘the
name Arsenal’ on football scarves in principle qualiﬁes
as trade mark use also, although it can also be partly
regarded as a badge of loyalty. The comparable line of
reasoning in this respect followed by the Court of
Appeal in The Hague in Teletubbies also seems right to
me: the public may assume that such trade marks are
only used for merchandising purposes permitted by the
titleholder and, consequently, that this merchandise is
of reasonable quality. In that sense, the trade mark has
the function of guaranteeing the product’s origin, as
also considered by the Court of Appeal. A counter-
argument may be that this is circular reasoning with a
self-fulﬁlling prophecy,57 but this does not detract from
the fact that this manner of reasoning is in keeping
with current merchandising practice.

For instance, assuming that ‘Jurassic Park’ is a valid
trade mark for the ﬁlms by the same name would
make it easier for the trade mark holder to oppose
unauthorized merchandising on the basis of
the
public’s familiarity with the trade mark built with the
ﬁlm, thus making it harder for people like Jadnanan-
sing to slip through the loopholes of trade mark law.

Famous historic ﬁgures
If the main character of a book or ﬁlm is a famous
person, a historic ﬁgure, or mythological hero, the situ-
ation is more complicated. In the ﬁrst place, because
the public is not likely to assume that all ﬁlms or
books about (for example) Elvis Presley originate from
the same makers, whereas the public is likely to assume
this in respect of
the comic characters ‘Tintin’ or
‘Suske and Wiske’.58 Secondly, it seems unreasonable to
monopolize the name of a famous ﬁgure on the basis
of trade mark law.59 Nonetheless, it is conceivable that,

54 Neither the judgment on appeal nor the lower judgment demonstrate

that this was adduced on behalf of Ragdoll.

55 Art 9, paragraph 2 Trade Mark Directive, Art 5, paragraph 2 Trade Mark

58 See for a comparable case, The Hague District Court, 16 February 2000,
Fa Mulan/Disney’s Mulan, BIE 2001, no. 36 (Fa Mulan apparently was a
Chinese heroine).

Regulation, and Art 2.20, paragraph 1, under c BTIP.

59 Cf note Verkade commenting on the judgment of the Breda District

56 ECJ, 12 November 2002, Arsenal, NJ 2003, 265.
57 Cf in connection to portrait rights Verkade in his note commenting on

the judgment of the Dutch Supreme Court, 2 May 1997, Disco dancer, NJ
1997, 661.

Court, 11 May 1999, Euro, BIE 1999, no. 75. This undercurrent is also
found in ECJ, 12 January 2006, Picasso v Picaro, also see conclusion of
the Dutch Advocate General with ECJ, 27 November 2003, Fu¨r Elise. As
appears from the judgment of the Dutch Supreme Court, 5 March 1999,

38

ARTICLE

by means of intensive use of the trade mark, its holder
can detach the name of such a famous historic ﬁgure
from its original meaning and link it primarily to a
particular ﬁlm about this ﬁgure. For instance, the Euro-
pean Court of Justice assumed that this is possible in
Chiemsee in relation to a well-known German recrea-
tion lake.60 For this reason, I believe that it is not a
priori impossible to protect the ﬁlm title JFK under
trade mark law.

Final remarks
We need to shed our reluctance to assign trade mark
law protection to titles of books and ﬁlms or names of
characters. Our timidity is mainly dictated by the
undesirability of artiﬁcially extending the term of copy-
right protection through the application of trade mark
law. I agree with this undesirability and there is no

need to discuss it at great length, but it should rather
be an argument for restricting the protective scope
granted under trade mark law in a way which avoids
such extension.

We also need to discard the automatic presupposition
that characters and titles cannot be trade marks on
account of being descriptive. What applies to 7 Up should
also apply to the well-known comic characters Asterix &
Obelix. This would also free us of the series argument
which is legally improper in many ways. Acknowledg-
ment of title and character trade marks will also make it
possible to protect the public’s familiarity with those titles
and characters in a normal trade mark law manner,
without having to lean over backward to avoid ‘Teletub-
bies issues’. There is no reason to fear any tension with
copyright law because trade mark law is sufﬁciently
elastic to counterbalance any such tension. So, Dr No, I
hereby bid you a warm welcome to trade mark country!

Route 66 II, NJ 2000, 306, the Supreme Court has less problems with the
trade mark occupation of signs in the public domain. Incidentally, the Dutch
Supreme Court was confronted in this case with the closed system of
invalidity grounds as contained in the BTA.

60 See legal consideration no. 47 of ECJ, 4 May 1999, Windsurﬁng

Chiemsee, NJ 2000, 269 with notes by Verkade.


