738

ARTICLE

Where now for stems cell patents?
Scott Parker and Paul England*

What is the use of stem cells?
The delivery of cells to regenerate damaged and dis-
eased human tissue (stem cell therapy, also known as
regenerative medicine) has been hailed for its revolu-
tionary potential. Its power lies in two properties of
stem cells that make them unique:

(i) ‘Self renewal’—the ability of stem cells to divide
indeﬁnitely to produce more stem cells (while main-
taining a stage of undifferentiation between specia-
lized types of cells); and

(ii) ‘Potency’—the ability to differentiate into specia-

lized cell types:

- Totipotent stem cells can differentiate into all
cell types and can develop into a complete,
viable organism, eg a fertilized egg;

- Pluripotent stem cells are the descendants of
totipotent cells and can differentiate into a
wide range of cell types (but not all); and

- Multipotent stem cells can be isolated from the
adult body and have the ability to differenti-
ate into a more limited range of cell types.

Stem cells are central to the development of humans
and other organisms. They have the potential to regener-
ate tissue and also act as a ‘repair system’ for the body.
The aim of stem cell therapy is to harness these charac-
teristics for treatment. However, with such potential
beneﬁts for medicine and the commercial rewards that
may follow, a key question is how will those who invest
in this research be able to protect the technology they
develop? Patent law is controversial at the best of times,
but this question is more than normally contentious.

To address it, this article looks at the law surround-
ing stem cell patenting; the seminal WARF and Bru¨stle
cases; the reaction to the Bru¨stle decision, its signiﬁ-
cance and the signiﬁcant issues it raises; and, how to
protect stem cell inventions post-Bru¨stle.

The sources of stem cells
Destructive sources
To understand the controversy over the patenting of
stem cell inventions, it is necessary to look ﬁrst at how

*

Emails: scott.parker@simmons-simmons.com and paul.england@
simmons-simmons.com.

The authors
† Scott Parker is a Partner with Simmons &
Simmons LLP,
in the international IP group.
Paul England is a professional support lawyer in
the international IP group at the same ﬁrm.

This article
† Stem cells are central to the development of
humans and other organisms. They have the po-
tential to regenerate tissue and also act as a
‘repair system’ for the body. The aim of stem cell
therapy is to harness these characteristics for
treatment. However, with such potential beneﬁts
for medicine and the commercial rewards that
may follow, a key question is how will those who
invest in this research be able to protect the tech-
nology they develop?

† The Bru¨stle decision in particular has been
received with a chorus of disapproving voices.
Quite aside from moral commentaries there are
widespread fears that
it will bring stem cell
research and business in Europe to a stop. Are
these fears justiﬁed?

† This article examines the legal background to
in particular the WARF
stem cell patenting,
and Bru¨stle decisions;
levelled
at Bru¨stle; the limits on its application; and,
how other forms of protection and new scientiﬁc
developments may be used to avoid its
consequences.

the criticisms

stem cells are obtained. Embryonic stem cells are
derived from a pre-implantation stage embryo, typical-
ly from the inner cell mass of a blastocyst (the structure
comprising up to about 100 undifferentiated cells that
is formed about four to ﬁve days after fertilization).
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are derived from
blastocysts donated from in vitro fertilization (IVF)
procedures
to
obtain the embryonic cells
from these blastocysts,
which would otherwise be discarded, destruction of the

(with informed consent). However,

# The Authors (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jps131

Scott Parker and Paul England . Where now for stems cell patents?

ARTICLE

739

embryo generally results and it
hESCs controversial.

is this that makes

Cultured human embryonic stem cell lines (hESCs)
are now publicly available, having since being deposited
at the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) in May
2003 and are suitable for many stem cell-based tech-
nologies. Although the original cells from which these
lines were obtained also required the destruction of
embryos, no further embryos are required in order to
work with such a cell line.

In addition,

‘non-destructive’ alternatives are now

available.

Non-destructive sources of stem cells
The major alternative to hESCs is adult (somatic) stem
cells. These are obtainable from a variety of sources, in-
cluding bone marrow; adipose tissue by liposuction;
peripheral or umbilical cord blood and amniotic ﬂuid.
Depending on their source, adult stem cells have differ-
ent potential for long-term self-renewal and differenti-
ation. For example, pluripotent adult stem cells may be
removed from the umbilical cord, but generally adult
stem cells are more limited in their ability to differenti-
ate into other cell types (relative to hESCs) and this
translates into different therapeutic potential.

An alternative source of stem cells can be found in
artiﬁcially generated stem cells called human induced
pluripotent cells (iPSCs). These were developed from
the ground-breaking discovery in 2007 that somatic
cells, for example, skin cells, may be ‘reprogrammed’ to
manipulate the expression of transcription factors in
order to ‘force’ differentiated cells to take on pluripotent
capabilities. It is thought that in time this iPSC technol-
ogy has the potential
to reduce transplant rejection
issues, as the patient’s own cells can be ‘reprogrammed’
as the source of the stem cells for therapeutic use. iPSCs
also avoid the legal and ethical issues associated with
hESCs, since no embryos are used in their preparation.
Although there has been an explosion of work in this
area over the past ﬁve years, the drawback of iPSCs is
that their safety and functional equivalence to hESCs
remains to be determined. In particular, difﬁculties pre-
sented by the inherent variability of iPSC cell lines and
concerns that there may be an increased cancer risk as
the consequence of the genetic manipulation required in
their creation. Accordingly, there is a great deal of work
to be done before iPSCs could be used in the clinic.

The technology in this area continues

to move
forward; for example Advanced Cell Technology’s (ACTs)

non-destructive ‘single-cell blastomere’ technology.1 ACT
claims that:

[t]he technique involves removal of a single blastomere
(cell) from an eight-cell stage embryo, which can then gen-
erate stem cell lines that have the same characteristics as
the embryo. The biopsy procedure does not damage or
destroy the embryo, nor does it interfere with the embryo’s
developmental potential.2

The potential of embryonic stem cells developed in this
‘non-destructive’ way remains to be validated, though
ACT’s technology was approved in late 2011 in the UK
by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA) for use to generate hESCs for clinical
trials on Stargardt’s Macular Dystrophy (SMD).

Uses, barriers and controversy
Adult stem cell treatments have been used successfully
for more than 40 years, a notable example being the
treatment of leukaemia by using bone marrow trans-
the immune
plants and also the reconstitution of
system in other diseases. Indeed,
it is claimed that
adult stem cells have been used to treat more than 100
diseases. The potential use of human stem cells in re-
generative medicine focuses typically on treatments for
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, stroke,
heart disease and other organ damage and spinal injury
(eg using insulin-producing cells for treating Type I
diabetes, or cardiac muscle cells for repairing damage
caused by heart attack). Human stem cells are also
useful in the study of human development and other
biological processes and have a role in applied research
such as studying birth defects, producing transgenic
animals and as models for drug screening.

Thus the focus of research and therapeutic use to
date has been on adult stem cells; more than 2 700
clinical trials are believed to be underway or completed
using adult stems cells.
there are no
approved treatments using embryonic stem cells, al-
though the ﬁrst clinical trials in this area, for spinal
injury and macular degeneration are now underway.

In contrast,

There are major barriers to more widespread appli-
cation of embryonic stem cells, most notably the need
for more basic research to address the risk of tumours
(teratomas) arising from uncontrolled differentiation
and immunological rejection of the transplant. In add-
ition, there are a host of practical difﬁculties around
developing the correct culture conditions and directing
the desired differentiation to allow cells of the appro-
priate type to be grown to the necessary quantities.

1 US Patent No 7893315.

2

http://www.advancedcell.com/our-technology/selected-publications/.

740

ARTICLE

Then there are the legal, ethical and regulatory issues.
These are many and varied, including the issue of em-
bryonic destruction and the impact that this has on the
regulatory environment for regenerative medicine. In
particular, many European countries have moratoria on
embryonic stem cell research or the production of new
embryonic stem cell
lines, and in the US federal
funding of stem cell research was halted under the
Bush administration, and although President Obama
lifted the ban in 2009, legal battles remain.

These restrictions all concern the ability to conduct
research in the ﬁrst place; but what about restrictions
on the ability to seek commercial protection when re-
search that has been conducted produces results? This
brings us to the issue at the heart of this article: the
patentability of stem cell research.

Stem cell patents: the relevant law in
Europe
The sources on patentability of stem cells are found in
the Agreement On Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS), the European Patent Conven-
tion (EPC) and Directive 98/44 (the ‘Biotech Direct-
ive’), as follows:

(i) TRIPS 1994 Art 27(2):

Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the
prevention within their territory of the commercial ex-
ploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public
(public policy) or morality, including to protect human,
animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious preju-
dice to the environment, provided that such exclusion is
not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited
by their law. [Emphasis added]

(ii) European Patent Convention 1973 Art 53:

European patents shall not be granted in respect of: (a)
inventions the commercial exploitation of which would
be contrary to ‘ordre public’ or morality; such exploit-
ation shall not be deemed to be so contrary merely
because it is prohibited by law or regulation in some or
all of the Contracting States . . . [Emphasis added]

(iii) Directive 98/44/EC (the ‘Biotech Directive’):
† Art 5(2) An element isolated from the human body or
otherwise produced by means of a technical process, in-
cluding the sequence of a gene, may constitute a patent-
able invention, even if the structure of the element is
identical to that of a natural element.
† Art 6(1) Inventions shall be considered unpatentable
where their commercial exploitation would be contrary
to ordre public or morality; however exploitation shall

3

See also EPC Rule 28(c).

such inventions and of

not be deemed so contrary merely because it is prohib-
ited by law or regulation.
† Art 6(2) On the basis of paragraph 1, the following, in
particular, shall be considered unpatentable: . . . (c) uses of
human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes. . . . 3
[Emphasis added]
† Recital (3) Whereas effective and harmonised protection
throughout the Member States is essential
in order to
maintain and encourage investment in the ﬁeld of bio-
technology. [Emphasis added]
† Recital (7) Whereas uncoordinated development of na-
tional laws on the legal protection of biotechnological
inventions in the Community could lead to further dis-
incentives to trade to the detriment of the industrial de-
the smooth
velopment of
operation of the internal market.
† Recital (14) Whereas a patent for invention does not au-
thorise the holder to implement that invention . . . sub-
stantive patent law cannot serve to replace or render
law
superﬂuous national, European or international
which may impose restrictions or prohibitions. . . .
† Recital (16) Whereas patent law must be applied so as to
respect the fundamental principles safeguarding the dignity
and integrity of the person. . . . [Emphasis added]
† Recital (37) Whereas the principle whereby inventions
must be excluded from patentability where their com-
mercial exploitation offends against ordre public or
morality must also be stressed. . . .
† Recital (38) Whereas the operative part of this Directive
should also include an illustrative list of
inventions
excluded from patentability so as to provide referring
courts and patent ofﬁces with a general guide to inter-
preting the reference to ordre public and morality. . . .
† Recital (42) Whereas, moreover, uses of human embryos
for
commercial purposes must also be
excluded from patentability; whereas in any case such ex-
clusion does not affect inventions for therapeutic or diag-
nostic purposes which are applied to the human embryo
and are useful to it. [Emphasis added]

industrial or

It is ‘uses of human embryos’ that are unpatentable in
Europe. Much of what follows in this article concerns
the scope of the application of this provision. Signiﬁ-
cantly, the term ‘human embryo’ is not deﬁned in the
Biotech Directive and it contains no speciﬁc reference
to the patenting of hESCs. Nor is there any consensus
in national
to how Member States deﬁne
‘human embryo’. The main approaches are either to say
that an embryo exists from fertilization or that it exists
from the time when the fertilized ovum has been
implanted into the uterus.

law as

Scott Parker and Paul England . Where now for stems cell patents?

ARTICLE

741

Stem cell patents in Europe: background
Although it has been superseded by more recent deci-
sions, the Edinburgh Patent case (Patent EP 0 695 351)
was signiﬁcant in giving the ﬁrst indication that the
European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) would give a broad in-
terpretation to the exclusion under Article 6(2)(c). The
Edinburgh Patent concerned a method for the modiﬁ-
cation of animal stem cells that gives them a survival
advantage facilitating their selection and isolation. It
also covered the genetically modiﬁed cells for use in
such methods. Dispute arose over the meaning of
‘animal’ stem cells, which could be interpreted to
include human embryonic stem cells. Fourteen EPO
oppositions were ﬁled on the grounds of morality and
the exceptions to patentability described above (includ-
ing an opposition by Greenpeace, which argued that
the patent covered human cloning). The EPO gave a
broad interpretation to the exclusion, holding that it
covered the use of hESCs obtained by the destruction
of human embryos. The patent was therefore held to
be contrary to EPC Article 53(a) and Rule 28(c) (exclu-
sion of ‘uses of embryos for industrial or commercial
purposes’) before being maintained in amended form
in 2002 (with the exclusion of hESCs).

WARF— Referral to Enlarged Board of Appeal
(G 02/06)
This opposition and appeal
in the EPO-related to
claims to a cell culture comprising puriﬁed primate (in-
cluding human) embryonic stem cells that can be pre-
vented from differentiating by a particular culturing
technique. The method of obtaining these cells was not
part of the claims, but no ‘non-destructive’ source of
hESCs was available at the time. WARF accepted that
human embryos are unpatentable but argued hESC cul-
tures are not embryos. It also argued that, since there
was no European consensus on morality issues surround-
ing hESCs, the EPO should not reject the application (a
point reinforced by amicus briefs ﬁled in the opposition,
including by the UK Patent Ofﬁce). The claims were
nonetheless refused by the Examining Division on the
basis that Article 53(a) and Rule 28(c) were concerned
with ‘inventions’ rather than the claimed subject matter.
It was therefore relevant how the claimed subject matter
was made available to the public. The invention was con-
sidered unpatentable because the application provided
no starting material other than an early stage embryo.
Accordingly, the claimed cells were inseparable from the
method used to make them—the use of the embryo.

The case was eventually appealed to the EPO
Enlarged Board of Appeal, which decided that the legis-
lative intent was to forbid patenting of inventions that
necessitated the destruction of an embryo, on moral
grounds. Article 6(2)(c) of the Biotech Directive and
EPC Rule 28(c) thus prevented patenting of WARF’s
invention, even though the claims did not identify the
means of production of the cells and there was no express
reference to the destruction of an embryo. Instead, the
logic adopted was that ‘a claimed new and inventive
product must ﬁrst be made before it can be used’.4

The Enlarged Board considered it irrelevant that,
after the ﬁling date (1996), cultured cell lines became
available that made implementation of the invention
possible without (further) destruction of an embryo. It
also thought it unnecessary to consider whether the use
of hESCs was deemed ethical across contracting states,
in light of Biotech Directive and EPC Rule 28(c).
However, the Enlarged Board stressed that the decision
was not concerned with the patentability of stem cells
generally but with inventions ‘which can only be obtained
by the use involving the destruction of human embryos’,5
this being reﬂected in the EPO’s practice subsequently.
Importantly, the WARF ruling still allowed patents to be
granted for inventions using already existing hESC cell
lines.

Stem cell patents in Europe: EPO
practice post-WARF
Human totipotent cells and inventions that at the ﬁling
date necessitate the destruction of an embryo are not
patentable at the EPO. However, the EPO has contin-
ued to grant patents for hESC inventions that, at the
ﬁling/priority date, could be obtained by means other
than requiring the destruction of human embryos, for
example if the inventions are based on deposited hESC
lines. In particular, having established that human em-
bryonic stem cell lines were publicly available by May
2003, European patent applications based on such ma-
terial and ﬁled after this date have not generally been
rejected by application of the ‘morality exclusion’. The
source of the hESCs need not be identiﬁed in the speci-
ﬁcation (although it is advisable to do so).

The exclusion from patentability of the WARF deci-
sion has thus been applied narrowly. It has had no
impact on the patentability of inventions utilizing hESCs
ﬁled after May 2003; nor has it impacted upon adult
stem cell technologies or induced pluripotent cells.

4 Use of embryos/WARF, G02/06, paragraph 25.

5 Use of embryos/WARF, G02/06, paragraph 35.

742

ARTICLE

Bru¨stle v Greenpeace
The facts
Bru¨stle v Greenpeace6 concerned Dr Oliver Bru¨stle’s
German patent (ﬁling date in December 1997) for iso-
lated, puriﬁed neural precursor cells, processes for their
production from hESCs and their use for the treatment
of neural defects. The invention was presented as an
ethical alternative to the use of donor cells derived
from embryonic brains (it is stated in Bru¨stle’s patent
that seven human embryos would otherwise be needed
per transplant to a Parkinson’s patient). Like the WARF
case, Bru¨stle is not expressly concerned with the ‘uses
of human embryos’ but with the application of the
‘morality exclusion’ to stem cell processes requiring the
use of human embryos.

Greenpeace brought a revocation action under
the German national
law corresponding to Article
6(2)(c) of the Biotech Directive (motivated by con-
cerns relating to the ‘commercialisation of life’). The
Federal Patent Court held the patent to be invalid in
so far as it relates to precursor cells obtained from
hESCs. On appeal,
the Bundesgerichtshof made a
referral to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) on
the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the
Directive.

Questions referred to the ECJ
(1) What is meant by the term ‘human embryos’ in

Article 6(2)(c) of the Biotech Directive?

(a) Does it include all stages of the development of
human life, beginning with fertilization or must
further requirements, such as attainment of a
certain developmental stage, be satisﬁed?

(b) Does it include certain cloning methods used to

produce totipotent cells?

(c) Are stem cells obtained from human embryos at

the blastocyst stage included?

(2) What is meant by ‘uses of human embryos for in-
dustrial or commercial purposes’; does it include
use for the purposes of scientiﬁc research?

(3) Is

invention unpatentable pursuant

to Article
6(2)(c) even if the use of human embryos does not
form part of the technical teaching claimed within
patent, but is a necessary precondition for the ap-
plication of that teaching?

the development and formation of

Advocate General’s Opinion
Advocate General Bot pointed out that the Biotech Dir-
ective was intended as a harmonization directive and
no discretion is given to Member States regarding Art
6(2) exclusions. The AG applied a broad deﬁnition of
‘human embryo’:
‘from the fertilisation stage to the
initial totipotent cells and to the entire ensuing process
of
the human
body’.7 There was no need for any other conditions to
be met before the fertilized egg becomes an embryo.
The deﬁnition included totipotent cells that exist for a
few days after fertilization and the blastocyst stage. The
AG, however,
recommended that pluripotent cells
should not be regarded as a ‘human embryo’ because
they do not have the capacity to develop into a human
being (as per the national
laws of many Member
States). He added that pluripotent cells should only be
patentable if they can be obtained without detriment to
the embryo (even if the use of human embryos is not
referred to in the patent): ‘it is not possible to ignore
the origin of this pluripotent cell’.8

Despite the similarities to WARF and the overlap-
ping issues to be decided, the AG paid little attention
to WARF and appeared to go further than the EPO by
hinting that the full history of the invention needed to
be taken into account when considering its morality.

ECJ decision (18 October 2011)
The main points of the ECJ decision can be summar-
ized as follows:

Question 1: What is a ‘human embryo’ in the context
of the Directive? Reasoning that a legal interpretation
of the Biotech Directive was required for a uniform ap-
plication, the ECJ gave particular weight to Recital 16,
and speciﬁcally ‘ . . . safeguarding the dignity and integ-
rity of the person’. The ECJ stated that the legislature
intended to exclude ‘any possibility of patentability
where respect for human dignity could be affected’ and
that ‘[i]t follows that the concept of “human embryo”
. . . must be understood in a wide sense’.9

The ECJ agreed with the AG that a fertilized egg
must be regarded as a ‘human embryo’ (as must the
products of cloning techniques where the nucleus from
a mature cell is transplanted into an unfertilized egg).
However, it was for the national courts to determine
‘in light of scientiﬁc developments’ whether stem cells
obtained from blastocysts are capable of developing

6 C-34/10 OJC100, 17.4.2010.
7 Opinion of Advocate General Bot, 10 March 2011 in C-34/10, paragraph

115.

8 Opinion of Advocate General Bot, 10 March 2011 in C-34/10, paragraph

103.

9 C-34/10, paragraph 34.

Scott Parker and Paul England . Where now for stems cell patents?

ARTICLE

743

into a human being and therefore whether or not
they fall within the deﬁnition of ‘embryo’. As things
currently stand, hESCs obtained from a blastocyst
are not totipotent and therefore would not satisfy the
ECJ’s deﬁnition of an ‘embryo’. However, in this regard
at least, the ECJ left it open for national courts to
decide otherwise should the technology develop to
such a point.

Question 2: What about ‘uses of human embryos for
industrial or commercial purposes’? Addressing this
question the ECJ stated: ‘Clearly the grant of a patent
implies, in principle, its industrial or commercial appli-
cation’ and ‘ . . . the use of human embryos cannot be
separated from the patent itself and the rights attaching
to it’.10 The court held that the exclusion from patent-
ability concerning the use of human embryos for indus-
trial or commercial purposes in Article 6(2)(c) also
covered use for purposes of scientiﬁc research (ie the ex-
clusion was to be interpreted broadly). The only caveat
to this is that, following Recital 42 of the Biotech Direct-
ive, the ECJ ruled that the exclusion from patentability
did not apply in respect of inventions for therapeutic or
diagnostic purposes ‘which are applied to the embryo
and are useful to it’. However, this limitation to the ex-
clusion will not impact upon the patenting of regenera-
tive therapies.

Question 3: What if the use of a human embryo is
not part of the teaching of the patent?. It was a
ﬁnding of fact in the Bru¨stle case that the production
of neural precursor cells required the use of stem cells
obtained from a blastocyst and that the removal of cells
from a blastocyst entails its destruction. The court went
on to say that the exclusion from patentability on moral
grounds applies where the technical teaching of the
patent ‘requires the prior destruction of human embryos or
their use as base material, whatever the stage at which
that takes place’11 [emphasis added] and this is so re-
gardless of whether or not use of the human embryo is
referred to in the patent. In other words, the ruling is
concerned with substance and will not allow skilful
drafting of the patent to avoid the exclusion.

Importantly, the ECJ added:

The fact that destruction may occur at a stage long before
the implementation of the invention, as in the case of the
production of embryonic stem cells from a lineage of stem
cells, the mere production of which implied the destruction
of human embryos is . . . irrelevant.12 [Emphasis added]

10 C-34/10, paragraph 43.
11 C-34/10, paragraph 52.
12 C-34/10, paragraph 49.
13 C-34/10, paragraph 28.

On this important point the ECJ appears to be going
further than the EPO in WARF and the ruling is at
odds with the EPO’s recent granting practice.
Criticisms of Bru¨stle
Bru¨stle was met with a storm of criticism. For example,
observations of the Governments of Member States
(UK, Ireland and Sweden) that the deﬁnition of a
‘human embryo’ should be left to their discretion were
ignored in favour of a universal approach on the basis
that a common understanding is needed in order to
avoid different patentability outcomes
in different
Member States (‘Such a situation would adversely affect
the smooth functioning of the internal market . . . ’13).
Thus no attention was paid in the ruling to the diver-
sity of moral perspectives across Europe; that plurality
is recognized in related legal areas, for example the
Advanced Therapies Medicinal Products Regulation pro-
vides that European legislation should not interfere with
national laws on use of hESCs or that, until such time
as there is a uniﬁed European patent or court system,
the same European patent may be upheld in some coun-
tries and revoked in others. Ultimately, there is a broad
criticism of Bru¨stle on a number of speciﬁc grounds,
and also, more generally, that it is inconsistent that re-
search that is considered lawful (and may even be EU
funded) is rendered unpatentable on ethical grounds.

The way in which the ECJ has deﬁned an embryo has
also been criticized. For example, some have argued that
implantation is a precondition for a human embryo to
exist (although the ECJ’s deﬁnition is consistent with,
for example, German law and the UK Human Fertilisa-
tion and Embryology Act 1990). Others say that the AG
has displayed a lack of scientiﬁc rigour in suggesting
that there are limits on the ability of contemporary
science to address metaphysical matters such as deﬁning
life or detecting its appearance.14

More generally, it has also been asked whether it is
appropriate for an unelected court to be deciding on
issues of morality. In particular, criticism has been
made of the AG’s Opinion which, although expressed
to be a ‘purely legal’ analysis based on objective scien-
tiﬁc information, drew parallels to the trafﬁcking of
organs ‘harvested’ from Yugoslav prisoners of war and
appeared to borrow clumsily from difﬁcult and complex
philosophical concepts such mind-body dualism: the
human body existing ‘independently of the person who
occupies it’.15 The court’s focus on human dignity has

14 See, for example, www.kenanmalik.com; eutopialaw.com; and

www.medpedia.com for a selection of views.

15 Ibid.

744

ARTICLE

also been called into question, on the basis that (i) the
plurality of positions on stem cell research illustrates
that there is no ‘indivisible, universal value of human
dignity’ as referred to in the Preamble to the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union and (ii) in
focusing on human dignity of an embryo, the ECJ has
disregarded the dignity of patients.16

The answer to the third question is most controver-
sial and potentially signiﬁcant, namely that it is ‘irrele-
vant’ how long ago the originating embryo was
destroyed: ‘downstream’ technologies are unpatentable.
The ECJ stated that the EPO reached the same conclu-
sion in WARF. However,
inventions were
excluded that are exploitable only by ‘necessarily in-
volving destruction of human embryos’. By contrast, in
Bru¨stle, the bar on patentability applies regardless of
how long ago the embryo was destroyed. Accordingly,
Bru¨stle is not concerned with whether the invention
could be put into practice in an ethical manner at the
actual ﬁling date: the history of the cell/cell lines used
also needs to be taken into account.

in WARF,

As indicated, there is strong and polarized opinion
on the merits of the decision. Views also differ widely
as to its consequences. The irony is perhaps that the
ECJ’s interpretation of a directive that was intended to
promote the European biotech industry may actually
have the reverse effect. That said, on another view the
irony is that the unintended consequence of Green-
peace’s action may be to reduce the number of ‘block-
ing’ patents and stimulate research in the area.

The damage done?
Perhaps the greatest concern about this decision is that
it sends the message to the many interested in this area
of research that the EU does not have an internally
consistent regulatory regime for regenerative medicine.
Inevitably, it must be asked whether this risks creating
uncertainty that will undermine stem cell research in
Europe and dampen the entrepreneurial
spirit of
researchers and that investors will not invest in Europe
in the absence of patent protection. Says The Econo-
mist:

America and Europe . . . seem to be in a bizarre parallel
contest: which can make its scientists’ lives more difﬁcult
by imposing the most muddled rules. This week the Euro-
pean Union edged ahead.17

Similarly, according to Professor Sir Ian Wilmut, this
decision:

. . . makes it less likely that companies in Europe will
invest in research to develop treatments.18

This thinking has led some to suggest that funding
agencies will stop supporting hESC technologies and
that research will be moved to the USA/Asia, where the
patenting regime may be more favourable.
In the
authors’ view, such a move would not make sense. It
does not matter where research is based, it will not
improve the patentability in Europe of such research.
However, it is safe to say that it will certainly not en-
courage it. In particular, those investing in hESC tech-
nologies will need to look beyond the problems of
patentability in Europe and a weakened patent port-
folio and consider the patent position internationally,
as well as take into account other means of protecting
their investment (considered further below).

A silver lining?
In Bru¨stle, the ECJ did not rule to prevent stem cell re-
search and it also did not rule that pluripotent cells per
se must be regarded as human embryos, and therefore
unpatentable. Therefore the ramiﬁcations of the deci-
sion may in fact be more limited than at ﬁrst would
appear. In particular:
† Most existing stem cell research uses adult stem cells,
not hESCs, and this is not affected by the decision.
† Technology has moved on since this dispute ﬁrst

arose and continues to do so:
W alternative means of producing stem cell lines are
now available that do not require use of human
embryos (that is iPSCs); and

W alternative means of producing hESCs that do not
require the destruction of the embryo are also
possible.

† Patents are still available on the technology in ques-
tion outside the EU. Given that biotechnology is an
global market, European industry
increasingly
should not be affected disproportionately.
† There are other means of protecting investment in

this technology (see below).

As highlighted above, there is also the argument that
fewer ‘upstream’ patents may have the reverse effect
and stimulate hESC research in Europe by removing
‘blocking’ protection.

16 www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2011/10/stem-cell-research.
17 www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2011/10/stem-cell-research.

18 Quoted in www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-15355991.

Scott Parker and Paul England . Where now for stems cell patents?

ARTICLE

745

Key questions and answers
Are downstream products of embryonic stem cell lines
now unpatentable on the basis that years ago it was ne-
cessary to destroy an embryo in order to make the cell
line? On the face of the decision the answer is ‘yes’.
Indeed, this seems to be a motivating concern behind
the ECJ decision. But, what about the inventions that
may arise even further downstream,
for example,
means of administering hESC therapy? What will the
response of national courts be to such inventions?
Bru¨stle is binding on national courts and, indirectly, on
national patent ofﬁces, and we will have to wait to see
how they interpret it. There is the risk that patents for
inventions that at some earlier stage have required the
destruction of a human embryo are rendered unen-
forceable by this decision, leading to an increase of liti-
gation and great uncertainty for their holders (eg
European patents for hESC technologies with a ﬁling
date after the availability of hESC cell
lines, that is,
post-May 2003).

is

As

there

indicated above,

an inconsistency
between Bru¨stle and the WARF decision of the EPO in
respect of patentability when, at the ﬁling date, the in-
vention could be put into effect using embryonic stem
cell lines. The EPO has no capacity to make a referral
to the ECJ and is not bound by its decisions. However,
new Guidelines
for Examination in the European
Patent Ofﬁce came out on 20 June 2012 and, following
Bru¨stle, they now say that, to be patentable in Europe,
a stem cell
invention should not be directed to a
human embryo, nor should the subject matter of the
patent have required the prior destruction of a human
embryo, at any time in the past.

What about iPSCs? The AG in Bru¨stle referred to
induced pluripotent cells as ‘a process which would not
appear to raise any ethical problems’. Accordingly, the
patentability of iPSCs should be unaffected. Similarly,
the patentability of human induced pluripotent stem
cells, or inventions relating to adult stem cells, remain
unaffected by the new Guidelines.

What if embryonic stem cells can be removed from a
blastocyst (or otherwise generated) without causing its
destruction, such as is possible with ACT’s single-cell
blastomere technology? The language of the ECJ deci-
sion is ‘necessitates’. So, if a non-destructive alternative
is available at the ﬁling date, then the exclusion ought
not to apply (an interpretation which is consistent with
EPO practice post-WARF and the new Guidelines
which state that the technology must not be ‘exclusively

obtained by a method which necessarily involved the
destruction of human embryos’ [emphasis added]).
Indeed, Advanced Cell Technology claim that the deci-
sion will have a minimal impact on its commercial ac-
tivities. But the issue may not be so clear cut. For
instance, what about
the wording from the ruling:
‘requires the prior destruction of human embryos or
the use as a base material . . . ’?19 Would ACT’s technol-
ogy encompass use of a human embryo as a base ma-
terial? On the other hand, however, the decision refers
elsewhere to ‘ . . . necessitates the prior destruction of
human embryos or a process which requires a base ma-
terial obtained by destruction of human embryos’20 [em-
phasis added]; so perhaps the intention was only to
encompass ‘destructive’ processes after all—the deci-
sion is not clear.

structive means could be used instead?

This raises some interesting questions about how
one would demonstrate,
for EPO patentability pur-
poses, that the technology is not exclusively obtained
by a method which necessarily involved the destruction
of human embryos. In particular:
† What is the threshold for showing that a non-de-
† Does this need to be proven and, if so, how? (This
would be extremely burdensome if the technology of
the application has only been validated using hESCs
based on a cultured cell line, which would still be ac-
ceptable for USPTO purposes.)
† Does it instead just have to be plausible (and could
† Does this have to be addressed in the speciﬁcation
or is it good enough if it can be established as a
matter of fact?

this be established without data)?

Further practical difﬁculties may arise if it needs to be
demonstrated that a non-destructive means could be
used, for example, ACT’s single-blastomere technology,
if it is patent protected and could only be used under
licence (or, would this fall under the experimental use
exemption?).

Protection of stem cell inventions
post-Bru¨stle
Maximize prospects of patentability
There are still means by which stem cell inventions
may be protected and ways in which the Bru¨stle ruling
may be worked around. An example is the use of adult
stem cells or iPSCs (where possible) to avoid the use of

19 C-34/10, paragraph 52.

20 C-34/10, paragraph 47.

746

ARTICLE

a human embryo. These technologies should be unaffect-
ed by the decision. Bear in mind, however, that asserting
an increased totipotency as the technical contribution of
the invention may raise patentability issues. Indeed, it
may be wise to include a statement that the cells used in
the invention are pluripotent, not totipotent.

If the invention necessarily involves the use of human
embryos, applicants should disclose a method of produc-
tion that does not involve their destruction, for example
ACT and Roslin Cells are in the process of establishing a
bank for hESC lines made using ACT’s single-cell blasto-
mere technique. It is expected that where an invention
could be implemented at the ﬁling date using either a de-
structive or a non-destructive means, the technology
should be patentable (consistent with the ‘necessitates’
language of Bru¨stle). Accordingly, this technology may
also offer a ‘patent-friendly’ alternative.

Alternative patenting strategies
Protection for stem cell therapies may also be achieved
by patenting downstream steps in the pathway from
obtaining stem cells to developing a therapy, that is,
steps other than the cells themselves. Examples of
such a strategy might include patenting the cell culture
media used, treatment regimes and solving problems of
rejection.

In addition, there is no reason why applications
should not continue to be ﬁled for hESC patents outside
Europe: the equivalent Bru¨stle patent was granted in the
USA.

Alternative means of protection
Can parallels also be drawn to other industries that are
built up around unpatentable core assets, for example,
the software industry, by reliance upon other regulatory
hurdles to create de facto monopoly protection? Cer-
tainly, there are signiﬁcant technical and regulatory
hurdles for stem cell therapies, regardless of the patent
eligibility position. Take Geron’s Phase I trial of hESC
for spinal injury, for instance. This required the most
complex clinical trial submission in the US Food and
Ddrug Administration’s history—an application 21,000
pages long! Such documentation is an onerously ex-

pensive start to gaining authorization and, although
not expressly linked,
the study recently terminated
citing ﬁnancial difﬁculties. It is unlikely that a competi-
tor wanting to use the same technology would seek to
duplicate such a submission. However, the exclusivity
protecting such regulatory data would run for up to 11
years. This data/market exclusivity also provides a de
facto monopoly.

A further alternative to patent protection is, where
possible, to keep substantial parts of the production
process for stem cells protected by means of carefully
cultivating conﬁdentiality over know-how, for example
the details of culture media and processes. Given the
complexity of stem cell technologies and the difﬁculties
of ‘reverse engineering’, the techniques and conditions
needed to deliver a stem cell based therapy,
there
should be scope to achieve protection by paying due at-
tention to the relevant ‘know how’. This would include
ensuring appropriate conﬁdentiality and material transfer
agreements are put in place, taking care over the content
of scientiﬁc publications and presentations and ensuring
that all of those in possession of the know-how under-
stand and act to preserve its commercial value. However,
such an approach in Europe would need careful manage-
ment to be consistent with the disclosure that would be
necessary to obtain patents outside Europe.

Not the last word
To be patentable in Europe, an invention should not be
directed to the human embryo as broadly deﬁned, nor
should the subject matter of the patent have required
the prior destruction of a human embryo, at any time
in the past. Inventions relating to adult stem cells or to
iPSCs are not affected by Bru¨stle and the permissibility
of embryonic stem cell research itself is not affected.
However, in this controversial area stakeholders hold a
wide variety of divergent opinions, and Bru¨stle is un-
likely to be the last word on the subject, not least
because it is unknown how national courts will inter-
pret the decision.

In the meantime, those engaged in embryonic stem
cell research will need to look to other possibilities for
protecting their innovations in the European Union.


