ARTICLE

295

Designing for the future—2017 reforms to
Singapore’s registered designs regime
Simon Seow and William Kwek*

Introduction

There is increasing recognition in Singapore, as in
many other countries, that innovation and design are
indispensable drivers of sustained economic growth
and contribute towards building a national
identity.
This can be seen from the ‘Design 2025 – Singapore by
Design’
released by the Design Masterplan
Committee in March 20161 and the recommendations
of the Committee for the Future Economy published in
February 2017.2

report

Innovation and design rely upon intellectual prop-
erty (IP) protection to capture value. Singapore’s IP
regime enjoys a strong international reputation,3 but it
is not spared from obsolescence and needs to evolve
continually to keep pace with modern realities. With
this in mind, the Ministry of Law and the Intellectual
Property Ofﬁce of Singapore (IPOS) embarked on a
comprehensive review of our registered designs regime
in 2014.

The motivation for the review was primarily to
ensure
that Singapore’s design protection regime
remains robust, relevant, and useful to designers in light
of trends in technology, design and business practices.
Singapore’s primary legislation for protecting industrial
designs, the Registered Designs Act (Cap. 266 of the
2005 Revised Edition) (hereafter RDA), was enacted in
2000 and there had not been a comprehensive review
since then. A review was thus timely.

The review process involved extensive consultations.
More than 25 Focus Group Discussions and closed
door consultations were organized between October
2014 and March 2015. Views were sought
from,
amongst others, the design industry, IP practitioners,
academics, and tertiary education institutions. In addi-
tion, we studied the design protection systems in major
overseas jurisdictions—Germany, the United Kingdom,
Japan and the United States. We sought views from
the IP ofﬁces in these countries, and also spoke to

The authors
 Simon Seow is the Director of the Intellectual
Property Policy Division of the Ministry of Law,
Singapore. He has also held various positions in
the Intellectual Property Ofﬁce of Singapore,
including Director of
the Registry of Designs.
Prior to joining the public sector, he was in legal
practice and venture capital. William Kwek is an
Assistant Director at
the Intellectual Property
Policy Division of the Ministry of Law, Singapore.
He graduated with an MSc Economics from the
London School of Economics in 2014.

This article
 Singapore

the

passed

review of

comprehensive

Registered Designs
(Amendment) Act 2017 on 8 May 2017. It was the
culmination of a three-year review process, the
ﬁrst
registered
designs regime since the Registered Designs Act
(‘RDA’) was enacted in 2000. The review involved
extensive consultations, and sought to update and
modernize Singapore’s design protection system in
light of developments in technology, design and
business practices.

the

 The key amendments include: broadening the
scope of protection under the RDA (in particular
to include designs of non-physical products),
switching the default position on ownership of a
commissioned design from the commissioning
party to the designer, and broadening and length-
ening the grace period provisions
for design
applications.

 This article discusses these key changes and how
they have been implemented. It sheds light on the
main issues considered during the legislative draft-
ing process, and how the legislative amendments
reﬂect our policy intent.

*

1

The authors would like to thank Mr Adrian Chiew, Legal Counsel at the
Intellectual Property Ofﬁce of Singapore, for proofreading the article.
Email: william_kwek@mlaw.gov.sg.
See designsingapore.org/what-we-do/resources/design-2025.

2

3

Eg, Recommendation 3.1: ‘Strengthen our innovation ecosystem’. See
more at gov.sg/microsites/future-economy.
For example, the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness
Report 2017–2018 ranks Singapore fourth in the world, and ﬁrst in Asia,
for IP protection.

VC The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jpy014

296

ARTICLE

design-centric multinational companies with experience
protecting their designs internationally. The prelimi-
nary set of policy recommendations was put out for
public consultation in October 2015.4 After the feed-
back was reviewed, a Final Report, containing 20 policy
recommendations, was published in March 2016.5

A draft Registered Designs (Amendment) Bill, and
related amendments to other legislation, were released
for public consultation in November 2016.6 Finally, the
Registered Designs (Amendment) Bill 2017 was pre-
sented to Parliament on 3 April 2017, and passed on 8
May 2017. The new regime, including amendments to
subsidiary legislation,7 came into force on 30 October
2017.

The policy intent and rationale behind the changes
made to Singapore’s Registered Designs regime can be
found in the Final Report. This article will focus on the
key changes and how they have been implemented. We
will cover the changes in relation to ownership, grace
period, multiple designs and the interface between reg-
istered design and copyright protection. We will also
discuss the expansion of the scope of protection, in par-
ticular to designs applied to non-physical products
(what we term ‘virtual designs’).

Ownership, grace period, multiple
designs and interface with copyright

The ﬁrst signiﬁcant change to the regime was to the
default position for ownership of a commissioned
design. Previously, where a design was created under
commission, the commissioning party was treated as
the owner unless provided otherwise by contract. This
was reversed so that the designer is now the default
owner. This was done to support the design commun-
ity, and in recognition of the creative contributions of
designers. Section 4(2) of the RDA was deleted,8 similar
to an amendment to section 2 of the UK Registered
Designs Act 1949 (hereafter, UK RDA) made in 2014
for the same purpose. Parties still retain the ﬂexibility
to determine ownership by contract—this is provided
for in section 4(5) of the RDA.

The amended section 4 does not apply to designs
that were created before 30 October 2017, and in situa-
tions where the designer and the commissioning party
entered into a contract before 30 October 2017.9 In
such situations, the previous regime applies.

Secondly, we adjusted the grace period for design
applications in two ways. First, the scope of the grace
period was broadened. Previously, design applicants
could only rely on the grace period in a very narrow set
of circumstances, for instance when the disclosure was
contrary to good faith, or when the design was dis-
played at an ‘ofﬁcial international exhibition’.10 Second,
the length of the grace period was increased, from six
months previously. We had received feedback from
industry stakeholders that the previous grace period
regime was too restrictive, and unsuited for the modern
business environment where early disclosures of designs
are more commonplace, and often necessary.

A new section 8A was introduced.11 Under this new
section, any disclosure originating from the designer
would be ‘graced’ for a period of 12 months. The legis-
lative language of the new section 8A was based on the
equivalent provisions in the UK, namely section 1B(6)
of the UK RDA. The obvious exception is that section
1B(6)(a) of the UK RDA, which refers to the European
Economic Area and is therefore not relevant for the
Singapore context, was not adopted. It was intended for
Singapore to have similar provisions, and the same
scope of grace period, as the UK, to allow the Singapore
courts to refer to UK case law.

The new grace period provisions in section 8A only
apply to designs that are disclosed on or after 30
October 2017. In situations where the design was dis-
closed before 30 October 2017, the previous grace period
provisions in section 8 would apply, even if the applica-
tion to register the design was ﬁled after that date.

Thirdly, we made it easier for design applicants to
register multiple designs within a single application.
This will reduce the administrative burden for appli-
cants, and brings us in line with the design registration
systems of
the European Union and the World
Intellectual Property Organization. Previously, under
rule 22(a) of the Registered Designs Rules (hereafter,

4

5

6

7

The consultation document can be found at ipos.gov.sg/resources/ip-
legislation.
The press release and Final Report can be found at mlaw.gov.sg/content/
minlaw/en/news/press-releases.html.
The consultation documents can be found at ipos.gov.sg/resources/ip-
legislation.
These were the Registered Designs (Amendment No. 2) Rules 2017,
Registered Designs (International Registration) (Amendment) Rules
2017, and Copyright (Amendment) Regulations 2017.

Section 3 of RD(A)A 2017.
Section 29(2) of RD(A)A 2017.

8
9
10 The RDA deﬁnes ‘ofﬁcial international exhibition’ in section 8(3) to

mean an ofﬁcial, or ofﬁcially recognized, international exhibition falling
within the terms of the Convention on International Exhibitions signed
at Paris on 22 November 1928, and any protocols to that Convention, as
revised or amended from time to time. They include, for example, the
World Expos.
Section 7 of RD(A)A 2017.

11

Simon Seow and William Kwek  Designing for the future

ARTICLE

297

RDR), multiple designs could only be ﬁled in the same
application if the designs related to the same subclass of
articles.12 Section 11 was amended to allow the registra-
tion of multiple designs in a single application if the
articles or non-physical products to which the designs
are intended to be applied fall within the same class.
However, the designs will be considered as having been
ﬁled in separate applications for post-registration pur-
poses—for example, surrender and renewal.13 These
new provisions only apply to applications ﬁled on or
after 30 October 2017.

Fourthly, we sought

to streamline and provide
greater clarity on the interface between registered design
and copyright protection. As discussed in the Final
Report, the policy position of not allowing concurrent
or dual copyright and registered design protection for
the same artistic work remains. Furthermore, the ‘50
reproductions’ condition will continue to serve as the
‘bright line’ between the two IP regimes. This distinc-
tion is admittedly arbitrary, but in this case, it was felt
that the certainty afforded by a quantitative criteria was
preferred to a qualitative criteria. We also received feed-
back that the language in the legislation was difﬁcult to
understand. One way in which we addressed this was to
align the criteria for ‘applied industrially’ across differ-
ent pieces of legislation.14 Rule 12 of the RDR and
Regulation 12 of the Copyright Regulations are now, in
effect, identical. When drafting the provisions, we also
had to take into account designs applied to non-
issues.15
physical products, and certain transitional
These will be discussed in greater detail later.

Expansion of scope of protection

Probably the most signiﬁcant change to the regime
relates to the scope of protection under the RDA. The
RD(A)A 2017 introduced amendments to:

(a) include colour as a feature of design that can be

protected;

(b) clarify that designs of handmade items can be pro-

tected; and

12 Although Singapore is not currently a signatory of the Locarno

Agreement, we have in effect adopted the Locarno Classiﬁcation (with
certain deviations). The classiﬁcation was previously provided for in the
Third Schedule of the RDR. From 30 October 2017, the Third Schedule
will be deleted and the classiﬁcation of articles and non-physical products
will be speciﬁed by way of Practice Directions issued by IPOS under rule
26 of the RDR.
Section 10(b) of RD(A)A 2017.
IPOS has released an Information Note to provide more guidance on the
interface between registered design and copyright protection, found at
ipos.gov.sg/resources/design.

13
14

(c) allow protection of designs applied to non-physical

products.

Inclusion of colours as a feature of design

The previous deﬁnition of ‘design’ referred to ‘features
of shape, conﬁguration, pattern or ornament applied to
an article by any industrial process’. Compared to
equivalent legislation in the UK16 and EU,17 one clear
difference was the omission of features of colour.

We received feedback that colours can be an important
feature of a product’s distinctive appearance. Businesses
may wish to create a strong association between their
products and a particular colour scheme. We have thus
included features of colour within the scope of protection,
by introducing a new deﬁnition of ‘design’:

‘[D]esign’ means features of shape, conﬁguration, colours,
pattern or ornament applied to any article or non-physical
product that give that article or non-physical product its
appearance, but does not include. . .18

We pause here to make three remarks. First, similar to
the UK and EU legislation, the deﬁnition of ‘design’ in
Singapore now includes a reference to ‘appearance’—in
Singapore’s case, the ‘appearance’ of the article or non-
physical product. While the explicit
reference to
‘appearance’ was not present before, there is little ques-
tion that the features of design in the previous deﬁni-
tion—shape, conﬁguration, pattern and ornament—are
visual features.

This is a continuation of our policy position that
registered design protection is intended for the aesthetic
qualities of products that are perceptible by sight. The
intellectual creation that is incentivized and protected
here is the enhancement of the visual appeal of the
product that adds to its value (for instance, in attracting
consumers).

Second, as before, designs are also not required to be
assessed on their artistic merits as a condition for
registration.

Third, it can be said that this portion of the deﬁni-
tion of ‘design’—‘[F]eatures of shape, conﬁguration,
colours, pattern or ornament applied to any article
or non-physical product
that give that article or

15

16

17

18

See Rule 3 of the Registered Designs (Amendment No. 2) Rules 2017 and
Regulation 2 of the Copyright (Amendment) Regulations 2017.
‘[T]he appearance of the whole or a part of a product resulting from the
features of, in particular, the lines, contours, colours, shape, texture or
materials of the product or its ornamentation.’
‘[T]he appearance of the whole or a part of a product resulting from the
features of, in particular, the lines, contours, colours, shape, texture and/
or materials of the product itself and/or its ornamentation.’
Section 2(c) of RD(A)A 2017.

298

ARTICLE

non-physical product its appearance’—presents a fairly
low bar. If practically all such ‘features’ are granted pro-
tection, the risk of over-protection can be substantial. To
provide balance, the deﬁnition of ‘design’ also contains
an ‘exclusion list’, that is, a list of features that are not
eligible for registered design protection. This includes
what are commonly known as the ‘functional’, ‘must ﬁt’
and ‘must match’ exclusions. These exclusions reinforce
the distinction between design features intended to have
an aesthetic appeal on the one hand, and design features
intended to perform some function on the other. The
former category would be suitable for protection under
the RDA, while the latter would not be.

We were conscious of the need to minimize the risk
of overprotection when including colours as a feature
of design that can be protected. We did so in two ways.
First, in addition to features of shape and conﬁguration,
colours are now also subject to the exclusions. As an
example of how the functional exclusion may apply to
colours—in Singapore the colours of a ‘probation plate’
(which drivers have to display prominently on their
vehicles during a certain period of time immediately
after the date they receive their driving licence) are
speciﬁed in legislation.

Second, there are safeguards on the extent to which
designers may seek protection for colours. In particular,
designers will not be able to protect colours per se. The
amended deﬁnition of ‘design’ states that the following
are excluded from protection:

Features consisting only of one or more colours that—

(i) are not used with any feature of shape or conﬁgura-

tion; and

(ii) do not give rise to any feature of pattern or ornament.

Thus, a novel design of a teapot consisting of its shape
and colour (say, purple) can be protected as a registered
design, but not the colour purple on its own. Put another
way, a designer cannot obtain protection for the colour
purple, applied to teapots of all shapes. Doing so would
effectively give the designer a monopoly over the colour
purple for teapots. As another example, a surface pattern
consisting of a white background and purple polka dots
may be registered, as the interaction of colours has given
rise to a feature of pattern or ornament.19

Clariﬁcation that designs of handmade items
can be protected

We intended to clarify that designs need not be applied
to items that are mass-produced and/or produced

within an industrial/factory setting to be eligible for
protection. While that sort of mass or factory produc-
tion may have been the usual methods of production in
the past, technology (both in the production and distri-
bution of goods) have evolved such that smaller-scale
production for targeted and niche markets is increas-
ingly common. Blog shops operated by home-based
artisans are a good example. Designs created in these
contexts should also be eligible for protection.

The ﬁrst amendment was the deletion of the phrase
‘applied . . . by any industrial process’ in the deﬁnition
of ‘design’, as seen above.

Another amendment that was required was to the

deﬁnition of ‘article’, which previously read:

‘[A]rticle’ means
includes. . .

any

article

of manufacture

and

We considered whether the word ‘manufacture’ implies
a certain method of production, and in particular
whether production by hand on a small scale can be
accommodated. We referred to the UK and EU deﬁni-
tions of ‘product’ which contain the phrase ‘industrial
and the Australian deﬁnition of
or handicraft’,
‘product’ which
phrase
‘manufactured or hand made’. While these deﬁnitions
would achieve our policy intent, we were concerned
with, in particular, the Australian deﬁnition that seems
to suggest that a manufacturing process can never be by
hand. We settled on the following deﬁnition of ‘article’:

similarly

contains

the

‘[A]rticle’ means any thing that is manufactured (whether
by an industrial process, by hand or otherwise), and
includes. . .20

In our view, this clariﬁes that designs of handmade
articles are within the scope of the RDA. At the same
time, this has the advantage of not distorting the plain
and ordinary meaning of ‘manufacture’, which does
not necessarily preclude production by hand.

Allowing protection of designs applied to
non-physical products

To our knowledge, Singapore is the ﬁrst jurisdiction to
legislate protection for virtual designs by introducing a
separate category of
‘non-physical products’. Before
proceeding further, a point of clariﬁcation should be
made. By ‘virtual designs’, we refer to designs of intan-
gible objects (we will discuss the relevant deﬁnitions
below), and not, for example Graphical User Interfaces
those found on mobile devices.
(GUIs)

such as

19 More information about the protection of colours as a design feature can
be found in the Information Note found at ipos.gov.sg/resources/design.

20

Section 2(a) of RD(A)A 2017.

Simon Seow and William Kwek  Designing for the future

ARTICLE

299

The registration of GUIs in Singapore is already a fairly
well-established practice.21

What follows below is a discussion on several issues

related to the protection of virtual designs.

Deﬁning a new category of ‘non-physical products’
We took the approach of clearly and explicitly provid-
ing for the protection of virtual designs in the legisla-
tion, beginning with deﬁning several key terms. The
deﬁnition of ‘non-physical products’ is as follows:

[A]ny thing that—

(i) does not have a physical form;

(ii) is produced by the projection of a design on a surface

or into a medium (including air); and

(iii) has an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not merely
to portray the appearance of the thing or to convey
information; and. . .22

In addition, for reasons which we will elaborate on fur-
ther down, it was necessary to include a deﬁnition of a
‘device for projecting a non-physical product’:

[A] device for projecting a non-physical product—

(a) is any device that when activated projects the non-
physical product on a surface or into a medium
(including air); and

(b) includes any product or component that is used in or
with a device mentioned in paragraph (a) to project
the non-physical product on a surface or into a
medium (including air).23

includes non-physical products. However,

We decided on this approach after considering two
alternatives. The ﬁrst option was to rely on the existing
term ‘article’, and possibly clarifying or providing that
‘article’
it
was felt that ‘article’ does not satisfactorily include non-
physical products within its scope, as it would usually
bring to mind and be associated with tangible objects
only. The second option was to replace ‘article’ with
another term that is broad enough to capture both tan-
gible and non-intangible items. This would also be
problematic because, amongst other things, the identi-
cal treatment of tangible and non-intangible items may
not always be possible throughout the legislation. While
identical treatment appears workable in the registration
phase, it might not work when one is attempting to
enforce the design rights. For example, it is not clear
how one can possess or deliver up an intangible
object—it appears preferable to reference the projection

device instead. Therefore, having separate categories of
articles and non-physical products allows greater ﬂexi-
bility, precision, and clarity when referring to them in
various parts of the legislation.

The key criteria for a non-physical product to fall
within the scope of the RDA is that it has a utilitarian
function. This language was adapted from the deﬁni-
tion of ‘useful article’ in section 70(4) of the Copyright
Act. This is a continuation of our policy position that
registered design protection is intended for the aes-
thetic, visual qualities of objects (whether physical or
not) that have functional uses, rather than objects that
primarily carry an artist’s artistic expression. The
Explanatory Statement of
the Registered Designs
(Amendment) Bill explains that an example of a non-
physical product is a virtual keyboard, which can be
used to type and input characters in the same manner
as a traditional, physical computer keyboard. A pro-
jected image of a mug, for example, would not be a
non-physical product within the deﬁnition in the RDA
unless it is capable of holding water (or serving some
other function). In the same way, images displayed by a
projector are not non-physical products for the pur-
poses of the RDA.

We recognize that deﬁning non-physical products in
this way might not be ‘future prooﬁng’ our legislation
completely—for example, as technology evolves, there
could be virtual designs in future that are not projected
by a projection device. The alternative would have been
to omit legislating the scope of ‘non-physical products’,
whether as included within an all-encompassing term
that also includes physical articles or as a separate cate-
gory. This will leave the courts to decide on its scope, at
least on a case-speciﬁc basis. While this could have
allowed the RDA to be more technology-neutral and
‘future proof’, it does not provide the same degree of
certainty to designers and the public today. For exam-
ple, the designer of a virtual design might be unclear as
to whether a design fell within the scope of the RDA.
The approach taken provides greater certainty today,
and we are cognisant of the need to review our regime
continually as technology evolves.

Exclusive rights and infringement provisions
An important issue that required careful consideration
was
the provisions governing the exclusive rights
enjoyed by the owner of a registered design and, as a

21 Practice Direction No. 4 of 2014 (found at ipos.gov.sg/resources/design/

practice-direction-archives) contains information on how the registration
of GUIs should be carried out.

22
23

Section 2(e) of RD(A)A 2017.
Section 2(h) of RD(A)A 2017.

300

ARTICLE

corollary, the infringement of registered design rights.
The previous section 30(1) provided that:

The registration of a design under this Act gives to the reg-
istered owner the exclusive right—

(a) to make in Singapore or import into Singapore—

(i) for sale or hire; or

(ii) for use for the purpose of trade or business; or

(b) to sell, hire, or offer or expose for sale or hire, in

Singapore,

any article in respect of which the design is registered and
to which that design or a design not substantially different
from it has been applied.

Section 30(2) then sets out what would constitute
infringement of a registered design right. This includes,
for instance, doing anything in section 30(1) without
the consent of the registered design owner and while
the registration is in force.

Extending these provisions as is to designs applied to
non-physical products led to several difﬁculties, the
chief of which was, in our view, the concept of ‘making’
and ‘importing’ a non-physical product. It seems more
logical to associate the acts of ‘making’ and ‘importing’
with a device that projects the non-physical product. As
a result, section 30(1) has been reformulated to exclude
references to ‘making’ and ‘importing’ a non-physical
product. Instead, these actions relate to the projection
device—see section 30(1)(a)(ii). It is also an infringe-
ment of a registered design right to sell, hire, or offer or
expose for sale or hire, in Singapore, a device that proj-
ects a non-physical product in respect of which the
design is registered and to which the design has been
applied (see section 30(1)(b)(ii)). The exclusive rights
of a registered design owner in relation to articles
remain unchanged.

in the course of

Delivery up and disposal
Related to this is the issue of delivery up and disposal of
items
infringement proceedings,
addressed in sections 40 and 41 of the RDA. How would
these remedies apply in the context of designs applied to
non-physical products? We took the view that it is difﬁ-
cult to conceive of non-physical products existing inde-
pendently of projection devices, at least with the current
state of technology. As with ‘making’ and ‘importing’,
the acts of delivery up and disposal should relate to the
device, rather than the non-physical product.24

We recognized that the amended legislation allows
for the delivery up and disposal of ‘multi-function’
devices—that is, devices that are capable of projecting
both non-physical products that
infringe registered
design(s), as well as other non-physical products that
do not infringe. In other words, there could be devices
that project both infringing and non-infringing non-
physical products subjected to delivery up and disposal.
We also noted that under section 41(2), the court has
discretion when deciding on orders for disposal. It is
envisaged that in the situation where the defendant’s
infringing devices have both infringing and non-
infringing uses, the court can consider whether the
devices can be ‘reprogrammed’ so as to cease to be
infringing (ie such that the device no longer projects
the infringing non-physical product, but can continue
to project non-infringing non-physical products). If
this can be achieved, then an order for delivery up and
disposal may not be needed. This is a balance that we
regard as appropriate. On the one hand, the registered
design owner should have recourse and access to these
remedies even when the infringing devices have other
legitimate uses. The fact that the infringing devices have
other legitimate uses does not lessen or remove the eco-
nomic harm the registered design owner suffers. On the
other hand, the defendant should be given the opportu-
nity to continue trading in the device if it can be ren-
dered non-infringing.

Implications on ‘applied industrially’
The deﬁnitions of ‘applied industrially’ also needed to be
revised to take into account non-physical products. In
particular, how should non-physical products be
‘counted’ when determining the number of reproductions
of the design (which, in turn, determines when a design is
considered to be ‘applied industrially’)? Should the num-
ber of devices for projecting the non-physical product be
counted? What about instances where a device can project
multiple non-physical products?

It was decided that the closest equivalent to the physi-
cal article paradigm would be the number of non-physical
products that can be projected simultaneously. Hence, the
number of devices would be irrelevant—if 26 devices can
each project two non-physical products each capable of
functioning on its own, there would be a total of 52 possi-
ble simultaneous projections and, in this case, the design
of the non-physical product would be deemed to be

24

Section 20 and 21 of RD(A)A 2017.

Simon Seow and William Kwek  Designing for the future

ARTICLE

301

‘applied industrially’. This approach is reﬂected in the
new rule 12(3)(a)(ii) of the RDR, for example.

Transitional issues
inter-related transitional
Finally,
issues relating to the introduction of protection for vir-
tual designs.

there were several

First, because of the novelty criteria for registration
of designs,25 virtual designs would not be validly regis-
tered if they have been previously disclosed. This is not-
withstanding the fact that the previous disclosure could
have occurred before virtual designs could be registered,
that is, before 30 October 2017. To allow for the regis-
tration of such virtual designs, a ‘one-time grace period’
of 12 months was introduced as a new section 8B:26

An application for registration of a design in respect of a
non-physical product must not be refused, and the regis-
tration pursuant to that application of the design in respect
of the non-physical product must not be revoked, by rea-
son only of a disclosure of the design made before the date
of ﬁling of that application, if that application is ﬁled dur-
ing the period of 12 months immediately after the date of
commencement of section 7 of the Registered Designs
(Amendment) Act 2017.

Second, we considered the situation where a design is
abruptly taken to be ‘applied industrially’ as a result of
the criteria for ‘applied industrially’ being amended to
take into account non-physical products.27 For exam-
ple, a designer could have 40 physical keyboards bear-
ing the design, and another 15 virtual keyboards
bearing the same design capable of simultaneous pro-
jection. This would mean that the design was not
deemed ‘applied industrially’ before 30 October 2017
(since, before that date, the criteria for ‘applied indus-
trially’ only took into account articles), but would be so
after that date. The ﬁrst implication of this is that his
copyright in the artistic work (ie the design of the key-
board) would be abruptly ‘extinguished’ on 30 October
2017. Furthermore, the ‘extinguishing’ would be in
accordance with the new regime. To see this, consider
the amendments to sections 73(2)(b) and 74(3)(b) of
the Copyright Act.28 The phrase ‘scope of the copyright
in the design as extended to all associated designs and
articles’ in section 74(3)(b) (to be read with section
the
73(2)(b)) has been replaced with ‘scope of

Section 5(2) of RDA.
Section 7 of RD(A)A 217.

25
26
27 This is provided for in Regulation 12 of the Copyright Regulations, and

was amended by Regulation 2 of the Copyright (Amendment)
Regulations 2017.
Sections 28(3) and 28(4) of RD(A)A 2017.

28

copyright in the design as extended to all associated
designs, articles and non-physical products’. The scope
of this phrase has been expanded to include non-
physical products to which the design was capable of
being applied. In other words, in situations where the
design falls under section 74(2) of the Copyright Act—
that is, where the design is ‘applied industrially’ and has
not been registered under the RDA—after a period of
15 years,29 copyright would be ‘extinguished’
for a
wider scope of items, now including non-physical prod-
ucts. This new regime for the ‘extinguishing’ of copy-
right
that
applied
industrially on or after 30 October 2017.30

to artistic works

applies

are

The second implication of the amended criteria for
‘applied industrially’ has to do with section 9 of the
RDA read with rule 12 of the RDR. If a design is not
applied industrially, the copyright owner of that artis-
tic work is still able to register the design notwith-
standing previous use of the artistic work (ie novelty
is not lost as a result). Once the new criteria for
‘applied industrially’ kicks in, there could be designs
that are abruptly deemed to be ‘applied industrially’
and therefore without the possibility of obtaining reg-
istered design protection.31 Combined with the effects
of the previous paragraph, the overall effect is that
these designs could be left without any form of IP
protection.

To address this issue, the new criteria for ‘applied
industrially’ in rule 12 of the RDR will kick in only a
year after 30 October 2017. In this one-year period,
designers will be able to obtain registered design protec-
tion for their designs,
if they anticipate that these
designs will meet the new criteria for ‘applied industri-
ally’ (or have already done so). To be clear, the inten-
tion was for the broadened scope of ‘scope of the
copyright in the design as extended to all associated
designs, articles and non-physical products’ to kick in
immediately on 30 October 2017.

Conclusion

The RD(A)A 2017 was the culmination of an almost
three-year
to update and
modernize Singapore’s design protection regime. It is part
of the government’s regular and ongoing efforts to ensure

long process

sought

that

29

See section 74(4) of Copyright Act for the calculation of ‘the relevant
period of 15 years’.
Section 29(9) of RD(A)A 2017.

30
31 Because of section 9(2) of RDA, as amended by section 8(a) of RD(A)A

2017.

302

ARTICLE

that our IP regime is ﬁt for purpose. In today’s economy
where the generation of new ideas, and capturing value
from these ideas, are crucial, the importance of a sound
and progressive IP protection system to undergird the
innovation ecosystem cannot be overstated.

The review process considered views from a wide
and varied range of stakeholders. In some areas, we

have leaned heavily on established regimes and practices
in other jurisdictions, adapting their legislation for our
purposes. In other areas, we have forged our own path.
The work continues as we continue to monitor the
impact of these amendments, and periodically review
our IP regime to ensure that it supports the national
innovation agenda.


