734

ARTICLE

Through the eyes of Omani courts: Copyright
protection of photographs
Riyadh Al-Balushi*

Al-Toqi v Ministry of Commerce
and Industry

regional

Ahmed Al-Toqi is an internationally acclaimed profes-
sional Omani photographer who has won numerous
national,
and international photography
awards.1 He publicizes his photographs and services
through his personal website, which includes samples of
his work.2 Al-Toqi’s website explains that he offers all
the photographs available on the website for sale in
print and digital formats and that he is also available
for commissioned work. The Ministry of Commerce
and Industry found photographs by Ahmed Al-Toqi re-
lating to Omani dates (the fruit), used them in a variety
of written pieces on the subject of date production, and
published these pieces in local Omani newspapers in
2011. The case related to three written pieces that fea-
tured Al-Toqi’s photographs. The ﬁrst piece featured a
single photograph and was published in three newspa-
pers; the second piece featured ﬁve photographs and
was published in two newspapers; and the third piece
featured three photographs and was published in one
newspaper. The photographs in question had a water-
mark signature of Al-Toqi and the VC symbol, and both
were visible on the photographs that appeared in the
newspapers as part of the written pieces produced by
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

Al-Toqi was not happy with the fact that his photo-
graphs had been used by the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry without his permission and without com-
pensation. The irony here cannot be escaped because
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is the body re-
sponsible for intellectual property policy in Oman.3 Al-
Toqi contacted the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
directly to inform them of the infringement of copy-
right in his photographs. When the Ministry did not ac-
knowledge the demands made by Al-Toqi, in 2012 he

*

1

Email: riyadh@mola.gov.om. I would like to thank Ahmed Al-Toqi for
allowing me to name him and use his case for this article. I would also
like to thank Rashad Al-Wahaibi for bringing this case to my attention,
and sharing the texts of the court decisions with me.
The Guardian, ‘Winners of the National Geographic Photo Contest 2015’
(The Guardian, 3 August 2015) <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/
gallery/2015/aug/03/winners-national-geographic-photo-contest-2015>
accessed 10 May 2017.

VC The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

The author
 Riyadh Al Balushi is an Omani lawyer currently

pursuing a PhD at SOAS, University of London.

This article
 This

article

v Ministry

examines Al-Toqi

of
Commerce and Industry, one of the few publicly
available copyright-related decisions by the courts
of the Sultanate of Oman. This case concerned the
unauthorized use of photographs by the Omani
Government itself.

 Omani courts at all levels—including the Supreme
Court—held that no copyright infringement had
occurred for different reasons. This case demon-
strates that, even though Oman has been a member
of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and a
United States free trade partner for over a decade,
its legal system is still not capable of ensuring the
protection of the most basic rights of authors under
copyright law.

 The ﬁrst section of this article provides an overview
of the facts of Al-Toqi v Ministry of Commerce and
Industry; the second section examines the decision
of Muscat Primary Court;
third section
addresses the decision of the Supreme Court; and
the fourth section concludes with some lessons to
be taken from this case.

the

decided to take legal action against the Ministry to de-
mand compensation for the unauthorized use of his
photographs.

The case was ﬁrst examined by Muscat Primary
Court, which decided that the publication of these pho-
tographs in newspapers was a permitted use under

2

3

Ahmed Al-Toqi, ‘Ahmed Al-Toqi Photography’ <http://www.ahmedal
toqi.com/> accessed 22 October 2016.
Competences of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Royal Decree No
102/2005 (issued 21 September 2005, published 1 January 2005) OG 806,
para 9: ‘The protection of intellectual property rights including inven-
tions and creations in accordance with the laws and treaties that regulate
these matters and in accordance with the competent authorities’.

 

i

Riyadh Al-Balushi  Through the eyes of Omani courts

ARTICLE

735

Article 20 of the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Law 2008. As such the use does neither entitle the au-
thor to any compensation, nor is his permission
needed.4 Al-Toqi appealed to the Muscat Court of
Appeal, which conﬁrmed the decision of Muscat
Primary Court.5 He then appealed to the Supreme
Court which did not conﬁrm the decisions of the previ-
ous courts, but rather decided that photographs are not
subject matter that is protected by the Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights Law 2008. It thus held that Al-
Toqi had no rights that had been infringed in this case.6

The decision of the Primary Court

Muscat Primary Court correctly understood that there
are situations in which the Copyright and Neighbouring
Rights Law 2008 permits members of the public via
Article 20 to use a protected work without the need to
seek the permission of the author. Like all copyright
laws, the Omani Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Law 2008 offers some exceptions to draw a balance be-
tween the rights of authors and the rights of users to use
these works in ways necessary for the protection of cer-
tain public-interests, such as freedom of expression, edu-
cation and preservation of culture. However,
the
Primary Court incorrectly applied Article 20 by using it
as a ﬂexible fair use style exception, when instead Article
20 provides an exhaustive list of exceptions.7 The draft-
ing of Article 20 is cumbersome and includes in its ﬁrst
paragraph the second and third steps of the three-step
test, which is confusing to novice judges who—as appar-
ent in this case—might assume that if these two condi-
tions are satisﬁed, the use will be permitted without the
need to identify a speciﬁc case within the sub-paragraphs
of Article 20.

The correct approach under the Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights Law 2008 for relying on a copy-
right exception under Article 20 requires identiﬁcation

5

4 Muscat Primary Court Decision No 120/2013 (issued 13 June 2013)
(unpublished); Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008, Royal
Decree No 65/2008 (issued 4 May 2008, published 17 May 2008) OG
863, art 20.
The text of the decision of Muscat Court of Appeal was not available to
the author at the time of writing; but according to a piece published in
Alfalq, an Omani online newspaper, Muscat Court of Appeal conﬁrmed
the decision of Muscat Primary Court. For more on this see Rashad Al-
Wahaibi, ‘Do We Have a Culture of Intellectual Property Protection in
the Sultanate of Oman?’[Arabic Article](Alfalq, 26 April 2016) <http://
www.alfalq.com/?p¼7992> accessed 10 May 2017.
Supreme Court Decision No 4/2014 (issued 2 February 2014)
(unpublished).
It is interesting to contrast Article 20 of the Omani Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights Law 2008 with Article 29 of the Kuwaiti Copyright
and Neighbouring Rights Law 2016. The Kuwaiti Article 29 is a ﬂexible
exception that enables any use to be permitted as long as the use satisﬁes

6

7

of a speciﬁc exception applicable to the use at hand in
one of the sub-paragraphs of Article 20, and—then—
application of the second and third steps of the three-
step test to the facts of the case.8 This is conﬁrmed by
Article 3 of the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Regulations 2008,9 which restates the need to satisfy the
third step of the three-step test and introduces addi-
tional conditions to all permitted uses, including a re-
quirement for such uses not to be directly or indirectly
commercial. The exhaustive list of permitted uses under
Article 20 is extremely limited, but there are two excep-
tions that appear to be relevant to this case. The ﬁrst is
the quotation exception for the purpose of explanation,
illustration or criticism under Article 20(1). The second
is the exception for reproducing extracts of articles pub-
lished in newspapers or periodicals relating to public-
interest issues under Article 20(4).

In relation to the quotation exception, it is possible
to interpret this as encompassing photographs in a way
that permits a newspaper to publish a quotation of a
photograph, or a small version of it, for the purpose of
illustration, explanation or criticism. The Copyright
and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008 does not deﬁne any
of these terms and there is no jurisprudence from
Omani courts that can help us understand the meaning
of ‘quotation’. However, the scope of the Omani quota-
tion exception appears to be narrower than the manda-
tory quotation exception under the Berne Convention,
which is not subject to the three-step test. Under the
Berne Convention, Member States are required to make
it ‘permissible to make quotations from a work which
has already been lawfully made available to the public,
provided that the quotation is compatible with fair
practice, and it does not exceed that justiﬁed by the
purpose’.10 The Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Law 2008 limits the enjoyment of this exception to the
purpose of ‘explanation, illustration, or criticism’, re-
quires the use to be ‘compatible with fair practice’ and

the second and third steps of the 3-step test and therefore provides a
non-exhaustive list of exceptions.
The Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008 is the ﬁrst Omani
copyright law to utilise the three-step test as a domestic precondition for
taking advantage of any exception. This law was issued to comply with
the Free Trade Agreement signed between the United States of America
and Oman and which also uses the three-step as the standard for permit-
ting exceptions to copyright protection as well as patent protection:
Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and
the Government of the Sultanate of Oman on the Establishment of a Free
Trade Area (signed 9 January 2006, entered into force 1 January 2009)
arts 15.4(10)(a) & 15.8(3).
Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Regulations 2008<AQ: should this
be consistently styled as Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008
throughout?>, MOCI Decision No 103/2008 (issued 2 December 2008,
published 17 December 2008) OG 877, art 3.
‘Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(adopted 1886), 828 UNTS 221 (Berne Convention)’ art 10(1).

8

9

10

 

i

736

ARTICLE

that ‘it does not exceed that justiﬁed by the purpose’.
Imposing conditions on the use of the quotation excep-
tion is not uncommon. Goldstein and Hugenholtz note
that Member States of the Berne Union are ‘presumably
free to prescribe the conditions on which quotation is
permitted’,11 and there are domestic copyright laws that
have even narrower quotation exceptions than that of
Oman, such as the copyright exception under the
Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1998 of the United
Kingdom, which—before the 2014 reform (when the
UK introduced a self-standing quotation exception
within the new section 30(1ZA) of the Act—allowed
quotation only for the purpose of
‘criticism or re-
view’).12 However, it does not appear that Article 20(1)
would cover the use of Al-Toqi’s photographs in this
case. Article 20(1) requires the use to be for the purpose
of ‘explanation, illustration, or criticism’. The only rea-
sonable understanding of these purposes is that the ex-
planation, illustration or criticism must be of the work
quoted. Quoting a copyright work to explain, illustrate
or criticize an unrelated work cannot be a justiﬁcation
for relying on this work. For example, it is not logical
to permit someone to play an extract of a recording by
the London Symphony Orchestra in a documentary
made to criticize the architectural works of Zaha
Hadid. The musical quotation in this hypothetical ex-
ample is used in a work of criticism, but the criticism
in question is not of the quoted work and therefore the
exception cannot be invoked. This interpretation is
conﬁrmed in the WIPO Guidance on the Berne
Convention which states that ‘quotation consists of
reproducing extracts from a work either to illustrate a
theme or defend some proposition or to describe or
criticise the work quoted from’.13 In the case of Al-Toqi,
the newspaper pieces in which his photographs were
used were not pieces that explained his photographs, il-
lustrated their components or criticized them. Rather,
the articles concerned the production of dates in
Oman, and the photographs were used to highlight the
topic of
readers.
Therefore, the purpose for which the photographs were
quoted does not fall under the scope of Article 20(1) of
the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008.

(dates) and attract

each piece

The other exception relevant to this case allows the
press to reproduce segments of articles published in
newspapers or periodicals relating to public-interest

issues. Unlike most of the sub-paragraphs of Article 20,
sub-paragraph (4) does not use the term ‘work’, but
rather the term ‘article’ (maqalah) to indicate that this
exception only applies to written works. The exception
is limited further by only applying to articles relating to
economic, political or religious issues. This exception
appears to be rooted within freedom of expression, and
provides a mechanism to enable members of the public
to be informed about pressing issues by allowing news-
papers to freely copy extracts of public-interest articles.
Furthermore, the exception permits newspapers to pub-
lish only ‘extracts’ of an article, not the whole work.14
Finally, and interestingly, this exception can only be re-
lied upon if the author of the article has not ‘reserved
[the republication] right at the time of publication’.
This is a unique condition that appears to allow the
press to use this exception only if the author has not
declared that all uses of the work are prohibited with-
out permission. Like all the other members of the Berne
Convention, copyright protection in Oman is auto-
matic and does not require the author to take any ac-
tion to be able to enjoy it. However, for this speciﬁc
case, the author of a work may enjoy greater or lesser
control over the use of his/her work in regard to this
exception, depending on whether he/she has reserved
the rights over its use. The photographs of Al-Toqi that
were used in this case were watermarked with his signa-
ture and the VC symbol. Even though the decision of the
Muscat Primary Court is rather concise, the court pass-
ingly interpreted the VC symbol to signify that ‘the use
of the photograph is not permitted’. This suggests that
this exception may not be relied upon if the author
merely attaches
to his/her work.
However, the primary reason why this exception cannot
be relied upon to reproduce photographs in this case is
the fact that it only applies to written works—such as
newspaper articles—and not also photographs.

symbol

the VC

In addition to the limitations found in relation to
each of these two exceptions, it is also possible to argue
these exceptions do not apply to the case in question
due to the general restrictions on permitted uses found
in Article 3 of the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Regulations 2008. Article 3 of the Regulations requires
the permitted use not be directly or indirectly for proﬁt.
The articles were published in several newspapers,
including the Arabic Oman Daily, Al-Watan and

11 Paul Goldstein and Bernt Hugenholtz, International Copyright: Principles,

14 The formulation of this exception under Omani law is unique when

Law, and Practice (3rd ed, Oxford University Press 2013) 392–393.

12 Lionel Bently and Brad Sherman, Intellectual Property Law (4th edn,

Oxford University Press 2014) 238–241; Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988 (UK) s 30(1).

13 World Intellectual Property Organisation, WIPO Guide to the Berne

Convention (WIPO 1978) 58 (emphasis added).

compared to the equivalent exception under the laws of neighbouring
countries as it appears to be the only one to restrict its use to ‘segments’
of the work. Contrast Article 20(4) of the Omani Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights Law 2008 with Article 23(2) of the Emirati
Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2002.

 

i

Riyadh Al-Balushi  Through the eyes of Omani courts

ARTICLE

737

Al-Shabiba. Two of these are issued by for-proﬁt enter-
prises. Therefore their use of the work is excluded by
Article 3 of the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Regulations 2008.

Finally, there is an argument to be made that the use
in question does not satisfy the second and third steps
of the three-step test. The victim of copyright infringe-
ment in this case is a professional photographer whose
livelihood depends on his ability to commercially ex-
ploit his works with institutions, such as governmental
entities and the press. It is not unreasonable to recog-
nize that any unauthorized use by these subjects use
contradicts the normal exploitation of the work and ad-
versely
the
photographer.

legitimate

interests

affects

the

of

Muscat Primary Court did not go into any elaborate
analysis of the nature of exceptions provided by the
Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008. Rather,
it merely stated that Article 20 permits copying of a
work as long as the name of the author and the source
are attributed, if such uses do not conﬂict with the nor-
mal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interests of the original author.
Muscat Primary Court held that the name of the author
was attributed in the newspaper pieces (through the
watermarks that the photographer added to his photo-
graphs) and therefore the use was permitted under
Article 20 even if the source of the photograph was not
acknowledged. The decision appears to assume that the
conditions of the second and third steps of the three-
step test were satisﬁed. The court did not recognize the
need to identify one of the sub-paragraphs of Article 20
as the basis for permitting the unauthorized use. This
clearly is an incorrect application of the law as was illus-
trated in the discussion above.

In comparison to the error made by the Supreme
Court, the error of the Primary Court does not appear
too unforgiveable, given the complex wording of Article
20 of the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law
2008. The Supreme Court did not attempt to identify a
provision under
the Copyright and Neighbouring
Rights Law 2008 that would justify the unauthorized
use of Al-Toqi’s photographs. Instead, it simply de-
clared that photographs are not subject to copyright
protection and, accordingly, that Al-Toqi has no rights
over their use.

Oman is a member of numerous international treaties
that explicitly require the protection of photographs
by means of copyright. These include the Berne
Convention,15 the TRIPS Agreement16 and the Free
Trade Agreement with the United States of America.17
Domestically, the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Law 2008 also explicitly recognizes photographs and
similar works as a category of protected copyright sub-
ject matter.18 Photographs might not enjoy an identical
standard of protection as other works under certain
copyright regimes, and the Berne Convention permits
states to protect photographs for a shorter term than
other artistic works as long as this term lasts for at least
the photograph.19
25 years from the production of
However,
the Omani Copyright and Neighbouring
Rights Law 2008 treats photographs in the same way as
other literary, artistic and scientiﬁc works, and protects
them for a term that lasts for the lifetime of the author
plus 70 years after his/her death.20 There is absolutely no
justiﬁcation for the Supreme Court to deny the qualiﬁca-
tion of photographs as a subject matter for the enjoy-
ment of copyright protection. The only explanation for
this decision is the ignorance of the judges in Oman of
the basics of copyright law.

The decision of the Supreme Court

Conclusion

The full text of the decision of the Muscat Court of
Appeal is not available, but it appears that it conﬁrmed
the decision of the Muscat Primary Court and that is
why the photographer made a ﬁnal appeal
to the
Supreme Court.

Due to the inadequate reporting of court decisions in
Oman, it is difﬁcult to assess the extent to which the
Omani judiciary is failing to ensure the protection of
copyright in Oman, but the fact that the Supreme
Court in this case neglected to recognize the protection

15 Berne Convention, art 2(1): (1) The expression ‘“literary and artistic

works” shall include every production in the literary, scientiﬁc and artis-
tic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expression, such as
[. . .] photographic works to which are assimilated works expressed by a
process analogous to photography, [. . .]’.

16 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization

(adopted 15 April 1994) 1869 UNTS 299 Appendix C - Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement), art 12: ‘Whenever the term of protection of a work, other
than a photographic work or a work of applied art, is calculated on a ba-
sis [. . .]’.

17 Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and
the Government of the Sultanate of Oman on the Establishment of a Free
Trade Area (signed 9 January 2006, entered into Force 1 January 2009)
art 15.4(4): ‘Each Party shall provide that, where the term of protection
of a work (including a photographic work), performance, or phonogram
is to be calculated [. . .]’.

18 Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008, art 2(h).
19 Berne Convention, art 7(4).
20 Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008, art 26.

 

i

738

ARTICLE

of copyright over photographs suggests that there is a
lack of understanding of the most basic aspects of copy-
right law at the highest level of the Omani judiciary.
What is even more concerning here is that the copy-
right infringer in this case was the government itself,
notably the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, that
is,
the body responsible for developing intellectual
property policy and raising awareness of intellectual
property issues.21 Government is not only failing to up-
hold the rights of Omani authors, but is it also infring-
ing their rights by using their works without their
permission.

This case also underscores how little membership to
treaties helps local creators.
international copyright
Even though Oman is a member of
the Berne
Convention and the WTO, and is a signatory of numer-
ous bilateral
investment and free trade agreements,
these international treaties give rights to foreigners for
the protection of their intellectual property rights, but
not to its own nationals. The failure of Oman to protect
the copyright of its own nationals is not considered a
violation of any of international law commitments. The
Berne Convention requires a state to protect the works
of the nationals of other Member States, not works of
the nationals of that state itself.

Notwithstanding inadequate copyright protection,
photography remains as one of the most popular forms

of creative production in Oman. Professional photogra-
phers manage to sustain their professions using busi-
ness models that do not require monopoly rights. For
example, Omani photographers, such as Al-Toqi, may
get paid through commissioned work, and may rely on
self-help solutions to ensure that they can still sell their
photographs even if they are shared. Such self-help so-
lutions include using watermarks and selling photo-
graphs
formats.
Photographers in Oman also enjoy a special attention
from the Sultan of Oman himself as the Omani
Photographic Society is technically a governmental en-
tity funded and supervised by the Diwan of Royal
Court.

in framed high-resolution print

Copyright might not be the most vital legal instru-
ment for supporting photographers in Oman, but it
does provide them with a level of protection that is nec-
essary for certain business models. The existence of
copyright law also gives photographers an expectation
of how their works may be used. Courts must uphold
the law and ensure that these expectations are met. If
the Omani Government truly believes that copyright
law is a matter worth protecting, then it must recon-
sider its capacity-building initiatives at all judicial and
administrative levels, and make sure that copyright law
is drafted in such a way that creators and users are in a
position to predict how courts will interpret the law.

21 Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Law 2008, art 61: ‘The Ministry shall
be responsible for: (a) educating authors and the holders of neighbouring
rights of their moral and economic rights’.

 

i


