ARTICLE

473

Copyright in custom code: Who owns
commissioned software?
T. J. McIntyre*

The recent decisions in R Griggs Group Ltd v Evans1
and Clearsprings Management Limited v Businesslinx
Limited and others2 show that some confusion remains
as to the issues surrounding ownership of commis-
sioned works generally and software in particular. This
article examines the ownership of commissioned soft-
ware in England and Ireland together with the rules of
law which might modify or limit the effects of that
ownership.3

An understandable misconception
There is a popular misconception that a person who
commissions and pays for work automatically owns
that work. This belief is understandable: as Groves puts
it: ‘If you pay someone to do something for you, you
generally expect to own the product of their labour.’4
This myth, like many others, is based on a grain of
truth: until recently, both English and Irish copyright
law5 provided for ownership of certain commissioned
artistic works (such as photographs and engravings) to
vest in the client.6

However, popular understanding has failed to keep up
with legislative change. In both England7 and Ireland,8
the commissioned works exceptions have been elimi-
nated: the author of a commissioned work is now the
ﬁrst owner of the copyright unless the author is an
employee in the course of employment or the work falls
within other narrow statutory exceptions.9

Consequently, in the case of commissioned software,
copyright initially vests in the author, not the client.

*

1
2
3

4

5
6

Barrister at Law, Lecturer in Law, University College Dublin.
Email: tjmcintyre@ucd.ie. I am greatly indebted to Professor Robert
Clark for his extensive comments.
[2005] EWCA Civ 11.
[2005] EWHC 1487.
Cameron, E. ‘The Role of Copyright in Protecting the Creativity of
Programmers’, paper delivered at the 17th BILETA Annual Conference,
available at http://www.bileta.ac.uk/Document Library/1/The Role of
Copyright in Protecting the Creativity of Programmers.pdf (last accessed
29 August 2006).
Groves, P. Copyright in commissioned work: Court of Appeal put the
boot in. Entertainment Law Review. 2005; 16(3): 56.
Under the Copyright Acts 1956 and 1963, respectively.
Section 4, Copyright Act 1956 and Section 10, Copyright Act 1963.

# The Author (2007). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved

Key issues
† Despite the fundamental nature of the principles
governing authorship and ownership of copyright
in protected works, substantial uncertainty still
shrouds
in
works generated in pursuit of a contractual com-
mission, particularly in the ﬁeld of computer
software.

the allocation of property rights

† Areas of uncertainty include not only those in
which the commissioning contract is silent as to
ownership and other issues but also those in
which, in addition to copyright, database right
may also be created, as well as those in which
legal rights may be in conﬂict with authors’
moral rights.

† This article examines case law relating to copy-
right in commissioned works and seeks to apply
it to contemporary problems within the ﬁeld of
software creation, leading to the conclusion that
the most prudent practice is
to ensure that
express contract terms are employed wherever
possible.

A client who wishes to acquire the copyright must
agree this with the author, who must then assign it.
Moreover, the assignment will be ineffective unless it
is in writing and signed by or on behalf of
the
assignor.10 An unwritten agreement or understanding
as to ownership—however clear—will not sufﬁce.

7

8

9

Section 11(1) Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988. Hereinafter
‘CDPA’.
Section 23(1) of the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000. Hereinafter
‘CRRA’.
Section 23(1) CRRA contains three other exceptions where ‘(b) the work
is the subject of Government or Oireachtas copyright, (c) the work is
the subject of the copyright of a prescribed international organisation,
or (d) the copyright in the work is conferred on some other person by
an enactment’. Section 11(3) CDPA similarly excludes ‘Crown copyright
or Parliamentary copyright (see sections 163 and 165) or . . . copyright
which subsists by virtue of section 168 (copyright of certain
international organisations)’.

10 CRRA Section 120(3); CDPA Section 90(3). Any agreement to assign

future copyright must also be in writing and signed: CRRA Section
121(1) and CDPA Section 91(1).

474

ARTICLE

An unsuspecting client may receive merely a licence
to use the work. This can come as a surprise. Depend-
ing on the nature of the licence, it may be forbidden
to modify software11 and there may be no access to
the source code.12 Licensees ﬁnd themselves unable to
distribute the software further. They may need to pur-
chase the copyright—in effect paying twice for the
work. In a worst-case scenario, the author may even
sell the work to a competitor (as happened in R Griggs
Group Ltd v Evans13).

The fact that a person is mistaken as to what has
been purchased does not of itself justify legal interven-
tion. Normal commercial practice is for the parties to
specify, by way of written agreement, the precise rights
which are being purchased.14 Such an agreement is
essential in the case of all copyright works, given that a
variety of rights might be transferred, from a limited
non-exclusive licence to an outright assignment of
copyright. Where the client has failed to secure such an
agreement, it might be said that the courts should not
rewrite their foolish bargain, reﬂecting the policy of the
legislation, which vests ownership in the author by
default and requires clear steps to transfer that owner-
ship.15 One might even say that in such a case the
client is attempting to secure rights that were neither
bargained nor paid for.

In some circumstances, however, the statutory rules
as to ownership and transfer of ownership might work
an injustice. As Millard explains:

The automatic operation of the rules as to ﬁrst ownership
may produce results that are contrary to the reasonable
commercial expectations of one or more of the parties. For
example, the commissioning party may contribute a brilli-
ant original concept and pay all the costs of its subsequent
development and implementation, yet end up with no
legal rights of ownership in the ﬁnal product. Even if it
had been understood from the start, and possibly even
agreed orally, that the commissioner would in all respects

11 Mars UK v Teknowledge (No. 2) [2000] FSR 138. But note Council

Directive 91/250/EEC, which permits adaptation for purposes of ‘error
correction’ or ‘interoperability’. This is implemented in Ireland by
Sections 81(1) and 82(1) CRRA and in England and Wales by Section
50C CDPA. Compare Saphena Computing v Allied Collection Agencies
[1995] FSR 616.

12 Decompilation is permitted only in limited circumstances under Section

13
14

81 CRRA and Section 50B CDPA.
[2005] EWCA Civ 11.
See, for example, Morgan, R & Burden, K on Computer Contracts (7th
edn, Sweet and Maxwell, 2005), Chs 3 and 4 and Bainbridge, D.
Introduction to Computer Law (5th edn, Pearson, 2004) 235 et seq.
15 Lea, G. Trading places: the involuntary transfer of copyright in the

United Kingdom. Entertainment Law Review. 1994; 5(5): 179.

16 Millard, C. ‘Copyright’ in Reed, C. and Angel, J. (eds), Computer Law

(5th edn, Oxford, 2003), 198.

17 The legitimacy of this judicial reasoning is questionable in that it

undermines the statutory scheme as to ownership. For discussion of this

‘own’ the product, this will not be sufﬁcient to alter the
operation of the ﬁrst-ownership rules. This is because . . .
assignments of copyright and agreements as to future own-
ership of copyright will only be enforceable if they are evi-
denced in writing. . . .16

In response,
the courts have developed principles
which may allow the commissioner to assert rights
over a work notwithstanding that there is no written
agreement or assignment concerning ownership.17

Equitable ownership
Although statute vests legal ownership in the author,
the courts have held that, where a speciﬁcally enforce-
able contract requires assignment of the copyright, the
commissioner will be treated as the owner in equity18
and the author can be ordered to execute an assign-
ment.19 Consequently, the lack of a written assignment
or agreement is not necessarily fatal.

Limitations of equitable ownership
However, equitable ownership may leave the client in a
precarious position. So long as the author retains legal
title, there is a risk of conveying that title to a bona ﬁde
purchaser for value without notice, defeating the com-
missioner’s equitable interest.20 Further, the right to
seek an assignment is equitable and therefore discre-
tionary, creating a risk that the court may refuse the
assignment or grant it only on terms.21

Equitable owners also face difﬁculties in protecting
rights against third parties. They may commence pro-
ceedings22 and take them to the stage of obtaining
interlocutory relief, but a ﬁnal injunction or damages
will not be available unless they join the legal owner as
a party to the action.23

point, see Bently, L. ‘Interpretation of Copyright Rules: The Role of the
Interpreter—The Creation Function’, a paper delivered to the ALAI
(Association Litte´raire et Artistique Internationale) on 20 September
2005, available at http://cipil.law.cam.ac.uk/Media/Judicial Creativity in
Copyright Interpretation.doc (last accessed 15 August 2006).

18 Pasterﬁeld v Denham [1999] FSR 168.
19 Massine v De Basil [1936 –1945] MacG CC 223 and The Times, 23

February 1938.

20 R Griggs Group v Evans [2003] EWHC 2914 (Ch). Similarly, a licence,
express or implied, is not binding as against a bona ﬁde purchaser for
value without notice—see Section 120(4) CRRA and Section 91(3)
CDPA.
Ibid.

21
22 Merchant-Adventurers Ltd v M. Grew & Co. Ltd [1972] Ch 242.
23 Performing Right Society v London Theatre of Varieties [1924] AC 1;

Batjac Productions Inc v Simitar Entertainment (UK) Ltd [1996] FSR 139.

T. J. McIntyre . Copyright in custom code

ARTICLE

475

Implied terms as to ownership
and implied licences
Before equitable ownership can be asserted, it must be
shown that there is an agreement that ownership will vest
in the commissioner. Explicit agreement rarely exists—
disputes arise precisely because the parties fail to address
the point. Consequently, the court must reconstruct the
parties’ intentions, asking whether a term dealing with
ownership can be implied into the contract.24

This was summarized in Clearsprings:25

It is now well established that where a party (‘the client’)
uses the services of an independent contractor (‘the con-
tractor’) to perform work involving the creation of a copy-
right work, the circumstances may be such that there will
be implied into the contract an agreement that the con-
tractor will in due course assign the copyright so created
to the client. Where the circumstances do not justify the
implication of an obligation to assign, the law may never-
theless require the implication of a licence, whether exclu-
sive or otherwise, and on such terms as may be necessary
to give business efﬁcacy to the contract.26

This passage also makes it clear that this is a ﬂexible
approach which permits several possible outcomes: a
term may be implied that ownership vests in the client;
there may be no implied term, ownership remaining in
the author; or the contract may be found to give the
client an implied licence in respect of the software but
falling short of full ownership.

Case law27
Massine v de Basil28
De Basil hired Massine to choreograph a ballet which
de Basil’s company would perform. A dispute arose as
to the ownership of copyright in the choreography. The
Court of Appeal held in favour of de Basil, ﬁnding that
Massine was acting as an employee. However, Lord
Justice Greene held, obiter, that even if Massine were an
independent contractor

it ought to be implied as a term of the agreement that any
work done by the plaintiff would be done on the basis that
the defendant who had paid for the work should be
entitled to such rights as might arise from that payment.29

24 The ﬁrst case to take this approach appears to be Sweet v Benning (1855)

16 CB 459 where Jervis CJ held that there was an implied term that
barristers preparing headnotes for cases did so on the basis that
copyright would vest in the publisher, stating that ‘there is an implied
condition, understanding, or arrangement between the proprietors of
the Jurist and the gentlemen who furnish the reports or other articles for
publication therein, that the former shall acquire a copyright in the
articles so written and published and paid for by him’.
[2005] EWHC 1487.

25

The court considered that the ballet was made up of
numerous elements including the music, the story, the
choreography,
the scenery, and the costumes; both
parties must have intended that the copyright in each
element was to be held by de Basil:

The choreography was but one part of a composite whole.
The defendant had paid the money under the agreement
for the supplying to his ballet of a part which was necess-
ary for its completeness, and unless he was entitled to the
copyright in that part of the ballet he would not be getting
that beneﬁt from the contract which must have been the
intention of the parties.30

That decision therefore looked to the commercial
reality behind the transaction, ﬁnding in effect that
the ballet could not be performed as intended without
the copyright being vested in the client. Signiﬁcantly,
the court did not ask whether an implied term falling
short of an assignment would sufﬁce. Later cases have
paid more attention to the extent of the implied term.

Blair v Osborne and Tompkins;
Stovin-Bradford v Volpoint Properties
The Court of Appeal heard these cases, within 6
months of one another, on essentially the same
issue—the extent of the implied licence granted by
an architect to a client who commissioned drawings.
In both, the clients had commissioned drawings to
obtain planning permission;
the clients
built in reliance on those plans but without enga-
ging the architect. Each architect had been engaged
under
Institute of British Architects
(RIBA) conditions. These speciﬁed that they retained
copyright in the drawings but were silent as to what
uses could be made of the drawings.

the Royal

thereafter,

In Blair,31 the court took a wide view of the implied

licence, holding (per Lord Denning MR) that

When the owner of a building plot employs an architect to
prepare plans for a house on that site, the architect impli-
edly promises that, in return for his fee, he will give a
licence to the owner to use the plans for the building on
that site. The copyright remains in the architect, so that he
can stop anyone else copying his plans, or making a house
from them; but he cannot stop the owner, who employed
him, from 112 Compare Hospital for the Sick Children (Board of Governors) v

Walt Disney Productions Inc [1968] 1 Ch 52 (whether grant of right to
make moving picture ﬁlms limited to silent ﬁlms or extended to sound
ﬁlms also) and New York Times v Tasini 533 US 483 (2001) (whether
freelance authors’ licence of rights in stories for newspaper and

magazine use extended to republication of those stories in electronic
databases).

113 [1998] ECC 488.


