ARTICLE

33

Oil States v Greene’s Energy: US Supreme Court
‘taps a gusher’ for patent challengers
Robert M. Kunstadt*

Did Oil States interpret ‘public rights’
correctly?

A review of the case law concerning the public right/
private right distinction in respect of the requirement
of jury trial suggests that the Oil States decision repre-
sents a departure from the manner in which ‘public
rights’ were previously construed by the US Supreme
Court.

As early as 1937, the Supreme Court considered this
topic in the context of labor-relations law. During the
Great Depression, Congress empowered the National
Labor Relations Board to impose administrative penal-
ties,
for unfair labor
practices. Chief Justice Hughes upheld the power of the
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to administer
Federal labor law without beneﬁt of jury trial.

including monetary penalties,

common law.

The instant case is not a suit at common law or in
the nature of such a suit. The proceeding is one un-
known to the
is a statutory
proceeding. Reinstatement of the employee and payment
for time lost are requirements imposed for violation of
its
the
enforcement. The
Seventh
Amendment is without merit.2

remedies appropriate

contention under

statute, and are

the

to

It

Hence, new administrative remedies unknown to the
English common law did not need adjudication by jury.
The NLRB decision was clariﬁed in Granﬁnanciera, SA
v Nordberg which explained:

[O]ur statement should not be taken to mean that Congress
may assign at least the initial factﬁnding in all cases involv-
ing controversies entirely between private parties to adminis-
trative agencies or other tribunals not involving juries, so
long as they are established as adjuncts to Article III courts.
If
the Seventh
Amendment a nullity. Rather, that statement . . . means only
that in some cases involving “private rights” . . . namely, as
encompassing all disputes to which the Federal Government

could render

so, Congress

that were

The author
 Robert M. Kunstadt is an IP Attorney with R

Kunstadt, PC, New York.

This article
 In Oil States Energy Services, LLC v Greene’s Energy
Group, LLC (Oil States), the US Supreme Court’s
opinion by Justice Thomas upheld the power of
Congress to assign validity issues concerning an
oil-well patent contested between the parties, to
determination by administrative judges of
the
Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB) sitting
without a jury.1 Justice Thomas considered patents
to be a form of ‘public right’ of the type histori-
cally subject, at least in certain instances, to royal
prerogative, with determination by administrative
agents of the English monarchy; hence, not of the
type calling for mandatory trial by jury under the
US Constitution.

 The Oil States decision facilitates a developing
practice for patent cases pending in the US district
courts to be stayed pending determinations of va-
lidity by the PTAB (increasingly a favoured forum
for patent challengers).

 A few loose ends sketched by Justice Thomas, in-
cluding a possible concern about retroactive applica-
tion to previously issued patents, suggest that Oil
States may not be the last word on the PTAB’s au-
thority. The Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (PTO) has
now itself suggested that reforms to make PTAB
decisions more closely conform to those rendered in
the district courts might be considered.

is not a party in its sovereign capacity – may Congress dis-
pense with juries as factﬁnders through its choice of an adju-
dicative forum. Those cases in which Congress may decline

*
1

Email: mail@RKunstadtPC.com.
Oil States Energy Services, LLC v Greene’s Energy Group, LLC, Slip
Opinion issued April 24, 2018. The author published in this journal con-
cerning previous developments in connection with patent jury trials: R
Kunstadt, ‘MCM v. HP: are Patent Jury-trials now Buggy-whips?’, (2017)
12(4) JIPLP 331 (analysing CAFC’s rejection of Seventh Amendment
jury-trial-right objection to invalidation of US patents by PTAB); and R

Kunstadt, ‘IP Jury Trials—Trouble Ahead?’ (2014) 9(8) JIPLP 639 (fore-
shadowing implications of ‘public right’ doctrine for curtailing IP jury
trials of all kinds (patent, trade mark and copyright)). Readers are re-
ferred to those articles for basic information on the topic, which will not
be repeated here.
NLRB v Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp, 301 US 1, 48–49 (1937) (emphasis
added).

2

VC The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

34

ARTICLE

to provide jury trials are ones involving statutory rights that
are integral parts of a public regulatory scheme and whose ad-
judication Congress has assigned to an administrative agency
or specialized court of equity . . . [W]e now refer to those
rights as “public,” rather than “private.”3

The Granﬁnanciera court explained that ‘[i]f a statutory
right is not closely intertwined with a federal regulatory
program Congress has power to enact, and if that right
neither belongs
the Federal
Government, then it must be adjudicated by an Article
III court.’.4

to nor exists against

Thus, by allowing certain ‘public rights’ cases to escape
jurisdiction of the Article III courts—and with it the jury-
trial requirement—Granﬁnanceria expanded the scope of
public rights from party disputes with the Federal govern-
ment (such as under the NLRB in 1937) to include rights
‘intertwined with a federal regulatory program’.

Consequently, if patent rights are now understood as
rights intertwined with a Federal regulatory program,
then jury trial before an Article III court is not required
by the Constitution. The Oil States majority opinion by
Justice Thomas applied ‘public rights’ doctrine in this
manner to dismiss the constitutional challenge to the
PTAB’s adjudication of patent validity by an Article I
tribunal without beneﬁt of jury.

However, is it appropriate to categorize patent rights
in the same manner as labor-law regulations? The origi-
nal rationale for non-jury adjudication of labor cases by
administrative tribunal was that labor-law regulations
represented a type of case ‘unknown to the common
law’.5 Adjudication of patent validity could hardly be
considered a type of case unknown to the common law.
Indeed, the parties and amici, as well as the Oil States
majority and dissenting opinions, devote many pages to
treating the common-law approach to determination of
patent validity. Hence, patent law cannot by any stretch
be viewed as a novel statutory scheme for administra-
tive regulations ﬁrst promulgated in the 20th century.

Similarly, the PTAB’s inter-partes trial procedure does
not represent a contest between the US Government and
a private party of the type traditionally considered a vindi-
cation of a ‘public right’ by the Government in its capac-
ity as sovereign. Rather, PTAB validity challenges are
instituted by private parties, with Government-employed
judges participating as the neutral arbiter.

In this respect, PTAB inter-partes trials may be dis-
tinguished from the re-issue and re-examination proce-
dures previously upheld as constitutional.6 In a re-issue
case, the patentee voluntarily surrenders the issued pat-
ent to the PTO, and solicits new claims from the PTO
examiner.7 In a re-examination case, either the patentee
or a third party solicits the PTO to take a second look
at the issued patent, in view of new-discovered evidence
of prior art. If a re-examination is instituted, proceed-
ings to determine the validity of the patent claims are
between the patentee and the PTO, not between the
patentee and a private party.8

Hence, the previously upheld procedures are more
closely akin to a controversy between the Government
and a private party (the patentee) than is a PTAB trial
between two private parties taking opposite sides of the
validity issue. All the more so, when one of those pri-
vate parties, the challenger, may already have been en-
gaged as
in a patent-
infringement case pending before an Article III court
(with a jury-trial having already been demanded in the
patentee’s complaint).

accused defendant

the

Oil States, if validly decided, therefore represents a
signiﬁcant expansion of the public-rights doctrine be-
yond its previous application. The question arises
whether in consequence and furtherance of Oil States,
‘Congress could render the Seventh Amendment a
nullity’ in patent cases.9

Further Congressional efforts in that direction might
ﬁnd support in B&B Hardware, Inc v Hargis Industries,
Inc, a trade mark case in which the Supreme Court held
that decisions rendered by the Article I Trademark Trial
and Appeal Board (TTAB) sitting without a jury, must
be respected as binding precedent
in trade mark-
infringement litigation in the Article III district courts.10
The theory applied in that case was not ‘public
rights’, but rather ‘issue preclusion’. Since the issue of
likelihood of confusion had already been tried before
the TTAB, the Supreme Court found no objection to
the application of that result in subsequent proceed-
ings—including in the district courts.

It must be noted, however, that trial before the
TTAB is essentially voluntary, since TTAB trials are
routinely suspended when district court litigation is
pending.11 Hence, enforcing a TTAB verdict is like

3

4
5
6
7

Granﬁnanciera, SA v Nordberg, 492 US 33, 55 fn 10 (1989) (emphasis
added).
ibid 492 US 54–55.
See n 2.
See eg Patlex Corp v Mossinghoff, 758 F 2d 594 (CAFC 1985).
35 USC s 251.

8
9
10

ibid s 302.
See n 3.
B&B Hardware, Inc v Hargis Industries, Inc, 575 US ___; 135 S.Ct. 1293
(2015).

11 Eg New Orleans Louisiana Saints LLC and NFL Properties LLC v Who

Dat? Inc, 99 USPQ2d 1550 (TTAB 2011).

Robert M. Kunstadt  Oil States v Greene’s Energy

ARTICLE

35

enforcing a district court verdict in a case in which the
parties have waived trial by jury.

Patent rights as ‘property’ rights

Justice Thomas was presented with a further impedi-
ment to his interpretation in favour of the executive
branch’s administrative power, in the form of prior
Supreme Court precedents that by their terms appeared
indefeasible
to classify already-granted patents as
‘property’
the
McCormick decision of 1898:

rights. One such leading case was

[W]hen a patent has received the signature of the Secretary
of the Interior, countersigned by the Commissioner of
Patents, and has had afﬁxed to it the seal of the Patent
Ofﬁce, it has passed beyond the control and jurisdiction of
that ofﬁce, and is not subject to be revoked or cancelled by
the President, or any other ofﬁcer of the Government. It
has become the property of the patentee, and as such is en-
titled to the same legal protection as other property. The
only authority competent to set a patent aside, or to annul
it, or to correct it for any reason whatever, is vested in the
courts of the United States, and not in the department
which issued the patent. And in this respect a patent for an
invention stands in the same position and is subject to the
same limitations as a patent for a grant of lands. The power
to issue either one of these patents comes from Congress,
and is vested in the same department. In the case of a pat-
ent for lands, it has been held that when one has obtained
a patent from the government, he cannot be called upon to
answer in regard to that patent before the ofﬁcers of the
Land Department, and that the only way his title can be
impeached is by suit.12

Faced with such sweeping Supreme Court precedent
appearing to validate the equivalence of property in land
with property in patents, Justice Thomas drew a distinc-
tion between patent rights secured by statute and other
rights that might be secured by the Constitution. Justice
Thomas proceeded to distinguish McCormick by main-
taining that the 1898 McCormick court must have de-
cided only on the basis of the patent statute as it existed
at that time. Since the patent statute was amended in
2011 to provide for the PTAB’s administrative revoca-
tion of granted patents, Justice Thomas determined that
such new statutory authority provided sufﬁcient basis to
support the challenged PTAB procedures.13

An objection to Justice Thomas’ reasoning is that the
McCormick court did not explain its rationale for

upholding that patent-in-suit on grounds that no spe-
ciﬁc statutory authority permitted its nulliﬁcation. It
would have been simple enough for that court to point
to the patent statute as it existed in 1870, if that is what
the court had in mind as its rationale for decision.

Instead, the court preferred to reason by analogy,
comparing invention patents to indefeasible grants of
property rights in land (property constitutionally pro-
tected from takings). Reference was expressly made to
the concept of ‘jurisdiction’ of the PTO. If the basis for
lack of jurisdiction was only a deﬁciency in the then-
existing patent statute, the McCormick court could have
simply cited the section of the 1870 statute enumerating
the powers of the PTO, and noted lack of any authority
for revocation.

The Patent Act of 1870, Ch 230, 16 Stat. 198–217 (8
July 1870), in force at the time of the McCormick deci-
sion, provided that the authority of the Commissioner
of Patents was to ‘superintend or perform all the duties
respecting the granting and issuing of patents’ (section
7) (emphasis added).14 Section 55 of the Act provided:

[A]ll actions, suits, controversies, and cases arising under
the patent laws of the United States shall be originally cog-
nizable, as well in equity as at law, by the circuit courts of
the United States, or any district court having the powers
and jurisdiction of a circuit court, or by the supreme court
of the District of Columbia, or of any Territory . . .

Therefore, if the McCormick court had been inclined to
base its ruling upon a ‘strict-constructionist’ interpreta-
tion of the patent statute, it readily enough might have
reasoned that since revocation of a granted patent was
not encompassed within the power of the Commissioner
to grant and issue patents—being the exact opposite of
those speciﬁed tasks—the Commissioner acted ultra vires
in purporting to revoke a patent. And, further, that orig-
inal jurisdiction was statutorily ﬁxed in the courts for all
‘actions, suits, controversies, and cases’. A ruling on
those narrow statutory grounds would not have needed
to reach constitutional issues.

However, this did not happen. Instead, it’s apparent
that the McCormick court must have intended to ad-
dress the broader question of the property status of pat-
ent rights, such as to entitle them vel non to exclusive
jurisdiction of the courts for revocation actions. The
logical reason why the McCormick court resorted to
consideration of the corresponding powers of ofﬁcers
of the Land Department, which on ﬁrst blush would

12 McCormick Harvesting Mach Co v Aultman, 169 US 606, 608–09 (1898)

14

(citations omitted).

13 Op, 11 (‘Those precedents, then, are best read as a description of the stat-

utory scheme that existed at that time.’).

Interferences—including those involving granted patents—were to be de-
cided by testimonial proceedings within the Patent Ofﬁce (s 42ff). Re-
issue was provided by s 53. Full text of 1870 Act: <http://www.ipmall.
info/sites/default/ﬁles/hosted_resources/lipa/patents/Patent_Act_of_
1870.pdf> accessed 26 June 2018.

36

ARTICLE

seem not to shed the least light upon the express statu-
tory authority of the Commissioner of Patents, must
have been that it wished to establish general principles
of jurisdiction beyond the limited application of any
particular statute.

if

Indeed,

the point of mentioning the Land
Department was merely to invoke its governing statute
as a model for a close reading of the patent statute,
then the McCormick court would have been expected to
quote and compare those governing statutes conferring
authority upon those two kinds of administrative ofﬁ-
cials; showing that both were constrained to compara-
ble limits of executive power. Instead, we ﬁnd the
McCormick court eschewing any reference to statutes or
statutory construction—quite to the contrary, invoking
broad concepts of ‘property’ rights resonating in princi-
ples of constitutional law:

[T]o attempt to cancel a patent upon an application for re-
issue when the ﬁrst patent is considered invalid by the ex-
aminer would be to deprive the applicant of his property
without due process of law, and would be in fact an invasion
of the judicial branch of the government by the executive.15

Justice Thomas, in dismissing the McCormick ruling as
having been based upon statutory grounds when that
manifestly could not have been the actual intent of that
court, downplayed the very issue that called for resolu-
tion in Oil States. Justice Thomas might fairly have crit-
icized the McCormick decision as dictum, needlessly
overreaching to consider constitutional grounds while
ignoring the plain text of the Patent Act of 1870. But
that would have taken Justice Thomas only partway
home: even if McCormick were reinterpreted as mere
dictum, it still would have been a persuasive authority
on the constitutional issues. The mere fact that the
McCormick court did not have to rule on constitutional
grounds does not erase the fact that it evidently did do
so—consequently, the Oil States Court was not writing
upon a completely clean slate.

The ‘Privy Council’ in English historical
practice

Even defenders of the PTAB, such as Amicus Dell, ad-
mitted that Article III courts should decide ‘any matter
which, from its nature, is the subject of a suit at the

15 McCormick (n 12) 612 (emphasis added).
16 Dell Amicus Brief in Oil States, p 5 (30 October 2017) (citing Murray’s

17

Lessee v Hoboken Land & Improvement Co, 59 US (18 How) 272, 284
(1856)).
ibid 9 (emphasis added). Dell did alternatively mention the ‘public rights’
doctrine as an alternative theory for supporting the PTAB, while not
brieﬁng it. Dell Amicus Brief in Oil States, 6 fn 2.

common law, or in equity, or admiralty’.16 However,
Dell urged that, because the English ‘Privy Council’ had
inherent authority to revoke English patents,
the
common-law and chancery courts were not the exclu-
sive English forum in which patents could be revoked
when the US Constitution was adopted:

The relevant constitutional question for purposes of Article
III and the Seventh Amendment is therefore whether, at
the time of the Founding, patents could be revoked—
whether typically, occasionally, or even rarely—by a non-
judicial decision-maker. The answer to that question is em-
phatically “yes” because persons seeking to challenge the
validity of a patent could seek relief from the Privy Council
for more than a century after the Founding.17

Hence, the brieﬁng in Oil States framed the issue of
how to treat certain exceptional and rare cases.
Defenders of the PTAB argued like Dell that any excep-
tions to English jury practice support the PTAB’s pro-
priety; while opponents of the PTAB argued to the
contrary that the infrequency of such exceptions dem-
onstrates the need for jury trials before US Article III
courts due to the general practice of jury submission in
England.

It therefore becomes instructive to consider a prior
Supreme Court decision by Justice Thomas himself,
which upheld the right to a jury trial in a copyright case.
Did Justice Thomas adhere to the ‘any exception’
school in order to deny a jury? Or did he follow the
‘general practice’
line of reasoning to require one?
Justice Thomas’ prior decision will be considered in de-
tail below, upon completion of an historical review of
English practice.

While the US Constitution marked a clean break
from monarchical authority in the former colonies,
commentators record only a gradual diminution of the
monarch’s control of patent matters in England itself,
in favour of proceedings conducted in the common-law
courts. Prof. Bracha characterizes this as ‘a gradual de-
cline that lasted into the 19th century accompanied by
a long period of ambiguity’.18 Signiﬁcantly, during this
period the Privy Council came to refer parties to the
common-law courts to try their claims.19

Unfortunately for those seeking clarity in divining
the contours of US patent law that may be consistent
with the
‘long period of
ambiguity’ is precisely where the attention of the parties

constitution, England’s

18 O Bracha, ‘Owning Ideas: A History of Anglo-American Intellectual

Property’, ch 1, 63 (June 2005) (PhD Thesis, Harvard Law School)
<https://law.utexas.edu/faculty/obracha/dissertation/> accessed 26 June
2018).
ibid 62–63.

19

Robert M. Kunstadt  Oil States v Greene’s Energy

ARTICLE

37

and amici strongly focused in Oil States. Jurists like
Justice Thomas, whose preferred touchstone of consti-
tutional interpretation is limited by doctrine to the de-
termination of ‘original intent’, may even decline to
look elsewhere.

Since those justices who otherwise might be inclined
to espouse an interpretation of the constitution in light
of the full arc of history sided with Justice Thomas’ Oil
States opinion, no justice on the court made an attempt
to redirect attention to any possible differences between
the business environment of 18th century England and
21st century USA in order to see what might be a rea-
sonable interpretation in view of developments over
more than 200 years. It was left to Justice Gorsuch to
present a defense of the common-law courts, in a dis-
sent joined by Chief Justice Roberts.

The Oil States dissent

The Oil States dissent took sharp issue with the major-
ity’s conclusion that certain rare or exceptional instan-
ces of non-jury adjudication of patent validity by the
English Privy Council could sufﬁce to validate the
PTAB’s constitutionality. Dissenting Justice Gorsuch
pointed out:

As I read the historical record presented to us, only courts
could hear patent challenges in England at the time of the
founding. If facts were in dispute, the matter ﬁrst had to pro-
ceed in the law courts. If successful there, a challenger then
had to obtain a writ of scire facias in the law side of the Court
of Chancery. The last time an executive body (the King’s
Privy Council) invalidated an invention patent on an ordinary
application was in 1746, in Darby v. Betton; and the last time
the Privy Council even considered doing so was in 1753, in
Baker v. James. After Baker v. James, the Privy Council
“divest[ed] itself of its functions” in ordinary patent disputes,
which “thereafter [were] adjudicated solely by the law courts,
as opposed to the [crown’s] prerogative courts” . . .20

Addressing the few cases in which the Privy Council
was
Justice
Gorsuch noted:

involved in patent-revocation disputes,

At most, they suggest that the Privy Council might have
possessed some residual power to revoke patents to address
wartime necessities. Equally, they might serve only as more
unfortunate evidence of the maxim that in time of war, the
laws fall silent.21

Indeed, those cases seem to have involved the Board of
Ordinance.22 An Amicus brief
submitted by Prof.

Gomez-Arostegui reviewed the history of patent cases
before the Privy Council in England:

The last revocation of an invention patent occurred in
1779, and that was on a matter affecting national security
and only after the patentee refused to go to law. The peti-
tioner, the Board of Ordnance, was responsible for supply-
ing munitions to the army and navy during the American
Revolutionary War and it sought to annul a patent for cast-
ing and boring iron cannons. The patentee had used the
patent to impede the Board’s contractors. The last English
petition, ﬁled with the Council in 1782, and which sought
to vacate a patent for pistols, was also referred to the
Attorney General, but nothing came of it.23

A close modern analogy to the Privy Council’s power
to revoke patents on munitions needed in wartime may
be the US Government’s immunity from injunctive re-
lief in patent cases, necessitating a claim for damages as
the sole form of relief, to be pursued in a non-jury trial
before the Court of Federal Claims. 28 USC section
1498(a) provides:

Whenever an invention described in and covered by a pat-
ent of the United States is used or manufactured by or for
the United States without license of the owner thereof or
lawful right to use or manufacture the same, the owner’s
remedy shall be by action against the United States in the
United States Court of Federal Claims for the recovery of
his reasonable and entire compensation for such use and
manufacture.

Hence it’s not possible for a patentee to impede pro-
duction of the patented product by obtaining injunctive
relief against the sovereign US government.24 An inven-
tion indispensable for war production—of the type that
in 18th-century England might have been adminis-
tratively revoked by the Privy Council—would now in
the USA become the subject of royalty proceedings be-
fore the Court of Federal Claims.

The Court of Federal Claims is an Article I adminis-
trative court that tries its cases by a single judge sitting
without a jury.25 Hence, it may be the body most com-
parable to the pre-1789 monarchical English Privy
Council, in that the Court of Federal Claims provides
special privileges and immunities to the US sovereign
that are not enjoyed by ordinary citizens accused of pat-
ent
the US sovereign has
waived its immunity from infringement suits to the
limited extent it permits itself to be sued before that
court in accordance with its non-jury procedures; with
the remedy being limited to monetary relief.

infringement. Effectively,

20 Oil States, Gorsuch Op, 4–5 (citations omitted).
21
22

ibid p 6 (emphasis added; footnote omitted).
ibid.

23

‘Brief For H Toma´s Go´ mez-Arostegui and Sean Bottomley as Amici
Curiae In Support Of Neither Party’, 35 (17 August 2017).

24 Richmond Screw Anchor Co v United States, 275 US 331, 344 (1928).
25

28 USC s 174.

38

ARTICLE

Justice Thomas may have overlooked an apt alterna-
tive analogy to the Privy Council, by focusing ﬁxedly
on blunt facts of ancient history while failing to con-
sider the historically limited purposes underlying the
Privy Council’s power to revoke patents. By analogizing
the Privy Council to the PTAB, rather than to the
Court of Federal Claims, a rarely exercised historical
tool for the English monarch to revoke patents as a
royal prerogative for the public defense has now been
put in the hands of any member of the modern general
public to invoke at the PTAB—be it for a good pur-
pose, for no purpose, or as an intermeddling pest. This
does unquestionably democratize the formerly royal
prerogative.

Justice Gorsuch, however, points out that a principal
motivation for the USA to break from England, was to
be free of such prerogatives:

[A]n American patent in the late eighteenth century was
radically different from the royal monopoly privilege dis-
pensed by Queen Elizabeth or King James in the early sev-
enteenth century. Patents no longer created, and sheltered
from competition, manufacturing monopolies—they se-
cured the exclusive control of an inventor over his novel
and useful scientiﬁc or mechanical invention.26

As explained in Chief Justice Rehnquist’s dissent in an
earlier case:

It is perhaps easy to forget, now more than 200 years re-
moved from the events, that the right of trial by jury was
held in such esteem by the colonists that its deprivation at
the hands of the English was one of the important grievan-
ces leading to the break with England. The extensive use of
vice-admiralty courts by colonial administrators to elimi-
nate the colonists’ right of jury trial was listed among
the speciﬁc offensive English acts denounced in the
Declaration of Independence.27

Justice Gorsuch’s view also ﬁnds support in the 19th-
century American Bell Supreme Court precedent:

But whatever may have been the course of procedure usual
or requisite in the English jurisprudence to enable the King
to repeal, revoke, or nullify his own patents, issued under
his prerogative right, it can have but little force in limiting
or restricting the measures by which the government of the
United States shall have a remedy for an imposition upon
it or its ofﬁcers in the procurement or issue of a patent. We
have no King in this country; we have here no prerogative
right of the Crown, and letters patent, whether for inven-
tions or for grants of land, issue not from the President,

but from the United States. The President has no preroga-
tive in the matter.28

Justice Thomas criticized petitioner Oil States’ reliance
on such 19 century precedent, holding that it must
have been decided on statutory grounds based upon the
patent
laws then in force, which have since been
amended to permit PTAB review.29 But the precedent
quoted above relies upon the key circumstance that
‘[w]e have no King in this country’—and that has not
been changed by the ‘America Invents Act’ setting up
the PTAB. Hence, the American Bell court was self-
evidently invoking the underlying framework of the
American constitutional republic as a limit on executive
authority, not just the patent statute as it was then in
force.

Viewed in this light, denial of jury trials on patent
validity can be seen as a throwback to the pre-
Revolutionary theory that
the monarchy and its
appointed administrative ofﬁcers are the ones best
equipped to manage the intellectual-property incentive
system. Perhaps that’s the inevitable result of a ‘strict’
application of
the principle that pre-revolutionary
English practice must be the ironclad touchstone ines-
capably controlling modern procedures.

Copyright jury trials—Feltner contrasted
with Oil States

Oil States is not the ﬁrst time that Justice Thomas has
addressed the right to jury trial in an IP case. Twenty
years ago, Justice Thomas wrote the opinion securing
the right to jury trial in a copyright case, Feltner v
Columbia Pictures Television, Inc, 523 US 340 (1998).30
In that case, Justice Thomas reasoned as follows:

Since Justice Story’s time, the Court has understood ‘Suits
at common law’ to refer ‘not merely [to] suits, which the
common law recognized among its old and settled proceed-
ings, but [to] suits in which legal rights were to be ascer-
tained and determined, in contradistinction to those where
equitable rights alone were recognized, and equitable rem-
edies were administered.’ The Seventh Amendment thus
applies not only to common-law causes of action, but also
to ‘actions brought to enforce statutory rights that are
analogous to common-law causes of action ordinarily
decided in English law courts in the late 18th century, as
opposed to those customarily heard by courts of equity or
admiralty.’ To determine whether a statutory action is

26 Oil States, Gorsuch Op, fn 3 (quoting A Mossoff, ‘Who Cares What
Thomas Jefferson Thought About Patents? Reevaluating the Patent
“Privilege” in Historical Context’ (2007) 92 Cornell L Rev 953, 967–68).

27 Parklane Hoisery Co, Inc v Shore, 439 US 322, 340 (1979).
28 United States v American Bell Telephone Co, 128 US 315, 362–63 (1888)

(emphasis added).

29 Oil States, Op, 11.
30

Interestingly, Chief Justice Roberts, who joined Justice Gorsuch’s Oil
States dissent, was the winning counsel for petitioner in the previous
Feltner case. Hence, Chief Justice Roberts must have been familiar with
Justice Thomas’ reasoning for upholding a jury-trial right in that copy-
right case.

Robert M. Kunstadt  Oil States v Greene’s Energy

ARTICLE

39

more analogous to cases tried in courts of law than to suits
tried in courts of equity or admiralty, we examine both the
nature of the statutory action and the remedy sought.31

In that instance, Justice Thomas did not apply a bright-
line test to select cases for constitutionally mandated
jury trials. To the contrary, the Feltner test for copyright
cases reasoned on the basis of ‘analogy’ to what was
‘ordinary’ and ‘customary’. If ‘equitable rights alone’
were in issue, then a jury was not needed. But if a mod-
ern action can be analogized to what was ordinarily and
customarily a common-law cause of action, then jury
trial
the
Constitution. The apparent preference in Feltner was in
favour of upholding the right to jury trial; showing a
willingness to stretch the right to encompass modern
cases that are only ‘analogous’ to the old common-law
forms of action ‘ordinarily’ and ‘customarily’ handled
in the law courts with their juries.

appropriate

necessary

under

and

is

Hence, when viewed from the perspective of Justice
Thomas’ approach of 20 years ago, his reasoning in Oil
States becomes all the more exceptional. In Oil States,
Justice Thomas’ bias works in the opposite direction,
straining to deny a Constitutional right to trial by jury.
Essentially, the test now becomes: if there is any basis at
all to think that the issue of patent validity might have
been capable of decision without beneﬁt of jury in pre-
Revolutionary times, no matter how tenuous, rare, in-
frequent or limited in scope, then jury trial is not re-
quired by the US Constitution. Since the Privy Council
had at least a concurrent authority to hold patents inva-
lid for wartime necessity, then under Justice Thomas’
reasoning in Oil States that sufﬁces for denying a right
to jury trial now.32 It is not necessary to consider what
may have been ordinary or customary.

Traditional preference for jury trial

Dairy Queen, Inc v Wood, 369 US 469 (1962), provides
that in any case containing mixed equitable and legal
claims, the Seventh Amendment right to trial by jury
may not be defeated by deciding the equitable claims—
traditionally decided by English courts without juries—
before the legal claim (decided by English law courts
with beneﬁt of juries).

Dairy Queen was a trade mark case alleging breach of
a license agreement and trade mark infringement in
consequence of breach. The remedy sought by the trade
mark owner was an equitable accounting, on the basis

of which it urged that an equity court sitting without a
jury could assess the award. The Supreme Court dis-
agreed. A concurring opinion by Justices Harlan and
Douglas pointed out:

The fact that an “accounting” is sought is not, of itself, dis-
positive of the jury trial issue. To render this aspect of the
complaint truly “equitable,” it must appear that the sub-
stantive claim is one cognizable only in equity, or that the
“accounts between the parties” are of such a “complicated
nature” that they can be satisfactorily unraveled only by a
court of equity. . . . It is manifest from the face of the com-
plaint that the “accounting” sought in this instance is not
of either variety. A jury, under proper instructions from
the court, could readily calculate the damages ﬂowing from
this alleged trademark infringement, just as courts of law
often do in copyright and patent cases.33

If a claim must be ‘only’ cognizable in equity in order
to defeat the Seventh Amendment right, then the fact
that a small number of English patent-validity chal-
lenges were decided by the Privy Council prior to 1789
could hardly defeat the right: all observers seem to agree
that most such cases were either decided in the law
courts in the ﬁrst instance, or by a referral there from
the equity courts. Hence Justice Thomas’ approach in
Oil States not only is hard to square with his prior deci-
sion in Feltner, but it departs from the Supreme Court’s
long-standing preference for upholding the jury-trial
right (as exempliﬁed in Dairy Queen, a leading case
routinely included in law-school textbooks).

The revocation clause

Patents issued in England, long prior to the time of the
US Constitution,
included a proviso known as the
‘revocation clause’. It expressly announced the granted
patent to be revocable by the Privy Council (an admin-
istrative arm of the monarch) upon proof of ‘inconven-
iency’, which included lack of novelty or priority of
invention, as well as non-working and prejudice to
public policy.34 One commentator explains:

[R]evocation proceedings in the Privy Council served as a
forum in which interested parties tried to convince the
king’s agents that it would be a sound policy decision to re-
voke the patent or not to grant it to begin with. These par-
ties used, among other things, arguments about the speciﬁc
beneﬁts offered by the patentee, his ability to supply such
beneﬁts in practice and the potential and actual effects of
the patents on relevant interests. These proceedings and
the revocation clauses on which they were premised were

31

Feltner v Columbia Pictures Television, Inc, 523 US 340, 347–48 (1998)
(emphasis added).

32 Oil States, Op, 12–13 (citations omitted).

33 Dairy Queen, Inc v Wood, 369 US 469, 480–81 (1962) (citations omitted;

emphasis added).

34 Bracha (n 18).

40

ARTICLE

deeply rooted in the concept of the patent as a speciﬁc pol-
icy decision based on royal prerogative.35

English patents, therefore, may be considered to have
been issued ‘upon a string’, which the monarch could
pull back to effect
recapture when deemed
convenient.

their

US patents, in contrast, do not contain an express
proviso for revocation upon any such basis, by a king’s
agent or otherwise. US patents may only be nulliﬁed
in accordance with statutory and constitutional au-
thority. This might be considered to reﬂect a funda-
mental difference in governing philosophy between
the two countries. One of the reasons for the founding
of the USA was a profound dissatisfaction with subor-
dination to arbitrary orders emanating only upon
claim of monarchial authority. As discussed above,
Justice Gorsuch’s dissent in Oil States reﬂects that
tradition.

Retroactivity

Even though Oil States’ patent had no revocation
clause, the Oil States decision upheld the power of the
PTAB to revoke it. Justice Thomas certainly understood
that Oil States’ patent had issued well before the effec-
tive date of the act establishing the PTAB, so it could
not be assumed that Oil States had implicitly consented
to secure a patent knowing that the PTAB might later
revoke it:

In 2001, Oil States obtained a patent relating to an appara-
tus and method for protecting well-head equipment used
in hydraulic fracturing.

* * *

Oil States does not challenge the retroactive application of
inter partes review, even though that procedure was not in
place when its patent issued.36

While mentioning a possible challenge based on retro-
activity, Justice Thomas did not address that issue or
even remanded the case so that it could be considered
in the lower courts.37

This result seems harsh,

if Justice Thomas really
thought much of a retroactivity defense. But it is in
character with his judicial thinking, which gives weight
to such ﬁne technicalities in other instances. For exam-
ple, in the recent McCoy capital-murder case Justice
Thomas agreed with the dissent written by Justice Alito:

We have stated time and again that we are “a court of re-
view, not of ﬁrst view” and, for that reason, have refused to
decide issues not addressed below.38

In McCoy, Justice Ginsberg wrote the majority opinion
criticized by Justices Alito and Thomas: the majority
granted a new trial to the defendant on its own initia-
tive in order to redress a constitutional violation. Yet,
in the Oil States patent case, Justice Ginsberg signed on
to Justice Thomas’ majority opinion, without any indi-
cation of having a second thought about its failure
to address retroactivity as a possible constitutional
violation.

It is a neat question whether Oil States had duly
raised the retroactivity issue for Supreme Court review,
or not. The ﬁrst question that Oil States presented for
review was:

1. Whether inter partes review—an adversarial process used
by the Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (PTO) to analyze the
validity of existing patents—violates the Constitution
by extinguishing private property rights through a non-
Article III forum without a jury. Petition for Certiorari, p. i
(emphasis added).

for

III,

the

the

issues

decision would

to include Article

seem
Hence,
Seventh
necessarily
Amendment, and derogation of property rights by
other unconstitutional means. It appears disingenuous
of the court to read a complaint about ‘extinguishing
private property rights’ in violation of the Constitution,
which was implemented ‘through a non-Article III fo-
rum without a jury’, as if that could be the only
‘extinguishing’
thing wrong with it. A charge of
constitutional
imply
issues
of both retroactive application and lack of due process.

seems

rights

to

Oil States’ brief did in fact speciﬁcally complain
about violation of due process in connection with the
PTAB’s restrictive amendment practice (Br, 10). But
Justice Thomas broadly maintained that Oil States
never raised a due process challenge (Op, 17).

Thus, the initial impression may be that Oil States did
not get fair consideration: the Supreme Court decided
the hypothetical case of a post-AIA patent, issuing an ad-
visory opinion upon facts not before it (and indeed con-
trary to the acknowledged fact-of-record concerning the
issue date of the patent-in-suit).

Given that Justice Thomas relied upon a contract-like
theory of patent applicants’ presumed fore-knowledge

ibid p 23 (emphasis added).

35
36 Oil States, Op, 4, 17.
37 The Leahy-Smith America Invents Act (AIA), 35 USC s 100ff, established

the process of ‘inter partes review’ before the PTAB only in 2011—10
years after Oil States’ patent issued. The fact of a retroactive application

of the AIA therefore was undeniable on the record before the Supreme
Court.

38 McCoy v Louisiana, 584 US __ (2018), Slip Opinion, 11 (citations

omitted).

Robert M. Kunstadt  Oil States v Greene’s Energy

ARTICLE

41

of recent statutory law providing for post-grant review
(Op, 9), it made little sense to apply such a theory—even
if correct—to a case in which judicial notice was
expressly taken that the patent-in-suit was a pre-AIA
patent (Op, 17). A conscientious justice could have
ﬂeshed-out the implications of a contemplated rationale
for decision, by considering how it might—or might
not—apply to the case before the court (before issuing an
opinion on it). That’s what the majority seems to have
done in the McCoy capital-murder case, even though it
meant taking heat from the dissent for reaching issues not
briefed. Alternatively, the court might have remanded the
case to the lower courts for consideration of the retroactiv-
ity issue.

If Justice Thomas really did not reach the full scope
of constitutional issues, then the Oil States Court’s ma-
jority opinion is not completely reliable as ﬁnal guid-
ance to the public and the profession: we still have not
fully unpacked the constitutionality vel non of PTAB
post-grant
Justice
reservations on
Thomas
grounds of retroactive application and/or due process.
It’s hard to tell, since Justice Thomas cannot be faulted
for inconsistency on this point: it does appear to be his
usual practice to deﬁne the scope of review narrowly
(as explained in the McCoy dissent that he joined).

review.39 That’s especially so if

secretly harbors

serious

Class action

Taking the cue from Justice Thomas’ mention of retro-
activity and due process as potential issues unaddressed
in the Oil States decision, a class-action case has already
been ﬁled in the Court of Federal Claims to recover
money from the US Government for alleged unconsti-
tutional taking of patentees’ property in their patents.40
The class-action plaintiffs pick up on the PTO’s ar-
gument in favour of the PTAB’s constitutionality—that
all it is doing is the public function of correcting errors
in the patent process—to urge that since the PTO ad-
mittedly is making errors,
it has thereby effectively
defrauded patent owners of issue fees and maintenance
fees that would never have been paid, but for the PTO’s
shoddy service in issuing defective patents.41 Based on
the mistaken impression that they had been issued valid
patents, the class-action plaintiffs allegedly were harmed

39

Justice Thomas’ opinion thus to an extent resembles the 19th century
McCormick opinion that it dismissed as dictum, insofar as it decides
upon a ground that might not have been necessary to reach.

40 Christy v US, Case 1:18-cv-00657-MMS (Court of Federal Claims, 5

September 2018).

41 Complaint, para 11.
42 Complaint, para 12.
43 Complaint, para 175.

by investing in them and expending attorneys’ fees to
defend them.42 Damages claimed in the prayer for relief
are in an amount ‘greater than $100 million’.43

Stay of district court proceedings

The developing practice of staying patent trials in district
court pending a determination on validity issues by the
PTAB44 seems contrary to the Supreme Court’s previous
insistence on the primacy of the jury-trial right once a
‘case-or-controversy’ is under way in an Article III court.
As discussed above, the issue was considered by the
Supreme Court in Dairy Queen, a trade mark case rais-
ing both equitable issues (triable to a judge alone) and
legal issues (triable to a jury).45 If the equitable issues
had been decided ﬁrst and hence had become the law of
the case, any overlap could have been resolved to the
detriment of
right. Therefore, Dairy
Queen required that precedence be given to securing
the jury’s determination in the ﬁrst instance, as to any
common issues of fact.

the jury-trial

Allowing a case in which issue has been joined in
district court to be stayed while a non-jury determina-
tion on validity is obtained upon petition of an already-
accused infringer seeking relief from the PTAB, hardly
comports with the rationale of Dairy Queen that jury
trials take precedence over bench trials.

If Dairy Queen were to be observed, it would be the
other way around: PTAB proceedings would have to be
stayed pending the outcome of a jury trial on validity
and the jury’s verdict would be binding as precedent
upon the PTAB (at least as to the litigating parties—
and perhaps as persuasive authority not to be disre-
garded lightly in case any third party would wish to
present the same arguments at the PTAB, looking for a
different outcome).

But, quite to the contrary, the PTAB has considered

itself unbound by district-court rulings as precedent.46

Possible PTAB reform

Even before the Oil States decision issued in late April
2018, the PTO had begun an initiative to review and
possibly reform PTAB procedures. In a speech to the

44

eg AC-QIS, LLC v EMC Corp, 109 F Supp 3d 352 (D Mass 2015) (district
court stayed case pending PTAB proceedings).

45 Dairy Queen v Wood, 369 US 469 (1962).
46

Indeed, the PTAB appears to consider itself not required to treat any
prior court decisions as binding precedent, including even those of its
own reviewing court. Knowles Electronics LLC v Cirrus Logic, Inc [2018]
WL 1095253 (CAFC 1 March 2018) (Newman J, dissenting).

42

ARTICLE

US Chamber of Commerce on 11 April 2018, PTO
Director Iancu announced:

[A]mong various other things, we are now examining: how
and when we institute proceedings, the standards we employ
during the proceedings, and how we conduct the overall pro-
ceedings. The goal, with whatever action we take, is to in-
crease predictability of appropriately-scoped claims.47

If PTO procedures were to be reformed to match the
PTAB’s claim construction standard to the one used in
district court, such harmonization could help to meet
the goal of increasing predictability when assessing US
patents: validity of a claim would no longer be so
clearly dependent upon the forum.

of

the

namely

substitution

administrative-law judges

However, unless the PTO were to institute jury trials
at the PTAB—an unlikely result since it runs counter to
one of the purposes of assigning validity issues to that
technically
forum,
knowledgeable
lay
jurors—Seventh Amendment
issues would not be
mooted by planned PTO reforms. Nor would such
reforms be expected to mitigate the Article III issue,
since the PTO could hardly be expected voluntarily to
PTAB
replace
corps
administrative-law judges, with Article
judges
appointed for life and conﬁrmed by vote of the Senate.

in-house

current

of
III

for

its

47

‘Remarks by Director Andrei Iancu at U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Patent Policy Conference’, 11 April 2018 <https://www.uspto.gov/about-
us/news-updates/remarks-director-andrei-iancu-us-chamber-commerce-

patent-policy-conference> accessed 26 June 2018; S Graham, ‘PTO
Director Fleshes Out Reform Proposals’, Corporate Counsel, June 2018,
25.


