174

ARTICLE

Moral rights in university students’
academic works
Phil C. W. Chan*

But leaving aside what might be justly offensive to God, it
was a trespass also more than usual against human right,
which commands that every author should have the prop-
erty of his own work reserved to him after death, as well as
living. Many princes have been rigorous in laying taxes on
their subjects by the head, but of any king heretofore that
made a levy upon their art and seized it as his own legiti-
mate, I have not whom beside to instance.1

– Milton

As to ordinary contractual principles, I have discussed
elsewhere the validity and enforceability of intellectual
property (IP) policies adopted by various universities
in the UK, Hong Kong, Australia, and the US which
assert copyright ownership in academic works pro-
duced by their students.2

University life however,

embodies an array of
life-changing experience in addition to intellectual
discourse and pedagogical engagement. One’s identity
formation reaches its peak during adolescence through
‘a process of simultaneous reﬂection and observation, a
process taking place on all levels of mental function-
ing’.3 Boggs discerns that

reative people are prisoners. That is to say that they get
‘captivated’, and the only way out is to beat a path away
from the point of captivity. If my attention is ‘captured’, it
is impossible to simply get away. The bars are not physical.
They are produced by the intellectual, the emotional, or,
more usually, a combination of the two. But, they are as
functional as any jail cell you will ever construct in the
material world.4

The late developmental psychoanalyst Erikson attests
that ‘there is often an intrinsic relation between the
originality of an individual’s gift and the depth of his
personal conﬂicts’.5 Whatever his present status within

Key issues
† Copyright law protects not only the commercial
interests of an author but also the author’s moral
rights, such as the right to be acknowledged as
the author of his work and the right to object to
its distortion or mutilation.

† The university student has little leverage when
seeking to assert his moral rights against the uni-
versity, which often requires the student to accept
terms prejudicial to his rights as author as a con-
dition of registration for candidature.

† This article considers the position of the student
as author, with particular reference to his moral
rights examining university contract practice and
measuring it against norms of conﬁdence, copy-
right law, and privacy.

the literary/intellectual community, an author has
overwhelming reputational and personality interests in
his literary work which is often ‘seen, partially or
wholly, as an extension of the author’s personality, the
means by which he seeks to communicate to the
public’.6 Indeed, the lower the author’s present status,
the more important his reputation is.

As Dreyfuss points out, ‘attention to non-pecuniary,
author-based interests is necessary in order to take full
advantage of the talents of the creative’.7 With know-
ledge, hence IP, transcending boundaries, the issue of
university students’ moral rights in their academic
works will be approached from a comparative perspec-
tive. Case-law and legislation in the UK, Hong Kong,

*

1

2

in Merritt Y. Hughes (ed.), Complete Poems

Visiting Scholar/Visiting Professor, Faculty of Law, Common Law,
University of Ottawa. The author wishes to thank Paul Serfaty for his
assistance to the project.
J Milton,
‘Areopagitica’,
and Major Prose (1957), 794; as quoted in Mark Rose, ‘The Author as
Proprietor: Donaldson v Becket and the Genealogy of Modern
Authorship’, in Brad Sherman and Alain Strowel (eds), Of Authors and
Origins: Essays on Copyright Law (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994),
23 – 56, 29.
PCW Chan,
Work (2006), 1 JIPLP 664.

‘Copyright Ownership in University Students’ Academic

# The Author (2007). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

4
5
6 N Netanel,

3

Identity: Youth and Crisis

EH Erikson,
W. W. Norton, 1968), 22.
JSG Boggs, ‘Who Owns This?’ (1993) 68 Chicago-Kent L R 889, 889.
Erikson (n 3 above) 249.

(New York and London:

‘Alienability Restrictions and the Enhancement of Author

Autonomy in US and Continental Copyright Law’, (1994) 12 Cardozo
Arts & Ent L J 1, 7.
RC Dreyfuss, ‘The Creative Employee and the Copyright Act of 1976’
(1987) 54 U Chi L R 590, 591.

7

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

175

be

university

examined. Various

Australia, and the US, alongside international treaties,
will
policies,
statements adopted by the American Association of
University Professors as well as academic literature on
this and related subjects will be consulted as appropri-
ate. Part I of this examination analyses the nature and
scope of university students’ moral rights in their aca-
demic works. Part II examines whether the defence of
fair dealing (fair use in the US) may be applicable to
moral right infringement. Part III discusses whether a
university student may sue for breach of conﬁdence or
violation of his privacy in the event that his academic
work is, without his consent, distributed or dissemi-
nated to an unrelated person.

invariably attaches great

University students’ moral rights
in their academic works
An author
signiﬁcance to
authorship recognition, as ‘[c]reators and authors feel a
strong afﬁnity to their work, and commonly see it as an
extension of their being. We often judge the artist by her
art and the author by her writing. So personhood the-
ories appear to be particularly strong when it comes to
justifying the protection of creative work with intellec-
tual property rights’.8 Indeed, Lord Mansﬁeld in Millar v
Taylor9 maintained that non-entitlement to copyright
ownership in one’s own work renders the author

no more master of the use of his own name. He has no
control over the correctness of his own work. He cannot
prevent additions. He can not retract errors. He cannot
amend; or cancel a faulty edition. Any one may print, pirate,
and perpetuate the imperfections, to the disgrace and against
the will of the author; may propagate sentiments under his
name, which he disapproves, repents and is ashamed of. He
can exercise no discretion as to the manner in which, or the
persons by whom his work shall be published.10

According to Dreyfuss,

creators have three central non-pecuniary interests in their
works: ﬁrst, a possessory interest, which is fulﬁlled by
composing a work that satisﬁes the creator’s initial vision;
second, an interest in the integrity of the work, which is
endangered by the process of compromising that vision

8 D Lametti, ‘Publish and Proﬁt?: Justifying the Ownership of Copyright

in the Academic Setting’ (2001) 26 Queen’s L J 497, 527.
(1769) 98 ER 201 (King’s Bench Division).

9
10 ibid, per Lord Mansﬁeld, 252.
11 Dreyfuss (n 7 above) 605.
12 ibid, 641.
13 Lametti (n 8 above) 530.
14 J Katzman,

Columbia L R 867, 883.

‘Joint Authorship of Commissioned Works’ (1989) 89

with commercial demands; and third, a reputational
interest, which turns on how the work is presented to the
public.11

She adds that ‘[a] copyrighted work is dangerous to
its creator precisely because the public can use it and
that use may lead to unwarranted inferences’.12 A uni-
versity student producing an academic work for evalu-
ation and assessment is no less an author, equally
entitled to protection of his authorship. As Lametti
argues:

When one takes the risks of originality or creativity in a
setting where orthodoxy often prevails, or puts one’s aca-
demic reputation on the line, it seems quite natural that
he or she should be rewarded with the ownership of any
economic rights that might ensue. As one becomes increas-
ingly creative or original, the personal
link strengthens.
Indeed,
the
[Canadian] Copyright Act might seem insufﬁcient if there
is ﬁnancial gain to be had from the work.13

rights accorded under

even the moral

The argument that the student as author is nonethe-
less disentitled to copyright ownership in his own
work—which is ‘an entitlement based on authorship’14
but without which the author has no locus standi to
bring suit against copyright infringement15—requires
scrutiny. The persona that
the student author has
impressed upon his work reinforces the Hegelian claim
that ‘[a] work of literature belonged to an individual
because it was, ﬁnally, an embodiment of that individ-
ual. The basis of literary property, in other words, was
not just labour but “personality”’.16 Thus, Cherensky
maintains,
‘[p]ersonality is the reconciliation of the
inner self and external world. Property—the relation-
ship between persons and things—is the means by
which we achieve this reconciliation’.17 In their land-
mark article ‘The Right
to Privacy’, Warren and
Brandeis assert that ‘[t]he principle which protects per-
sonal writings and all other personal productions, not
against theft and physical appropriation, but against
publication in any form, is in reality not the principle
of private property, but that of an inviolate personal-
ity’.18 Cherensky, following their logic, concludes that
‘property which forms an essential element of personal-
ity must be inalienable’.19

15 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 96(1); Hong Kong’s
Copyright Ordinance, § 107(1); Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 115(1);
US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 501(b).

16 Rose (n 1 above) 47.
17 Cherensky S.

‘A Penny for Their Thoughts: Employee-Inventors,
Preinvention Assignment Agreements, Property, and Personhood’ (1993)
81 California L R 595, 643.

18 SD Warren and LD Brandeis,

‘The Right

to Privacy’

(1890)

4 Harvard L R 193, 205.

19 Cherensky (n 17 above) 644.

176

ARTICLE

As has been noted,

‘there is often an intrinsic
relation between the originality of an individual’s gift
and the depth of his personal conﬂicts’.20 An individual
gifted with creativity will utilize the opportunity and
mechanism of authorship for self-expression. Author-
ship in this light is comparable to ‘a form of therapy’.21
His writings are enriched with his own personal experi-
ence and his peculiar perceptions of the world. As US
Supreme Court Justice Holmes observed in Bleistein v
Donaldson Lithographing,22 ‘[t]he copy is the personal
reaction of an individual upon nature. Personality
always contains something unique. . . That something
he may copyright’.23 Hughes discerns that ‘personal
experiences reﬂect in intellectual works because they
are deep causes in the course of events that produce
the works. But the “reﬂection” theory has a more expli-
cit side. The possibility is that personal reﬂection, per-
sonal expression, and creativity should all collapse on
one another, i.e., that “creativity” is only a fancy cover-
ing for observation—the direct reproduction of things
we have experienced’.24 Whether the author is a univer-
sity student or an eminent researcher in his ﬁeld is irre-
levant: the personality interests of an author in his
work are manifest.

An individual gifted with creativity will utilize
the opportunity and mechanism of authorship
for self-expression with authorship being
comparable to ‘a form of therapy’

An instance where an author’s personality interests
may be undermined is where his work is distributed
without his consent. The author is likely to feel that his
persona has been physically violated. As Hughes argues,

viewing creativity as a therapeutic process, a surrogate
reworking of part of the self, does not mean that the work
is an ‘expression’ in the sense of an act of communication.
Perhaps we could solve this problem by saying that the
process of producing intellectual works should be likened
to therapy in which one expresses problems to a therapist.
An artist’s work may be her statement to an unknown

20 Erikson (n 3 above) 249.
21 L Berman, ‘An Artist Destroys His Work: Comments on Creativity and

Destructiveness’ in Panter et al. (eds), Creativity and Madness:
Psychological Studies in Art and Artists, p.137 quoting Graham Greene; as
quoted in Justin Hughes, ‘The Personality Interest of Artists and
Inventors in Intellectual Property’ (1998) 16 Cardozo Arts and
Entertainment L J 81, 114.

22 188 US 239 (1903) (US Supreme Court).
23 ibid, per Holmes J, 250.
24 Hughes (n 21 above) 109.
25 ibid, 114 –115.

like the confessional, there may be some
audience and,
candor-inducing comfort in at least the veneer of audience
anonymity. What is said may be frank or opaque,
just
as one may tell a therapist things directly or obliquely,
candidly or metaphorically.25

In Millar v Taylor, Justice Yates declared:

It is certain every man has a right to keep his own senti-
ments,
if he pleases: he has certainly a right to judge
whether he will make them public, or commit them only
to the sight of his friends. In that state, the manuscript is,
in every sense, his peculiar property; and no man can take
it from him, or make any use of it which he has not auth-
orized, without being guilty of a violation of his property.
And as every author or proprietor of a manuscript has a
right to determine whether he will publish it or not, he
has a right to the ﬁrst publication: and whoever deprives
him of that priority is guilty of a manifest wrong; and the
Court have a right to stop it.26

Vice-Chancellor Bruce in Prince Albert v Strange27
afﬁrmed that

[t]he question, however, does not turn upon the form or
amount of mischief or advantage,
loss or gain. The
author of manuscripts, whether he is famous or obscure,
low or high, has a right to say of them, if innocent, that,
whether interesting or dull,
light or heavy, saleable or
unsaleable, they shall not, without his consent, be pub-
lished.28

An author’s right to privacy—being ‘entirely inde-
pendent of the copyright laws’,29 ‘the more general
right of the individual to be let alone’30 and ‘the right
to remain silent’31—ceases only ‘when the author
himself communicates his production to the public—
in other words, publishes it’.32 Warren and Brandeis
emphasize that ‘a private communication or circulation
for a restricted purpose is not a publication within the
meaning of the law’.33 The reasoning underlying these
propositions applies squarely to an academic work sub-
mitted by a university student to his university for the
sole purpose of evaluation and assessment pertinent to
his university candidacy.

Dreyfuss argues that ‘[s]ociety as a whole shares
[with authors] the same cluster of concerns with regard
to creative works. High-quality work enriches
the

26 Millar v Taylor (n 9 above) per Yates J, 242.
27 (1849) 64 ER 293 (Vice-Chancellor’s Court).
28 ibid, per Bruce V-C, 311.
29 Warren and Brandeis (n 18 above) 200.
30 ibid, 205.
31 K O’Neill, ‘Against Dicta: A Legal Method for Rescuing Fair Use from

the Right of First Publication’ (2001) 89 California L R 369, 405.

32 Warren and Brandeis (n 18 above) 199– 200.
33 ibid, 218.

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

177

cultural heritage; thus it is important to allow and
encourage someone with expertise, and an understand-
ing of the vision underlying the work, to protect its
integrity’.34 Acknowledging its own interests in the con-
tinual ﬂow of authorial creativity, society has conferred
certain moral rights on an author,
independent of
copyright ownership. The essential aspects of an
author’s moral rights include the right to be acknowl-
edged as the author of one’s work; the right to prevent
others being named author of one’s work; the right to
prevent others deforming or defacing one’s work; the
right to stop others falsely claiming authorship of a
work; the right to withdraw a published work; and the
right to prevent others using one’s work, or name in a
way that violates one’s good name or reputation.
Liemer describes these rights as speciﬁcally encompass-
ing ‘the rights of attribution, integrity, disclosure, with-
drawal and resale royalties’,35 maintaining that ‘[m]oral
rights are akin to rights of personality or personal civil
rights’.36 Joffrain extends moral rights’ coverage to
cover the right of access37 which, in our context, enti-
tles a university student author to salvage his work
from the university where appropriate. Yet, Joffrain
qualiﬁes moral rights as ones which

protect only the work’s quality, as it reﬂects its creator’s
personality, and not the creator’s personality itself because
moral rights are ‘completely foreign’ to the protection of
personality rights generally. Acts that damage the repu-
tation of a writer do not create a cause of action under
moral rights unless the writer’s work is affected. It is the
work, as its creator has chosen to reveal it to the world,
that is protected by the right and in this sense the rights of
integrity and divulgation are related: not protecting the
creator’s artistic choices after a work is divulged would
render meaningless the creator’s prerogative to choose the
form in which to divulge a work.38

The UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
Hong Kong’s Copyright Ordinance, and Australia’s
Copyright Act 1968 as amended by its Copyright

34 Dreyfuss (n 7 above) 605.
35 SP Liemer,

‘Understanding Artists’ Moral Rights: A Primer’ (1998) 7

Boston University Public Interest L J 41, 46.

36 ibid, 42.
37 Joffrain T.

‘Deriving a (Moral) Right for Creators’ (2001) 36 Texas

International J 735, 761.

38 ibid, 772.
39 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 77; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 89; Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 193.

40 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 80; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 92.

41 Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 195AI.
42 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 84; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 96; Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 195AC.

43 US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 106A.

Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000 all confer upon
an author certain moral rights including the right to be
identiﬁed as author of his literary work39 and the right
to not have his work subjected to derogatory treat-
ment,40 whatever also known as the right of integrity41
and the right against false attribution to a work that is
not properly his.42 In contrast, notwithstanding its
accession to the Berne Conventions the US conﬁnes
protection of moral rights to visual works of art only
for the protection of Literary and Artistic Works.43

states

At the international level, Article 27(2) of the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights
that
‘[e]veryone has the right to the protection of the moral
and material interests resulting from any scientiﬁc, lit-
erary or artistic production of which he is
the
author’,44 as does Article 15(1)(c) of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.45
In addition, Article 6bis(1) of the Berne Convention
confers certain moral rights upon an author such that

[i]ndependently of the author’s economic rights, and even
after the transfer of the said rights, the author shall have
the right to claim authorship of the work and to object to
any distortion, mutilation or other modiﬁcation of, or
other derogatory action in relation to,
the said work,
which would be prejudicial to his honor or reputation.46

Here, the university student author’s moral rights of
attribution and of integrity are of pivotal importance,
infringement by a university of the moral rights of
the student author is tantamount to intellectual theft.
Meanwhile, as a university student’s academic work is
often assessed and retained in anonymity, he will be
concerned that his work as a whole will be respected
and not be subjected to derogatory treatment, which
includes unconsented-to distribution.47 As Justice Hirst
in Fraser v Thames Television48 held, such conventional
anonymity is ‘a factor of considerable force in deciding
whether a legal obligation exists’.49 A university’s
mishandling of
its student’s academic work severely

44 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by

United Nations General Assembly Resolution 217A(III) of 10 December
1948, Art 27(2).

45 Adopted and opened for signature, ratiﬁcation and accession by United
Nations General Assembly Resolution 2200A(XXI) of 16 December 1966;
entry into force: 3 January 1976.

46 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works,
done at Berne, Switzerland, on 9 September 1886, completed at Paris on
4 May 1896, revised at Berlin on 13 November 1908, completed at Berne
on 20 March 1914, revised at Rome on 2 June 1928; at Brussels on 26
June 1948; at Stockholm on 14 July 1967; and at Paris on 24 July 1971,
and amended on 28 September 1979, Art 6bis(1).

47 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 83; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 95.

48 [1983] 2 All ER 101.
49 ibid, per Hirst J, 122.

178

ARTICLE

integrity
compromises the student’s moral right of
which Joffrain considers as ‘arguably the more promi-
nent component of moral
‘is
entitled to expect the observance of professional stan-
dards in matters of education and administration of
the university’51 in his intellectual quests, and ‘[r]ecog-
nizing a student’s legal right in his or her creation
encourages the student to set higher goals’.52

rights’.50 A student

Infringement by a university
of the moral rights of the student
is tantamount to intellectual theft

When a moral right is infringed, British and Hong
Kong laws provide that such infringement is actionable
as a breach of statutory duty owed to the author.53 In
Australia, infringement is susceptible to civil process by
the author of the work concerned or his representative.54
Nevertheless,
in the UK and Hong Kong, the moral
right of attribution must be asserted by the author in
order to be binding;55 this requirement is absent from
the Australian legislation.56 It is contrary to the notion
of fairness, propounded by Lord Diplock in Schroeder
Music Publishing v Macaulay57 as the threshold test of
enforceability of a standard form contract58 (such as a
university admissions contract), to expect a university
student to possess knowledge of this legal requirement
when submitting his work to his university.

In principle, moral rights can be waived. While
both the UK and Hong Kong require that such agree-
ment be in writing,59 Australian isolation goes further
to demand that a purported waiver is valid only if it is
within the scope of a written agreement genuinely
entered into by the author or his representative.60
Further, all three jurisdictions recognize the personal
nature of moral rights. In the UK and Hong Kong,
moral rights are not assignable;61 in Australia, moral
rights are capable of being conferred upon a natural
person only.62 Accordingly, a university IP policy that

purports to vest copyright ownership in academic
works produced by its students in the university—even
if adjudged valid and enforceable—cannot vest
the
moral rights of the student authors in the university,
and the moral rights remain with the student authors.

justify deprivation of

One must acknowledge that protection of moral
the author’s
rights does not
copyright ownership in his work,
for the author’s
moral rights are equally his entitlement as a conse-
quence of his labour and personality impressed upon
his work. Australia’s copyright
legislation expressly
acknowledges the duality of an author’s entitlement to
protection of both his copyright and his moral rights
as inhere in his work.63

Applicability of the defence of fair
dealing/use
A university may consider that it is in the pedagogical
interests of the institution that its students have access
to works produced by their fellow members. A student
author’s assertion of copyright ownership so as to
prevent such access will be seen as defying the values of
communitarian scholarship. This position may be
regarded as hypocritical where the university then
claims copyright ownership in an academic work
which its student has produced after rigorous intellec-
tual exertion. In Harper & Row, Publishers v Nation
Enterprises,64
rejected this
public interest argument outright, for ‘[a]ny copyright
infringer may claim to beneﬁt the public by increasing
public access to the copyrighted work’.65 As Landes and
Posner comment:

the US Supreme Court

A property right is an exclusive right to the use, control,
and enjoyment of some resource—that
to
exclude anyone else in the world from using the resource
without the consent of the owner of the right, irrespective
of any argument that the general welfare, whether deﬁned
in economic or any other terms, would be increased by
transferring the right to someone else.66

is, a right

50 Joffrain (n 37 above) 771.
51 AL Monotti and S Ricketson, Universities and Intellectual Property:

58 ibid, per Lord Diplock, 623.
59 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 87(2); Hong Kong’s

Ownership and Exploitation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003),
113.

52 SH Patel,

‘Graduate Students’ Ownership and Attribution Rights in

Intellectual Property’ (1996) 71 Indiana L J 481, 512.

53 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 103(1); Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 114(1).

54 Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 195AZ.
55 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 78; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 90.

56 Monotti and Ricketson (n 51 above) 286.
57 [1974] 3 All ER 616 (House of Lords).

Copyright Ordinance, § 98(2).

60 Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 195AWA(2).
61 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 94; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 105.

62 Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 190.
63 ibid, § 192.
64 471 US 539 (1985) (US Supreme Court).
65 ibid, per O’Connor J, 569.
66 WM Landes and RA Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law

(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1987), 29.

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

179

information which is detrimental

New South Wales Court of Appeal Justice McHugh
for the UK v
(as he then was) in Attorney-General
Heinemann Publishers Australia67
emphasized that
‘[p]rivate citizens are entitled to protect or further
their own interests, no matter how selﬁsh they are
in doing so. Consequently, the publication of conﬁ-
dential
to the
private interest of a citizen is a legitimate concern of a
court of Equity’.68 Indeed, as Lord Justice Fox in
Francome v Mirror Group Newspapers69 pointed out,
‘[t]he proposition that citizens are free to commit a
infringement]70
criminal offence [such as copyright
if
they have formed the view that
it will
further
what they believe to be the public interest is quite
baseless in our law and inimical
to parliamentary
authority’.71

Although all

four examined jurisdictions provide
that it is a defence, known as fair dealing (fair use in
the US), to an action for copyright infringement if the
purpose of such dealing is, inter alia, for research or
(private) study,72 the defence has no applicability to an
action for moral right infringement, breach of conﬁ-
dence or infringement of one’s right to privacy. The
defence does not depend on whether the university is
legally entitled to copyright ownership in its university
student’s academic work, as one can infringe only the
copyright in a literary work and not the work itself.73
As this author has demonstrated elsewhere, many uni-
versities’ positions on copyright ownership are unten-
able as a matter of contract law74 and it is likely that a
court would decide that copyright ownership in an aca-
demic work produced by a university student remains
with the student author. In that case, but for the
defence of fair dealing or fair use, the university will be
including copyright
answerable to any infringement,
infringement, committed by itself or, vicariously,
its
employees.

Further, while the four examined jurisdictions differ
on their respective deﬁnitions of fair educational use,
they exclude pedagogical use of one’s unpublished aca-
demic work as fair. In the UK and Hong Kong, only

67 (1987) 10 NSWLR 86 (New South Wales Court of Appeal).
68 ibid, per McHugh J.A., 191.
69 [1984] 2 All ER 408 (English Court of Appeal).
70 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 107; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 118; Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 132; US’
Copyright Act 1976, § 506.

71 Francome v Mirror Group Newspapers (n 69 above) per Fox LJ, 415.
72 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 29(1); Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 38(1); Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 40(1);
US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 107.

73 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 16(1); Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 22(1); Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 36(1);
US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 501(a).

use of copyright material for research or private study
by the user is covered by the defence.75 Hong Kong’s
copyright legislation stipulates that ‘[i]n determining
whether any dealing with a work of any description is
fair dealing, the factors to be considered include (a) the
purpose and nature of the dealing; (b) the nature of
the work; and (c) the amount and substantiality of the
portion dealt with in relation to the work as a whole’.76
It is impertinent to stretch the deﬁnition of research to
enable a university to use its student’s academic work
for pedagogical use without the consent of the student
author, and Lord Denning in Hubbard v Vosper77
observed that ‘[i]t is not fair dealing for a rival in the
trade to take copyright material and use it for his own
beneﬁt’.78 Indeed, the necessary privacy of private study
is vehemently opposed to using the student author’s
work for pedagogy, which perforce necessitates third
party use.

It is impertinent to stretch the definition of
research to enable a university to use its student’s
academic work for pedagogical use without consent

legislation,

In Australia, an amendment in 198079 removed the
word ‘private’, which remains in both the UK and
Hong Kong’s copyright
from Australia’s
Copyright Act 1968;80 the defence is now applicable
only to use of copyright material for the purpose of a
person’s own research or study. Use of copyright
material, such as an academic work produced by a
student, for the purpose of an academic’s other stu-
dents’ research or study is not covered by the defence81
and constitutes copyright
infringement where the
consent of the student author is absent.

In the US, regarding the applicability of the defence
of fair use in section 106 of the Copyright Act 1976,
the courts are particularly protective of an unpublished
work—in which copyright inheres no less—such as an
academic work produced by a university student.

74 Chan (n 2 above).
75 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 29(3)(b); Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 38(2)(b).

76 Hong Kong’s Copyright Ordinance, § 38(3).
77 [1972] 2 QB 84 (English Court of Appeal).
78 ibid, per Lord Denning M.R., 93.
79 Australia’s Copyright Amendment Act 1980; as cited in Anwar (Andy)

N Khan and Philip Hancock, ‘Copyright Law in Australia –Fair Dealing
for Research or Study Purposes’ (2001) 30 J Law and Education 505,
510.

80 Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 40.
81 Monotti and Ricketson (n 51 above) 342.

180

ARTICLE

Section 107 of the US copyright legislation stipulates
that

In determining whether the use made of a work in any
particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered
shall include (1) the purpose and character of the use,
including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is
for nonproﬁt educational purposes; (2) the nature of the
copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the
portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a
whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential
market for or value of the copyrighted work.82

In its landmark decision in Harper & Row, Publishers v
Nation Enterprises, the US Supreme Court ruled:

the
his work, echoes the common law’s concern that
author or copyright owner retain control throughout this
critical stage. The obvious beneﬁt to author and public
alike of assuring authors the leisure to develop their ideas
free from fear of expropriation outweighs any short-term
‘news-value’ to be gained from premature publication of
the author’s expression. The author’s control of ﬁrst public
distribution implicates not only his personal
interest in
creative control but his property interest in exploitation of
prepublication rights, which are valuable in themselves and
serve as a valuable adjunct to publicity and marketing.
Under ordinary circumstances,
to
control the ﬁrst public appearance of his undisseminated
expression will outweigh a claim of fair use.89

the author’s

right

Publication of an author’s expression before he has author-
ized its dissemination seriously infringes the author’s right
to decide when and whether it will be made public, a
factor not present in fair use of published works. Respon-
dents contend, however, that Congress . . . intended that
fair use would apply in pari materia to published and
unpublished works. The Copyright Act does not support
this proposition.83
Signiﬁcantly, the Court recalled that the US Senate84
maintained that ‘[u]nder ordinary circumstances, the
copyright owner’s “right of ﬁrst publication” would
outweigh any needs of reproduction for classroom pur-
poses’.85 Justice O’Connor maintained that generally
speaking ‘[u]nder ordinary circumstances, the author’s
right
the ﬁrst public appearance of his
undisseminated expression will outweigh a claim of fair
use’.86 An author’s right of ﬁrst publication—‘the most
fundamental
authors’
rights’87—entitles the author to abstain from publish-
ing his work in question:88

and important of

to control

the

all

It is true that common-law copyright was often enlisted in
the service of personal privacy. In its commercial guise,
however, an author’s right to choose when he will publish
is no less deserving of protection. The period encompassing
the work’s imitation, its preparation, and its grooming for
public dissemination is a crucial one for any literary
endeavor. The Copyright Act, which accords the copyright
owner the ‘right to control the ﬁrst public distribution’ of

82 US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 107.
83 Harper & Row (n 64 above) per O’Connor J., 551.
84 Senate Report No. 94-473 (1975); as cited in Harper & Row, ibid.
85 Senate Report,

ibid, p. 64; as quoted in Harper & Row,

ibid, per

O’Connor J, 553.

86 Harper & Row, ibid, 555.
87 Fair Use and Unpublished Works: Joint Hearing on S.2370 and H.R.4263

before the Subcommittee on Patents, Copyrights and Trademarks of the
Senate Committee on the Judiciary and the Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, and the Administration of Justice of the House
Committee on the Judiciary, 101st Cong.107 (1990), 215 (statement of
Barbara Ringer); as quoted in Kenneth D Crews, ‘Fair Use of
Unpublished Works: Burdens of Proof and the Integrity of Copyright’
(1999) 31 Arizona State L J 1, 46.

Furthermore, the Court accepted the plaintiffs’ argu-
ment that their conﬁdence had been breached by the
defendants’ unauthorized use of
yet-to-be-
their consent,90 concluding
published work without
that the defence of fair use was inapplicable,91 as ‘[a]
use that so clearly infringes the copyright holder’s
interests
is
difﬁcult to characterize as “fair”’.92

in conﬁdentiality and creative control

their

Applying Harper & Row, the US Court of Appeals
for the Second Circuit (‘traditionally the premier copy-
right court’ in the country93) in New Era Publications
International v Henry Holt94 held that ‘[w]here use is
made of materials of an “unpublished nature”,
the
second fair use factor has yet to be applied in favor of
an infringer, and we do not do so here’.95 In Association
of American Medical Colleges v Carey,96 a US District
Court stated that New Era could

properly be read as instructing district courts to give little
extra regard to an ‘important’ use—even one of great
public beneﬁt—beyond that given a work of ‘ordinary’
comment and criticism. Moreover, absent extraordinary
circumstance, works unpublished in nature are to receive
complete copyright protection. While these narrow rules
would appear to be inconsistent with an equitable nature
of the fair use analysis, this court is bound to follow
them.97

88 Harper & Row, (n 64 above) per O’Connor J, 559– 560.
89 ibid, 554 –555.
90 ibid, 564.
91 ibid, 569.
92 ibid, 564.
93 JC Ginsburg, ‘Creation and Commercial Value: Copyright Protection of

Works of Information’ (1990) 90 Columbia L R 1865, 1896.

94 873 F 2d 576 (1989) (US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit).
95 ibid, per Miner Cir J, 583.
96 728 F Supp 873 (1990) (US District Court for the Northern District of

New York).

97 ibid, per McCurn CUSDJ, 883.

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

181

Another US District Court in Sinkler v Goldsmith98
accepted that the plaintiff infringed the copyright in
her deceased husband’s unpublished letters99 by
‘reading the copyrighted letters to large groups of stu-
form or in revised form . . .
dents in their original
without permission or license from counterplaintiff ’.100
Such infringement, said the court, cannot be excused
by the plaintiff ’s plea of fair use.101 From these judicial
authorities, Crews discerns
is of
great aid to the protection of conﬁdence and privacy
(discussed in Part III).102

copyright

that

Although US Congress in 1992 amended section 107
of the Copyright Act 1976 to the effect that ‘[t]he fact
that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a ﬁnding
of fair use if such ﬁnding is made upon consideration
of all the above factors’,103 the fact that a work is
unpublished remains a strong indicator against fair use
as ‘[u]npublished works are the favorite sons of factor
two’.104

is not

Meanwhile, section 29(3) of the UK’s Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988, upon which the equival-
ent provision in Hong Kong’s copyright legislation is
based,105 stipulates that ‘[c]opying by a person other
than the researcher or student himself
fair
dealing if (b) [in any case other than of a librarian to
which sub-section (a) applies], the person doing the
copying knows or has reason to believe that it will
result in copies of substantially the same material being
provided to more than one person at substantially the
same time and for substantially the same purpose’.106
The intellectual
theft which university students are
alleged to be prone to commit further augments the
unfairness of pedagogical use of a university student’s
copyright work without his consent. As Australian
High Court Justice Gibbs in University of New South
Wales v Moorhouse stated:107

It could not be assumed that persons making copies of
works in which copyright existed would do so only in cir-
cumstances which amounted to a fair dealing for the
purpose of research or private study, at least in the absence
of any effective measures to ensure that any other copying

of copyright works was forbidden ibid., per Gibbs J.,
201.108

The University was aware of the assertions of the
Australian Copyright Council that ‘unlawful and unde-
sirable practices are commonplace within the univer-
sities’. Thus, a university, not being the owner of the
copyright in its student’s work,109 infringes its student’s
copyright110 by making his work ‘available to other
persons, knowing, or having reason to suspect, that it
is likely to be used for the purpose of committing an
infringement, and omitting to take reasonable steps to
limit its use to legitimate purposes’.111 Any claim on
the part of the university that its unauthorized use of
as student’s copyright work was not intended to preju-
dice the student author’s copyright is without merit, as
Lord Justice Willmer in Francis Day & Hunter v
Bron112 indicated that ‘in order to establish an infringe-
ment of copyright, it is not necessary to prove anything
in the nature of mens rea’.113 As Mervyn Davis in Silli-
toe v McGraw Hill114 stated, ‘[i]f a person takes a delib-
erate risk as to whether what he is doing is wrong in
law, I do not see that he can say later that he did not,
at the time, know that what he was doing was wrong,
if, in the event, his action is held to be wrong’.115

Finally, a university’s use of

student’s work
without his consent and unsupported by the defence of
fair dealing or fair use indicates that it has failed to
meet a profactioned threshold such as put forward by
the American Association of University Professors:

its

In dealing with graduate students, professors must demon-
strate by precept and example the necessity of rigorous
honesty in the use of sources and of utter respect for the
work of others. The same expectations apply to the gui-
dance of undergraduate students, with a special obligation
to acquaint students new to the world of higher education
with its standards and the means of ensuring intellectual
honesty.116

Conﬁdence and privacy concerns
As early as 1940, the American Association of Univer-
‘[i]nstitutions of
sity Professors was adamant

that

98 623 F Supp 727(1985) (US District Court for the District of Arizona).
99 ibid, per Hardy USDJ, 732.
100 ibid.
101 ibid.
102 Crews (n 87 above) 70.
103 US’ Copyright Act 1976 (as amended), § 107.
104 Wright v Warner Books 953 F 2d 731 (1991), per Meskill Cir J, 737 (US

Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit).

105 Hong Kong’s Copyright Ordinance, § 38(2)(b).
106 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 29(3)(b).
107 (1974 –75) 6 ALR 193 (High Court of Australia).
108 ibid, per Gibbs J., 201.

109 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, § 16(1); Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 22(1); Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 36(1);
US’ Copyright Act 1976, § 501(a).

110 UK’s Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, §§ 18; 23; Hong Kong’s

Copyright Ordinance, § 19; 26; 31; Australia’s Copyright Act 1968, § 36.

111 University of New South Wales v Moorhouse (n 107 above) per Gibbs J,

201.

112 [1963] 1 Ch 587 (English Court of Appeal).
113 ibid, per Willmer LJ, 613.
114 [1983] FSR 545.
115 ibid, per Mervyn Davis QC, 557.
116 American Association of University Professors, 1990 Statement on

Plagiarism, Precept 5.

182

ARTICLE

for

higher education are conducted for the common good
and not to further the interest of either the individual
teacher or the institution as a whole’.117 Despite their
mission to advance knowledge and creativity, univer-
sities are nonetheless notorious for their internal press-
ures
intellectual conformity and orthodoxy. A
university student, by virtue of his status as young
‘learner’, is assumed to be a mere absorber of and not
potential contributor to knowledge, and he is expected
to be subservient to his instructors and the university
bureaucracy. Such patriarchal hierarchy is detrimental
to the university mission, for the student as a result is
prone to consider that by reason of his inferiority
within the university he is restrained into a ‘culture of
subservience’.118 Worse,
the subordination reinforces
university students’ perception and behaviour that they
will in time be able to further their own agendas at the
expense of
is
imperative that a university is to train society’s future
leaders with moral and intellectual pertinence and it
has an important inﬂuence upon the character of its
students.

those placed in inferior positions. It

That said, the nature of things dictates that some
individuals will for certain reason always possess more
power than and over others. Thus, judicial courts and
legislatures have embraced protection of an individual’s
rights to conﬁdence and to privacy. The relevant juris-
prudence and legislation is discussed here.

Conﬁdence
Since university admissions contracts, rules, and regu-
lations are invariably one-sided in favour of the univer-
sity, the university and its employees are bound by a
duty of conﬁdence towards its student. On account of
the student’s vulnerability to his university and its
employees, various commentators have argued that the
relationship between the two groups is ﬁduciary119
whereby ‘the ﬁduciary undertakes or agrees to act for
or on behalf of or in the interests of another person in
the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect
the interests of that other person in a legal or practical
sense’.120 A ﬁduciary university – student relationship

its

towards

carries with it various obligations on the part of the
university and its employees
student,
including a duty of conﬁdence. While a judicial court
is likely to be inclined towards the view that a univer-
sity– student relationship is not a ﬁduciary relationship,
equity is ‘less concerned with the conceptual character
or classiﬁcation of the relationship . . . than with the
immediate ascertainment of the rights of the parties to
the particular dispute in the context of the relationship,
including the terms of any contract, existing between
them’.121 Indeed, Monotti and Ricketson maintain that
‘the rejection of the entire relationship as ﬁduciary
does not mean that ﬁduciary duties cannot arise in
relation to particular aspects of that relationship’.122
Further, the vulnerability of the student may give rise
to an implied contractual term wherein a duty of conﬁ-
dence inheres. In any case, the absence of a ﬁnding of
such an implied term does not mean that no duty of
conﬁdence exists. As Lord Keith afﬁrmed in Attorney-
General v Guardian Newspapers (No.2);123

A fiduciary university –student relationship carries
various obligations on the part of the university
and its employees towards its student

The law has long recognised that an obligation of conﬁ-
dence can arise out of particular relationships. Examples
are the relationships of doctor and patient, priest and
penitent, solicitor and client, banker and customer. The
obligation may be imposed by an express or implied term
in a contract but it may also exist independently of any
contract on the basis of an independent equitable principle
of conﬁdence.124

Lord Chief Justice Woolf
admirably the law of conﬁdence such that

in A v B125 summarized

The need for the existence of a conﬁdential relationship
should not give rise to problems as to the law. The difﬁculty
will be as to the relevant facts. A duty of conﬁdence will
arise whenever the party subject to the duty is in a situation
where he either knows or ought to know that the other
person can reasonably expect his privacy to be protected.
The range of situations in which protection can be provided

117 American Association of University Professors, 1940 Statement of

120 Hospital Products v US Surgical Corporation (1984– 85) 156 CLR 41, per

Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure with 1970 Interpretive
Comments.

Mason J, 96 –97 (High Court of Australia).

121 BH McPherson,

‘Joint Ventures’

in Paul D Finn (ed.), Equity and

118 The phrase was employed in Professor Ying Chan’s submission to the

Commercial Relationships (Sydney: Law Book, 1987), 19 – 36, 36.

Independent Investigation Panel appointed by the Council of The
University of Hong Kong in relation to the Robert Chung Affair in 2000;
as mentioned in Carole J Petersen, ‘Preserving Academic Freedom in
Hong Kong: Lessons from the “Robert Chung Affair”’ (2000) 30 Hong
Kong L J 165, 176.

119 See Monotti and Ricketson (n 51 above) 112 –115 and the various

sources cited therein.

122 Monotti and Ricketson (n 51 above) 114.
123 [1990] 1 AC 109 (House of Lords).
124 ibid, per Lord Keith, 255.
125 [2002] 2 All ER 545 (English Court of Appeal).

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

183

is therefore extensive. Obviously, the necessary relationship
can be expressly created. More often its existence will have
to be inferred from the facts. Whether a duty of conﬁdence
does exist which courts can protect, if it is right to do so,
will depend on all the circumstances of the relationship
between the parties at the time of the threatened or actual
breach of the alleged duty of conﬁdence.126

To be protected by conﬁdence, the information or
work in question must, according to Lord Greene in
Saltman Engineering v Campbell Engineering,127 have
‘the necessary quality of conﬁdence about it’.128 Justice
Megarry (as he then was) in Coco v A. N. Clark
(Engineers)129 elaborated on the essential elements of
breach of conﬁdence such that in addition to Lord
requirement,130
Greene’s
‘[s]econdly, that information must have been imparted
in circumstances importing an obligation of conﬁdence.
Thirdly, there must be an unauthorized use of that
information to the detriment of the party communicat-
ing it’.131 His Honour then explained that:

aforementioned qualitative

If the circumstances are such that any reasonable man
standing in the shoes of the recipient of the information
would have realised that upon reasonable grounds the
information was being given to him in conﬁdence, then
this should sufﬁce to impose upon him the equitable obli-
gation of conﬁdence. In particular, where information of
commercial or industrial value is given on a business-like
basis and with some avowed common object in mind . . . I
would regard the recipient as carrying a heavy burden if he
seeks to repel a contention that he was bound by an obli-
gation of conﬁdence.132

In respect of the ﬁrst requirement that the infor-
mation or work have elements of conﬁdence, the per-
sonality interests of an author and his right to privacy
whereby his work shall not be subjected to public
perusal absent consent, as elucidated above, sufﬁce to
bestow upon a university student’s academic work ‘the
necessary quality of conﬁdence about
it’. The ﬁrst
requirement
for a ﬁnding of breach of conﬁdence
accordingly should be found as satisﬁed.

As to the second requirement that the information
or work must have been communicated in conﬁdence,
it is clear that where the university student author has

126 ibid, per Lord Woolf CJ, 553– 554.
127 (1948) 65 RPC 203 (English Court of Appeal).
128 ibid, per Lord Greene MR, 215.
129 [1969] RPC 41.
130 ibid, per Megarry J, 47.
131 ibid.
132 ibid, 48.
133 See, e.g., University of Durham (Department of Law), Notes

for
Guidance of Master of Laws and Master of Arts Students on the Writing
and Presentation of Dissertations.

consented to grant an unrelated person access to his
work, conﬁdence implications will not be engaged.
However, where such consent is not present or forth-
coming, distribution to an individual who has no
connection with the controlling purpose of the work,
namely evaluation and assessment pertinent
to the
student author’s university candidacy, may give rise to
breach of conﬁdence, particularly as a university stu-
dent’s academic work is ordinarily assessed in anonym-
ity with the university simultaneously denying the
student the right to the return of his work on the basis
the work constitutes an examination script133
that
which necessitates the strictest secrecy. Warren and
Brandeis
common-law protection
enables him to control absolutely the act of publi-
cation, and in the exercise of his own discretion, to
decide whether there shall be any publication at all’.134
Phillipson and Fenwick assert that use or distribution
of information or work for an unrelated purpose is

stress

that

‘the

wholly incompatible with . . . the core privacy value of the
individual’s right to control over the release of personal
information. All of us exercise this right to selective dis-
closure in our social lives: we may tell one friend an inti-
mate secret and not another; at times be open, at others
more reticent. No one denies our right to do this. A friend
who is shown a personal letter on one occasion does not
assume that he has thereby acquired the right to read,
uninvited, all other such letters.135

The University of Queensland agrees, conﬁrming in
its IP Policy for Staff and Students136 that ‘staff and
students have the substantial
freedom to determine
how to disseminate research outcomes and, in particu-
lar, the ability to control the publication process’.137

Thus,

‘it would seem beyond doubt that an obli-
gation should be imposed on a conﬁdant where the cir-
cumstances are such as to indicate that the conﬁdant
either knew or ought to have known that information
was being imparted for a limited purpose’.138 As a uni-
versity receives its students’ academic work in accord-
ance with such powers as are enabled only by its
university statutes, rules and regulations, and, in the
case of a public institution, the enabling legislation,
the university is circumscribed in its handling of its

134 Warren and Brandeis (n 18 above) 200.
135 G Phillipson and H Fenwick, ‘Breach of Conﬁdence as a Privacy Remedy

in the Human Rights Act Era’ (2000) 63 Modern L R 660, 680.

136 University of Queensland, Intellectual Property Policy for Staff and

Students.

137 ibid, A. Introduction: Intellectual Property Policy, para (ii).
138 F Gurry, ‘Breach of Conﬁdence’ in Paul D Finn (ed.), Essays in Equity

(Sydney: Law Book, 1985), 110 –130, 118.

184

ARTICLE

student’s work. Justice Morritt in Hoechst UK v Chemi-
culture139 held:

Browne-Wilkinson (as he then was) in Stephens v
Avery146 declared:

(1) Information obtained pursuant to statutory powers
can only be disclosed by the recipient to such persons and
for such purposes as are envisaged by the statute confer-
ring the powers or pursuant to a court order. (2) The
remedy of the person who provided the information to
ensure compliance by the recipient with his obligation is
an action for breach of conﬁdence.140

The University of Hong Kong in its Staff Manual:
Terms of Service I141 directs:

Many appointees, by virtue of their duties, have access to
various kinds of conﬁdential information about the Uni-
versity,
its staff, and its students. Such appointees are
reminded that they are in trust not to divulge conﬁdential
information to any person not speciﬁcally authorized to
receive it, nor to use such information for personal
beneﬁt’.142

In Thomas Marshall v Guinle,143 Vice-Chancellor
Megarry illuminated the second requirement which he
had ﬁrst laid down in Coco:

First, I think that the information must be information the
release of which the owner believes would be injurious to
him or of advantage to his rivals or others. Second, I think
the owner must believe that the information is conﬁdential
or secret, i.e., that it is not already in the public domain. It
may be that some or all of his rivals already have the infor-
mation: but as long as the owner believes it to be conﬁ-
dential I think he is entitled to try and protect it. Third, I
think that the owner’s belief under the two previous heads
must be reasonable. Fourth, I think that the information
must be judged in the light of the usage and practices of
the particular industry or trade concerned.144

A university student who is competitive towards his
peers certainly conceives that unconsented-to distri-
bution of his academic work to his peers will ‘be injur-
ious to him or of advantage to his rivals or others’ in
that such distribution enhances the works of his peers
and thereby adversely prejudices his own class rank.
Gordon discerns that ‘[w]henever someone withholds
consent, no matter what the motivation, any overriding
of
some lack of
autonomy’.145 As Vice-Chancellor
respect

that person’s objections

for his

implies

that

The basis of equitable intervention to protect conﬁdential-
ity is that it is unconscionable for a person who has
received information on the basis that it is conﬁdential
subsequently to reveal
information. Although the
relationship between the parties is often important in cases
where it is said there is an implied as opposed to express
obligation of conﬁdence,
the relationship between the
parties is not the determining factor. It is the acceptance of
the information on the basis that it will be kept secret that
affects
the infor-
mation.147

the conscience of

the recipient of

Accordingly, the second requirement, that the infor-
mation or work must have been communicated in con-
ﬁdence should also be found as satisﬁed in the present
context.

Use by a university of its student’s academic
work for an unrelated purpose without
the consent of the student author
constitutes copyright infringement

Lastly, use by a university of its student’s academic
work for an unrelated purpose without the consent of
the student author constitutes unauthorized use and
thus copyright infringement of the student’s work to
which the defence of fair dealing or fair use is not
applicable. Okuley ﬁnds that ‘[a]ttribution, whether on
a research publication or on a patent application, can
inﬂame emotional
issues that can be highly disrup-
tive’,148 and Lord Justice Hoffmann in R v Central Inde-
pendent Television149 observed that unconsented-to
‘publication may cause needless pain, distress and
damage to individuals’.150

Nevertheless,

the university may argue that

the
student author suffers no detriment through uncon-
sented-to distribution of his work, as such distribution
merely indicates that the work is of a quality high
enough to be worthy of reading. This position cannot
be accepted, for it demonstrates yet another instance
where the university perceives and behaves towards its

139 [1993] FSR 270
140 ibid, per Morritt J, 276.
141 The University of Hong Kong, Staff Manual: Terms of Service I and

Terms of Service I (Clinical Medical Staff).

142 ibid, Section V: Policies and Regulations on Personnel Matters,

1. Conﬁdentiality.
143 [1979] 1 Ch 227.
144 ibid, per Megarry V-C, 248.

145 Gordon WJ. ‘An Inquiry into the Merits of Copyright: The Challenges of
Consistency, Consent, and Encouragement Theory’ (1989) 41 Stanford L
R 1343, 1428.

146 [1988] 2 All ER 477 (English Court of Appeal).
147 ibid, per Browne-Wilkinson V-C, 482.
148 Okuley JJ.

‘Resolution of Inventorship Disputes: Avoiding Litigation

through Early Evaluation’ (2003) 18 Ohio State Journal on Dispute
Resolution 915, 946.

149 [1994] 3 All ER 641 (English Court of Appeal).
150 ibid, per Hoffmann LJ, 652.

Phil C. W. Chan . Moral rights in university students’ academic works

ARTICLE

185

student with condescending disrespect. As Lord Keith
in Guardian Newspapers (No. 2) pointed out:

The anonymous donor of a very large sum to a very
worthy cause has his own reasons for wishing to remain
anonymous, which are unlikely to be discreditable. He
should surely be in a position to restrain disclosure in
breach of conﬁdence of his identity in connection with the
donation. So I would think it a sufﬁcient detriment to the
conﬁder that information given in conﬁdence is to be dis-
closed to persons whom he would prefer not to know of
it, even though the disclosure would not be harmful to
him in any positive way.151

His Lordship’s observation explains

that not all
individuals appreciate their expressions to be given
publicity. O’Neill observes that in the course of intellec-
tual pursuit,

The psychological comfort of guaranteed ‘exclusivity’ or
‘privacy’
for drafts may shield the creator’s missteps,
juvenilia, and the like from public view, regardless of
whether he intends to publish and perhaps, precisely
because he does not. The utilitarian argument would be
that a zone of privacy facilitates creation. The personal
argument would be the one made in Harper & Row: the
revelation of earlier drafts undermines the incentive to
polish the work because the creator’s presentation of self
in the completed manuscript is the ‘work’, the expression
of self that she presents to the public. In this respect, a
never-to-be-published draft should be as protected as a
soon-to-be-published one.152

The author expounds the view of the US Supreme
Court in Harper & Row that ‘unpublished expression
remains essentially inseparable from the creator’s iden-
tity because, at least theoretically, it remains subject to
change or may even be withheld altogether’.153 The
Supreme Court in Harper & Row, it is recalled, con-
cluded that the defence of fair use in section 107 of the
Copyright Act 1976 is not applicable where unpub-
lished material
the consent of the
author, as ‘[a] use that so clearly infringes the copy-
right holder’s interests in conﬁdentiality and creative
control is difﬁcult to characterize as “fair”’.154

is used without

The fact that there is no tangible detriment is in any

case no defence, for

The obligation of conscience is to respect the conﬁdence,
not merely to refrain from causing detriment
to the

151 Guardian Newspapers (No. 2) (n 124 above) per Lord Keith, 256.
152 O’Neill (n 32 above) 442.
153 ibid, 423.
154 Harper & Row (n 64 above) per O’Connor J, 564.
155 Smith Kline & French Laboratories

(Australia) v Secretary to the

Department of Community Services and Health [1990] FSR 617, per
Gummow J., 664 (Federal Court of Australia).

156 Guardian Newspapers (No. 2) (n 124 above) per Lord Keith, 255.

plaintiff. The plaintiff comes to equity to vindicate his
right to observance of the obligation, not necessarily to
recover loss or to restrain inﬂiction of apprehended loss.155

Lord Keith in Guardian Newspapers (No. 2) pointed
out that ‘there may be no ﬁnancial detriment to the
conﬁder, since the breach of conﬁdence involves no
. . . The
more than an invasion of personal privacy.
right to personal privacy is clearly one which the law
should in this ﬁeld seek to protect’.156 His Lordship
advanced that ‘as a general rule it is in the public inter-
est
that conﬁdences should be respected, and the
encouragement of such respect may in itself constitute
a sufﬁcient ground for recognising and enforcing the
obligation of conscience even where the conﬁder can
to himself ’.157 Lord
point
Chief Justice Woolf in A v B held, accordingly, that

to no speciﬁc detriment

If there is an intrusion in a situation where a person can
reasonably expect his privacy to be respected then that
intrusion will be capable of giving rise to liability in an
action for breach of conﬁdence unless the intrusion can be
justiﬁed.158

Thus, invasions into an author’s personality interests
and expectations of respect for conﬁdence and privacy
amounts to such detriment that it fulﬁls the third
requirement of an unauthorized use of the conﬁden-
tially communicated information or work to the detri-
ment of the conﬁder who is ‘entitled to the conﬁdence
and to have it respected’.159

Any unauthorized recipient of an academic work
produced by a university student is equally bound by
the duty of conﬁdence as is owed by the university to
the student author, as ‘[i]t is well settled that the obli-
gation of conﬁdence rests not only on the original reci-
pient, but also on any person who received the
information with knowledge acquired at the time or
subsequently that
it was originally given in conﬁ-
dence’.160 Justice Morritt in Hoechst UK maintained
that ‘if the third party is aware of the conﬁdentiality of
the information he can be restrained from using it even
if he came by it innocently’.161 It is a legitimate pre-
sumption that a university student be well aware of the
conﬁdentiality of any information or work which his
peer has submitted to his university in anonymity, for

157 ibid, per Lord Keith, 256.
158 A v B (n 126 above) per Lord Woolf CJ, 554.
159 Fraser v Evans [1969] 1 All ER 8, per Lord Denning MR, 361 (English

Court of Appeal).

160 Fraser v Thames Television, (n 48 above) per Hirst J, 116.
161 Hoechst UK v Chemiculture (n 114 above), per Morritt J, 276 –277.

186

ARTICLE

he shares the same interests in the observance of
respect for students’ conﬁdences generally maintained.

Privacy
In the preceding decades, the importance of an individ-
ual’s right to privacy has received constitutional and
legislative recognition in the four examined jurisdic-
tions.162 In addition, many universities have adopted
their own privacy policies. For example, in its Privacy
Policy Statement, the University of Hong Kong pro-
claims that it ‘is committed to meeting internationally
recognized standards of personal data privacy protec-
tion, in compliance with the requirements of the Per-
sonal Data (Privacy) Ordinance. In doing so, it will be
ensured that staff comply with the strictest standards of
security and conﬁdentiality’.163

Space constraints disallow a more detailed discussion
of the right to privacy. Nonetheless, it is appropriate to
draw out a major difference between the protection of
conﬁdence and the right to privacy. The beneﬁt that
arises from an action for infringement of one’s right to
privacy which cannot be obtained in that for breach of
conﬁdence was succinctly elucidated by Lord Justice
Sedley in Douglas v Hello! (No. 1):164

What a concept of privacy does, however, is accord recog-
nition to the fact that the law has to protect not only those
people whose trust has been abused but those who simply
ﬁnd themselves subjected to an unwanted intrusion into
their personal lives. The law no longer needs to construct

an artiﬁcial relationship of conﬁdentiality between intruder
and victim: it can recognise privacy itself as a legal prin-
ciple drawn from the fundamental value of personal
autonomy.165

The oppression
It should be emphasized that an intention to infringe
or breach an individual’s copyright, moral right or
right to conﬁdence or privacy is not necessary for a
ﬁnding of infringement or breach of any of them.166

literary

than to realize one’s

It is through university students that society pro-
gresses. For an individual, there is nothing more exhi-
larating
creativity,
particularly at an age where everything seems to err
and where his
identity is continually tested with
intense volatility. At the same time, there is nothing
more oppressive than to rob or demean the fruits of
another individual’s intellectual pursuit, which obliter-
ates the author’s very own autonomy. It is therefore
important that the courts, where petitioned to adjudi-
cate upon a university copyright ownership dispute or
an action for moral right infringement, breach of conﬁ-
dence or infringement of one’s right to privacy in
attendant circumstances, do not condone any intellec-
tual exploitation and abuse of trust.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jpl240

162 UK’s Data Protection Act 1998; Hong Kong’s Personal Data (Privacy)

Ordinance; Australia’s Privacy Act 1988; US’ Constitution, Fourth
Amendment.

164 [2001] QB 967 (English Court of Appeal).
165 ibid, per Sedley LJ, 1001.
166 Francis Day & Hunter (n 113 above) per Willmer LJ, 613.

163 University of Hong Kong, Privacy Policy Statement.


