ARTICLE

383

Valuing footsteps—towards a valuation model
of indigenous knowledge and cultural
expression for the sustainability of indigenous
people’s culture
Brian Burﬁtt and Marion Heathcote*

“We cannot own the land, the land owns us”1

This quote encapsulates the fundamental premise of
The Shadow King, the Australian indigenous reworking
of Shakespeare’s classic tale of greed, corruption and de-
ception in the wretched tragedy of King Lear. The folly of
the Shadow King, as he reﬂects the current circum-
stances of indigenous Australians and the tragedy of the
erosion of traditional beliefs and connection to country,
is that he forgets the fundamental tenants of his ancestry
which has sustained the world’s oldest people and fool-
ishly believes he cannot only own land but can divide it.
As the enormity of his fallacy unfolds, so too does the
struggle of indigenous Australians to retain a sense of
traditional culture in the social construct of the ‘new
worlds’. The concept of existing in the land and on the
land without any claim to ownership places indigenous
peoples’ customary systems in an opposing trajectory
with the western legal system and in particular the legal
construct of ‘intellectual property rights’.

inter alia,

Intellectual property,

is a mechanism
‘which enable[s] people to earn recognition and beneﬁt
from what they invent or create’.2 It exists or operates
within the premise that there will be a commercial
return generated by the exploitation of the property in
question albeit patent, design, copyright or trade mark.
Exploitation necessarily implies an ownership of the in-
vention and creation and an ability to estimate the value
of the return to the property’s owner.

Indigenous cultural property includes within its
scope traditional knowledge, and the expressions of
that traditional culture. It exists holistically and is not
readily divisible or valued in parts. Ownership models
are culturally inclusive rather than alienable. Sustain-
ability rather than exclusivity of use is emphasized.
Such features are problematic when attempting to

The authors
† Brian Burﬁtt is a Lecturer in the School of Accounting at
the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia.
He researches into the management accounting and valu-
ation implications of Value in Kind resources in organiza-
tions, often with an indigenous focus. Marion Heathcote is
a partner in Davies Collison Cave, Patent and Trade Mark
Attorneys, Australia. For many years she has been active
within the International Trade Mark Association (INTA)
and Marques in increasing brand owner awareness as to
Indigenous Cultural Property. In 2009 she was awarded
the INTA Volunteer Service Award for the Advancement of
Trademark Law for her advocacy in this area.

This article
† Indigenous cultural property includes within its scope
traditional knowledge, and the expressions of that trad-
itional culture. It exists holistically and is not readily
divisible or valued in parts. Ownership models are cul-
turally inclusive rather than alienable. Sustainability
rather than exclusivity of use is emphasized.

† Such features are problematic when attempting to
utilize the intellectual property systems that are cur-
rently available. Having come to the decision that indi-
genous cultural property should in fact be valued, this
paper asserts the need for a valuation model that recog-
nizes and retains the integrity of the indigenous cul-
tural property as a holistic functioning system.

† In doing so, it identiﬁes a number of issues that must
be addressed; ownership, property identiﬁcation, in-
novation, tangibility and sustainability. In dealing with
these issues effectively, the paper advocates for a differ-
ent treatment of indigenous cultural property incorp-
orating a valuation model.

Email: b.burﬁtt@unsw.edu.au and mheathcote@davies.com.au.

*
1 The Shadow King, co-created by Tom E Lewis and Michael Kantor,

premiered Malthouse Theatre, Melbourne Australia, 11 October 2013.

2 Deﬁnition supplied by WIPO, ‘About IP’. Available at http://www.wipo.int/

about-ip/en (accessed 14 February 2014).

# The Author(s) (2014). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jpu043

384

ARTICLE

utilize the intellectual property systems that are cur-
rently available.

Using Australia as a base reference point, this paper
asks some of the questions which arise from attempts to
apply Western intellectual property law frameworks to
indigenous cultural property and the struggle to place a
value on that property within the Western paradigm.
Prior to engaging in that more speciﬁc discussion, there
are a number of assumptions that we consider should be
challenged. This article does not seek to answer these
questions but identiﬁes and addresses some of the issues
that arise when attempting to apply Western intellectual
property principles to indigenous cultural property. We
ﬁrst consider whether, as a base premise, indigenous cul-
tural property should be valued; and having suggested
that it is a necessity, subsequently identify the challenges
confronting attempts to value. The signiﬁcant issues
addressed include ownership, property identiﬁcation,
innovation, tangibility and sustainability.

Should indigenous cultural property
be valued?
There is a general reluctance to try and put a value on in-
digenous cultural property. This reluctance is motivated
by a mixture of political, commercial and heritage con-
cerns. It requires us to accept the guilt about our past
colonial history, acknowledge the limitations of a
Western-style valuation model and address the challenge
of recognizing the contribution and integral role of indi-
genous cultures to the collective society. This reluctance
is motivated perhaps by the more general concern that,
when commodiﬁed, culture becomes an asset capable of
compensation—a compensation able to be given for ap-
propriation, misappropriation and amelioration of that
property.

Valuing cultural property also allows for the possibil-
ity that it may be fragmented and disseminated, and
ultimately decimated. Indigenous peoples generally rec-
ognize their rights ‘as a bundle of relationships, rather
than a bundle of economic rights’.3 These relationships
are interwoven between land or ‘country’, ancestors,
plants and animals. ‘If there is one thing that unites indi-
genous systems of knowledge, it is the principle that
most or all knowledge that is part of a groups system can
be traced back to the acts of powerful ancestors. The acts

of ancestors are the threads that connect different parts
of an indigenous knowledge system.’4 Placing a value on
different items or pieces of what is effectively a function-
ing system allows for the possibility that these individual
items may be sold off or acquired individually. The frag-
mentation that results can effectively end the balance or
functionality of that system: a ‘fragmentation into pieces
until nothing remains’.5

In spite of this, there is a strong argument that valu-
ation of itself is a positive action. It is recognition of the
signiﬁcance and the cultural value of the item being
quantiﬁed. The recognition is integral to the identity
and survival of the cultural property itself as well as the
peoples who are the custodians of the property. By
giving it a value, the property is deemed valuable. By
giving it a value, the property also becomes visible. This
visibility ensures that the property cannot be ignored.
Thus, the process of valuation is necessary as a means
of supporting the protection and recognition of indi-
genous cultural property. The retention of this cultural
property is a pre-condition to the perpetuation of
indigenous people as a separate identity. For this article
we adopt the term ‘indigenous peoples’ to refer to
peoples that possess their own cultural patterns, social
institutions and legal
to different
degrees); that claim a historical continuity with pre-co-
lonial societies; and that are determined to preserve
and transmit to future generations their ancestral terri-
tories and identities as a basis for their continued exist-
ence as peoples.6

systems

(albeit

If it is accepted that valuation should occur, then it
becomes a critical challenge to select a valuation model
that recognizes and retains the integrity of cultural prop-
erty as a holistic functioning system. In determining an
effective model, a number of issues must be addressed.
In this article we will conﬁne our discussion to the
following (which will be outlined below and then dis-
cussed in more detail in the rest of the paper):
† ownership: indigenous versus Western concepts of
† property identiﬁcation: attributing cultural properties
to traditional owners rather than an assumption of
‘public domain’ status;
† innovation: the dynamic and evolutionary nature of
cultural property (not merely historical or in the past);

ownership and assets;

3 E Daes as reported in M Solomon ‘Indigenous People’s Rights versus

Intellectual Property Rights’ in N. Tomas (ed), Collective Human Rights of
Paciﬁc Peoples’ Human Rights Commission (International Research Unit for
Maori & Indigenous Education University of Auckland NZ 1998) 63, 61.
4 P Drahos and S Frankel ‘Indigenous Peoples’ Innovation and Intellectual
Property: The Issues’ in Drahos P and Frankel S (eds) Indigenous Peoples

Innovation: Intellectual Property Pathways to Development (Australian
National University E Press Canberra 2012) 1, 16.
Solomon, above, n 3, 62.
L Helfer and G Austin Human Rights and Intellectual Property: Mapping the
global interface (Cambridge University Press Cambridge 2011) 433.

5
6

Brian Burﬁtt and Marion Heathcote . Valuing footsteps—towards a valuation model

ARTICLE

385

† tangibility: the unique nature of indigenous cultural
properties and the inclusion of aspects of cultural
heritage and customary values; and
† sustainability: the inclusion of indigenous concepts of
sustainability into business plans and commercial
valuations; sustainability as a concept in resource use
as well as the long-term sustainability of the indigen-
ous groups and their culture.

Ownership
The indigenous concepts of ownership are often very
different from those of Western cultures. The common
concept among most
indigenous peoples is one of
collective rights. In Australia, for example, whilst there
exists a great diversity of aboriginal cultures, across
those cultures there are consistent principles of owner-
ship and control.7 These principles include notions of
ownership that is collective, socially based and continu-
ally evolving, and in which group attribution is a cultural
right.8 Dealing with the question of ownership of indi-
genous cultural property requires an understanding of
the operation of community and customary laws, rights
and responsibilities. These principles
the
concept of the indigenous people as custodians rather
than owners of the property on behalf of future genera-
tions. As custodians, their ability to deal (in a commer-
cial sense) with the properties is limited, ‘as a trustee
(they have) a binding role to pass on the knowledge in
the best interests of the community’.9

include

These collective rights and responsibilities are a chal-
lenge when an attempt is made to determine a value for
use in valuation/compensation discussions. For example,
land is not subject to individual acquisition and is attached
to the indigenous culture. While the land may be used to
support current peoples, there is an obligation to ensure
that it will provide returns for future generations. ‘Aborigi-
nal culture is inseparable from the land to which the title
attaches. The loss or impairment of that title is not simply
a loss of real estate, it is a loss of culture.’10 Thus, any valu-
ation of the land cannot adequately account for this
cultural connection or its past and on-going role.

Fundamental to Western intellectual property princi-
ples is the concept of ownership. The challenges discussed
above also exist when attempts are made to utilize intel-
lectual property laws to protect aspects of indigenous

7 T Janke and P Dawson New Tracks: Indigenous Knowledge and cultural

expression and the Australian Intellectual Property System (Terri Janke and
Company Pty Ltd Sydney 2012) 6.
Ibid, 6.
Ibid, 6.

8
9
10 N Pearson ‘Law must dig deeper to ﬁnd land rights’, The Australian, 8 June

1993 cited in R Craig, R Taonui and S Wild ‘The concept of Taonga in

cultural property. Bangarra Dance Theatre, Australia’s
pre-eminent indigenous dance company, having been
concerned that copyright law did not adequately recog-
nize the collective and traditional ownership of the artistic
works from which they derive their dance, has developed
its own ‘legal’ model to attempt to redress this situation.11
‘There was no one individual who owned or had choreo-
graphed the dances: they belong to the Clan, and they
have done for thousands of years.’12

Property identiﬁcation
In discussing ownership and its role in the recognition
of indigenous cultural property, consideration must be
given to a correct attribution of cultural properties
to traditional owners rather than to an assumption of
‘public domain’ status. The fact that traditional owner-
ship is derived ancestrally and continues its existence
within the community as a collective is not akin to the
passage of that property to the public domain. Further-
more, the on-going and custodial nature of the indigen-
ous cultural property is not functionally equivalent to
the otherwise time limited properties associated with
Western intellectual property systems. These systems
allow for knowledge to move in to the public domain
after a set period of time of exclusive ownership (eg
upon the expiry of a patent, design or copyright). This is
not to say that indigenous peoples are not willing to
share their knowledge; indeed, it has been suggested that
there is considerable evidence to the contrary. However,
this is not the equivalent of that knowledge passing into
the public domain.13 What does remain a constant is the
belief that as traditional custodians there is an on-going
right to retain control of that knowledge: ‘Each indi-
genous community must retain permanent control
over all elements of its own heritage . . . this continuing,
collective right to manage heritage is critical to the iden-
tity, survival and development of each indigenous
society.’14

Innovation
A commonly held misconception is that indigenous cul-
tural property is static and a-historical in nature. This
implies a lack of innovation and therefore is problematic
when attempting to determine ownership as discussed
above in the ownership and property identiﬁcation sec-

Maori culture: insights for accounting’ (2012) 25(6) Accounting Auditing
and Accountability Journal 1025, 1039.

11 M Rimmer, ‘Bangarra Dance Theatre Copyright Law and Indigenous

Culture’ (2000) 9(2) Grifﬁth Law Review 275.

12 Ibid, 279.
13 Drahos and Frankel, above, n 4, 9.
14 Solomon, above, n 3, 62.

386

ARTICLE

tions. Innovation is an on-going reality as a consequence
of the custodial role played by many contemporary indi-
genous leaders on behalf of their communities. These
obligations require the leaders to consider their responsi-
bility to future generations to ensure on-going cultural
sustainability. This innovation is going on as part of the
interaction between the communities and their ‘country’.

Indigenous innovation is place based innovation. In the case
of Aboriginal people in Australia, it takes place on ‘Country’
(a place of spiritual afﬁliation and connection). . . . A focal
point of Maori innovation is also place. . . . It is this place
based network that maintains and advances knowledge.’15

Valuation of indigenous innovation has become more
important as commercial interests are being increasingly
forced to recognize the role of traditional knowledge in
innovation, and to develop beneﬁt-sharing schemes. It
has become more apparent to researchers in recent years
that the intimate knowledge of traditional owners of the
land can best be translated by in-ﬁeld research. In some
cases, the indigenous community is also heavily involved
in research activities which are set up to identify com-
mercial applications of indigenous traditional knowledge.
In Cape York, Australia, traditional owner and chair of
the Chuulangun Aboriginal Corporation, David Claudie,
is working with scientists in ethnobotany and ethno-
pharmacology to develop guidelines and protocols in
relation to ensuring culturally appropriate development
of medicinal plant products while maintaining their intel-
lectual property. ‘It is now widely recognised that projects
in indigenous communities that are locally run, locally
owned and culturally relevant will deliver more meaning-
ful outcomes.’16 Claudie argues that ‘those engaged in
research on medicinal plants need to move beyond using
indigenous peoples as ‘informants’. Indigenous peoples
must become researchers and share in the beneﬁts of
research.’17

Tangibility
In the discussion of ownership above, we raised the idea
that items that are collectively owned also have values or
features that are not easily captured using Western style
valuation or accounting methods. Indigenous cultural
properties extend beyond. An attempt to value an ‘asset’
from an accounting perspective will not capture intan-
gible notions associated with ‘social, cultural, human

and spiritual wealth’.18 Within many indigenous cultures
is terminology which refers to these broader notions, for
example New Zealand Maori use the phrase ‘Taonga’ to
express the concept of rights and obligations across the
generations, as well as to ‘evoke awareness of cultural
and spiritual attributes that are regarded to be of incom-
parable and immeasurable value. Taonga are irreducible
to an economic exchange value and are not substitutable
with other items in the ordinary course of trade.’19

While the inclusion of these additional considerations
makes the direct comparison between an indigenous
concept of an item’s value and accounting or commercial
valuation difﬁcult to determine, it does offer an alterna-
tive perspective. Many of the additional attributes dis-
cussed above are aspects that are now being considered
in discussions on best practices in reporting for sustain-
ability considerations or for the purposes of social
accountability.

Sustainability
‘Westerners, raised with a Judaeo-Christian worldview,
think of themselves as separate from the natural world in
which they live. Aboriginal people considered themselves
integrated with and part of the natural world.’20 As pre-
viously discussed, the custodial nature of traditional
ownership carries with it obligations towards future gen-
erations. These obligations imbue a sense of interest in
ensuring the sustainability of the land and the parts that
combine to help the ‘system’ operate successfully. Sus-
tainability of the land includes all its associated natural
resources. Like other
‘Maori
embrace the idea of intergenerational wealth: they are
committed to ensuring future generations have these
means and resources in order to be self sustaining.’21

indigenous

cultures,

This ‘take only what you need’ principle is in conﬂict
with contemporary business practices which emphasize
commercialization of resources solely for economic gain.
While there may be a possibility of negotiating a com-
mercial arrangement that does not overly deplete the
resources that are targeted, the risk of depletion through
commercial exploitation is ever present. A valuation
model that recognizes the indigenous concept of the cul-
tural capital value of sustainability would beneﬁt these
interests. This concept is closely aligned to the increased
interest in sustainability concepts that are now frequent-
ly present in corporate agendas.

15 Drahos, and Frankel, above, n 4, 13.
16 D Claudie et al ‘Ancient But New: Developing locally driven enterprises

based on traditional medicines in Kuukul’yu Northern Kaanju Homelands,
Cape York, Queensland, Australia’ in Drahos P and Frankel S, Indigenous
Peoples Innovation, above, n 4, 29, 36.

18 Craig et al, above, n 10, 1026.
19 Ibid, 1041.
20 K Sveiby and T Skuthorpe Treading Lightly: The Hidden Wisdom of the

World’s Oldest People (Allen and Unwin Sydney Australia 2006), 2.

21 Craig et al, above, n 10, 1039.

17 Ibid, 36.

Brian Burﬁtt and Marion Heathcote . Valuing footsteps—towards a valuation model

ARTICLE

387

The valuation discussion in relation to sustainability
also encompasses the issue of sustainability of indigen-
ous cultures and communities. A contribution from the
commercialization of indigenous intellectual property
towards the survival and growth of these groups is an in-
creasingly important consideration. Models that consider
the long-term implications of commercial applications
must take into account the period of the likely ﬂow of
beneﬁts and plans for the future, post commercialization.
‘The building of social capital and sustainable economic
development through the use of indigenous knowledge is
an essential step in “closing the gap”’22 (ie the gap referen-
cing the difference between average life expectancy for in-
digenous and non-indigenous peoples).

The ‘Rekindling Youth Program’ at Bangarra Dance
Theatre in Australia,
funded from commercial and
donor contributions, is an example of using culture to
reinvigorate itself. Bangarra has a long history of invest-
ing in building and maintaining relationships with the
traditional owners of the cultural property from which it
derives its artistic dance expression. The youth program
focuses on connecting the next generation, ‘rekindling’
their commitment to their traditional
language and
customs, thereby ensuring its longevity.23

Towards a valuation model
In coming to a conclusion as to the requirement for a
valuation model, and in considering appropriate options
for it, it is evident from signiﬁcant contemporary indi-
genous writings that a framework for protection and
valuation needs to be developed primarily by the rele-
vant indigenous peoples in order that they ‘retain per-
manent control over all elements of its own heritage’.24
Some discussion in this area is based on the premise that
indigenous people, while having a right of ownership of
their traditional knowledge, do not necessarily have any
rights to the commercial application of that traditional
knowledge. The issue seems to be that indigenous peoples
may have a right to the beneﬁts that derive from their
own use of their traditional cultural property, but not the
commercial beneﬁts that derive from the use by corpora-
tions. Any discussion of compensation of indigenous
peoples for the commercial use of their traditional knowl-
edge must be informed by a level of understanding of a
‘reasonable value’ of that traditional knowledge. The
questions seem to be: How do we determine a price for
that value? What is the value being priced? And to take a
step back, what do we even mean by value?

When something has been held or used by indigenous
people and their ancestors over many centuries, it may
be difﬁcult to understand the processes to be used in de-
termining or calculating a commercial value. A number
of steps or processes could be determined, a model if
you like, as a means of assisting the valuation calcula-
tion. What factors should be considered? What facts are
necessary to be known? Should the value be based
around the likely commercial outcomes? Should it be
based on the opportunity costs of the indigenous groups
giving up these commercial rights? Is there a need for a
clause in the agreement which recognizes future com-
mercial potential in other uses or, recognizes the possi-
bility that other commercial uses may be determined in
the future? To be involved in negotiations as equal part-
ners, indigenous people and their representatives require
assistance to understand these concepts in determining
values to be used in those negotiations.

Fundamental to any consideration of these questions
is whether it is culturally insensitive to even consider
some of these factors? Should we be going about this
process in a different way? While we are considering this
process as a means of assisting indigenous people in
commercial negotiations are we in fact being insulting
by suggesting that a commercial value can be put on as-
pects of their cultural property? While it may be helpful
to come up with a methodology that will assist in deter-
mining a value for commercial negotiation purposes,
will the act of putting a value on the traditional knowl-
edge demean it? Is the very act of attempting to put a
dollar value on something which may have been the
basis of a group’s culture, part of its own recognition of
what it means to be part of their group, something that
by doing it simpliﬁes it or denies it is very importance?

The need for custodian input
In order to ensure the sustainability and longevity of in-
digenous culture, it is essential that the custodians of the
property of that culture have the primary role in its de-
termination. To suggest otherwise would be to invoke
another form of colonial imperialism. That is not to say
that, with certain adaptations, Western intellectual prop-
erty protection regimes could not be utilized, at least to
some extent, to protect the integrity of certain aspects of
indigenous cultural property, for example, a certiﬁcation
trademark scheme for protection of product source.
However, it has to be recognized that until those regimes
can accommodate notions of collective rights, commu-

22 Janke and Dawson, above, n 7, 7.
23 Bangarra, ‘Company Proﬁle’, http://www.bangarra.com.au/vision (accessed

24 Solomon, above, n 3, 62.

20 March 2014).

388

ARTICLE

nal ownership and custodian obligations, their contribu-
tion as a vehicle for maintaining cultural heritage is
limited. While some indigenous cultural organizations
such as Bangarra Dance Theatre have sought to adapt
Western legal frameworks to help recognize and respect
the ancestral derivation of their works, and other com-
munities such as David Claudie’s in Cape York have uti-
lized aspects of the patent regime to protect cultural
innovation, these options have yet to be fully utilized by
indigenous peoples because of their inherent limitations.
Nevertheless, we would argue that those mechanisms
that are available should be utilized if only to pave the
way for cultural survival by placing it in a construct that
is recognized within both the Western legal and com-
mercial systems. The encouragement to do so would be
facilitated by the construction of a valuation model that
recognises not only the value of the property within the

pure commercial compensation paradigm, but also its
intangible contribution to the survival of culture for the
beneﬁt of both indigenous and non-indigenous people.

Having concluded that indigenous cultural property
should be valued, this article has asserted the need for a
valuation model that recognizes and retains the integrity
of the indigenous cultural property as a holistic func-
tioning system. In doing so, it has identiﬁed a number of
issues that must be addressed: ownership, property identi-
ﬁcation,
tangibility and sustainability. In
dealing with these issues effectively, the article argues for a
path through this dangerous ground towards a position
that may allow for a more positive treatment of indigen-
ous cultural property. The journey towards a valuation
model, however necessary, requires far more considered
input, and most particularly input from the custodians of
that cultural property.

innovation,


