ARTICLE

591

Levies in EU copyright law: an overview of the
CJEU’s judgments on the fair compensation of
private copying and reprography
Alexandre L. Dias Pereira*

Introduction

legally acquired content’ (n 2),

On 27 February 2014 the European Parliament adopted
a Resolution on private copying levies,1 calling on the
Commission to submit a proposal of revision of
Directive 2001/29 to set up a ‘virtuous system’ of pri-
vate copying levies.2 Considering that ‘all European
consumers should have the right to make private copies
of
the European
Parliament found it necessary to harmonize the essen-
tial elements of the levy system, notably the concept of
fair compensation and the concept of harm to authors
resulting from private copying (Recital G). In reply, the
European Commission stated that it would ‘assess the
need for action to ensure that, when Member States
impose levies for private copying and reprography to
compensate right holders, their different systems work
well in the single market and do not raise barriers to the
free movement of goods and services’.3

The Commission had already received recommenda-
tions concerning the revision of
the levy system,
including a ‘uniform’ deﬁnition of harm by reference to
the value for consumers of private copying as ‘lost
proﬁt’ (n 1).4 An active NGO on this sector has also
advocated a ‘comprehensive reform’ of compensation

The author
 Alexandre Pereira is Assistant Professor at the
Faculty of Law, University of Coimbra, Portugal.

This article
 The European Parliament has called for a ‘virtu-

ous system’ of levies for private copying.

 The Court of Justice of

the European Union
(CJEU) is developing a model of ‘fair compensa-
tion’, based upon the notion of harm to right
holders.

 This contribution provides an overview of the sys-
tem of copyright levies in EU law as interpreted
by the CJEU, and suggests enhancement via a tax-
like measure upon the consumption of reproduc-
tion equipment and media.

for private copying based upon the notion of ‘actual
and demonstrable harm’.5 Meanwhile, the Court of
Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has also issued a
number of judgments on this topic.6

*

1
2

3

4

The author is grateful for the anonymous referee’s comments and sug-
gestions, which were useful in revising this contribution. Nevertheless,
any mistakes or errors are solely mine. FCT Fellowship (SFRH/BSAB/
113592/2015), Email: aldp@fd.uc.pt.
P7_TA(2014)0179.
Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
22 May 2001 on the harmonization of certain aspects of copyright and
related rights in the information society, OJ L, L 167, 10–19.
‘Towards a Modern, More European Copyright Framework’, COM
(2015) 626 ﬁnal, at 9. The Proposal for a Directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council on Copyright in the Digital Single Market
(COM (2016) 593 ﬁnal, 14 September 2016) provides for a mandatory
exception concerning the use, under certain conditions, of works and
other subject matter in digital and cross-border teaching activities, and
allows Member States to provide for fair compensation for the harm
incurred by rightholders due to the use of their works or other subject
matter pursuant to such exception—Article 4(1) and (4).
A. Vitorino, ‘Recommendations Resulting from the Mediation on Private
Copying and Reprography Levies’ (Brussels, 31 January 2013). Other
interesting recommendations by Vitorino are, eg: (1) to place more levy

5

6

emphasis on operator than on hardware; (2) no payment of compensa-
tion for licensed copied; or (3) to simplify the system and shift the liabil-
ity for payment of levies from manufacturer/importer’s level to the
retailer’s level.
Digital Europe, ‘Private Copying: Assessing Actual Harm and
Implementing Alternative Systems to Device- Alternative Systems to
Device-Based Copyright Levies Based Copyright Levies’ (Brussels, 22
June 2015). In scholarship see notably P. B. Hugenholtz, L. Guibault and
G. van Sjoerd, The Future of Levies in a Digital Environment (Final
Report) (IVIR, Amsterdam, 2003), p. 46, holding the phasing out of levies
‘not in function of actual use, but of availability of technical measures on
the market place’.
Padawan, C-467/08, EU:C:2010:620; Stichting de Thuiskopie, C-462/09,
EU:C:2011:397; Luksan, C-277/10, EU:C:2012:65; VG Wort, C-457/11 to
C-460/11, EU:C:2013:426; Amazon.com International Sales, C-521/11,
EU:C:2013:515; ACI Adam, C-435/12, EU:C:2014:254; Copydan
Ba˚ndkopi, C-463/12, EU:C:2015:144; Hewlett-Packard Belgium, C-572/13,
EU:C:2015:750; Austro-Mechana, C-572/14, EU:C:2016:286; EGEDA, C-
470/14, EU:C:2016:418; Microsoft, C-110/15, EU:C:2016:717; and SAWP,
C-37/16, EU:C:2017:22.

VC The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

592

ARTICLE

I. From the ‘German Levy Saga’
fair compensation in EU
copyright law

A. The ‘German Levy Saga’

judgments

The ‘virtuous system’ provided by Directive 2001/29,
as interpreted by the CJEU, ﬁnds its roots in the so-
called ‘German levy saga’.7 The German Federal Court
(BGH) held in its
in Tonband (BGH,
18.05.1955 – I ZR 8/54, NJW (1955) 1276) and
Personalausweise (BGH, 29.05.1964 – Ib ZR 4/63, NJW
(1964) 2157) that, despite private copying being con-
trary to the right of reproduction, copyright enforce-
ment in this area would be not only unfeasible, but also
invasive of users’ privacy. The BGH suggested
introducing statutory provision of compensation for
private copying. This eventually occurred under the
German Copyright Act of 1965, by means of a levy sys-
tem on recording equipment and devices. Subsequently,
a similar mechanism was set up for reprography, fol-
in Kopierl€aden (BGH,
lowing the BGH judgment
09.06.1983 – I ZR 70/81, NJW (1984) 1106).

The reproduction by natural persons for their private
use became an accepted exception to the exclusive right
of reproduction under the three-step test provided for
by Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention as introduced
by the Stockholm Act (1967), and later adopted by
other
(TRIPS Agreement
1994, WIPO Internet Treaties 1996).
It does not
expressly incorporate the requirement of fair compen-
sation, but reference to it ‘as an element of the third
step’ is found ‘into the ﬁnal report of the [Stockholm]
Conference’.8

international

instruments

Nowadays, copyright levies exist not only in several
EU Member States,9 but also in third countries,

7

P. B. Hugenholtz, ‘The Story of the Tape Recorder and the History of
Copyright Levies’, in: B. Sherman and L. Wiseman (eds), Copyright and
the Challenge of the New (Wolters Kluwer, Alphen aan den Rijn, 2012),
pp. 179–96, at p. 180.

9

8 Hugenholtz supra n 7 at p. 191, referring to the WIPO Conference and
pointing out at 188 that ‘The idea of a levy can actually be traced to the
voluntary scheme developed by GEMA in the early 1950s, under which
tape recorder manufacturers and importers were offered blanket licences
for a one-time licence fee per recorder.’
In Portugal a levy system was introduced in the Copyright Act of 1985
and implemented by Law No. 62/98. However, several provisions of this
Law have been declared unconstitutional by the Portuguese
Constitutional Court: Judgment No 616/2003 of 16 December 2003, case
340/99, (2004) 62 Diario da Republica I-A, due to failure to comply with
tax-law principles, as copyright levies would be a tax-like measure as
argued by J.O. Ascens~ao, ‘A «compensac¸~ao»’ (1990) 31 RFDUL 211–38.
Law No. 50/2004 has established a ﬁxed percentage on the price of sale to
the public of reproduction equipment and a list of levied media and tar-
iffs. However, it has been argued that Law No 50/2004 did not comply
with Directive 2001/29 notably because it did not provide a reimburse-
ment scheme—D. M. Vicente, ‘Copia privada e compensac¸~ao equitativa:

including, for example, Canada, Japan and Russia. They
amounted to e804 million in 2014—Germany alone
contributing e281 million.10

and

reproduction

devices, media

According to the CJEU, the fair compensation for
private copying established by Directive 2001/29 is
mandatory in consideration of the (above de minimis)
private copy exception and its rationale is to repair the
harm to rightholders presumably caused by consumers
services.11
of
Notwithstanding this, practical difﬁculties justify that
those making such devices, media or services available
to the public have to discharge a levy on the price of
sale of their goods or services, which presumably they
can pass on to consumers. Inasmuch as the levy system
exempts copies made for purposes other than private
use (ex ante exemptions) and provides mechanisms of
reimbursement of such undue levies (ex post reim-
bursement), it ensures a fair balance between righthold-
ers and users of protected content.

The CJEU rulings raise the question of whether only
a harm-based model of compensation is possible. The
system relies upon a mandatory presumption of harm,
as if the cause of damage was the private copy exception
itself. Linking the system to a presumed (and somewhat
ﬁctitious12) harm, the source of which is legislation
itself, then Member States should have broader discre-
tion to set up funding schemes, including a tax or tax-
like model. In such an alternative or supplementary
mechanism the fair compensation could apply to any
private reproduction and be funded by the state budget,
at least as part of the VAT on such equipment and
media, or by means of a broadcasting-like cultural
fee.13 Authors and other rightholders could receive
more funding for their creative and cultural activities,
thus contributing to a high level of IP protection in the
EU, while at the same time safeguarding consumers

reﬂex~oes sobre o Acord~ao Padawan’, 36 CDP (2011), 22–35, at 30. In
order to ﬁx this, Law No 48/2015 has extended the levy to digital equip-
ment and other media and expressly linked the compensation to the cri-
terion of harm.

10 WIPO, International Survey on Private Copying Law & Practice (Geneva,

WIPO, 2015), p. 22.

11 M. Leistner, ‘Europe’s Copyright Law Decade: Recent Case Law of the
European Court of Justice and Policy Perspectives’, 51 CMLR (2014),
559–600, at 586–7.

12 K. J. Koelman, ‘The Levitation of Copyright: An Economic View of

Digital Home Copying, Levies and DRM’, in: E. Huizer, C. Alberdingk,
P. B. Hugenholtz and K. J. Koelman, De toekomst van het auteursrecht -
Bijdragen Symposium 15.10.2004 (XS4ALL Bits of Freedom, Amsterdam,
2004), pp. 39–59, at pp. 42–4 (pointing out economic ﬂaws of such an
approach); J. Poort and J. P. Quintais, ‘The Levy Runs Dry. A Legal and
Economic Analysis of EU Private Copying Levies’, 4(3) JIPITEC (2013),
205–24, at 214 (‘lacking the relevant data, it becomes nearly impossible
to establish a realistic baseline from which to calculate harm’).
See Digital Europe, ‘Private Copying’, para 2.3.

13

Alexandre L Dias Pereira  Levies in EU copyright law

ARTICLE

593

from the risk of liability. In copyright scholarship, an
alternative system of ‘compensation without control’
has been considered, particularly in the ﬁeld of
non-commercial ﬁle-sharing, as one of ‘the most prom-
ising approaches to take advantage of this new technol-
ogy for authors and society at large’.14

B. The fair compensation requirement in EU
legislation

Directive 2001/29/EC ‘concerns the legal protection of
copyright and related rights in the framework of the
internal market, with particular emphasis on the infor-
mation society’.15 Among other things, it has harmon-
ized the exclusive right of reproduction for authors,
performers, phonogram and ﬁlm producers and broad-
casters, and done so upon a ‘broad deﬁnition’ of this
right.16 In addition, it has provided ‘for an exhaustive
enumeration of exceptions and limitations to the repro-
duction right’.17

To begin with, ‘certain acts of temporary reproduc-
tion, which are transient or incidental reproductions’
(including routing, browsing and caching), are manda-
torily exempted from the right of reproduction.18 Then,
as exceptions and limitations to the reproduction right,
it provides the reprography exception19 and the private
copying exception.20 The private copy exception—or
limitation, according to some commentators21—is pos-
sible ‘on condition that the rightholders receive “fair
compensation”
them
adequately for the use made of their protected works or
other subject-matter’.22 Recital 35 of Directive 2001/29
puts forward a ‘valuable criterion’ to assess these cir-
cumstances (‘the possible harm to the rightholders
resulting from the act in question’), and provides a set
of guidelines for the implementation of the fair com-
pensation,
including: (1) whether ‘rightholders have
already received payment
for
instance as part of a licence fee’, because in that case
‘no speciﬁc or separate payment may be due’; (2) ‘the
degree of use of technological protection measures’;

in some other form,

compensate

order

‘to

in

14 A. Peukert, ‘A Bipolar Copyright System for the Digital Network
Environment’, in: A. Strowel (ed), Peer-to-Peer File Sharing and
Secondary Liability in Copyright Law (Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, 2009),
pp. 148–95, at p. 193 (quoting Lessig); see also A. Stazi, ‘Digital
Copyright and Consumer/User Protection: Moving Toward a New
framework’, 2(2) QMJIP (2012), 158–74.

15 Article 1(1) of Directive 2001/29.
16 Article 2 and Recital 21 of Directive 2001/29.
17 Recital 32 of Directive 2001/29.
18 Recital 33 and Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/29. For the notion of ‘transi-

ent act’ see the CJEU’s judgments in Infopaq International, C-5/08,
EU:C:2009:465, paras 61, 64, 65 and 74, and PRCA, C-360/13,
EU:C:2014:1195, para 63: ‘the on-screen copies and the cached copies
made by an end-user in the course of viewing a website’.

and (3) certain situations of minimal prejudice to the
right holder in which ‘no obligation for payment may
arise’.

Recital 38 points out that ‘Digital private copying is
likely to be more widespread and have a greater eco-
nomic impact’, but it is not clear what ‘greater eco-
nomic impact’ means. Moreover, the ‘form, detailed
arrangements and possible level’ of the fair compensa-
tion is a matter for each Member State. However, in
several judgments, the CJEU has limited the national
discretion in setting up the relevant systems.

II. The CJEU judgments

The CJEU has answered a number of questions con-
cerning the conformity of national laws with the provi-
sions of Directive 2001/29. Fair compensation is
attached to both its rationale and the level of harm pre-
sumably caused to right holders by the use by consum-
ers of copying equipment and media.

A. The rationale of fair compensation

In its landmark judgment in Padawan, the CJEU clari-
ﬁed the rationale of the fair compensation requirement
and the criteria to follow in national legislation. Fair
compensation is deemed to be ‘an autonomous notion
of European Union law’,23 the rationale of which is to
repair harm which private copying does to right-
holders.24 Referring to Recitals 35 and 38 in the pream-
ble to Directive 2001/29, the CJEU stated that: ‘It is
clear from those provisions that the notion and level of
fair compensation are linked to the harm resulting for
the author from the reproduction for private use of his
protected work without his authorisation. From that
perspective, fair compensation must be regarded as rec-
ompense for the harm suffered by the author,’25 which
consumers have to remedy.26

However, practical reasons of enforcement and the
fact that each single private copy is per se a minimal
harm for which no payment is due,27 justify a mecha-
nism of indirect payment by means of charging a levy

19 Article 5(2)(a) of Directive 2001/29.
20 Article 5(2)(b) of Directive 2001/29.
21

J. Reinbothe and S. von Lewinski, The WIPO Treaties on Copyright: A
Commentary on the WCT, the WPPT, and the BTAP, 2nd edn (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2015), p. 158.

22 Recital 35 of Directive 2001/29.
23 Padawan, paras 29, 33, 35, 37 and conclusion 1.
24
25
26
27

Ibid, para 39.
Ibid, para 40 (emphasis added).
Ibid, paras 44 and 45.
Ibid, para 46.

594

ARTICLE

on the sale of equipment, devices and media to be dis-
charged by those who make them available to end users.
The rationale is that producers of blank media can pass
on the levy in the charged price, and therefore, ‘the bur-
den of the levy will ultimately be borne by the private
user who pays that price’.28 Such levy system is deemed
to meet the requirement of a ‘fair balance’ between the
interests of rightholders and of those who use protected
subject-matter,29 ‘inasmuch as [producers of blank
media] are able to pass on to private users the actual
burden of ﬁnancing it’.30

A presumed harm is the normative criterion of the
fair compensation. A ‘necessary link’ between the levy
and the use of devices and media for purposes of pri-
vate copying is therefore required, as levies cannot
charge devices and media regardless of their use,31 in
particular where they are ‘acquired by persons other
than natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to
private copying’.32 However,
it is irrelevant whether
private copies have actually been made because harm is
deemed to occur merely by making available reproduc-
tion equipment, media and services to consumers as
these ‘are rightly presumed to beneﬁt fully from the
making available of that equipment’.33 The presumed
harm lies merely in the possibility of making use of the
private copying exception:

It follows that the fact that that equipment or devices are
able to make copies is sufﬁcient in itself to justify the appli-
cation of the private copying levy, provided that the equip-
ment or devices have been made available to natural
persons as private users.34 [. . .] Such an interpretation is
supported by the wording of recital 35 in the preamble to
Directive 2001/29. That recital mentions, as a valuable cri-
terion for the determination of the level of fair compensa-
tion, not only the ‘harm’ as such but also the ‘possible’
harm. The ‘possibility’ of causing harm to the author of
the protected work depends on the fulﬁlment of the neces-
sary pre-condition that equipment or devices which allow
copying have been made available to natural persons,
which need not necessarily be followed by the actual pro-
duction of private copies.35

28
29
30
31
32

33

Ibid, para 48.
Ibid, para 49.
Ibid, para 50 and conclusion 2.
Ibid, para 52.
Ibid, para 53 (Spanish legislation charging devices and media manifestly
used for purposes other than private copying was found incompatible
with Directive 2001/29—para 59).
Ibid, paras 54 and 55. Fair compensation may also apply to the printing
out of works on paper or their storage on a USB stick, carried out by
users from dedicated terminals installed in publicly accessible libraries,
provided that such acts meet the conditions to fall within the exceptions
in Article 5(2)(a) or (b)—judgment of 11 September 2014, case C-117/
13, Eugen Ulmer, ECLI:EU:C:2014:2196, conclusion 3, and paras 50–7.

34 Padawan, para 56.

In short, the system relies upon a double presumption:
(1) natural persons use such equipment and media to
make copies of copyright works and (2) these copies
harm the legitimate interests of the author.

B. The discharger of fair compensation

In Stichting de Thuiskopie, the CJEU reafﬁrmed that, for
practical reasons, Member States may charge a levy on
devices and media to be discharged by those who pro-
duce them ‘since they are able to pass on the amount of
that levy in the price paid by the ﬁnal user for that serv-
ice’.36 Member States have to ensure the effective recov-
ery of
fair compensation for the harm suffered by
rightholders on their territory, even where consumers
acquire equipment and media at a distance from sellers
established in a different Member State.37 Harm occurs
in the territory of residence of the ﬁnal user, because he
reproduces for his private use protected works without
prior authorization from rightholders.38 Nevertheless,
Member States may ‘establish a private copying levy
chargeable to the persons who make reproduction
equipment (. . .) available to that ﬁnal user, since they
are able to pass on the amount of that levy in the price
paid by the ﬁnal user for that service’.39

Later on, in Amazon.com International Sales, the CJEU
refused an exemption of levies where a comparable levy
has already been paid in another Member State,40 holding
that the place of establishment of the seller is irrelevant
and that harm can be presumed to occur in the territory
of the Member State in which the consumer resides.41
Therefore, the fact that the levy has already been dis-
charged in one Member State does not preclude payment
in the Member State of the consumer’s residence, but a
mechanism of reimbursement must be available.42

C. Authorship of cinematographic works and
ownership of fair compensation

In Luksan the CJEU asserted the principle of authorship
of droit d’auteur jurisdictions and held that, under EU
law, the economic rights in a cinematographic work

35

Ibid, para 57. See also Hewlett-Packard Belgium (Reprobel), paras 69 and
71, in which the CJEU ruled that the fair compensation is, in principle,
intended to compensate for the harm suffered resulting from the copies
actually produced (‘the criterion of actual harm suffered’), but neverthe-
less ‘the amount of a levy of that kind which is ﬁxed in advance cannot
be ﬁxed on the basis of the criterion of actual harm suffered’.
Stichting de Thuiskopie, para 29 and conclusion 1.
Ibid, paras 31–41 and conclusion 2
Ibid, paras 26 and 29.
Ibid, para 29.

36
37
38
39
40 Amazon.com International Sales, para 66 and conclusion 4.
41
42

Ibid, paras 57–61.
Ibid, para 62–5.

Alexandre L Dias Pereira  Levies in EU copyright law

ARTICLE

595

belong to the principal director, because s/he is manda-
torily the or one of the authors of such works. Member
States cannot exclusively allocate the economic rights to
the producer, but they can provide a rebuttable pre-
sumption of transfer of such rights, insofar as the prin-
cipal director is able to agree otherwise.43 However,
national legislation cannot provide a rebuttable or non-
rebuttable presumption of transfer of the right to equi-
table compensation to the producer44—by analogy with
the prohibition to waive the right to receive equitable
remuneration for the rental of copyright works45—as it
would be contrary to the obligation to ensure effective
recovery of the fair compensation.46

D. Effects of authorizations given by the
rightholder for acts covered by an exception
or limitation and of the use of technological
protection measures

In VG Wort the CJEU ruled that, where national legisla-
tion provides the private copying exception, the author-
ization given by the rightholder to make private copies
is ‘devoid of legal effects’47 for purposes of the harm
caused to him/her and therefore has no impact upon
the need for a fair compensation. It appears that, if
there is no private copying exception, the harm which
fair compensation aims to repair does not take place.48
In short, the harm caused by the private copying excep-
tion is presumed and independent from any authoriza-
tion given by the rightholder, which therefore has ‘no
bearing on the fair compensation payable for reproduc-
tions made in accordance with Article 5(2)(b)’.49

It could give rise to double payment where private
copies are directly licensed by the right holder.50 It is
questionable whether Recital 35 of Directive 2001/29 has
been taken into account, in particular where it reads that

if ‘rightholders have already received payment in some
other form, for instance as part of a licence fee’, then ‘no
speciﬁc or separate payment may be due’. However, it
means that where a Member State provides for a private
copying exception then the licensing of such copies is
‘devoid of legal effects’ (VG Wort para. 37, Copydan
Ba˚ndkopi para. 66) and therefore cannot justify a remu-
neration for such licensing. In order to facilitate digital
licensing business models, such as the pricing-in model,
copies of works lawfully made available online could be
excluded from the scope of application of the private
copying exception, so that they are licensed and remuner-
ated by means of the license instead of by means of levies.
Article 6(4) of Directive 2001/29 appears to facilitate
licensing business models based upon conditional access,
concerning ‘works or other subject-matter made available
to the public on agreed contractual terms in such a way
that members of the public may access them from a place
and at a time individually chosen by them’.

Notwithstanding this, with regard to the use of tech-
nological protection measures, as such use is voluntary
and cannot prevent effective application of the private
copy exception where it is provided by the Member
State,51 the CJEU found that it ‘cannot render inappli-
cable the condition relating to fair compensation’.52
However, as per Recital 35 (per. 5, of Directive 2001/
29), the level of fair compensation should take into
account ‘the degree of use of technological protection
measures’.

E. Criterion to level the compensation where
a copying involves the use of several devices

In VG Wort, the CJEU held that ‘mediums which do
not have comparable and equivalent qualities to those
of paper do not come within the scope of
the

43
44
45

46

Luksan, conclusions 1 and 2.
Ibid, conclusions 3 and 4.
Ibid, paras 100–2. Despite different terminology, according to the CJEU
the equitable remuneration for the rental of copyright works ‘is also
designed to establish recompense for authors, since it arises in order to
compensate for harm to the latter’—Luksan, para 103 (with reference to
VEWA, C271/10). Article 13(1)(b) of Directive 2004/48/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforce-
ment of intellectual property rights (IPRED), provides criteria to set up
damages, including ‘as a lump sum on the basis of elements such as at
least the amount of royalties or fees which would have been due if the
infringer had requested authorisation to use the intellectual property
right in question’. However, private copying is not an infringement to
the right of reproduction, but rather a lawful use under national legisla-
tion. So, the fair compensation could be regarded as a remuneration for
a statutory licence, and give it a meaning autonomous from the concept
of damages provided by the IPRED. See also P. Johnson, ‘Damages in
European Law and the Traditional Accounts of Proﬁt’, 3(4) QMJIP
(2013), 296–306, at 300.
Luksan, paras 106–9.

47 VG Wort para 37. See also Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, para 66 (‘such authorisa-

tion is devoid of legal effects’).

48 VG Wort, paras 37, 39 and 40, and conclusion 2.
49 Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, para 67.
50

See, eg, Poort and Quintais, ‘The Levy Runs Dry’, 219, holding that
‘charging levies for copies that are licenced by rightholders would lead to
double payment’; Digital Europe, ‘Private Copying’, para 2.1 in ﬁne (in
streaming subscription services the ability to private copying ‘is already
included in the purchase price’ and therefore ‘does not cause any addi-
tional harm to rightholders’). The UK has amended its copyright act
(Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988) to provide a narrow copying
exception in terms of a pricing-in solution, and since only minimal dam-
age would occur, it has not adopted a levy system: The Copyright and
Rights in Performance (Personal Copies for Private Use) Regulations of
26 August 2014. However, without appropriate evidence being provided
by UK Government to justify the absence of a compensation mechanism,
the High Court of England and Wales ruled on 19 June 2015 the excep-
tion unlawful: [2015] EWHC 1723, Case No. CO/5444/2014.

51 VG Wort, paras 52–4.
52

Ibid, paras 57, 59 and conclusion 3.

596

ARTICLE

[reprography] exception’,53 which covers the photo-
graphic technique and ‘some other process having simi-
lar effects’, that is, ‘the analogue representation of a
protected work or other subject-matter’.54 The reprog-
raphy exception does not exclude the use of ‘several
devices, including those with a digital function’,55 pro-
vided, however, that ‘the various elements or non-
autonomous stages of that single process act or are car-
ried out under the control of the same person and are
all intended to reproduce the protected work or other
subject-matter on paper or a similar medium’.56

Moreover, the court found that it is open to each
Member State to put in place a system in which the fair
compensation is paid by the persons in possession of a
device contributing, in a non-autonomous manner, to
the single process of reproduction of the protected
work or other subject matter on the given medium,
insofar as: (1) they can pass on the cost of the levy to
their customers; and (2) the overall amount of the fair
compensation owed as recompense for the harm suf-
fered by the author at the end of that single process is
not ‘substantially different from the amount ﬁxed for a
reproduction obtained by means of a single device’.57

It appears that fair compensation concerns the out-
come of the copying process rather than the number of
devices involved, as a multi-device process does not
necessarily result in more copies than a single device,
and therefore the levy does not have to apply to all the
devices in a copying chain.

F. Reimbursement of levies charged at the ﬁrst
introduction in the market in the territory of
a Member State regardless of the purpose of
acquisition of recording media and the
exemption of levies for sales to business users

In Amazon.com International Sales, the CJEU accepted
the imposition of levies regardless of the purpose of
acquisition, on condition that, in particular, ‘practical
difﬁculties justify such a system of ﬁnancing fair com-
pensation and the right to reimbursement is effective
and does not make repayment of the levies paid exces-
sively difﬁcult’.58 The validity of a rebuttable presump-
tion of private use of recording media where such
media is sold to natural persons is conﬁrmed, but on

condition that ‘the presumption established does not
result in the imposition of the private copying levy in
cases where the ﬁnal use of those media clearly does not
fall within’ the private copying exception.59

Accordingly, an effective and not too burdensome
ex post reimbursement mechanism is required as well
as an ex ante exemption concerning devices used by
businesses, that is, persons other than natural persons
for purposes clearly unrelated to private copying,60
thus exempting importers from imposing the levy
where the devices are clearly to be used by business
users.61

In Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, the CJEU concluded that the
levy system can apply to producers and importers who
sell mobile telephone memory cards to business cus-
tomers and are aware that those cards will be sold on
by those customers but do not know whether the ﬁnal
purchasers of the cards will be individuals or business
customers, on condition that: (1) the introduction of
such a system is justiﬁed by practical difﬁculties; (2) the
persons responsible for payment are exempt
from
the levy if they can establish that they have supplied the
mobile telephone memory cards to persons other than
natural persons for purposes clearly unrelated to copy-
ing for private use, it being understood that the exemp-
tion cannot be restricted to the supply of business
customers registered with the organization responsible
for administering the levy; (3) the system provides for a
right to reimbursement of the private copying levy
which is effective and does not make it excessively difﬁ-
cult to repay the levy paid and only the ﬁnal purchaser
of such a memory card may obtain reimbursement,
by submitting an appropriate application to that
organization.62

Later on, in Microsoft, the CJEU found that: (1) the
exemption from payment of the private copying levy
for producers and importers of devices and media
intended for use clearly unrelated to private copying
cannot be subject to the conclusion of agreements
between an entity which has a legal monopoly on the
representation of the interests of authors of works, and
those liable to pay compensation, or their trade associa-
tions; and (2) the reimbursement of such a levy, where
it has been unduly paid, cannot be requested only by
the ﬁnal user of those devices and media.63

Ibid, para 66.
Ibid, para 68.
Ibid, para 72.
Ibid, para 70.
Ibid, para 80 and conclusion 4.

53
54
55
56
57
58 Amazon.com International Sales, para 37 and conclusion 1.

Ibid, conclusion 2.
See, eg, Padawan, para 52, and Amazon.com International Sales, para 28.
See also Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, para 50.
Ibid, para 55 and conclusion 3.

59
60
61
62
63 Microsoft, paras 55–6 and conclusion.

Alexandre L Dias Pereira  Levies in EU copyright law

ARTICLE

597

G. Attribution of half of the revenue to social
and cultural institutions set up for the beneﬁt
of authors and other rightholders

The statutory attribution of half of the levy revenue to
social and cultural institutions set up for the beneﬁt of
authors and other rightholders is accepted by the
Court, but on the condition that ‘those social and cul-
tural establishments actually beneﬁt those entitled and
the detailed arrangements for the operation of such
establishments are not discriminatory’ (notably for rea-
sons of nationality64).65

The statutory attribution of half of such revenue to
third parties is questionable. In principle, it is up to the
person awarded damages to decide if and how she
wants to assign the revenue to third parties. As the
CJEU accepts to have half of the revenue given by the
national legislator to third parties, the fair compensa-
tion can hardly be only a tool to repair harm suffered
by individual rightholders.

H. Lawfulness of the source of private copies
and reprography

In ACI Adam,

This issue concerns the scope of application of the pri-
vate copying exception.
the CJEU
recalled the principle of restrictive interpretation of
exceptions and limitations to the exclusive rights and
found that the private copying exception does not apply
to copies made from an unlawful source.66 According
to the court, ‘the objective of proper support for the
dissemination of culture must not be achieved by sacri-
ﬁcing strict protection of rights or by tolerating illegal
forms of distribution of counterfeited or pirated
works’.67 An undifferentiated system would be contrary
to the ‘fair balance’ between rightholders and users, as
it would overcharge with a ‘non-negligible cost’ pur-
chasers of such equipment, devices and media.68

This judgment is in line with the opinion of several
scholars.69 It has been argued that the exclusion of cop-
ies made from unlawful sources would ‘narrow the
scope of the [private copying] exception’ and ‘provide

Ibid, para 55 and conclusion 3.

64 Amazon.com International Sales, para 54.
65
66 ACI Adam, paras 37 and 58 and conclusion 1.
67

Ibid, para 36 (adding that the circulation of pirated works adversely
affects their normal exploitation works and unreasonably prejudices
copyright holders—paras 39 and 40).
Ibid, para 56.
See, eg, Hugenholtz, Guibault and van Sjoerd, The Future of Levies, p. 46.
Considering that, otherwise it would lead to the ‘levitation of copyright’
as an exclusive right, Koelman, ‘The Levitation of Copyright’, 53–5.

68
69

70 Poort and Quintais, ‘The Levy Runs Dry’, 219.
71

J. P. Quintais, ‘Private Copying and Downloading from Unlawful
Sources’, 46(1) IIC (2015), 66–92, at 74 (referring to ‘some circularity’ in

an increasingly weaker economic case for levies in the
digital age’.70 Apparently taking for granted a ‘substitu-
tion effect’71 between lawful and unlawful copies, the
CJEU excluded the latter from the private copying
exception, while leaving unclear which method levy-set-
ting bodies will use for this purpose. A can of worms
might have been opened as far as consumers’ privacy72
and possible criminal enforcement of copyright against
them under the rule of ‘copyright is watching you’ is
concerned.

However, this ruling has a relevant economic effect:
overall damages allegedly due to piracy, notably online
piracy, and claimed by the copyright industries are, as
such, not eligible for fair compensation.

The CJEU has also dealt with this issue in other deci-
sions.73 On the one hand, it found that a system which
applies fair compensation to the copying of sheet music
cannot be accepted because sheet music is excluded
from the reprography exception and by extension from
the private copying exception, without prejudice of
‘limited and isolated situations’ of unauthorized repro-
duction of sheet music where the prejudice to right
holders is minimal.74 On the other hand, the court
ruled that fair compensation does not cover reproduc-
tions made from an unlawful source, including those in
the reprography sector.75

I. Multifunctional media (eg mobile telephone
memory cards) irrespective of their main
function

In Copydan Ba˚ndkopi the CJEU ruled that multifunc-
tional media (eg mobile telephone memory cards) are
subject to the fair compensation requirement, but on
the condition that ‘one of the functions of the media,
be it merely an ancillary function, enables the operator
[reproduction] purpose’.76
to use
However, for the purpose of determining the amount
of payable compensation, it is necessary to consider
‘whether the function is a main or an ancillary one and
the relative importance of the medium’s capacity to
make copies’, so that in case of minimal prejudice, ‘the

them for

that

the argument that unlawful copies would unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of right holders, as if the fair compensation was not
designed to compensate them for such prejudice).
See, eg, ibid, 81 (pointing out ‘the Court’s failure to consider the impact
of the fundamental right of privacy in the interpretation of the three-step
test’, at 89).

72

73 Copydan, paras 74–9, Hewlett-Packard Belgium (Reprobel), paras 50–64.
74 Hewlett-Packard Belgium, paras 50–6.
75
76 Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, paras 26–9 and conclusion 1. With a different opin-

Ibid, paras 57–61 and 62–3.

ion, Hugenholtz, Guibault and van Sjoerd, The Future of Levies, p. 47.

598

ARTICLE

fair

making available of such a function need not give rise
compensation’.77
to an obligation to pay
Determination of what amounts to ‘minimal prejudice’
is a matter for Member States to decide—in respect of
the principle of equal treatment.78 Once again the func-
tion of fair compensation justiﬁes the application (and
the level) of the levy, and its exclusion concerning
reproduction equipment and media which cause only
minimum harm.

J. Exemption of supply of components
designed primarily to store copies for private
use (eg internal memory of MP3 players)

The CJEU has not allowed the exemption of compo-
nents designed primarily to store copies for private
use.79 The fact that a memory card is detachable is not
deemed sufﬁcient objective justiﬁcation, but the court
has given national courts the option of assessing other
circumstances capable of providing such justiﬁcation,
such as, for example, where ‘rightholders receive fair
compensation in another form’.80 The court may have
considered that in order to store copies in the internal
memory of an MP3 reader, other devices and media
(notably a PC or a smartphone) have to be used and
therefore levying these devices would already allow
rightholders to receive the fair compensation for such
copies.

K. Copies made by or with the aid of a device
belonging to third persons

To determine the scope of the private copy exception,
only the medium of reproduction is relevant—not the
‘legal nature’ of the connection between the natural
person doing the reproduction and the device used.81
The silence of the Directive on this point would mean
that private copies can be done ‘by a natural person by
or with the aid of a device which belongs to a third
party’.82 Therefore, unless copies made with the aid of
such device are excluded from the scope of the private
copying exception, they would be also covered by the
levy.83

77 Copydan Ba˚ndkopi, para 29 and conclusion 1, 2nd per.
78
79
80
81
82
83 The Spanish Copyright Reform of 2014 has expressly exempted ‘time-

Ibid, paras 61–2 and conclusion 4.
Ibid, paras 32–3.
Ibid, paras 40–1 and conclusion 2
Ibid, paras 81, 84–90.
Ibid, para 91 and conclusion 8.

shifting’ from the fair compensation—Article 25(5) of the Ley de
Propiedad Intelectual, enacted by Real Decreto Legislativo No 1/1996 of 12
April, as amended by Ley No 21/2014 of 4 November.

L. Beneﬁciaries of the reprography exception

The reprography exception concerns reproductions in
paper or similar medium by means of photography or
comparable techinques.84 In Hewlett-Packard, the CJEU
ruled that it beneﬁts both categories of persons (busi-
nesses and consumers), while the private copying
exception only applies to natural persons acting with-
out direct or indirect commercial purposes.85 The con-
ceptual autonomy as well as the rationale of the fair
compensation apply also to the reprography exception
for reasons of coherence in interpreting exceptions.86
Nevertheless, because the harm suffered by rightholders
is not identical, one must draw a distinction between
the reprographic reproduction on paper carried out by
any user, and the reproduction by a natural person for
private use and without direct or indirect commercial
purposes.87 In other words, the reprography exception
beneﬁts any user, including legal persons acting for pur-
poses other than private use, and therefore it causes
more harm to rightholders than if it would beneﬁt con-
sumers only.

M. Publishers as unlikely beneﬁciaries of fair
compensation

The fair compensation requirement is meant to redress
authors of the harm caused by the private copying
exception, and cannot be waived by rightholders in
favour of third parties.88 Publishers are not holders of
the right of reproduction under Directive 2001/29. If
publishers have no obligation to beneﬁt authors from a
substantial share of the compensation from which they
are deprived, then they should not be entitled to receive
a signiﬁcant share of the fair compensation.89

N. Levy on technical speciﬁcations (copying
device speed) and/or number of copies?

Is it possible to set a levy based merely on the technical
speciﬁcations of the device (in this case, the speed of
copying), or should it rather be combined with a levy
ﬁxed after the reproduction by reference to the number
of copies produced?90

84 Article 5(2)(a) of Directive 2001/29.
85 Hewlett-Packard Belgium, paras 29–34.
86
87
88
89 Hewlett-Packard Belgium, paras 44–9 and conclusion 2.
90

Ibid, paras 37–9.
Ibid, para 43 and conclusion 1.
Luksan, paras 106–9.

Ibid, para 66.

Alexandre L Dias Pereira  Levies in EU copyright law

ARTICLE

599

The CJEU held that levies ‘must necessarily be set as
a lump sum’, on the sole basis of the reproduction
function of the device, because they ‘cannot be ﬁxed on
the basis of the criterion of actual harm suffered, as the
extent of that harm remains unknown at the moment
at which the devices concerned are put into circulation
on national territory’.91 However, the court added that
it cannot be assumed that users will dedicate the devices
to their full capacity to making copies.92 Considering
that the use of a reproduction device for private copy-
ing is different from its use for commercial or other
purposes, a lump-sum remuneration ﬁxed solely by
reference to the technical copying speed of the device
cannot be accepted.93 Arguably, if it is not possible to
assess levies based only upon the speed of a printer,
then the same should apply to the storage capacity of a
PC or a mobile phone.

Notwithstanding this, a levy ﬁxed prior to the mak-
ing of copies may be justiﬁed only due to practical difﬁ-
culties in identifying users and assessing the actual use
of the devices.94 Then, a system which combines the
proportional remuneration for copies produced with
the lump-sum remuneration ﬁxed in advance is not
incompatible, a priori, with fair compensation, provided
that it enables the amount of levies to correspond, in
essence, to the actual harm suffered by the rightholders.95
This means that such a system has to provide, notably, a
mechanism for reimbursement designed to correct any
occurring ‘overcompensation’ detrimental to particular
categories of users,96 and to safeguard a fair balance
between the rightholders and the users of protected sub-
ject-matter.97 Therefore, it appears that when operator
fees are implementable, these should fund the compensa-
tion, and levies should not apply.98

O. For jurisdiction purposes, the payment
of fair compensation is a matter of tort or
delict

In Austro-Mechana, the CJEU recalled that the scope of
application of the special rule of jurisdiction in matters

91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

Ibid, paras 71–2.
Ibid, para 73.
Ibid, para 77.
Ibid, para 82.
Ibid, para 84.
Ibid, para 85 (referring by analogy to Amazon.com International Sales).
Ibid, para 86.
See A. Vitorino’s recommendations and the Belgian Act of 22 December
2016, amending inter alia Article XI.236 (remuneration for reprography)
of the Code de droit e´conomique.

99 Article 5 of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 of 22 December 2000

on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in
civil and commercial matters, replaced by Regulation (EU) No 1215/

relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict (formerly Article
5(3) of Brussels I, and currently Article 7(2) of Brussels
I recast99) is deﬁned in negative terms, as covering any
action of civil liability in matters not relating to a con-
tract.100 Matters relating to a contract do not necessa-
rily require the conclusion of a contract, but they do
not cover ‘a situation in which there is no obligation
freely assumed by one party towards another’.101 The
payment of fair compensation is not a matter related to
contract because it does not arise from an agreement
freely consented by the debtor, but rather its source is a
statutory provision concerning the distribution with
commercial purposes of
reproduction devices and
media.102 On the other hand, concerning the link of
causality, the non-payment of the levy imposed to fund
fair compensation is the relevant cause of harm, even if
payment is due to a copyright collecting society and not
directly to right holders.103

There is not much elaboration to this ﬁnding, but it
probably means that the levy system concerns primarily
intermediaries, despite rightholders and consumers
being—respectively—the (virtual) main creditors and
debtors of the fair compensation.

P. Funding fair compensation through the
State budget

In EGEDA, the CJEU accepted that, as a matter of prin-
ciple, the funding of fair compensation can take place
through the general state budget of a Member State,
instead of by a system of levies.104 However, the ration-
ale of fair compensation is to repair the harm presum-
ably caused by the beneﬁciaries of the private copy
exception (consumers), who are therefore the indirect
debtors of levies, and the beneﬁciaries of the private
copying exception are only natural persons acting for
private purposes
legal persons being
therefore exempted from the levies.105 For these reasons
the court did not accept that there is no ‘deﬁnite alloca-
tion of revenue—such as revenue from a speciﬁc levy—
to particular expenditure’,106 nor a particular measure
allowing tax payers
exemption from

(consumers),

to request

2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December
2012 as from 10 January 2015 (Brussels I Regulation recast).

100 Austro-Mechana, para 32.
101 Ibid, para 35 (with reference to Ceska sporitelna, C419/11,

EU:C:2013:165, para 46).

102 Austro-Mechana, paras 37–8.
103 Ibid, paras 39–46.
104 EGEDA, paras 24–5. Besides Spain, other countries like Finland and

Norway have established funding of fair compensation by means of their
state budget. See Digital Europe, ‘Private Copying’, para 2.2.

105 EGEDA, paras 26–36.
106 Ibid, para 39.

600

ARTICLE

contributing to the ﬁnancing of the compensation or,
at least, to seek reimbursement.107

Such alternative schemes cannot ‘ensure that the cost
of that compensation is borne by the users of private
copies’ (only)108 and therefore cannot be accepted.
Nevertheless, this ruling appears to pave the way to a
tax on consumption of reproduction equipment and
media (eg a percentage of VAT over such goods).

Q. VAT does not apply to fair compensation
for private copying

added tax for purposes of

In SAWP the CJEU decided whether the fee on devices
and media for recording or reproducing copyright
works or the subject matter of related rights is subject
to value
the VAT
Directive.109 The court found that fair compensation
concerns the harm suffered by rightholders due to pri-
vate copying, and therefore the payment of levies to
collecting societies does not remunerate the supply of a
service.110 Accordingly, VAT does not apply to fair
compensation. It follows that: (1) collecting societies can-
not apply VAT in the invoices sent to manufacturers/
importers of devices subject to levies; and (2) VAT can-
not charge the fair compensation when levies are passed
on through the distribution chain to consumers. This
does not mean, however, that Member States cannot
fund fair compensation for private copying by means of
a consumer tax on reproduction equipment and media
(eg, a percentage of VAT over such goods).

Conclusion

A ‘virtuous system’ of private copying levies called for
by the European Parliament is ‘under construction’ by
the CJEU based upon the relevant provisions
in
Directive 2001/29.

compensation is

substantially mandatory

Since Padawan, the CJEU has consistently held that
fair
for
Member States that envisage the (optional) private copy-
ing exception. The rationale of the fair compensation is
to repair the harm presumably caused to rightholders by
consumers who acquire copying devices and media or
services based thereupon. However, harm caused by each
consumer is probably minimal and therefore irrelevant,
and it would be intrusive to the consumers’ privacy as

well as unfeasible to seek damages by means of court
enforcement of copyright against each individual con-
sumer. Harm is presumed (it is not necessary to prove
that consumers make copies), but levies must be based
on the actual criterion of harm (devices subject to levies
and the applicable rates must be based on a prior assess-
ment of harm). As the CJEU recognized, ‘the extent of
that harm remains unknown at the moment at which
the devices concerned are put into circulation’.111

Due to practical difﬁculties, fair compensation can
be set up as a levy scheme: national legislation may
charge levies from persons making reproduction devices
and media available to consumers upon the price of
sale to the public of such equipment and media.
Another presumption takes place: businesses can pass
on the levy to consumers, who remain the actual—yet
indirect—subject responsible for payment of fair com-
pensation. For this reason, the levy system has to pro-
vide ex ante exemptions of levies on devices available to
non-consumers and, additionally, provide ex post reim-
bursement of levies paid by them where such ex ante
exemption did not apply. At the same time, the author-
ization given by the rightholder to making private cop-
ies does not exclude fair compensation, and the same
applies to the use of technological protection measures.
Finally, the CJEU has not denied the possibility to
fund fair compensation through the state budget,
if
there is ‘deﬁnite allocation of revenue to particular
expenditure’ and exemption and/or reimbursement
provisions.112 The criterion, however,
the
same: to compensate the harm presumably due to law-
ful private copying. Harm caused by and passed on to
consumers, assuming a substitution effect.

remains

This said, the economic effect of ‘margin compression’
for sellers of copying equipment and media appears
neglected, especially in a market also governed by Moore’s
law, and which along with the business models of licens-
ing, streaming and cloud computing may end-up ‘phasing
out’ the levy system. The revision of the system might
combine the levy scheme with a tax-like special contribu-
tion allocated to fund activities of cultural creation. Fair
compensation would then have two equally valuable
rationales and operating systems: to compensate harm,
possibly by means of a levy scheme; and to promote cul-
tural production through a tax-like instrument.

107 Ibid, paras 39 and 40.
108 Ibid, paras 41–2 and conclusion.
109 Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common

system of value added tax (OJ 2006 L 347, p. 1), as amended by Council
Directive 2010/45/EU of 13 July 2010 (OJ 2010 L 189, p. 1).

110 SAWP, para 33 and conclusion (‘holders of reproduction rights do not

make a supply of services [. . .] to producers and importers of blank

media and of recording and reproduction devices on whom organisa-
tions collectively managing copyright and related rights levy on behalf of
those rightholders, but in their own name, fees in respect of the sale of
those devices and media’).

111 Hewlett-Packard Belgium, paras 71–2.
112 EGEDA, paras 39–40.


