ARTICLE

43

Trade mark use in transit: EU-phony
or cacophony?
Olivier Vrins* and Marius Schneider**

Class International BV v Unilever NV and others,1
referred to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) by
the Court of Appeal of The Hague, the Netherlands,
raises a novel trade mark infringement issue relating
to grey-market goods in transit through the European
Union. The opinion of Advocate General Jacobs2 in
this case has received a lukewarm welcome from
intellectual property right-holders since it might,
should it be endorsed by the ECJ, complicate the
enforcement of
trade mark rights against grey-
market goods. This article examines the soundness
of the legal reasoning behind this opinion and con-
siders whether it conflicts with established case law
of the ECJ in similar matters.

1. Ouverture:3 Class International
Class International involves genuine goods, toothpaste
bearing the AQUAFRESH trade mark, which were
shipped without the trade mark owner’s consent
from South Africa, outside the European Economic
Area (EEA), to Rotterdam (the Netherlands), where
they were placed in a customs warehouse. The goods
had thus not yet been cleared with any customs office
in the EU. It was unclear whether the goods had been,
or were to be, sold to a third party inside or outside
the EEA.

At the request of the trade mark owner, the con-
signment was initially detained by the Dutch customs
authorities under Council Regulation 3295/944 (‘the
Customs Regulation’), on the assumption that
it

The issues dealt with in this article are discussed in more detail in O Vrins
and M Schneider (eds) Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights through
Border Measures: Law and Practice in the EU (Oxford University Press
Oxford 2006 forthcoming) ch 3.

* Attorney-at-law, Altius law firm, Brussels, Belgium.

E-mail: olivier.vrins@altius.com.

** European trade mark attorney, Gevers & Partners, Brussels, Belgium.

E-mail: marius.schneider@gevers.com.

1 Case C-405/03.

2 At the time of writing, the ECJ had not yet handed down its decision in

this case.

Ó The Authors (2005). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

 The temporary suspension from free move-
ment within the European Economic Area
(EEA) of goods suspected of infringing intellec-
tual property rights is an increasingly popular
device in the battle to prevent infringing goods
entering that area.



In Class International the ECJ has been asked to
rule whether the temporary storage in a cus-
toms warehouse of original trade marked goods
with customs transit status and the transit of
those goods to countries outside the EEA
should be regarded as an infringing use of a
trade mark.

 The Advocate General has advised the ECJ that
the placing in transit through, or in a customs
warehouse in, the EEA of genuine trade marked
goods coming from outside the EEA without
the trade mark owner’s consent does not con-
stitute a trade mark infringement.



In giving its preliminary ruling in this case the
ECJ has an opportunity to synthesize its earlier
rulings arising from questions referred to it in
somewhat similar situations.

goods.

counterfeit

contained
subsequently
appeared that the detained products were not coun-
terfeit goods within the meaning of the Customs
Regulation.5 The trade mark holder could thus no

It

3 o·ver·ture (o¯0v´r-chUr0). n. An instrumental composition intended espe-
cially as an introduction to an extended work, such as an opera or oratorio.

4 Council Regulation 3295/94 laying down measures to prohibit the release
for free circulation, export, re-export, or entry for a suspensive procedure
of counterfeit and pirated goods ([1994] OJ L341/8), amended in 1999.
This regulation was replaced, on 1 July 2004, by Council Regulation
1383/2003 concerning customs action against goods suspected of infrin-
ging certain intellectual property rights and the measures to be taken
against goods found to have infringed such rights ([2003] OJ L196/7).

5 Reg 3295/94 (n 4 above) Art 1(2) defines ‘counterfeit goods’ as ‘goods,
including packaging, bearing without authorization a trade mark identical
to the trade mark validly registered in respect of the same type of goods,
or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trade

44

ARTICLE

longer rely on the Regulation to continue their
detention.6

The owner of the goods filed a motion with the
president of the Rechtbank Rotterdam to attempt to
obtain their release, which was dismissed. Thereafter
the matter came before the Hague Court of Appeal
in proceedings in which the key issue was whether
the temporary storage in a customs warehouse of ori-
ginal trade marked goods with customs transit status
and/or the transit of those goods to countries outside
the EEA should be regarded as an infringing use of a
trade mark within the meaning of Article 5 of the
Trade Mark Directive.7

In a

customs warehousing procedure, non-
Community goods brought into the customs territory
of the Community are stored in a place approved by,
and under the supervision of, the customs authorities
until the country to which the goods will ultimately
be delivered has been determined.8 As the Advocate
General puts it:

Customs warehousing is a procedure enabling impor-
ters to store imported goods where it is not known
at the time of importation how the goods will finally
be disposed of. The goods may subsequently be re-
exported, in which case there will have been no need
to pay import duties, or released for free circulation,
at which point import duties will be payable.9

The external transit procedure relates to goods
moving from a location within the customs territory
of the Community to another location within that
territory, to be exported afterwards (in the case of
Community goods) or re-exported (in the case of

non-Community goods) from the internal market,
on the conditions set out
the
in Article 91 of
Community Customs Code. As the ECJ puts it:

Goods placed under
this procedure are subject
neither to the corresponding import duties nor to
the other measures of commercial policy; it is as if
they had not entered the Community territory. In
reality,
they are imported from a non-member
country and pass through one or more Member States
before being
exported to another non-member
country.10

Both the customs warehousing and the external
transit procedures are ‘suspensive procedures’ under
Article 84(1)(a) of the Community Customs Code.11
They end when the goods and the corresponding
documents are produced at the customs office of des-
tination in accordance with the provisions of the pro-
cedure in question.12 Non-Community goods placed
under this procedure are subject to customs supervi-
sion from the moment of entry until they leave the
Community.13

2. Cadenza:14 AG Jacobs’s stance
In the Advocate General’s opinion, trade mark ow-
ners cannot oppose the entry into the EU of non-
Community goods placed in transit or in a customs
warehouse and bearing their trade marks on the
ground of Article 5(1)15 of the Trade Mark Directive,
or any equivalent provision,16 since such entry does not
constitute trade mark use. While such goods remain
non-Community goods, storing them in a customs
warehouse (without the consent of the trade mark

mark, and which thereby infringes the trade mark holder’s rights under
Community law, as provided for by Council Regulation 40/94 on the
Community trade mark or the law of the Member State in which the
application for action by the customs authorities is made’ (cf Reg 1383/
2003 Art 2(1)(a)(i)).

6 Reg 3295/94 (n 4 above) Art 1(4) excludes parallel imported goods from
the system of border measures put in place by the regulation (cf Reg
1383/2003 Art 3(1)). Cf O Vrins and M Schneider (eds) Enforcement of
Intellectual Property Rights through Border Measures: Law and Practice in
the EU (Oxford University Press Oxford 2006), ch 3 paras 3.175 ff.

7

First Council Directive 89/104 to approximate the laws of the member
states relating to trade marks ([1989] OJ EC L40/1). Article 5(1) provides
that ‘The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive
rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent all third parties
not having his consent from using in the course of trade: (a) any sign
which is identical with the trade mark in relation to goods or services
which are identical with those for which the trade mark is registered’.
Under Article 5(3), ‘[t]he following, inter alia, may be prohibited under
paragraphs 1 and 2: . . . (b) offering the goods, or putting them on the
market or stocking them for these purposes under that sign, or offering
or supplying services thereunder; (c) importing or exporting the goods
under the sign.’

8 Cf in particular Council Regulation 2913/92 establishing the Community
Customs Code ([1992] OJ L302/1) (‘the Community Customs Code’)
Arts 85–86, 101, and 105.

9 Opinion of AG Jacobs in Class International BV v Unilever NV (n 1 above)

para 12.

10 ECJ Case C-383/98 The Polo/Lauren v PT Dwidua Langgeng Pratama Inter-

national Freight Forwarders [2000] ECR I-2519 [34].

11 For a more detailed overview of the suspensive procedures, see F Rutter
and A Serneels Handbook douane en internationale handel 2000–2001
(Intersentia Antwerpen 2000) ch 9 ff 127 ff.

12 Community Customs Code (n 8 above) Art 92.

13 ibid Arts 94 and 96; Commission Regulation 2454/93 laying down provi-
sions for the implementation of Council Regulation 2913/92 establishing
the Community Customs Code ([1993] OJ L253/1) Arts 345, 349, 356–
357, 361, and 365–366.

14 ca·den·za (k´-de˘n0z´). n. An extended virtuosic section for the soloist usu-

ally near the end of a movement of a concerto.

15 Together with Art 5(3)(b) and (c).

16 Cf eg Council Regulation 40/94 on the Community trade mark ([1994] OJ

L11/1) Art 9(1), together with Art 9(2)(b) and (c).

Olivier Vrins and Marius Schneider · Trade mark use in transit

ARTICLE

45

holder) does not constitute ‘using [the mark] in the
course of trade’ within Article 5(1), which would
entitle right-holders only to prevent the release into
free circulation (ie the importation) in the EEA of
such goods.

Jacobs considered in this respect that, to be actio-
nable, use under Article 5(1) must affect, or be liable
to affect, the essential function of the trade mark,
which is to guarantee the origin of the goods to con-
sumers.17 He then opined that the essential function
of a trade mark cannot be compromised ‘solely by
the fact that goods genuinely bearing that mark are
subject to the external transit procedure and hence
by definition are not in free circulation within the
Community’,18 nor can it be compromised ‘solely
by the storage in a Community customs warehouse
of
trade marked non-Community goods. Such
storage cannot in itself affect or be liable to affect
the functions of the trade mark’.19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Surprisingly, AG Jacobs disregarded the
circumstances surrounding the sale
of the goods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

This opinion means that the placing in transit
through, or in a customs warehouse in, the EEA of
genuine trade marked goods coming from outside the
EEA without the trade mark owner’s consent does not
constitute a trade mark infringement, as in these cases
no ‘use’ is made of the trade mark in the course of trade.
Surprisingly, Jacobs disregarded the circumstances
surrounding the sale of the goods. In other words, the
issue of whether the goods had already been resold
and, if they had, of whether the purchaser was located
within or outside the EEA was considered irrelevant.
Only in those cases where the goods would be highly
likely to be released for free circulation within the
EEA would the right-holder be in a position to assert
his trade mark rights.

3. Variations on an ECJ theme
Advocate General Jacobs corroborates his findings in
the light of earlier ECJ case law.

Euphony: Commission v France
and Rioglass

28 EC22

as precluding

In Commission v France20 and Rioglass,21 the ECJ
construed Article
the
implementation, in a member state’s intellectual pro-
perty legislation, of procedures for detention by the
customs authorities of goods lawfully manufactured
in another member state and intended, following their
transit through the territory of the first member state,
to be placed on the market in another member state
(Commission v France) or in a non-member country
(Rioglass).

In Commission v France the Court held that by
providing an option for the customs authorities to
retain goods23 in transit through French territory
which had been legally manufactured in Spain
and were destined for another member state where
they could equally be legally offered for sale, on
the ground that
those goods would infringe a
right-holder’s design rights under French law, the
French Republic had violated Article 28 (formerly
Article 30) EC.

In Rioglass trade marked spare car parts, lawfully
manufactured in Spain, had been exported from
Spain to Poland under cover of a Community transit
certificate which allowed movement between two
points in the customs territory of the Community
and Poland free of import duty, tax, or commercial
policy measures. The goods were detained by French
customs officers on suspicion of trade mark infringe-
ment. The manufacturer and the transporter of the
goods sought an order that the detention be lifted.

Unlike in Class International, the sacrosanct prin-
ciple of freedom of movement of goods applied in
both Commission v France and Rioglass. However,
Article 30 (formerly Article 36) EC allows member
states to provide for ‘prohibitions or restrictions on

17 Opinion of AG Jacobs in Class International v Unilever (n 1 above), refer-
ring to Case C-206/01 Arsenal Football Club (12 November 2002) [2002]
ECR I-10273 [40]. On the relevance of the ‘essential function’ theory in
the field of intellectual property rights in relation to Art 30 EC, cf I Gov-
aere The Use and Abuse of Intellectual Property Rights in E.C. Law (Sweet
& Maxwell London 1996).

18 ibid [29].

20 ECJ Case C-23/99 Commission v France [2000] ECR I-7653.

21 Case C-115/02 Rioglass and Transremar [2003] ECR I-12705.

22 ‘Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent

effect shall be prohibited between Member States.’

23 In that case, spare parts for cars, which, as one knows, are the object of

fierce debate from the perspective of design rights protection.

19 ibid [43].

46

ARTICLE

justified on
imports, exports or goods
ground of . . . the protection of industrial and com-
mercial property’.

in transit

In Commission v France and Rioglass the French
government relied on this provision to justify the
system of border measures set up to detain goods sus-
pected of
infringing certain intellectual property
rights when in transit through French territory.

The Court rejected the French government’s pleas
by recalling its earlier case law on the application of
Article 30 EC in intellectual property matters. It
emphasized that the ‘safeguard clause’ in this provi-
sion may be relied on only where the situation affects,
or is liable to affect, the essential function of an intel-
lectual property right. It is settled case law that the
specific subject matter of design and trade mark
rights is, in particular, to guarantee its owner the
exclusive right to use the design or trade mark so as
to put a product on the market for the first time.24
The Court further pointed out that the right to put
a product into circulation was not the mere physical
transportation of the goods but consisted in placing
them on the market, that is to say, the marketing of
those goods:

However, in this case, the product is marketed not in
French territory, through which it only passes in tran-
sit, but in another Member State, where the product is
not protected and may therefore be lawfully sold.25

Intra-Community transit . . . consists of the trans-
portation of goods from one Member State to another
across the territory of one or more Member States and
involves no use of the appearance of the protected
design. . .. Intra-Community transit does not therefore
form part of the specific subject matter of the right of
industrial and commercial property in designs.26

Similarly, since transit does not involve any marke-
ting of the goods in question,
it is not liable to
infringe the specific subject matter of a trade mark.27
In Class International, AG Jacobs followed the same
reasoning and opined that it applies a fortiori to non-
Community goods in respect of which import form-
alities have not been completed.

Of paramount importance is that as in AG Jacobs’s
opinion in Class International, in Commission v France
and in Rioglass, the ECJ did not take into considera-
tion the risk of the transit goods ultimately being
placed on the market in the country of transit, where
they would infringe intellectual property rights. Better
still: the ECJ seems to have considered that this risk
did not exist, as it found that the placing in transit of
the goods was not even liable to affect the essential
function of the intellectual property rights in question.

Cacophony: The Polo/Lauren and
Rolex cases

Polo/Lauren28 involved the external transit of coun-
terfeit RALPH LAUREN garments from Indonesia
to Poland (which was not yet a member of the EU).
The Polo/Lauren Company initiated court procee-
dings in Austria, where the goods had been intercep-
ted under the Customs Regulation. The Austrian
Supreme Court referred the case to the ECJ for a pre-
liminary ruling. The national Court asked whether
the Customs Regulation applied to infringing goods
in external transit through the Community. The ECJ
answered this question affirmatively. Importantly, it
stressed that goods in external transit are ultimately
liable to be fraudulently brought on to the EC
market. Accordingly, the potential
impact of this
type of movement appeared sufficient to justify the
broadening of the scope of the Customs Regulation
to the case of external transit:

After all, the external transit of non-Community goods
is not completely devoid of effect on the internal
market. It is, in fact, based on a legal fiction. Goods
placed under this procedure are subject neither to the
corresponding import duties nor to the other mea-
sures of commercial policy; it is as if they had not
entered Community territory.
they are
imported from a non-member country and pass
through one or more Member States before being
exported to another non-member country. This opera-
tion is all the more liable to have a direct effect on the
internal market as there is a risk that counterfeit goods
placed under the external transit procedure may be
fraudulently brought on to the Community market,

In reality,

24 Regarding industrial designs, cf eg ECJ Case 238/87 Volvo (5 October 1988)
[1988] ECR 6211 [8]. As to trade mark rights, cf eg ECJ Case 16/74 Win-
throp (31 October 1974) [1974] ECR 1183 [8]; Case 102/77 Hoffman-La
Roche (23 May 1978) [1978] ECR 1139 [7]; Case C-349/95 Loendersloot
(11 November 1997) [1997] ECR I-6227 [22]; Case C-206/01 (n 17 above)
[40].

25 Case C-23/99 (n 20 above) [44].

26 ibid [43].

27 Case C-115/02 (n 21 above) [27].

28 ECJ Case C-383/98 (n 10 above).

Olivier Vrins and Marius Schneider · Trade mark use in transit

ARTICLE

47

as several Governments pointed out in their written
observations and at the hearing.29

The Court also concluded that although the Cus-
toms Regulation applied to situations that appeared
to have no direct connection with the internal
market, analysis of the issue revealed no factor of
such a kind as to affect its validity.30

The ECJ recalled this point of view in another case,
Rolex, concerning the transit
through Austria of
goods of Chinese origin and destined for the Slovak
market (also then not yet part of the EU), which
infringing trade mark rights.31
were suspected of
The only difference in the question referred for pre-
liminary ruling to the ECJ in this case, compared
with the Polo/Lauren case, was that it was referred
by an investigating body having jurisdiction under
criminal law. The ECJ pointed out that the interpreta-
tion of the scope of the Customs Regulation was not
conditional upon the type of national proceedings
(civil, criminal, or administrative) in which that
interpretation was relied on32 and stressed that it
did apply to the external transit of counterfeit goods,
regardless of whether the external transit of such
goods was considered an intellectual property right
infringement under the national law of the member
state where the customs intervention occurred.33

The Court went further in Rolex, when considering
whether a provision of national law, which may be
interpreted as meaning that the mere transit of goods
manufactured/distributed in contravention of trade
mark law is not punishable under criminal law, is
contrary to Article 2 of Regulation 3295/94, as
amended by Regulation 241/1999.34 The Court
pointed out that under Articles 2 and 11 of Regula-
tion 3295/94, the member states were to prohibit
and, thus, to penalize the mere transit of counterfeit
goods through their respective territories.35 Since,

29 ibid [34].

30 ibid [30]–[35]. For a more extensive comment on the Polo/Lauren

decision, see eg [2001] Trade Mark Reporter 385.

31 Case C-60/02 (7 January 2004) Montres Rolex SA and others [2004] Eur

Court Rep I-651. Cf also opinion of AG Colomer of 5 June 2003 [36].

32 Opinion of AG Colomer of 5 June 2003 [56] and [58]: ‘It is not for the
Court of Justice to rule on the interpretation of national law, which is a
matter for the national court alone. If the national court were to find
that the relevant provisions of national law do not prohibit and, thus, do
not penalize the mere transit of counterfeit goods through the Member
State concerned, contrary none the less to the requirements under Articles
2 and 11 of Regulation 3295/94, it would be proper to conclude that those
articles preclude the national provisions in question.’

33 ibid [58].

‘national courts
according to established case law,
are required to interpret their national
law within
the limits set by Community law, in order to achieve
the result
intended by the Community rule in
question’,36 if such a compatible interpretation were
possible, it was for the national court, in order to
secure for holders of intellectual property rights pro-
tection of those rights against abuses prohibited by
Article 2 of Regulation 3295/94, to apply to the transit
of counterfeit goods across the national territory
the civil law remedies applicable under national law
to other conduct prohibited by that provision,
provided that they were effective, dissuasive, and
proportionate.37

transit

in external

the intellectual property rights

This ECJ case law implies that goods intercepted at
through
the borders while
Community territory and which would infringe any
listed in the
of
Customs Regulation under the legislation of
the
transit country if they were to be commercialized
in that country—with the exception of grey-market
goods—may be detained by the customs authorities
of the member state of transit and should be con-
sidered a trade mark infringement in this state, irre-
spective of their status as ‘goods in transit’ and even
if those goods would not in fact infringe any intellec-
tual property right in the country of destination.

4. Attacca:38 critical comments
AG Jacobs in Class International followed the line of
reasoning adopted by the ECJ in Commission v France
and Rioglass when concluding that the mere transit of
branded goods does not result in trade mark ‘use’ as
it does not, and is not liable to, affect the essential
function of the mark. Although Class International
can be distinguished from the earlier cases to the
extent that it relates to external transit instead of

34 Under the Austrian Trade Marks Law, only the import and export of coun-
terfeit goods, and not their mere transit across national territory, consti-
tutes illegal use of a trade mark.

35 Case C-60/02 (n 31 above) [58].

36 ibid [59].

37 ibid [60]. However, the ECJ conceded that a particular problem arises
where the principle of compatible interpretation is applied to criminal
matters. ‘As the Court has also held, that principle finds its limits in the
general principles of law which form part of the Community legal system
and,
legal certainty and non-
retroactivity [61].

in the principles of

in particular,

38 Attacca. It., attack. A musical directive for the performer to begin the next

movement of a composition immediately and without pause.

48

ARTICLE

‘Community’) transit,

the Advocate
internal (or
General implicitly considered that the ‘essential func-
tion’ doctrine was not relevant only in the context of
the application of the safeguard clause of Article
30 EC: it is relevant whenever one must determine
whether a trade mark—if not any kind of intellectual
property right—is infringed. The fact that in Commiss-
ion v France and Rioglass the principle of freedom of
movement of goods played a role is thus, in Jacobs’s
opinion, of no significance: the same approach must
be followed in external transit cases as well.39

At the same time, this reasoning does not seem
consistent with the approach of the Court in Polo/
Lauren and, for that matter, with the Customs Regu-
lation. Indeed, Article 16 of Regulation 1383/2003
provides that goods that fall under the scope of the
Regulation and have been found by a national court
to infringe an intellectual property right shall not
be placed under a suspensive procedure—which
includes external transit and customs warehousing—
while Article 18 provides that each member state
must introduce penalties to apply in cases of violation
of this prohibition. It was the express wish of the
European legislature to broaden the scope of the Cus-
toms Regulation irrespective of the customs status of
the goods, even including transhipment.40 This
approach was unambiguously upheld by the Court
in Polo/Lauren, based on the fact that external transit
involved the inherent risk that the goods would ulti-
mately be placed on the internal market. For some
reason, which we cannot explain, this risk was held
not to exist in Class International, and not even in
the case of ‘Community transit’ (cf Commission v
France and Rioglass), where the goods are, by defini-
tion, already ab initio within the internal market.
This is all the more surprising as, in Class Interna-
tional, the owner of the goods was apparently unable
to prove that the final destination of the goods was
outside the EEA.

One might be tempted, as AG Jacobs was,41 to
explain this discrepancy of treatment on the ground
that Polo/Lauren concerned counterfeit products
(manufactured without
the trade
mark owner), whereas Class International related to
grey-market goods (manufactured with the consent
of the right-holder). However, the assessment of the

the consent of

existence of a trade mark infringement in both cases
has to take place on the basis of the same criteria,
which are set out in Article 5 of the Trade Mark
Directive.

Finally, Article 5(3) of the Trade Mark Directive
clearly regards the export of trade marked goods as a
form of trade mark use. It is questionable whether
the very nature of the transit procedure differs sub-
stantially from the export procedure and thus
deserves to be treated in a different way.

5. Conclusion: Class International,
or how to cultivate dissonance
In Class International AG Jacobs had the opportunity
to reconcile the earlier decisions of the ECJ regarding
the fate of trade marked goods placed in transit in the
EU without the trade mark owner’s consent. For the
reasons mentioned above, this proved impossible to
achieve. Indeed, while the new Customs Regulation
1383/2003
and its predecessor—EC Regulation
3295/94, as amended in 1999—as well as ECJ case
law developed in relation to those Regulations build
on the premise that the placing in transit of goods
that infringe intellectual property rights is per se
liable to affect the internal market, AG Jacobs relies
on the opposite assumption in concluding, in accor-
dance with Commission v France and Rioglass, that
the placing in a transit or a customs warehousing
procedure of grey-market goods is not liable to affect
the essential function of the trade mark in question.
The ‘Enigma Variations’ revisited . . .

It is in any event doubtful whether the ECJ’s ruling
in Class International will clear up the significant
uncertainties that are deeply anchored in the national
laws of the member states. The facts of Rolex reveal
that several EU countries are still unwilling to regard
the placing in transit or in a customs warehouse of
counterfeit goods as a trade mark infringement per
se, although such an approach is clearly in breach of
the Customs Regulation. If the ECJ were to adopt
Jacobs’s stance, it would definitely be an uphill task
to convince member states to apprehend and pro-
hibit such acts in respect of certain types of infringe-
ments
trade marked goods manufactured
without the right-holder’s consent) but not others
(ie grey goods).

(ie

39 In Class International, the goods had been intercepted in the Netherlands,
ie at the external border of the EU, so that the principle of free movement
of goods was not relevant.

40 Reg 1383/2003 Art 1(1) and 3rd Recital.

41 Opinion of AG Jacobs in Class International (n 1 above) [34].

Olivier Vrins and Marius Schneider · Trade mark use in transit

ARTICLE

49

The history of Benelux legislation and case law in
the trade mark sector is probably symptomatic of
the haziness that governs this issue, to which Class
International will probably contribute. Thus, before
implementing the Trade Mark Directive (which is
reputed to be largely inspired by the Uniform Bene-
lux Trade Marks Act), the Benelux Court of Justice
used to follow the same approach as AG Jacobs in
Class International. However, unlike ECJ case law,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The history of Benelux trade mark legislation
and case law is symptomatic of the haziness
which governs this issue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

this approach was apparently retained irrespective of
whether the trade mark had initially been affixed to
the goods with the consent of
the trade mark
owner.42 Despite the adoption of the Trade Mark
Directive and the Community border measures sys-
tem under Customs Regulation 1383/2003 and its
predecessor, most courts and commentators seem to
favour the same reasoning. For a while, this contin-
ued to be the case even in cases involving the external
transit or customs warehousing of goods manufac-
tured without the consent of the trade mark owner;43
this case law was subsequently disavowed to a large
extent—based on the direct effect of the Customs
Regulation, not on the Benelux Trade Marks Act or
the EC Trade Mark Directive—even though scholars
meanwhile continue to disagree on the interpretation
of the Benelux Trade Marks Act.44

The Benelux legislature failed to explicitly solve the
problem. On 7 August 1996 the Benelux Trade Marks
Act and Designs Act were amended so as to prohibit
the placing under a suspensive procedure (thus
including the transit and customs warehousing) of
goods infringing a trade mark or design. However, two
protocols of 11 December 2001 and 20 June 2002
undid the changes made to both Acts on 7 August
1996. Some argue that those changes were unneces-
sary, owing to the direct effect of the Customs Regu-
lation,45 but a few judges disagreed.46

the

Copyright

law reflect

and patent

same
dilemma. While the Customs Regulation and the
principles outlined in Polo/Lauren and Rolex have
been applied mutatis mutandis in external transit
cases in the field of patents,47 the opposite approach
is usually adopted whenever the Customs Regulation
is not applicable (ie in respect of grey goods and in
‘Community’ transit cases).48

On the international scene it is also noteworthy
that governments appear reluctant to include external
transit among the situations in which customs may
take action against goods suspected of
infringing
intellectual property rights, irrespective of whether
the goods in question have initially been placed on
the market with the right-holder’s consent.49

The authors are somewhat pessimistic as to the
chances of ‘harmonizing’ the approaches adopted by
the ECJ in Polo/Lauren and Rolex, on the one hand,
and in Commission v France, Rioglass, and presumably
soon also in Class International, on the other hand.
They wonder whether a more balanced approach
would be to prohibit the placing in transit of goods

42 Benelux Court of Justice, Case A 81/5 Hagens and Jacobs v Niemeyer
[1981–82] Cour de justice Benelux Jurisprudence 40, and the opinion of
AG Berger.

43 Cf President of the Rotterdam District Court (30 September 1999) [2000]
BMM Bull 2000; President of the Haarlem District Court (8 September
2000) Nike [2001] Bijblad bij de Industrie¨le Eigendom 99.

44 Cf M De Cock Bunning ’De Nieuwe Antipiraterij Verordening’ [2004]
Bijblad bij de Industrie¨le Eigendom 241: transit does not constitute trade
mark use. Contra G Vos and J Wintjes ‘Mogelijkheden van bestrijding
van piraterij in Nederland’ [2000] BMM Bull 11.

45 H Vanhees ‘De Benelux Tekeningen- en Modellenwet na de Europese

Harmonisatie’ [2003] Revue de droit commercial belge 632.

46 Cf eg Antwerp Seizure Judge (4 September 2002) [2003] Intellectuele

rechten Droit intellectuel 144, 146.

47 President of the Haarlem District Court (28 December 2001) Mobile
Accessory Club v Nokia [2002] Bijblad bij de Industrie¨le Eigendom 305;
The Hague Court of Appeal (25 October 2001) Philips v Postech and
Princo, and Dutch Supreme Court (Hoge Raad) (19 March 2004) [2004]
Intellectuele Eigendom en Reclamerecht 233, and the opinion of AG
Strikwerda.

48 In copyright cases, see the Dutch Supreme Court (27 January 1995) [1995]
Tijdschrift voor auteurs-, media- en informatierecht 67: the placing in
transit of a work enjoying copyright protection is not an act of commu-
nication to the public and thus does not result in a copyright infringement.
In patent cases, see eg the Belgian situation: Explanatory Memorandum to
the 28 March 1984 Belgian Patent Act Art 27; M Buydens Droit des Brevets
d’Invention (Larcier Brussels 1999) 194; A Braun and B Van Reepinghen
‘Chronique de jurisprudence—Droits intellectuels (1987–1991)’ [1992]

Journal des Tribunaux 506; AC Delcorde La Protection des Inventions
(Story-Scientia 1985) 75–76; B Van Reepinghen and M De Brabanter, Les
Brevets d’Invention (Larcier Brussels 1987) 236–237.

49 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property as amended Art
9(4). However, this provision does not prevent the contracting states from
blocking counterfeit goods in transit: cf Lithuanian Supreme Court Case
3K-3-1060 HD Lee Company Inc v UAB Mita (4 February 2004) World
Trademark Law Report, regarding the application of border measures to
goods bearing the trade mark ‘Lee’. Cf also TRIPs Annex 1C, Legal Instru-
ments Results of the Uruguay Round vol. 31 [1994] 33 Intl Legal Materials
81 Art 51.

50

ARTICLE

that

suggests

which would infringe an intellectual property right
under the law of the country of transit, unless the
owner or consignor of the goods can undeniably
prove that the goods are not destined for the internal
market. In our view, this approach would be more in
line with the territoriality principle which presides
over intellectual property law than the principles
outlined in Polo/Lauren and Rolex, and it would pre-
sumably guarantee a fairer protection to the right-
holders than the reasoning followed by AG Jacobs in
Class International. In his opinion in the latter case,
Jacobs
should be
entitled to oppose the movement of parallel imported
goods where the outcome of their offer for sale would
be to cause their release into free circulation in the
Community. He goes on to state that in circumstances
where it is ‘evident’ that the goods are ‘highly likely’
to be released into free circulation to effect delivery, the
right-holder should be in a position to ‘assert his
rights to prevent that release or delivery’.50 However,
such a stringent standard of proof seems unreason-
able—and in any case completely out of proportion
when compared with the ECJ’s stance in Polo/Lauren
and Rolex. It is to be hoped that the member states
will prove more flexible in this respect.51

the right-holders

The approach advocated by the authors might
require some changes in the current Community legal
framework, which would probably not be easy to
orchestrate, but this seems to be the only possible
option if one were to develop a consistent system in
transit cases, thus paving the way from a humoresque
or a fantasy to a romance,
from cacophony to
EU-phony . . .

STOP PRESS: ECJ decision. On 18 October 2005, the Grand Chamber of
the ECJ handed down its decision in Class International. The fact that this
case was dealt with by the Grand Chamber shows the paramount import-
ance of the issues involved.

The ECJ, following the Advocate General, considered that the provisions
of Community law under consideration must be interpreted as meaning
that a trade mark owner cannot oppose the mere entry into the Commu-
nity, under the external transit procedure or the customs warehousing

procedure, of genuine goods bearing a mark which had not already
been put on the market in the Community by that right-holder with his
consent. Since the mere physical introduction of the goods into the territ-
ory of the Community is not ‘importing’ and does not entail ’using the
mark in the course of trade’,52 the trade mark owner cannot therefore
oppose that introduction under those provisions or make it conditional
on the existence of a final destination already specified in a third country,
possibly pursuant to a sale agreement.53 The ECJ did not regard the con-
tention that there is a real risk that the goods will be released for free cir-
culation as conclusive in this regard.54

The ECJ reached this solution on the basis of Article 7(1) of the Trade
Mark Directive and Article 13(1) of the Community Trade Mark Regula-
tion – setting out the ‘exhaustion’ principle55 – and not by analogy with
earlier case-law based on Article 30 EC, as seemed to be the case in AG
Jacobs’ opinion. This could at first sight suggest that the scope of the
Court’s decision in Class International should be limited to (genuine)
grey-market goods. However, this approach induced the ECJ into inter-
preting the concept of ‘importation’ in Article 5(1) of the Directive and
Article 9(1) of the Regulation, which apply without distinction to authentic
and non-authentic goods, as requiring introduction of the goods into the
Community ‘for the purposes of putting them on the market therein’.56
Therefore the criticism raised in the above article remains relevant.

The ECJ also decided that ‘offering’ and ‘putting on the market’ within
the meaning of Community law, which do amount to actionable trade
mark use, may include, respectively, the offering and sale within the Com-
munity of original goods bearing a trade mark and having the customs
status of non-Community goods, when the offer is made and/or the sale
is effected while the goods are placed under the external transit procedure
or the customs warehousing procedure. The right-holder may only
oppose the offering or the sale of such goods when he can prove that it
necessarily entails the putting of those goods on the Community market.
In this latter case it is irrelevant where the addressee of the offer or the
purchaser are established and whether the provisions of the contract
contain restrictions on the resale or the customs status of the goods.57 It
cannot be assumed that the goods are likely to be put on the market in
the Community on the sole basis of the fact that their owner, the addres-
see of the offer or the purchaser engage in parallel trade.58

Concerning the onus of proof, that the goods are released for free cir-
culation or that they are on offering or sale which necessarily entails put-
ting them on the Community market, the ECJ considered that this lies
with the trade mark owner. If that is proven, the trader must prove the
trade mark owner’s consent to the marketing of the goods in the Com-
munity.59 Unlike Advocate General Jacobs, the ECJ was of the opinion
that the onus of proving interference is not a matter of national law,
but rather a question of Community law. Indeed, deciding otherwise
would have had as a consequence that the trade mark owners’ protection
could vary according to the legal system concerned.

50 Opinion of AG Jacobs in Class International (n 1 above) [63] and [70].

51 When asked to deal with the issue of the burden of proof of the destination
of the goods—and therefore of the likelihood that the goods could ulti-
mately be released for free circulation within the Community—Jacobs
simply refers, to the national law of the member states.

importation of those goods without his consent, the Community legislat-
ure has thus allowed the trade mark proprietor to control the initial
marketing in the Community of goods bearing the mark. . .’ (emphasis
added)

52 Para 44.

53 Para 45.

54 Para 48.
55 Cf para 33: ‘. . .By making it clear that putting goods on the market outside
the Community does not exhaust the proprietor’s rights to oppose the

56 Para 54.

57 Para 58.

58 Para 59.

59 Para 74. The ECJ refers here to its decision in Case C-414/99 Zino Davidoff

and Levi Strauss, para 54.


