ARTICLE

809

Transparency, trust, and the patent system
Konstantinos Karachalios and Shirin Elahi*

Change and overreach
The very nature and availability of knowledge is chan-
ging. The processes of knowledge generation and inno-
vation are becoming increasingly complex, delocalized,
and cross-sectoral1 and the way codiﬁed knowledge and
its potential rewards are controlled and appropriated
across networks governs its successful application.2 Sim-
ultaneously, as information has become increasingly
abundant, the question arises as to what knowledge has
value. As innovative knowledge becomes recognized as
the driver of productivity and economic growth in the
knowledge-based economy,3 understanding this ‘knowl-
edge paradox’ (identiﬁed as one of the ﬁve key driving
system)4
forces affecting the future of
becomes of critical importance. Here, the generation,
appropriation, and control of knowledge lie at the heart
of the modern knowledge economies—and IP rights (in
particular, patents) that protect this knowledge can be
described as their currency. It is therefore not surprising
that issues around knowledge and its ownership have
become contested by an increasing number of actors, as
the stakes are very high. This has led to the patent
system today being questioned by many. If the judge-
ment is negative, it could have far-reaching effects:

the patent

fear that we have overreach on both sides of

I
the
equation. If that is true, we will have to brace ourselves for
the collapse of the patent system. Then we will have to
start
thinking of completely different business models,
founded on secrecy rather than disclosure.5

Transparency
A major criticism levied at the patent system is the per-
ceived lack of openness or transparency. This is an
indictment of a system where the very name ‘patent’
means clear, open, unenclosed, and freely accessible, as it
originates from the Latin pate¯re, ie to lay open. The anti-
pode to pate¯re is the verb late¯re (originating from the

Key issues
† Trust is a prerequisite for any system. It is the
lubricant of social interactions, easing the func-
tioning of
institutions and governments and
facilitating greater cooperation in society.

† Trust building requires transparency. We believe
that creating transparent
initiatives to debate
and potentially tackle the following three issues
will undoubtedly improve levels of trust in the
system and its institutions:

† Boundaries: what are the limits of enclosure?
† Bar: what innovation deserves reward?
† Balance: what is a fair balance?

Greek lanua´nein), ie to conceal, to render not perceiva-
ble.6 Therefore, the antonym of the word ‘patent’, at least
etymologically, is not open and freely accessible, but
latent, hidden, and thus inaccessible. Thus a promise of
openness, transparency, and ultimately accessibility has
been intrinsically linked to the emergence of the patent
system. Society has therefore every right to scrutinize the
system with regard to the original quid pro quo: the con-
ferring of a restricted monopoly in return for public
access to the knowledge it encapsulates.

In the social context, transparency implies openness,
communication, and accountability. However, examin-
ation of this concept in relation to patents depends on
the deﬁnition. Here, we believe that there are two
different narratives that can be applied.

Proprietary ownership v commons
This concept is the one most civil society actors and
opponents of the IPR system recognize. The IP system
intangible
is described as

enclosure of

‘the

the

*

Scenarios Analyst and Consultant/Project Manager of the EPO Scenarios
for the Future Project. Both authors here express strictly their personal
views. Email: shirin@shirinelahi.com.

1 D Ernst, ‘A new geography of knowledge? Asia’s role in global innovation

networks’, EEM Conference Beijing, 27 and 28 November 2008.

2 C Dhanaraj and A Parkhe, ‘Orchestrating innovation networks’ (2006) 31

Academy of Management Review 659– 669.

3 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)

(1996) The Knowledge-Based Economy. Paris. Available at http://www.oecd.
org/dataoecd/51/8/1913021.pdf.
Scenarios for the Future, EPO, 2007, available from the EPO website.

4
5 Prof Visser, University of South Africa. Interview for EPO’s Scenarios for

the Future Project.
Lantha´nein is also the root of lethargy and lethal.

6

# The Authors (2009). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

810

ARTICLE

commons of the mind’, where things that were formerly
accepted to be common property or uncommodiﬁable
are no longer.7 Here, the narrative is of a monopolistic
world that hampers
the
commons, where taking a stand against patents appears
to beneﬁt society.

the royalty-free world of

However, this concept rests on an in-built assumption
that it is possible to obtain the knowledge that forms the
subject matter of the patent at no or low cost, and that
enough people would be ready to donate their efforts and
enterprise in return for the public good and personal
reputation.8 This might work in some instances, but
there are limits to this model. For example, even the best
known example of commonality, Wikipedia, is asking for
charitable donations to support the continued operation
of its free knowledge projects, to pay for servers, hosting,
bandwidth, and operations staff.9

Secrecy v disclosure
Research into science and technology often takes place
behind closed doors, with the limits constantly being
expanded. Today, humans have the ability to create and
manipulate living forms in a way that was previously
unimaginable. The risks and beneﬁts of these advances
are acceptable to some, while to others they represent
the seeds of human destruction. Whatever the perspec-
tive, an advantage of the patent monopoly is that it not
only encourages researchers to put this private knowl-
edge into the public domain, thus enabling others to
‘stand on the shoulders of giants’ and extend the
boundaries of scientiﬁc endeavour, but also to subject
it to societal scrutiny. IP is one of very few monopolies
acceptable within the liberal market system and thus a
way of obtaining a competitive advantage. To use it,

7

J Boyle, ‘The second enclosure movement and the construction of the
public domain’ (2003) 66 Law and Contemporary Problems, Duke
University 33. Available at http://www.law.duke.edu/pd/papers/boyle.pdf.

8 C Andersen, Free: The Future of a Radical Price (Random House Business

Books, 2009); S Weber, The Success of Open Source (Harvard University
Press, 2004).

9 The Wikimedia Foundation’s appeal can be found on the Wikipedia

website.

10 S Schultz, ‘Patentrecht in der Krise: Lieber in den Panzerschrank’, Spiegel

Online Wirtschaft 3 January 2008. Available at http://www.spiegel.de/
wirtschaft/0,1518,526453,00.html. The ‘Verband Deutscher Maschinen-
und Anlagenbau’ (VDMA) suggests to its members to ﬁle only then for a
patent, if the products include a very complex technical knowhow and
thus secret, tacit knowledge. Available at http://www.ipb-ag.com/
06_0801_Patente_im_Maschinenbau.htm.

11 This assertion is invalid if patents fulﬁl their original purpose, which is

not always apparently the case. See S Chandrasekharan et al. ‘Proprietary
science, open science and the role of patent disclosure: the case of zinc-
ﬁnger proteins’ (2009) 27 Nature Biotechnology. The authors found ‘that
for academics, lack of access to information and materials is a greater
problem than the threat of patent lawsuits. However, because some of the

businesses walk a ﬁne line between sufﬁcient disclosure
in order to obtain a patent and sufﬁcient conﬁdential-
technological knowhow, or tacit knowledge,
ity of
beyond the reach of
the public domain—with the
courts and patent ofﬁces regulating this balance.

Despite the visible success of

the patent system,
secrecy and ﬁrst mover advantage remain powerful
business strategies and have experienced even a revival in
recent times.10 Should the patent system lose its appeal,
the unintended consequences might be greater secrecy
and opacity, rather than more openness and transpar-
ency, leaving the public with even less access to infor-
mation regarding technological evolution, at a time
where technology is pushing ethical and political fron-
tiers to previously unimaginable limits. Thus taking a
position against patents could potentially be a loss for
society.11

Both narratives have historical precedents. As men-
tioned above, openness lies at the heart of the system,
which was developed in Venice in 1474 as a means to
attract skilled craftsman and thus technical innovation.
Some 250 years later in England, a detailed description
of the invention became a requirement.12 This was an
explicit blow against secrecy. Knowledge in the medi-
eval ages was tightly controlled by guilds, with trans-
mission taking place from master to disciple under
strict conﬁdentiality rules. The concept of exposing
knowledge for dissection by the community is a
ground-breaking one originating in the Renaissance in
Europe and certainly due to its historical and cultural
roots. In the tradition of the vibrating agora` of Ancient
Greece, public spaces were re-created where people
competed dialectically with their ideas.13 The philo-
sophical discourse was closely linked to the scientiﬁc
one, so that scientiﬁc insight could be transformed into

access problems would have been alleviated if statutory obligations
regarding patent disclosure had been met, our research also suggests the
heretofore unrecognized possibility of an overlap between patents and
access to information and research materials. More complete patent
disclosure might also have obviated the need to generate various open
science alternatives . . . ’. They found in a concrete case that ‘even though
these patents are not being asserted against scientists, they confer
“practical excludability” because they do not meet the statutory
obligation of enabling scientists to practice the inventions that the patents
cover’.

12 D Guellec and B van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, The Economics of the

European Patent System (Oxford University Press, 2007).

13 The emergence of a new kind of agoraphobia is evoked in J Boyle’s recent

work: ‘I would argue that the chapters in this book present evidence of
another kind of cognitive bias, one that the behavioral economists have
not yet identiﬁed. Call it the openness aversion. Cultural agoraphobia.
We are systematically likely to undervalue the importance, viability, and
productive power of open systems, open networks, and nonproprietary
production’. Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind, Caravan
book (2008) 231.

Konstantinos Karachalios and Shirin Elahi . Transparency, trust, and the patent system

ARTICLE

811

technological applications.14 The
resultant age of
industrialization gave a decisive push to western capit-
alism, thereby radically transforming the face of the
earth. In contrast, public disclosure of knowledge in
hierarchical, imperial systems was either formally for-
bidden or strictly controlled.15

Trust
When the patent system originated, most inventors
were individuals protecting personal knowhow, or
working within a small group of scientists. Innovation
today is often multidisciplinary and global, with inno-
vators working together across geographic, disciplinary,
and commercial boundaries. Thus
the relationship
between trust and knowledge is rapidly evolving. John
Hardwig argues that the interplay shifts from an anti-
thetical relationship (you need to trust only when you
do not know; from the moment you know, there is no
need to trust) to a more symbiotic one.
‘Modern
knowers’ must trust each other, as no one can ever get
a complete overview of the whole process.16 Here the
patent system plays a pivotal role, because it provides
the legal and possibly ﬁnancial security to individuals
working within a collective setting that enables dispa-
rate parties to trust each other sufﬁciently to expose
their most valued assets—their knowledge.

Transparency is a major component of social trust.17
We contend that the heated discussions around some
aspects of the IP rights system (eg its ability to block
open standards and interoperability, patent thickets,
biopiracy, patents on life forms) are often a surrogate
for a wider societal debate on the more general under-
lying issues (north –south inequalities, genetic modiﬁ-
cations of higher life forms, knowledge as a public
good,18 etc.).

The root causes of societal concerns hinge on new technol-
ogies and the dilemmas they raise. However, they cannot
be dealt with when there is no link between consumer con-
cerns and the market place. This has resulted in distrust, in
turn leading to attacks on the patent system that serves
new technology.19

The patent system has taken the centre stage of the pol-
itical arena because it has become a pivotal element of
the knowledge economy era, offering some rules in the
often non-regulated, non-governed global environment
of knowledge generation, exchange, and control.20
Understandably the patent ofﬁces, with their adminis-
trative rather than policy-making background, do not
feel comfortable under the resultant spotlight. The
dilemma is how to ensure that the system remains suf-
ﬁciently trusted to maintain its function in a global
economy in an era when societal trust can no longer be
taken for granted.21

and facilitating

the question of

and governments

Building trust
Trust is a prerequisite for any system. It is the lubricant
of social interactions, easing the functioning of insti-
tutions
greater
cooperation in society. In the face of growing public
debate on the desirability of the system and its evol-
ution,
trust becomes fundamental.
Without
there are increased transaction costs
borne by society as a whole, as individuals, and insti-
tutions waste precious resources on attempts to prove
the credibility of institutional processes as well as to
enforce distrusted measures.22 Trust building requires
transparency and, for patent ofﬁces, whether it is desir-
able or not, transparency is today an essential require-
ment for the effective functioning of the system.

trust,

The IP system underpins the global economy, and
yet this is no guarantee of its survival as the cata-
strophic collapse of the ﬁnancial markets has shown.
Like the ﬁnancial system, one of the pillars of the econ-
omics of intangibles, there are systemic threats that
must be addressed in order to avoid the system being
stretched in too many directions by too many stake-
holders with their own particular interests. Without a
measure of reform and trust building, the system could
eventually disappear or become less relevant. There are
historical precedents here; in the nineteenth century,
the ﬁerce debates about the patent system led to its
abolition in Holland in 1869 (with a reintroduction

14 See pride to be recognized by a wider peers community as key driver for
science: T Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Univ. of Chicago,
1962).

15 In the inner circles of the Forbidden City in China, there was an

encyclopaedia with 13,000 volumes, which contained all the known
knowledge available at that time. Access was limited to the emperor and
certain courtiers.

16 J Hardwig, ‘The role of trust in knowledge’ (1991) 88 The Journal of

Philosophy 693 –708.

17 G Cvetkovich and RE Lo¨fstedt (eds), Social Trust and the Management of

Risk (Earthscan, London, 1999).

18 J Boyle, above note 13.

19 Dr J Staman, Rathenau Institute, The Netherlands. Interview for EPO

Scenarios for the Future Project.

20 See research project of the East –West Center ‘Governing the Global

Knowledge Economy’, available on the East– West Center website at http
://www.eastwestcenter.org/research/research-program-overview/
economics/.

21 See, for example, Lichtman/Zogby poll (2006) ‘Government, corporate
scandals damage public trust in institutions at the bedrock of society’; J
Nye et al. (eds) Why People Don’t Trust Governments (Harvard University
Press, 1997).

22 N Luhmann, Trust and Power: Two Works by Niklas Luhmann (John

Wiley and Sons, 1979).

812

ARTICLE

only taking place in 1911) and its continued rejection
by Switzerland until 1888.

Both authors were involved in the EPO Scenarios for
the Future project, which examined some of the issues
we have discussed above. We believe this was a ﬁtting
summary of the main challenges faced by the system.
As an outcome, four scenarios were published, setting
out possible futures for the system. In each of these,
the main driver and the challenges were different. In
Market Rules, business was the main driver, and the
challenges revolved around a system collapsing under
its own weight. In Whose Game, state power and geo-
politics took the lead and the patent system became a
tool for national interest, leading to it being split across
regions. In Trees of Knowledge, societal interests were
paramount, and issues of the commons and social
morality led the system to shrink. In the fourth scen-
ario, Blue Skies, the nature and pace of technology
caused the system to abolish the current one-size-ﬁts-
all model. The project asked many questions, questions
beyond the domain of any patent ofﬁce, yet ones that
deserve wider debate. It concluded that
the patent
system of tomorrow was unlikely to look like that of
today, given the many pressures on it, some of which
we are discussing in this paper.

So, how to build trust? We believe that the chal-
lenges to the future fall into three categories as set out
below. We believe that creating transparent initiatives
to debate and possibly tackle these issues will undoubt-
edly improve levels of
in the system and its
institutions.

trust

Boundaries: what are the limits
of enclosure?
The success of the patent system has led to the unre-
mitting expansion of its protection over the past few
decades. This enlargement has taken place in several
different directions. The most obvious enlargement has
been due to the TRIPS Agreement, which mandated
recognition of IP rights to member states of the WTO,
thereby linking IPR to the ability to engage in inter-
national trade. Alongside this geographical expansion,
the patent system has been stretched by revisions to
patentability criteria, which enabled the inclusion of

some non-technical

new forms of subject matter, incorporating many new
innovative ﬁelds,
(eg business
methods) and some ethically contested (eg animal,
plant, or human genes-related). This incorporation of
new innovative ﬁelds has also meant that some subjects
that might previously have been considered ‘subpaten-
table’23 be included. More importantly, these changes
have forced a system initially designed to protect dis-
crete innovation to grapple with complex knowledge of
a different, often interdisciplinary nature. In addition,
as the economic role of patents has become more
recognized, new types of players have started to take
part—not only every country wishing to participate in
global
trade, but also technology transfer ofﬁces
looking after the interests of universities that are now
able to patent their research, and ﬁnancial players such
as venture capitalists relying on patents as security for
innovative research. This expansion of the ‘enclosure’
has led to the inclusion of growing numbers of stake-
holders as well as issues.

Some argue that the time has come to examine the
limits of enclosure. Indeed, the US Supreme Court has
now concentrated the spotlight on certain areas. His-
torically, the patent system provided monopolies on
innovations that related to practical– technical ﬁelds,
but today many argue that these monopolies have been
extended to other types of innovations and creativity,
linked to the emergence of post-industrial societies.24
Another major problem is the impact on basic human
needs, such as medicines, food, and agriculture. As one
EPO interviewee said: ‘We are faced with uncontrolled
population explosion, resulting in energy and food
requirements and the destruction of the environment,
yet these problems go unsolved.’25 Whether the issue is
access to essential drugs that could save millions of
lives in the developing world,26 or to technologies for
climate change, the desirability of patent monopolies
on innovations that affect current basic human needs
becomes questionable.

Bar: what innovation deserves reward?
The patent system has traditionally served as a ﬁlter
separating trivial improvements from inventive techno-
logical developments. Determining where the bar lies
between these two is no mean feat: it takes time and

23 JH Reichman, ‘Of green tulips and legal kudzu: repackaging rights in

26 A signiﬁcant policy turn is signalled by GSK which announced it will ‘Put

subpatentable innovation’ 53 Van der Belt Law Review 1743 –1798.

24 For the ongoing and deep societal transformations, see C Hill’s, ‘The

Post-Scientiﬁc Society’ (2007) Issues in Science and Technology. Available
at http://www.issues.org/24.1/c_hill.html.

25 T Yoshida, Director General, AIPPI, Japan. Interview for EPO Scenarios

for the Future Project.

any chemicals or processes over which it has intellectual property rights
that are relevant to ﬁnding drugs for neglected diseases into a “patent
pool”, so they can be explored by other researchers’; see ‘Drug giant
GlaxoSmithKline pledges cheap medicine for world’s poor’,
guardian.co.uk, Friday, 13 February 2009.

Konstantinos Karachalios and Shirin Elahi . Transparency, trust, and the patent system

ARTICLE

813

requires substantial resources, so ‘raising the bar’ has
become synonymous with improving quality in the
patent system.27 Today, one of the most critical pro-
blems facing it is the sheer number of unexamined
patents clogging the system, currently estimated at 4
million patent applications across the three Trilateral
ofﬁces (EPO, USPTO, and JPO).28 These unexamined
patents are tantamount
to myriads of Damocles’
swords hanging over the heads of the innovation com-
munity, as nobody really knows their real value and
possible impact.

This

‘global patent warming’29 has

resulted in
internal workload stress for the patent ofﬁces. More
importantly, it has led to fundamental problems for the
system, such as unclear boundaries and patent thickets,
standards disputes, and controversies over traditional
knowledge and biopiracy. At the core of this lies the
question regarding quality: how to ensure that patents
are properly examined within a reasonable timescale,
and what level of innovation deserves the reward by
society? Few would argue against the importance of
rewarding creators for their innovations, yet
these
monopolies raise the costs for other innovators and
society as a whole.30 Perhaps the ‘ﬂash of genius’ test of
patentability was a step too far, but ensuring that the
bar is set so that the patent system rewards genuine
innovation rather than incremental development and
intellectual speculation is essential.31 Without the bar
correctly calibrated, the danger of shifting the pendu-
lum back from patent to latent is real. As both techno-
logical development and its
speculation potential
increase,
the patent system then runs the risk of
becoming a risk ampliﬁer between business games and
industrial development, comparable to the banking
sector in the recent past.32

Balance: what is a fair balance?
The patent system is regularly described as a virtuous
circle:33 once the technology has been protected by IP
rights,
it can be converted into products and new
businesses, bringing in revenues, which can then again
be invested in research and development, thereby creat-
ing more technological development. However, while

historically ﬂexibilities in or even the absence of a
patent system enabled many countries to climb the
ladder of development, TRIPS has denied late entrants
the same ﬂexibilities as recognition of IP rights is a pre-
requisite for membership of WTO and thereby the
ability to participate in global trade.

Thanks to the internet, a vast pool of technological
knowledge in the public domain is available to almost
everyone anywhere. This knowledge can theoretically
including legal
be used for a variety of purposes,
reverse engineering and copying,
in cases where the
invention is not patented locally or after expiration of
the granted monopoly term. However, access to this
knowledge requires both elevated technological skills
and the capacity for absorption of technological teach-
ings, ensuring that this is not a level playing ﬁeld. As
such skills seem to be context-sensitive and there are
vast variations in technical capacities and infrastruc-
ture, the system is most advantageous to the most
developed countries. This potentially also leads to a
serious distortion of the original promise of the patent
system. The
emergence of WIPO’s Development
Agenda shows that there is now a growing international
consensus that this is a serious problem.

The industrialised world made a promise to open up agri-
cultural reforms in return for acknowledgment of
IP
rights, but this has not happened,’ says Brad Huther, presi-
dent and CEO of the International Intellectual Property
Institute. ‘It is time to hold people accountable for what
has been negotiated in the past to enable the developing
world to improve its lot for the future. If the developing
world cannot take advantage of the teaching aspects of the
patent system, then the haves and have-nots will perpe-
tually remain in a vicious circle.34

Accelerating pace, increased demands
The nature and pace of economic, political, societal,
and technological change are quickening and the com-
plexity of
increasing.
Meeting these challenges is no mean task, particularly
for legal institutions such as the patent ofﬁces which
function according to complex legislative and bureau-
cratic timescales and processes. Unless
the patent

interactions and demands

is

27 C McGinley, ‘Taking the heat out of the global patent system’, Intellectual

30 E Maskin presented at the TACD Conference in January 2008 a

Asset Management August/September 2008.

28 Trilateral Statistical Report 2007 available from EPO website, s. table 4

‘Pendency in the procedure’; although about the half of them are under
search or examination, uncertainty about ﬁnal outcome is still high; from
the same report, the number of valid patents worldwide is estimated at
ca. 6.2 million. Refer to http://www.trilateral.net/statistics/tsr/2007/activity
.pdf.

29 C McGinley, above note 27.

mathematical proof that exclusive IP rights in a ﬁeld of sequential
innovation cause more harm than good.

31 J Bessen and MJ Meurer, Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and

Lawyers Put Innovators at Risk (Princeton University Press, 2008).

32 ‘Basel outlines stricter limits’, FT, 21 November 2008.
33 H Ogawa, Ex-Commissioner, Japan Patent Ofﬁce. Interview for EPO

Scenarios for the Future Project.

34 Scenarios for the Future, above note 4, p. 59.

814

ARTICLE

its
system ﬁnds a means
threatened virtue, by removing the excesses in the
system, it is likely to remain challenged.

to regain and protect

The patent system has too great an impact on the
economic and technological development of society to
fade from public prominence. However, it would be wise
to note that systemic threats arise when a system is
stretched in too many directions by too many stake-
holders with their own particular interests. Whether or
not these threats are recognised by the IP community,
it is important to remember that society today has
unprecedented access to alternative perspectives and
sources of information. Without greater transparency,

the credibility of the system as a whole is likely to
become increasingly questioned. Without transparency,
the patent system is likely to ﬁnd it difﬁcult to retain—
or restore—public trust. Without public trust, there will
be increased transaction costs that the system and society
have to bear. Public trust lubricates cooperation and
cooperation lubricates public trust. It is therefore time to
go back to the roots of the patent system and ﬁnd its
virtuous circle—one adapted to the twenty-ﬁrst century.


