830

ARTICLE

Antitrust and IP overlap: patent pooling
in the United States and the Russian Federation
Elza Dauletshina*

Antitrust and Intellectual Property law are the fastest-devel-
oping legal areas not only in the United States but all over
the world, including in the Russian Federation; and the way
these two areas overlap is much discussed in the legal com-
munity.1 One of the most difﬁcult challenges that the
courts, antitrust agencies and legal scholars face is ﬁnding an
optimal balance between antitrust restrictions on monopol-
istic activities and the substantial protection of IP rights.

Although both antitrust law and IP law are intended to
pursue the same goals – to promote the progress of science
and the useful arts,2 (as well as national welfare, efﬁcient
resource allocation and to support scientiﬁc and techno-
logical development), these goals are reached through dif-
ferent methodologies. While antitrust laws are meant to
prevent the monopolization of the market, IP laws grant
exclusive rights to IP owners, thus de facto granting them a
monopoly. Such a legitimate monopoly can in some cases
be used by companies to perpetrate antitrust violations, in-
cluding the elimination or prevention of competition.

Abuse of IP rights may cause anticompetitive effects on
the market, shifting IP matters into an antitrust dimension.
The main question is how to protect an intellectual rights
owner sufﬁciently without elimination of competition in
that market. This article seeks to answer this question by
analysing antitrust and IP law and regulations on patent
pooling in the United States and the Russian Federation.

General overview of patent pools
The modern economy is characterized by an increase in
the number of companies specializing in the commercial-
ization of IP. This tendency leads to the emergence of new
legal mechanisms that help to achieve this goal. One of
such means is patent pooling. The term ‘patent pool’ is
similar to the concept of cross-licensing, deﬁned as an

[e]xchange of licenses by two or more patent holders in order
that each may use or beneﬁt from the patents of the other.3

The author
† Elza Dauletshina is a 2014 graduate of the Private
International Law department at the Law Faculty
of National Research University Higher School of
Economics, Moscow, Russia.

This article
† This article

explains

and analyses different
approaches to regulating patent pooling in the
United States and the Russian Federation. The dif-
ference in the countries’ approaches lies not only
in legislative tradition but also in the time period
devoted by its legal community to exploring the
issue.

† In the case of the United States, doctrine and case
law on patent pooling that has been developing
for more than a hundred years may be used as
guidance in achieving, in a relatively short time
and without mishap on the way, the balance
which has long been sought between antitrust and
IP law.

† Russian antitrust legislation does not currently
cover issues related to patent pooling and is about
to expand its regulations to cover a very large
number of relationships involving IP rights. This
expansion will be accompanied by an analysis of
approaches currently used elsewhere in the world,
and its success will depend on choosing the best
practices.

‘Patent pool’ refers to the assembling of various IP
rights subject to cross-licensing arrangements into one
package available for licence, usually in exchange for

*
1

Email: elza.dauletshina@gmail.com.
See, for example, Pitofsky, Robert, Challenges of the New Economy: Issues at
the Intersection of Antitrust and Intellectual Property, Georgetown Law
Faculty Publications and Other Works, Paper 314 (2001); Debra Bernstein
and Rod Ganske, ‘Lessons Learned When the Antitrust and Intellectual
Property Laws Collide’, Intellectual Property & Technology Law Journal, Vol.
21, No. 1 (2009); Amedeo Arena, Bettina Bergmann and Jay Himes, ‘Two
Bodies of Law Separated by a Common Mission: Unilateral Conduct by

Dominant Firms at the IP/Antitrust Intersection in the EU and the US’,
European Competition Law Journal (2013).

2 US Const. Art. I, § 8, cl. 8; Edward C. Walterscheid, To Promote the Progress
of Useful Arts: American Patent Law and Administration, 1798 –1836, at 56 –
7 (1998); Letter from James Madison to Thomas Jefferson (17 Oct. 1788),
reprinted in The Republic of Letters 566 (James Morton Smith ed., 1995).

3 Black’s Law Dictionary 376 (6th ed. 1990).

# The Author(s) (2015). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jpv148

Elza Dauletshina . Antitrust and IP overlap

ARTICLE

831

royalties.4 With the help of patent pools,
individual
owners of IP rights can give up their exclusive rights in
their patents, contribute them to a ‘pool’, and make
those rights available under a single package or joint
licence to each other and to the third parties (prospective
licensees).5 Such pools signiﬁcantly reduce the transac-
tion costs of exchanging rights when compared to a
series of one-shot licensing deals. When they are not
being used as a cover for a cartel,6 they add signiﬁcantly
to the efﬁcient operation of the patent system,7 as many
industries have discovered.8

Historical development of patent pools
The emergence of patent pools allowed right holders to
reach a new level of economic gain due to the synergy of
their patents’ combination. However, patent pooling
practice is still considered to be a novelty in some coun-
tries, such as Russian Federation, whereas in the US the
ﬁrst court cases and theoretical studies can be traced
back to the end of the 19th century.

One of the earliest patent pools was created in 1917 and
consisted of a number of patents necessary for the manu-
facture of aeroplanes and was called the Aircraft Manufac-
turers’ Pool.9 A cross-licensing agreement was proposed by
the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics to the
two companies that owned blocking patents, establishing a
ﬂat per-aircraft royalty for access to the patents in the
pool. The pool included almost all aeroplane manufac-
turers and resolved all pending patent infringement claims.
After the patent pool formation, the Secretary of War
sent the Attorney General s request to provide an anti-
trust advisory opinion. The Attorney General noted that
the pro-competitive beneﬁts of the arrangement out-
weighed any anticompetitive effects,10 it being observed
that the per-aircraft royalty fee was ‘materially lower’
than the royalty fee demanded by one of the companies
alone.11 The Attorney General thus came to a conclusion
that the aircraft manufacturers could not have con-
structed ‘any modern approved form of airplane without

infringing one or more alleged patents of each of these
companies’12 and that the agreement had an overall pro-
competitive effect on the aircraft industry.

The law regarding patent pools in the United States has
been ‘changing dramatically over the last century and a
half’,13 testing the line between the protection of IP rights
and its anti-competitive effects. The Russian Federation’s
legislative history on correlation of antitrust and IP laws is
less than ﬁfteen years old. The Law of the RSFSR of 22
March 1991, ‘On competition and restriction of monop-
olistic activity on commodity markets’, gave a general
indication of the IP rights’ limits; it stated that the anti-
trust law did not apply to the relationships governed by
the rules protecting the rights of inventions, industrial
designs, trade marks and copyrights except when

the agreement relating to their use aimed at restricting com-
petition or acquisition, use, and violation of the exclusive
rights to IP may lead to unfair competition.14

The Federal Law of 26 July 2006, ‘On Protection of Com-
petition’, narrowed the scope of the earlier law’s application
by excluding the provision related to IP rights’ use aimed
at restricting competition. According to Articles 10(4) and
Art. 11(9) of the current antitrust law the prohibitions
regarding an abuse of the dominant position in the market
and the prohibition of anti-competitive agreements of eco-
nomic ﬁgures does not apply to transactions involving IP
rights. However, the antitrust law still applies where the use
of IP rights is associated with unfair competition.15

Types of patent pools and their purpose
Currently, both in the United States and the Russian
Federation, two types of patent pooling organizational
structures may be used to establish a patent pool:

a speciﬁc organization to which the patents are licensed or
assigned such as a joint venture or an SPV [Special Purpose
Vehicle] could be created;16

the conclusion of patent pool agreements between all of the
patent owners.17

4 Barbara Sicalides and Kathleen A. Mullen, ‘The Plane Lands on Patent Pooling’

9 George Bittlingmayer, ‘Property Rights, Progress, and the Aircraft Patent

(2001), note 1 // URL: http://www.pepperlaw.com/publications/the-plane-
lands-on-patent-pooling-2001-04-10/, last accessed August 25, 2015.
Ibid.

5
6 George Priest, ‘Cartels and Patent License Arrangements’, 20 J. L. & Econ.

309 (1977); Carl Kaysen and Donald Turner, ‘Antitrust Policy: An
Economic and Legal Analysis’ 164 (1959) (role of patent pools in Gypsum,
Masonite, and Hartford-Empire glass cartels).

7 Alfred Kahn, ‘Fundamental Deﬁciencies of the American Patent Law’, 30
Am. Econ. Rev. 975 (1940) (‘All things considered, it must be concluded
that the pool is a distinct improvement over the patent law as originally
contemplated in effecting technological advance under modern
conditions’.)

8 Pooling of Patents: Hearings on H.R. 4523 Before the House Comm. on

Patents, 74th Cong. 1140, 1144 –45 (1935).

Agreement’, 31 J.L. & Econ. 227, 232 (1988).

10 31 Op. Atty. Gen. at 170 –1.
11 Ibid at 167.
12 Ibid.
13 Steven C. Carlson, Note, ‘Patent Pools and the Antitrust Dilemma’, 16 Yale

J. on Reg. 359, 373 (1999).

14 Article 2(1)(2) of the Law of RSFSR of 22 March 1991 N 948-1 ‘On
competition and restriction of monopolistic activity on commodity
markets’ (‘Vedomosti SND and VS RSFSR’, 18 April 1991, N 16, p. 499).

15 Ibid at Art. 14.
16 For regulation in the Russian Federation see ‘Civil Code of the Russian

Federation (Part Four)’ of 18.12.2006 N 230-FZ (‘The Parliament
Newspaper’, N 214 –215, 21.12.2006 Art. 1365).

17 Ibid, Art. 1367.

832

ARTICLE

These organizational structures, commonly used in the
United States, may carry certain risks for their potential
participants due to the absence of speciﬁc legal regula-
tion in the Russian Federation. The implementation of
projects based on legal structures for which the legisla-
tion makes no speciﬁc provision may be considered as
contrary to Russian legislation by courts.

Both patent pooling organizational structures can be
used to achieve the initial goals of a patent pool partici-
pants. However, the creation of a separate corporation
(or holding) is usually driven by the need of forming a
‘mega pool’ that has a complex administrative structure,
including special regulations for the appointment and
approval of ofﬁcers, corporate audit and regulation and
the distribution of votes among the parties that partici-
pate in the corporation. The number of votes that a
patent pool member can receive is usually based on the
value of the patent that was contributed to the pool by
the party and its value is determined by an independent
commission rather than as a result of mutual negoti-
ation. This type of patent pooling organizational struc-
ture can be found throughout history in such different
industries as automobile and aircraft, sewing machines,
bathtubs, door parts, seeded raisins, coaster brakes, and
a variety of other technologies.18

Patents that are added to the pool after its formation
are usually divided into two groups: normal patents and
exceptional patents. Normal patents are licensed into the
pool for all to use, with no special royalty payout going
to the inventor or the ﬁrm.19 Exceptional patents would
normally earn some ongoing royalties, in an amount
which would be determined by a formal arbitration pro-
cedure. To achieve that, a patentee must ﬁle a statement
to the Board of Arbitrators which, in turn, must determine
whether a patent is exceptional. If the patent is found to
be exceptional, the Board will then set the amount of
compensation that the patentee would receive.

Usually mega pools are not intended to receive royal-
ties. They are found to fulﬁl the need of contributing
patent licences when certain sectors of the economy, in
which many patents that block each other exist, do not
receive all the beneﬁts of the patent rights that could be
obtained through patent pooling. As mentioned above,
the creation of the Manufacture Airborne Association
was invited by the Advisory Committee of the United
States Government, since the astronomical royalties that

were demanded in the licensing agreements caused
obstacles to this industry, which as a result could not
produce a sufﬁcient number of aircraft for public use.

The creation of a special project company for the for-
mation of a patent pool entails a number of legal risks
from the antitrust regulation point of view. Evaluation of
the anti-competitive effects of a patent pool will directly
affect the assessment of the legality of the joint venture as
a whole. If the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is created
solely or primarily for the purpose of accumulating and
distributing licences from the patent pool, its survivability
will greatly depend on the pool’s compliance with the
antitrust law. If, in contrast, a patent pool is considered to
be only one of the elements of the complex business struc-
ture, its non-compliance with the antitrust law will not
result in the termination of a joint venture’s existence.

Smaller, more modest pools are usually aimed at spe-
ciﬁc industry sectors or technologies. However, regardless
of the particular industry or the scale of the institution
for which the patent pool is established, it still embraces
two principles on which mega pools operate. First, con-
solidate property rights in a centralized entity (ie, the con-
tract); secondly, establish an evaluation mechanism to
divide up the royalties, which in most cases can be
achieved by implementing a simple formula. Most small-
scale pools are often ‘nothing more than multilateral con-
tracts incorporating these two basic elements’.20

Pro-competitive and anti-competitive
effects
As noted by legal scholars,21 properly structured patent
pools promote IP integration, allowing technology to be
more efﬁciently available, thus beneﬁting consumers by
introducing new products and bringing down the costs.22
To determine whether the pro-competitive beneﬁts of
such arrangements outweigh any anticompetitive effects
the courts apply the rule of reason test.23 In Standard
Oil Co. v United States the United States Supreme Court
concluded that

[i]f the available advantages are open upon reasonable terms
to all manufacturers desiring to participate, such inter-
change may promote rather than restrain competition.24

Thus, the Supreme Court conﬁrmed that the potential ef-
ﬁciencies of the patent pooling agreements are recognized
by the United States courts.

18 Floyd L. Vaughan, The United States Patent System 40 –50 (1956).
19 Pooling of Patents: Hearings on H.R. 4523 Before the House Comm. on

Patents, 74th Cong. 1140, 1144 –5 (1935).

20 Robert P. Merges, Institutions for Intellectual Property Transactions: The

Case of Patent Pools at 23 (August 1999).

21 Sicalides and Mullen, op. cit.

22 U.S. Dep’t of Justice & Federal Trade Comm’n, Antitrust Guidelines for the

Licensing of Intellectual Property § 2.3 (1995), reprinted in 4 Trade Reg.
Rep. (CCH) } 13,132.

23 283 U.S. 163, 171 (1931).
24 Ibid.

Elza Dauletshina . Antitrust and IP overlap

ARTICLE

833

At the same time, pooling arrangements that are based
upon or accompanied by inappropriate purposes, restric-
tions, or activities can be found in violation of the
Sherman Act.25 In 1948 in United States v Line Materials
Co.,26 the Supreme Court found cross-licensing arrange-
ment invalid, as designed to ﬁx prices and violating
Section 1 of the Sherman Act. These crosslicensing
agreements entered by the companies included price
maintenance provisions restricting the prices at which
their licensees could sell products manufactured under
the patents. Later, in United States v Singer Manufactur-
ing Co.,27 the Supreme Court held that a patent pooling
agreement concluded by US, Italian and Swiss sewing
machine manufacturers violated the Sherman Act since
the sole purpose of this arrangement was to drive a rival
Japanese manufacturer out of the US market.28 Six years
later, in 1969, the United States Supreme Court in Zenith
Radio Corp. v Hazeltine Research, Inc.29 afﬁrmed the in-
validity of a television and radio patent pool which was
established with the purpose if excluding ﬁrms from
Canadian markets that did not agree to manufacture
their products in Canada.30

Collective standards and governmental
authorities
The establishment of patent pools also allowed their
members to set collective technical standards for the
certain types of product. Such standards can establish
uniﬁed requirements for conﬁguration and compatibil-
ity of technical devices, data formats, or a set of charac-
teristics, that the product samples must have.

The emergence of such standards can however affect
the IP rights of different companies, ‘making compliance
with such standards prohibitively costly from a manu-
facturer’s perspective.’31 As an example, provided by
Sicalides and Mullen, if the set standards require manu-
facturer’s access to a number of different patents, that
party may be forced into negotiating separately with
each patent-holder to obtain a licence for the use of such

25 Sicalides and Mullen, op. cit.; see also United States v Line Materials Co.,
333 U.S. 287, 311 (1948); United States v New Wrinkle, Inc., 342 U.S. 371,
380 (1952).

26 333 U.S. 287 (1948).
27 374 U.S. 174 (1963).
28 Ibid at 196 –97.
29 395 U.S. 100 (1969).
30 Ibid at 118.
31 Sicalides and Mullen, op. cit.
32 Ibid.
33 Roger B. Andewelt, ‘Analysis of Patent Pools Under the Antitrust Laws’, 53

Antitrust L.J. 611, 616 (1984).

34 Ibid at 617.

patents.32 A patent pool is designed to eliminate these
types of problems and allow to the owners of the various
patents necessary for conformance to the standards to
reduce the costs involved in negotiating with several po-
tential licensees.33 Patent pooling can also encourage in-
novation among its members in order to garner the full
value of the patents involved.34 Further, patent pool
members are usually protected against costly infringe-
ment suits.35 The advantages with respect to immunity
are apparent in the situations dealing with the blocking
patents, such as the one involving the Aircraft Manufac-
turers’ Pool.36

Patent pools also allow access to valuable IP rights,
thus, increasing the number of manufacturers who can
obtain necessary patents to conform to the standards
and satisfy the consumers’ demands.

In many cases, establishing certain standards has a posi-
tive impact on the market as well as solving the problem
of compatibility of products and technologies. On the
other hand, the establishment of standards may cause a
decrease in innovation and encourage monopolization
attempts. That is why patent pooling agreements are care-
fully examined by the antitrust authorities, including the
Federal Trade Commission37 and the Antitrust Division of
the Department of Justice38 in the United States. Even
though the Federal Antimonopoly Service in the Russian
Federation is the governmental body responsible for de-
velopment and enforcement of antitrust law, it has not yet
faced the challenge of providing an antitrust analysis of a
patent pooling agreement.

Because the Department of Justice letters are considered
by some authors to provide an effective ‘template for patent
pooling arrangements that should not run afoul of the anti-
trust laws’,39 the same level of signiﬁcance could be attribu-
ted to the Federal Antimonopoly Service commentaries
and analysis40 once they are demanded by the market.

MPEG-2 and DVD patent pools
The two most famous and successful patent pooling
agreements examined by the Department of Justice dealt

35 Ibid at 615.
36 IP Guidelines § 2.3.
37 See the Federal Trade Commission’s authorities on providing advisory

opinions 16 C.F.R. §§ 1.1– 1.4 (‘Advisory Opinions’).

38 See the Department of Justice’s authorities on business review procedure 28

C.F.R. § 50.6 (‘Antitrust Division Business Review Procedure’).

39 Richard J. Gilbert, ‘Antitrust for Patent Pools: A Century of Policy

Evolution’, Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 3, para 3 (2004).

40 See the Federal Antimonopoly Service’s authorities to provide clariﬁcations

on antitrust law the Russian Federation Government Resolution dated
30.06.2004 N 331 ‘On approval of the Federal Antimonopoly Service
Resolution’ // ‘Russian newspaper’, N 162, 31.07.2004, Art. 6.3.

834

ARTICLE

with MPEG-2 and DVD standards. The ﬁrst arrange-
ment was in a form of a joint venture, according to
which MPEG LA would offer a package licence that
consisted of patents owned by various licensors that are
‘essential’ for compliance with the compression technol-
ogy standard developed by MPEG-2.41 The second
arrangement was quite similar and proposed that
Toshiba Corporation would assemble and offer a single
license for a package of patents that are ‘essential’ for
compliance with the DVD formats.42 The Department of
Justice closely scrutinized these patent pooling agree-
ment proposals and, by approving them, set an example
of the patent pooling arrangements that can withstand
antitrust scrutiny.

The Department’s analysis of such IP pools addressed
the question of whether the proposed licensing arrange-
ments are likely to integrate any complementary patent
rights and, if so, whether the resulting competitive bene-
ﬁts of patent pooling agreements are likely to outweigh
any harm caused to the competition by this arrange-
ments.43 However,
if a patent pooling arrangement
only aggregates competing patents, it could give licen-
sors an economic incentive to use the patent pool to
reduce competition among each other.44 For this reason,
the patents included in the pool should complement
rather than compete with each other, so that the pool is
considered to be an effective way of distributing those
complementary patent rights to licensees.45

After a detailed analysis of the DVD and MPEG propo-
sals, the Department of Justice concluded, with respect to
both, that it would not be presently inclined to initiate
antitrust enforcement against either arrangement.46 Both
MPEG-2 and DVD patent pools were found to consist of
‘essential’ patents, that do not have an economically feas-
ible alternatives, and, thus, in compliance with antitrust
law. It should be noted, that while properly drafted patent
pooling agreements have numerous pro-competitive ben-
eﬁts on the market in some circumstances they also have
the ability to limit or restrict competition. That is why the

letters of the Department of Justice establishing a certain
set of rules with which the patents in the pool have to
comply is of such a great importance. These letters
provide guidance both to antitrust authorities and to the
IP right owners.

Patent pools in the Russian Federation
Even though the rules that apply to patent pooling agree-
ments are well developed in the United States, the Russian
Federation laws do not provide any speciﬁc regulation of
this matter. As some authors note,
‘[c]ontemporary
Russian law lags behind the US law on the issue of patent
pools for more than a hundred years’.47 Thus we may only
rely on the principle of freedom of contract48 and the dis-
cretionary origins of private law,49 when suggesting that
patent pools can be legitimately created under Russian
legislation.

Further, there is no elaborate position in Russian legal
doctrine regarding the relation of antitrust and IP law.
This issue is currently being heavily discussed by Russian
authors. The discussions mostly cover general ideas and
consideration.50 However, based on the growing interest
in the subject shown by legal authors and legislators, it
may be expected that speciﬁc areas of antitrust and IP law
interactions, such as patent pooling, will be addressed in
the near future.

This does not mean that the intersection of antitrust
and IP law will remain the same in the future. According
to the ‘Strategy of Competition and Antitrust Regula-
tions Development in the Russian Federation for 2013–
2024’ the Federal Antimonopoly Service plans to ‘extend
the application of competition law on agreements on the
use of exclusive rights, leading to restriction, prevention
and elimination of competition in the sale of goods’.51
This extension of antitrust law will result in regulation of
patent pooling and will also cover a signiﬁcant part of IP
rights relationships which were previously out of the
scope of antitrust regulations. This process of ﬁnding a

41 Letter from Joel I. Klein, Acting Assistant Attorney General, to Gerrard

48 ‘Civil Code of the Russian Federation (Part One)’ 30.11.1994 N 51-FZ

R. Beeney, Esq. (26 June 1997).

42 Letter from Joel I. Klein, Assistant Attorney General, to Carey R. Ramos,

Esq. (June 10, 1999)

43 Ibid. at 5.
44 Wynne S. Carvill and Douglas D. Leeds, ‘Antitrust Issues in Management of

Intellectual Property’, 438 PLI/Pat. 59, 74 (1997).

45 Joel I. Klein, Address before the Practicing Law Institute Third Annual
Institute for Intellectual Property Law (Sept. 1997), in 490 PLI/Pat 437,
447.

46 Letter from Joel I. Klein, Acting Assistant Attorney General, to Gerrard
R. Beeney, Esq. (26 June 1997) at 16; Letter from Joel I. Klein, Assistant
Attorney General, to Carey R. Ramos, Esq. (10 June 1999) § IV.

47 Vadim Borodkin, Elena Cherkasova, ‘Patent pools: the legal nature and

trends of application in Russia’, Legal Insight, No. 8 (14), 2012.

(‘Collection of Laws of the Russian Federation’, 05.12.1994, N 32, art. 421).

49 Ibid Art. 1 (2).
50 A.E. Shastitko, A.A. Kurdin, Protection of Intellectual Property Rights and

Competition Policy: Seeking for a Better Balance, Journal of the New
Economic Association, No. 1 (21), 2014, p. 111– 135; Arzumanyan A.E.
‘Competition in the Markets of Intellectual Products From a Position
Antitrust: Structural Analysis’, Modern economy: Problems and Solutions,
No. 1 (37), 2013, p. 8 – 15.

51 Art. 2.1.3 of the ‘Strategy of Competition and Antitrust Regulations

Development in the Russian Federation for 2013 –2024’ //URL: http://www.
fas.gov.ru/netcat_ﬁles/File/Str_razv_konk_i_antimonop_reg_13-14.pdf,
last accessed August 25, 2015.

Elza Dauletshina . Antitrust and IP overlap

ARTICLE

835

new balance between antitrust and IP law will require a
great deal legislative work, which may extend over many
years.

This extension of antitrust regulation on intellectual
property may take place even sooner, if the Federal Anti-
monopoly Service will chose to bypass the legislative pro-
cedure and implement this extension on case by case
basis. Such concern is voiced in light of a recent decision
of the Arbitrazh Court of the Moscow Circuit of March
18, 2015 in case No. A40-42997/14. The court noted that,
while a patent owner has the right to decide for a patented
products to enter the market, while doing so, he must
comply with limitations established by Russian antitrust
law. At the same time, the court’s decision was based on a

the situation,

taking into
comprehensive analysis of
account all the anticompetative actions taken by the
company, and the court indicated the fact, that being an
owner of intellectual property rights does not give a per-
mission to violate the antitrust law. Further development
of antitrust and IP laws in the Russian Federation is likely
to result in an even greater overlap of these two areas of
law. This being so it is inevitable that issues of patent
pooling will emerge before the legislators and will require
regulation. What we can do now is open up discussions
on this issue, carefully study the development of patent
pooling regulations in other countries and implement the
most successful models for protecting IP rights and pro-
moting fair competition.


