___________________
|
406 |

| ARTICLE

Dilution in the US, Europe, and beyond:
international obligations and basic definitions
Ilanah Simon*

1. Introduction
This is the ﬁrst of two articles on trade mark dilution.
It compares the protection against dilution1 offered
in the United States and the European Union, asks
what the jurisdictions have to learn from each other
and questions whether the two regimes meet the
trade mark obligations under international law. The
way in which blurring is tested will receive particular
attention in a subsequent article, being one ‘micro’
example in which the many detailed similarities
between the dilution provisions of the two jurisdic-
tions can be examined.

With regard to the US law, the focus will be on the
Trademark Dilution Revision Act 2005, and on
the EU side particular attention will be paid to the
jurisprudence of
Justice,
OHIM (the body responsible for administering the
Community trade mark) and the UK.

the European Court of

First though, it is necessary to identify what inter-
national law requires in the way of protection for
well-known marks.

2. Dilution protection under
international law
The Paris Convention

Key issues
 Dilution of an earlier trade mark through the
exploitation of a later one is a concept that is
well known in United States federal and state
law, though it has an analogue in the protec-
tion accorded to marks with reputations in
the European Union too.

 In addition to the development of dilution
doctrine in the United States and in Europe,
the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) has been active in recommending how
dilutionary issues should be tackled; WIPO’s
constituency is however a wider one, including
emerging markets in which both consumer
and commercial responses to the threat of
dilution may be different.

 The evolution and scope of protection against
dilution in the United States is somewhat
different from that in Europe. This article
considers current proposals for reform in the
United States and considers what lessons the
United States experience has for Europe.

Bespoke protection for well-known trade marks ﬁrst
appeared in Article 6bis of the Paris Convention.
However, the protection envisaged by that article
rests on a traditional confusion-based conception
of infringement, since it calls upon the countries
of the Paris Union to refuse to register, prohibit
the use of, or to cancel a later mark which creates

confusion with the earlier well-known mark. More-
over, its protection is limited to situations in which
the later use is on goods which are identical or similar
to those for which the earlier mark is well-known.
Instead,
is that
protection is afforded to marks that are well-known
in a particular jurisdiction, even when they have

the great novelty of Article 6bis

* Queen Mary Intellectual Property Research Institute, University of
London. The author would like to thank the following people (in
alphabetical order) for reading and commenting on this article: Mats
Bjo¨rkenfeldt, Dr Gail Evans, Phillip Johnson, Dr Jukka Palm, Professor
Jeremy Phillips, Dr Spyros Maniatis and Alexandra Sims. The paper on
which this article is based was presented at the 5th Annual Intellectual
Property Scholars’ Conference, Yeshiva University, New York, 11 and 12
August 2005.

1 Though there is little consensus on the precise meaning of dilution it is
widely acknowledged that there are at least two types: dilution by blurring
(harm to the distinctiveness of the earlier mark, possibly to the extent
that its ability to act a trade mark for its owner’s goods is impaired) and
dilution by tarnishment (damage to the image of the mark by associating
it with unsavoury or low-quality goods). See McCarthy, McCarthy on
Trademarks and Unfair Competition, ss 24.67–24.70.

Ó The Author (2006). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

Ilanah Simon · Dilution in the US, Europe, and beyond

not been used and are not
jurisdiction.2

registered in that

Thus the Paris Convention imports no obligation
to provide dilution protection. Instead,
it merely
extends traditional trade mark protection to well-
known but unregistered marks.

TRIPs

The TRIPs Agreement, by which all members of the
WTO are bound, provides protection that is a little
closer to what we understand by dilution protection.
Under Article 16(3), TRIPs extends Article 6bis of
the Paris Convention so that it applies to later use
on goods which are dissimilar to those for which the
earlier mark is well-known. This brings international
trade mark law closer to the conventional view of
dilution, which has focused on use of the later marks
on goods which are dissimilar to those on which the
earlier mark has been used or registered for.3

The type of harm to the earlier well-known mark

called for in Article 16(3) is that

use of that trademark in relation to those goods or
services would indicate a connection between those
goods or services and the owner of the registered
trademark and provided that the interests of the owner
of the registered trademark are likely to be damaged by
such use [emphasis added]

_____________________
|
|
|
|
|
|

ARTICLE

407

goods or services and the owner of the earlier mark.
This is more like traditional confusion (where con-
sumers believe that the later goods were made by or
under the authority of the earlier user) than the
type of connection between the two parties’ marks
that is necessary for dilution to occur. Furthermore,
Article 16(3) provides these words as an explanation
of how Article 6bis Paris can apply to a dissimilar
goods situation. Ultimately though, its purpose is to
apply Article 6bis and Article 6bis is an expression
of
traditional, confusion-based infringement and,
contrary to the comments of Daniel Gervais,4 Article
16(3) does not provide dilution protection per se.

Article 16(2) of TRIPs provides further clariﬁcation
on various aspects of well-known mark protection,
but does not add anything on the subject of the type
of protection that is offered.5

The TRIPs Agreement merely sets down the min-
imum standards for the protection of
intellectual
property that WTO members must provide.6 There
is nothing to prevent its signatories from providing
greater protection than that laid down in TRIPs; so,
while TRIPs does not oblige members to provide
dilution protection, it does not prevent them from

