ARTICLE

51

Walking the groundless threats minefield
Ewan Nettleton and Brian Cordery*

1. Introduction
Whether a groundless threats action could arise on
threatening litigation depends on several
factors.
The type of IP right involved will always be the start-
ing point, since for some IP rights, such as copyright,
there are no groundless threats provisions. That is not
to say that there can be no cause of action where a
threat has been made in relation to such rights. Other
causes of action may arise such as malicious false-
hood, defamation, or even contempt of court in
some circumstances. However, such actions are relat-
ively rare and, falling outside the scope of this article,
will not be considered further.

it

is
threat(s)

important
and

If there are threats provisions for the IP right
the
in question,
potential
the
circumstances and the identity of the parties involved
in the context of those provisions. The next section of
this article seeks to provide an overview of the law
for each relevant right.

to identify
consider

then

 The making of a groundless threat

to sue
another person for infringing an intellectual
property right may result in civil liability for
the person making the threat.

 It is important to distinguish those intellectual
property rights that give rise to threats actions
from those that do not and to consider the rel-
evant legislation and caselaw in each case.

 The risk of a statement made being considered
a threat can lead to intellectual property owners
launching legal proceedings before seeking a
negotiated settlement.

 The option of suing any party for making a
infringement,
groundless
including the IP owner’s solicitors, may be put
to strategic use by the alleged infringer.

to sue for

threat

2. Overview of the law on
groundless threats
IP rights with groundless threats
provisions

Specific groundless threats provisions apply mainly in
relation to registrable rights, and at the time of writ-
ing apply to the following: patents, trade marks, and
UK designs. No such provisions exist for the follow-
ing non-registrable rights: copyright, (unregistered)
Community design right, database right, rights in
confidential
information and unregistered trade
marks (in the sense of marks that would form
the basis of a passing-off claim). However,
the

*

1

Bristows. E-mail:
bristows.com.

ewan.nettleton@bristows.com and brian.cordery@

See eg Jaybeam Ltd v Abru Aluminium Ltd [1976] RPC 308, where an
injunction was granted to restrain further threats following notification
of a design registration in a letter which also threatened proceedings in
relation to copyright infringement.

Ó The Authors (2005). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

in contrast

distinction is not altogether so simple. Registered
Community designs,
to their UK
registered counterparts, are not presently subject to
any threats provisions, and yet, anomalously, unre-
gistered UK designs are. The position in relation to
Community designs is set to change later this year
as described below, but the anomaly with regard to
unregistered designs will remain. Furthermore, where
multiple IP rights are concerned, seeking to threaten
in relation to a right for which there are no threats
provisions, while mentioning another, might lead to
problems.1

General aspects of the various
groundless threats provisions

Where threats provisions could apply, there are three
common aspects worthy of mention. These can be
considered together before examining the individual
provisions, because the case law until recently has
tended to apply generally, irrespective of the particu-
lar right involved.

52

ARTICLE

The first common aspect, unsurprisingly,

is a
‘threat’. This term, construed widely, includes both
express and implied threats. The test that tends to
be used is objective, the court assessing whether the
language used would convey to the reasonable man
an intention to bring infringement proceedings.2 It
covers threats made in a whole range of media
including letters, circulars, and advertisements.

The second main common element is the person
who may bring a groundless threats action, the so-
called person aggrieved. This term is also construed
widely and covers anyone whose ‘commercial interests
are likely to be adversely affected in a real, as opposed
to a fanciful or minimal, way’.3 Therefore, a potential
cause of action is not limited merely to the person
directly threatened. For example, a supplier whose
customer cancels a contract in the face of threatened
litigation for patent or trade mark infringement could
bring an action against the right-holder to seek to
restrain the threats.

The remedies available in a groundless threats
action are also broadly the same for each of the IP
rights. In each case, one may obtain a declaration
that the threat was unjustifiable, an injunction res-
training the continuance of the threats, and damages
in respect of any losses sustained by reason of the
threats (though these will often be nominal). How-
ever, what is often seen as the real utility of threats
actions is the ability to seize the initiative that such
actions can give to potential defendants to infringe-
ment proceedings. This aspect, which has been used
to great effect as a tactical ploy in the context of wider
litigation, is considered further below.

Patents

The groundless threats provisions relating to patents
are found in section 70, Patents Act 1977. Before
1 January 2005, these provisions were very similar
to the statutory provisions relating to trade marks
and UK designs. However, important changes to sec-
tion 70 came into effect4 from the beginning of 2005.

2

See eg C&P Developments Co (London) v Sisabro Novelty Co (1953) 70 RPC
277 in the context of patents and L’Oreal (UK) Ltd v Johnson & Johnson
[2000] FSR 686 in the context of trade marks.

In particular, the ‘old’ version of section 70 had the
following important aspects:

(i) Permitted acts. Threats concerning acts of primary
infringement (ie making or importing a patented
product or using a patented process) were per-
mitted.5 However, threats that went further by
alleging secondary acts (eg threatening infringe-
ment by selling or keeping a product) were not,
even where the person threatened was someone
who was also engaged in acts of primary infringe-
ment. The latter point was made clear in the Cav-
ity Trays case,6 where wider threats against a
manufacturer were held not to be permitted.

(ii) Mere notification. Merely notifying someone of
the existence of a patent was likewise permitted,7
allowing patent holders to bring their patent to
a potential infringer’s attention (and to provide
a copy of the patent if desired). However, saying
more than this always had the potential to be
construed as a threat because of the breadth of
the interpretation of this term.

(iii)Justification. The standard response of a patent
holder accused of making a threat is to start the
proceedings that were threatened. If the person
threatened was shown to infringe, then the patent
holder could avoid liability for making a ground-
less threat on the basis of the defence of justifica-
tion.8 This defence would not be available if the
patent was held to be invalid on the ground that
an invalid patent cannot be infringed and there-
fore that the threat was not justified.

The amendments to section 70 changed each of
these aspects significantly, strengthening the paten-
tee’s position but not, as many IP practitioners would
have hoped, removing the threats provisions com-
pletely. Permitted threats have now been extended
to cover all threats made to primary infringers so
that, on this point, Cavity Trays is no longer good
law.9 With regard to concerns over groundless threats
actions, manufacturers and importers of infringing

6 Cavity

Trays

Ltd

v

RMC

Panel

Products

Ltd

[1996]

3 Brain v Ingledew Brown Bennison & Garrett (No.3) [1997] FSR 511.

RPC 361.

4 Amendments made by section 12 of the Patents Act 2004. The amend-
ments to section 70 of the Patents Act 1977 were brought into effect on
1 January 2005.

5

Section 70(4), Patents Act 1977, prior to amendment by section 12, Patents
Act 2004.

7

8

9

Section 70(5), Patents Act 1977, prior to amendment by section 12, Patents
Act 2004.

Section 70(2), Patents Act 1977, prior to amendment by section 12, Patents
Act 2004.

Section 70(4), Patents Act 1977, as amended.

Ewan Nettleton and Brian Cordery · Walking the groundless threats minefield

ARTICLE

53

Are legal proceedings already in

Yes

existence?

No

(Arguably) No action for

unjustified threats can lie since
the proceedings already exist

Is the communication, when
viewed through the eyes of the
objective recipient, a threat?

Yes

Is the ‘threat’ made in respect
only of allegations of making or
importing a product or using a

process?

No

Is the ‘threat’ made against a

person who has made or

imported a product or used a

process for allegedly

undertaking any other infringing

act?

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Is the ‘threat’ merely providing
factual information about the

patent?

No

Is the ‘threat’ merely for the sole

purpose of discovering the

identity of the person who has

made or imported alleged

infringing products or used an
allegedly infringing process?

Yes

No

The person who issued the

threat has a valid defence to the

threats action

Yes

The threats action will fail

Yes

Yes

The threats action will succeed

No

No action for unjustified

threats will lie

An action for unjustified

threats will lie

Did the person threatening use

his/her best endeavours to
ascertain the identity of the

primary infringer and notify the
person threatened accordingly?

No

Is the patent held valid and

infringed at trial?

No

Is the patent held infringed and
invalid but, at the time of making
the threat, the person making the
threat did not know and had no
reason to suspect that the patent

was invalid?

Flowchart 1. Threats in relation to patents under the regime of the Patents Act 2004.

54

ARTICLE

Are legal proceedings already in

Yes

existence?

No

(Arguably) No action for

unjustified threats can lie since
the proceedings already exist

Is the communication, when
viewed through the eyes of the
objective recipient, a threat?

Yes

Is the ‘threat’ made in respect of
an act of primary infringement –
i.e. applying the mark to goods,

importing goods bearing the
mark or supplying services

under the mark?

No

Is the ‘threat’ a mere notification
that a trade mark is registered or

has been applied for?

No

Yes

Yes

No

No action for unjustified

threats will lie

An action for unjustified

threats will lie

The threats action will fail

Yes

Is the trade mark held valid and

infringed at trial?

No

The threats action will succeed

Flowchart 2. Threats in relation to trade marks under the 1994 regime.

products and those using infringing processes can
now, to all intents and purposes, be threatened with
impunity. The mere notification provisions have also
been extended, expressly permitting patent holders
to provide factual information about the patent, to
make enquiries for the sole purpose of unearthing
the perpetrators or instances of primary infringe-
ment, and to make assertions about the patent for
the purpose of such enquiries. It is unclear how much
further this permits a patentee to go compared with
the previous (mere notification) provision, but pat-
entees now appear to be in a stronger position. The
defence of
justification has also been widened in
that the patentee can avoid liability where he can
show that he did not know and had no reason to sus-
pect that the patent would be held invalid.10

The 2004 Act also introduced a new defence that
applies where a patentee can show that he used his

best endeavours, without success, to discover the
identity of the primary infringer, if he notified the
person threatened accordingly, providing details of
the endeavours used before or at the time of the
threat.11

Trade marks and designs

In respect of trade marks, the relevant provisions are
to be found in section 21 of the Trade Marks Act
1994, and these are very similar to those of the ‘old’
version of section 70, Patents Act 1977. Permitted
threats are confined to threats that relate to primary
acts of infringement, which in the context of trade
marks are12 (i) the application of a mark to goods
or their packaging, (ii) the importation of goods (or
their packaging) to which a mark has been applied,
or (iii) the supply of services under a mark. The

10 The patentee would also need to show infringement of the patent as under

11 Section 70(6), Patents Act 1977, as amended.

the ‘old’ version of Section 70(4) to make use of the defence.

12 Section 21(1), Trade Marks Act 1994.

Ewan Nettleton and Brian Cordery · Walking the groundless threats minefield

ARTICLE

55

provisions likewise permit ‘mere notification’ and,
like the ‘old’ version of section 70, offer no defence
of justification where a registration is held to be
invalid.13

The position is similar in relation to registered UK
designs, under section 26 of the Registered Designs
Act 1949, and for UK unregistered design right, under
section 253 of the Copyright Designs and Patents Act
1988 (CDPA). Currently, however, in contrast to the
law applicable to trade marks (where section 21 of
the Trade Marks Act applies to Community and
international marks),14
there are no groundless
threats provisions in relation to (registered or unre-
gistered) Community designs.15 This position is set
to change following a consultation conducted by the
UK Patent Office in 2004 on the UK legislation relat-
ing to Community designs. Among the changes
proposed was the suggestion that section 26 of the
Registered Designs Act should be extended to apply
to Community designs. According to the UK Patent
Office, it is intended that section 26 will apply to
both registered and unregistered Community designs
(rather than section 253 of the CPDA applying to the
latter), and, as at August 2005, it is anticipated that
these provisions will be implemented in October 2005.
Although this would remove the present anomaly, by
which threats
relating to registered Community
designs are not covered,
it would maintain the
anomalous nature of threats provisions in relation
to unregistered designs.

3. Tactical use of groundless
threats actions
The availability of a threats action has in the past pro-
vided potential defendants with significant armament
in the face of possible infringement proceedings. By
starting a threats action, they have the opportunity
to seize the initiative and to make important decisions
about the case. For instance, they can choose the
court in which they want to start proceedings rather
than leaving this to the right-holder. This choice will
normally be between the Patents Court and the
Patents County Court, but the selection could be sig-
nificant, not least because the space in the respective

13 Subsections 21(4) and (3), respectively.

14 By virtue of Article 4 of the Community Trade Mark Regulations 1996.

the relevant
court diaries and the availability of
judges could determine the speed with which the
case will run.

A groundless threats action can also disrupt the
right-holder’s infringement action, diverting time
and resources into defending the groundless threats
claim. Advisors in this situation not only may have
to explain to their client why they are now in the
position of defendant rather than claimant but also
may find themselves joined as co-defendant if they
were involved in making the threat (eg if they sent
the threat in the form of a letter before action). Fur-
thermore, even if proceedings are not commenced,
an infringer may seek to use the threat of bringing
groundless threats proceedings as a bargaining chip
in negotiations. For these reasons, the decision to
place a client in the position where a groundless threats
action could be brought should not be taken lightly.
There will be commercial circumstances where the
merits of sending a strong signal
to a potential
defendant outweigh the risks, but the possibility of a
threats action must be taken into account when
reaching a decision.

The decision in Reckitt16 demonstrates the Court’s
position on the tactical use of groundless threats in
infringement actions. Reckitt sued Home Pairfum
for infringement of registered UK and Community
trade marks, registered and unregistered designs, and
for passing off and breach of confidence in relation to
Home Pairfum’s air freshener products. Before com-
mencing proceedings Reckitt’s solicitors, Laytons,
wrote to Home Pairfum, allegedly threatening litiga-
tion of the UK and Community trade marks and
registered designs. Home Pairfum, counterclaiming
that the trade marks were invalid, also sought declar-
atory and injunctive relief and compensation for the
alleged threats. Reckitt applied to strike out Home
Pairfum’s threats counterclaim as abusive. Home
Pairfum’s subsequent application to add Laytons as
defendants to the threats counterclaim had the effect
of bringing under the magnifying glass the tactical
use of groundless threats actions in infringement
proceedings.

In his judgment, Mr Justice Laddie recognized the
inherent tensions in the law between encouraging

15 Both of which are governed by Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of

16 Reckitt Benkiser (UK) Ltd v Home Pairfum Ltd [2004] England and Wales

12 December 2001 on Community Designs.

High Court 302.

56

ARTICLE

parties to talk before commencing proceedings and
the statutory groundless threats provisions.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Laddie J considered himself unable to use the
Court’s case management powers to override
the statutes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

However, he considered himself unable to use the
Court’s case management powers to override the stat-
utes and refused to strike out the threats counter-
claim. That said, he recognized that Home Pairfum’s
attempt to join Laytons was a tactical ploy. Although
he was not willing to condemn it as pure ‘mischief ’,
which was how Reckitt’s counsel characterized it, he
noted that it was at least in part aimed at making
the relationship with their client uncomfortable.
This may give some comfort to advisors who write
letters before action on behalf of their clients, since
it suggests that they are unlikely to be joined as
defendants in a threats claim in any ongoing proceed-
ings. However, the situation might have been differ-
ent had Home Pairfum sued first, including Laytons
as a defendant. Advisors may therefore,17 when their
client wishes to write letters which could be construed
as a threat, wish to suggest that such letters are best
sent by the client. Then, if a groundless threats action
is brought, they at least will be able to continue advis-
ing and should not be prevented from acting by the
potential conflict of interest that might result if they
were added as a defendant.

4. Tensions in the law
Groundless threats, as Mr Justice Laddie noted in
Reckitt, create ‘an obvious tension between the sens-
ible ‘‘talk first’’ policy of the [Civil Procedure Rules
(CPR)] and the ‘‘sue first’’ policy encouraged by the
legislation’. Indeed the CPR, which was introduced
to transform the civil justice system, includes various
pre-action protocols to be followed in advance of
starting proceedings. Some categories of cases have
specific protocols associated with them, but where
no specific protocol has yet been adopted, as is the

steps,

case for intellectual property disputes, the Practice
Direction—Protocols applies. This protocol suggests
taking several
starting with the potential
claimant giving written details of his claim to the
potential defendant.18
to envisage
how the protocol might be followed for relevant
IP rights without risking liability for a groundless
threats claim, except where the person notified is
allegedly involved in primary acts of patent infringe-
ment.

is difficult

It

Although a good deal of effort was put into the
for
development of a specific pre-action protocol
intellectual property disputes,
the resulting drafts
were not adopted as a protocol to the CPR, not least
because of the inherent conflicts with the statutory
groundless threats provisions. Notwithstanding the
lack of formal adoption, one of the drafts was pub-
lished as a non-binding Code of Pre-action Practice
for IP cases19 in January 2004. The status of the
code is uncertain but,
like the general Pre-Action
Protocol, this code suggests steps that parties should
take before commencing IP proceedings which will
involve pre-action interparty correspondence. The

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

There is a tension between the ‘talk first’
philosophy of the CPR and the ‘sue first’
approach encouraged by the legislation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Code of Pre-action Practice itself acknowledges that
following these steps could give rise to a groundless
threats action and suggests that there may be cases
where a claimant can reasonably justify not sending
such letters on the grounds that to do so would be
likely to give rise to a groundless threats claim. In
effect, the code says to right-holders and advisors:
‘Please ensure you follow this Code but, if you do
so, it is probable that you’ll be opening yourself to a
potential threats action and, if so, pointing to the
Code and saying you followed it won’t give you a
defence to a threats action.’

In light of the above, and given Mr Justice Laddie’s
judgment in Reckitt, it seems likely that these tensions
in the law will remain.

17 Subject to following the rules of professional conduct when communicat-

ing with other parties.

18 Paragraph 4.2(a) of the Practice Direction—Protocols to the CPR.

19 Code of Practice for Pre-Action Conduct in Intellectual Property Disputes
published in January 2004 by the Law Society Committee assembled to
draft a pre-action protocol for IP disputes chaired by Michael Skrein.

Ewan Nettleton and Brian Cordery · Walking the groundless threats minefield

ARTICLE

57

5. Practical tips on navigating
the minefield
There are a number of steps that IP right-holders
and their advisors may wish to consider in order to
navigate this difficult area of the law:

(i) Staying within the statutory exceptions. Knowledge
of the threats provisions and their exceptions may
allow advisors to assist their clients to demon-
strate that they are serious about enforcing their
rights against a potential defendant while staying
within those exceptions. This is certainly easier
for patents than it once was, but it will not assist
where a right-holder wishes to make this point
about relevant IP rights to a secondary infringer,
for example to inform a retailer that proceedings
will be brought in the event that it does not
stop selling an infringing product.

(ii) Compliance with the pre-action protocols/code of
practice. It is open to a party to follow the Prac-
tice Direction—Protocols to the CPR or the IP-
specific Code of Pre-action Practice to the letter.
Indeed, a failure to follow them may lead to costs
sanctions. Compliance with them is, however,
unlikely to circumvent a groundless threats claim.
The Code of Pre-action Practice itself acknow-
ledges that such a claim might arise.

(iii)General trade warnings. Since groundless threats
actions require that the threat be directed at
someone specifically,20 a right-holder may instead
communicate its intention to enforce its rights to
the industry generally. This might be done by way
of an advertisement in the trade press. However,
extreme care should be taken as it is clear that
threats can be made by circulars and advertise-
ments as well as in direct communications to spe-
cific persons.

(iv) The ‘protective claim form’. In the face of the
groundless
threats provisions, a practice has
grown up whereby a claim form is issued by the
claimant but not served on the potential defend-
ant so that if a groundless threats action is com-

20 See eg Speedcranes Ltd v Thomson [1978] RPC 221.

21 Council Regulation 44/2001 on jurisdiction and the recognition and

enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters.

menced in relation to subsequent threatening
communications, it can be defended on the basis
that the threat was not groundless because an
infringement action had already been com-
menced. The legal basis for this practice has
been strengthened recently by the implementa-
tion of the Brussels Regulation,21 which confirms
that the UK court is first seized of proceedings
(and therefore that they have genuinely begun)
when the claim form is issued. However, the
time for serving the claim form once issued is
much reduced under the CPR.22 Furthermore,
issuing a claim form incurs a significant court
fee and this may be too big a step for some clients
to take. For these reasons, the practical utility of
the ‘protective claim form’ as well as the underly-
ing rationale is open to question.

(v) Without prejudice

correspondence. The

courts
appear reluctant to grant relief
for groundless
threats made in genuine settlement discussions,23
which may therefore provide a useful tool for
groundless threats avoidance. However, merely
marking a letter ‘without prejudice’ will not assist
a party if the communication in question was not
directed at negotiations to settle actual or poten-
tial litigation.24 The question of what amounts to
a genuine negotiating document as opposed to a
mere assertion of rights was usefully discussed by
the High Court in Schering v Cipla.25

6. Conclusions
Groundless threats form a complex and changing area
of IP law, which advisers need to take into account in
virtually every dispute. Reckitt recently confirmed that
the groundless
threats provisions, while running
counter to the purpose of the CPR, cannot be ignored
by the courts. Ultimately, the only satisfactory way to
relieve the tension between the modern ‘talk first’
policy of the CPR and the ‘sue first’ policy encour-
aged by the legislation would be to remove the threats
provisions or to introduce exceptions weakening the
threats provisions so as to allow right-holders to

22 It is now four months from issue for service within the jurisdiction (subject
to extension on application to the Court) under Rule 7.5 of the CPR (com-
pared with a year under the Rules of the Supreme Court).

23 See eg Unilever Plc v Procter & Gamble Co [1999] FSR 849.
24 Kooltrade Ltd v XTS Ltd [2001] FSR 13.
25 [2004] England and Wales High Court 2587 (Ch).

58

ARTICLE

notify alleged infringers of their rights and seek fur-
ther information from them. This weakening has par-
tially occurred in relation to patents with the
introduction at the start of 2005 of the amendments
to section 70. However, the introduction of these
amendments has not provided a threats panacea to
patent holders and it remains to be seen how the sec-
tion will be interpreted by the courts. What is clear
is that the threats provisions contained in the IP
legislation will remain in force in one form or
another for the foreseeable future and that
they
remain a trap for the unwary.


