560

ARTICLE

Setting the threshold for industrial application:
the UK diverges from Europe
Robert Fitt and Edward Nodder*

Lack of industrial application is a rarely used ground for
seeking to invalidate a patent. This is in part because it
has conventionally been viewed as a relatively low
threshold to meet since potential applications for an
invention are usually readily apparent. However, the pos-
ition in respect of biotechnology inventions is often less
clear-cut as the biological function of a newly identiﬁed
gene or protein may not be known with any degree of cer-
tainty. The European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) has grappled
with the issue of the industrial application of biotechnol-
ogy inventions for many years as it has been at the fore-
front of examining which inventions meet the criteria for
patentability. National courts have had less experience in
this area as they are only faced with patents that are
subject to litigation, as was the position in the UK until
Eli Lilly and Company v Human Genome Sciences, Inc1
was recently decided by the Court of Appeal. As well as
setting out the approach to assessing industrial appli-
cation in the ﬁeld of biotechnology patents, the judgment
is notable for its analysis of the interplay and relationship
between the UK courts and the EPO.

the protein was

interest. A fragment of

Hunting for genes
Until the early 1990s, genes were conventionally ident-
iﬁed after having ﬁrst detected proteins with activities
of
then
sequenced in order to determine the sequence of the
nucleic acid that encoded it. That sequence could then
be used as a probe to clone the actual gene from a
library; the cloned gene could then be used to express
the protein in a suitable host cell. This approach
involved traditional
laboratory work and more
often than not required a signiﬁcant investment of
research time.

‘wet’

The advent of bioinformatics at the beginning of the
1990s opened up a new approach for identifying genes.
Partly as a result of the Human Genome Project, vast
public and private databases of DNA and protein
sequence data were built up. These databases could be
‘mined’ using computer algorithms to trawl for frag-
ments of
sequence which displayed similarity (or

Key issues
† The industrial application of a biotechnology
invention must be reasonably plausible to those
skilled in the art.

† It is important for national courts and the EPO
to cooperate at all stages of procedure and,
where possible, opposition proceedings should
be speeded up in commercially important cases.
† Although it is settled law in the UK that any
principle of law clearly laid down by the Techni-
cal Boards of Appeal of the EPO should be fol-
lowed, national courts are free to apply their
own evaluation to the facts before them rather
than give deference to the assessment of the
Technical Boards of Appeal.

homology) to previously characterized genes and pro-
teins. Statistical analysis of the results obtained from
the homology screening process enabled researchers to
identify which sequences were most likely to be new
genes or proteins. An important distinction between
the bioinformatics approach and the traditional
‘wet
lab’ approach was that, although the activity of the
gene identiﬁed using bioinformatics could be predicted
based on the activities of the members of the family of
genes it displayed homology with, it was not possible
to prove the actual activity of the gene until after it had
been cloned and the protein it encoded for had been
assayed. The crucial issue in the present case was how
much needed to be said about the proposed appli-
cation, and how reliable that proposal had to be, when
using bioinformatics techniques to identify a new gene
encoding a protein in an established family.

Neutrokine-a and the TNF ligand
superfamily
The bioinformatics approach to identifying new genes
and proteins was the path followed by numerous

* Bristows. Email: robert.ﬁtt@bristows.com

1

[2010] EWCA Civ 33.

# The Authors (2010). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

Robert Fitt and Edward Nodder . Setting the threshold for industrial application

ARTICLE

561

companies during the 1990s, including the leading US
biotech corporation, Human Genome Sciences, Inc.
(HGS). One of HGS’ research projects focused on iden-
tifying new members of the tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) ligand superfamily. The founding member of
the TNF ligand superfamily, TNF-a, was isolated in
1975. TNF-a is a cytokine, a protein which acts as an
inter-cellular mediator in inﬂammation and immune
responses. It was originally shown to provoke the death
of tumours, hence the name tumour necrosis factor,
but subsequently was found to play a key role in
inﬂammation and, in particular, rheumatoid arthritis.
By 1996 at least a further eight members of the TNF
ligand superfamily, once identiﬁed, were shown to
display some overlapping functions but also many indi-
vidual ones in relation to a wide variety of cell types.
However, they were all involved, to some degree, in the
immune system and immune responses. Today thera-
peutic monoclonal antibodies to TNF-a, such as Remi-
cade and Humira, are used to treat immunological
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease,
and psoriasis.

In 1996, HGS successfully identiﬁed a new member
of the TNF ligand superfamily using homology screen-
ing and named it Neutrokine-a. Shortly afterwards
they ﬁled a patent disclosing the full-length nucleotide
and amino acid sequences of Neutrokine-a. The patent
included claims to the nucleotide and amino acid
sequences of Neutrokine-a and to therapeutic and
diagnostic applications of the protein and antibodies to
the protein. The patent described the likely activities of
Neutrokine-a based on its membership of the TNF
ligand superfamily. However,
it did not include any
conventional
‘wet lab’ data which precisely identiﬁed
Neutrokine-a’s biological activities.

Subsequent research by HGS suggested that Neutro-
kine-a was particularly involved in the development of
speciﬁc immune response cells known as B cells (or B
lymphocytes) into mature plasma B cells. Plasma B
cells produce antibodies which are one of the body’s
main mechanisms for targeting foreign particles for
destruction. Consequently, Neutrokine-a was renamed
BLyS (or B-Lymphocyte Stimulator). Research showing
elevated levels of BLyS in patients
suffering from
immunological diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis
and lupus supported HGS’ development of a mono-
clonal antibody to BLyS called belimumab to treat
these diseases.

Eli Lilly & Company were one of a number of com-
panies who were also searching for new members of

2

[2008] EWHC 1903 (Pat).

the TNF superfamily during the late 1990s and had
independently identiﬁed Neutrokine-a sometime after
HGS. They had also developed their own monoclonal
antibody to Neutrokine-a. Following the grant of HGS’
patent in August 2005, Lilly commenced opposition
proceedings before the EPO and revocation proceed-
ings before the UK High Court in 2006.

In the UK proceedings, Lilly’s attack on the validity
of the patent focused on a lack of industrial applica-
bility but also included allegations of obviousness and
insufﬁciency. However, the common thread to all of
these attacks by Lilly was that in their view HGS, at the
time of ﬁling, did not know for sure what the biologi-
cal activity or function of Neutrokine-a was.

The UK trial
At ﬁrst instance,2 Kitchin J held that the patent was
invalid. Accepting that HGS had identiﬁed a novel
member of the TNF ligand superfamily, he ruled that
simply identifying a protein was not necessarily sufﬁ-
cient to confer industrial utility upon it. In his view,
neither the patent nor the common general knowledge
identiﬁed any disease or condition which Neutrokine-a
could be used to diagnose or treat, concluding that the
functions of Neutrokine-a were, at best, a matter of
expectation and then at far too high a level of general-
ity to constitute a sound or concrete basis for anything
except a research project. He also held that the fact that
later publications demonstrated that Neutrokine-a was
useful
in treating diseases associated with particular
immunological disorders did not change matters, as
the claimed invention was not susceptible of industrial
application when the patent was ﬁled.

Kitchin J also found the patent to be insufﬁcient and
obvious. It would have required a research programme
to produce a candidate pharmaceutical or diagnostic
composition comprising an antibody to Neutrokine-a:
such a project may have failed altogether depending on
the route taken. Although the patent was not obvious
in respect of the two prior art nucleic acid sequences
cited by Lilly, he still found that the patent lacked any
inventive step because, in his view, it provided no more
than speculation about how Neutrokine-a might be
useful and did not teach the skilled person how to
solve any technical problem.

The EPO approach
Following the trial, but before Kitchin J handed
down his judgment, the patent was revoked by the

562

ARTICLE

Opposition Division of the EPO on the basis that it
lacked any inventive step and constituted a claim to an
arbitrary member of
the TNF ligand superfamily
without known function. HGS appealed this decision
and, following coordination between the EPO and the
Court of Appeal, the Technical Board of Appeal (TBA)
hearing was arranged to take place before the appeal.
In the lead-up to the TBA hearing, both parties ﬁled
further documents, including new evidence, which had
not been submitted during the English trial and, at the
oral hearing, HGS ﬁled an amended set of claims. The
TBA rejected Lilly’s arguments that the patent was not
novel, obvious, and insufﬁcient. On the issue of indus-
trial application, the TBA noted that data published
after the patent was ﬁled conﬁrmed the plausibility of
the teaching in the patent and held that there was a
concrete technical basis for the skilled person to recog-
nize a practical exploitation of the claimed invention in
industry.

importance of

The relationship between national
courts and the EPO
Following the decision of the TBA, Lord Justice Jacob,
who gave the leading judgment of the Court of Appeal,
asserted the
cooperation between
national courts and the EPO and noted that it should
happen, as far as possible, for all stages of procedure in
both national courts and the EPO. For example, in the
present case,
the TBA had found HGS’ patent
invalid, it would have removed the need for the appeal
to take place, saving the Court and the parties time
and money. Jacob LJ also suggested that, in commer-
cially important cases, EPO oppositions should be
speeded up on a separate ‘fast track’ so ﬁnal decisions
could be reached more rapidly,
thus reducing the
amount of damaging commercial uncertainty caused
when oppositions drag on for years.

if

Jacob LJ also took the opportunity to explain the
in
differences between the nature of proceedings
England and Wales and the EPO. In the former, the
parties have to disclose internal documents which are
relevant to the issues in dispute and each party’s factual
and expert witnesses are subjected to detailed cross-
examination. Crucially, since on appeal it is not per-
missible, other than in exceptional cases, to introduce
new documents or evidence, the appeal court gives
very considerable deference to the ﬁndings of fact of
the ﬁrst instance court—so much so that the appeal
court will not interfere with the lower court’s ﬁndings

3 Directive 98/44/EC.

unless there has been some error of principle. The
upshot is that both parties have to bring the best case
at the trial as the appeal hearing is not a re-hearing of
the case. Jacob LJ observed that the position at the
EPO was very different. The ﬁrst instance proceedings
in the Opposition Division took on an ‘administrative’
role which was closely related to the grant of
the
patent, while on appeal it was common to permit the
admission on new material which was not considered
at ﬁrst instance. Furthermore, there was no cross-exam-
ination or compulsory disclosure of documents at
either stage.

In Jacob LJ’s view, the EPO was something of a
‘coarse ﬁlter’, which was inevitable given its procedures
and the pressures of an enormous caseload: the EPO
could not, need not, and did not consider the issue of
validity as profoundly as a national court could. As a
consequence, it was not unusual for national courts to
differ on the facts to the EPO as the national courts
were free to apply their own evaluation rather than
give deference to the assessment of the TBAs. However,
at least in the UK, the position was different when it
came to applying legal principles. Jacob LJ noted that
decisions of the TBAs on questions of law were of
immense importance and it was settled law in the UK
that any principle of law clearly laid down by the TBAs
should be followed.

The meaning of industrial application
Following the TBA hearing, the Court of Appeal con-
ducted the appeal on the basis of the claims allowed by
the TBA. However, the only issue decided upon by
Jacob LJ was in respect of industrial application.

Under

the European Patent Convention (EPC),
patents are granted for any inventions, in all ﬁelds of
technology, provided that they are new,
involve an
inventive step, and are susceptible of industrial appli-
cation. Industrial application is deﬁned by Article 57 of
the EPC as follows:

An invention shall be considered as susceptible of indus-
trial application if it can be made or used in any kind of
industry, including agriculture.

In order to interpret Article 57, Jacob LJ stated that it was
necessary to look at the Biotechnology Directive3 and the
decisions of the TBAs. Although the Directive did not
alter the meaning of the EPC, given that the EPC is a
free-standing international treaty whose signatories do
not include the Member States of the EU, it did provide

Robert Fitt and Edward Nodder . Setting the threshold for industrial application

ARTICLE

563

assistance in interpreting Article 57 in the case of biotech-
nology inventions. Article 5 of the Directive states:

1. The human body, at the various stages of its formation
and development, and the simple discovery of one of
its
sequence or partial
sequence of a gene, cannot constitute patentable
inventions.

including

elements,

the

2. An element isolated from the human body or otherwise
produced by means of a technical process, including
the sequence or partial sequence of a gene, may consti-
tute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that
element is identical to that of a natural element.

3. The industrial application of a sequence or partial
sequence of a gene must be disclosed in the patent
application.

He noted that Recitals 22 to 24 of the Directive helped
put the meaning of Article 5(2) in context:

22.

. . . . Whereas the industrial application of a sequence
or partial sequence [of a gene] must be disclosed in
the patent application as ﬁled;

23. Whereas a mere DNA sequence without indication
of a function does not contain any technical informa-
tion and is therefore not a patentable invention;

24. Whereas,

in order to comply with the industrial
application criterion it is necessary in cases where a
sequence or partial sequence of a gene is used to
produce a protein or part of a protein, to specify
which protein or part of a protein is produced or
what function it performs;

Jacob LJ’s interpretation of these provisions was that an
isolated gene sequence could be patented—but only if
the industrial application of the protein for which it
encoded was disclosed. The crucial issue to decide was
whether the patent disclosed a sufﬁcient speciﬁcation of
the function of the protein. In his view, a high level of
generality was not enough since an element of particu-
larization was required. However, what amounted to a
sufﬁcient speciﬁcation of function would depend on the
facts of the case and would involve a question of degree.
Lord Justice Jacob commented that this approach was
consistent with the case law of the TBAs; the decision of
the TBA concerning HGS’ patent did not purport to lay
down any new principles. Reviewing the relevant au-
thorities, he concluded that discovering a nucleotide
sequence encoding for a human protein and being able
to show that the protein concerned had some common
homology with known proteins was not in itself a bar to
industrial applicability. However, a sufﬁcient speciﬁca-
tion would depend on the facts and in particular how
well established were the functions of the other family
members. Kitchin J had formulated a series of prop-

ositions based on the relevant EPO authorities which
Jacob LJ adopted into the 10 principles set out in Box 1.
HGS submitted that Kitchin J had applied too high a
standard of plausibility when compared with the standard
applied in the decisions of the TBAs and that he may have
been unduly inﬂuenced by the US case law that he had
considered in order to conclude that more than mere
plausibility was necessary. Jacob LJ was unconvinced by
this argument. In his view, more than ‘not incredible’ was
required as there must be some real reason for supposing
that the stated application was true. In his view, it was not
good enough to say that the protein or antibody claimed
probably had a pharmaceutical use. Such a statement was
plausible, but of no real practical use as one would still be
left to ﬁnd out what that use was.

Credible plausibility
Jacob LJ noted that Kitchin J had formulated the crucial
question as whether the disclosure to the skilled reader
that Neutrokine-a was structurally similar to TNF ligand
superfamily members and was believed to have similar
biological effects and activities was enough to make the
invention susceptible to industrial application. The answer
depended on what was known about the biological effects
and activities of known members of
the superfamily.
While each use described in the patent was in itself ‘plaus-
ible’, in Jacob LJ’s view that was very different to any par-
ticular use being plausible in the sense of it being taken,
by the skilled reader, to be reasonably so. It would thus
have been necessary to carry out a research programme to
determine which of the possible uses were real.

Accepting that the patent did disclose sufﬁcient infor-
mation to make it plausible that Neutrokine-a was a
member of the TNF ligand superfamily, Lilly argued that
this was not enough to make it susceptible of industrial
application: the biological effects and activities of the
family were so poorly understood at the time the patent
was ﬁled that any actual use could only be regarded as
purely speculative. HGS countered that what was relevant
was that within all the teaching in the patent there were
practical uses disclosed in the patent. In particular, when
the patent was read with the relevant common general
knowledge, it was plausible that Neutrokine-a and anti-
bodies to Neutrokine-a were involved in the regulation of
immune and inﬂammatory responses and in the treat-
ment and diagnosis of autoimmune diseases and inﬂam-
matory conditions.

Jacob LJ rejected HGS’ arguments as, on his reading of
the common general knowledge, there was no support for
any reasonably credible use for any member of the TNF
ligand superfamily. Although it was known that members

564

ARTICLE

Box 1. The ten principles for assessing the industrial

application of biotechnology inventions

1. The notion of industry must be construed broadly. It
includes all manufacturing, extracting, and proces-
sing activities of enterprises that are carried out con-
tinuously,
independently, and for commercial gain
(Max-Planck4).

2. However, it need not necessarily be conducted for
proﬁt (Chiron5) and a product which is shown to be
useful to cure a rare or orphan disease may be con-
sidered capable of industrial application even if it is
not
all
(ZymoGenetics6).

intended for use

in any

trade

at

3. The capability of

industrial exploitation must be
derivable by the skilled person from the description
read with the beneﬁt of the common general knowl-
edge (Genentech7).

4. The description, so read, must disclose a practical
way of exploiting the invention in at least one ﬁeld
of industrial activity (Max-Planck; Salk Institute8).

5. More recently,

this has been re-formulated as an
enquiry as to whether there is a sound and concrete
basis for recognizing that the contribution could lead
to practical application in industry. Nevertheless, there
remains a need to disclose in deﬁnite technical terms
the purpose of the invention and how it can be used to
solve a given technical problem. Moreover, there must
be a real prospect of exploitation which is derivable
directly from the speciﬁcation, if not already obvious
from the nature of the invention or the background art
(ZymoGenetics; Bayer9).

6. Conversely, the requirement will not be satisﬁed if what
is described is merely an interesting research result that

might yield a yet to be identiﬁed industrial application
(Salk Institute). A speculative indication of possible
objectives that might or might not be achievable by car-
rying out research is not sufﬁcient (Max-Planck).
Similarly, it should not be left to the skilled reader to
ﬁnd out how to exploit the invention by carrying out a
research programme (ZymoGenetics).

7. It follows that the purpose of granting a patent is not
to reserve an unexplored ﬁeld of research for the
applicant (Max-Planck) nor to give the patentee
unjustiﬁed control over others who are actively inves-
tigating in that area and who might eventually ﬁnd
ways actually to exploit it (ZymoGenetics).

8. If a substance is disclosed and its function is essential
for human health then the identiﬁcation of the sub-
stance having that function will immediately suggest
a practical application. If, on the other hand, the
function of that substance is not known or is incom-
pletely understood, and no disease has been ident-
iﬁed which is attributable to an excess or a deﬁciency
of it, and no other practical use is suggested for it,
then the requirement of industrial applicability is
not satisﬁed. This will be so even though the disclos-
ure may be a scientiﬁc achievement of considerable
merit (Max-Planck).

9. Using the claimed invention to ﬁnd out more about
its own activities is not in itself an industrial appli-
cation (Max-Planck).

10. Finally, it is no bar to patentability that the invention
has been found by homology studies using bioinfor-
matics techniques (ZymoGenetics) although this may
have a bearing on how the skilled person would
understand the disclosure.

of the superfamily were involved in immune responses, he
held that it did not follow that any member had a practi-
cal use or that the skilled reader would envisage such a
use on being told that a new member of the superfamily
had been identiﬁed. Since the use could only be deter-
mined by investigating each new member to ﬁnd out its
use, it was all too speculative to say, on the basis of infor-
mation in the patent and the common general knowledge,
that a new found member of the superfamily was suscep-
tible of
the
Court of Appeal held that the patent was invalid for lack
of industrial application.

industrial application. As a consequence,

Why the TBA is different
Jacob LJ commented that, although Kitchin J and the
TBA had asked the same key question, the difference was
that Kitchin J found on the facts before him that there
was insufﬁcient support for supposing that the invention
was susceptible of industrial application, whereas the TBA
thought there was sufﬁcient support on the facts before it.
HGS argued that the TBA had not only laid down a ‘pure’
principle of law; it also set a standard in the relevant ﬁeld
of technology. Jacob LJ did not accept this submission as
trying to consider how a particular TBA applied the legal

4 T 0870/04.
5
6 T 0898/05.

[1996] RPC 535.

7 T 0604/04.
8 T 338/00.
9 T 1452/06.

Robert Fitt and Edward Nodder . Setting the threshold for industrial application

ARTICLE

565

principles to various sets of facts in different cases inevita-
bly involved assessing the facts of those cases.

Jacob LJ thought the TBA took a much less stringent
view of what was plausible in the patent. In particular, the
TBA’s ﬁnding that the patent disclosed the ﬁrst essential
steps at the onset of research work into the newly found
TNF ligand superfamily member was not enough, in his
view, to provide an immediate and concrete beneﬁt. In
any event, he held that the TBA, working on different evi-
dence and using different procedures, had reached a
different conclusion on the facts and the Court of Appeal
was not bound to follow, or even give deference to, the
TBA’s ﬁndings of fact.

The UK goes its own way
The judgment of the Court of Appeal afﬁrms the prin-
ciples on industrial application set down by Kitchin J at
ﬁrst instance. The key issue was whether there was sufﬁ-
cient support for supposing that the invention was sus-
ceptible of industrial application. On the facts before it,

the Court of Appeal concluded that the trial judge was
entitled to reach his view that there was not sufﬁcient
support. However, Jacob LJ was at pains to explain that
the reason for the divergence from the decision of the
TBA was because of the different procedures of national
courts compared with the EPO.

Until a European Patents Court is in operation, it is
always likely that national courts will on occasion reach
different decisions to the EPO, given the intrinsic differ-
ences in procedure. This results in commercial uncer-
tainty for industry which Jacob LJ noted is inherently
damaging. At present, HGS’ patent
valid
throughout Europe other than in the UK, although the
patent could still be challenged in other national courts.
At a higher level, the validity of bioinformatics patents
appears to be doubtful in the UK, whereas the opposite
is true at the EPO. Although there is now more case law
in this area, given the different approaches taken by the
Court of Appeal and the TBA, the position on industrial
application remains unclear
for owners of biotech
patents.

remains


