ARTICLE

723

Intellectual property issues in chess games
Alisa Melekhina and Neal Orkin*

The tournament-tested chess players sit across from each
other.1 One leans back in her chair, arms crossed, a slight
smirk on her face. Her opponent deﬁantly hunches over the
board, hands clasping his forehead like a visor, his face red-
dening with each passing second of the clock. Sweat forms
on his old, wrinkled brow, his hand shakes slightly as he
clasps his face, and then it hovers across the board. His time
is running out, and he sees no possible move to escape his
opponent’s deadly mating attack. Cursing himself
for
hanging a piece in the opening, Boris resigns and pushes his
way through the crowd gathered around the board.
Throughout this contest, Natasha had calmly rocked back
and forth in her chair, eyeing the prominent, world-class
chess players in the crowd who had intently watched. Once
the crowd disperses and the chess pieces and board are
secured in their box, Natasha haughtily drops a carbon copy
of her victorious game into the designated box, knowing
that her brilliant masterpiece will soon ﬁnd a permanent
place in the chess databases for everyone to see.

Publication of chess games
Publishing chess games is the current norm at tourna-
ments with directors requiring that players submit a copy
of their score sheet, which acts as a tangible move-by-
move record of the game. The score sheet is ﬁlled in with
special shorthand chess notation designed to record con-
cisely the moves played on the board, allowing them to
be replayed later for post-mortem analysis (Figure 1).

A chess ofﬁcial usually interprets the notation, and
enters the moves into a computer program designed
speciﬁcally to facilitate the input of chess games. The elec-
tronic record is submitted either for online live broadcast,
or posted later to the tournament website. The games are
subsequently copied from the website by a third party,
and are transmitted to various chess databases. Some,
such as the weekly TWIC, are available as free downloads,
while others, like the annual ChessBase, collect various
games and sell the collection for proﬁt. Major tourna-
ments
in the late nineteenth century imposed the

The authors
† Alisa Melekhina is, at age 19, a graduate of the
philosophy programme at Drexel University. She
is also a national chess master, having won numer-
ous honours including a gold medal for the USA
in the Women’s World Team Chess Champion-
ships held in Ningbo, China in 2009. Neal Orkin
is an associate professor of Legal Studies at Drexel
University’s LeBow College of Business
in
Philadelphia where he teaches courses in IP.

for

copyright protection under

This article
† This article considers whether chess games are
eligible
the
current US Copyright Act. Publishing chess
games is the norm at tournaments. While the
amateur player may be delighted that his or her
win may be viewed, studied, and revered around
the world,
losing opponents may believe that
they have a right to block publication of their
game. Whether winners or losers, many believe
that they should at least be compensated when
their games are published in chess books.

† The nature of chess games as a series of discov-
ered facts fails to meet the originality require-
ment of copyright
legislation. Nevertheless, a
minimally creative presentation of a compilation
of chess games in a training manual or puzzle
book may be eligible for the protection.
In
limited circumstances, chess games can be the
subject matter of conﬁdentiality agreements.

† While chess games are not proper subject matter
for copyright protection, they may be eligible for
trade secret protection in rare circumstances.

currently outmoded practice requiring that players had no
choice but to agree to terms such as,
‘All games and

*
1

Email: orkinn@drexel.edu and alisa.melekhina@gmail.com.
I would like to thank Neal Orkin, whose course on Intellectual Property
and Cyber Law inspired not only the concept of this paper, but the
direction for my future legal career. His guidance and knowledge was
invaluable from the ﬁrst to ﬁnal draft. Dr. Alan Soble, a chess player in

his own right, prompted me to think of chess as a ﬁnite logical system
throughout his classes on propositional and predicate logic at Drexel
University. Finally, Professor Robert O’Neill’s undergraduate course in
Legal Research and Writing was an essential that I am certain will also
guide the research of many others in their legal careers.

# The Authors (2011). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

724

ARTICLE

Alisa Melekhina and Neal Orkin . Intellectual property issues in chess games

ARTICLE

725

the forefront of

Copyright protection
In the USA, copyright protects the expression of ideas
that are original works of authorship.3 Protecting chess
games through copyright has been debated since the
late nineteenth century. At
these
debates stood Wilhelm Steinitz, the ﬁrst world chess
champion, who led arduous campaigns in favour of
copyright protection. Steinitz, who later changed his
ﬁrst name to William, emigrated to the USA from
Austria in 1883, ofﬁcially becoming a citizen ﬁve years
later.4 His fervour was manifested by his publishing a
piece in an 1886 edition of International Chess Maga-
zine demanding royalties for chess games that he con-
sidered were unjustly exploited by ungrateful, wealthy
fans.5

At that time, any legal redress for copyright protec-
tion in the USA would have been based on the arcane
Copyright Act of 1790 (the next major statutory revi-
sion was enacted in 1909), which limited protection to
‘maps, charts, and books’.6 The public eventually lost
interest, rendering Steinitz’s efforts unsuccessful, and
leaving chess games by default in the public domain.
The main argument advanced against copyright protec-
tion during that era, persisting to this day, was that few
individuals would beneﬁt while any outlet of creativity
and learning available to the chess public would be
stiﬂed.

Many chess players analyse opening theory and chess
games from databases and instructional materials to
improve their game and create novel moves in the
opening, further beneﬁting, and contributing to the
technique and ideas employed by others. It can be
reasonably argued that no chess game is truly unique,
inevitably borrowing from ideas,
theories, novelties,
and analyses from previous games. For example, a
player may have inadvertently stumbled upon a strong
opening novelty played by a grandmaster, and used the
exact move in the game against his or her next unwit-
ting opponent. If the number of accessible games were
severely limited by legal protection, each player would
be left to depend upon his or her own analysis, sup-
pressing any strategic advancement in chess theory, and
severely lowering the quality of the game. Additional
arguments against copyrighting chess games rely on the
complexities regarding the claims of both players over

the same game. For instance, the following issue may
arise: which of the two players, who often reside in
different states or even countries, would have authority
over publication rights to the game, especially in cases
where the interests of the two parties happen to con-
ﬂict, as in the opening scenario?

These arguments are relevant, but contain a critical
assumption that must be analysed before the aforemen-
tioned complexities can even be addressed. They
assume that chess games are original works of author-
ship, a fundamental requirement of the current US
Copyright Act.

Originality
The term original is not deﬁned by the Copyright Act,
but courts have interpreted it to mean that the work
must be original
to the author. Only a nominal
amount of creativity is necessary. To this end, one may
rely on Judge Learned Hand’s famous statement, ‘But if
by some magic a man who had never known it were to
compose a new Keats’s Ode on a Grecian Urn, he
would be an “author,” and, if he copyrighted it, others
might not copy that poem,
though they might of
course copy Keats’s.’7 To further this argument, a game
that exactly repeats several moves of previously played
games might be copyrightable, provided that
the
players were unaware of the primary game.

Chess games demand that creative moves, strategies,
and techniques be employed in response to the
opponent’s threats designed ultimately to checkmate
the king. Surely, the intuitive reaction and counterac-
tion taken by both opponents during the course of the
game in formulating the moves could result in an orig-
inal work. However, the phrase ‘works of authorship’
limits the material that can be copyright-protected,
regardless of its originality. The Copyright Statute pro-
vides a wide array of categories for what may be con-
sidered a work of authorship. Among those listed are
literary works, pictures, graphics, and audiovisual
works. The notation representing directions for moving
pieces in chess games in print (such as the score sheet)
or digital (Figure 2) format may arguably be considered
a literary work.8

Many players insist that the aesthetic qualities of
chess games relay a masterful story of an intricate

17 USC §102 (2009).

3
4 B Wall, ‘Wilhelm Steinitz (1836-1900)’ [2009], Bill Wall’s Chess Master

Proﬁles: Geocites. http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Lab/7378/
steinitz.htm.
5 Winter, ibid.
6

Library of Congress, 2011, Copyright Act of 1790 full text, Washington
DC, Copyright Ofﬁce. http://www.copyright.gov/history/1790act.pdf.

7

8

Sheldon v Metro-Goldwyn Pictures Corporation, 81 F.2d 49, 54 (2nd Cir.
1936).
17 USC §101 (2009) deﬁnes literary works as ‘works, other than
audiovisual works, expressed in words, numbers, or other verbal or
numerical symbols or indicia, regardless of the nature of the material
objects, such as books, periodicals, manuscripts, phonorecords, ﬁlm,
tapes, disks, or cards, in which they are embodied’.

726

ARTICLE

extending to ‘principles or discoveries’,10 but courts
have recognized the ‘copyright monopoly’11 that would
arise if
facts were indeed granted protection. For
example, facts of nature, such as E ¼ mc2, would not
be eligible for copyright protection because that would
understandably impose an absurd monopoly over
‘They are manifestations of laws of
physics research.
nature,
free to all men and reserved exclusively to
none. He who discovers a hitherto unknown phenom-
enon of nature has no claim to a monopoly of it which
the law recognizes.’12 Einstein did not manipulate the
universe into conforming to this equation; rather, he
empirically discovered the equation as an expression of
the functionality of the universe.

Concepts that are discovered rather
than created
While it may seem counterintuitive, chess parameters,
similar to those of mathematical systems, yield abstract
concepts that are discovered rather than created. Math-
ematical systems are variants of logical systems in that
they function based on axioms or rules of inference (eg
a line is the shortest distance between two points in
Euclidean geometry), and rules of formation or syntax
(eg the positioning of
the symbols of operation).
system, one can derive mathematical
Within this
truths, such as 32 ¼ 8  4, which are considered facts.
Similarly, chess games function on the basis of their
axioms, which include the way the pieces move (eg the
knight moves in an L-shape), and rules for capturing
and castling. Included in its rules of formation are the
64 squares on the board, the initial set-up of the pieces,
and the number of pieces used. Conversely, different
rules of formation are employed in bughouse, a chess
variant played with a partner in which captured pieces
from the partner’s board are transferred to one’s own
board with certain limitations. The occurrence of
unusual numbers of pieces on the board from neigh-
bouring and concurrent games represents a separate
logical system. Within this system, one makes moves
that conform to the established rules of inference and
formation, but one cannot legally (by chess terms)
make or create moves on the board that fall outside the
conﬁnes of the rules.

In compliance with these rules, a ﬁnite number of
sequences of moves can be made, even if the number is
too
calculation.

for human or

computer

vast

12 Diamond v Chakrabarty, 447 US 303, 309 (1980) partially quoting from

Funk Brothers Seed Co. v Kalo Inoculant Co., 333 US 127, 130 (1948).

Figure 2. Text format of above score sheet game.

battle, with the skilful player/craftsman controlling and
directing the artistic procession of events. If chess
games were entitled to copyright, would it still be poss-
ible to control the publication of the moves involved?
Before this can be afﬁrmed, another limitation to copy-
rightable material must be taken into consideration.

Facts generally cannot be copyrighted since they fail
the originality requirement. ‘This is because facts do
not owe their origin to an act of authorship. The dis-
tinction is one between creation and discovery: the ﬁrst
person to ﬁnd and report a particular fact has not
created the fact; he or she has merely discovered its
existence.’9 Not only is copyright prohibited from

Feist Publications, Inc. v Rural Telephone Service, 499 US 340, 347 (1991).

9
10 17 USC §102 (2009).
11 Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. v Nation Enterprises, 471 US 539, 544

(1985).

Alisa Melekhina and Neal Orkin . Intellectual property issues in chess games

ARTICLE

727

The players use their ingenuity to discover moves from
all possible options that would offer the most advantage
in a given position. All chess moves available in a pos-
ition are already present, made possible by the logical
nature of the system. One must discover the best move,
choosing from a selection of ‘legal’ or possible moves.
The discovery of a move from a selection of predeter-
mined possibilities renders each move factual. Accord-
ing to Feist, the compilation of facts does not render the
work original; facts must be presented in a ‘minimally
creative’ way to be worthy of copyright protection.
Therefore, while chess games themselves cannot be
copyright-protected, a compilation of games in a train-
ing manual or puzzle book could be an expression of
the author’s ideas. For example a physics textbook,
functioning as expressions of ideas, can be protected by
copyright even though the featured equations, such as
E ¼ mc2 would be ineligible for protection.

While the expressions of ideas in an instructional
chess book would be protected by copyright, it is ques-
tionable whether the same would hold for individual
score sheets. Despite the expression of an idea in a tan-
gible medium immediately acquiring a copyright,13 the
rearrangement of raw ‘facts’ in the tangible medium
may not meet the standard of minimal creativity estab-
lished in Feist. While assembling a legible score sheet
demands some efforts by the player—such as the
manner in which the opponent’s name, date, and tour-
nament are recorded, along with the spaces designated
to record the outcome and the players’ signatures—the
ﬁnal product follows a systematic notational scheme
that differs only by each player’s handwriting. Regard-
less of whether a score sheet or scanned image of a
score sheet
the protection
would still not be available for the represented game,
continuing to be published in the more legible and
modern text format (see Figure 2, the text format of
games used in chess books and online sources). Score
sheets are typically only included in a games compi-
lation if they represent an historic encounter by a chess
legend such as Bobby Fischer.
Trade secret protection
Finally, one must consider whether any other legal pro-
tection exists to prevent public release of a chess game
or chess moves. Since copyright protection probably
does not apply to chess games, trade secret protection

is eligible for copyright,

may be considered a last resort in the following limited
scenario. Trade secrets protect information that has an
economic value and which an owner shows an intent
to keep secret. The subject matter of a trade secret, as
deﬁned by the UTSA (Uniform Trade Secrets Act),14
extends to formulae, patterns, compilations, programs,
devices, methods, techniques, or processes. Any infor-
mation is eligible for protection provided that reason-
able security measures are undertaken. This ﬂexibility
may allow trade secret protection to apply to chess
games or moves, but only in very limited circum-
stances. Consider a scenario in which one’s ﬁnancial
success depended on winning a major tournament, and
the player hired a second to create an opening novelty
against a main rival for the prize money. Hiring the
assistance of a professional in preparation for a tourna-
ment is standard, acceptable practice. Many players
garner the majority of their income by coaching and
preparing others. A conﬁdentiality agreement could be
used to prohibit the second from disclosing the speci-
ﬁed opening novelty before it is played in the tourna-
ment and subsequently released to the public. If the
second were carelessly to employ the novelty before the
tournament, noticed by the adversaries’ team who con-
sequently devised a refutation to it, the second would
have misappropriated the trade secret.

Chess games are not a proper subject matter for IP
protection. Of course, a distressed chess player could
take precautions to inhibit the publication of his or her
games, such as refusing to use live broadcasting devices
during games, neglecting to submit the score sheet, and
playing in local tournaments that do not publish games
but merely facilitate the competition. To prevent the
earlier discomforting scenario featuring the dismal
player and haughty opponent, no legal remedy can
replace thorough and dedicated preparation and study
of chess strategy itself.

for

the coming round, Boris

With no immediate or future prospect of barring the
publication of chess games based on IP claims, the next
day when the other players are busy determining their
pairings
surreptitiously
removes the copy of his game against Natasha from the
drop-in box. Before the tournament director has a chance
to review it, he crumples it, and tosses it into the nearest
trashcan. ‘Now it won’t get published,’ he contemptuously
murmurs under his breath.

That’s another available remedy.

13 17 USC §102 (2009).

14 The model law has thus far been adopted by 46 states, with others still

relying on common law.


