148 ARTICLE

Is it a fair deal to tell tales on the tabloids?1
Myles Jelf and Gillian Johnson*

company Brighter

1. Introduction
In spring 2003, the BBC broadcast ‘Tabloid Tales’, a
series of programmes produced by the independent
production
Pictures which
examined the relationship between the tabloid press
and certain celebrities. Victoria Beckham was the
celebrity subject of the first programme, which dis-
cussed press coverage of ‘Posh and Becks’2 accom-
panied by photographs, film, newspaper mastheads,
and television footage.

Some of

the extracts

from the tabloid press
featured in the programme included photographs
taken by Jason Fraser, a celebrity photographer. His
company, Fraser-Woodward Limited, which owned
the rights both to his pictures and one other photo-
graph shown in the programme, sued the BBC and
Brighter Pictures for copyright
infringement. The
defendants claimed that the use of 13 of the photo-
graphs was fair dealing for the purpose of criticism
and review under section 30 of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988 (the Act). This section provides:
‘fair dealing with a work for the purposes of criticism
and review, of that work or another work, does not
infringe any copyright in the work provided that it
is accompanied by sufficient acknowledgement.’

The defendants also claimed that the remaining
photograph in issue and one use of one of the previous
photographs were included only incidentally, and
therefore could benefit section 31(1) of
the Act
which states: ‘copyright in a work is not infringed by
its incidental
inclusion in an artistic work, sound
recording, film or broadcast.’

2. Fair dealing for the purposes of
criticism and review
The section 30 fair dealing defence allows a third
party to use a copyright work for the purpose of
criticism and review,
the
copyright owner has given him permission to do

regardless of whether

Key issues
 In an era in which media morals are fast evolving
to match public expectations, the courts are
coming under increasing pressure to give firm
guidance as to what uses may fairly be made of
works in which others own the copyright.

 ‘Fair dealing’ for the purposes of criticism or
review is a principle that is well understood in
principle but which can be difficult to apply
in practical instances of unauthorized use of
topical materials.

 A further area in which the courts have been
asked to clarify the terms of statute law is that
which requires a fair dealing with another’s
work to be given ‘sufficient acknowledgment’, a
term which may mean quite different things
where works are reproduced or broadcast in
different media.

so. This
statutory defence helps maintain the
fundamental right of freedom of expression by ensur-
ing that a copyright owner cannot stifle genuine criti-
cism by relying upon his property rights.

For 13 of the claimant’s photographs in issue,

Mann J had to judge whether

1. the photographs were used for criticism and review;

2. the dealing in those photographs was fair; and if so,

3. whether the photographs were sufficiently acknow-

ledged.

3. What was the purpose for
which the photographs
were used?
The claimant submitted that, by broadcasting stills
of
containing Fraser’s

tabloid newspaper pages

* Myles Jelf is a Partner and Gillian Johnson an Associate in the specialist IP
law firm Bristows, who successfully acted for the defendant documentary
maker in this case.

1 Fraser-Woodward Limited v (1) BBC (2) Brighter Pictures Limited [2005]

FSR 36.

2 Posh is Victoria Beckham: ex-member of the Spice Girls pop group and

wife of footballer David Beckham (‘Becks’).

Ó The Authors (2006). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

 

i

Myles Jelf and Gillian Johnson · Is it a fair deal to tell tales on the tabloids?

ARTICLE

149

photographs, the BBC and Brighter Pictures infringed
the copyright in those photographs. They maintained
that the programme contained no specific criticism
relating to the photographs (the ‘works’) themselves
and, if any ‘other work’ was being reviewed under
the exemption, it had to be a specific and identifiable
copyright work. The
also contended
that ‘Tabloid Tales’ was merely a light entertainment
programme, effectively a public relations exercise for
Victoria Beckham. As such, they submitted that the
programme was incapable of containing genuine
criticism and review of any merit: at most, the pro-
gramme could only be said to pass ‘bare comment’
on the photographs, which could not be considered
‘criticism and review’ under the Act.

claimant

The defendants countered by highlighting Robert
Walker LJ’s dicta in the Court of Appeal in Pro Sieben
Media AG v Carlton UK Television Ltd, 3 that the
expression ‘criticism and review’ should be inter-
preted liberally, without precise boundaries regarding
its scope and should not be limited to comments on
the style or the content of the copied work or another
work. They argued that ‘criticism and review’ can
and indeed should, extend to the philosophy underly-
ing the work (or another work), suggesting that the
correct approach for the court was to examine the
programme as a whole and interpret it as it would
strike a reasonable viewer. The defendants submitted
that the programme contained criticism and review
of the photographs themselves (including the philo-
sophy and ideas behind them), and criticism and
review of another work or works, namely the tabloid
press’ coverage of the Beckham family.

As regards the criticism of the photographs per se,
Mann J agreed with the defendants,
following
Walker LJ’s approach in Pro Sieben, that ‘criticism
of a work need not be limited to criticism of style.
It may also extend to the ideas to be found in a
work and its social and moral implications.’4
the claimant’s

inter-
pretation of criticism and review was too narrowly
drawn, accepted the defendants’ submission that
ideas or philosophy underpinning a style of journal-
ism can be the subject of criticism or review within
section 30. He also found that the claimant’s sugges-
tion (that, for genuine criticism to take place, there must

finding that

The judge,

in

unhelpful

the Court. The question was

be something beyond a ‘bare comment’ about the
copyright work), was
applying
section 30. Given the impossibility of plotting precise
boundaries that would hold good in every case,
attempting to paraphrase the statutory wording did
not assist
simply
whether, when viewed in context, the use of the
allegedly infringing work amounted to criticism or
review. The judge also commented that there was no
reason why an entertaining programme could not
contain criticism and/or review for the purposes of
section 30(1). In response to the claimant’s submis-
sion that the Court should take account of whether
the same points could have been made without using
the photograph in question, Mann J observed that
section 30 contained no requirement of necessity.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If a viewer had tuned in to watch the
programme purely to see Fraser’s
photographs, he would have been
disappointed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

On the evidence Mann J found that, in all but
one instance, the programme had criticised the pho-
tographs themselves, for example in Piers Morgan’s
narrative, which questions whether the photographs
were as spontaneous as they appeared or whether
they were actually pre-arranged photo opportunities
for the Beckhams.

A central part of the claimant’s case was that the
criticism or review required by section 30 could not
be of some general media attitude: it must criticize
or review the copyright holder’s work or some other
specific, identified copyright work. Mann J agreed
that the statutory reference to ‘that work or another
work’ probably referred to a copyright work (the
same word, ‘work’, being used in relation to both),
but did not agree that such other works had to be
specified or identified by the critical work. He noted
the approach of Walker LJ in Pro Sieben, who had
found in relation to the documentary film there in
issue that the ‘programme as a whole was made for
the purpose of criticism of works of chequebook
journalism in general, and in particular, the (then
very recent) treatment of the media of the story. . .’5

3 Pro Sieben Media AG v Carlton UK Television Ltd [1999] FSR 610.

4

FSR 610 at 621.

5

[1999] FSR G10.

 

i

150

ARTICLE

and that the film clip complained of, even though not
the subject of criticism and review, had been properly
included as an example of the fruits of the genre of
chequebook journalism. Mann J concluded that it
was no part of Walker LJ’s reasoning that specific
newspapers or broadcasts had to be identified: the
works that Walker LJ had in mind were simply news-
papers and broadcasts of a particular type and such
newspapers and broadcasts—being copyright works
as defined by the Act—could be ‘other works’ for
the purposes of section 30(1). Hart J, in a case heard
almost at the same time as Fraser-Woodward, IPC
Media Ltd v News Group Newspapers Ltd,6 arrived at
essentially the same conclusion in this respect:
‘In
Pro Sieben Media the view seems to have been taken
that some use of copyright work was appropriate if
the criticism there sought to be made of cheque
book journalism was to be effectively presented’.7

Applying these legal conclusions

to the facts,
Mann J found that the 13 photographs in issue under
section 30(1) were deployed for the purpose of criti-
cism and review of the ‘other works’, that is, tabloid
press and magazine coverage of the Beckhams.

4. Was the dealing fair?
Before this trial, case law was clear that what amounts
to fair dealing depends on the circumstances of each
case. The claimant contended that its photographs
were used unfairly in circumstances that dressed up
copyright infringement in the form of criticism and
review. The claimant alleged in particular that

(a) the use of the photographs was for the defend-

ants’ commercial purposes;

(b) the use conflicted with and undermined the

claimant’s normal exploitation of the work;

(c) reproduction of all or a substantial part of the

works was excessive in the circumstances;

(d) the claimant had made it clear while the pro-
gramme was being made that it did not and
would not grant permission for the use of the
photographs; and

(e) Victoria Beckham was ceded editorial control
over the programme which invalidated any claim
to it being a genuine piece of criticism and review.

6

7

IPC Media Ltd v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2005] WL 401740.

IPC Media Ltd v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2005] WL 401740
para 11.

Commercial purpose

At the trial, the claimant did not actually say that
any commercial motive would render the use of the
copyright material unfair. It did, however, submit
that such a motive was a factor to be placed upon
the scales in coming to an overall view. Mann J
made it clear that commercial use per se is not
necessarily unfair: case law suggested only that, where
a defendant deployed copyright material so as to
generate profit
(rather
than the larger critical work), fairness of the use
might be undermined.8 There was no evidence that
the defendants in this case used the photographs
primarily for economic gain, or even as a ratings
booster. The photographs were not advertised in the
trailers for the programme and, if a viewer had tuned
in to watch the programme purely to see Fraser’s
photographs, he would have been disappointed as
the photographs were only shown for a short
length of time.

from that deployment

Undermining the claimant’s interests

The claimant argued that the use of the photographs
in the programme had substantively undermined its
own exploitation of the works. Even though the pho-
tographs had been published before, the claimant
maintained that the further TV exposure had mas-
sively damaged their residual value. The judge found
on the evidence presented this was not the case. The
claimant had on other occasions agreed to license its
photographs for television use without apparently
affecting their residual value. Mann J added that it
was unrealistic to suppose that the brief appearance
of the images would, in the interested tabloid reader’s
view, result in any increased boredom with the pho-
tographs. Although he accepted the principle that
undermining commercial value could go towards
demonstrating unfairness, it did not follow that any
risk of any damage would render any use unfair. On
this basis, and in the absence of evidence of any
significant risk to the value of the copyright works,
he found that the claimant had not been unfairly
prejudiced.

8 As

in the

case of Associated News Group plc

v News Group
Newspapers [1986] RPC 515, where the user was seeking to ‘spoil’ anothers
exclusive serialization of copyright material so as to attract readers, and
had no genuine motive to criticize or review.

 

i

Myles Jelf and Gillian Johnson · Is it a fair deal to tell tales on the tabloids?

ARTICLE

151

Extent of use

The claimant submitted that the extent of use of a
copyright work should be taken into account in
determining fairness. In criticising and reviewing a
book, for example, it might be unfair to reprint the
majority of the work simply to review it. Applying
this principle to the photographs
the
claimant argued that
 the use of the entirety of each photograph (rather
than focusing in on only one part of it) was unfair
and

in issue,

 the length of use, and in some cases the second
use, of the photographs was unfair particularly
where, as it alleged, the criticism surrounding the
photograph was slight.

Mann J, finding against the claimant, noted that it
would often be difficult to review a photograph with-
out reproducing it entirely, particularly where the
point was to show the photograph as it had appeared
in the tabloid press. Nor was the use of the photo-
graphs excessive, each typically being on screen for
only two or three seconds. ‘If there is such a thing
as a limit defined by a criticism : exposure ratio,
then this case fell easily on the fair side of the line’,9
he observed.

Permission refused?

The claimant also argued that an unidentified mem-
ber of the production team had approached Fraser
to ask permission to use the photographs in the pro-
gramme. Fraser maintained he had emphatically
refused the request, and only agreed to participate
in the programme as an interviewee on the under-
standing that his photographs would not be featured.
The defendants denied that such an approach had
been made and on evidence presented before him
Mann J agreed. Further, the judge indicated that,
even if Fraser had been asked for his consent, he
would not have found that the subsequent use was
unfair. Unfairness required for losing the benefit of
the statutory exemption must arise in relation to the
manner and the purpose of use of the photographs
(although it can extend to when the copyright
material had been dishonestly obtained, as in Hyde
Park Residence v Yelland),10 rather than any general

unfairness between the parties unrelated to the use
of the images.

Editorial control

that

submitting

The claimant alleged that the defendants had ceded
the programme to Victoria
editorial control of
Beckham,
this precluded the
programme from containing genuine, unfettered cri-
ticism and review. In Victoria Beckham’s participa-
tion agreement, it was agreed that she could review
the transcript of her interview for the purposes of
ensuring her comments did not prejudice a number
of ongoing legal disputes. In practice, for reasons of
courtesy, the defendants had also made some minor
additional concessions to Mrs Beckham when making
the programme (eg Mrs Beckham had requested that
her skin tone be smoothed out
in the footage).
Mann J, however, held that these concessions did
not result in Victoria Beckham gaining any control
over the content or message of the programme.

5. Were the photographs
sufficiently acknowledged?
Sufficient acknowledgement is defined in section 178
of the Act as

An acknowledgement identifying the work in question
by its title or other description, and identifying the
author unless
(a) in the case of a published work, it is published

anonymously;

(b) in the case of an unpublished work,

it is not
possible for a person to ascertain the identity of
the author by reasonable enquiry’

Before this case there was little guidance as to
what amounted to a ‘sufficient acknowledgement’
and what form that acknowledgment must take. The
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
It would be unworkable if a radio announcer
had to say ‘This is Mozart’ continuously
throughout a broadcast of that composer’s
music
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

claimant argued that such acknowledgement must be
an express statement as to authorship in relation to
each photograph: it could not be implied from the

9 Fraser-Woodward Limited v BBC, Brighter Pictures Limited [2005] EWHC

472 (ch) 519 para 58.

10 [2001] ch 143.

 

i

152

ARTICLE

surrounding context or material. The judge, however,
agreed with the defendants that the correct approach
was to consider the programme as a whole, as it would
be watched by a reasonable viewer. Similarly the
defendants argued that, if a work is reproduced more
than once in the alleged infringing publication, it is
unnecessary to provide a separate acknowledgement
each time it is used. Again Mann J agreed, pointing
out it would be unworkable if a radio announcer
had to say ‘This is Mozart’ continuously throughout
a broadcast of that composer’s music. He stated:

to be

there has

I do not think that the concept of identification means
that
virtually
contemporaneous act of identification. Once the iden-
tification has been provided then it is capable of oper-
ating in relation to a later appearance of the copyright
material.11

a precisely or

Mann J also found that when photographs were
clearly taken in a series, the photographer being iden-
tified as the author of one photograph in that series,
then (depending on the context in which they are
displayed) the whole series of photographs can be
said to be acknowledged:
‘what matters for these
purposes is how the material appears in the pro-
gramme, and there is a sufficient link to make the
identification’.12

On this basis the judge found that there was a suf-
ficient acknowledgement in relation to all occurrences
of the 13 photographs reviewed in the programme.

6. Were the defendants flagrant?
Section 97(2) of the Act provides the Court with the
discretion to award additional damages if a defendant
flagrantly infringes another’s copyright. This provi-
sion seeks to deter would-be copyright infringers if
they calculate,
the commercial
benefit of an infringing act would outweigh the award
of compensatory damages.13

for example,

that

In exercising this discretion, the court should con-
sider both the flagrancy of the infringement and the
benefit, if any, obtained by reason of the infringe-
ment. For example, when a defendant’s conduct
had been calculated to make a profit (as found in

Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Trust v News Group
Newspapers Ltd14) or carried overtones of dishonesty
(Hyde Park Residence v Yelland), additional damages
may be appropriate.

The claimant had submitted that both defendants
were experienced copyright users who should know
when a licence for use of any copyright work is
required. Consequently, they ran a calculated risk in
using the photographs on a fair dealing basis; thus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Before this case there was little guidance as to
what amounted to a ‘sufficient
acknowledgement’ and what form that
acknowledgment must take
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

any resulting infringement
should be considered
sufficiently serious to attract an award of additional
damages. Although Mann J found that there had
been no infringement, he felt he should make a ruling
on this point should the case be appealed. Dismissing
the claimant’s arguments, he said:

It does not follow that knowing there was a risk auto-
matically translates a breach into a more serious one for
the purpose of additional damages . . . The decision to
use the material was taken in an honest belief of entitle-
ment to do so. Even in that belief was wrong, it was not
so wrong, or so dishonest, or so reckless, or so calculat-
ing, or even so negligent (assuming that one or more of
those factors is relevant to additional damages) to
attract a claim to additional damages.15

The claimant also argued that Fraser’s refusal to
license use the photographs indicated that additional
damages should be awarded. Again Mann J disagreed:
even if there had been such a refusal, it would not
have materially increased the seriousness of
the
breach. Consequently, he would have found against
any claim for additional damages in this case.

Incidental inclusion
in the
In respect of
programme, the defendants argued that, to the extent
that their use was not considered to be for the pur-
poses of criticism and review, it was incidental. The

two uses of photographs

11 Fraser-Woodward Limited v BBC, Brighter Pictures Limited [2005] FSR

36 para 75

13 see, eg, Bannier v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1997] FSR 815.

14 [2002] RPC 49.

12 Fraser-Woodward Limited v BBC, Brighter Pictures Limited [2005] FSR

15 Fraser-Woodward Limited v BBC,) Brighter Pictures Limited [2005] FSR

36 para 76.

36 para 91.

 

i

Myles Jelf and Gillian Johnson · Is it a fair deal to tell tales on the tabloids?

ARTICLE

153

disputed screenshots were deployed to show the
tabloid headlines generated by the alleged plot to kid-
nap the Beckhams, and the defendants argued that
the photographs which accompanied the headlines
were only incidentally included.

The leading case on incidental inclusion is Football
Association Premier League Limited v Panini UK Ltd16
where the defendant published collectable stickers
with photographs of footballers in their club strip,
which included the Premier League and club logos.
Panini argued, unsuccessfully, that the logos were
not included intentionally, the Court of Appeal ruling
that ‘incidental’ should be given its ordinary plain
meaning. The key question was simply why the copy-
right work was included in the alleged infringing
work. If there was some particular reason why the
work had been included, either commercially or
aesthetically, this would likely indicate the use was
not incidental. In Panini the logos were an important
part of the photographs: their inclusion was not
incidental as it benefited the defendant commercially.
In this case, the claimant argued that the defend-
ants benefited from the inclusion of the photographs
as they made the screen shots more attractive to view-
ers. In one of the uses complained of, Mann J held
that the inclusion of the photograph in the screen
shot was deliberate, relying particularly upon the
fact that a shadow had been artificially cast over the
shot of the tabloid newspaper, obscuring some parts
of the page but not the claimant’s photograph. The
judge concluded from this that the inclusion of the

photograph had been deliberate (although also find-
ing that such deliberate inclusion was as part of the
use of the photograph for the purposes of criticism
and review). The second image in relation to which
the defendants relied upon section 31(1) was a small
headshot photograph of Victoria Beckham that the
depicted tabloid newspaper had embedded within
its headline. The judge held that, although this
photograph was initially used by the newspaper
its use in the
to lend interest
to the headline,
programme was purely incidental,
it having been
shown in the context of a series of shots of other dra-
matic newspaper headlines covering the Beckham
kidnap story.

7. Conclusion
Although it is clear that in fair dealing/copyright
infringement cases, each action must turn on its
own facts, Mann J’s judgment in Fraser-Woodward
helpfully clarifies several issues regarding the scope
of the defence of fair dealing for the purposes of cri-
ticism and review. In particular, the judgment shows
the application of the scope of the defence as inter-
preted by the Court of Appeal in Pro Sieben, and gives
useful guidance as to the meaning of sufficient
acknowledgement.

16 [2004] FSR 1 (CA).

 

i


