130

ARTICLE

The amended Polish Code of Civil Law
Procedure: its impact on intellectual
property enforcement litigation
Katarzyna Zbierska*

On 3 May 2012 the Amendment to the Polish Code of
Civil Law Procedure (PCCP) entered into force.1 This
is an important date not only for all lawyers in Poland,
but also for companies that may become a party to
civil law proceedings. This is because the civil law pro-
cedure is applicable in cases concerning enforcement of
intellectual property rights, including preliminary in-
junction (PI) proceedings which are heard by ordinary
courts. The scope of the Amendment is particularly sig-
niﬁcant with respect to the main part of the proceed-
ings concerning the examination of a case, and also for
granting a PI and in enforcement proceedings. Some
lawyers even suspect this is an evolution, or rather a
revolution, of civil law procedure in Poland.

The Amendment is contentious among Polish legal
commentators and judges who apply the amended pro-
visions in practice, since some provisions deserve praise
while others are highly criticized. It is still too early to
assess the Amendment and answer many practical
questions which professional attorneys face when repre-
senting their clients in civil law proceedings, and which
the courts need to address when hearing cases. Never-
theless, an understanding of the procedural changes
may be crucial. At ﬁrst glance, it may appear that pro-
cedural aspects play a secondary role, though technical-
ities in such complex court proceedings as IP litigation,
quite often conducted on a multi-jurisdictional scale,
may affect the case strategy agreed by local attorneys
representing each party.

This article addresses some of

the questions the
author most frequently encounters in her professional
practice concerning intellectual property in Poland.

Key aspects of the Amendment
While the Amendment entered into force on 3 May
2012 and applies to proceedings instigated on that date
or later, there are some exceptions to this principle, for

The author
† Katarzyna Zbierska is a Partner at KZR&P law
ﬁrm in Warsaw, where she supervises the ﬁrm’s
Industrial Property Protection Practice.

This article
† The Polish landscape of patent granting and
patent infringement cases has been changing from
both a legal and a factual perspective. Poland is
not among the most patent litigious countries in
Europe; nevertheless, since it is one of the largest
countries in Central and Eastern Europe, with
stable economic growth, which has been increas-
ingly catching up on developments in all major
areas, this is the right moment to take a look at the
recent trends in patent cases in Poland.

† The number of patent infringement cases varies
among industries, since some, such as electronic
and software industries or the ﬂourishing pharma-
ceutical and biotech sectors in Poland, drive more
complex patent
infringement and cancellation
cases than others. There are a few trends which are
worth noting and may have practical implications
for parties to patent granting and patent infringe-
ment cases. These trends result, among others,
from the evolving approach towards patent claim
interpretation, including the doctrine of equiva-
lents, the requirement of a legal interest in cancel-
lation proceedings, approach to the patentability
requirements as well as interrelations between pro-
ceedings pending before the common courts and
administrative courts,
the Polish Patent Ofﬁce
(PPO) and the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) with
respect to patents.

*

Email: k.zbierska@kochanski.pl.

1 Act of 16 September 2011 amending the Act on the Polish Code of Civil

Procedure and some other legal acts) (OJ 2011, no 233 item 1381).

# The Author (2013). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/jiplp/jps211

Katarzyna Zbierska . The Amended Polish Code of Civil Law Procedure

ARTICLE

131

in order

to support

the efﬁciency of

example the obligation on the parties to act in accord-
ance with the general principle of so-called ‘good prac-
tices’2
the
proceedings, which also applies to proceedings insti-
gated before 3 May 2012.3 Until
the Amendment
entered into force,
IPR cases, which were usually
pending between entrepreneurs, were decided in a fast-
track commercial procedure by commercial divisions of
the civil courts. Following the Amendment the com-
mercial divisions remained, though the special com-
mercial procedure was cancelled. As a result, all cases,
including
and
between entrepreneurs, are heard within the unitary
civil procedure, with the exception of some specialist
cases, such as anti-trust cases.

non-entrepreneurs

between

those

Collecting evidence material in the
proceedings
Prior to the Amendment, cases heard under the com-
mercial procedure were subject to the principle of ‘evi-
dence preclusion’
in order to speed up the cases
between entrepreneurs due to the inherent needs of
business operation. According to this principle, the
plaintiff had to submit all arguments and evidence in
the lawsuit, as did the defendant in response to the
lawsuit. Further evidence could be admitted at a later
stage of the proceedings, but only if the party seeking
to submit the evidence could prove that it was unable
to submit the evidence earlier, or that the need to
submit evidence arose at a later stage. Any unsubstanti-
ated evidence or arguments submitted at a later stage
were dismissed by law.

Following the Amendment, the ‘evidence preclusion’
principle, applicable only in previously abandoned
commercial proceedings between entrepreneurs, has
been replaced by the ‘court discretion’ principle which
is applicable to all types of proceedings. According to
the court discretion principle, a court will disregard
evidence and arguments ﬁled late unless a party shows
that it failed to submit such evidence or arguments
through no fault of its own, that their submission at
this stage would not delay the proceedings or that there
are other extraordinary circumstances which justify
submitting evidence or arguments at this stage. Discre-
tionary (though not unlimited or unsubstantiated) as-
sessment of
the submission will be based on the
progress of the proceedings which can be shaped by the
parties as ‘masters of the proceedings’.

However, as mentioned above, late ﬁlings will not
always be disregarded, and acceptance or refusal of evi-
dence or arguments does not occur by law, as it did
according to the ‘evidence preclusion’ principle. There
is a theory concerning what ‘a fault’ should mean in
the context of late ﬁlings, though this article will not
elaborate on it. It is worth remembering that the obli-
gation to submit arguments and evidence in due
course qualiﬁes the general principle that parties to a
dispute have the right to make submissions until the
end of the proceedings.

The chairman-judge and the court have an obligation
to instruct the parties as to the consequences of late
ﬁlings, regardless of whether they are represented by a
professional attorney; this supports the principle of equal-
ity of the parties in civil proceedings. The absence of such
instruction may be an argument against a judgment at
the appeal stage. The relevant reaction of the court in the
case of a submission is combined with a new obligation
imposed on the parties to indicate all circumstances and
submit evidence without delay in order that the court
may proceed with the case in due course.4 In the system
of court discretion, no motion to restore the deadline for
ﬁling evidence or arguments will be accepted.

When applying these general principles in practice
one may encounter difﬁculties in deciding whether the
evidence or arguments are ﬁled late and delay the pro-
ceedings. For example, what is the situation when, at
the end of the trial, a party brings a key witness to the
court, whereas the court had scheduled just 30 minutes
for the hearing? This means that the court needs to
extend the hearing and defer the next hearing or sched-
ule an additional hearing before the closing of the trial,
which (in a Warsaw court) would take a few months.
Does this produce a delay in the proceedings compared
to a similar situation in a court outside Warsaw, where
the next hearing can take place much sooner? Even if
hearing a witness would delay the proceedings, but the
witness testimony is absolutely crucial to the case, can
the court disregard the motion to hear this witness?

These and other doubts lead to the conclusion
that the preclusion principle, though stricter that the
court discretion principle, was based on more deﬁnite
notions. There is considerable speculation as to how
the discretionary authority should be applied by courts
in order to balance both the interests of the parties
and the need to hear the cases quickly and efﬁci-
ently without
the
proceedings.

frustrating the main purpose of

2 PCCP, Art 3.
3 Act of 16 September 2011, above, n 1, Art 9(2).

4 PCCP, Art 3.

132

ARTICLE

Structure of the civil proceedings: submitting
the pleadings
The other, quite contentious change introduced since
3 May 2012 is the way court proceedings are structured,
in particular with respect to submitting the pleadings
including evidence and arguments. The chairman-judge
who hears the case may order that
the defendant
respond to the lawsuit by a deadline no shorter than two
weeks from its receipt. The response ﬁled after such
deadline is returned, which was also the case in com-
mercial proceedings prior to the Amendment when
the defendant was also obliged by law to respond to the
lawsuit no later than two weeks from a receipt of the
lawsuit. In any event,
if a chairman-judge does not
order the defendant to submit a response to the lawsuit,
he may submit it on his own.

The chairman-judge may also order that the parties
submit ‘preparatory pleadings’, indicating the order of
the submission and circumstances that need to be clari-
ﬁed. In this respect, the chairman-judge or the court
may hear the parties at a non-public hearing.5 This is a
new aspect of the civil proceedings which is similar to
solutions applied in other jurisdictions when the chair-
man-judge may meet the parties in order to determine
the organization of the proceedings and identify key cir-
cumstances to be proved by the parties. Most important-
ly, during the proceedings, the parties may submit the
pleadings only once the chairman-judge has so decided,
unless the pleadings include solely evidentiary motions.

What happens if it is necessary to ﬁle both eviden-
tiary motions and additional arguments in the case but
the chairman-judge has not explicitly allowed a party
to ﬁle such a pleading? Some judges are of the opinion
that, in such a case, the court should accept the eviden-
tiary motions together with their substantiation and
return the pleading with respect to the other arguments
submitted without the prior approval of the chairman-
judge. What should a party do when he wants to
submit such additional arguments without the prior
approval of the chairman-judge? It appears that he
should either ask the court to schedule a non-public
hearing at which the chairman-judge would allow the
submission of the pleading, or wait until the next
public hearing at which the pleading could be pre-
sented orally and taken down in the minutes of the
hearing. This procedural concept may appear unusual
and unduly complicated, but it may speed up the pro-
ceedings and increase the role of public hearings and
statements of the attorneys made during the hearing.

As to the availability of appeal measures, since the
implementation of the Amendment it has been possible
to appeal against a judgment of the court of second in-
stance to the Polish Supreme Court, where the court of
second instance has reversed the judgment of the trial
court, and to remit it to that court for reconsideration.
This measure has been implemented in order to speed
up the proceedings since some second instance courts
overused this possibility instead of changing the judg-
ments under appeal on the merits of the cases before
them. According to the PCCP, reversing a judgment
which is remitted for reconsideration to the court of
ﬁrst instance is an exception to the general principle
that the court of second instance should decide the
case based on its merits and change the judgment. Re-
mitting the case for reconsideration may occur only
where the trial court did not analyse the core merits of
the case or where it is necessary to conduct full eviden-
tiary proceedings.

Following the Amendment,

it is now possible to
raise counterclaims in cases which were previously
subject to commercial procedure, ie between entrepre-
neurs, as opposed to the prohibition of counterclaims
until the Amendment entered into force.

Preliminary injunctions in IPR cases
Removal of a PI in the form of a payment
of the claimed amount to the plaintiff
Since the Amendment, PIs are no longer available in
intellectual property cases in which there are claims for
payment a direct payment of the claimed amount to
the plaintiff (the so-called ‘novatory PI’).6 One of the
characteristics of this form of PI was that the novatory
PI required merely the substantiation of a claim, as
opposed to other PI forms which could be granted
upon two prerequisites: substantiation of a claim and
interest (eg irreparable harm).7
the so-called legal
Further, in contrast to the general principle that a PI is
granted at a non-public hearing, without previously
informing the defendant, novatory PI could be granted
only after a hearing had taken place.8

Critics of the previous solution raised the argument
that, in intellectual property disputes, the most import-
ant objective is to secure a claim for cessation of a
certain activity, rather than obtain the payment of an
amount which is usually quite substantial, and which
actually satisﬁes the original claim raised by the plain-
tiff, but that this goes against the essential principle
in
regarding the grant of preliminary injunctions

5 PCCP, Arts 207(3) and 207(4).
6 Act of 16 September 2011, above, n 1, Art 1, cl 69(a).

7 PCCP, Arts 7531(3), 7301(1).
8 PCCP, Art 7531(2).

Katarzyna Zbierska . The Amended Polish Code of Civil Law Procedure

ARTICLE

133

Poland which says that, subject to a few explicit excep-
tions, a PI may not lead to direct satisfaction of a claim
sought in court by the plaintiff.9

the enforceability clause will depend not only on the
payment of the deposit by the plaintiff, but also on the
PI judgment becoming ﬁnal.

Novatory PI in claims for payment in intellectual
property cases were implemented by an amendment to
the PCCP in 2005, though some Polish commentators
argued that the criteria for extension of securing claims
by the novatory PI were unclear and usually applied in
different areas of law (in family and social security
cases).10 Since intellectual property cases are usually
conducted between entrepreneurs, their most import-
ant objective is that the defendant cease infringement
of such rights which otherwise may lead to irreparable
harm, the securing of a claim for payment should not
exceed the successful enforceability of such claim.11
However, the so-called ‘conservatory PI’, for example
blocking a bank account, seizing movables or imposing
a mortgage to secure enforceability of a claim for
payment, is still available.12

Deadline for ﬁling a claim for compensation
for damage incurred through a PI
Another important aspect of the Amendment concerns
the deposit to be paid before a PI becomes enforceable.
A court judgment on granting a PI can be enforced
only once the court grants an ‘enforceability clause’.
However, this may be subject to a prior payment of a
deposit to a court bank account to secure the claim of
the defendant who suffered damage as a result of the
PI order to the beneﬁt of the other party.13 The court
usually orders payment of the deposit when there is a
risk that the defendant may suffer damage as a result of
the PI, which the plaintiff would not be in a position
to reimburse, in particular on account of his unstable
ﬁnancial position. The court judgment on granting a
PI subject to a deposit paid by the plaintiff may be
appealed by either party to the proceedings.14

As a result of the Amendment, this legal loophole
has been removed so that it is clear now that, when
payment of a deposit is ordered by the court, an en-
forceability clause in a PI judgment can be granted by
that court no sooner than the deposit has been paid. In
the event that a defendant appeals the court judgment
granting the PI, the court may suspend enforceability
of
the defendant
requested this in the appeal pleading. In such a case,

judgment provided that

the PI

It also remains possible to order payment of the
deposit at a later stage of the court proceedings, in par-
ticular if the ﬁnancial position has suddenly deterio-
rated. However, in any case, the defendant may recover
his loss from the deposit only once the plaintiff is
ordered by a ﬁnal court judgment to pay a compensa-
tion to the defendant who suffered damage as a result
of the PI having been granted. In this case, the defend-
ant may satisfy his claim after the costs of the enforce-
ment proceedings have been covered.15

Following the Amendment, the deadline for ﬁling a
lawsuit by the defendant for compensation of damage
incurred by reason of the PI has changed.16 Under the
previous wording, the claim for compensation could be
sought within a year from the date the damage was in-
curred (and not within a year from the date the claim
became available). This led to an absurd situation in
which a deadline for ﬁling a lawsuit for compensation
lapsed before the claim for such compensation occurred.
This was true in particular in situations where the
damage occurred two years before the ﬁnal judgment of
the court on discontinuing the proceedings instigated by
the plaintiff or dismissal, rejection or remittance of the
lawsuit by the court or withdrawal of the lawsuit by the
plaintiff, from which the defendant could seek the claim.
This brought about practical difﬁculties in successfully
raising a claim for compensation before its lapse and
prompted heavy criticism with respect to the wording of
the provision. Ultimately, the Polish legislature admitted
its mistake and corrected it by restoring the wording of
the provision prior to the Amendment of 2005. Current-
ly the claim for compensation due to damage incurred
as a result of a PI can be sought within a year from the
date when it occurred, ie when the judgment of the
court on discontinuing the proceedings instigated by
the plaintiff or dismissal, rejection or remittance of the
lawsuit by the court or withdrawal of the lawsuit by the
plaintiff has become ﬁnal.

Enforcement of a PI
An important aspect of a granted PI is how to make
the defendant fulﬁl his obligations under the PI if he
has failed to do so. Efﬁcient compelling methods are

9 PCCP, Art 731.
10 Paweł Cioch ‘Poste˛powanie zabezpieczaja˛ce po nowelizacji Kodeksu

poste˛powania cywilnego z 16 wrzes´nia 2011 roku’ [Preliminary
injunction proceedings after amendment to the Polish Code of Civil
Procedure of 16 September 2011] (June 2012) 126 Radca Prawny 11D.

11 Ibid, 9D.

12 PCCP, Art 747.
13 Ibid, Art 739(1).
14 Ibid, Art 741.
15 Ibid, Art 739(1).
16 Ibid, Art 746(1).

134

ARTICLE

crucial for the ultimate result of the PI proceedings,
which only have meaning if the defendant observes his
obligation, for example, to abandon the sale of pro-
ducts which infringe a patent or a trade mark, or to
publish a relevant statement in the press. The Amend-
ment enhanced the position of the plaintiff in this
respect by implementing additional measures of en-
forcement and restricting the existing ones, which is
deﬁnitely more beneﬁcial for plaintiffs.

Prior to the Amendment, when a defendant did not
observe his obligation under a PI to act or cease, and
this could not be substituted by anyone else, a plaintiff
could ﬁle a motion asking the court to impose a ﬁne
on the defendant.17 Such ﬁnes could have amounted to
a maximum of PLN 100 000 (approximately EUR
25 000), which as of 3 May 2012 was replaced by an
upper limit of PLN 1 000 000 (approximately EUR
250 000).18 There is still a possibility that the failure to
pay the ﬁne will lead to imprisonment.19

Additionally, following the Amendment, the plaintiff
can ask the court in inter parte proceedings to inform
the defendant that, if he does not observe the PI, he
will pay a certain amount for each day of delay instead
of a ﬁne.20 This measure is available to the plaintiff ir-
respective of the plaintiff’s claim that the defendant pay
compensation for damages which the plaintiff suffered
due to the failure of the defendant to observe the PI. If
the defendant still does not observe the PI, the court
may order the defendant to pay the amount, and the
court will order payment of further amounts if the de-
fendant keeps on disobeying the PI. The amount
ordered by the court may be increased following the
plaintiff’s motion to that effect. Even if the defendant
eventually fulﬁls his obligation under the PI, but with a
delay, the plaintiff may reserve the right, within a month
from which such obligation had been fulﬁlled, to claim
that the defendant pay the amount ordered by the court.

Practical consequences and assessment
of the amendment
Although it is still too early to assess the Amendment
in full
its efﬁciency as compared with
the previous legal situation, the ﬁrst impressions are
positive. The Amendment imposes more discipline on
the parties which may accelerate the proceedings
irrespective of the status of the parties (whether they

in terms of

17 Ibid, Art 1050.
18 Ibid, Art 1052.
19 Ibid, Art 1053.
20 Ibid, Arts 10501 –52.

the Amendment

are entrepreneurs or non-entrepreneurs), and makes it
more difﬁcult to obstruct the proceedings intentionally.
Further,
forces the parties to the
dispute to analyse their strategy at an early stage of the
proceedings and, most
to determine
which arguments and evidence should be ﬁled—and
when to ﬁle them. However, some aspects of
the
Amendment have been severely criticized as incongru-
ent with the practical problems of civil law proceed-
ings, which will result in delays in the already ‘not-too-
fast’ civil law proceedings in Poland.21

importantly,

One can say that there is not much change in IPR
cases since they are mostly among entrepreneurs. Ac-
cordingly, even before the Amendment,
the parties
needed to obey the restricted commercial procedure
applicable in the court proceedings among entrepre-
neurs, and had their strategy prepared at an early stage
of the proceedings. Additionally, court proceedings in
IPR cases are usually prepared far in advance, and
some materials, in particular expert opinions and sci-
entiﬁc publications, are collected or prepared in-house
well in advance, sometimes for the purpose of court
proceedings
the
restricted procedure under the previous system prior to
the Amendment was effective by law and did not
provide the court or the chairman-judge with much
room for discretion on particular actions to be taken in
the course of the proceedings.

jurisdictions. However,

in other

Restriction on submissions without prior approval
may reach the desired aim of the legislature, ie acceler-
ate the proceedings by increasing their efﬁciency. Court
ﬁles will be less voluminous as the parties will submit
only those pleadings allowed by law or the court.
Pleadings will most likely be more concise as they
should refer to circumstances crucial to the proceedings
and indicated by the court. Early organization of the
proceedings will make the parties present
the case
materials at an early stage. However, such discipline
may be cumbersome for the parties and their attorneys
since it will be more difﬁcult for them to substantiate
an argument on the appeal on account of late ﬁling
which may be disregarded at the court’s discretion.
Court discretion is certainly not unlimited and should
be well founded. Nevertheless, parties need to have
very good arguments to challenge the court’s actions.
Parties to IPR proceedings should also pay attention
to technicalities, given that court discretion may be

21 Łukasz Piebiak ‘Nowelizacja Kodeksu poste˛powania cywilnego—uwagi

praktyczne, cz. 1’ [Amendment to the Polish Code of Civil Procedure—
practical remarks Part 1] (2012) 12 Monitor Prawniczy Wydawnictwo
C.H. Beck Sp. z o.o., Warsaw, 2012

Katarzyna Zbierska . The Amended Polish Code of Civil Law Procedure

ARTICLE

135

exercised in a different manner among the various
courts in Poland.

Irrespective of the wording of the Amendment, what is
important is how it will be applied by the courts in prac-
tice. Based on the most recent experience in the cases
adjudicated pursuant to the Amendment, some say that
there are judges unable to switch from the old system to
the new one, and that some legal solutions are little
used.22 This concerns, in particular, the holding of non-
public hearings at which the chairman-judge may meet
the parties in order to discuss the organization of the pro-
ceedings and clarify key circumstances they need to prove.
Some judges are said not to make use of this opportunity,
which could substantially speed up the proceedings and
enhance their predictability. The judges explain that it is
due to a lack of time and relevant premises in the courts.

Furthermore,

since they are used to the pre-
Amendment
law, according to which the response
should have been submitted no later than two weeks
after receipt of the lawsuit, some judges tend not to set
the deadlines of two weeks or longer for the defendant
to prepare a response to the lawsuit. This is a substan-
tial difference from IPR cases where two weeks to
prepare a response accompanied by all evidence is
often a tight deadline, in particular when compared
with the time which the plaintiff had spent preparing
the lawsuit. One of the reasons may be statistics, which
push the judges to complete the proceedings without
undue delay and meet the adjudicating standards. In
any case, we wait with curiosity to see how the Amend-
ment is applied in practice and whether its legislative
aim can be achieved.

22 Małgorzata Piasecka-Sobkiewicz ‘Prekluzja wraca tylnymi drzwiami’

[Preclusion is returning through the back door] (17 July 2012) 137(3275)
Dziennik Gazeta Prawna C2 (‘Firma i Prawo’).


