860

ARTICLE

The new era of home-made fake fashion: the
phenomenon of home-sewn copies and the
possibilities for fashion houses to take advantage
Heidi Ha¨rko¨nen*

1. Introduction

Copying of well-known fashion designs is not something
that only fast-fashion companies or shady counterfeit
businesses do.1 A knock-off might as well be produced by
your next-door neighbour. Copying is fairly easy for any-
one with sewing skills. Certain brand identiﬁcation sym-
bols, such as the three stripes of Adidas, are relatively easy
to make by yourself. Copying of fashion designs is not
difﬁcult either, since it only requires similar-looking fab-
ric and pattern drawing skills.

During the existence of the modern fashion indus-
try,2 people have always copied brands by home-sewing
identical or resembling items—especially in the past,
when sewing was every woman’s ‘must have’ skill.
Although the rise of cheap ready-made fashion caused a
temporary decrease in home-sewing, this activity has
now made a comeback as a leisure activity.3 And what
is new is that, while in the past there was no real possi-
bility for the copies to make their way to the eyes of the
masses, nowadays images of these copies are way more
likely to spread to a signiﬁcantly wider group of people
through social media, allowing the imitating object to
gain reputation and even fame.4

When copying of fashion designs occurs in private
households, has no commercial purpose and the end
products are used within the circle of acquaintances of
the person producing the copies, it is very difﬁcult for a
fashion house to intervene. However, an important
question rightholders should ask themselves is if they
should even want to intervene. In this article I propose

*

1

2

Email: heidi.l.m.harkonen@gmail.com. I am extremely grateful to PhD
Candidate Danie¨l Jongsma (Hanken School of Economics) and Dr Rosa
Maria Ballardini (University of Lapland) for their insightful comments
on this work. During the time of writing this article, I was self-funding
my research by working as a trainee district judge in the district court of
Hyvinka¨a¨, Finland. Previously my research has been funded by
Suomalainen Lakimiesyhdistys (The Association of Finnish Lawyers) and
Tex-Inno association.
About industrial copying as a phenomenon: L Crewe, The Geographies of
Fashion (Bloomsbury Publishing 2017) 55–59.
About the structure and deﬁnition of the modern fashion industry: V
Manlow, Designing Clothes. Culture and Organization of the Fashion
Industry (Transaction Publishers 2007) 1–5.

VC The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

The author
 Heidi Ha¨rko¨nen, LLM, PhD Candidate, co-
founded the Finnish Fashion Law Association
and acted as its President from 2014 to 2017.
Her PhD research at University of Lapland
Faculty of Law concerns the balance between
imitation and innovation in the fashion indus-
try. Prior to her law studies, she studied fashion
design.

this behaviour. The

This article
 This article focuses on home-sewn copies of
fashion designs. Providing insight
into what
people copy and why may help fashion compa-
nies monetize
article
enlightens the reasons behind the phenomenon
of home-made copies and the incentives that
drive people to duplicate the designs of fashion
houses by analysing the responses to a survey of
one hundred sewing amateurs. Furthermore, it
presents what kinds of brands are likely to be
copied and who the end-users of the copies are.
 The contribution proposes that there may be an
opportunity for rightholders to beneﬁt from this
phenomenon and suggests some possible strate-
gies for fashion brands to take advantage of the
private copying of their designs.

3

4

See eg: Global Industry Analytics, ‘Growing Demand for Advanced and
Feature Rich Models Drive the Global Sewing Machines Market’, June
2017 <http://www.strategyr.com/MarketResearch/Sewing_Machines
_Market_Trends.asp> accessed 29 April 2018. See also Z Wood, ‘A
Stitch in Time – New Era for Home Sewing’ (The Guardian, 27 January
2017) <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/27/a-stitch-
in-time-new-era-for-home-sewing> accessed 29 April 2018; and See also
S Kurutz, ‘Do-It-Yourself Fashion Thrives at the McCall Pattern
Company’ (The New York Times, 2 August 2016) <https://www.nyti-
mes.com/2016/08/04/fashion/mccalls-pattern-company-sewing-do-it-
yourself.html> accessed 1 May 2018.
According to the survey presented in Section 246.03% (29 out of 63) of
the hobbyist who copy brand products admitted that they also post
images of the copies on social media.

Heidi Ha¨rko¨nen  The new era of home-made fake fashion

ARTICLE

861

that, instead of trying to prevent private copying, it
might be even smarter for some fashion brands to make
such activity a little bit easier. I aim to enlighten the
phenomenon of home-made fake fashion by presenting
the reasons and incentives for such activity, explaining
what kind of brands are likely to be copied and which
elements of fashion designs are copied, presenting the
key legal questions related to the activity.5

The article is structured as follows. In Section 2, I in-
troduce and analyse the results of a survey of 100 sewing
amateurs that were asked about their habits, attitudes and
reasoning concerning home-sewing copying of fashion
brands for private use. Section 3 brieﬂy presents the
European legal framework for home-sewn fake fashion
and proposes solutions and strategies for fashion brands
as rightholders to make the best out of the status quo by
using this phenomenon to their advantage. In Section 4, I
state the main conclusions based on earlier sections and
address perspectives for future research.

2. The copying habits and preferences of
amateur sewers

The idea for this article occurred to me after follow-
ing random conversations
in the largest Finnish
Facebook group for sewing enthusiasts. I noticed that
it is quite common that home-sewers create copies of
well-known fashion designs and share photos of these
imitations online, typically indicating which brand
they have copied. This often seems to cause heated
debate among the group members. Strong opinions
pro and contra home-sewn copies are frequently dis-
cussed. People also give various, quite fascinating rea-
sons for their copying.

In order to get a better idea of what type of products
home-sewers decide to copy and why they choose to
copy fashion designs, I conducted a survey among the

5

6

7

8

9

It is clear that compared to the world-wide counterfeiting industry, the
home-made fakes are not a major problem and this article has no inten-
tion to parallel these two phenomena. See for example Crewe (n 1) 55–
59. Even though Crewe takes a critical approach towards the prohibition
of counterfeits, she describes the harm that counterfeits cause to fashion
houses.
The questions of the survey are available on the website of JIPLP. The
group is called ‘Ompeluela¨ma¨a¨’ (Fin: ‘sewing life’) <https://www.face-
book.com/groups/277095472307251/> accessed 1 April 2018.
The remaining respondents (39%) who stated that they do not copy fash-
ion designs in their home-sewing projects, were for obvious reasons
asked not to answer the following questions about what is being copied,
for whom are the copies made for and the reasons for copying. Thus, the
percentages that follow in the text are not always even numbers, even
though the total amount of respondents was 100.
80.95% of the respondents to the question told that they make copies for
their children.
73.02% of the respondents to the question told that they make copies for
themselves.

members of the aforementioned Facebook group.6 In
April 2018 the group involved circa 32 800 members
who shared the hobby of sewing.

The copyists and the end-users of home-made
knock-offs

According to the survey, 61 per cent of amateur seams-
tresses had copied or would copy a brand product by
imitating them in their home sewing one way or an-
other.7 The respondents were also asked for whom they
actually make these imitations, with the possibility to
choose multiple alternatives. It was surprising to dis-
cover that the respondents often did not sew the copies
for themselves: of those who admitted copying, more
than 80 per cent stated that they sew copies for their
children.8 A bit less than three quarters told that they
sew copies for themselves.9 The number of sewers who
sew copies for other than themselves or their children
was rather insigniﬁcant.10

What is interesting is that the majority11 of the
respondents had the opinion that
there is nothing
wrong with copying by home sewing. Some12 were not
sure if they felt that home-sewing copies of fashion
designs is ethically right or wrong, and even fewer
respondents13 thought that this kind of copying is
wrong even though the copies are privately made for
private use. When it comes to the respondents’ alleged
knowledge about legal questions related to home-sewn
copies, the majority of the amateur sewers said that
they were unaware or uncertain about the legal state of
home-sewn fake fashion.14

What is being copied?

A vast majority of those who copy fashion items cop-
ied the overall appearance or the design of the example
set by a certain fashion brand. Less than 10 per cent

10

11

12

13

14

17.46% of the respondents to the question stated that they sew copies for
their spouses and other family members, and 20.63% told that they sew
copies for their friends.
59 of the total 100 respondents thought that ethically, there is nothing
from with copying fashion designs by home-sewing.
23 of the total 100 respondents were not sure if there is ethically some-
thing wrong with copying fashion designs by home-sewing.
18% of respondents disapproved of copying fashion designs by home-
sewing.
30% of respondents did not know, and 31% were not sure if they knew
what kind of legal issues home-sewn copies of fashion designs involve.
39% claimed to know what kind of legal issues are related to the activity.
However, in reality the percentage of hobbyists who actually are familiar
with legal issues in home-sewn copies might be way lower than 39%. It is
presumable that some respondents only imagine that they know the legal
issues, when in reality they do not know the legal framework.

862

ARTICLE

copied the identiﬁcation symbol of the brand in ques-
tion, such as a logo.15 Furthermore, most respondents
chose the product that they were going to copy based
on the overall appearance or design of the product in
question—basically meaning that they chose the cop-
ied product because they thought it looked nice, in-
stead of trying to imitate the brand.16 From a legal
perspective, this means that features of the fashion
designs protected by copyright and design rights seem
more frequently copied than features protected by
trade mark rights.

The respondents were also asked, which brands have
they copied.17 Taking into account the previously dis-
covered fact that the majority of the home-sewn copies
are meant for children, it did not surprise me that the
most-mentioned brand was a children’s fashion brand.
The most-copied brands were (i) Gugguu,18 (ii) Papu,19
and (iii) Fja¨llra¨ven Ka˚nken,20 Marimekko21
and
Nosh.22 Of these brands, Gugguu is a children-only
brand, and the rest make apparel for all ages. In addi-
tion to children’s fashion being emphasized in the
answers, I found another common factor to the copied
brands. That is, it is striking how local the copying is.
Of the most-copied brands, 20 per cent are Finnish and
the remaining one comes from Sweden. Thus, it seems
that home-sewers, at least those in Finland, prefer to
imitate domestic fashion rather than international fash-
ion. International well-known brands that were men-
tioned by several respondents were Adidas and H&M23
and H&M being on the list is a bit surprising, since it is
known to be a very affordable brand. Thus, one would
think that there is no need to copy its items. However,
as the following section reveals, the reasons for copying
are not always ﬁnancial.

15

16

96.83% of the respondents to this question stated that they had copied or
would copy the overall appearance of a fashion design. 9.52% had copied
or would copy a brand identiﬁcation symbol. The respondents were able
to choose both options.
93.65% chose the copied product based on its overall appearance or de-
sign. Only 11.11% told that they chose the copied product because of its
brand. The respondents were able to choose both options, meaning that
some respondents value both fashion brand and how the fashion design
looks like, when they choose to imitate something.4.76% had other rea-
sons for why they chose to copy certain product.

17 Of the total 100 respondents, 56 answered to the question ‘which brands

have you copied by sewing the copy yourself?’. All together 93 answers
were given and 31 different brands were mentioned.

18 Gugguu is a Finnish children’s fashion brand.
19 Papu is a Finnish women’s and children’s fashion brand.
20

Fja¨llra¨ven is a Swedish outdoor lifestyle fashion company for all ages and
genders. Ka˚nken is an iconic backpack design of Fja¨llra¨ven.
21 Marimekko is a Finnish fashion, interior and lifestyle brand.
22 Nosh is a Finnish women and children’s fashion brand. Gugguu got 18
mentions; Papu 11 mentions; and Fja¨llra¨ven Ka˚nken, Marimekko and
Nosh got 6 mentions each.

The reasons for private copying of fashion
designs

An interesting question is why people use all that time
and energy to sew copies instead of buying the ‘real
deal’ or just sewing something that is completely cre-
ated by themselves. Also, are the activities of purchasing
the genuine fashion design and sewing a copy of it mu-
tually exclusive?

A slight majority24 of the respondents stated that
they would also buy the genuine item. The remaining
respondents who would not buy the genuine item were
asked to explain in their own words why not.25 My hy-
pothesis was that the reasons would be mostly ﬁnancial,
which appeared to be partly correct. Mostly, the explan-
ations seemed to be either ﬁnancial or, interestingly, re-
lated to some factor of the genuine product that was
not seen desirable. I was able to divide the reasons that
were given into three categories: (i) ﬁnancial reasons,
(ii) reasons related to the quality and origin of the gen-
uine product, and (iii) needs to alter or personalize the
product somehow.

conscious

The ﬁrst reason is rather obvious: brand clothing can
be viewed as pricy, especially compared to Do-It-
Yourself clothing. The reasons related to the quality
and origin the genuine product might have something
to do with the on-going trend of people being increas-
ingly
habits.
Nowadays people pay more and more attention to the
sustainability and origin of their clothing.26 For exam-
ple, several respondents mentioned that they want to
know where their clothes are being manufactured, that
they want
they are not wearing
sweatshop-made apparel and that they prefer domestic-
manufactured fashion.27 This last factor seems to be in

to be sure that

consuming

about

their

23 Adidas got 4 mentions and H&M 3 mentions.
24

25

26

27

From the respondents to this question, 59.38% stated that they could
buy the genuine product as well. Respondents who did not have the habit
of copying, were asked not to answer this question.
From the respondents to this question, 40.63% stated that they would
not buy the genuine item. Respondents who did not have the habit of
copying, were asked not to answer this question.
See eg P Crommentuijn-Marsh, C Eckertb and S Potter, ‘Consumer
Behaviour Towards Sustainability within Fashion’ [2010] KEER2010
International Conference on Kansei Engineering and Emotion Research,
Paris 2010; and E Saner, ‘Sustainable Style: Will Gen Z Help the Fashion
Industry Clean up its Act?’ (The Guardian, 25 April 2017) <https://
www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/apr/25/sustainable-clothing-fash-
ion-revolution-week-rana-plaza-emma-watson> accessed 22 April 2018.
Interestingly, one respondent brought up the perspective of misleading
marketing. They mentioned that they would not buy a genuine Gugguu
(see the sub-Section ‘What is being copied?’) product, because they felt
that Gugguu’s advertising is misleading on the grounds that the company
highlights to be Finnish even though it manufactures its products
abroad.

Heidi Ha¨rko¨nen  The new era of home-made fake fashion

ARTICLE

863

line with what was found out in the previous section:
home-sewers prefer domestic fashion brands. However,
domestic design does not seem to be enough for them,
and domestic manufacture is considered important as
well. When it comes to needs of altering and personaliz-
ing the original product somehow, for example the siz-
ing, ﬁt
and material were mentioned. A few
respondents also claimed that they could make a better,
longer-lasting version of the fashion designs themselves.
Some wrote that they just enjoy sewing and copying
presents them with interesting challenge where they can
test their skills. All in all, these answers seem to indicate
that a major reason behind home-copying is that peo-
ple want to be able to contribute in the manufacturing
process and to customize the brand product in one way
or another. Making the product themselves gives them
multiple advantages.

Taking into account the results that (i) the majority
of sewing enthusiasts have been copying or could copy
branded products and do not see it as a moral or ethical
problem, (ii) most amateur seamstresses feel the need to
contribute in the manufacturing process in some way or
to alter the product when it comes to sizing, ﬁt, material
etc., and (iii) almost half of these copyist also share pho-
tos of their results in social media bringing the images of
the copy available to masses, I come to the conclusion
that, instead of trying to prevent this activity, fashion
brands that are copied like this could even see this phe-
nomenon as an opportunity. This view is expanded fur-
ther in Section 3.

3. If you can’t beat them, join them

the overall appearance or the design of a fashion item.
A majority of the respondents also revealed that they
tend to merely copy the overall appearance or design of
the product instead of copying logos or other brand
identiﬁcation symbols. This means that, legally, the is-
sue is often more about copyright and design law rather
than trademarks. Regardless,
it seems unlikely that
rightholders would have much luck enforcing any rights
against home-sewers.28 Copyright offers little effective
protection. Provided that a fashion item reaches the re-
quired level of originality in the ﬁrst place,29 individuals
copying that item at home for private purposes will
likely be able to rely on a private copying exception in
most Member States.30 Design right and trade mark
protection will often be equally ineffective, since most
home-sewers will not make copies for commercial pur-
poses or use a registered sign in the course of trade.31
Only if the seamstress in question would somehow
make proﬁt of these DIY-knock-offs, for example by
selling the copies in a craft fair or sewing made to order
the copied fashion house could intervene.
copies,
Finally, even if rightholders may have a legal
leg to
stand on, practical problems may still hinder successful
enforcement: when the infringement occurs on a small
scale, by hand and at home, it is unlikely enforcement
will be practicable.

Since this copying phenomenon seems to be very
common among home-sewers and there are very few le-
gal impediments to making copies of fashion designs by
home-sewing,
the question is: should these copied
brands do something about it, or could they somehow
turn it to their advantage?

As explained in Section 2, the large majority of the
home-sewers who make copies of fashion designs, copy

Home-made fakes are not necessarily a major prob-
lem for fashion houses, especially compared to the

28

Since the purpose of this article is merely to provide some insight into
what kind of copies people are sewing at home and why they do that and
for whom, no comprehensive legal analysis is provided.

29 Generally speaking, fashion items as products of applied art have difﬁcul-
ties in reaching the originality level required by copyright law. See for ex-
ample S Monseau, ‘European Design Rights: A Model for the Protection
of All Designers from Piracy’ (2011) 48(1) ABLJ, 27–31; and L Bently,
‘The Return of Industrial Copyright?’ (2012) 34(10) EIPR 654–72. What
is more, the concept of originality has not been completely harmonized
in the EU (U-M Mylly, ‘Tekija¨noikeuden omapera¨isyyden harmonisointi
Euroopan unionissa’ (2016) 6/2016 Lakimies 907–30).

30 Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of

22 May 2001 on the harmonization of certain aspects of copyright and
related rights in the information society (‘The InfoSoc Directive’) art
5(2)(b) allows Member States to provide for an exception or limitation
to the reproduction right in respect of reproductions ‘on any medium
made by a natural person for private use and for end that neither directly
nor indirectly commercial’. Most of home-sewn knock-offs would fall
into this category. This exception has been implemented by all Member
States, except the UK and Ireland. (cf C Geiger and F Scho¨nherr,
‘Consumer’s Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Copyright’ EUIPO
summary report’ [2017], 6–7, 27, 41. A private copying exception was in-
troduced in the UK in 2014. However, it was quashed by BASCA v The

Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills [2015] EWHC 1723.)
Notably the InfoSoc Directive stipulates that this limitation to copyright
may only be provided on condition that the copyright holders receive
fair compensation. However, the laws of the Member States generally do
not provide for such compensation when it comes to home-sewn copies
of fashion designs.

31 Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on

Community designs, art 20; Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on the European Union
trade mark, art 9, and; Directive (EU) 2015/2436 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2015 to approximate the
laws of the Member States relating to trade marks, art 10.
However, the directive leaves the Member States some freedom when it
comes to ‘the protection against the use of a sign other than use for the
purposes of distinguishing goods or services, where use of that sign with-
out due cause takes unfair advantage of, or is detrimental to, the distinc-
tive character or the repute of the trade mark’ (art 10(3)(6)). Thus, a
Member State’s national law that would protect the right holder from a
use that does not occur in the course of trade but without due cause takes
unfair advantage of or is detrimental to the distinctive character or the
repute of the trademark, could in theory enable a fashion house to take
measures against private copying of its logo or other sign that is pro-
tected as a trademark.

864

ARTICLE

global counterfeiting industry. However, instead of ig-
noring the phenomenon of home-sewn copies, fashion
houses could consider using the above explained needs
and habits of sewing amateurs and make proﬁt out of
them. This could be done by taking a look into the past
of some fashion houses and ﬁnding inspiration from
there. In the mid-20th century, fashion houses did not
only sell garments but also licensed sewing patterns to
sewing pattern companies. This way consumers that did
not belong to the original target customer group of the
high-fashion houses could buy the design and sew their
own clothes that looked identical to the fashion houses’
garments. Haute couture brands such as Givenchy,
Balmain, Lanvin, Schiaparelli, Nina Ricci and Yves
Saint Lauren all used to license their sewing patterns to
major sewing pattern companies, such as McCall’s.32 It
was also a way for the fashion houses to expand their
brand to new consumer sections and acquire fame. This
way the fashion house was actually able to control the
copying, at least in some level.

Since the needs of the home-sewing copyist seem to
be related to the ability of making choices in the
manufacturing process, the joy of sewing and saving
money, brands could actually consider making the
copying easier for the consumers who are doing it any-
way. Providing sewing patterns of bestseller products
for private copying could beneﬁt both the brand and
the person whose intention it is to make a private copy
of the product in question. This idea could even be fur-
ther reﬁned by creating some kind of “Do-It-Yourself
kits” for home sewing purposes that could include not
only the pattern and sewing instructions, but also the
fabric and other material that is required to make the
product. This would both answer the needs of hobbyist
who want to alter the copied products but also the
needs of those who merely enjoy making handicraft
products and sewing. Taking into account that more
than 80 % of the copyists sew copies of fashion designs
for their children, providing these ‘Do-It-Yourself-
copy-kits’ would be something that especially children
fashion companies could consider as a side-business.33

The idea behind providing Do-It-Yourself kits of
fashion designs would be similar to the idea of high
fashion brands creating capsule collections in collabora-
tion with more affordable brands like H&M and
Uniqlo. This is a way to enlarge the target group of the
brand and engage new customers.

However, fashion houses may hesitate encouraging
the amateur sewers to produce home-made counterfeits
by providing logo patches or other brand identiﬁcation
symbols to be stitched to these private copies, for good
reason of course. It would cause the brand to lose the
control over what is being produced under its label and
the trade mark might face a risk of dilution. But since
according to the survey presented in Section 2, the
overall appearance of a product is way more often the
target of the copying than the logo or other brand iden-
tiﬁcation symbol, these kinds of stitch-it-yourself logos
would probably not be in such high demand anyway.

Some of the brands that were mentioned as copied
brands in the sub-Section ‘What is being copied?’ actually
assist people in copying their designs. Marimekko sells not
only ready-made apparel but also its printed fabrics, which
makes it even easier to create your own “Marimekkos” at
home. Moreover, Marimekko has published a book that
includes instructions and ideas how to home-sew gar-
ments, accessories and home de´cor using Marimekko fab-
rics.34 Nosh sells ready-made clothes for women and
children, but also fabrics of their own prints. Furthermore,
anyone can download simple sewing patterns accompa-
nied with sewing instructions from their website for free.35

4. Concluding remarks

It is clear that the IP system does not really offer meas-
ures for the rightholder to prevent home-sewn copies—
provided that the rightholder would want to prevent
these home-made fakes in the ﬁrst place. Legally, the
problem of home-sewn copies is rather simple. Fashion
houses have very little that they can do to prevent peo-
ple from home-sewing copies of their fashion designs,
since without any commercial purpose it will often fall
outside of the scope of exclusive rights.

32

33

See also S Kurutz, ‘Do-It-Yourself Fashion Thrives at the McCall Pattern
Company’ (The New York Times, 2 August 2016) <https://www.nyti-
mes.com/2016/08/04/fashion/mccalls-pattern-company-sewing-do-it-
yourself.html> accessed 1 May 2018. McCall’s and its co-brands Vogue
and Butterick still have ‘designer pattern’—lines. However, the designers
of those patterns are not as well-known as the above mentioned, world-
famous couture houses. To name a few bigger names, Vogue patterns
sells Anne Klein and Zandra Rhodes designer patterns, and McCall’s sells
Laura Ashley designer patterns.
See also MB Collins, ‘Patchwork Protection: Copyright Law and Quilted
Art’ (2010) 9 J Marshall Rev Intell Prop L 855, 862. Collins explains how

copying and exclusive rights work in another craft scene: quilting. The
most famous quilt artists provide instructions how to copy their quilt
designs, but under terms and conditions where only a limited amount of
copies is allowed and for private use only.

34 K Rapia and M Savio, SURRUR – Make your own Marimekko (WSOY

2011).

35 <https://en.nosh.ﬁ/category/539/free-sewing-patterns> accessed 15 April

2018.

Heidi Ha¨rko¨nen  The new era of home-made fake fashion

ARTICLE

865

When it comes to copyright, the only thing that might
play a role (and would thus need further research) is that
Article 5(2)(b) of the InfoSoc Directive sets a condition to
the private use exception: rightholders should receive fair
compensation for such private use. There is no system for
collecting compensation payments from home-sewers to
fashion houses as copyright holders. However, it probably
would not be realistic nor reasonable to introduce a levy
system for fashion design copyright holders. What is
more, in certain cases when determining the form of
compensation, detailed arrangements and possible level of
such fair compensation, the particular circumstances of
each case should be taken into account. When evaluating
these circumstances, a valuable criterion would be the
possible harm to the right holders resulting from the act
in question. In certain situations, where the damage to
the rightholder would be minimal, no obligation for pay-
ment may arise.36 Home sewing could likely fall into
this category, where the prejudice to fashion houses as
right holders would be so minimal that there would be no
obligation for
compensation
payments.

amateur

sewers

for

I acknowledge the limitations of this study, such as
the small sample size of the survey and the space avail-
able. Hence, further research of especially the following
issues presented in this article would be worthwhile: (i)
if copying by home-sewing occurs on a large enough
scale so that it becomes comparable to more ‘tradi-
tional’ forms of home copying37 for which there is a
levy system, the case for compensation for fashion
houses also becomes stronger. In this case, should there
be a levy system and what kind of a levy system should
it be? (ii) If fashion houses were to ‘help’ consumers
home-sewing copies of their items in a way that was de-
scribed in Section 3, would there be a market for it? In
other words, would the home-sewing copyists be willing
to pay for this? And ﬁnally, (iii) since high-fashion
brands used to license out their sewing patterns for pat-
tern companies, what stopped them from doing that?
Was
that because home-sewing became less usual
among consumers, or were the reasons somehow re-
lated to copying as a phenomenon?

Appendix

Questions of the survey that is presented in
Section 238
1. Do you ever sew clothes, accessories etc. that copy
or imitate brand products for yourself, your family
members or others? (Fin: ‘Ompeletko koskaan bra¨n-
dituotteita ja¨ljittelevia¨ vaatteita, asusteita tai muita
vastaavia tuotteita itsellesi, perheenja¨senillesi
tai
muille?’). Only one option allowed.
(a) yes, b. no.

2.

‘Jos

(Fin:

ompelet

If you sew copies of brand products, which elements
of them do you imitate? You may choose multiple
options.
bra¨ndituotteiden
kopioita, mita¨ elementteja¨ bra¨ndituotteista ja¨ljitte-
let? Voit valita useita vaihtoehtoja.’)
(a) the product identiﬁcation symbol, such as logo
(for example, Adidas stripes), b. the overall ap-
pearance or design (for example,
the cut or
model, such as Fja¨llra¨ven’s Ka˚nken backpack), c.
something else, what?).

3. For whom do you sew these imitations of brand
products? (Fin: ‘Kenelle ompelet na¨ita¨ bra¨ndituot-
teita ja¨ljittelevia¨ ompeluksia?’) Multiple options
allowed.
(a) myself, b. spouse, c. children or grandchildren,
d. other family members, e. friends, d. for some-
one else, who?

4. On what grounds do you choose the product you
‘Milla¨ perusteella valitset kopioimasi

copy? (Fin:
tuotteen?’) Multiple options allowed.
(a) the brand, b. the overall appearance or design, c.

some other reason, what?

5. Which brands have you copied or imitated by
home-sewing? (Fin: ‘Mita¨ bra¨ndeja¨ olet kopioinut
tai ja¨ljitellyt ompelemalla itse?’)

6. Do you publish photos of your home-sewn copies
in social media?
‘Julkaisetko sosiaalisessa
mediassa kuvia ompelemistasi kopiotuotteista?’)
Only one option allowed.
(a) yes, b. no.

(Fin:

36

See recital 35 in the preamble to the InfoSoc Directive preamble; CJEU:
Judgement in Copydan Ba˚ndkopi v Nokia Danmark A/S, C-463/12,
EU:C:2015:144, particularly paras 20–23; and UK: BASCA v The Secretary
of State for Business, Innovation and Skills [2015], paras 9–12. See also E
Rosati, ‘Lack of Fair Compensation Requirement in UK Private Copying
Exception not Supported by Sufﬁcient Evidence, High Court Rules’ (The
IPKat, 19 June 2015, <http://ipkitten.blogspot.ﬁ/2015/06/lack-of-fair-
compensation-requirement.html?m¼1> accessed 22 April 2018.

Such as time shifting and format shifting of music, movies etc.

37
38 As the respondents were found from a Finish Facebook group, the ques-
tions were also presented to the respondents in Finnish. For the readers
of this article, the questions have been translated to English. The original
Finnish question follows the translation in parentheses.

866

ARTICLE

7. Would you buy the genuine product instead of mak-
ing a copy? (Fin: ‘Voisitko ostaa aidon tuotteen itse
tekema¨si kopion sijaan?’). Only one option allowed.
(a) yes, b. no (explain, why not).

8. Do you feel like there is anything wrong in copying
brand products by home-sewing? (Fin: ‘Onko bra¨n-
dituotteiden kopiointi kotioloissa sinun mielesta¨si
va¨a¨rin?’) Only one option allowed.
(a) yes, b. no, c. I am not sure

9. Do you know what legal issues are related to home-
sewn copying? (Fin: ‘Tieda¨tko¨, mita¨ juridisia kysy-
myksia¨ kotioloissa tehta¨va¨a¨n tuotekopiointiin liit-
tyy?’) Only one option allowed.
(a) yes, b. no, c. I am not sure.


