Protection of Plant Varieties in China 

John Mo* 

INTRODUCTION 

“Plant varieties” is a term referring to new varieties of plants invented, developed 
or modified from the existing plants by  humans. They are a new form of intellectual 
property, which must be protected by World Trade Organization Members pursuant to 
the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual Property  Rights  (TRIPS 
Agreement). The People’s Republic of China (PRc) was not yet a WTO Member as at 
July 2001; however, it is expected that it will probably be able to join the WTO either 
in November 2001 or early in 2002. Protection of plant varieties in China has become 
a  legitimate  concern  of  all  WTO Members  and  their  companies  engaged  in  the 
agricultural sector and related businesses. 

A legal concept of plant varieties (or variety) has been provided by Artxle  1 of the 
International Union for the Protection of New Varieties  of Plants (UPOV) Convention 
1991, and Article 5 of the Council Regulation (EC) No. 2100/94 on Community Plant 
Variety  Rights.  In  fact,  the  definitions of  variety  as  adopted  in  these  provisions  are 
identical. Under these provisions, a plant variety means “a plant grouping within a single 
botanical taxon of the lowest known rank”. Further, the meaning of “grouping” can be 
defined  by  the  expression  of  the  characteristics resulting  from  a  given  genotype  or 
combination  of  genotypes1  as  distinguished  from  any  other  plant  grouping  by  the 
expression of at least one of the said characteristics, and considered as a unit with regard 
to its suitabhty for being propagated unchanged.2 

For comparison, a more general definition of plant variety describes a plant variety 
as  “the  physical  unit  of  plant  material  selected by  the  plant  breeder  with  its  set  of 

of this article. 

*  Associate Professor, City University  of Hong Kong; Barrister and Solicitor in Victoria, Australia; Adjunct 
Professor, Jilin University Law School, Shanghai University Law School, the Centre of Economic Law of People’s 
University, and the Centre for Legislative Studies of Beijing University; Arbitrator, China International Economic 
and  Trade  Arbitration  Commission  (CIETAC), Shenzhen  Arbitration  Commission,  Qingdao  Arbitration 
Commission and Dalian Arbitration Commission. 

The author acknowledges the support of a City University  of Hong Kong research project in the completion 

1  The World Intellectual  Property Organization (WIPO) has raised the question of the interpretation of the 
expression “plant grouping”. Paragraph 5.588 of WIPO’S Intellectual  Property  Reading Material  observes as  follows: 
“The expression ‘plant grouping’ used within the definition corresponds to the French ensemble vegetal  and leaves 
open the question whether  a variety must  invariably be constituted by  more  than  one whole plant.”: see WIPO 
Publication No. 476(E), p. 323, available at: (chttp://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/iprm/index.htmn. 

2  The UPOV Convention  1991, Article  1; and the Council Regulation  (EC) No. 2100/94  on Community 

Plant Variety Rights, Article 5. 

872 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

morphological and physiological characteristics.”3 The legal concept of plant varieties (or 
variety) is  crucial for the protection of such as  a form of intellectual property right.4 It 
must be noted that only new plant varieties, which satisfy the conmtions for the grant of 
a  breeder’s  right,s are protected by  the UPOV Convention  and  the TRIPS Agreement, 
although genetic resources, which means genetic materials of actual or potential value: 
are protected  by  the  Convention  on  Biological Diversity  (CBD),~ which wdl  not  be 
discussed in this article. 

The article will examine the present  state  of plant  protection  in  the  PRc-whch 

refers to only Mainland China in this article. Since Hong Kong and Macau have their own 
legal system and systems for the protection of plant varieties, the article does not intend to 
include the issues concerning the protection of plant varieties in Hong Kong and Macau. 
For the purpose of mscussion, the article consists of four Sections. Section I  investigates the 
recent developments of plant varieties in the PRC; Section 11 studies the international legal 
framework for the protection of plant  varieties.  Section III  reviews  the  domestic legal 
framework for the protection of plant varieties in the PRC, and Section IV analyses certain 
consistencies  or  inconsistencies between  the  domestic  law  of  China  and  its  WTO 
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement. A short conclusion will be provided at the end. 

I.  THE DEVELOPMENT OF  PLANT VARIETIES 

IN CHINA 

China began  to  apply biotechnology, including the  technology to  develop new 
plant varieties, in the 1980s. It was estimated that in 1986, the sale value ofbio-products 
in  China was  about R i ~ 3  2 billion.8 Ten  years  later, in  1996, the  sale  value  of bio- 
products reached  an  estimated sum of RMB 114 billion.9 Most  sales  were  related to 
memcal products; however, the use of biotechnology or genetically modified organisms 
(GMOS) in the agncultural sector has  developed quickly in recent years.  In the  1990s, 
China  developed  the  Project  863,  which  promoted  the  development  of  various 
advanced researches and technologies in China. It was estimated that in 1996, China had 
developed forty-seven new plant varieties, which involved the use of one hundred and 
three types of genetically modified genes.10 About twenty of these new plant varieties 
have entered into the stage of field experiment, and five of them have been approved 

3  WIPO, supra, footnote 1, p. 318. 
4  For example, in a U.S. case, Imazio Nursery Inc. v. Dania  Greenhouses,  69 F.  3d 1560; 1995 U.S. App. LEXIS 
31 165. available at: <<httu://web.lexis-nexis.com/)), the meanina of plant variew as defined in the relevant US. 
laws were examned by ;he  Court to determine whether the plal’ntiff s patent had been infringed by the defendant 
as alleged. 
5  For  example, Articles  5-9  of the UPOV Convention  1991 stipulate the  conditions  for  the  grant  of the 

breeder’s rights. 

6  Under Article 2 of the Convention on Biological Diversiw, “genetic materials” refers to  any material of 

plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units‘or heredity. 

7  The CBD was done in Ria de Janeiro on 5 June 1992, and came into effect on 29 December 1993. 
*  Wu  Lebin,  Trend  of Development of  the  Bio-Industry  in  China  (in  Chinese),  8  March  2001,  available at: 

<chttp://www.chinainfobank.com/)). 

Id. 

9 

chinainfobank.com/)>. 

1”  See  the  report  Special  Industry  of  China  (in  Chinese),  11 January  2001,  available  at:  <<http://www. 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

873 
for  commercial exploitation.’ ’ In  1998, there  were  sixty-eight  applications for  the 
protection of plant varieties based on G M O S , ~ ~  most of which are at the field experiment 
stage.  It  has  been  estimated  that  at  present  there  are  more  than  one  hundred 
biotechnological  companies  in  China  researching  on  various  topics  of  bio- 
engineering.13 Most  of  them  are  engaged  in  studies  concerning the  application of 
biotechnology in the medical field. Research on the development of plant varieties has 
been largely conducted by State-owned research institutes and centres. 

Agriculture is an important sector of the Chinese economy. The use of genetically 
modified  plants  has  huge  potentials  in  China.  Take  cotton  as  an  example:  China 
produces  about  450-500  tonnes  of raw  cotton  each  year,  accounting for  about  25 
percent of the world total production. In 1993, Chinese scientists developed their own 
pest-resistant cotton seeds. It was estimated that the use of these seeds would avoid a loss 
of about RMB 100 billion a  year.14  About  one  dozen  new varieties of pest-resistant 
cotton  seeds  have  been  approved  for  use  in  China.15  Besides  cotton,  China  has 
developed new plant varieties of tomatoes, chillis, egg plants, morning glory, disease- 
resistant  wheat, and  others.16 It  must  be  noted  that  also  in  1993, Chinese scientists 
regstered the first Chinese-made pest-killing virus, which was obtained &om the body 
of bollworms.i7 This virus was genetically mo&fied later to reduce the killing period 
from five to two days. 

It was reported in July 2001 that scientists from Mainland Chma, Hong Kong and 
the United States have been engaged in a joint research project to develop a GM super 
rice, which will not  only double the present yield  of normal rice in  China, but  also 
maintain a good taste and nutritional value.’* The scientists expect to have the super rice 
ready  for  trial  use  by  2004.  This  is  one  of  the  examples  of  biotechnological 
developments in China today. 

The potential significance of bio-engineering in  China is  also  seen in  the  use, 
development and protection of Chinese herb mehcine. The farming of Chinese herbs 
has  become an important industry. In 2000, there were  about 58,000,000 MuI9 of 
herb plants in China, which produced a total of 3,500,000 tonnes of herbs for medical 

11  These five  new plant  varieties  are:  a  pest-resistant  cotton,  a  colour-changed  morning glory, maturity- 

delayed tomatoes, virus-resistant sweet C~LUIS and virus-resistant tomatoes. 

chinainfobank.com/)). 

12  See  the  report  Herald  o j  Chinese  Economy  (in  Chinese),  19  May  2000,  available  at:  cchttp://www. 
13  See China Trade (in Chinese), 6 June 2000, available at: (<http://www.chinainfobank.com/,r. 
‘4  See  the  report  Market  Economy  of  China  (in  Chinese),  7  March  2001,  available  at:  cchttp://www. 
chinainfobank.com/n. It was reported that the grain yield of normal rice was about 360 kilograms per Mu, but the 
GM super rice was expected to reach about 900 kilograms per Mu (see inf;a, footnote 19). 

published on the Website of the Ministry of Agriculture. 

27 March 2001, available at: c(http://www.chinainbank.com/)). 

’ 5   See id.  However, it  must  be  noted that  this  news has  not been  verified oficially with the information 
‘ 6   See  Special  Industry  of  China, supra,  footnote  10; and  the  report  Rural  Enterprises of China  (in Chinese), 
1’  See Infbank (in Chinese), 25 May 2001, available at: cchttp://w.chinainfobank.com/)). 
18  See Genetic “SuperRice”could Double Grain Yield by 2008, SCMP, 4 July 2001, available at: <(http://hOngkong. 
l 9   Mu is the land unit used in China. It is equivalent to about 0.6 hectares. 

scmp.com/>). 

874 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

use.20 About 75 percent  of these herbs were exported for medical use overseas. This 
demonstrates the  economic  importance  of herb farming in  China. At present, there 
are 11,146 species of Chinese herbs which have medical values.21 These herbs must be 
protected  because  they  are  part  of  the  Chinese  cultural  heritage  and  traditional 
knowledge. It can be expected that modern biotechnology will be introduced into the 
field of Chinese medicine to improve the features of the existing plant varieties. No 
doubt protection of plant varieties and protection of traditional knowledge of Chinese 
medicine will become two of the very essential issues for intellectual property law in 
China in near future. 

Another  important  area  where  the  protection  of plant  varieties  is  crucial is  the 
cultivation  of  flower  and  ornamental  plant  varieties  for  commercial  use.  Yunnan 
Province is well known for its mild and idealistic climate for such cultivation. For the 
purpose  of  becoming  the  national  centre for breeding  flower varieties, the  Yunnan 
government promulgated a  local  law,  known  as  the  Rules  for  the  Registration and 
Protection  of  New Varieties  of Horticultural  Plants, on 25  September  1998. These 
Rules protect new varieties of flowers and ornamental plants on the grounds of novelty, 
distinctness, uniformity and stability.22 A new variety satisfjrlng these four criteria may 
be registered under these Rules. A variety which has been certified as a  “new variety” 
by  an overseas  authority may  be directly registered under  the Rules in Yunnan.23 By 
issuing these local Rules, the Yunnan government hopes to attract domestic and foreign 
breeders and farmers so that they bring their varieties of flowers and ornamental plants 
to Yunnan for commercial farming and cultivation. Although these local Rules appear 
to be unique in China, their operation has to be subject to the provisions of the Rules 
for  the  Protection  of  New  Varieties  of  Plants  (referred to  as  the  Rules  for  Plant 
Protection) made by the National government in 1997. This means that whatever these 
local  Rules  provide,  their  interpretation  and  application  must  be  governed  by  the 
relevant rules  and principles set out in the national law.  It was  estimated that the sale 
value of flower trade in China amounted to F ~ A B  540 billion in 2000.24 Since the overall 
quality  of  existing  varieties  of  flowers  in  China  is  considerably  lower  than  their 
counterparts  overseas, it  is  expected that  foreign  breeders will  probably  explore  the 
Chinese market of flower breedmg and sales soon, in view of China’s imminent entry 
into  the  WTO at  the  end  of  2001.  However,  it  should  also  be  noted  the  cloning 
technique has been applied widely in China to reproduce various species of flowers and 
ornamental plants and save the cost of importing and purchasing them.25 The use of such 

2o  See the report Herald ofAdvanced Technology and Industry in China (in Chinese), 21 March 2000, available at: 

See  the  report  Infomation  and  Research  OR  Chinese  Medicine  (in  Chinese), 26  April  2000,  avadable at: 

rchttp://www.chinainfobank.com/)). 

((http://www.chinainfobank.com/)). 

2z  The Rules for the Registration and Protection of New Varieties of Horticultural Plants, Article 3. 
23  Ibid., Article 6. 
*q  See  the  report  Rural  Enterprises  .f China  (in  Chinese), 20  December  2000,  available  at:  (<http://www. 
25  See the report Morning News (in Chinese), 9 July 2001, available at: ~~http://www.peopledaily.com.cn/)~. 

chinainfobank.com/)>. 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

875 

technology has  certain implications for the  rights and interests of breeders who have 
invested in  the  development of new  varieties  of flowers and  ornamental plants.  The 
position of Chinese law is yet to be clarified in relation to the use of cloning techniques 
to reproduce species of flowers and ornamental plants, some of which may be protected 
in China or overseas. 

The use of GM foods in China is a new issue. The government has not published 
specific guidelines on the production  and sale of GM foods. At  present, the Uniform 
Standards for  Food Labelling issued  by  the  State Standardization Bureau  on  13 May 
1987, govern the labelling standards of foods in China. In addition, there are also the 
Standards for Labelling Foods of Special Nutrition issued by the State Standardization 
Bureau in the  1980s. These administrative rules do not have special references to GM 
foods. In 1993, the State Council issued the Administrative Measures for the Safety of 
Genetic Engineering, and in  October  2000, the  Ministry  for Agriculture  issued the 
Administrative Measures for the Safety of Genetic Engineering in Agricultural Products. 
These Admmistrative Measures provide a  certain guidance for those biotechnological 
companies manufacturing GM foods. However, the Measures are not meant to be a set 
of comprehensive rules guiding the development of the GM food industry in China. 

In July  2001,  the  Ministry  for  Health  issued  a  notice  prohibiting  the  use  of 
protected wild plants or protected animals as ingredients of food products marketed as 
“health foods”. The lists of protected wild plants and animals are published regularly by 
the relevant government authorities. In the same notice, the Ministry for Health states 
that if a  plant  has  been  granted breeders’ rights pursuant to  the  relevant law for  the 
protection of plant varieties, the user of the plant must obtain a permit for use from the 
breeder or right-holder when using it as a food substance. This notice is in line with the 
protection  offered by  the Rules for Plant Protection,  promulgated on 20 May  1997 
by  the  State Council.  The Rules  for  Plant  Protection  will  be  examined in  detail in 
Section 111 of this article. 

11.  THE INTERNATIONAL LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROTECTION OF PLANT 

VARIETIES 

A.  THE TRIPS AGREEMENT 

The TRIPS Agreement requires WTO Members to protect “plant varieties either by 
patents or by an effective ruigeneris system or by any combination thereof.. .”26  Under 
the  Agreement, the  present total  of one hundred  and forty-one  WTO Members are 
obliged to adopt adequate measures to protect plant varieties within their territories,27 
even though the grace period for each Member to fklly comply with their obligations 
vanes  depending on the  status of their  economic development and the  date of their 

26  The TRIPS Agreement, Article 27(3)(b) 
27  As at July 2001. 

87 6 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

accession. Article 65 of the TRIPS Agreement provides that the original Members of the 
WTO are generally expected  to  comply with  their  obligations under  the Agreement 
from  1 January 1996. This date has become the basis  for allowing the grace period to 
developing-country  Members.  Accordingly,  a  developing-country  Member  or  a 
Member whose economy is in the process of transformation from a centrally-planned 
into a free-enterprise, market economy has been  given a grace period  of an additional 
five years (i.e. they were required to implement fully their obligations under the TRIPS 
Agreement fiom  1 January  2000), and  a  developing  country which  had  not  offered 
protection to plant varieties before  1995 has been given an additional grace period of 
ten years (i.e. they are required to comply with Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement only 
from  1 January 2005).  Furthermore,  the least-developed countries  (LDCS) have been 
given an addtional period of eleven years under Article 66 of the TRIPS Agreement to 
offer full protection  to plant varieties pursuant  to Article 27  of the Agreement.  This 
means that an LDC is  allowed to implement fully Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement 
from 1 January 2006. The formulae for calculating the time-periods for WTO Members 
to implement their obligations under the TRIPS Agreement, as set out in its Articles 65 
and 66, should apply to new WTO Members which accede to the WTO after 1 January 
1995, even though  the  existing Members may  not  all  wish  to  grant  the  same grace 
periods to new Members for various legal and practical considerations.28 

Under Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement, a plant variety should be protected in 
one of three ways: a patent, a strigeneris system of protection, or a mixed system of patent 
and strigeneris protection. The United States has the world's oldest patent system for the 
protection ofplant varieties in a broad sense. In fact, the United States has granted patent 
protection  to a-sexually reproduced  plants since the promulgation  of the Plant Patent 
Law of 1930,29 and granted protection to sexually reproduced plant varieties since the 
promulgation of the Plant Varieties Protection Law of 1970.30 It can be said that before 
1970, the  United  States protected  a-sexually  reproduced  plant  varieties solely under 
patent  law,  and  since  then,  the  a-sexually  reproduced  plant  varieties  and  sexually 
reproduced plant varieties have been protected by two separate laws, thus making the 
U.S.  system a combination  of patent  and  stri generis  protection.  For  comparison, the 
European countries have been well known for their contributions to the development 
of  the  UPOV Convention  since  1961, which  represents a  stri generis  system  for  the 
protection  of plant varieties.31 The three forms of protection  stipulated in Article 27 of 
the TRIPS Agreement offer sufficient flexibility to WTO Members to develop the most 
suitable way to protect plant varieties in their jurisdictions. 

of the TRIPS Agreement in the case of China's accession to the WTO. 

28  For example, the existing WTO Members may have different interpretations on the meaning of Article 65 
29  This law has been incorporated into U.S.C., Title 35, Part 11,  Chapter 15. 
3"  This law has been incorporated into U.S.C., Title 7, Chapter 57. 
31  However, it  must be noted  that  in  a number  of  European  countries,  cells, seeds, micro-organisms and 
bacteria may be  patentable sometimes, even though these micro-organisms  may be related to the production  or 
reproduction  of new plant varieties. 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

877 

If a plant variety is protected by patent law, it must satisfy the general criteria for 
the grant of patent in a particular jurisdiction. For example, the relevant provision of 
U.S. law granting patent to a-sexually  reproduced plant varieties states as follows: 

“Whoever invents or discovers and a-sexually  reproduces any distinct  and  new  variety  of 
plants, including cultivated sports, mutants, hybrids, and newly found seedlings, other than 
a  tuber-propagated  plant  or  a  plant  found  in an uncultivated  state,  may  obtain  a  patent 
therefor, subject to the conditions and requirement of this title.”32 
This provision makes an a-sexually  reproduced plant variety subject to the general 
conhtions for the grant to patentable inventions, which refer to LLany new and useful 
process,  machine,  manufacture,  or  composition  of  matter,  or  any  new  and  useful 
improvement thereoK”33 Under the U.S. patent law, an invention, which may refer to 
a utility model, design or plant variety, must be novel or non-obvious before it is eligible 
for patent protection.34 The protection  of a-sexually  reproduced plant varieties in the 
United States dustrates certain aspects of Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement. 

If a plant variety is protected by a suigeneris system, it must satisfy the special criteria 
for  the  grant  of  protection  to  plant  varieties  in  a  particular jurisdxtion.  A  typical 
example of such a system is the UPOV Convention, which will be examined further in 
the next Sub-section of this article. 

If a plant variety is protected by a mixed system of patent and sui generis systems of 
protection,  dfferent  plant  varieties  may  be  subject  to  different  condtions  for 
protection.  At  present,  the  United  States  has  adopted  a  mixed  system,  offering 
protection to a-sexually  reproduced plant varieties under the patent law, and to sexually 
reproduced  plant  varieties  under  the  special Plant  Variety  Protection Act.  The two 
types  of protection  are  distinguished on  the  ground  of  the  mode  of  reproduction, 
avoiding or minimizing the chance of double protection where the same plant variety 
might be eligible for protection under the two parallel systems. However, Article 27 of 
the TRIPS Agreement does not  expressly prohibit the existence of double protection, 
thus allowing a wide flexibility to WTO Members to decide what kind of combination 
they wish to make for the purpose of protecting plant varieties. 

The UPOV Convention, as amended on 23 October 1978, which still had twenty- 
eight Members as at July 2001,35 prohibits the grant of double protection to the same 
plant variety by its Members.36 However, this prohibition has been abandoned in the 
1991 version of the UPOV Convention, which had sixteen Members as at July 2001.37 
In the light of Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV Convention 1991, it 

32  35  U.S.C.  161. 
33  35 U.S.C. 101. 
34  35 U.S.C. 102 and 103. 
35  See the  relevant information supplied by WIPO, available at:  cchttp://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/iprm. 
36  UPOV  Convention 1978, Article 2. 
37  See  the  relevant  information  supplied  by  WIPO, avadable  at:  ((http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/iprm. 

index.htmn. 

index.htmn. 

878 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

can be said that  when  a  WTO Member decides to protect  plant  varieties by  a  mixed 
system of protection, how to mix the system or how to combine different features of 
the  two  systems  is  totally at  the  dscretion  of the  Member  concerned.  Of course, a 
system avoidmg the possibility of double protection provides a high level of certainty, 
foreseeability  and  stability,  and  better  protection  both  for  plant  varieties  and  the 
breeders. 

B.  THE UPOV CONVENTION 
1.  An Overview 

The UPOV Convention was initially concluded in 1961. It was amended later on 
10 November 1972, on 23 October 1978 and on 19 March 1991. Each new version of 
the  UPOV Convention  has  shown  significant  changes  from  the  previous  version. 
According to the general principles of international law, each amended treaty is a new 
treaty, which operates only among the countries having ratified it. At the moment, both 
the UPOV Convention  1978 and the UPOV Convention  1991 are operational, but the 
UPOV Convention  1978 appears to  be  more  important  than  the  UPOV Convention 
1991 for the time being as the former operates among twenty-eight  countries and the 
latter operates among sixteen countries.38  Therefore, technically, the Members of the 
two UPOV Conventions  may  have  different  obligations and  rights  under  these  two 
regimes for the protection of plant varieties. The major features of these two versions of 
the UPOV Convention are examined below. 

2.  Major Features Ofthe UPOV Convention 1978 

The Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants was established under the 
UPOV Convention  1978.  The  Union  is  the  organization  to  enforce  the  UPOV 
Convention 1978 and is permanently situated at Geneva.39 Its functions, organizational 
structure,  composition  and  other  related  matters  have  been  regulated  by  the 
Convention.40 

The  UPOV Convention  1978  permits  contracting  Members  to  q u a l i ~  the 
protection offered to plant varieties by referring to a particular manner of reproduction 
or multiplication or a certain end-use.41  An instance of the manner of reproduction or 
multiplication  is  the  differences  between  a-sexually  reproduced  plants  and  sexually 
reproduced plants. 

The UPOV Convention 1978 allows contracting Members to offer protection to 
new  plant  varieties by  either an  independent  system or  the  patent law.  However,  it 

38  Id. 
39  The UPOV Convention 1978, Article 1 
40  Ibid., Articles  15-26. 
4’  Ibid., Article 2(2). 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

879 

expressly states that the same botanical genus or species may be protected only by one 
of these methods in any contracting country.42 

The  UPOV Convention  1978  adopts  the  national  treatment  (NT) principle.43 
Under  the principle, nationals and companies of one  contracting country enjoy the 
same protection as the nationals and companies of another contracting country in each 
other’s territory. However, contracting countries are allowed to apply the NT principle 
on a reciprocal basis to each other’s nationals and companies to ensure fairness in the 
enforcement of the principle across the Member countries. 

The  UPOV Convention  1978  sets  out  a  timetable  for  Members  to  extend 
protection step by  step to all botanical genera and species which satisfy the prescribed 
conditions for protection. Under the timetable, the Members are required to protect at 
least five genera or species when the Convention enters into force. Subsequently, they 
should extend the protection to plant varieties in three stages. The first stage ends at the 
third year  after the  Convention’s entry into  force, during which  the  Members are 
required to extend the protection to at least ten genera or species. The second stage ends 
at the sixth year after the Convention’s entry into force, during which the Members are 
required to extend the protection to at least eighteen genera or species. The third stage 
ends  at  the  eighth year  after  the  Convention’s  entry  into  force,  during which  the 
Members are required to extend the protection to at least twenty-four genera or species. 
In the light of this timetable, it appears that a Member’s obligation is to protect at least 
twenty-four  genera  or  species  within  its  territory,  even  though  Article  4 of  the 
Convention states that the Convention may apply to all botanical genera and species. It 
can be concluded that the timetable should begm to run for a new Member which has 
acceded to the Convention either after its entry into force on 8 November 1981 or &om 
the date on which the Convention became effective for that Member. 

The  criteria  or  conditions for protection are set  out  in  Article  6  of the UPOV 

Convention 1978. Under this provision, the protectable plant variety “must be clearly 
dstinguishable by one or more important characteristics fiom any other variety whose 
existence is  a  matter of common knowledge at  the  time when protection is  applied 
for.”44 In  addition, the  protectable variety  must  not  have  been  offered for  sale  or 
marketed, with the agreement of the breeder, in the territory of any contracting country 
for longer than six years in the case of vines, forest trees, fruit trees and ornamental trees; 
or for longer than four years in the case of all other plants.45 A contracting country is 
also allowed to set up an additional requirement: that at the date of application, the plant 
variety concerned must not have been offered for sale or marketed for longer than one 
year, with the agreement of the breeder, in its territory.46 

42  Ibid., Article 2(1). 
43  Ibid., Article 3. 
44 Ibid., Article 6(l)(a). 
45  Ibid., Article 6(l)(b)(ii). 
46  Ibid., Article 6(1)(b)(i). 

880 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Besides the  characteristic of dstinctness,  a  plant variety must also  be  sufficiently 
homogenous,47 stable in its essential characteristics,4* and designated by a denomination 
destined to be its generic designation, which enables the variety to be identifiable.49 

Convention  Members should provide provisional measures of protection during 
the period between the filing of an application for protection and the decision thereon.50 
Under the UPOV Convention  1978, the protection period for vines, forest trees, 
and ornamental trees must not be less than eighteen years from the date of granting the 
protection; and the protection period for other varieties must not be less  than fifteen 
years fitom the date of granting the protection.51 

Although  the  UPOV Convention  1978 sets  out  uniform  criteria for the  grant of 
protection to plant varieties, it does not create an automatic system of protection across 
the  contracting countries.  Breeders  must  apply  for  protection  in  each  contracting 
country individually, and the grant of protection in one contracting country does not 
warrant automatic protection in other contracting countries.52 However, if a breeder has 
duly filed an application for protection in one contracting country, he may enjoy a right 
of priority for a period of twelve months for the purpose of applying for the protection 
of the same variety in other contracting countries.53 

The aforesaid features  of the  UPOV Convention  1978 illustrate the  major issues 
relating to, and the underlying principles governing the operation of, a suigeneris system 
for the protection of plant varieties. The most important aspect of such a system is its 
distinction from the patent system. The special criteria for granting protection and the 
qualified obligation to protect, at the discretion of the contracting countries, a minimum 
number of genera or species, explains why plant varieties should not be protected by a 
general patent law. The major features of the UPOV Convention 1978 are comparable 
with  the  major  characteristics  of  the  UPOV Convention  1991, which  will  now  be 
hscussed. 

3.  Major Features ofthe UPOV Convention  1991 

The  UPOV Convention  1991  has  made  considerable  changes  to  the  UPOV 
Convention 1978. It has provided a definition for “plant variety”, which is absent from 
the UPOV Convention  1978. Under Article 1 of the UPOV Convention 1991, a variety 
means a plant grouping within a single botanical taxon of the lowest known rank, which 
can be defined by the characteristics resulting from a given genotype or combination of 

47  Ibid., Article 6(l)(c). 
48  Ibid., Article h(l)(d). 
49  Ibid., Articles 6(l)(e) and 13 
5n  Ibid., Article 7(3). 
5l  Ibid., Article 8. 
52  Ibid., Article 11. 
53  Ibid., Article 12. 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

88 1 

genotypes, dstinguished from other plant groupings by the expression of at least one of 
the said characteristics and considered as  a unit with regard to its suitabihty for being 
propagated unchanged. This definition is identical to the definition of variety as adopted 
in Article 5 of the Council Regulation (EC) No. 2100/94 on Community Plant Variety 
Rights, and in Section 2401 of the U.S. Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970.54 

The  prohibition  on  double  protection  as  set  out  in  Article  2  of  the  UPOV 
Convention 1978 has been  omitted from the UPOV Convention  1991. The omission 
gives  more  flexibility  to  contracting  countries  in  the  regulation  of  plant  variety 
protection, which is known as the  “breeder’s right” under the  1991 Convention,55 in 
their jurisdictions. 

Article  3  of  the  UPOV Convention  1991  has  abolished  the  reference  to  the 
minimum number of genera or species a  contracting country must protect under  the 
UPOV Convention  1978, even  though  it  has  also  set  out  a  two-stage  structure for 
Members, to offer protection to all plant genera and species. For those countries which 
have  ratified  the UPOV Convention  1978, they are  initially required  to  continue  the 
protection offered to the genera and species under that Convention when they ratie the 
UPOV Convention  1991; and by  the end of a five-year period after the date on which 
the 1991 UPOV Convention becomes bound on them, they must offer protection to all 
plant  genera  and  species withn  their territories. For those countries which have  not 
ratlfied any version of the UPOV Convention, they are required initially to protect at least 
fifteen plant genera and species when they ratiG the 1991 UPOV Convention; and at the 
end of a ten-year period after the said date of ratification, they must extend the protection 
to all plant genera and species within their territories. Obviously, the UPOV Convention 
1991 imposes a heavier obligation to protect plant varieties than its predecessors. 

The UPOV Convention 1991 has also adopted the NT principle for the protection 
of plant varieties.56 However, the reciprocal qualification on the operation of the NT 
principle  as  seen in Article 3  of the UPOV Convention  1978 has  been  omitted.  This 
omission reflects a trend in the interpretation of the N T  principle worldwide. Countries 
are expected to have  good faith and the spirit of co-operation in the application of the 
N T  principle, which is also one of the essential principles of the WTO Agreements. 

The  criteria  or  conditions  for  the  protection  of  plant  varieties  have  been 
rationalized. Article 5 of the UPOV Convention 1991 expressly sets out four conhtions 
for the grant of protection to a variety. These are novelty, distinctness, uniformity and 
stabhty. These four conditions are defined and explained further in its Articles 6-9.  The 
clarity of these four conditions improves certainty and uniformity of protection across 
Member  countries, gwing rise  to a  reasonable  expectation of the breeder  to  receive 

54 7 U.S.C. 2401. 
55  Article  1 of the UPOV Convention 1991 defines the “breeder’s right” as the nght of breeders provided for 
in the Convention, in particular the right ofpriority, the right to claim NT treatment and the specific rights set out 
in its Articles 14-19. 

56 The UPOV Convention 1991, Aaicle 4. 

882 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

cross-border  protection  in  all  Member  countries  once  his  variety  of plant  has  been 
granted protection in any contracting Member. 

The UPOV Convention 1991 allows the breeder to choose any contracting country 
for filing the first application for protection.57 A breeder who has filed the first application 
may  enjoy  the  right  of  priority  when  applying for  protection  in  other  contracting 
countries withm a period of twelve months &om the date of the first application.58 

The contracting countries are  expected to provide provisional protection  to the 
breeder during the process of examining an application for protection under the UPOV 
Convention  1991.59 The same provisional protection is also available under the UPOV 
Convention  1978. 

The  UPOV Convention  1991  sets  out  in  detail  the  breeders’  rights,  or  the 

protection granted to breeders, in Articles 14-19.  In general, these rights include: 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

the exclusive right to produce, reproduce or multiply the protected variety; 
to set out conditions for the purpose of propagation; 
to offer for sale the propagating material of the protected variety; 
to export and import the propagating material of the protected variety; and 
to  stock the  protected variety and its propagating material for the purposes 
permitted by its Article 14. 

The exclusive right means that authorization from the breeder is a pre-condition 
for  anyone  to  use  the  propagating material of the  protected  variety  in  the  aforesaid 
manners. The protection  granted to the propagating material of the protected variety 
extends to the harvested material obtained through the unauthorized use of propagating 
material of the  protected  variety, unless  the  breeder  concerned  has  had  a  reasonable 
opportunity to exercise his right in relation to the said propagating material.60 

The protection granted to the breeder extends to the varieties which are essentially 
derived fiom the protected  variety, if the protected  variety is  not  itself an essentially 
derived variety.61 

Exceptions to the breeder’s right have also been allowed in Article 15. Under this 

57  Ibid., Article 10. 
58  Ibid., Article 11. 
59  Ibid., Article 13. 
60 Ibid., Article 14(2). 
61 Ibid., Article 14(5). Under this provision, a variety is deemed to be essentially derived from another variety 
when it is predominantly derived from the initial variety, or &om a variety that is itself predominantly derived from 
the initial variety, while retaining the  expression of the  essential characteristics that result from the genotype or 
combination of genotype of the initial variety; and when it is not clearly distinguishable from the initial variety; and 
when except for the dinerences which result &om the act of derivation, it conforms to the initial variety in the 
expression of the essential characteristics that result from the genotype or combination of genotypes of the initial 
variety. 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT  VARIETIES IN CHINA 

883 

provision,  acts  done  privately  and  for  non-commercial  purposes  and  acts  done  for 
experimental  purposes  are  not  regarded  as  inhngements  upon  breeders’  rights.  In 
addition, public interest has also been recognized as an exception to or restriction on the 
breeder’s right.62 

Breeders’ rights can be  exhausted if any material of the protected variety, which 
refers to the propagating material, harvested material or any product made directly from 
the harvested material,63 has been sold or marketed by  the breeder or with his consent 
in the territory of the contracting country concerned. However, the exhaustion does 
not apply to the situation where the propagating material of the protected variety is used 
for propagation of the  variety in  question, or where  the propagating material of the 
protected variety is  exported for the purpose of propagation in a country whch does 
not protect the variety in question.64 

The duration ofthe protection granted to plant varieties should not be less than twenty 
years.65 For trees and vines, the duration should not be less than twenty-five years.66 These 
periods of protection are longer than those required under the UPOV Convention 1978. 
The UPOV Convention  1991 has  also  provided  specific rules  for  its  operation. 
These rules will not be examined here, but it should be noted that in general terms, the 
UPOV Convention  1991 has  offered more protection  to plant  varieties and breeders, 
thus  imposing wider  obligations  upon  contracting  countries.  The  higher  standards 
stipulated in  this  Convention  probably  explain why  there  are  still more  contracting 
countries  to  the  UPOV Convention  1978  than  to  the  UPOV Convention  1991. 
However,  it  is  clear  that  sooner  or  later  the  contracting  countries  of  the  UPOV 
Convention  1978 will have to move in the direction of the UPOV Convention  1991 
even though whether they will ratifjr the UPOV Convention 1991 as it is or prefer to 
agree on a modified version, is still an open issue. 
c.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TRIPS AGREEMENT AND THE UPOV 

CONVENTION 

1.  The Principles of  the  TRIPS Agreement 

The TRIPS Agreement is  important for the protection of plant  varieties in  three 
respects. First, it recognizes plant varieties as a form of intellectual property, and imposes 
an  obligation upon  the WTO Members to protect plant varieties as  a form of private 
right. Second, the TRIPS Agreement is meant to co-exist with the existing international 
conventions on  the  protection  of  intellectual property.  It  has  set  out  the  necessary 
principles  to  ensure a  harmonised  co-existence  between  it  and  certain  international 

62  Ibid., Article 17. 
63  Ibid., Article 16(2). 
64  Ibid., Article 16. 
65  Ibid., Article 19(2). 
66  Id. 

884 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

conventions on intellectual property. Although the UPOV Convention is not specifically 
referred to in the TRIPS Agreement, it can be argued that the TRIPS Agreement and the 
UPOV Convention  should actually co-exist  under the relevant principles of the TRIPS 
Agreement. Third, the TRIPS Agreement  has  imposed a  number  of obligations upon 
WTO Members for the purpose of offering effective protection to all forms of intellectual 
property as recognized by the Agreement. This means that those WTO Members which 
are also Member countries of the international conventions on the protection  of plant 
varieties,  in  particular  the  UPOV Convention,  may  have  to  undertake  additional 
obligations when implementing their obligations under the international conventions on 
the protection of plant varieties concerned. These three respects will now be examined. 

First,  plant  variety  is  a  form  of intellectual  property  recognized  by  the  TRIPS 

Agreement. This proposition is supported mainly by two TRIPS provisions: 

- 

-  Article  l(2)  states  that  the  term  “intellectual  property”  in  the  Agreement 
“refers to all categories of intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 
1 through 7 of Part 11.”; and 
Article 27(3)(b) requires WTO Members to protect plant varieties “either by 
patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof.” 
Article 27(3)(b) is a provision within Section 5 of Part 11 of the TRIPS Agreement. 
Since  plant  variety  is  a  category  of  intellectual property  falling under  the  scope  of 
Section  1 through  7  in  Part  11, it  is  a  form  of intellectual property  recognized and 
protected by the TRIPS Agreement. This is important, because all the principles of the 
TRIPS Agreement affecting WTO Members’ obligations to protect intellectual property 
may apply their obligations to protect plant variety. One of the immelate examples is 
an underlying principle declared in the Preamble of the Agreement, which  states that 
WTO Members  recognize  “that  intellectual property  rights  are  private  rights”.  This 
underlying principle is so essential that a breeder may demand that a government protect 
his private rights by offering adequate protection  to his plant variety. This underlying 
principle may also have human right implications to justifir a breeder’s request for due 
protection in a particular jurisdiction. 

Second, the TRIPS Agreement has stipulated the principles to ensure effective co- 
existence  between  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  other  international  conventions  on 
intellectual property protection. Article 2 of the TRIPS Agreements states as follows: 

“Intellectual Property  Conventions 

1. 

2. 

In respect of Parts 11, 111 and IV of this Agreement, Members shall comply with Articles 
1 through  12 and Article 19, of the Paris Convention (1967). 
Nothing in Parts I to IV of this Agreement shall derogate from existing obligations that 
Members may have to each other under the Pans Convention, the Berne Convention, 
the  Rome  Convention  and  the  Treaty  on  Intellectual  Property  in  Respect  of 
Integrated Circuits.” 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

885 

It must be recognized that this provision does not make an express reference to the 
UPOV Convention or the CBD. Such omission opens two alternative interpretations. On 
the one hand, it can be argued that the UPOV Convention and the CBD, which regulate 
the protection of plant varieties, are not meant to co-exist with the TRIPS Agreement. 
This  interpretation is  based  on  the  approach  of strict  or literal interpretation  of the 
aforesaid Article  2.  On the  other  hand,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  omission  is  only 
technical and does not amount to a denial of the UPOV Convention or the CBD, because 
Article 27(3) expressly  requires WTO Members to  offer adequate protection  to plant 
varieties. It can be further argued that if Article 27(3) expects WTO Members to protect 
plant varieties either by  their patent law or a  sui generis system, the TRIPS Agreement 
must  also  co-exist  with  the UPOV Convention which  represents a  typical model of a 
sui generis system. To hrther strengthen this view, it can also be argued on the basis  of 
Article  27(3) that  Article 2  fails  to  make  a  reference  to  the  UPOV Convention  due 
merely to two technical reasons: 

-  the  UPOV Convention  is  only  one  of  the  possible  ways  to  protect  plant 

- 

varieties under Article 27(3); and 
the  memberships of the UPOV Convention  1978 or the  UPOV Convention 
1991 are relatively small in comparison with the membership of the WTO. 

The  two  alternative  interpretations may  result  in  two  alternative  conclusions. 
Under  the first  interpretation, the UPOV Convention is not  recognized by  the  TRIPS 
Agreement, and, therefore, any provisions of the UPOV Convention which are in direct 
or indirect conflict with the principles of the TRIPS Agreement should be overridden, 
raising  some  uncertainty  and  difficulty  for  UPOV Members  to  enforce  the  UPOV 
Convention.  Under  the  second  interpretation,  the  UPOV Convention  should  be 
recognized by analogy to the principle of Article 2, thus gwing rise to a proposition that 
the relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement do not affect the existing obligations of 
UPOV Members to each other under the Convention. 

The second conclusion makes the enforcement of the UPOV Convention among 
its Members easy and certain. However, whether or not the first conclusion will lead to 
real difficulties and make it impossible for Members to enforce their obligations to each 
other under the UPOV Convention will depend on whether there is any actual conflict 
between  the  provisions  of  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  the  UPOV Convention  in  a 
particular  case.  The two  alternative interpretations of Article  2  and  their  respective 
conclusions may affect the lscussion on the relationship between the TRIPS Agreement 
and the UPOV Convention. 

Third, the TRIPS Agreement has  imposed a  number  of specific obligations upon 
WTO Members for the purpose of protecting intellectual property. These obligations, 
where appropriate, may impose additional Obligations upon the members of the UPOV 
Convention which are also WTO Members, when offering protection to plant varieties. 

886 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Similarly,  some  of  these  obligations  may  compel  those  Members  of  the  UPOV 
Convention which are also WTO Members, to give priority to compliance with their 
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement, if the proposition that the TRIPS Agreement 
does not recognize that the co-existence between it and the WPOV Convention were 
accepted. However, it can be argued that as long as there is no direct or indirect conflict 
between the obligations imposed by  the TRIPS Agreement and those imposed by  the 
UPOV Convention,  the obligations under the TRIPS Agreement are supplementary to 
those obligations under the UPOV Convention to those WTO Members which are also 
Members of the UPOV Convention. This issue will be further examined under the next 
heading. 

2.  Reconciliation ofthe TRIDS Agreement and  the UPOV Convention 

The  TRIPS Agreement  imposes  general  obligations  upon  WTO Members  to 
protect  seven  main  forms  of  intellectual  property  as  stipulated in  Sections  1-7  of 
Part 11 of the TRIPS Agreement. These are: copyrights and related rights; trademarks; 
geographical indications; industrial designs; patents; layout-designs  (topographies) of 
integrated  circuits,  and  undisclosed  information.  The  obligation  to  protect  plant 
varieties is  set  out in Article 27, which  defines the  meaning  of patentable  subject- 
matter. As  we  have  seen, under  Article 27, WTO Members  are  obliged to  protect 
plant  varieties  either  by  their  patent  laws  or  by  a  sui  generis  system  or  by  any 
combination of the two. Under  Article 27, plant varieties can be regarded as either 
an  independent  form  of  intellectual  property  if  protected  independently,  or  as  a 
variation  of patent if protected  under  the  patent  law. Accordingly, whether  or  not 
plant varieties should be an  independent  category of intellectual property  protected 
by  the  TRIPS Agreement  will largely depend  on the means through  which they are 
protected  in  a particular country.  Further,  it  can  be  argued that  if a WTO Member 
protects plant varieties under its patent law, the protection of plant varieties falls under 
the patent law in that Member’s jurisdiction.  If so, the protection  of plant varieties 
falls  under  one of the  stipulated categories of intellectual property  under  the  TRIPS 
Agreement, explaining why there is no special reference to the UPOV Convention in 
that Agreement. 

Given the  special  status of plant  varieties under  TRIPS Article 27, the  principles 
applicable to patent protection  may  be  applied to the protection  of plant varieties to 
varying degrees or extent,  depending upon  the  specific means  through  which  plant 
varieties are protected  in  a WTO Member.  One such example is  the  patentability of 
micro-organisms  and  non-biological  or microbiological  processes, when  the  micro- 
organisms or processes  are related to the production or reproduction of plant varieties. 
This  article  now  examines a  number  of major principles which  may  affect  a  WTO 
Member’s obligations to protect plant varieties. 

PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

887 

The  term  of  protection  is  one  of  the  major  principles  which  may  result  in 
dfficulties for those WTO Members whch are also Members of the UPOV Convention 
to  comply with. Article 33 of the TRIPS Agreement  expressly states that  the term  of 
protection  for patents should not be shorter than twenty years commencing from the 
filing date. As  we have seen, the UPOV Convention has two versions (the 1978 version 
and the  1991 version) in  co-existence. Article  19 of the UPOV Convention  1991 has 
stipulated a minimum term of twenty years for the protection  of plant varieties. There 
is  thus  no  conflict between  this  Convention  and  the  TRIPS Agreement.  However, 
Article 8 of the UPOV Convention  1978 adopts a minimum term of eighteen years for 
trees and vines, and a minimum term of fifteen years for other plant varieties. There are 
still twenty-eight Members of the UPOV Convention 1978. Of them, only China is not 
yet a WTO Member. If these WTO Members do not comply with Article 33 of the TRIPS 
Agreement  when  offering  protection  to  plant  varieties,  whether  or  not  they  have 
breached their obligations under that Agreement will arise as  an issue. For the sake of 
fairness and uniformity, it is more likely that these countries will be compelled to offer 
a minimum term of twenty years to plant varieties in their domestic laws, regardless of 
what  is  stipulated  in  the  UPOV Convention  1978,  because  otherwise  other  WTO 
Members which  have protected  plant varieties under  their  patent  laws  or  under  the 
UPOV Convention 1991 may complain about inequality of obligations. 

The rights of the patentee or breeder are another issue which may or may not result 
in inconsistencies between the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV Convention. Article 28 
of the TRIPS Agreement grants the patentee an exclusive right to prevent third parties 
from  making,  using,  offering  for  sale,  selling  or  importing  the  patent  or  patented 
products without the consent of the patentee. For comparison, Article 14 of the UPOV 
Convention  1991 provides more rights to the breeder than the said Article 28. Under 
Article  14, without  consent  of the breeder,  producing  (reproducing or multiplying), 
offering for sale, selling, marketing, exporting, importing and stocking the propagating 
material  of  a  protected  variety  are  prohibited.  Offering  wider  protection  to  plant 
varieties than that granted in the TRIPS Agreement is consistent with  the principles of 
the Agreement. However, the breeders’ rights provided in the UPOV Convention  1978 
are not the same as, or even narrower than, those provided by the UPOV Convention 
1991.  The  difference  gives  rise  to  a  possibility  of  conflict  between  the  UPOV 
Convention 1978 and the TRIPS Agreement. Article 5 of the UPOV Convention 1978 
prohibits  unauthorized  production,  or  the  offering  for  sale  or  marketing  of  the 
propagating material of a protected variety. In comparison with Article 28 of the TRIPS 
Agreement,  at least the  right  to prohibit  the import  of the propagating material of a 
protected variety is missing. Thus, under Articles 27 and 28 of the TRIPS Agreement, a 
country which fails to prohibit  unauthorized  import of the propagating material of a 
protected variety because it has  adopted a sui generis system for the protection of plant 
varieties pursuant to the UPOV Convention 1978, may be challenged by another WTO 
Member for non-compliance with its obligations under the TRIPS Agreement. 

888 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

The principles  of the TRIPS Agreement  w h c h  regulate  the procedures for WTO 
Members  to allow  a compulsory  use  of patents  under  the relevant  domestic  law,  are 
supplementary to the obligations undertaken by the Members of the UPOV Convention. 
Article  31  of  the  TRIPS Agreement  stipulates  a  number  of  principles  to  ensure 
reasonableness and  fairness in a  government’s  decision  to  issue  a  compulsory licence 
against a patent and in the sum of remuneration  granted by a government. One of the 
most important  aspects of Article  31 is to provide  remedles  of independent review to 
the patentee or right holder whose interests have been affected by the said government 
decision.  Neither the  UPOV Convention  1978 nor  the  UPOV Convention  1991 has 
stipulated detailed rules, in particular procedural rules, to ensure the reasonableness and 
fairness in a government act affecting breeders’ rights, although Article 9(2) of the UPOV 
Convention  1978  and  Article  17(2)  of  the  UPOV Convention  1991  require  the 
contracting countries to ensure  equitable remuneration to the breeder  in the case of a 
compulsory  use  of a protected  variety.  It  can  be  argued  that  since  there  is  no  drect 
conflict between  the  UPOV Convention and  the TRIPS Agreement  in relation  to the 
procedural  requirements  and remedies  set out in Article  31, WTO Members who are 
also  Members of the  UPOV Convention 1978 or the UPOV Convention 1991 should 
undertake additional obligations under Article 31 in their domestic sui generis system for 
the protection  of plant varieties. 

The  most-favoured-nation 

(MFN) treatment  principle  has  been  adopted  in 
Article 4 of the TRIPS Agreement, Under this principle,  with regard to the protection 
of  intellectual  property  including  the  protection  of plant  varieties,  “any  advantage, 
favour,  privilege  or  immunity  granted  by  a  Member  to  the  nationals  of  any  other 
country shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the nationals of all other 
Members.”  However, this principle  does not apply to any advantage, favour, privilege 
or immunity accorded to a Member: 

“. . . deriving from international agreements related to the protection of intellectual property 
which entered into force prior to the entry into force ofthe WTO Agreement, provided that 
such agreements are notified to the Council for TRIPS and do not constitute an arbitrary or 
unjustifiable discrimination  against nationals of other Members.”67 
The UPOV Convention falls under the aforesaid exception, which may apply to the 
breeder’s right  to  choose  the place  of initial  application  and  to  exercise  the  right  of 
priority as recognized in Articles 11 and 12 of the UPOV Convention 1978 and Articles 
10 and  11 of the UPOV Convention 1991, respectively. Accordingly,  it can be argued 
that  breeders  of non-Member  states may  be  denied  the right  to  choose  the  place  of 
initial  application  and  the  right  of priority  which  are  available  to  breeders  who  are 
nationals and companies of Member States. This proposition is also supported by Article 
3(3)  of  the  UPOV Convention  1978,  which  permits  Member  States  to  limit  the 
application  of the  NT principle  to natural  and legal persons  resident  or having  their 

67  The TRIPS Agreement, Article 4(d). 

PROTECTION  O F  PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

889 

registered office in the Member States, and by Article 4(1) of the UPOV Convention 
1991 which  applies  the  N T  principle  to  nationals  of a  contracting country,  natural 
persons residing in and legal entities having their registered offices within the territory 
of a contracting country. In other words, the breeder who is not a national, resident or 
registered company of a contracting country has not been provided any express rights 
under the UPOV Convention. As  far as the MFN principle under the TRIPS Agreement 
and the right to choose the place of initial application as well as the right of priority are 
concerned, there  is  no  direct conflict between  the  TRIPS Agreement and  the  UPOV 
Convention. 

The N T  principle has been provided by both the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV 

Convention.68 However,  its  application  under  the  TRIPS Agreement may  be  more 
controversial than the MFN principle. This is because the language of Article 3 of the 
TRIPS Agreement, which sets out the N T  principle, does not make an express exception 
that may be extended to the UPOV Convention. TRIPS Article 3(1) provides that each 
Member of the WTO “shall accord to the nationals of other Members treatment no less 
favourable than that  it  accords to  its own  nationals with  regard  to  the protection  of 
intellectual  property  . . .”  However,  the  Article  continues  that  WTO Member’s 
obligation to practise the N T  principle is “subject to the exceptions already provided in, 
respectively, the Paris  Convention  (1967), the Berne Convention  (1971), the  Rome 
Convention or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits.” 
These exceptions do not apply to the UPOV Convention per re. Consequently, it can be 
argued that the Members of the UPOV Convention, which are also WTO Members, may 
face a dilemma when they  offer to each other NT for the purpose of protecting plant 
varieties. 

In the light of Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement, a WTO Member whch is not a 
Member of the  UPOV Convention  may  be  entitled to  claim  NT with  regard  to the 
measures  of protection  offered to  plant  varieties in  the  UPOV Convention  Member 
countries. If the Members of the UPOV Convention refuse such request by relying on 
the relevant provisions of the UPOV Convention 1978 or the UPOV Convention 1991, 
they may  be challenged on the  ground of Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement. If  they 
grant such request, they would lose some benefits granted on a reciprocal ground under 
the  relevant  UPOV Convention.  This  dilemma  potentially  may  result  in  conflicts 
between WTO Members. Whether  or not  the &lemma will lead to a  real  conflict or 
confrontation between them will largely depend on the nature of the &spute and the 
significance of the interest or privilege involved. 

Major  principles  of  the  TRIPS Agreement,  which  may  have  &rect  or  indirect 
relationships with  the  UPOV Convention,  have  been  examined  in  the  preceeding 
paragraphs. In general terms, the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV Convention should 

6s See  the TRIPS Agreement, Article  3; the UPOV Convention 1978, Article  3; and the U P ~ V  Convention 

1991, Article 4. 

890 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

co-exist with each other, because Article 27(3) of the TRIPS Agreement permits WTO 
Members to protect plant varieties by a sui generis system which can be represented by 
the UPOV Convention.  Largely due to  the vagueness of the TRIPS Agreement with 
regard to the relationship between the Agreement and the UPOV Convention, those 
WTO Members which are also Members of either the UPOV Convention 1978 or the 
UPOV Convention  1991 may  sometimes be  forced to  face  a  dilemma  to  determine 
whether their rights and obligations should be overridden by those drectly or indirectly 
arising from the  provisions of the  TRIPS Agreement. If  the  provisions of the  TRIPS 
Agreement prevail, the need and foundation for the existence of the UPOV Convention 
may be undermined. If their rights and obligations under the UPOV Convention prevail, 
they may be challenged by other WTO Members for a breach of their WTO obligations. 
At  present, not all WTO Members have fully complied with their obligations to 
protect plant varieties under Article 27(3) of the TRIPS Agreement due, perhaps, to the 
existence of grace periods allowed by the Agreement. The direct or indirect conflict, if 
any, between the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV Convention is not a prominent issue 
for WTO Members to deal with. Many conflicts of preliminary or insignificant nature, 
if any, may also be resolved by the WTO Members through negotiations which allow 
the greatest flexibility, controlled by them. However, along with the development of 
biotechnology and the extended use of plant varieties, the protection of plant varieties 
under the TRIPS Agreement will become more and more important. How to actually 
reconcile conflicts between the TRIPS Agreement and the UPOV Convention will then 
become one of the major concerns of WTO Members. 

111.  THE CHINESE SYSTEM FOR PROTECTION 
A.  THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

China has adopted a largely sui generis system for the protection of plant varieties. 
It  acceded to  the  UPOV Convention  1978 on  23  April  1999, and  the  Convention 
became binding upon  it  on the same  day. It  is  interesting to  note  that  even though 
China acceded to the UPOV Convention  1978 in  1999, it promulgated the Rules for 
Plant Protection on 20 May 1997 which, theoretically, came into effect on  1 October 
1997.  However,  it  is  only  since  1999,  when  China  formally  ratified  the  UPOV 
Convention  1978,  that  the  Rules  for  Plant  Protection  have  been  effectively 
implemented  in  China.  Pursuant  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Rules  for  Plant 
Protection,  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  issued  the  Detailed  Measures  for  the 
Implementation of the  Rules  for  Plant  Protection  (Agricultural Sector) on  16 June 
1999, and the Office of Forestry issued the Detailed Measures for the Implementation 
ofthe Rules for Plant Protection (Forestry Sector) on 10 August 1999. Therefore, it can 
be said that the present sui generis system of protection in China is mainly based on the 
Rules  for  Plant  Protection  and  the  two  Detailed  Measures  issued  by  the  two 
government  departments  in  charge  of  the  enforcement  of  the  Rules  for  Plant 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

89 1 

Protection.  The  Ministry  for  Agriculture  published  the  first  list  of  protected  plant 
varieties on 27 April 1999. Ten new varieties of plant belonging to the genera of rice, 
maize, potato and flower, were included in the list,@ and the list of the protected plant 
varieties appears to be consistent with China’s obligation to protect at least ten species 
within three years, under the UPOV Convention 1978, after it became a Member. 

Alongside the Rules for Plant Varieties, plant varieties may also be subject to the 
Patent Law amended in 2000,70 the Law of Seeds promulgated on 8July 2000, and the 
Implementing  Measures  for  the  Administration  of  Safety  in  Bio-Engineering  in 
Agriculture issued by the Ministry for Agnculture on 10 July 1996. Article 25 of the 
amended Patent Law states that the process for production of an animal or plant variety 
may be granted a patent pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Patent Law.  The 
“process for production”  here  means a  non-biological  process  or method,  and thus 
excludes a  process  which  is  essentially of a biological  nature.  Whether  a  process  is 
essentially  of  a  biological  nature  largely  depends  on  the  involvement  of  human 
technology. A process and its product, which has been  mainly controlled by human 
technology, is not regarded as a process of essentially a biological nat~re.7~ This means 
that some of the biotechnology relating to the development or production  of a new 
plant variety may be protected under the Patent Law if the emphasis has been placed 
on the innovative process producing the plant variety. This interpretation is endorsed 
by  the  Provisional  Measures  for  the  Administration  of  Patents  in  Agricultural, 
Husbandry and Fishery Industries, promulgated in December  1986. Article 8 of these 
Provisional  Measures  offered  patent  protection  to  methods  for  producing  new 
varieties  of  plants  and  animals.  In  addition,  the  micro-organisms  discovered  and 
modified by humans are also patentable under the Patent Law, provided that they are 
capable of industrial application.72 In fact, more  than  twenty patents relating to the 
process for producing  or improving plants or modifjring genes which can be applied 
to  plants have  been  recorded  by  Registry  of Patents  held  by  the  State  Intellectual 
Property Offke.73 

The Law of Seeds regulates the production, supply and use of plant seeds in China. 
It protects the legitimate interests of the owner, seller and user of seeds, which may also 
be the seeds of a protected variety. Under the Law, seeds of good plants and trees are 
selected and  approved  by  relevant  local  government  authorities for  the  purpose  of 
promoting the use of seeds of good quality to farmers. The use and reproduction of the 
approved seeds need the permission of their owners. A detailed study of the operation 
of the Law of Seeds will be discussed later in this article. 

4 J.W.I.P. I, January 2001, pp. 33-89. 

69  See the Website of the Ministry for Agriculture, at: ((http://agri.gov.cn/)>. 
70  For discussion on the amended Patent Law, see John Mo, Refrm ofthe Patent  System ofthe PRC ujer WID, 
71  See the State Intellectual Property Ofice, Handbookfor Patent Application, paragraph: Law 25.1(4) 3.4. 
72  Ibid., paragraph: 7.1.1. 
73  See the Website at: (chttp://wvnv.genetics.ac.cn/)). 

892 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

B.  MAJOR PRINCIPLES OF THE RULES  FOR PLANT PROTECTION 

The  Rules  for  Plant  Protection  were  issued  by  the  State  Council  as  a  set  of 
administrative rules.  Under  Chinese law,  the  State  Council  has  law-malung  power 
within its authority granted by  the law of the National People’s Congress (NPc). The 
Rules  for  Plant  Protection  contains  forty-six  Articles.  It  appears  to  contain  the 
combined features of the  UPOV Convention  1978 and the UPOV Convention  1991, 
although China has only ratified the former. The major principles of the Rules for Plant 
Protection are summarized in the following paragraphs. 

Article 2 of the Rules for Plant Protection  defines “new plant variety” as a plant 
variety  cultivated by  humans  from  an  existing variety  or varieties  or  from  a  newly 
discovered wild plant variety or varieties, which not only shows the features of novelty, 
distinctness, uniformity and  stability, but  also  bears  an  adequate  denomination.  The 
meanings of novelty, distinctness, uniformity and stability are defined in its Articles 14- 
17 and the adequacy of denomination is  defined in Article 18. In addtion, the plant 
variety subject of an application for protection  must be  within the  categories of plant 
genera or species listed by the State as protected.74 

The  Ministry for Agriculture and  the  Ofice of Forestry  are  the  authorities for 
examining  and  granting  protection  to  new  varieties  of  plants.75 The  Office  for 
Protection of Plant Varieties has been established within the Ministry for Agnculture 
and the Office of Forestry, as appropriate. 

The breeder enjoys an exclusive right over the protected variety. Unless permitted 
by  these Rules, no  one can, without  the  consent of the breeder, produce  or sell  the 
propagating material of a protected variety, or apply repeatedly the propagating material 
of a  protected variety to  the  propagating material of another variety for commercial 
purposes.76 

The breeder’s exclusive rights are subject to two exceptions which allow the use of 
a protected variety without the consent of,  or compensation to, the breeder. The first 
exception is the use of a protected variety for the cultivation of seeds or other research 
purposes. This is the so-called “exception of scientific research”. The second exception 
is the  use  of the propagating material of a  protected variety by  a  farmer for his  own 
production or reproduction.77 This is the so-called “exception of farmer’s right”. 

The Ministry for Agriculture and the Office of Forestry are empowered to issue 
compulsory licences for the use of new plant varieties for the purpose of protecting the 
State or public interest. The licensee under a  compulsory licence should negotiate the 
sum for the licence fee with the breeder or the right-holder. If they cannot agree on the 

74  The Rules for Plant Protection, Article 13 
75  Ibid., Article 3. 
76 Ibid.,  Article  6. 
77  Ibid.. Article 10. 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

893 

sum, the relevant Office for Protection of Plant Varieties should make a ruling on this. 
If a breeder or right-holder  is dissatisfied with the issue of a compulsory licence or the 
sum of the licence fee, he should commence a litigation within three months after the 
receipt of the notice concerned.78 

A  Chinese  breeder  who  wishes  to  transfer  his  rights  over  a  new  variety  to  a 
foreigner must seek prior approval fiom the Ministry for Agriculture or the Office of 
Forestry, as the case may be.79  However, a domestic transfer of the same right within 
China need be approved only when the relevant law so requests. 

The term of protection for trees and vines is twenty years from the date of granting 
the protection, and the term of protection for other plants is fifteen years fiom the date 
of granting the protection. 

The  Review  Committee  for  Plant  Varieties  should  be  established  within  the 
Ministry for Agriculture and the Office of Forestry, as  appropriate.80  The Committee 
has the power to review the decision of the Office for Protection of Plant Varieties to 
refuse to grant protection  to  a  plant.  It has  also  the power  to  declare the protection 
granted to a plant variety to be invalid at the request of an applicant. The decisions of 
the Committee are subject to the process ofjudicial review. 

As  can be  seen from the above, most  of these  rules  appear to be  reasonable and 
largely consistent with the principles of the TRIPS Agreement. However, it must be noted 
that  the  Chmese  government  has  restricted  the  application  of  the  Rules  for  Plant 
Protection by referring to the List of Protected Plant Varieties. This suggests that not all 
new plant varieties are protected in China. In this respect, the Rules of Plant Protection 
bear more resemblance to the UPOV Convention 1978 than the UPOV Convention 1991. 

C.  REGULATION  OF THE SEED INDUSTRY 

Regulation of the seed industry is an important aspect of protecting plant varieties. 
At  present,  the  seed  industry  is  regulated  separately  from  the  system  which  offers 
protection  to  plant  varieties  in  China.  The  Standing  Committee  of  the  NPC 
promulgated the Law of Seeds on 8 July 2000. This Law has been made for the purpose 
of regulating the processes for cultivating, selecting, producing, selling, using seeds and 
for  administering the  operation  of  the  seed  industry in  China.81  It  is  also  meant  to 
promote  plant  seeds  of  good  quality,  the  industrialization  of  seed  supply,  and  the 
development of the agricultural and forestry industry in China. 

The major feature of this Law is to establish a licence system for the production and 
supply of seeds. According to Article 2 of the Law of Seeds, “seeds” refers to propagating 

78  Ibid., Article 11. 
79  Ibid., Article 9. 
80  Ibid., Article 32. 
8’  The Law of Seeds, Article 2. 

894 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

materials  of  agricultural  products  or  trees,  including  grains,  fruits,  roots,  branches, 
seedlings, shoots and leaves. In fact, the Law of Seeds regulates the operation of the seed 
industry in China, and it sets out the following major principles: 

- 

- 

- 

-  the commercial production of seeds for major crops and trees is governed by 
a  licence  system,  under  which  only  the  licensed  breeders  (companies or 
indmiduals) are allowed to produce seeds for sale;82 
if a  seed producer  or breeder  intends to  produce  seeds  of a  protected new 
variety, he must present a letter of consent issued by the breeder or the right- 
holder of the protected variety.83 This rule suggests some connection between 
the Rules for Plant Protection and the Law of Seeds; 
the sale of seeds is also governed by a licence system, under which a seller of 
seeds must apply for a seller’s licence before applying to the relevant office of 
Industrial and Commercial Administration for a business licence;84 
both  the  breeder’s  licence  and  seller’s  licence  are  issued  by  the  relevant 
authorities in charge of agriculture or forestry at the county level or above;85 
the  importer  or  exporter  of seeds  must  apply  also  for  an  import  or  export 
permit, besides the seller’s licence;86 
seeds for normal crops and trees cultivated by farmers can be sold at the local 
fair without a licence.87 This is an exception to the licence system of breedmg 
and  selling  seeds  established by  the  Law  of  Seeds.  However,  the  relevant 
provincial government should issue local rules for the trading of such seeds; 
if a user of the seeds sold under a licence suffers any loss due to the low quality 
of the seeds, he is  entitled to claim an adequate compensation from the seller 
of the seeds. The sum of compensation should include the price of the seeds, 
expenses arising from the purchase and the use  of the seeds and loss of profit 
by the user;@ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

if the low quality of the seeds has been caused by a fault of the breeder or of 
the  previous  seller, the  seller who  has  compensated  the  loss  of  the  user  is 
entitled,  in  turn,  to  claim  compensation from  the  breeder  or the  previous 
se1ler;gg 
the sale of seeds which are of bad quality, contrary to the Law of Seeds and in 

82  Ibid., Article 20. 
83  Ibid., Article 21. 
*J  Ibid., Article 26. 
85  Ibid., Articles 20 and 26. 
86  Ibid., Article 50. 
87  Ibid., Article 27. 
88  Ibid., Article 41. 
8’)  Id. 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

895 

breach of any provision of the Law of Seeds, is punishable by the relevant local 
government,  which  can  impose  a  fine  of  between  RMEI 1,000 and 
50,000, depending on  the  nature  of the  offence.  In  special  circumstances, 
criminal penalties may also be imposed against  a person who has  committed 
serious offences. 

These major features of the Law of Seeds suggest that this Law is relevant, to some 
extent, to the protection of plant varieties in China. Although most approved seeds in 
China are  not  related to new varieties, the licence system  established by  the Law  of 
Seeds provides the necessary protection to the breeder of new varieties, who eventually 
has  to  recover h s  investment by  marketing and  sekng those  seeds  to  domestic and 
overseas users. 

At present, it appears that the licence system offered by the Law of Seeds provides 
some alternative protection to the breeder of new varieties in China. As  at July 2001, 
the Ministry for Agriculture had only published ten protected varieties, and the Office 
of Forestry had not  published any details of protected varieties of trees and vines in 
China.  However,  based  on  the  online  information  provided  by  the  Ministry  for 
Agriculture,90 it appears that about eighty types of approved seeds had been based on the 
plant  varieties which  have been  genetically modified  in  some way,  or  developed by 
humans.  Since the seed approval system is  subject to different requirements from the 
approval system  of new plant  Varieties,  it may  be  possible  that  certain plant  varieties 
which have not met the standards of protection under the Rules for Plant Protection 
may be protected under the Law of Seeds if the seeds of such varieties can be approved 
for commercial production  and sale by  the  relevant local authorities pursuant to  the 
relevant provisions of the Law of Seeds. 

Criminal penalties imposed on dealers or producers of seeds can be illustrated by a 
case decided by the Provincial Supreme Court of Guangxi Province in 1993. In R e  Pun 
Xingwu,gl the defendant, Pan Xingwu, in 1986 obtained two business licences to operate 
two farms of herb plants and one licence to operate a shop to provide technical services 
concerning plant cultivation. There was then no special law to regulate such operations, 
because the Law of Seeds had not yet been passed.  Pan bought 200 lulograms of out- 
of-date Chinese herb seeds from dealers in other provinces for resale. However, as these 
“seeds” were out of date they were incapable of reproducing. Pan sold these infertile 
seeds to more than 4,500 customers, who all suffered losses due to the use of these seeds. 
The  matter  went  to  the  police,  and  in  1990,  the  public  prosecutor  sued  Pan  for 
commercial fraud. The Intermediate Court of Liuzhou Region gave a life sentence to 
Pan in pursuance of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code. Pan appealed against 
the  severity  of  the  sentence.  In  1993,  the  Provincial  Supreme  Court  of  Guangxi 
Province partially  changed the  decision of the  trial court, handing down  a  ten-year 

90  See the Website of the Ministry for Agriculture at: (thttp://tn.agri.gov.cn/n. 
91  Decided on 20 March 1993, Database of Chinese Law, available in CD form, in Chinese. 

896 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

sentence against Pan. Both the trial court and the appeal court, however, held that Pan 
had committed a serious commercial fraud and caused grave damages to the users of his 
“seeds”. 

The same  crime  is  still  punishable under  the  present  Criminal  Code  of  Chma, 
although the sentencing may be less severe under the present law. In the light of this 
case, it can be expected that a licensed dealer or breeder who has deliberately defrauded 
and caused grave damage to others by selling infertile seeds or seeds of bad qu&ty  may 
be held guilty under  the Criminal Code for either the crime of commercial fraud or 
profiteering. 

Iv.  CONSISTENCY WITH AND POTENTIAL  CONFLICTS BETWEEN  THE DOMESTIC LAW 

AND THE TRIPS AGREEMENT 

A.  THE PRINCIPLES  OF THE TRIPS AGREEMENT 

The obligation to protect plant varieties is imposed by Article 27(3) of the TRIPS 

Agreement, which is  a provision relating to the protection  of patents. Because of the 
existence of this provision, and also the fact that plant varieties may be protected under 
patent  law  at  the  dlscretion  of  WTO Members,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  relevant 
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement concerning patent protection should also be applied 
to  the  protection  of  plant  varieties  whenever  appropriate. This  is  the  basis  for 
investigating the consistency and potential conflicts between the Chinese law on plant 
protection and the TRIPS Agreement. 

As  a general principle, WTO Members  are required  to  comply with  their  WTO 
obligations and  to  ensure  consistency between  their  domestic laws  and  the  relevant 
WTO Agreements. The principles are elaborated in Article 8 of the TRIPS Agreement in 
the following words: 

“1.  Members may, in formulating or amending their laws and regulations, adopt measures 
necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in 
sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development, 
provided that such measures are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. 

2.  Appropriate  measures, provided that  they  are  consistent with  the provisions of this 
Agreement, may  be  needed  to  prevent  the  abuse  of intellectual property  rights  by 
right-holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely 
affect the international transfer of technology.” 

These principles are directly related to a number of rules and practices adopted by 
China in its system for the protection of plant varieties. After China becomes a WTO 
Member,  both  China and other WTO Members have to follow the principles set out 
above when arguing whether a particular rule or policy of China has contravened the 
principles and spirit of the TRIPS Agreement. As we have seen, the present legal system 
for  the  protection  of plant  varieties in  China  is  largely consistent with  the  relevant 

PROTECTION  OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

897 

principles of the  TRIPS Agreement, which has  not  set  out many special rules for the 
protection  of plant varieties. Ths part  of the article examines a number  of aspects  of 
Chinese law  on the  protection  of plant  varieties  to  reveal the  consistency with  and 
potential  conflict  between  Chinese  law  and  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement. 

B.  TERM OF PROTECTION 

Since  China  has  not  yet  joined  the  WTO,  the  conflict  between  the  TRIPS 

Agreement  and  the  UPOV Convention  1978  concerning  the  protection  of  plant 
varieties, in particular the term of protection, has not yet arisen as an issue for Chna. 
However, after China becomes a Member of WTo-probably 
Rules for Plant Protection  and other laws concerning the protection of plant varieties 
may  be  scrutinized  and  challenged  under  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement. The consistency with or potential conflict between the Chinese domestic 
laws  and  regulations  on  plant  protection  and  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement is an issue which must be considered by China now. 

in November 2001-the 

As shown earlier, Article 33 of the TRIPS Agreement requires the minimum period 
of protection to be twenty years fiom the date of filing, but Article 34 of the Rules for 
Plant Protection set out a minimum of twenty years for vines and trees and a minimum 
term of fifteen years for other plant varieties. Under Article 33 of the TRIPS Agreement, 
the time begins to run from the date of ffing. Under Article 34 of the Rules for Plant 
Protection, the time begins from the date on which protection is  granted. Given the 
hfference  of  the  commencement  date,  China  may  be  able  to just;@ the  terms  of 
protection offered by Article 34 of the Rules for Plant Protection only when the total 
duration  of protection  offered to  any protected  variety is  not  less  than  twenty years 
starting fiom the date of filing. China will otherwise be criticized for faihng to comply 
with  TRIPS Article 33. Although the Rules for Plant Protection  do not  stipulate the 
length of time for examining and approving an application for protecting a plant variety, 
it is difficult to imagine that the examination period for plant varieties will always exceed 
five years.  If not,  the total period of protection  offered to plant varieties, other than 
varieties of  trees  and vines,  in  China,  is  usually less  than  the  twenty-year  period  as 
stipulated by TRIPS Article 33. Therefore, the term of protection offered at present by 
the Rules for Plant Protection has to be reconsidered and extended soon by  Chna, in 
view of its impending WTO accession. 

c .   SCOPE  OF PROTECTION 

The scope of protection offered to plant varieties in China by the Rules for Plant 
Varieties may also be questioned under the relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement. 
Article 27(3) of the TRIPS Agreement implicitly requires WTO Members to protect all 

898 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

plant varieties which satisfy the criteria for protection as adopted by them. In the absence 
of  any  explicit  definition  of  “plant  varieties”  under  the  TRIPS Agreement, WTO 
Members appear  to  have  some liberty in  defining the  precise  meaning within  their 
jurisdictions. However, such liberty is undoubtedly limited under the TRIPS Agreement, 
because all WTO Members are expected to enjoy the same rights and perform the same 
obligations under the WTO Agreements, includmg the TRIPS Agreement. This means 
that WTO Members have to consider the general and common international practices 
when regulating the protection of plant varieties within their jurisdictions. Accordmgly, 
it is impossible for any WTO Member to reduce its obligation to protect plant varieties 
by  adopting a  deliberately drafted but  somehow limited concept of “plant varieties”. 
The implied obligation to adopt the same or similar concept of “plant varieties” ensures 
the minimum consistency in the scope of protection offered by WTO Members to plant 
varieties within their jurisdictions. 

The  scope  of  protection  offered  by  the  Rules  for  Plant  Protection  may  be 
challenged later by other WTO Members if certain plant varieties, which may otherwise 
satis@ the four criteria for protecting plant varieties in China, have been excluded from 
protection because of some addtional  restriction imposed by law.  The eligibility of a 
plant variety to protection  in  China is  qualified by  Article  13 of the Rules  for Plant 
Protection, which provides that a protected plant variety must be one of those genera 
or species on the Lists  of Protected Plant Varieties published from time to time by the 
Ministry for Agriculture and the  Office of Forestry.  Only those plant varieties falling 
within the genera or species specified in the Lists are eligible for protection. The criteria 
for publishmg genera or species on the Lists are not known. If the criteria for compiling 
the Lists differ directly or indirectly from the four criteria for protecting plant varieties, 
certain plant varieties which have met the four criteria will be denied protection because 
they are  not  included. This possibility could lead  to  a  challenge by  a WTO Member 
against Article 13 of the Rules for Plant Protection. The challenge, if so made, will be 
likely to  succeed unless  China  can  establish that  Article  13 does  not  contradict any 
principle of the TRIPS Agreement and is consistent with China’s WTO obligations under 
the TRIPS Agreement. 

The use  of the  said  Lists  can  be justified  under  the  UPOV Convention  1978, 
which  only  requires  Members  to  protect  a  minimum  number  of  plant  varieties. 
However,  the  use  of  the  Lists  restricts  the  extent  of  protection  granted  to  plant 
varieties.  The restriction  may  amount  to  a  deviation  from Article 27  of the  TRIPS 
Agreement in certain circumstances, and lead to disputes among WTO Members. The 
vital defect of Article 13 is that there is no transparency or certainty on what should 
or should not be included in the Lists. If they are compiled accordmg to the same four 
criteria,  i.e.  novelty,  distinctness,  uniformity  and  stability,  for  protecting  plant 
varieties in  China,  why  are  the  Lists  necessary? If they  are  different, what  are  the 
justifications for having them? China must defend its justifications for having the Lists 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES  IN CHINA 

899 

under  the  relevant principles of the  TRIPS Agreement.  It is  a rather difficult task  to 
attempt. 

Transparency of law and policy is  one of the fundamental principles of the WTO 
Agreements,  and  also  one  of  the  essential  features  of  the  TRIPS Agreement. 
Transparency of law and policy is an issue which must be further improved by Chna. 
Article 63 of the TRIPS Agreement stipulates the principle of transparency of law 
and policy.  It imposes a  number  of obligations upon  WTO Members to ensure such 
transparency which affects the protection of intellectual property. Accordingly, for the 
purpose  of  protecting  plant  varieties,  a  WTO Member  has  the  following  major 
obligations: 

-  it must publish all its laws, regulations, bilateral treaties, judicial decisions and 
admmistrative rulings affecting the protection of plant varieties in a reasonable 
and practicable manner; 
it must notify the Council for TRIPS of any changes in its laws, regulations, 
bilateral treaties, judicial decisions and administrative rulings concerning the 
protection of plant varieties; 

- 

- 

- 

it must respond promptly to the request of another WTO Member to receive 
specific information on laws, regulations, bilateral treaties, judicial decisions 
and adrmnistrative rulings affecting the protection of plant varieties; 

it may  refuse  to publish or provide certain information on laws, regulations, 
bilateral  treaties, judicial  decisions  and  administrative rulings  affecting the 
protection of plant varieties for the sake of protecting confidential information 
concerning law enforcement or the public interest, or for not prejudicing the 
legitimate commercial interest of an individual party. 

These obligations are fairly specific and self-explanatory. At  present, the Chinese 
government  has  established  a  government  Website  which  operates  in  the  Chinese 
language. The Website has provided a lot of information which had not been previously 
available. This is certainly a significant step forward in the transparency of law and policy 
as  well  as  in  government  administration  in  China.  However,  if  we  apply  the  first 
requirement of transparency of law and policy as set out above to the present practices 
of the Ministry for Agriculture and the Office of Forestry, we have to accept that the 
information on the  protection  of  plant varieties is  stdl scarce. The operations of the 
Office  for Protection of Plant Varieties are still not known. There is also no information 
on its decisions or rulings on approved or rejected applications for protection under the 
Rules for Plant Protection.  It appears that there is  still a long way to go for China to 

900 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

comply with the  requirement for transparency of law and policy  after it becomes a 
WTO Member. China must speed up the process of improvement, otherwise disputes 
may arise between China and other WTO Members on the enforcement of Article 63 
of the TRIPS Agreement in China. 

E.  USE  OF  COMPULSORY LICENCES 

Compulsory licensing is a system which enables a government to compel a breeder 
or right-holder to allow other persons to use  his protected varieties. It is  necessary  to 
counterbalance the exclusivity and monopoly granted to the breeder or right-holder for 
the common public interest. 

Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement sets out specific procedural requirements for a 
WTO Member to issue  a  compulsory licence against a patentee or right-holder.  This 
provision  also  applies  to  the  issue  of  compulsory licences  against  the  breeder  in  a 
domestic  system  for  the  protection  of  plant  varieties.  The  major  procedural 
requirements of Article 31 are summarized as follows: 

-  applications for the issue  of a  compulsory licence must be  considered on a 

case-by-case  basis; 

- 

- 

the applicant for a compulsory licence must have applied to the breeder or the 
right-holder  for the  use  of the protected variety on reasonable commercial 
terms  unless there is  a  national emergency, other circumstances of extreme 
urgency, a need to use  the protected variety for public and non-commercial 
purposes or to ensure fair competition within the domestic market; 

the scope and duration of a compulsory licence must be limited to the purpose 
for which the compulsory licence is issued; 

-  a  compulsory 

licence  must  be  non-exclusive,  non-assignable  and 

predominantly for domestic market use only; 

- 

- 

- 

the  breeder  or  right-holder  shall  be  paid  adequate  remuneration under  a 
compulsory licence; 
the legal validq of a decision to issue a compulsory licence and on the sum of 
remuneration shall be subject to judicial review or other independent review 
by a distinct higher authority; and 

if a compulsory licence is necessary to enable a person to exploit a protected 
variety  (second protected variety) which is  derived from another protected 
variety (first protected variety), the breeder of the first protected variety should 
also  be  granted a  compulsory cross-licence  on  reasonable terms  to  use  the 
second protected variety. 

PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

901 

Chinese  law  must  comply  with  these  specific  procedural  requirements  when 
regulating the issue of a compulsory licence against a protected variety. The consistency 
and potential conficts between the relevant Chinese law and Article 31 of the TRIPS 
Agreement will be examined below in several respects. 

First,  Article 31  grants  certain  flexibility to  WTO Members in  determining the 
grounds  on  which  a  compulsory  licence  should  be  issued.  Public  interest,  national 
emergency,  extreme  urgency,  and  protection  of  fair  competition  appear  to  be  the 
common grounds recognized by Article 31. The issue of a compulsory licence against a 
protected variety has  been  regulated by both  the  Rules for Plant Protection  and the 
detailed  measures  made  by  the  Ministry  for  Agriculture  and  Office  of  Forestry  to 
implement the Rules. Article 11 of the Rules for Plant Protection only states generally 
State interest and public interest as grounds for issuing a compulsory licence. However, 
the  Detailed  Measures  for  the  Implementation  of  the  Rules  for  Plant  Protection 
(Agncultural Sector) made by the Ministry for Agriculture add two adhtional grounds 
for the issue of a compulsory licence. These are: 

-  if the breeder refuses to use the protected variety without justification and also 

- 

disallows other persons to use it on reasonable terms; and 
if the variety is an important species, whose present use has not met the need 
of the domestic market, but the breeder has refused to allow others to increase 
its use on reasonable terms.92 

The Detailed Measures for the Implementation of the Rules for Plant Protection 
(Forestry Sector) issued by the Office of Forestry adds only one more ground to those 
set out in Article 11 of the Rules for Plant Protection: 

-  if the breeder refuses to use the protected variety without justification and also 

&sallows other persons to use it on reasonable terms. 

These specific grounds added by  the two departments are not expressly endorsed 
by Article 11 of the Rules for Plant Protection. However, they may arguably fall under 
the broader category of public interest. Thus, these additional grounds may be regarded 
as being consistent with the relevant principles of the TRIPS Agreement. 

Second, under Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, China is obliged to make the 
judicial review or an independent and appropriate adrmnistrative review available to the 
breeder  or  right-holder  whose  interest  has  been  affected  by  a  decision  of  the 
government to issue a compulsory licence to use a protected plant variety. Article 11 of 
the Rules for Plant Protection permits the breeder or the right-holder who is dssatisfied 
with the decision to issue the compulsory licence or the decision on the amount of the 
licence fee payable under a compulsory licence, to commence a legal proceeding at a 

92  The Detailed Measures for the  Implementation of the Rules for Plant Protection (Agricultural Sector), 

Article 12. 

902 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL, PROPERTY 

court within three months after the receipt of the relevant notice from the authority 
concerned. This provision appears to be consistent with Article 31. Since a compulsory 
licence is  issued by the Ministry for Agriculture and the Office of Forestry in Beijing, 
the judicial  review  process  is  likely  to  be  conducted  in  the  Intermediate  Court  of 
Beijing. 

Third,  the  Ministry  for  Agriculture  and  the  Office  of  Forestry  have  adopted  a 
questionable rule for mahng an administrative ruling on the amount of the licence fee 
payable under a compulsory licence. Article 11 of the Rules for Plant Protection states 
that a competent authority may make a ruling on the amount of the licence fee payable 
under a  compulsory licence. The Ministry for Agriculture and the Office of Forestry 
have  all required that if parties cannot agree on the amount of that fee and request the 
Office for Protection of Plant Varieties to make a ruling in pursuance of Article 11 of the 
Rules for Plant Protection, the parties must present an arbitration agreement to submit 
their dispute to the Office for a ruling.93 Such requirement makes  the existence of an 
arbitration agreement a pre-condtion  for the making of an administrative ruling on the 
amount of the licence fee by the Office for Protection of Plant Varieties, which has been 
set up as appropriate within the Ministry for Agriculture or the Office of Forestry. 

This requirement is unreasonable because it fails to protect adequately the breeder’s 
interest to receive a  reasonable amount of remuneration under  a  compulsory licence. 
Under the two Detailed Measures issued by the two government departments, the issue 
of a compulsory licence and the determination of the amount of remuneration under 
the  compulsory licence appear to be  two disconnected processes. The pre-condtion 
that  parties  must  have  reached  an  arbitration  agreement  before  the  government 
authority can make a ruling on the amount means that the breeder may  not receive a 
reasonable sum-or  may  not  receive  any  remuneration  at  all  if  the  licensee  simply 
refuses  to  make  an  arbitration  agreement  with  the  breeder.  In  such  cases,  the 
government authority issuing the compulsory licence has  an  obligation to protect the 
legitimate interest of the breeder for a reasonable remuneration, regardless  of whether 
an  arbitration agreement has  been  concluded. Otherwise,  Chinese law would fail  to 
protect  not  only  the  breeder’s  right  to  receive  an  adequate remuneration  stipulated 
under  Article  31(h)  of  the  TRIPS Agreement,  but  also  the  property  interest  of  the 
breeder recognized in the Preamble of the TRIPS Agreement. Therefore, potentially a 
conflict  may  arise  between  Chinese  law  on  the  determination  of  the  amount  of 
remuneration  under  a  compulsory  licence  and  the  general  principles  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement  concerning  the  protection  of  plant  varieties  as  a  private  right  and  the 
procedures for the issue of a compulsory licence. 

Fourth, Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement is supplementary to the Rules for Plant 
Protection in China, which have not  stipulated detailed procedures for the issue  of a 

y3  Ibid., Article  13; and  the  Detailed  Measures for the  Implementation of  the  Rules for Plant Protection 

(Forestry Sector), Article 10. 

PROTECTION  O F  PLANT VARIETIES IN CHINA 

903 

compulsory licence. Under the general principles of Chinese jurisprudence, a Chinese 
court is able to apply provisions of international treaties directly in China because these 
treaties are regarded as being part of Chinese law once they have become bindmg upon 
China  pursuant  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  Chinese  law.  Thus,  the  procedural 
requirements for examining each application on its individual merits, the restrictions on 
the scope and duration of a compulsory licence, the non-exclusive and non-assignable 
nature of a compulsory licence, and the right of breeders of the first protected variety 
to  receive  a  cross-licence  to  use  the  second  protected  variety  under  a  compulsory 
licence,  shall  be  enforced  by  the  Chinese  court  in  relevant  cases,  despite  these 
requirements not being stipulated in the Rules for Plant Protection in China. 

CONCLUSION 

Protection  of plant varieties is  one of the emerging areas  of intellectual property. 
The new  plant  varieties  have  become  accessible  to  farmers and  the  public  in  most 
countries due to the rapid development of biotechnology and bio-engineering in the 
world today. More and more developing countries and less-developed countries have 
begun to exploit the benefits of new varieties of plants. The rapid development of the 
WTo and regional trading organizations or  zones  have  opened  a huge  international 
market  for  the  use,  production,  reproduction,  sale,  import  and  export  of  products 
relating to  plant  varieties.  The cross-border  tradmg  activities in  the  agricultural and 
horticultural sectors have raised the need for adequate protection for all parties engaged 
in these activities, in particular breeders and right-holders. WTO Members have been 
forced to develop and improve their domestic laws for the protection of plant varieties 
in line with the relevant principles of the TRIPS Agreement in particular, and other WTO 
Agreements in general. 

Protection of plant varieties is an important issue for China, given that it has been 
reluctant  to  open  its  agricultural market  to  foreign  companies  during  the  lengthy 
negotiations which will lead to China's entry into the WTO. As a WTO Member, China 
must  provide  adequate  protection  to  plant  varieties  owned  by  either  Chinese  or 
foreigners.  On  the  other  hand,  China  will  be  legitimately  concerned  about  the 
dominance  and  monopoly  created  by  the  granting  of  breeder's  rights  to  foreign 
companies,  and  the  far-reaching  implications  of  a  few  multinational  companies 
controlling  most  of  the  new  plant  varieties  and  the  related  technologies  in  the 
agricultural sector around the world. 

Since Article 27(3) of the TRIPS Agreement imposes a sole obligation upon WTO 
Members to  protect plant  varieties, technically there  will be  many uncertainties and 
dlsagreements among the Members on the specific obligations imposed upon them by 
the TRIPS Agreement. Like most developing or less-developed countries which have 
complex feelings about the protection of plant varieties, China may move only slowly 

904 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

to  strengthen  and  improve  its  system  of  protection  for  plant  varieties.  However, 
whatever China does, it has to justifi its laws, policies and decisions under the relevant 
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement. Thus, it is possible that for the next few years- 
before the WTO has reached a consensus on the specific rules governing the protection 
of plant varieties-many 
disputes or disagreements on the compliance of Chinese law 
with the TRIPS Agreement with regard to such protection will be largely concentrated 
on the interpretation and applicability of certain TRIPS provisions, which appear to have 
been made to guide the protection ofintellectual property in general, and the protection 
of patents in particular. 

In the interpretation of these provisions, good faith and a spirit of co-operation will 
be  essential  so  that  the  WTO Members  may  reach  consensus  or  mutual  acceptable 
positions on the operation of the TRIPS Agreement in such circumstances. 


