The TRIPS Agreement and Access to Health Care 

Richard P. ROZEK* and Nicola TULLY** 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

For developed and some newly industrialized countries, the question of access to 
health  care  is  related  to  whether  the  health  care  system  in  a  country  is  universal. 
Universality is  the principle  that  welfare  services should be  available  to  all  by  right, 
according to need, and not restricted by individual ability to pay. This principle is one 
of the  five essential  elements of the  National Economic Research Associates  (NERA) 
prototype  for  a  health  care  system.’  It  is  also  consistent  with  the  World  Health 
Organization’s (WHO) goal of “Health for All”. For the poorest developing countries, 
the question of universality may not arise due to the lack of resources to provide even 
rudimentary health care. 

Understandmg the causes of access problems for the poorest developing countries 
is  a  complex exercise. It is incorrect to suggest  that access to health care is a problem 
that should be examined solely in terms of pharmaceuticals, especially as is related to the 
impact  of the  Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects  of Intellectual Property  Rights 
(TRIPS Agreement).  First,  existing  pharmaceutical  products  treat  only  about  ten 
thousand out of thirty thousand diagnosed diseases.2 Two-thirds  of the known medcal 
problems  cannot  be  treated  or  cured  with  drugs.  Second,  intellectual  property 
protection  (IPP)  encourages  innovation,  which  is  a  key  fictor  that  contributes  to 
improved health  care, through  promoting  both  development of new  mehcines  and 
economic growth generally. Encouraging countries to implement effective IPP regimes 
should be a public policy goal. 

TPP  provides substantial benefits for a country. Pharmaceutical firms are more likely 
to launch products in countries that have effective IPP.~ They also have the incentive to 

acknowledged. 

*  Vice President in the Washington D.C. office ofNational Economic Research Associates, Inc. (NERA). 
** Economic Analyst in the Sydney, Australia, office of NERA. 
Research  support  &om  the  Pharmaceutical  Research  and  Manufacturen  of  America  is  grateiuily 
’  U.K. Hofflneyer and T.R. McCarthy, Finum’ng Health Core, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 1994, Vol.  1, Chapter 3. 
Otto A.  Stamm, Intellectual  Property  Rigkts  and  Competitive  Strufegy,  in  Office  of  International  Mairs, 
National Research  Council,  Global  Dimensions  cf Intellectual  Property  Rights  in  Science  and  Technology,  National 
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1993, p. 223. 
Richard Rozek and Ruth Berkowitz, The Efecects  $Patent  Protection on fke prices cfPkarmaceuh’cul Prodtut5- 
Is Intellectual Property  Protection Raising  the Drug  Bill in Developing  Countries? 1 J.W.I.P. 2, March 1998, 179 at 216. 

3 

814 

THE  

search for solutions to the health problems of the countries with IPP.~ The incidence of 
AIDS and its impact on life expectancy in Sub-Saharan Afhca, where nearly 21 million 
people  were  living  with  HIV/AIDS in  1997,  is  dramatic.5  The  associated  African 
countries  would  benefit  by  implementing  policies  to  encourage  research  into  and 
launch  of  products  to  prevent  or  treat  AIDS.  Moreover,  IPP  does  not  apply  to 
approximately  95  percent  of  the  pharmaceutical  products  available  commercially.6 
These products have been available for many years. The remaining products are often 
subject to therapeutic competition. In these cases, consumers receive the benefits of the 
competitive marketplace. 

Access  to health care is  restricted in many ways.  Lengthy waiting times for heart 
surgery in Canada reduce quality of life and increase pain and general discomfort for 
patients. People working in the grey-labor  market in Mexico are not allowed to enter 
the  social  security health care  system. These  examples lllustrate that  barriers  exist  to 
restrict  access  to  health  care  that  are  not  related  to  availability  and  prices  of 
pharmaceuticals. Problems of access to health care are generally classified into one of six 
areas: 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 

Physical, 
Informational, 
Financial, 
Political, 
Social,and 
Ethnic. 

Examining access to health care fiom thts broader perspective will  help WHO to 
focus its recommendations for reforms on the areas likely to have the greatest impact. 

11.  NATURE OF ACCESS PROBLEMS 
A.  PHYSICAL  BARRIERS 

Physical barriers to health care exist in developing countries in the form of a lack 
of access to health care facilities or personnel. The primary physical problem is providing 
health care to people who live in remote, rural areas. The elderly and the mentally or 
physically handicapped may also have difficulty in accessing health care, even within an 
urban environment, if there is an inadequate support system. 

4  “E. Merck company officials suggested that the development of drugs for developing country markets has 
usually  been  considered  a sigtllficant risk, because of inadequate patent  protection.”  See Michael R. Reich, ed., 
International  Strategiesfor  Tropical  Disease  Treatments: Expetiences with Prariquantel, Action Programme on Essential 
Drugs, Division of Control of Tropical Diseases, World Health Organization, January 1998, p. 91. 

5  The World Bank, 1998  World Development  Indicators, p. 40. 
6  Greg Tobias, Patent Profecfion-7he Argentinian  Divide, Scrip Magazine, November 1992, p. 28. In adktion, 
in 1990, over 90 percent of the more than two hundred-fifcy  chemical entities on the WHO’S Essential Drugs List 
were not  protected by  patents.  See Richard  Rapp and Richard  Rozek, Benejts  and  Costs o j  Intellectual  Property 
Protection in Developing  Countries, 24 J.W.T. 5, October 1990, 75. 

THE TRIPS AGREEMENT AND ACCESS TO HEALTH  CARE 

815 

There are inadequate infrastructures in place in many developing countries to meet 

the level of health care demand 

-  the public and private resources available to construct health care facilities are 

- 

- 

insufficient to meet the needs of a growing population; 
an expanding health care system may be unable to meet the needs of a larger 
population; for example, South Korea experienced access problems when  it 
expanded coverage; and 
on a more basic level, roads, transportation, and education in these developing 
countries inhibit access to health care. 

The mstribution of physicians and health care facilities is skewed toward urban, not 

rural, areas: 

physicians  are  often  from  urban  centers  and  more  likely  to  select  urban 
locations to practice.  In South Korea, 36  percent of the population lives in 
rural areas, but only 8 percent of the physicians are located in these rural areas; 
in South Korea, the health care infrastructure has been developed with private 
financing and without  appropriate regulation. The fachties are concentrated 
in densely populated areas, leaving the rest of the country without adequate 
care; 
some specialist care may be more appropriately provided on a centralized basis 
due to economies of scale or quality issues. This centralized structure implies 
that populations living in the remote, rural areas will have longer travel times 
to receive care and may even postpone seelung care. 

Waiting lists are a form of rationing health care: 
-  most waiting lists arise from constraints due to the use of global budgets. Tax 
or social  insurance systems of health care such as  exist in Canada have  this 
problem; 
waiting lines  may  arise  due  to  shortages of health  care  staf€ or facilities in 
particular areas. 

- 

B. 

INFORMATIONAL BARRIERS 

Imperfect information may affect access to health care: 
-  people may  fail to access health care due to a lack of information about the 

need to treat diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis, or hypertension;’ and 
patients may not know how or where to access health care, particularly in the 
cases  of  minorities  or  immigrants.  In  Africa,  vertical health  care  programs 

- 

7  S. Asch, L. Gelberg, and B. Leake, Access fo Health Services and Delay in Obtaining Carefor Tuberculosis, Division 

of Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, UCLA, Los Angeles, Cahfomia, 1994. 

816 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

funded from different sources increase the difficulty for a patient in identifying 
and  accessing  the  provider  that  they  actually  need.  The  system  does  not 
operate as an integrated network. 

Imperfect information may affect proper and economical use of pharmaceuticals: 

-  self-mehcation  by  poorly  informed  patients  may  lead  to  ineffective  drug 

- 

- 

- 

utilization;* 
poorly informed physicians in  developing countries often treat illnesses such 
as diarrhea inappropriately with  antibiotic^;^ 
physicians may  not  always  be  aware of  the  most  cost-effective  therapy. In 
addition, physician preferences for dosage form may  influence the choice of 
drugs prescribed;”J and 
without  IPP,  there  is  a  lack  of  information  about  the  quality  of  generic 
products. In Africa, providers and patients prefer brand name products because 
they  are  unsure  of the  safety  and reliability of generic products  (pirated).*’ 
Therefore,  IPP will  encourage more  economical use  of pharmaceuticals, in 
that  the  government  can  establish  safety  and  efficacy standards for  generic 
products after patent expiration. 

c.  FINANCIAL BARRIERS 

Access may be restricted due to financial barriers: 

- 

-  some countries may not have resources available to provide even rudimentary 
health care. For example, annual spending on health by Ministries of Health 
in some Afiican countries is under US$ 4.00 per capita;12 
health insurance may  not be available  in a region or country, and it may  be 
costly for an individual to purchase private health insurance even where it is 
available; 
the significance of private health insurance differs in importance in accessing 
health care  dependmg on whether  there  is  a  public health  system  that  is  a 

- 

in 

PharmacoEconomics, April 1996. 

*  Jawahar  Bapna,  Chakra  Tripathi,  and  Uma  Tekur,  Drug  Utilisation  Patterns 
the  Third  World, 
9  For example, one study found that in Nigeria 60 percent of children with diarrhea inappropriately received 
antibiotics: see A.  Isenalumbe and 0. Osawaru, Polypharmacy: Its  Cost Burden  and  Bartier  to  Medical  Care in Drug- 
Oriented Health System, International Journal of Health Service, 1988, pp. 335-42, cited in Bapna et al., ibid., p. 291. 
Another study found  that  in Sri Lanka 40 percent  of antibiotics were used  inappropriately: see  I.  Angunawela, 
V.  Diwan, and  G.  Tomson, Experimental  Evaluan’on  of the  EJecfs  of Drug  Injomnh’on  oti  Antibiotic  Prescribing, in 
G. Tomson,  ed.,  Drug  Utilizafion Studies  in Sri  Lanka,  International  Health Care Research, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, 1990, pp.  1-14,  cited in Bapma eta/., ibid., p. 291. 

For example, physicians in Brazil are reluctant to prescribe praziquantel for schistosomiasis over the more 
expensive and less effective drug, oxamniquine. One reason for the reluctance is patient complaints about the large 
size of the praziquantel tablets, which are difficult for children to swallow: see Reich, supra, footnote 4, p. 76. 
’ I C. Bruneton, I.  Favre, and D. Fontaine, A Competitionfor the Promotion  ofEsmtial Generic Drugs in Africa: A 
Participatim Methodfor Appropriate  Promotion  andfor Research, World Health  Organization, World Wide Web page 
*~http://www.who.int/dap-icium/posters/3B2-TXTF.ht~)). 

12  Reich, supra, footnote 4, p. 74. 

THE TRIPS AGREEMENT AND ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE 

81 7 

viable alternative to the private one. For example, the National Health Service 
in the United Kingdom is  an  adequate provider of health care, whereas the 
public system in South Afiica is only a provider of last resort and does not offer 
a comparable level of care; 
social  insurance  systems  may  choose  to  &scriminate  if  an  adequate  risk 
adjustment  system  does  not  exist  to  compensate  insurers  for  patients 
considered high risk, such as those patients afflicted with chronic conditions; 
denying access may be subtle; for example, providing services only for those 
who appear in person to request care at a facility that is dlfficult to locate; 
some patients are not able to pay the full cost for health care, and there may 
be relatively high co-payments for health care services, which some patients 
in developing countries cannot pay; and 
unofficial or side  payments to health  care providers are  prevalent  in  many 
central and eastern European  countries.  Having to make such payments to 
access health care may discourage people from seelung care. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

The government may  not assign priority or have sufficient resources available  to 
build the infrastructure necessary  to improve health status and provide access to health 
care.  Government spendmg to improve sanitation will have a positive impact on the 
health status of the population. Other factors to consider are education, a clean or safe 
environment, and programs to reduce poverty. There are stronger correlations between 
safe water or sanitation and life expectancy than between health care expenditure per 
capita and life expectancy.13 Investments in preventing health problems have  a more 
significant impact  on  a  country's  health  status  than  investments  in  treating  health 
problems once they arise. 

D.  POLITICAL BARRIERS 

Some  groups,  such  as  illegal  immigrants,  lack  access  to  health  care.  Illegal 
immigrants are not entitled to access the health care system (other than emergency and 
maternal services) in countries such as Italy,14 and they may not seek out health care for 
fear of dlscovery by immigration authorities.15 

Political rules  and  the  unofficial  labor  markets are  sources of access  problems. 
Those working outside of the official labor market may be unable to access health care. 
In Mexico, grey-market workers do not contribute to the tax system and are excluded 
from the social and workers health insurance system.16 

'3  The correlation between safe water and sanitation and life expectancy for all countries with available data 
in  World Development Indicators,  supra, footnote 5, is  0.79 and 0.71, respectively, while the  correlation between 
health expenditures per capita and Me  expectancy for the same group is 0.57. 

14  International Healthcare News, November 1995, p. 11. 
15  Asch et al., supra, footnote 7. 
16  The  Health  Care  Sy5fem  in  Mexico,  report  prepared  by  National  Economic  Research  Associates, Inc., 

Washington, D.C., 1998. 

818 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORCD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

E.  SOCIAL BARRIERS 

Language barriers: 
-  if  the  patient  does  not  understand  the  language  used  by  the  health  care 

- 

providers, then they will have &fficulty in accessing care; 
in  addition,  a  patient  may  be  illiterate  and  unable  to  get  through  the 
admmistrative system to access health care. 

Minority groups: 

-  homosexuals and drug addicts may have greater dificulty in accessing health 

- 

care due to discriminatory attitudes of some health care providers;17 
barriers of gender or religion; in some Islamic states, women have difficulty in 
accessing health care since there is  a shortage of (or no) female physicians to 
provide health care. 

F.  ETHNIC BARRIERS 

Certain ethnic groups within a country, such as the Aborigines in Australia, may 
have greater difficulty in accessing health care. In addition, the health care that is being 
provided to ethnic groups may not be appropriate to meet the needs of the groups due 
to cultural differences in the perception of health care; for example, the Romany people 
(gypsies) in Romania. 

111.  CONCLUSION 

There is  no empirical basis  to support the proposition that  the TRIPS Agreement 
will raise pharmaceutical prices and, thus, create problems for people in need of health 
care.  On  the  contrary,  the  empirical  work  confirms  that  prices  of  existing 
pharmaceutical  products  do  not  increase  after  a  developing  country  adopts  Ipp.18 
Institutional features such as  therapeutic  competition, single buyers, price regulation, 
and the fact that  the  IPP laws  are not retroactive,  already exist in  most  countries to 
restrain prices. In  many instances, the prices  of pharmaceuticals are not  the  cause of 
access problems. If the patient  does not have access  to  a  physician, or lacks  accurate 
information, prices of pharmaceuticals are irrelevant. 

Rather than focusing on the pharmaceutical industry and the TRIPS Agreement as 
inhibiting people in developing countries &om accessing health care, the WHO should 
attempt  to  classify  the  underlying  causes  of  access  problems  as  due  to  physical, 
informational, financial, social, political, or  ethnic barriers.  The underlying  causes  of 

K.A.  O’Hanlan, Do  We Really Mean Preventive Medicinefor All? American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 

Vol.  12, 1996, p. 411. 

Rozek and Berkowitz, supra, footnote 3. 

THE TRIPS AGREEMENT AND ACCESS  TO HEALTH  CARE 

819 

access problems in particular countries may dffer. Political barriers may be the primary 
cause in one case, whereas physical barriers may exist elsewhere. A first step for WHO is 
to identify  the  set of causes for access problems  in each  country and then  attempt  to 
formulate country-specific  reform plans to improve access. 

In  general,  as  the  WHO sets  priorities  for  sponsoring  programs  to  improve  the 
health of people in developing countries, it is important to realize that preventing health 
problems  through safe water and proper sanitation have a greater impact on increasing 
life expectancy than increasing health care spendmg per capita. Focusing on prevention 
of diseases has the  most  significant effect on health  status. Nevertheless,  if improving 
access to health  care is a goal, WHO should devote its resources to addressing the most 
severe  access problems.  In  that  regard,  designing  programs  to  create  incentives  for 
physicians  and  other  health  care  providers  to  locate  in  rural  areas  will  dramatically 
improve  access. Providing information  to physicians and patients to aid in diagnosing 
diseases and in identifying the most  cost-effective treatments is another major area for 
the WHO to contribute. 


