Potential and Substantial Benefits of the TRIPS 
Agreement to the Member Countries of the African 
Intellectual Property Organization in the Patent Field 

An African’s  Perspective 

Ituku ELANCI BOTOY* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Since it entered into force in  1995, the Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of 
Intellectual Property  Rights has become the most influential international agreement 
ever subscribed to on intellectual property rights.’ Contrary to previous agreements on 
the matter,* it provides international standards covering almost all aspects of intellectual 
property.3  Shortly  after  its  adoption,  and  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  transitional 
periods enshrined in its Articles 65 and 66, numerous developing countries have started 
the process of reforming their IPR legislation. This is especially the case of the African 
Intellectual Property Organization (OAPi-the  French acronym is used) whose revised 
Agreement is pictured in Africa as a mirror of the TRIPS Agreement.4 

Mostly, the TRIPS Agreement refers to the two major fields viewed as  the starting 
point of the rise of social welfare as well as  of the technological and economic bases  of 
a country or a region.  The first reference of the TRIPS Agreement is  trade: this field 
allows a country or a region to export its finished or semi-finished intellectual property 
products  to  the  international market.  The trade  field plays  a significant role  since it 
*  Law degree, Fribourg University, Fribourg, Switzerland; Master’s degree, University of Geneva, Geneva. At 
Carlos M.  Correa,  Implementing  the  TIUPS Agreement  in  the  Patent  Field-Options 
for  Developing  Countries, 

present preparing a doctorate at the University of Geneva. 

1 J.W.I.P.  1, January 1998, p. 75. 

Notably, the Paris Convention  of 1883 for the Protection of Industrial Property, revised  last in  1967; the 
Beme  Convention  of  1886 for  the  Protection  of Literary  and  Artistic Works, revised last  in  1971; the Rome 
International Convention  of 1961 for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting 
Organizations and the Washington Treaty of 1989 on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits. 

In  seventy-three  Articles,  the  TRIPS Agreement enshrines  minimum  standards covering the  availability, 
acquisition, scope, maintenance and enforcement of IPRS and the protection against abuse of those rights. It makes 
the IPRS embodied in previous Conventions subject to an efficient dispute settlement system never set up before 
on the matter. 
4  With  regard  to  the  TRIPS Agreement, the  fifteen  OAPI Member  States  (at  present  numbering  sixteen) 
initiated the complex process ofreform oftheir IPR  legislation in 1994. The final text, entitled “Agreement bringing 
revision to the Bangui Agreement  of 2 March 1977 creating an African Intellectual  Property Organization” (the 
official French version  reads Accord  portanf  rivision  de  I’Accord  de  Bangui  du  2 mars  1977  insiituant w e  ogunisution 
afncuine de  la propdtt intellertuelle), was adopted in Nouakchott  (Mauritania) at the end of December 1998. It was 
submitted to the ratification of the Member States in Bangui (Central Afncan Republic) from 22 to 25 March 1999. 
At  present, only six Member States have ratified the revised Agreement. In accordance with its Article 43, four 
more ratifications are needed for the revised Agreement to enter into force. 

92 

THE  

enables a country or a region, especially through its income from exports, to increase its 
gross domestic product  or its gross national  product,  the consequence  of which is the 
creation ofjobs, the raising of the standard of living, expansion and growth, etc. 

The second reference of the TRIPS Agreement is to intellectual property: this field 
enables  a  country  to  proceed  with  inventions.  It  facilitates  the  mastering  of natural 
resources or raw  materials from  their  extraction  to their  transformation  into  finished 
products.  Intellectual property  leads to the self-emancipation  of a country or a region 
since it helps solve existential problems or to satisfj the basic needs of the population. 
Intellectual property  is a generic term which includes, in particular, patents, trade 
marks, copyright  and registered  designs, all  of which  can be described  as products  of 
intellect.  It is  also commonly regarded  as  including rights in know-how.  In addxion, 
intellectual  property  confers  to  its  owner  exclusive  rights  to  his  intellectual 
achievements. It grants a monopoly of rights to its owner. It protects the right holder- 
notably  through  a patent,  a  utility  model,  a  trade  mark,  a geographical  indication,  a 
model  and  industrial  design-fiom 
unfair  competition,  piracy  and  other  kinds  of 
infringements. 

The TRIPS Agreement is an international convention which has “married”  trade- 
related aspects of intellectual property to intellectual property-related  aspects of trade in 
a way they never were before.  It makes these two connected fields subject to a strong 
and  efficient  protection  never  previously  offered.  Consequently,  the  two joined 
protected  fields will more and  more  be  seen as two  strong pillars of a country’s  or a 
region’s economic, technological and industrial “architecture”  throughout  the twenty- 
first century. 

It is  appropriate  to  notice  that  the two afore-mentioned  fields will not benefit  a 
country or a region if not circumscribed within a consistent judicial and administrative 
framework, as  well  as  within  a fair and  open  trading system. O n  the  one  hand,  this 
framework will offer strong and efficient protection to the IPR or to the trade goods; on 
the other hand, it wlll be conducive to the social welfare and technological  innovation 
of the country  or the region that grants such protection. As  to a fair and open trading 
system, it is important that it gain the benefits of robust intellectual property protection. 
Thomas Edison observed that an invention is made of 1 percent  “inspiration”  and 
99  percent  “perspiration”.5  This  last  percentage  reflects  the  physical  efforts  and  the 
financial  expenses  of  the  inventors.  They  cannot  recoup  their  expenses  if  their 
intellectual property  products are immediately  pirated  or counterfeited.6  Low or non- 
existent  levels of IP protection  are  seen  as  a barrier  to  exports,  as  exports  are being 
displaced by local piracy production.  In the North-South  trade, the tolerance  towards 

5  Fredtric Wagret and Jean-Michel Wagret, Brevets d’lnuention,  Marques et Propriiti  hdustrielk, Que sais-jc? PUF, 

1997, p. 9 (the English title reads:  Patents,  Trade Marks and Industrial Property). 

b  HClene Kuiz  Fabri,  Organisation Mondiale du  Comnwce, fascicule 130-25,  Edition  du Juns-Classeur,  1998, 

p. 12 (the Enghsh  title reads:  World  Trade Organization). 

TRIPS,  PATENTS AND  OAPI 

93 

local pirates deprives developed country industries of licensing income in  developing 
countries, as there is no incentive to ask and pay the original creator or right holder for 
permission to reproduce locally. Finally, piracy deters these industries from investing in 
developing countries.7 Therefore, the strength or weakness of a developing country’s or 
a developing region’s system of intellectual property protection will have a significant 
effect on the amount and kind of technology transfers and international trade of goods 
and services to its territory. 

Concerning  OAPI, its country Members have not yet mastered the two fields of 
reference of the TRIPS Agreement. The inability to do so, linked with a previously weak 
and  inadequate  IP  system, are  two  major  factors which  have  excluded Africa from 
international  trade and industrial relations.9 Now that  OAPI has  offered a strong and 
sufficient regional protection of IP on the level of the TRIPS Agreement, it is  obvious 
that  it will step by step become  a magnet for investment in Africa in the twenty-first 
century. Many polemicists from the Third World have offered disturbing views of the 
impact  of the  TRIPS Agreement,  yet  dispassionate analysis  in  many  areas  is  missing. 
While providing compulsory standards for all the signatory countries, TRIPS does not 
pertain  to  a too-strict  protection  of intellectual property  rights.  O n  the  contrary, it 
grants  numerous  potential  advantages or benefits to  developing and  least  developed 
countries.  It  is  up  to  those  countries  to  find their  way  to reaping those benefits. In 
Africa,  OAPI Member  countries  are  called  to  analyse,  in  an  objective  way,  the 
implications of the Agreement and to put them to use throughout their region. 

With regard  to  the importance  of patents for the commercial, technological and 
industrial development  of OAPI, this article seeks to demonstrate, beyond  the North- 
South  political  dwergences,  some  potential  and  substantial  benefits  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement  for the Member  countries of that Ahcan regional organization.  It could 
also  refer,  mufatir  mufundis,  to  the  Member  countries  of  ARIPO (African Regional 
Industrial Property  Organization)  as  well  as  to  other  sub-Saharan  countries.  Before 
demonstrating  potential  and  substantial benefits of the  TRIPS to  the  OAPI countries 
(Section III), it is important to explore the rights conferred by  the TRIPS Agreement to 
the patentee or the right holder (Section 11). 

11.  RIGHTS CONFERRED 

BY  A  PATENT 

The patent field is enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement from Article 24 to Article 34. 
Article 28 makes  a distinction according to the fact of whether  a subject-matter  is  a 

Market Law Review 31, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994, p. 1247. 
and Technology, Vol.  37, No. 3,  1997, p. 507. 

7  Marco C.E.J. Bronckers, TIie Impact  O~TRIPS: 
8  Robert M. Sherwood, 7 k e  TRIPS Agreement: Implicationsfor  Developing  Countries, IDEA, The Journal of Law 
Y  Philippe Hugon, L’Economie de I’Ajique, La DCcouverte, second edition, 1999, p. 46 (the English title reads: 

Intellectual  Property  Protection  in Developing  Countries, Common 

Economy OfAfnca). 

94 

THE  

product or a process. Relating to a product,lo a patent confers to its owner the following 
exclusive rights: 

-  making; 
-  using; 
-  offering for sale; 
-  selling; 
-  importing the patented product. 
If  the  subject-matter  is  a  process,  the  owner  is  endowed  with  the  following 

privileges: 

-  using; 
-  offering for sale; 
-  selling; 
-  importing  for  these purposes at  least  the  product  obtained directly by  that 

process. 

In  addition, patent  owners shall  also  have  the  right  to  assign  or  to  transfer by 

succession the patent, and to conclude licensing contracts. 

Whether  it is a product or a process, TRIPS Article 28 confers on the patentee or 
the right holder the right to prevent third parties not having his consent from carrying 
out the above-mentioned acts. In case of infringement, the patentee or the right holder 
has  several legal  remedies  to  protect  his  right.  He  can  introduce  an  action  against 
inhngement,  especially against acts of unfair  competition  (TRIPS Article 39 in  initio), 
and bring to the attention of the authorities that practices in violation of his  right are 
being committed or are about to be committed (TRIPS Article 40.3). In addition, he can 
order an infringer to desist  from an infiringing  activity (TRIPS Article 44) and  obtain 
damages from the infringer (TRIPS Article 45). 

Moreover, the patentee or the right holder can initiate administrative proceedmgs 
(in particular under TRIPS Articles 46,49,50,51,53,57 and 59) or criminal proceedings 
(notably under TRIPS Article 61). Lastly, under  TRIPS Article 33, the patentee or the 
right holder is conferred twenty years of protection of his right during which he has the 
above-mentioned exclusive rights.  In  a  sense, the  patentee  or the  right  holder  has  a 
monopoly to  recoup his  investment during that  term. All  the  above-mentioned legal 
remedies,  of which  some  could be  introduced  or  initiated together  against  a  single 
infringement of an intellectual property right, constitute a strong legal barrier destined 
to protect the patentee or the right holder.’’ Only this kind oflegal protection can allow 
the patentee or the right holder to use his right in safety. 

lo  TRIPS Article 28(a). 
1’  Ituku  Elangi Botoy, L’Auord  stir  h Aspects  des  Droits  de  PropriCtC  Intelktuelle  p i  touchenf au  Commerce: 
Implications  pour  l a  Pays  de  I’Oyynnisation  qfrcaine  de  la  Propri6d  InteElectuelle,  MCmoire  de  DiplBme  d’Etudes 
Suptrieures en Droit, UnivcrsitC de Genkve, mai 2000, p. 75 (the English title reads:  The Trade-Related  Aspects of 
Intellectual  Property Rights: Implicationrjbr  the Member Countries Dfthe Afican Intellectual Property  Opnization (OAPI). 

TRIPS, PATENTS AND  OAPI 

95 

In the next Section, after examining the rights conferred by the TRIPS Agreement 
on  the  patentee  or  the  right  holder,  the  potential  and  substantial  benefits  of  the 
Agreement for the Member countries of OAPI wdl be analysed. 

111.  POTENTIAL AND SUBSTANTIAL BENEFITS OF TRIPS FOR THE OAPI MEMBER 

COUNTRIES 
Capacity to Limit the Exclusive Intellectual Property Rights 

A. 

The OAPI Member States have the right to limit the exclusive rights conferred by 
intellectual property rights, notably by a patent. Referring to this, the TRIPS Agreement 
provides the said right  in its Article 30 in  initio12 accordmg to which  “Members may 
provide limited exceptions  to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent . . .” 

In fact, the TRIPS Agreement disapproves oftoo strict a protection ofprivate rights. 
Exclusivity of the rights are  conferred on the  one hand, but  on the other  hand  they 
strive to maintain a &ir competition and an open market. The protection is guided by 
principles taking into account a balance between the private interests of the inventors 
or the patent holders, and the public interest of affording protection to countries. 

It should be emphasized that intellectual property rights do not exist in a vacuum. 
They are granted tahng into account other social and economic welfare policy interests 
and values.  According to one of TRIPS, objectives, the protection and enforcement of 
intellectual  property  rights  should  contribute  not  only  to  the  promotion  of 
technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, but also 
to the “mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge” and in a 
manner conducive to “social welfare”, and to “a  balance of rights and obligations”.13 
Therefore, OAPI Member countries are endowed by the TRIPS Agreement with the 
right to adopt measures necessary to protect, for instance, public health and nutrition, and 
to promote the public interest in sectors ofvital importance to their socio-economic and 
technological development in order to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights 
by right holders.14 This possibility can also be used in situations of national emergency or 
other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use.15 

Thus, African countries can use all these possibilities-in  particular to make generic 

l2  It should be noted that the same possibility is provided in TRIPS Article 3(2), to limit national treatment; in 
Article 4(a), (b), (c) and (d) to limit most-favoured-nation treatment; in Article 13 to limit exclusive rights conferred 
by copyright and related rights; in Article 17 to limit exclusive rights conferred by copyright and related rights; in 
Article 17 to limit exclusive rights conferred by trademarks; in Article 26(2) to limit exclusive rights conferred by 
geographical indications; in Article 39(3) infine to limit the protection of undisclosed information; in Article 40(2) 
to limit  cases  constituting an abuse of intellectual property  rights having an  adverse  effect  on  competition  in  a 
relevant market; and in Article 73 to limit the dissemination of information the disclosure of which a Member State 
considers contrary to its essential security interests. 

l3  TRIPS Article 7. 
I4  TRIPS Article 8. 
15  TRIPS Article 31 0.). 

96 

THE  

order to protect their public health. All over sub-Saharan 
pharmaceutical products-in 
Afbca, a great percentage of the population is reportedly running the risk of being totally 
exterminated by  very  dangerous  epidemic diseases  and  viruses  such  as  AIDS, cholera, 
malaria and tuberculosis. There is also another dangerous epidemic disease about to spread 
in many African countries: the Ebola virus. These are real cases of extreme emergency for 
which the requirements for an authorization from a right holder may be waived. 

Even  if  the  TRIPS Agreement  acknowledges the  afore-mentioned  possibilities, 
measures  adopted  thereupon  have  to  be  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Agreement. Any  measure which  OAPI Member  States adopt to protect,  for instance, 
public  health,  would  have  to  be  taken  within  the  perspective of the  recognition of 
intellectual  property  as  a  private  right.16  Therefore,  TRIPS Article  30  allows  these 
measures provided that such exceptions “do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate 
interests of the patent owner, takmg account of the legitimate interests of third parties.” 
When adopting such measures, the OAPI Member user-government has to make efforts 
to  obtain  authorization from  the  right  holder  on  reasonable commercial  terms  and 
conditions. In case of emergency, the right holder shall anyway be informed promptly. 
In both cases, a remuneration has to be provided to the right holder, and any decision 
relating  to  it  in  respect  of  such  use  shall  be  subject  to  jumcial  review  or  other 
independent review by a distinct higher authority in that country.17 

With regard to the economic and financial difficulties OAPI countries are facing, 
the question relating to remuneration in respect of emergency or non-emergency  use 
underlines a  big problem,  in  particular between  foreign pharmaceutical groups with 
their own financial interests in mind, and African countries struggling for their public 
health.  It  is  obvious  that  rising  drug costs  are  of great  concern for  all  black  African 
countries more  than anywhere else.  To save  millions of Ati-ican lives  !&om epidemic 
diseases spreading all over the continent, it is up to international solidarity to enter into 
action. It is  obvious that foreign pharmaceutical groups will not allow the use of their 
rights without  remuneration or compensation.  This situation is  understandable, since 
those private pharmaceutical groups have to recoup  their financial and physical  costs 
expended  during  their  long-term  research  programmes.  Even  though  authorization 
from the right holder may be waived in cases of national emergency, OAPI countries will 
ultimately have  to provide a remuneration to the right  holder in respect of such use. 
This situation aggravates once more their economic and financial constraints, since it 
adds private debts to their tight budget, along with numerous public debts contracted 
from, in particular, Western countries and international financial institutions. 

In the patent field, it is obvious that there are a great deal of potential and substantial 
benefits for  OAPI countries. Therefore,  it  is  up  to  their  governments to  seize  those 

‘ 6   Frederick S .  Ringo,  77ze  Trade-Related  Aspects ofIntellectual Property Rights Agreement  in the  GATT and  Legal 
Implicutionsfor Sub-Saharan AfiiCa-Rospective PoZicy lssuesfor the  World Trade Organization, 28 J.W.T. 6, December 
1994, at p. 128. 

’7  TRIPS Article 31(j). 

TRIPS,  PATENTS AND OAPI 

97 

benefits. This requires efficient and analytical vision as well as economic rationality from 
African governments. The TRIPS Agreement offers  potential advantages in black and 
white on paper, and the governments of OAPI countries have the responsibility to bring 
them to reality for the benefit of their nationals. 

In  a  sense, exceptions and limits to  the  exclusive rights  are provided to  grant  a 
balanced exchange between the protecting State and the inventor. As mentioned above, 
TRIPS Article 30, as well as  the whole Agreement, aims  at a balance between private 
interest and public interest. On the one hand, there are the legitimate interests of the 
foreign  patent  holders,  the  producers  of  technology,  who  are  called  to  play  a 
fundamental  role  in  the  OAPI region  in  a  process  that  wdl  lead  to  economic 
development. The OAPI patent system cannot be understood other than as a means of 
granting, for a limited period of time, adequate compensation for the investment made 
by the investors, as well as for providmg an incentive for further research in the attempt 
to develop new creations in the region. O n  the other hand, there is the consumer side, 
represented by  the beneficiaries of these inventions, the OAPI population as  a whole, 
whose interests are to be considered by the OAPI governments. Therefore, the attention 
of OAPr Member States should be drawn to the fact that the TRIPS Agreement does not 
aim to achieve a degree ofprotection for the patent which would unduly prejudice their 
vital public interest in social, technologcal and economic welfare. 

In  this  regard,  OAPI Members  can-on 

an  experimental basis,  and even before 
generic drugs in order to allow competition just after 
expiration of the patent-make 
expiration of the right. In the current Afiican health context, it is imperative to favour 
the use of generic drugs because such drugs are significantly less expensive than patented 
ones. Patented medicines are expensive, in large part because of the high development 
costs which patentees seek to recoup through the exclusive marketing rights conferred 
by a patent during its twenty years of protection (TRIPS Article 33). 

The attention of OAPI Member States should be drawn again to the fact that social 
welfare  and  protection  of public  health  have  always  been  the  cornerstone  of  most 
countries’ or regional organizations’ policy. Like those countries and organizations, the 
European Union  has  recognized the  beneficial effect of exceptions and limits to  the 
exclusive rights  conferred by  a patent. In a  report  dated 2 April 1996, the European 
Parliament considered that: 

“. . . measures  should  be  introduced  which  enable  pharmaceutical  companies  to  begin, 
in  advance  of  patent  supplementary  protection  certificate  expiry,  such  laboratory 
experiments and  regulatory preparations as  may  be  required  only  for  the registration of 
generic  pharmaceuticals  developed  in  the  European  Union  to  be  available  on  the 
market  immediately, but  only  after  the  expiry  of  a  patent  or  supplementary  protection 
certificate for a proprietary product.”18 
Pursuant to TRIPS Article 30, patentees will not forbid OAPI Members or ARIPO 

18  No. A4-1014/96;  Official Journal No. C 141, 13 May 1996, p. 0063. 

98 

THE  

Members to make generic drugs before the expiry of their rights, even though patentees 
are  conferred the  exclusive right  to  make  the  product  subject to  the  patent  during 
twenty  years.  This  has  been  recently  recognized  by  the  World  Trade  Organization 
Dispute Settlement Body.19  From  that point  of view, the necessity of the  single and 
indivisible  principle  of  Article  31(1)  of  the  Vienna  Convention  related  to  the 
interpretation of multilateral treaties is perceived.20 Should patentees exclusively make 
the product which is subject to a patent during the whole twenty years of protection, 
they will certainly commit an abuse of their right since they will gain some more years 
of monopoly beyond  the allotted period  of protection.21 This will constitute a barrier 
to legitimate trade and  social welfare since it  restrains fair  competition by  excluding 
potential African competitors-and 
this is not the objective of the TRIPS Agreement.22 
Limitations to  the  exclusive  rights  conferred  by  a  patent  cannot  be  used  by  OAPI 
countries unless they benefit from the disclosure of inventions. This potential benefit 
will be examined below. 

B.  Disclosure of  Inventions 

The TRIPS Agreement brings to OAPI Member  countries, through its Article 29, 
numerous  advantages regarding the diverse patents filed in their  region; these would 
make a useful database of information disclosing filed patents. The information stocked 
would  chiefly be  used  in  case  of  national  emergency,  and  ultimately when  patents 
become public property. This would be of much benefit and importance, not only for 
the development of local firms or industries, but also, more importantly, in the training 
of local human resources in the intellectual property field. 

TRIPS Article 29 sets out condtions on patent applicants. According to it: 
“1.  Members shall require  that  an  applicant for  a patent  shall disclose the invention in  a 
manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by a person 
skilled in the art and may  require the applicant  to indicate the best mode for carrying 
out the invention known to the inventor at the filing date or, where priority is claimed, 
at the priority date of application. 

2.  Members may require an applicant for a patent to provide information concerning the 

applicant’s corresponding foreign applications and grants.” 

l9  See the Report of the WTO Panel dated 17 March 2000 in the case between the European Community and 

Canada, WT/DS114/R. 

20  Article 31 of the Vienna Convention requires that the t e r n  of a treaty be given their ordinary meaning within 
their context and in light of their object and purpose. It is not possible to draw a sharp distinction between those 
principles or separate those methods of interpretation into discrete compartments. Otherwise, t h ~ s  sharp division wdl 
make a text go out of context, and will lay a foundation to a pretext: “a text out of its context becomes a pretext”. 
21  When a patent becomes public property, competitors have the right to start using it. If they begin their use 
only after the twenty years of protection conferred by TRIPS Article 33, the making and the finahzing of a product 
thereof might take place only after two or more years. It is  obvious that this situation gives the former patentee a 
gratuitous monopoly beyond the allotted time ofprotection and restrains trade unreasonably in the post-expiv market. 
22  The TRIPS Agreement encourages fair competition so  as to orient consumers to make a fiee choice between 

two or more products having the same quality. 

TRIPS,  PATENTS AND OAPI 

99 

The TRIPS Agreement, particularly in its Article 7, pursues the achievement of a 
balance between  rights  and  obligations, both  of which  are  recognized objectives. It 
allows potential Afiican competitors to compete fi-eely with the patentee after the patent 
has expired, consistent with the policy of full competition underlying the requirement 
of Article 29 that, in return for the grant of patent protection, patentees must dsclose 
In the pharmaceutical context for example, TRIPS Article 
their inventions to the 
29 has a signdkant influence on the promotion and development of the AGican health 
care  system, since it  will ensure Afiican  consumers and investors access  to less  costly 
generic  drugs  in  the  post-expiry  market.  It  is  clear  that  Afiican  private  insurance 
companies and public health care systems as well as Africans themselves, will benefit fiom 
information divulged under Article 29, notably as to patented pharmaceutical products. 
It  is  understandable how  important  a  system of strong protection  of intellectual 
property rights is  for the development of a  country or a region.24  In fict, intellectual 
property  protection  helps  countries  attract  technology,  difliuse  it  throughout  the 
domestic economy and, ultimately, develop indigenous industries.25 The acquisition of 
new  technology brings  much  information  and  often  stimulates local  technicians to 
advance  their  work  and  develop  more  new  technology.26  In  the  absence  of  strong 
protection, it is obvious that technology will f d  backward since the innovator d have 
no incentive to  develop new products or improve methods of producing established 
products.  Thus,  technological  advancement  automatically  causes  backwardness  of 
knowledge.  Strong  intellectual  protection  can  be  expected  to  produce  maximum 
benefits in markets where private capital and open trade are encouraged. 

As long as innovators have to reveal their inventions to the public, OAPI Member 
countries have in return to offer them strong and full protection, not only on paper but 
also, and more importantly, through complete implementation of the TRIPS Agreement. 
The OAPI Revised Agreement contains rules on such matters as rights on evidence, on 
measures by  customs authorities, on penalties and on criminal law.  In addition, it has 
incorporated  the  TRIPS Agreement  in  the  IP  regional  system.  Nevertheless,  to  be 
effective, the OAPI Revised Agreement can not only be pictured on paper as a mirror 
of the TRIPS Agreement, but the provisions regarding the enforcement of private rights 
must be implemented. This is essential in order to attract foreign investors and, through 
them,  information  disclosing patents.  Otherwise,  OAPI Member  countries will  not 
benefit  fiom  TRIPS Article  29  which  can  play  a  significant  role  in  Afi-ican  skills 

The policy of full and fair competition is also enshrined in TRIPS Article 7; in Article 33, accordmg to which 
the  exclusive rights are  not conferred endlessly; and in Article 40, accordmg to which national measures can be 
adopted to prevent abuse of intellectual property tights having an adverse effect on competition. 
24  Hisamtsu Arai,  Intellectual Ropetfy Policies for  the  Twenty-First  Centwy-The  Japanese  Experience  in  Wealth 
Creation, 3 J.W.I.P. 3, May 2000, p. 423; Jacques Werner, Intellectual Property and the Creation oflndushial Wealth in 
Japan-Some  R@ections on a Recent Book by Hiramitsu Arai, 3 J.W.I.P. 3, May 2000, p. 421. 
25  Richard T.  Rapp  and Richard P. Rozek,  Benefits and  Costs of Intellecrual  Property  Protection  in  Developing 
Countries, 24 J.W.T. 5,  October 1990, at p. 81. 
26  For  example, after Brazil  enacted copyright protection for  software  in late  1987 and libedzed impoa 
policies, local sohare producers wrote applications  programs under commodity programs such as Lotus 123 R and 
then moved to customized programs which helped local industry production methods. 

100 

THE  

development. Therefore, it is up to the OAPI Member countries to be aware of the link 
between  an  educated  population  (not  only  a plethoric  demography),  and  the  socio- 
economic and technological  development  of their countries. 

C.  Technical and Financial  Co-operation 

Technical  and financial co-operation  constitutes  another  major  potential  benefit 

granted  by  the  TRIPS Agreement  to OAPI countries.  The legal base  thereof  is  TRIPS 
Article 67, accordmg to which: 

“In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, developed country Members 
shall  provide,  on  request  and  on  mutually  agreed  terms  and  conditions, technical  and 
financial co-operation in favour of developing and least-developed country Members. Such 
co-operation  shall  include assistance  in  the  preparation of laws  and  regulations  on  the 
protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as on the prevention of 
their  abuse,  and  shall  include support  regarding the  establishment  or  reinforcement of 
domestic offices and agencies relevant to these matters, including the training of personnel.” 
Numerous  observers27 have come to the conclusion that the financial resources of 
each developing or least-developed  country are not sufficient to carry out the reforms 
imposed by the TRIPS Agreement. Since OAPI countries had weaker protection prior to 
the  TRIPS Agreement,  the  Agreement  places  substantially greater  burdens  on these 
countries  for  reforming  their  previous  regional  intellectual  property  system.  These 
burdens include the costs of developing an institutional infrastructure in order to protect 
the exclusive rights of the right holders in the OAPI region and the costs of responding 
to  retaliation  against  alleged  violations  of  those  rights.  The  TRIPS Agreement,  in 
particular under Article  67, offers the possibility to ease this situation.  OAPI countries 
may thus request financial and technical  assistance from industrialized countries when 
necessary, and the latter wdl not refuse it, otherwise, implementation  of the Agreement 
will be undermined in that region. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  success  of  the  implementation  of  the  TRIPS 

Agreement in OMI countries will depend in great measure on the application of Article 
67. More importantly, this success will also depend on the orientation and the use ofthe 
benefits  which  can  be  accorded  under  Article  67  to  the  OAPI countries.  Industrial 
countries should use all their weight to attain a positive and rational orientation  of the 
benefits of Article  67.  In  contrahction with TRIPS Article  41(5),28 aid offered  under 
Article 67 can create an obligation  for OAPI countries to put in place a judicial  system 

~ 

27  Notably R.K. Burch, P.J.D.  Smith and W.P. Wheatly, Divergenr  Incentives  to protect Inrellecrual  P r o p e r t y A  
Political Economy Analysis ofNorfh-South We@re,  3 J.W.I.P.  2, March  2000, p.  169; Sherwood, supra, footnote 8, 
p. 511. 
**  This provision states that:  “It is understood  that this Part does not create any obligation to put in place a 
judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property  rights distinct f?om  that for the enforcement  of law in 
general, nor does it affect the capacity of Members to enforce their law in general. Nothing in this Part creates any 
obligation with respect to the distribution of resources as between enforcement of intellectual property  rights and 
the enforcement of law in general.’’ 

TRIPS, PATENTS AND OAPI 

101 

for the enforcement of IPRS or to use resources of technical and financial co-operation 
only to develop the IPR system (still deficient on the ground) in their countries. 

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  TRIPS Article  67  is  based  upon  solidarity  in 
international relations since it reflects goodwill and the awareness of the industrialized 
countries  of  the  economic  and  financial problems  faced  by  developing and  least- 
developed countries.  It  is  inspired fiom  an  ideology  of social relations between  the 
members  of the  international community  which  Professor Pierre-Marie  Dupuy  has 
affirmed constitutes an active instrument for the transformation of relations between 
States regarding the conception of justice and international 
It is  clear that 
strong  legahsm  itself  cannot  promote  world-wide  economic  and  technological 
development.  Nevertheless,  as  long  as  industrialized  countries  grant  technical  and 
financial assistance to OAPI Members, it rests with the latter to fully use the h i t s  of that 
co-operation  for the benefit of their nationals, to whom they have to be accountable. 
Afiican governments have been and are still being criticized about the emphasis being 
placed  on the  tribal  or ethnical aspect in public  affairs rather than  the  State aspect. 
Conversely, it is the State aspect that has to be promoted for Aiiica to go forward. 

The preparation of laws and regulations deahng with patents and the training of 
Afiican  personnel will  play  an  essential  role  in  the  IP  education of Afiicans.  TRIPS 
Article 67 is therefore fundamental for the development of the region. 

D.  Recognition that  TNPS Rights are Private Rights 

It should be emphasized that, in the current Afiican cultural context, private rights do 
not stem fiom individuals but, in general, fiom the social entity or social group fiom where 
these  individuals derive.30  This is  contradictory to  the  conception of private  rights in 
Western countries 6om where the ideas enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement originate. It is 
obvious  that  divergences  of  the  conception  of  and  respect  for  private  rights,  if  not 
homogenized or harmonised, leaves room for cultural barriers, constituting a serious threat 
to the acceptance and enforcement of such rights. Therefore, recognizing TRPS rights as 
private rights in Afiica will be the starting point of a strong and efilcient protection of such 
rights in  the  coming years  and  decades.  In  addition, such recognition will also  play  a 
fundamental role in Afiica, leading more and more to a robust protection and promotion 
of human rights. It goes without saying that intellectual property rights as private rights are 
also known to be human rights in international conventions, notably as in the Universal 
Declaration  of  Human  Rights  (Article  27(2))  and  the  International  Covenant  on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Article 15(c)). The consequence of all this will be 
the expansion of a new conception of human rights in general (notably TRIPS) in Afiica and 
on the African mentality. From this perspective, recognition of TRIPS will limit the ability 

29  Pierre-Marie  Dupuy, Droit InterMfional Public, fourth edition, Dalloz, 1998, p. 567. 
Jo  For hrther details, see Elangi Botoy, supra, footnote 11, p.  89. 

102 

THE JOURNAL OF WOFUD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

of OAPI countries to get the best from their IP systems, with the exception of the afore- 
mentioned emergency cases, the public policy objectives of their regional systems for IP 
protection, especially in accordance with their developmental and technological objectives. 
Moreover, even if the TRIPS Agreement recognizes a c a ’ s  special needs  and the 
importance of its public policy objectives, measures deriving therefrom will be adopted 
within the boundaries of a strong and efficient protection of private rights. So, contrary to 
the discriminatory situation faced by foreign right holders and investors in several African 
countries in the past, OAPI countries will, in the hture, adopt public measures only within 
the limits of the TRIPS Agreement. For instance, they will inform the right holder of the 
use of h s  patent, and a remuneration will be provided in respect of that use. It must be 
understood by  OAPI Member  countries that  the  ratio  fegir  of the  TRIPS Agreement is 
to achieve a balance  of rights and obligations. It is clear that the TRIPS Agreement offers 
them numerous potential and substantial  benefits, but they are also  called upon to play 
their part by assuming their obligations completely if they wish to reap those benefits. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

In the patent field, the potential and substantial benefits of the TRIPS Agreement to 
the  OAPI countries are  considerable, and  they  would  have  the  capacity to  limit  the 
exclusive rights conferred to the patentee or the right holder with regard to basic and 
emergency needs. In cases of national emergency, they could use disclosed information 
related to patents filed in their region in order to bring about a solution, in particular to 
epidemic cases  such  as  AIDS and Ebola.  In the  international co-operation  field, they 
could request financial and technical assistance from industrialized countries in order to 
develop  their  IP  system  and  to  transform  their  educational system  in  this  regard.31 
Therefore,  they  would  need  qualified and  trained  personnel  as  well  as judicial and 
administrative structures which would function well. The outcome  of all this should 
lead to strong and sufficient protection of private rights in their region. 

It is  obvious that the above-mentioned benefits could not be reaped in a system 
minimizing a strong and efficient protection of private rights; a country or a region gets 
only what it pays  for. To the  extent that the level of intellectual property protection 
influences the industrial base of a country or a region, the characteristics of the industrial 
base  appear to  change in important ways  as  a  country  or a  region shifts from a non- 
robust  system  to higher levels  of protection.32 Therefore,  there is  an  interconnection 
between  the protection  of intellectual property and the development of industry33 as 
well as the promotion of social welfare. 

The OAPI Member countries have realized the importance of IP protection as well as 

31  Id. 
32  Sherwood, supra, footnote 8, p. 506; see also Arai, supra, footnote 24, p. 423. 
33  Werner, supra, footnote 24, p. 421. 

TRIPS, PATENTS AND OAPI 

103 

the  promotion  of IP for the  development of their region. They have  demonstrated a 
political willingness  to  that  end.  That  is  why  their  new  regional Revised Agreement 
mirrors the TRIPS Agreement. It contains provisions dealing with national treatment as 
well as most-favoured-nation treatment. In addition, foreign investors or  nationals may use 
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement where they are more favourable than the provisions of 
the OAPI Revised Agreement.34 In this new ffican IP environment, foreign and national 
investors will find a better instrument of protection of their rights in that region. 

In  the  meantime, OAPI Members do  not  have  the  independent means  for  self- 
development, either technologically or  economically. Once  they are in possession  of 
these  means,  A&ca  will,  little  by  little,  become  in  its  turn  an  industrial-exporting 
continent. Although the benefits of the TRIPS Agreement cannot be reaped immedately, 
OAPI Member countries have less to lose, as they have already offered strong protection 
in their region. But it should be pointed out that this strong protection appears only on 
paper at present, as many OAPI Member countries have  not yet finalized the structures 
imposed  by  the  TRIPS Agreement.  After  this  has  been  done,  the  main  challenge 
which  will  remain for  them  will  be  to  transform  the  TRIPS Agreement  from a  rent 
transfer  mechanism into an  effective instrument for their technological development.35 
This implies adaptation of the African  educational system to the concept that initiated 
the  TRIPS Agreement.  Nevertheless,  this  adaptation  should  not  only  aim  at  the 
“TRIPsanization” of Africa, but  also, and more importantly, at the “fficanization”  of 
the  TRIPS Agreement.  In  this  particular  task,  prior  responsibility  belongs  to  OAPI 
governments and to &can  and foreign experts whose knowledge of the concepts that 
initiated the TRIPS Agreement, as well as  of Afiican underlying cultural or ideological 
barriers,  is  broad, profound  and  complete. Such experts will  strive to  explain  to  the 
Afiican population the advantages and disadvantages  of the two divergent concepts of 
private rights. 

In short, the OAPI Member countries are called upon to welcome and dsseminate 
the TRIPS Agreement over their region. They should realize that their economic and 
technological  development  will  greatly  depend  on  their  understanding  of  the 
implications of the TRIPS Agreement. At the same time, they should use the benefits of 
the TRIPS Agreement for the advancement of OAPI social welfare and, simultaneously 
develop other concurrent and crucial fields of which the paramount concern is also to 
lift up their region from economic, commercial, technological and social disgrace.36 

34  Article 3.2. 
35  Carlos A. Primo Braga, Trade-Related Intellectual Property Issues: 711e Uruguay Round Agreement and Its Economic 
implications, in William Martin and L. Alan Winters (eds.), The Uruguay Round and the Developing Economies, World 
Bank Discussion Paper No. 307, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,  1995. 

36  Intellectual property rights are a highly complex area, involving elements of economics, law, international 
relations, politics and ethics: see UNCTAD, the TRIPS Agreement and Developing Counfries, United Nations, New York 
and Geneva,  1996, p. 13. OAPI countries are called upon to develop the above-mentioned  fields, among others, 
since all countries have nowadays entered into a globalized world. It is obvious that a political environment polluted 
by  discrimination,  Coups  d ’Etut,  never-ending  changes  of  regimes,  dxtatorial  regimes  and  institutionahzed 
corruption exudes  a  dangerous poison  to  investments.  Only  a  democratic  regime  with  controls  and  efficient 
mechanisms constitutes a strong foundation for economic, commercial, social and industrial development. 


