Preserving Originality in Cyberspace 

What China can Learnfrom the  United States and the 

European  Union about Database Protection 

Jiarui LIU* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Although China has long been criticized for her half-hearted  efforts in copyright 
enforcement,’ she is actually one of the few countries that, under international pressures 
and obligations,2 has established a basic, modern, copyright system in an extremely short 
period of time.3 It is undeniable that response to international pressures has increasingly 
become one of the primary motives behind domestic copyright legislation efforts.4 Yet 
Chinese copyright law,5 as well as those of most modern countries is also proposed for 
furthering the other two equally, if not more, important ends. That is: 

-  to recognize and encourage intellectual creations of authors;6 and 

Republic of China; LL.M., University of Washington Law School, Washington. 

* Ph.D.  Candidate,  the  Intellectual Property  Center, China Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, People’s 
The author wishes to acknowledge Professor  Chengsi Zheng for his insightful comments and his seminal 
*  See, e.g.,  Gregory S. Feder, Enforcement  $Intellectual  Property  Rights in  China: You can  lead  a Horse  to  W a t q  
but you can’t make it Drink, 37 Va. J. Int’l L. 223, 1996: discussing the insufficiency of China’s efforts to enforce her 
domestic intellectual property laws and to discharge her international obligations. 

works &om which this article drew most of its inspirations. He may be contacted at: ~~erry_liu75~yahoo.com~~. 

2  For a comprehensive description of China’s recent legislative efforts to bring her intellectual property regime 
in line with the Agreement  on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intelleczual Property Rights (TRIPS) under the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), see Chengsi Zheng,  The Tium Agreement and Intellectual Property  Protection in China, 9 
Duke J. Comp. & Int’l L. 219, 1998. 

3  “[Chinese copyright laws] cover in a little more than a dozen years, a &stance which took other developed 
countries  scores of  years,  even  a  hundred  years,  establishing a  relatively comprehensive  legal system for  the 
protection  of intellectual property rights.”: Rafael A. Declet Jr., Protecting American Intellectual Property in China: The 
Persistent  Problem  $S$ware 

Piracy,  10 N.Y. Int’l L. Rev. 57, 1997, 60. 

Notable, among a long list of counmes that recently revised their copyright laws in compliance with international 

standards, was the United  States. See Peter Jaszi, Caught  in the Net  lf  Copytight, 75 Or. L. Rev. 299, 1996, 306-307: 
“Often in recent years, as I’ve  suggested, we  are told  that we  must  enact this  or  that  piece  of domestic copyright 
legislation, even at the cost of curtailing public access, in order to ‘keep up’ with developing international norms.” 
5  For the policy underpinnings of Chinese copyright law, see the Copyright Law of the People’s Republic of China 
2001, Article 1: “This Law is enacted, in accordance with the Constitution for the purposes ofprotecting the copyright 
of authors in their literary, artistic and sciendfic works and rights and interests related to copyright, of encouraging the 
creation and dissemination ofworks which would contribute to the building of an advanced socialist culture and ideology 
and to socialist m a t e d  development, and of promoting the development and flourishing socialist culture and sciences.” 
6  This perspective, labelled “natural law”, is dominant in continental Europe that follows Locke’s labour theory 
and Hegel’s personhood  theory. See, e.g., Justin  Hughes,  The Philosophy  $Intellectual  Property, 77 Geo.  L.J.  287, 
1988: providing an excellent introduction ofboth Locke and Hegel theories in association with intellectual property; 
Wendy J.  Gordon, A  Property  Right  in  SeFExpression: Equality  and  Individualism  in  the  Natural  Law  $ Intellectual 
Property, 102 Yale LJ.  1533, 1993: providing a focused treatment on the Locke theory in the context ofintellectual 
property; and Neil W. Netanel, Copyright Alienability Restrictions and the Enhancement $Author  Autonomy: A Normative 
Evaluation, 24 Rutgers L.J. 347, 1993: providing a tremendous application of Hegel theory to copyright law. 

594 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

-  to promote  public interest in  the progress and dissemination of science and 

knowledge.7 

The  awareness of these dual purposes of  copyright law  is  particularly crucial in 
cyberspace, where the international community has not yet achieved a final consensus 
on the appropriate level of copyright protection.8 

Taking electronic database protection as a case study, this article discusses whether 
China should start to build a more balanced copyright system in cyberspace to tame new 
technologies into maximizing the welfare not only of individual authors but also of the 
society as a whole. 

Database protection may not be classified as an entirely novel issue in cyberspace. 
Literally spealung, any collection of information is a “data-base”-for 
example, yellow 
pages  and  encyclopedias  which  have  long  been  existing  in  the  printed  f0m.9 
Nonetheless,  digital  technology  has  dramatically  reactivated  and  exaggerated  the 
database concern in at least two aspects. On the one hand, the use of computers makes 
it economically feasible to create highly comprehensive but still user-friendly databases, 
collecting, storing and processing a huge amount of data. On the other hand, it is also 
not hard to imagine that electronic databases are particularly vulnerable to piracy. Once 
they become available on the Internet, several clicks  on the mouse may  turn an end- 
user into a potential competitor. l o  Nonetheless, what brings database protection to the 
front  of  the  digital  copyright agenda  worldwidell  is  not  only  the  bright  economic 
’ This approach, labelled  “utilitarianism”. is  well accepted as the foundation  of Anglo-American copyright 
laws. For example, the admitted fmt copyright statute in history, the “Statute of Ann” in the early 1700s. is titled 
with a clear utilitarian bias: “An Act,for the Encouragement oflearning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the 
Authors or Purchasers  of Such Copies, during the  Times therein  mentioned”.  The U.S. Constitution, Article I, 
Section 8, Clause 8, stipulates that: “The Congress shall have power.. . To promote the Progress ofscience and usejul Arts, 
by  securing for  limited  Times  to  Authors  and  Inventors  the  exclusive  Right  to  their  respective Writings and 
Discoveries.”  (emphases added). As indicated in the legislative history of the U.S.  Copyright Act: “The enactment 
of copyright legislation by Congress under the terms of the Constitution is not based upon any natural right that the 
author has in his writings . . . but upon the ground that the welfare of the public will be served and progress of science 
and useful arts will be promoted ...” (H. Rep. No. 2222, 60th Cong. 2d Sess.). See also the U.S. Supreme Court’s 
interpretations of copyright justification: Sony COT. ofAmerica v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984): holding 
that copyright privilege is a means to achieve a public purpose instead ofprivate benefits; Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201 
(1954): holding that the copyright law makes reward to authors a secondary consideration to the public welfare. 

International  instruments  dealing  with  digital  copyright  issues  are  the  World  Intellectual  Property 
Organization (WIPO) Copyright Treaty, adopted on 20 December 1996 and effective on 6 March 2002.36  I.L.M. 
65; and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, adopted on 20 December 1996 and effective on 20 May 
2002. Instead of imposing high level and detailed obligations, these two Treaties include  only modest provisions 
leaving much  flexibility to the contracting parties.  See generally, Pamela Samuelson, The  U.S. Digital  Agenda at 
WIPO, 37 Va. J. Int’l L.  369,  1997: describing how national delegations rebuffed U.S.  and EU efforts to  instate 
extensive copyright control over digital content. China is not a party to either of the two Treaties. 
Copyright  Protection of Works oflnformation, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 1865, 1990. 
’ 0   For more detailed descriptions of opportunities  and  challenges that  digital technology  brings to database 
industries, see, e.g., J.H. Reichman and Paul F. Uhlir, Database  Protection at  the  Crossroads: Recent Developments  and 
their  Impat  on  Science  and  Technology,  14 Berkeley Tech.  L.J.  793,  1999, 794;  and J.H.  Reichman  and  Pamela 
Samuelson, Intellectual Property  in Data? 50 Vand. L. Rev. 51, 1997, 64-72. 

For a nice treatment of pre-cyberspace  database issues, see Jane C. Ginsberg, Creation and  Commercial  Value: 

11  In 1996, WIPO made a Basic Proposalfor the Substantive  Provision  ofthe  Treaty on Intellectual  Property  in Respect 
ofDatabases to be considered by the Diplomatic  Conference, WIPO Doc.  CRNR/DC/~, 30 August  1996. The 
Conference  did not adopt the proposal, but it decided to continue the work on the issue of database protection 
according to the Recommendah’on Concerning Databases, WIPO Doc. CRNR/DC/~OO, 23 December 1996. 

8 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY  IN  CYBERSPACE 

595 

prospects and exacerbated vulnerability of database industries in cyberspace, but also the 
potential effects of expansive database protection on the public interest in the free flow 
of information. 

Section 11 will briefly survey the database protection regimes in the United States 
and the European Union, which lays the ground for a further comparative analysis of 
their  Chinese counterpart. Section III  will trace the  history of database  protection  in 
China, with particular emphasis on the recent trend of applying unfair competition law 
to protect uncopyrightable databases. Based on the successful experiences of the United 
States and the European Union, Section IV will articulate constitutional and economic 
implications  of  originality  and  propose  how  China  might  preserve  orignality  in 
cyberspace to  strike the  delicate balance between providing incentives to intellectual 
creation and safeguarding the public domain. Section v will conclude the main points 
of the article and try to invoke some further policy considerations. Although these are 
beyond  the  scope of this  article, they require  even  more  serious attention  from the 
Chinese copyright profession. 

11.  A COMPARATIVE STUDY  OF DATABASE PROTECTION: THE UNITED  STATES  AND 

THE EUROPEAN UNION 

A.  DATABASE PROTECTION  IN THE UNITED STATES v. UNFAIR COMPETITION 

In  the  United  States,  copyright  law  is  the  traditional  mechanism  for  database 
protection.  The Copyright Act  of 1976 provided that  copyright only covers ‘‘original 
works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression.” (emphasis added).12 
Most  databases  may  be  protected  as  compilations, which  were  defined as  “a  work 
formed by  the  collection and  assembling of pre-existing  materials or of data  that  are 
selected, co-ordinated  or arranged in  such a way  that  the  resulting work  as  a  whole 
constitutes  an  original  work  of  authorship.”  (emphasis  added).13  Accordingly,  the 
originality requirement becomes crucial in limiting the scope of copyright protection 
available to databases. 

Surprisingly, such a key term as “originality” was left undefined in the U.S. copyright 
law. The most authoritative interpretation of originality arose &om the Supreme Court 
in the Feist case.14 In Feist, the plaintiff, a local telephone company, annually published a 
telephone  &rectory  as  requested by  state  law.  AU  the  information  in  the  telephone 
directory was collected by  the plaintiff directly fiom all the subscribers of its telephone 
services and  listed  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  names  and  addresses,  etc.15  The 
defendant initially applied to the plaintiff for the licence to use  the plaintiffs telephone 
directory. After being rejected, the defendant, without authorization, copied a substantial 

12  See the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976,17 U.S.C. $102. 
13  See ibid., 5 101. 
l4  See Feist hblications,  Im. v. Rural  Telephone Service Company, Inc., 499 U.S. 340 (1990) 
‘5  Ibid.. at 344. 

596 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

part ofthe plaintiffs telephone &rectory for its own publication. In response, the plaintiff 
brought an action against the defendant for copyright inhngement.16 

The Supreme  Court held  that  the contents  of the plaintiffs  telephone  directory 
were  uncopyrightable,  despite its substantial labour  and investment  in the  creation of 
the directory.’’  The Court reasoned that, as  a constitutional prerequisite  for copyright 
protection,  an  original  work  must  constitute  “independent  creation”  and  bear  a 
“modicum of creativity”.l8 Accordingly, in order to render  a database original enough 
for copyright protection, its selection and arrangement must be made independently and 
involve  a  minium  degree of creativity. Applying  such an originality  requirement,  the 
Court held that, because all the  information  in the plaintiffs  telephone  directory was 
selected and arranged in a very “obvious” and actually “inevitable” way, there was lack 
of originality and thus did not qualify for copyright protection.19 

To  sum up, the  dominant  view  in the  United  States is  that  copyright law  only 
protects  an  original  database  whose  selection  and  arrangement  reflect  its  author’s 
minimum creativity, regardless of the labour or investment involved. 

Although copyright protection was not available to unoriginal databases, they used to 
have some protection in the early twentieth century under unfair-competition principles. 
In the landmark INS case,20 the U.S. Supreme Court announced a quasi-property right in 
the  dwemination  of uncopyrightable news reports by  creating a new branch  of unfair- 
In  INS, the  defendant,  a  news  agency  competing 
competition  law-misappropriation. 
with the plaintiff, literally copied and retransmitted the plaintiffs news reports without the 
consent of the latter. The Court held that, although news reports lacked the  originahty 
necessary for copyright protection, the defendant’s actions constituted unfair competition 
by appropriating the plantiffs labour and investment in collecting news. 

However, this quasi-property  right in unoriginal databases appears to be no longer 
acceptable to modern courts.  First of all, the broad holding of misappropriation  law in 
INS was  severely  narrowed  to  its  unique  facts,  and  has  been  sparingly  applied  by 
subsequent courts over the years.2’  In most recent  cases, courts squarely held that broad 
misappropriation  claims were  “pre-empted”  by federal copyright law.22 The so-called 
“pre-emption”  means that  all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent  to any of the 

‘ 6   Ibid., at 345. 
17  Ibid., at 346-348. 
‘8  Ibid.,  at 347. 
Iy  Ibid., at 362-363. 
2”  See irrfernational News Service v. Associated Press,  (INS), 248 US. 215 (1918). 
2’  See  Restatement  (Third)  of  Unfair  Competition  Section  38,  Comment  C.:  discussing  the  negative 
treatments  of subsequent  courts  towards  the  INS case  and  why  the  Restatement did  not  incorporate  the  INS 
misappropriation doctrine as common-law  unfair competition. 

22  See, e.g., National  Basketball  Association v. Motorola  Inc.  (NBA), 105 F.  3d 841 (2d Cir. 1997): holding that 
federal copyright law pre-empted  the plaintiffs state misappropriation claim over the defendant’s provision of red- 
tmie  information  about  professional  basketball  games; and  Financial  Infmation Service,  Inc.  v.  Moody’s  Investors 
Service, Inc. (Financial Information), 808 F. 2d 204 (2d Cir. 1986); holding that the financial report publisher’s state 
misappropriation claim was pre-empted  by federal copyright law. 

PRESERVING  ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

597 

exclusive rights within the  general scope of copyright in works of authorship will be 
exclusively governed by the copyright regime.23 Therefore, copyright law largely pre- 
empts any equivalent common-law  claims,  including those under  unfair-competition 
principles. For instance, in the well-known case of N B A  v. Motorola, the Court held that 
when the instant information about a basketball game could not be copyrightable as an 
original work, its misappropriation claim under unfair-competition principles could not 
prevail either because of the copyright pre-emption.24 

Moreover,  Restatement  (Third) of Unfair  Competition also  expressly rejected 
misappropriation as a separate common-law  unfair-competition  cause of action.25 It 
stated that the INS decision “had little enduring effect” and “no general rule of law 
prohibit[ed] 
the  appropriation  of  a  competitor’s  ideas,  innovation,  or  other 
intangible  assets  once  they  become  publicly  kn0wn.”~6 This  position  further 
indicated  that  the  majority  of  American  courts  would  leave  unoriginal  databases 
basically  unprotectable  in  any  legal  regime  and  therefore  preserve  them  for  the 
general public. 

B.  DATABASE PROTECTION IN THE EUROPEAN UNION:  COPYRIGHT AND  SUI  GENERIS 

PROTECTION 

The most important legal source of database protection in the European Union is 
the 1996 Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases.27 The EU Database Directive 
provides two separate legal mechanisms for database protection: first, original databases 
will  enjoy  conventional copyright protection;  second,  the  unoriginal  databases  may 
enjoy sui generis protection, which is subject to stricter limitations and shorter duration 
than copyright protection. 

In  accordance with  the  Directive, databases  that,  by  reason  of the  selection or 
arrangement of their contents, constitute the author’s own “intellectual creation” shall 
be protected as such by copyright.** In another paragraph, the Directive provides a plain 
explanation for the term  “intellectual creation”: “no criterion other than originality in 
the  sense  of  the  author’s  intellectual  creation  should  be  applied  to  determine  the 
eligibility of the  database  for  copyright protection,  and  in  particular no  aesthetic or 
qualitative criteria  should  be  applied;”  (emphasis added).29 Accordingly, in  order  to 
qualify for copyright protection, a  database  must satisfjr  the originality requirement as 
the threshold for “intellectual creation”. 

23  See 17 U.S.C. § 301. 
24  See the NBA case, supra, footnote 22. 
25  See Restatement (Third), supra, footnote 21, Section 38, Comment B. 
26  Id. 
27  See Directive  96/9/EC  of the European  Parliament and of the Council of 11 March  1996 on the Legal 

Protection of Databases. 

ZR  See ibid., Article 3. 
29  See ibid., Preamble, Paragraph 16. 

598 

THE  

Under copyright protection, the author of a database will enjoy the exclusive right 

to carry out or authorize: 

- 
- 
- 
- 

temporary or permanent  reproduction by any means and in any form; 
translation, adaptation,  arrangement and any other alterations; 
any form of distribution to the public of the database or of copies thereof; and 
any communication, display or performance to the public.30 

These exclusive rights in copyrighted databases will basically last the whole life of 

the author plus seventy years.31 

The most significant characteristic of the E U  Database Directive is that it provides 
a  unique  type  of  sui  generis  protection  for  unoriginal  databases.  While  sui  generis 
protection  requires  no originality  or creativity  in databases, it  is  available to database 
owners who make substantial investment in “the obtaining, verification or presentation 
of the contents . . . of that databa~e.”3~ 
In other words, “substantial investment”, instead 
of originality, is the trigger of sui generix protection. 

In  contrast  with  the four exclusive rights under the  copyright law,  a rightholder 

under the sui generis protection  enjoys only two exclusive rights: 

-  extraction right-the 

right to prevent the permanent or temporary transfer of 
all or a substantial part of the contents of a database to another medium by any 
means or in any form; and 

- 

re-utilization  right-the 
right to prevent any form of making available to the 
public  all or a substantial part of the contents  of a database by distribution  of 
copies, by renting, or by on-line  or other forms of transmission.33 

These two rights will only last for fifeen years upon the completion of the database.34 

111.  THE EBB AND FLOW OF  ORIGINALITY: DATABASE PROTECTION 

IN CHINA 

Database protection  in China has an interesting history  of continuous expansion. 
China  had  previously  made  a U-turn  in  her  copyright  law,  from  merely  protecting 
compilations  of pre-existing  works  to  the  covering  of  almost  all  databases  having 
original selection or arrangement. Most remarkably, there is a recent trend in Chinese 
judiciary  that  general  principles  of unfair  competition  law-such 
as  “honesty”  and 
“fairness”-might 

be used to protect even unoriginal and uncopyrightable databases. 

111  See ibid., Article 5. 
3’  See Council Directive 93/98/EEc of 29 October 1993, Harmonising the Term of Protection of Copyright 

_ .  - 

and  Certain Related Rights, Article 1. 

32  See the EU Database Directive, Article 7. 
.’3  Id. 
34  See ibid.. Article 10. 

PRESERVING  ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

599 

A.  TRADITIONAL 

COPYRIGHT PROTECTION 

Under  the Chinese Copyright Law  of 1990, only a limited number  of databases 
were eligible for copyright protection as  “compilation”.35 “Compilation” was defined 
as the “creation of a work by assembling a number of selected pve-existing works, in whole 
or in parts,  according to  an arrangement designed for  a  specific purpose.”  (emphasis 
added).3h  By  definition,  databases  such  as  directories  and  catalogues,  which  only 
comprised uncopyrightable data and raw facts, fell outside the scope of compilation, no 
matter  how  creative the  collection or  arrangement  of such databases  could be.  This 
narrow protection  seemed to be  a faithful following of the Berne Convention,37 but 
directly at odds with the U.S. position,38and arguably those ofmost of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) Member countries. The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS) explicitly rebutted the Berne Convention on the 
copyrightable scope of compilation by stipulating that: 

“Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other form, which 
by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute intellectual creations 
shall be protected as such . . .”.39 
However,  China’s  position  on  compilation  was  slackened  long  before  China 
revised her intellectual property laws into compliance with TRIPS as part of her effort 
for entry into the WTO. When China enacted a new regulation to implement a bilateral 
treaty  between  China  and  the  United  States on  intellectual property  protection  in 
with  TRIPS standard 
1992,40  she  endowed  foreign-and 
protection  covering  compilations  both  of  individually  copyrightable  works  and  of 
uncopyrightable  data  and facts.41 To put  it another way,  foreign authors could enjoy 
certain  super-national 
to  copyright  under 
“compilation”. In 2001, China finally put an end to such embarrassment by extendmg 
full compilation protection to both national and international authors.42 

in  China  with  respect 

only  foreign-authors 

treatment 

35  See the Chinese Copyright Law of 1990, Article 14: “Copyright in compilation is enjoyed by the compiler, 
provided that the exercise of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright of the pre-existing works included 
in the compilation.” 

36  See the Chinese Copyright Regulation of 1991, Article 5. 
” See the Beme Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Paris Text 1971), Article 2:5: 
“Collections of literary or artistic works such as  encyclopedias and anthologies which, by reason of the selection 
and arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations shall be protected as such, without prejudice to 
the copyright in each of the works forming part of such collections.” 

38  See supra, text at footnote 13. 
39  See TRIPS, Article 10:2. 
40  Scc the Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government of the United States of America and the 
Government  of the  People’s  Republic  of  China on the  Protection  of  Intellectual Property,  17 January  1992, 
34 I.L.M. 676, 1992, Article 3. 

41  See the Implementing Regulations of International Copyright Treaties of 1992, Article 8: “Foreign works 
that are a compilation of unprotected material but that are original in the terms of the selection or arrangement of 
the material shall be protected under Article 14 of the Copyright Law.” 

42  See the Chinese Copyright  Law of 2001, Article 14: “Works that are created by  assembling a number of 
works, in whole  or in parts, or data or other materials  not constituting works  and that  are original in t e r n  of 
selection and arrangement are compilation in which the compiler enjoys copyright, provided that the excise of such 
copyright shall not prejudice the copyright of the pre-existing works included in the compilation.” 

600 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Even so, it is still a half-truth to say that all databases wdl enjoy copyright protection 
in  China.  Like  the  United  States43  and  the  European  Union,44  China  imposes  an 
orignality  requirement  on  the  copyrightability  of  databases.45  Although  originality 
seems to be the essence of copyright, this term remains undefined in Chinese copyright 
laws. Literally interpreted, originality must mean that the work  owes its origin to the 
author  and  is  not  a  copy  from  another.  Then,  the  immediate  question is  whether 
Chinese laws impute any creativity requirement into originality as the US. Supreme 
Court did in Feist.46  If so, a significant number of valuable and costly databases, such as 
yellow  pages,  shopping  lists  and  financial  statistics,  will  be  deprived  of  copyright 
protection,  since  they  are  basically  selected  and  arranged  by  some  standardized or 
routine means. 

Absent  any direct guideline, many  parts  of Chinese copyright laws  nevertheless 
imply such a creativity requirement. For example, the Implementing Regulations of the 
Copyright Law  defined  “creation” as  intellectual activities directly resulting from the 
works, and ruled out labours merely comprising co-ordination, general consultation or 
material support from the scope of  r re at ion".^^ This position could be interpreted as a 
direct rejection of the “sweat-of-the-brow’’  doctrine.48 Moreover, Chinese copyright 
laws explicitly exclude current events and news from their coverage.49  This might be 
another indicator that pure facts are not protectable in the Chinese copyright regime. 
Most  Chinese  courts  appear  to  also  endorse  that  original works  of  authorship 
dictate a modicum of creativity. In a classic originality case, the plaintiff was the author 
ofa well-known children’s song entitled “Wahaha”, which was created in the 1950s and 
immediately became one of the  Chinese people’s all-time  favourites. The defendant, 
without  the  plaintiffs  authorization, registered and  used  the  phrase  “Wahaha” as  its 
trademark  for  food  and  beverage  products.  Hence,  the  defendant  was  accused  of 
infnnging the plaintiffs copyright in the title “Wahaha”. Despite the famousness of the 
disputed song, the Court finally held the phrase “Wahaha” per se uncopyrightable and 
acquitted the  defendant of any  copyright infringement. It  reasoned that  such a  short 
phrase  was  too trivial and banal to bear any characteristic of the author’s own mind50 
and therefore was not recognizable as the author’s own intellectual creation. This case 

43  17 U.S.C. §  102: “Copyright protection  subsists . . . in original works of authorship  . . .”. 
44  See the EU Database Directive, Preamble, Paragraph 16; see text supra, footnote 29. 
45  See  the  Implementing  Regulations  of  the  Copyright  Law,  Article  2:  “The  term  ‘works’ used  in  the 

Copyright Law refers to original intellectual creations in the literary, artistic and scientific domain . . .” 
are not eligible for copyright protection. 

46  See Feist, supra, footnote 14: holding that alphabetized telephone directory white pages lack originality and 

47  See the Implementing Regulations  of The Copyright Law, Article 3: “The term ‘creation’ mentioned  in 
the  Copyright Law  refers  to intellectual activities from  which  literary, artistic  and scientific works  result.  The 
making of arrangement and the provision of consultation, material means or supportive service, done for others in 
the creating activities, shall not be deemed as acts of creating.” 

48  The “sweat-of-the-brow”  doctrine refers to the argument that mere labour or investment can give rise to 

copyrighted works. For a thorough criticism of the doctrine see Feist, supra, footnote 14, at 345. 

49  See the Chinese Copyright Law of 2001, Article 5. 
5”  See  Cuo Shfi  v. HangZhou  Wahaha Ltd., Shanghai 2d Intermediate People’s Court (Hu Er Zhuo Chu Zi 

No.  15,  1998).  Its  facts  and  holdings  are  available  at:  ~http://~~~.chinaiprlaw.com/wsjx/w~jxdi5.htm~~. 
“Wahaha” means kids’ laughter in Chinese. 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

60 1 

may  remind us  of a vast  number of U.S.  decisions in which copyright was denied for 
lack of originality to fragmentary words and slogans.51 

B.  THE TREND O F  UNFAIR-COMPETITION  PROTECTION  IN CYBERSPACE 

However, a highly controversial case concerning a  dispute over television guides 
subtly unsettled the originality issue, and later on proved to be the trigger of change in 
the landscape of electronic database protection in cyberspace.52 In this case, the plaintiff 
obtained  licences  from  several  national  and  local  television  stations  to  print  their 
television  guides  in  exchange  for  a  certain  sum  for  licence  fees.53  The  defendant, 
without  authorization from the plaintiff, copied and reprinted these guides from the 
plaintiffs  newspaper.54  On the  one  hand,  the  Court  admitted that  television guides 
lacked  the  necessary  originality for  copyright protection.55 On the  other,  the  Court 
opined  that,  since  television  stations  devoted  a  substantial  amount  of  labour  and 
investment in creating television guides, they deserved certain rights in the fruits of their 
labour.56 The plainti$  by  the means of licences from television stations, became  the 
successor to television stations’ rights in television guides.57 Finally, the Court bypassed 
copyright law  and  applied  directly  some  general principles of  civil law  to  hold  the 
defendant  liable  for  infilnging  the  plaintiffs  rights  in  television  guides.58  This  case 
immediately attracted a storm of academic criticism, focusing on the fact that it unduly 
stepped outside the boundary of orignality without squarely defining what new rights 
it created under unfair-competition  ~rinciples.5~ 

Nevertheless, two subsequent courts deahng with electronic databases concurrently 
followed the above television guide case and furthered the trend of expansive protection 
of unoriginal databases,  probably  out of special appreciation and sympathy for high- 
technology industries. In the first case, the plaintiff was licensed by more than a dozen 
stock  and  commodity  exchanges to  collect  and  retransmit  their  real-time  financial 
inforrnation.60  These collected segments of information would be sorted and formatted 
by  a  special  data-analysing  software  designed  by  the  plaintiff and  finally  would  be 

51  See, e.g., Alberto-Culver  C o .  v. Andrea Dumon, Inc.,  466 F. 2d 705 (7th Cir. 1972): holding that the phrase 
“most personal sort of deodorant” is not copyrightable; Magic Marketing u. Mailing Services of Pittsburgh,  634 F.  Supp. 
769 (W.D.Pa.  1986): holding that short phrases “Telegram”, “Gift Check” and “Priority Message” do not exhibit 
a sufficient degree of creativity to be copyrightable. 

52 See  Guangxin  Broadcasting and  Television Post  u.  Guangxin Coal Miners Post, Liuzhou Intermediate People’s 

Court (1994). Its facts and holdings are available at: cchttp://www.civiUaw.com.cn/typical/case-6.asp~~. 

53  Id. 
54  Id. 
55  Id. 
56  Id. 
57  Id. 
58  Id. The main applicable law of this case is the General Principles of Civil Law of the People’s Republic of 
China, Article 4: “In civil activities, the principles of voluntariness, fairness, making compensation for equal value, 
honesty and credibility shall be observed.” 

59  See Chengsi  Zheng,  Intellectual  Property  Enforcement  in  China:  Leading  Cases and  Commentaries,  Sweet & 

Maxwell, London, 1997, at 17-33. 

6”  See Beijing  Sunshine Data Co. u.  Shanghai  Bacai  Data and Infoormation Co., Beijing High People’s Court (Gao 

Zhi Zhong Zi No. 66, 1997). Its facts and holdings are available at: c~http://www.civillaw.com.cn/research)). 

602 

THE  

transmitted to the plaintiffs clients via a satellite broadcasting system as an information 
service called  “SIC Simultaneous Finance”.61 The plaintiff and the  defendant entered 
into  a  contract  that  permitted  the  defendant  to  use  the  “SIC Simultaneous Finance” 
formatting software for the purpose of developing a new  data-analysing software, but 
prohibited him from using the s o h a r e  for any other purpose, in particular for decoding 
and  retransmitting  the  plaintiffs  “SIC  Simultaneous  Finance”.62 Before  long,  the 
plaintiff  discovered  that  the  defendant  engaged  in  unauthorized  retransmissions  of 
“SIC Simultaneous Finance”, so  brought  it  into  an  action.63 This could have  been  a 
rather  straightforward breach-of-contract  case.  But,  for  some  unknown  reason,  the 
plaintiff elected copyright inhngement and general tort as causes of action. In the first 
place,  the  Court  rejected  the  copyright  claim  by  pointing  out  that,  although  “SIC 
Simultaneous  Finance”  could  be  deemed  as  an  electronic  database  of  financial 
information, its selection or arrangement was too mechanical to meet the threshold of 
originality for copyright protection.64 

The  Court  then  made  an  extraordinary endeavour  to  work  on  the  plaintiffs 
general tort claim. The Court recognized that the plaintiff undertook certain investment 
risks  by  devoting  sizeable  financial  resources  to  create  the  electronic  database; 
meanwhile, the plaintiff realized its investment return by the means of selling this time- 
sensitive information to the public. As a result, the plaintiff should enjoy legal protection 
of its  legitimate investment and  interest  in  the  electronic database.65  The  defendant, 
without the authorization of the plaintiff, retransmitted “SIC Simultaneous Finance” for 
commercial purposes. This activity went against the principles of honesty and credibility 
and  business  ethics in the market-place,  and therefore constituted unfair  competition 
actionable under Chinese Anti-Unfair  Competition Law.66 

In the second case  concerning electronic databases, the  Court went  even a step 
further  by  holding  that  merely  hyper-linking,  instead  of  copying,  another’s 
uncopyrightable electronic database constituted  an  act of unfair  competition.67 The 
disputed subject-matter of this case was a foreign exchange fluctuation Chart (posted 
on the plaintiffs  Website  to which  the  public had  free  access. The plaintiff alleged 
that  the  defendant  should  be  liable  for  its  Website  providing  a  direct  link  to  the 
Chart, bypassing the plaintiffs  home page. The defendant argued that the Chart did 
not  exhibit  sufficient  originality  for  copyright  protection  as  it  was  automatically 
generated  by  a  specially  designed  software  processing  real-time  foreign  exchange 

6’ 

Id 

h4  Id. 
65  Id. 

See Anti-Unfair  Competition Law  of the People’s Republic of China, Article  2: “An operator shall, in 
transactions in  the  market,  follow the  principle  of voluntariness,  equality, fairness,  honesty  and  credibility, and 
observe generally recognized business ethics.” 

67  See Beijing Finance  City Nefwork Ltd. u. Chengdu Caizi Software Ltd., Beijing 2d Intermediate People’s Court 
(Er Zhong Zhi Chu Zi No.  122, 2000). Its  facts and holdings  are available at:  cchttp://www.bjgfgov.cn/spws/ 
list.asp?id=21~. 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY  IN CYBERSPACE 

603 

information  &om the  China  Construction Bank. The Court stated that,  despite the 
fact  that  the  defendant  was  correct  on  the  originality  of  the  Chart,  the  denial of 
copyright protection had no bearing on this case’s favourable outcome to the plaintiff. 
It started the reasoning with characterizing “Internet economy” as a type of “eyeball- 
catching economy”, in which a dotcom company’s success by and large depended on 
the  eye traffic to its Website.68 Hyper-linking,  especially deep-linking, would  divert 
the eye traffic from the original Website, and therefore cause it economic losses.69 In 
addition, commercial Website operators must invest substantial money and labour to 
survive  in  the  highly  competitive  market  among  dotcom  companies.  Unlimited 
hyper-linking of another’s Websites was not only unfair to original Website operators 
and against business ethics, but  also  detrimental to  the  development  of the  Internet 
industry  as  a  whole.70  Consequently,  the  defendant’s  unauthorized  hyper-linking 
constituted  an  unfair-competition  act  actionable  under  the  Chinese  Anti-Unfair 
Competition Law.71 

IV.  PROPOSALS FOR DATABASE PROTECTION 

IN CYBERSPACE 

Based  on  the  comparative  study  of  the  above  three  jurisdictions,  this  article 

proposes that China should: 

A. 

B. 

insist on tbe originality requirement for copyright protection of databases in 
cyberspace; and 
reverse the recent trend of manipulating general unfair competition principles 
to  protect  unoriginal databases,  rather than  creating well-defined  sui generis 
rights in legislation. 

The following discussions wdl further explore these two points. 

A.  THE SIGNIFICANCE O F  ORIGINALITY 

A  considerable part  of the Chinese legal  literature applauded the  above database 
cases that directly applied general legal principles such as honesty, fairness and business 
ethics.72 It was argued that, although Chinese copyright laws did not explicitly include 
television guides or electronic databases as eligible subject-matter, this should not render 
courts  impotent;  instead,  courts  should  creatively  interpret  and  apply  catch-all 

hX  Id. 
69 Id. 
70  Id. 
71  Id. 
72  See, e.g., Liang Huixing, Legal Protection of Television  Guide and  Interests  Balancing, advocating using general 
principles  of  civil  law  to  protect  composers  of  television  guides,  available  at:  c(http://m.civiIlaw.corn.cn/ 
research)); Li Haijiang, Behaviour Rules with Respect to  Unaair Competition in Network  Economy, arguing that the use of 
general  principles  of  anti-unfair  competition  is  a  significant  advance  of  Chinese  courts,  available  at: 
c~http://www.hd315.gov.cn/jingjian/luntan/luntan-main-l.htm~~; 
and Xu Yanbing, Legal Issues Concerning Linking, 
discussing the potential legal liabilities of hyper-linking,  available at: cchttp://m.netlawcn.com/xyb/OOOl 
.htm)). 

604 

THE  

provisions  in  the  Chinese Anti-Unfair  Competition  Law73  to  resolve  these  flaws  in 
Chinese copyright laws.74 

The assumption of the above academic argument and, probably, of the three cases 
discussed  above, is  that  failure to  cover certain subject-matters is an inherent  flaw  in 
Chinese copyright laws.’5  However,  a second  thought  on this issue  may  lead to  an 
entirely different conclusion: that such a  “failure” is not  negligence but a deliberation 
of legislators. In other words, television guides or electronic databases falling outside the 
scope of copyright law is not because legislators had no conception about these subject- 
matters at the  time  of legislation, but  because  they intentionally left  certain kinds of 
works unprotected and freely accessible to the public. Such a legslative intent could be 
easily  inferred  from  the  explicit  imposition  of  the  originality  requirement  to  all 
copyrightable works.76 

One may  argue  that  the  originality requirement per  se  may  be  a  slip-up  of the 
legislators of the Copyright Law. Why should we need such a cumbersome requirement 
to  block  enormously valuable  and  costly  databases  from legal  protection?  It  appears 
extremely unjust to allow the appropriating of the fruits of another’s labour.77 Likewise, 
the courts in the three cases seemingly shared the sentiment that one should be entitled 
to  the  full  return  of  one’s  labour  and  investment.78 As  mentioned  above,  a  similar 
impulse of restitution had also been strongly felt by the U.S. Supreme Court, which in 
the  INS  case79  attempted  to  protect  uncopyrightable  news  reports  under  unfair- 
competition  principles.  However,  it  turned  out  that  subsequent  courts  and  the 
Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition never literally followed this approach.*” 

The underlying concern of the  originality requirement is  substantive rather than 
procedural. Although the argument that one should not “reap where another has sown” 
sounds entirely valid,Rl it is by no means a universal truth, at least in a legal sense. For 
example, a small shop may freely benefit tiom the traffic attracted by a huge department 
store in the neighbourhood, and a newspaper may gain better sales by reporting popular 
athletic events.R2 Such a “reap/sown” theory could be even more fallacious in the arena 

73  See the Chinese Anti-Unfair Competition Law, Article 2 
74 See Liang Huixing,  supra, footnote 72. 
75  Id. 
7 h   See Feist, supra, footnote 14, stating that the originality requirement  is mandated by the US. Constitution 
77  Sec William W.  Fisher,  111,  Reconstructing the  Fair-Use Doctrine,  101 Haw. L. Rev. 1659, 1988, 1688-1689: 
“authors and inventors deserve a reward for their labour and should be given it regardless of whether they would 
continue their work in the absence of such compensation.” 

to “promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts”. 

7*  Wendy J. Gordon, On Owning Infurnation: Intellecfual Property arid  tke Restitutionmy  Impulse, 78 Va. L. Rev. 
149, 1992,166-170: arguing that the common-law  trend of expanding intellectual property was partially driven by 
an intuition of fairness that one should not “reap where another has sown”. 
7y  See INS, supra,  footnote 20: holding  that  “expenditure of labor, skill  and  money  _ _ _   must be  regarded as 
quasi-property” and that “a  court of equity ought not to hesitate long in characterizing it as unfair fair competition” 
if one “reap($ where it has not sown”. 

8”  See supra, footnotes  18 to 24 and accompanying text. 
8’  See Gordon, supra, footnote 78, at  146. 

See Restatement (Third), supra, footnote 21, Section 38, Comment B. 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

605 

of  intellectual  property.  Taking  patents  as  an  example,  patent  law  protects  only 
inventions with novelty, non-obviousness and utility.83 Therefore, inventions that are 
only  repetition  or obvious  variations  of  prior  arts,  once  published,  will  be  freely 
accessible to the public, no matter how  much time or money was  expended.84 The 
economic underpinning of patent as  well as  other intellectual property rights is  that 
information, in contrast to tangible property, has more characteristics ofpublic goods- 
usually described as “non-excludable”  and  “inexhaustible”.85 It is  non-excludable in 
that, once information is published, it will physically be difficult to exclude others from 
using it.  It is inexhaustible in that  one person’s use  of information will  not naturally 
diminish  another’s use  of  the  same.  Accordingly, without  certain  legal  protection, 
inventors and authors would tend to under-produce, because “non-excludable” free- 
riders would mean that they would be unable to recoup their expenditures on research 
and development and authorship; with too much legal protection, the general public 
would, however,  have very limited access to  valuable information, which otherwise 
might  have  my  realized  its  potential  of  “inexhaustible”  accessibility.  As  a  legal 
mechanism  to  rescue  this productionlaccess ddemma,  intellectual property  law  is 
designed to strike the delicate balance between rewarding the hard work of creators and 
preserving the  public  domain in  which  the  public  can  Geely  draw  knowledge  and 
idormation.86 

As  many commentators indicate, the public domain is of vital significance in both 
constitutional and economic dimensions. First of all, the public domain is essential for 
free speech.87 Citizens in a democratic society should be well informed of facts and ideas 
to participate in social dialogue and political &scourse.88 Establishing excessive property 
rights in information and ideas is tantamount to establishing a private censorship over 
speech.89 Second, the public domain is an indispensable element in the Chinese current 

83  See the Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China, Article 22; for relevant sections in the U.S. Patent 

Act, see 35 U.S.C.A.  § 101-103. 

Restatement (Thud),  supra, footnote 21, Sections 39-45. 

84  One twist here is that, ifthe information is not published, it may enjoy some protection as trade secret: see 
85  For an excellent treatment of economic theories in connection with intellectual property, see James Boyle, 
A  7keory o f h  and Infonation: Copyright, Spleens, Blackmail, and  Insider  Trading, 80 Calif.  L.  Rev.  1413, 1992, 
14431457. 
86  Some authors  repprd  the  public  domain as an aggregation of individual  user  rights  that  are  at  least  as 
important as authors’ exclusive righa. See generally  L.  Ray Patterson  and  Stanley W.  Lindberg,  n t e  Nature  of 
Coppiiht: A Lmv of Usen’ Rights, University of Georgia Press, Athens, 1991. 
R7 See the Constitution of the People’s Republic of China, Article 35: “Citizens of the People’s Republic of 
China enjoy fieedom of speech, of press . . .”. For a recent comprehensive discussion of the relationship between 
copyright and the First Amendment of the U.S.  Constitution, see Yochai Benkler, Free  as the Air to  Common Use: 
First Amendment Comtrainfi on Endosurr ofthe Public Domain, 74 N.Y.U.  L.  Rev. 354,  1999. 
88 See, e.g.,  Neil W. Netanel, Copyright and a Democratic Civil Soriety,  106 Yale LJ.  283,  1996: justifying thc 
copyright system as a legal institution to enhance the democratic nature of a civil society. See Niva Elkin-Koren, 
Cyberiaw and S o d  Change: A Demonatic Approach to Copyright Law in  Cyberspace, 14 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 215, 
1996 arguing that copyright law should fully realize the Internet’s potential to decentralize social dialogue. 
89  See Wendy J. Gordon, Towards ~1 Jurisprudence of Benejits:  The Norms of Copyright and  the Problem of Private 
Censorship, 57  U. Chi. L.  Rev. 109, 1990, 110. For two recent Internet-related  cases that attracted a great amount 
of criticism for quashing kee speech, see Religious  Tech. Ctr. v. Netcom  On-Line Communication Sews., Inc., 923 F. 
Supp. 1231 (N.D.  Cal. 1995): imposing a preliminary injunction  on the on-line access-provider  for users’ posting 
scientologist articles on BBS; and Los Angeles  Times v. Free Republic, 2000 56 U.S.P.Q.2d 1862 (C.D. Cal. 2000): 
holding that the defendants are permanently enjoined fiom posting news stones on the on-line political forum. 

606 

THE  

education  system.90 As  Professor Kaplan has  indicated:  “Education,  after all,  proceeds 
from  a  kind  of mimicry,  and  ‘progress’, if  it  is  not  entirely  an  illusion,  depends  on 
generous indulgence of copying.”g* Allowing private enclosure of information and ideas 
previously in the public domain will unduly increase education costs and severely upset 
the financial sustainability of the education system.92 

From an economic perspective,  over-protection  of information may even serve as 
a  disincentive  to  intellectual  creation,  contrary  to  the  original  intentions  of “unfair- 
competition”  proponents.  A  romantic  notion  of authorship  characterizes intellectual 
creation  as  “craft[ing] out of thin  air”:93 authors  create  something from  nothing  and 
works  exclusively  owe  their  origins  to  their  respective  authors.  However,  such  a 
charming notion is largely dlusory in reality, because all processes of authorship are more 
or less incremental and cumulative, and may be properly described as transformative uses 
of pre-existing knowledge and material~~4 
Ideas and facts are basic building blocks from 
which  all  generations  of  authors  can  draw  to  produce  diverse  works.  If  an  overly 
expanded  property  regime  removes  these  raw  materials  from  the  public  domain, 
second-comers  would be forced to repetitively  conduct  the basic research and collect 
the factual data all from scratch.95 This would not only be a huge waste of scarce material 
and  intellectual  recourses,  but  also  generate  anti-competitive  effects  in  the  market- 
place.96 The anti-competitive  danger of over-protection  may be even more imminent 
in  database  industries,  which  are  notorious  for  sole-source  problems.Y7 Many  data 
sources, such as television stations and stock exchanges, hold defucto dominant positions 
on the  generation  of certain  information  products.  Expanded  protection  on facts and 
information may reinforce their natural monopolies by vesting them with further legal 
vetoes to any second-comer in the market-place.98 As a very interesting illustration here, 
in  a  European  case99 with  almost  identical  fact-patterns  to  those  of  the  Chinese 

China have the duty as well as the right to receive education.” 

90  See the Constitution of the People’s Republic of China, Article 46: “Citizens of the People’s Kepublic of 
y1  See Benjamin Kaplan, A n  Unhurried  View of Copyright 2, Columbia University Press, New York, 1966. 
92  See Reichman and  Samuelson, supra, footnote  10, at  131: discussing that  a suigeneris  database protection 

may have a great impact on scientific research, education and public interest organizations, etc. 

notions and modern implications of copyright and authorship. 

‘J3  See Paul Goldstein,  Copyright, 55-SPG  Law and Contemp. Probs. 79, 1992, 80: elaborating on traditional 
94  See Jessica Litman,  The Public Domain, 39 Emory L.J. 965, 1990, 966: characterizing the public domain as 

“the essence of authorship”. 

95  Some commentators detect a tendency of systematic inter-generational  bias among legislators, which might 
cause them to enact overly protected database rights only in favour of the current generation of authors. See Yochai 
Benkler, Constitutional Bounds ofDatabase Protection:  T h e  Role ofjudicial Review in the Creation and Definition ofPrivate 
Rights  in Information, 15 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 535, 2000, 570-573. 

96  See  Reichman  and  Samuelson,  supra,  footnote  10, at  90-94:  discussing that  strong property  rights  in 

information may establish legal barriers to market entry. 

y7  “Sole source” refers to the market phenomena that some information products are supplied by only one or 
a very limited number of producers. See ibid., at 70, quoting the report by  [he National  Research Council, which 
“suggests  that  the  market  for  commercially distributed  databases is almost universally characterized by  a distinct 
absence of competition.” 

‘’8  See Reichman and Uhlir, supra, footnote 10, at 808-809. 
99  See Radio  Telefiz Eireann  v.  Commission ofthe European  Communities, (C241/91)  [1995] All E.R. (EC) 416 

(EcJ). 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

607 

television guide case,lOO the European Court of Justice held that television stations that 
refused to license their television guides to other competitors constituted abuse of their 
dominant market positions.101 

In short, originality is not “some unforeseen by-product of a statutory scheme”, but 
“the  essence of copyright”,102  and  the  means  by  which  copyright law promotes  the 
progress of science and useful arts. The originality requirement secures exclusive rights 
being only recognized for adding to the wealth of public knowledge, not for “remov[ing] 
existent knowledge &om the public domain” (emphasis added) .lo3  Harshly expanding 
general principles of unfair-competition law  to  cover  unoriginal  facts  and  ideas will 
swallow  the  notion  of  public  domain  and  frustrate  the  delicate  production/access 
balance achieved by copyright law. Instead ofbeing a complement, it could be a disaster 
to copyright law. 

B.  REJECTING  UNFAIR-COMPETITION  PRINCIPLES IN DATABASE  PROTECTION 

One may  argue that  digital technology upsets  the production/access balance  in 
database industries and generates underproduction problems,104 which entails the need 
for new incentives to create. Assuming this argument is valid, the Chinese Anti-Unfair 
Competition Law is thus in no sense the proper legal institution to redress the balance. 
The legal principles in the  Chinese Anti-Unfair  Competition  Law  speak merely  of 
“honesty”, “fairness” and other  “business ethics”.105 On the contrary, the issue here is 
“not about ethics; it is about the protection of property rights in . . . information so that 
the 
the  public  by  profit-seeking 
economic  solution  to  an  economic  dilemma.  Furthermore, 
entrepreneurs.”lO+n 
“the general rule of law is, that the noblest of human productions-knowledge, 
truths 
ascertained,  conceptions,  and  ideas-became, 
after  voluntary  communication  to 
others, free as the air to common use.”107 In other words, it is not preserving the public 
domain,  but  encompassing  the  public  domain  with  property  rights  that  need 

information  d be  made  available 

to 

See supra, footnote 52. 

lol  Even more ironically, the applicable law of this European case (supra, footnote 99) were the copyright laws 
of the United Kingdom and Ireland, both of which recognize copyright in non-creative  works. See Ulrika Bath, 
Access to Infomation  v. Intellectual Property Rights, E.I.P.R. 24(3), 2002, 138-146:  discussing the interaction between 
the European Union Competition Law and Intellectual Property Law. 

See supra, footnotes 2-30  and the accompanying text. 

102  See Harper G Row Publishers u.  Nation Enterprises, 471 US. 539, at 589, dissenting opinion. 
1°3  See Graham u.]ohn &ere  Co. at Kansas City, 383 U.S.  1  (1966), at 6. 
105  See the Chinese Anti-Unfair  Competition Law, Article 2. 
106  See NBA, supra, footnote 22. 
lo’  See INS, supra, footnote 20, at 250, dissenting opinion. See also Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder CraJ  Boats, Inc., 
489 U.S. 141, 1989, 146 “Imitation and refinement through imitation are both necessary to _ _ _   the very lifeblood 
of a competitive  economy.”;  Financial  Infomation,  supra, footnote 22, at 208: “Whether or not reproduction  of 
another’s work is ‘immoral’ depends on whether such use of the work is wrongful. If, for example, the work is in 
the  public  domain,  then its use  would not be wrongful.”:  Restatement Third, supra, footnote 21, Section 38, 
Comment B.: “The law has long recognized the right of a competitor to copy the successful products and business 
methods of othea absent protection  under patent, copyright, or trademark law.” 

608 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

compelling economic justifications to be exceptions to the general rule.108 Accordingly, 
any legal institution establishing property  rights in information must be well defined 
and  wisely  guarded,  but  only  enough  to  provide  necessary  incentives.109  Taking 
copyright  as  an  example,  on  the  one  hand  it  clearly  defines its boundary  with  the 
originality requirement  and with the duration of copyright, and on the other hand it 
carves out several affirmative defences such as fair-use and cover licence.11” Even the 
EU  Database Directive,  which  has  been  subject to  persistent  controversy,  contains 
some safety-valves such as duration’”  and exceptions.112 In contrast, the Chinese Anti- 
Unfair  Competition  Law-equipped  with  nothing  more  than  bare  words  such  as 
“honesty” and  “fairness”-has 
the  potential  to  grow  into  a  monstrous amoeba that 
generates  eternal and  absolute  property  rights  in  information  and  swallows-up  the 
entire public domain.113 This potential, even though not yet fully realized, will have a 
chilling  effect  on  the  free  flow  of  information,  and  render  traditional  intellectual 
property  institutions  largely  superfluous.  In  a  nutshell,  the  Chinese  Anti-Unfair 
Competition Law is both ill-oriented and ill-defined  to cope with production/access 
problems. 

The  remaining  question  is  whether  the  Chinese  courts  are  able  to  creatively 
supplement the Anti-Unfair Competition Law and turn it into a quasi-property regime. 
As the Restatement of Unfair Competition pointed out, because of inherent intricacy 
and subtlety in intellectual property law, it would be better if rule-making in this area 
were  deferred to  legdation.114 For instance, any rule-making  initiative should begin 
with  an  investigation into  whether  the  current  legal  regime  had  already  caused  an 
underproduction of information.115 Next, one must ascertain whether any alternatives 
exist, such as contracts or encryption, which producers may themselves use to cure the 
problem.Il6 The above investigations might be so time-consuming and expensive that 
the courts could hardly afford to  conduct them during the relatively short periods of 
individual actions.117 Also,  creating new  property  rights  in information may  affect a 
wide  variety  of interest  groups includng education, libraries, research  institutes and 
even governmental bodies.118  Therefore, in order to accommodate all  the competing 

See Yochai Benkler, supra, footnote 95, at 587-589:  arguing that for database legislation to pass the muster 

of first amendment, it must “further an important or substantial governmental interest”. 

joy  See INS, supra, footnote 20, at 263, dissenting opinion. 
‘I”  See  Restatement  Third,  supra,  footnote  21,  Section  38,  Comment  B.:  stating  that  copyright  law 

“Contain[s] elaborate mechanisms intended to balance the interests in protection  and access.” 

See the EU Database Directive, Article 10. 

affected by the Feist case. See Yochai Benkler, supra, footnote 95, at 592. 

‘12  Ibid., Article 9. 
l I 3   This point owes its inspiration to Professor Mike Townsend of University of Washington Law School. 
‘14  See Restatement Third, supra, footnote 21, Section 38, Comment B. 
115  Interestingly, it was reported  that the commercial private database industry was healthy, robust and hardly 
I l 6   See James Boyle, A  Politics ofInfellecfual Property: Environmentalismfor  the Net? 47 Duke L.J. 87, 1997, 102: 
arguing that, while digital technology poses a formidablc threat to content-providers,  it also provides new means 
to recover investments in content production. 
investigations which should precede a determination  of  . . . any property rights in news.” 

See INS, supra, footnote 20, at 263, dissenting opinion: stating that “Courts are ill-equipped to make the 

l l R  See Reichman and Samuelson, supra, footnote 10, at 131. 

PRESERVING ORIGINALITY IN CYBERSPACE 

609 

interests to  the  greatest  extent,  rule-makers  should  establish  a  forum for wide  social 
discourse. Because disputes are usually narrowed to parties in the courtroom, the courts 
have  a  systematic  tendency  to  overlook  outside interests and  the  potential  costs  to 
society as a  whole.119 Above all,  Chinese courts-as 
are all courts following the civil- 
law traditionare never designed or equipped to undertake any rule-malung task apart 
fi-om the  extremely narrow power  of judicial interpretation of existing laws.120  Self- 
empowered  rule-malungs  d only  end  up  adding  to  uncertainty  in  the  law  and 
jeopardizing the integnty of the legal system. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

The baseline  of  this  article is  that  copyright law  must  strike a  delicate balance 
between providing incentives to intellectual creation and securing the public interest in 
the free flow of information.121 To  further these dual purposes copyright law, on the 
one hand, grants authors a bundle of exclusive rights in copyrighted works,122  and on 
the  other  hand,  has  devised  the  originality  requirement  to  safeguard  the  public’s 
privileges  in  liberally  utilizing  the  ideas  and  information  conveyed  by  works.123 
Therefore, when  copyright law is  expanding its coverage on new  subject-matters in 
cyberspace,  it  must  also  pay  proportionate  attention  to  such  traditional  doctrines as 
originality in  order  to  avoid  depriving the  public  of  the  welfare brought  by  new 
information technology. This is especially important for China where copyright statutes 
seemingly have failed to  give detailed and practical guidelines about originality even 
before the advent of dgital technology. This article argues, therefore, that substantial 
legislative effects must be  dedicated to this  aspect  as  an indispensable part  of China’s 
digital copyright agenda. 

Furthermore, the urgent need for legislative progress in Chinese copyright law may 
also  lie  in some deeper policy  considerations that  could be  inferred  from  the  above 
discussions but which  go far  beyond the coverage of this article. With  the increasing 
complexity of society, public interest tends to become omnipresent; and the problems 
presented  by  new  demands  for justice  cease  to  be  simple.124 Accordingly,  the  law 
continues  to  decline  as  an  “autonomous  discipline”,  and  legal  doctrines  become 
increasingly  entangled  with  theories  from  other  disciplines,  such  as  economics, 

‘19  Notably,  some  commentators  argue  that  even  legislations  often  result  from  expedient  compromises 
between  lobbying  groups  regardless  of social  costs  as  a  whole.  See Jessica  Litman,  Copyright,  Compromise  and 
Legislative  History,  72 Cornell L.  Rev.  857, 1987, 869-879:  stating that  the  U.S. Copyright Act  of  1976 was  a 
negotiated settlement among specific stakeholders. 

l20  See generally Susan Finder, The Supreme People’s Court ofthe People’s Republic ofChina, 7 J. Chinese L. 145, 
121  For more discussions of copyright objectives, see supra, footnotes 5-7  and the accompanying text. 
‘22  See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. §  106, or the Chinese Copyright Law of2001, Article 10. 
Iz3  See Ray Patterson and Lindberg, supra, footnote 86, 120-122. 

1993. 

See  INS, supra, footnote 20, at 262-263;  dissenting opinion. 

610 

THE JOURNAL O F  W O R L D  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

sociology and anthropology.125 This is  especially true  in the area  of copyright law, in 
which  even  tiny  revisions wdl  profoundly affect  various interests of the information 
producers  and  which  concern  such  fundamental policies  as  culture,  education  and 
competition. Therefore, courts are no more able, if they ever were, to handle intricate 
challenges from new technologies equipped merely with such bare words as “honesty” 
and  “fairness”.  It  is  a  sound  policy  that  copyright  expansion,  with  technological 
innovation, be consistently deferred to the systematic treatment oflegislation rather than 
the individual talents of judiciary.126 

Rev. 761,1987. 

12s  See generally Richard A. Posner, The Decline o f h w  as an Autonomous Diwipline:  2962-2987,100, Ham. L. 
lZh  See Sony Coy., supra, footnote 7, at 430: “The judiciary’s reluctance to expand the protections afforded by 

the copyright without explicit legislative guidance is a recurring theme.” 


