The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2, pp. 39–57

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2013.12005.x

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms
Concerning Protection of Intellectual and Artistic
Creations: On the Crisis of Copyright Law in the
Digital Era

Katarzyna Gracz
European University Institute

The paper aims at explaining the current crisis of copyright law in the digital era. The primary hypothesis of the study
is that the core of the problem can be found in the divergence between legal and social norms concerning the access to
intellectual and artistic creations. The author discerns two main sources of the conﬂict between these two bodies of
norms. The ﬁrst is the result of the particular dynamics in the development of technology, copyright law and social
norms that are perceived as a global phenomenon. The second is the outcome of speciﬁc local particularities that led in
some societies to the evolution of social norms which differ considerably from the contemporary intellectual property
regime. In both cases, however, the core of the problem lies in the fact that consumer held social norms (developed
either on the global or local level) strongly oppose the absolute property rhetoric present in most of the international
regulations in copyright law.

Keywords copyright; Eastern Europe; colonialism; globalisation

It seems that copyright law has been at a crossroads since the digital revolution. Initially, the
introduction of technologies allowing consumers to access fast, easy, cheap and effective reproduction
of cultural and knowledge goods, and more recently—the advent of Internet, that enables users to
exchange an unlimited number of ﬁles containing protected contents, have seriously challenged
the logic of copyright law. The response of the legal system to the perceived inefﬁciency of the
solutions applied so far is the recent tendency to the exorbitant expansion of copyright law. This
expansion takes various forms, the most important being: (1) prolongation of the terms of protection;
(2) extension in the catalogue of the goods protected, that results in an inclusion of the commodities
whose very nature is alien to the copyright regime (e.g. computer programs); (3) introduction of
the technological means of protection simultaneous with legal restrictions and a legal ban on
circumventing encryptions1; (4) reduction of the catalogue of limitations and exceptions to copyright;
(5) increasing tendency of transferring copyright regulations from the private realm into that of criminal
law, etc.

In general, the trend could be described as strengthening the protection of the right holders through the
introduction of the paradigm of absolute and unlimited property at the expense of consumers’ interests.
Moreover, the reforms tend to universalise the regulations worldwide due to the recent globalisation of
intellectual property law.2 Paradoxically, however, the increasing severity of copyright law is not
accompanied by a rise in the level of observance of its legal rules and respect towards the current regime.
The open-content paradigm, promoting alternative values to those of the expanding proprietary logic is
gradually gaining visibility in public discourse, the illegal ﬁle-sharing in the network is ﬂourishing, and
actions opposing contemporary intellectual property reforms are often described using the rhetoric of
revolution and war.3

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

39

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Hypothesis and Research Questions

Given the aforementioned circumstances this analysis will be guided by the following research questions:

1. What mechanisms underlie the current crisis of copyright law in the digital era?
2. Why is the legal system following the wrong pattern notwithstanding the signals which suggest that its
response to the perceived crisis of copyright law is ineffective and inadequate to the needs of the digital
environment?

3. What should be modiﬁed to increase the efﬁciency of copyright regulations?

The analysis that follows will be aimed at answering the aforementioned research questions.

Methodology and Description of the Analysed Model

The central part of the analysis focuses on the description of mutual interactions of the legal system as a
whole and its particular branches, especially copyright law and property law.

Simultaneously, the study reconstructs the mutual interplay between the legal system and the
following elements that comprise environment in which the legal system acts: technology, social norms
and collective interests of four groups representing most important actors in the described model, namely
the state authorities, creators, public and the intermediaries on the market between the creators and the
public. It shows how the interactions of those elements with one another and with the legal system led ﬁrst
to the introduction of the proprietary paradigm in the protection of intellectual creations, and then to the
degeneration of this paradigm that caused the contemporary crisis of copyright law in the digital era.

Legal system hereinafter is understood as in the Systems’ theory developed by Niklas Luhmann and
Gunther Teubner (Luhmann, 2008; Teubner, 1988), that is as an autonomous, self-referential normative
system that is separate from other normative systems (i.e. religion, morality, social norms), and which is
independently setting its own boundaries in the process of autopoietic operations according to the bilateral
code: legal vs unlegal.

Technology is approached in this paper in a broad sense, as deﬁned by the American sociologist Read
Bain, who in the 1930s wrote that “technology includes all tools, machines, utensils, weapons,
instruments, housing, clothing, communicating and transporting devices and the skills by which we
produce and use them.” (Bain, 1937, p. 860)

Social norms4 are here interpreted as normative statements (Homans, 1961, p. 12) that identify social
expectations arising in the course of repeated interactions (Bicchieri et al., 1997, pp. 25–7; Wrong, 1994,
p. 48). They are enforced either through the application of internal sanctions of the ego which emerge as a
result of the internalisation of the norms (Durkheim, 1915, pp. 236–45; 1951) and/or through the
application of external, informal (i.e. non-legal) social sanctions (Parsons, 1952, p. 38; Durkheim,
[1903] 1953, pp. 36, 43). Social norms might, but do not necessarily have to, coincide with legal norms.
Even if they do coincide, they belong to diverse normative systems.

Collective interests are here understood as covering four groups: the collective interests of:
(1) authors/creators, (2) the public, (3) intermediaries on the market between the authors and the public,
(4) state authorities. Interests are understood as comprising both advantages of ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
nature. However, in the case of the intermediaries, due to the nature of those entities and their role in the
network of interdependencies analysed below—emphasis will be placed on the commercial interests,
stemming from the mass reproduction and distribution of copyrighted works. The interests are described
as collective because they are perceived as common for the representatives of the respective groups, not as
speciﬁcally relevant for some individuals only (e.g. creators’ interests are those that are perceived as
common for all or most of the creators in the particular territory and historical period).

40

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

Part I: The Distancing Islands of Law and Social Norms—Universal Problem

It will be argued in this paper that the current divergence between the social and legal norms is at the
source of the crisis of copyright law in the digital era, which has its origins in the failure of the legal
system to adapt satisfactorily to the new environment created by digital technologies, which instead
applied old and inadequate patterns to an entirely new context. Rather than responding to all the stimuli
of the digital environment, copyright law reproduced the rules of the physical world into the digital
reality, thereby furthering the interests of right holders, while completely ignoring the emerging needs of
users.

This paper, however, will show that this process did not start with the introduction of Internet and
digital technologies, but actually has its roots at the inception of copyright regime when the proprietary
paradigm was ﬁrst transposed from property law into the new realm of protection of knowledge and
artistic goods. It will be argued, nonetheless, that it was not the introduction of the proprietary rhetoric
itself that led to the current crisis of copyright law, but rather the degeneration of the notion of property as
applied to the protection of intellectual and artistic creations, that with the emergence of new technologies
tends to be treated as an absolute and unlimited right.

To prove it the paper will focus on four historical phases that are perceived as landmarks in the
development of mechanisms underlying the current crisis of copyright law5: (1) manuscript culture, (2)
advent of print and birth of copyright law, (3) introduction of technologies allowing for mass consumer
copying and (4) the advent of digital technologies and Internet. It will endeavour to show not only the
operations of the legal system but also the mechanisms of the complicated mutual relations between the
legal system and the elements of its environment that led to the present shortcomings of copyright
protection.

Manuscript Culture
The analysis starts with the very beginning of the story: the era of the manuscripts—when there were no
copyright regulations, no technologies that enabled copying on a mass scale, entrepreneurial interests
stemming from reproduction and distribution of creative works of others were just emerging, and the
general social norms concerning replication of works of human ingenuity were unambiguously in favour
of copying.

In ancient times, the profession of a scribe was extremely elitist, usually inherited from father to son
and limited to the highest social classes (McLain, 2005; Johnson, 1987; Rice, 2001).6 Scribes exercised
many functions that required literacy and enjoyed a high esteem. Those of them who were professionally
devoted to manual copying of texts, especially sacred verses, were working at the services of the rulers or
religious institutions (temples, monasteries, etc.) who commissioned particular works. At that time there
was no open market for manuscripts. Both the scribes and their works were part of the religious or
governmental structures. The copying of sacred texts was regarded as a metaphysical activity and required
complex rituals.7

In Medieval Europe, the spiritually important process of reproducing holy texts concentrated in
Christian monasteries, that had regular provision for the making of books called scriptorium. Before
around 1200 books were copied in ecclesiastical institutions, however, by the eleventh century the class of
professional lay scribes and illuminators emerged. They travelled from monastery to monastery and
treated copying of texts as a mere commercial activity, rather than a religious practice. From about 1200
books were mainly produced by lay people who were established in particular cities and who earned they
living by making books (Watson, 2003, p. 8).

This crucial change in the manuscript production, which moved from monasteries to lay scriptoria
and from rural settings to urban centres, was a result of a shift in the motivation for copying the word in ink
on parchment as it evolved from divine meditation to personal proﬁt (Booton, 2010a, p. 33). This is when,

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

41

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

the commercial

relevant for this analysis, the commercial interests of the intermediaries in the market of the creative works
emerged.8 As might be inferred from the historical sources,
interests of those
intermediaries were from the very beginning inconsistent, or in some instances even contrary to the
interests of the authors themselves9 (Watson, 2003, p. 9). By the early thirteenth century, many European
cities had a commercial book trade that was largely governed by the university authorities (Watson, 2003,
p. 9). At this time another chain of intermediaries in the book trade emerged: libraries, who were
middlemen responsible for hiring scribes and illuminators and for selling the completed manuscripts
(Booton, 2010b, p. 252). Some of the libraries realised the orders commissioned by particular customers,
mainly belonging to nobility or clergy, however, in general production of books in this time became
speculative (Watson, 2003, p. 11). It meant that the business of libraries became unpredictable as there
was no guarantee that the costs incurred in the process of books’ production would be covered by adequate
demand on the market. This fact is essential for the further analysis, because it will be argued that it was
exactly this commercial risk of the libraries, who with arrival of print decommissioned the obsolete
services of the scribes and turned into printers, that later triggered the transposition of the proprietary
paradigm to law protecting the fruits of human creativity.

The Advent of Print and the Birth of Copyright Law—The Introduction of the Proprietary Paradigm
The introduction of the technology of printing had a double-edged effect on the interests of the
intermediaries on the book market. On one hand, it allowed for fast, and for the ﬁrst time in history—mass
reproduction of books that could be achieved at considerably low costs, as the work of the people has been
replaced by the machines.10 In this way the advent of print enlarged the interests of the middlemen as they
could potentially increase their proﬁts due to the fact that copying at this moment became on a mass scale,
and so the number of potential clients who could be addressed augmented. However, the new technology
created new commercial risks as the potential gain could have been easily stolen by unfair competitors,
who equipped with the adequate machines could easily reproduce the same material, not having incurred
the transaction costs of the ﬁrst stage of the publishing process, that is the costs stemming from the primary
interactions between the publisher and the author.

Nonetheless, luckily for the publishers at that time in Europe their interests were compatible with the
interests of the governments and the church, which in trying to protect their own affairs—introduced legal
regulations that as a by-product created a monopoly for the publishers’ services and in this way
strengthened their position on the market. That was the case in most European countries in that period, as
the states and the church trying to avoid the dissemination of undesirable content, expressing dissent and
criticism of the government and established religion, introduced controls over printing, by requiring
printers to have ofﬁcial licenses for producing books. These licenses gave the printer an exclusive
right to print particular works for a ﬁxed period of years and enabled him to prevent others from
printing the same books during that period. The licenses usually also prohibited the import of the same
works printed abroad (MacQueen et al., 2007, p. 34). This regulation system present in most European
countries did not yet amount to the modern copyright law, as it had different goals and took a completely
different form. Nevertheless, the licensing regime of the print industry could be perceived as the ﬁrst
attempt to regulate the market in intellectual creations. It was already under this regime, long before the
introduction of the modern copyright law, that the self-referential operations of legal system, allowing
proprietary logic to gradually enter the discourse concerning the nature of intellectual and artistic works
commenced.

The proprietary logic entered the discourse concerning intellectual creations for the ﬁrst time in
England around 1590 (Arber, vol. II, p. 538, quoted after: Patterson, 1968, p. 54) when members of the
Stationers’ Company modiﬁed the language used in the register of printed books. As the excellent
historical analysis done by Lyman Ray Patterson proves, the form of the entry “evolved from that of a

42

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

license to print, to the ownership of copy, to the ownership of a book.” [emphasis added] (Patterson, 1968,
p. 54). Notwithstanding the fact that the change “was one of form only, not substance” (Patterson, 1968,
p. 54) and legal basis for, as well as, legal nature of the copyright remained the same, “the evolution in the
form of entry indicates that a subtle conceptual change was occurring and that booksellers had begun to
think more explicitly of their “copies” or “books” as private property” [emphasis added] (Rose, 1993,
p. 45) as was perceptively noticed by Mark Rose. Although at this point the modiﬁcation in rhetoric did not
yet enter the public debates, the shift in the publishers’ perception of their rights that ushered in the
paradigm of property in knowledge goods, is crucial for this analysis. For it was exactly when this shift
occurred, that the reproduction of the patterns from property law into the realm of protection of intellectual
creations started.

The rhetoric of property in intellectual creations was later used by the Stationers for the purpose of
agitation as early as in 1643, when threatened by the fact that their exclusive rights to print would be
endangered, the printers published a pamphlet entitled The Humble Remonstrance of the Company of
Stationers to the High Court of Parliament in which they openly referred to the proprietary paradigm,
arguing that “their ancient Right, Propriety of Copies” was no longer secured, and therefore they would
lack the “encouragement to make them [their properties] active and alacrious in the service of the state”
[emphasis added] (Arber, vol. I, p. 586, quoted after: Rose, 1993, p. 16).

It is worth emphasising that the publishers at that time used the property paradigm to justify and
strengthen solely their own interests, and initially did not refer at all to the interests of authors. Eventually,
however, it was the publishers who for the ﬁrst time applied the proprietary rhetoric with regard to the
creators’ rights. Nonetheless, the printers made reference to the property rights of authors in intellectual
and artistic works to defend their own interests.

The proprietary rhetoric with regard to protection of intellectual and artistic creations should be
therefore perceived as invented and popularised by the publishers, who threatened by technological and
legal developments weakening their position on the market, applied it in trying to secure their own
commercial interests.

Although the Stationers used the rhetoric of absolute property perceived as a natural right when
lobbying for the legal protection of their commercial interests, the Statute of Anne,11 enacted in 1709 that
was the ﬁrst instantiation of the modern copyright law was to be a considerably moderate and balanced
response. The Statute introduced the concept of author’s rights, as diverse from publisher’s rights and by
minimising the protection to the limited period of fourteen years—it asserted that the copyright law should
be differentiated from property rights and treated more as a privilege granted by the state. Symptomatic of
this de-propertization of the protection of intellectual and artistic creations is the fact that the initial title of
the act was changed from A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning and for Securing the Property of
Copies of Books to the Rightful Owners thereof to A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning by Vesting the
Copies of Printed Books in the Authors, or Purchasers, of such Copies, during the Times therein
Mentioned (Rose, 1993, p. 46).

As far as the object of this analysis is concerned, although the publishers’ lobbying actions later taken
up by the authors themselves, attempted to introduce the proprietary rhetoric into the realm of the
protection of literary works—the act itself refused to apply a proprietary paradigm. The legislator, by
resisting the proprietary rhetoric wanted to limit the monopoly of the stationers in order to keep a proper
balance between the interests of the creators, public and intermediaries in the market in the knowledge and
artistic goods.

Nonetheless, the introduction of the Statute of Anne should be perceived as the beginning, and not the
end, of the debate on the proprietary paradigm in the protection of creation and dissemination of
intellectual and artistic goods, especially that other Western European countries soon followed suit,
providing space for public debates on the nature of literary and intellectual property.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

43

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Introduction of Technologies Permitting Mass Consumer Copying—Initial Attempts to Strengthen
the Proprietary Paradigm
Although publishers faced with the technological novelty challenging the protection of their ﬁnancial
interests already in the sixteenth century used the strong proprietary rhetoric understood as absolute
control over the use of the protected works, this power was never granted to the right holders by law. The
copyright regulations never protected against consumption by individuals and the idea of a private
use perceived as being outside the right holders’ monopoly exploitation, thus not requiring the prior
authorisation of rights, was so obvious and accepted by most early European copyright scholars that
initially the copyright acts did not even contain provisions protecting private use (Guibault et al., 2003,
p. 10.). They appeared only at the beginning of the twentieth century (Guibault et al., 2003, p. 10).12

Nevertheless the copyright holders (represented mainly by middlemen in the market for intellectual
and artistic creations) resorted to absolute property rhetoric every time they felt that their interests were
being endangered by the inﬂuence of new technology. The twentieth century’s inventions of photocopying
and analogue recording equipment had the same double-edged effect on the commercial interests of
middlemen in the market for intellectual and artistic goods as before the invention of print did. This time,
however, the new inventions were enabling consumers and not professional competitors to copy the
knowledge and artistic goods on a massive scale. This once again triggered the absolute-property rhetoric
on the part of the right holders who were claiming absolute control over the use of protected works that
would preclude private copying with the use of new technologies. Following the logic of this strong
proprietary arguments both private individuals who made reproductions with the use of new technologies
and manufacturers and retailers of the necessary equipment were infringing the owner’s copyright in the
work (Gentz, 1952, p. 495; Guibault et al., 2003, p. 10). This reasoning ﬁnally led to the introduction of the
copyright levy system that was introduced ﬁrstly in Germany as a consequence of two decisions of the
German Federal Supreme Court rendered in 1955 (Grundig Reporter case)13 and 1964 (Personalausweise
case)14 and then spread throughout the rest of continental Europe. The reasons for introducing the levy
systems combined with the earlier private copying exceptions in Europe were to balance the rights of both
users and right holders as required by the three-step test set out in the Berne Convention, which establishes
the conditions for any limitations of the reproduction right (Reinbothe, 2003).

The limits to right holders’ control over the copyrighted goods were even more strongly stated in the
later UK case Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc v The British Phonograph Industry Ltd Amstrad (1986)
in which the court stated that the power of the right holders is also limited by the protection of
technological development.15

In conclusion, it should be stated that the legal system once again managed to balance the diverse
social needs as expressed in the signals stemming from the environment in which the law operates and did
not succumb to the absolute-property postulates of the right holders. The levy system introduced in most
European countries allowed for equitable remuneration for the creators while at the same time leaving the
copyright regulations in line with the social norms favouring private copying.

The Digital Era—Absolute Property?
It was not until another technological revolution, namely the introduction of Internet and later on P2P
technologies, that the legal system was once again facing the absolute-property demands of the copyright
holders, which again were mainly intermediaries. These new technologies allowed not only for mass
reproduction but also mass distribution of the copyrighted material. Therefore, the absolute-property
campaign started again, this time successfully changing the face of copyright law by introducing DRM
technologies simultaneously to legal restrictions and legal ban on circumventing encryptions, prolonging
the terms of protection and leading to the increasing tendency of transferring copyright regulations from
the realm of private into that of criminal law.

44

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

No longer were potential competitors the biggest challenge to the protection of copyright holders’
interests. The content industry turned on practices of individual users as endangering their legitimate
interests and once again attempted to enforce the paradigm of absolute property. This destroyed the
delicate balance simultaneously safeguarding the interests of the right holders and the public, that
copyright law managed to maintain for a long time, and lead to the conﬂict between legal and social norms
regarding the protection of production and dissemination of intellectual creations.

The Response of the Environment—Consumer Reaction
The new technologies affected not only the legal regulations but also the social norms, increasing the
number of postulates for general access to knowledge and information. Thus the exorbitant protection of
copyright holders’ commercial interests introduced at the expense of the public’s needs led to the
additional costs of compliance with the law stemming from the tension between the copyright regulations
and social norms. Therefore, consumers trying to lower the incurred costs started choosing between two
strategies: the strategy of avoidance or change of the onerous law.16

The mechanisms allowing for the avoidance of problematic legal regulations that started to be applied
by consumers may take two forms: evasion understood as an investment in decreasing the odds of being
punished for violating a law (Wu, 2003, pp. 112–6) or avoision which can be deﬁned as efforts to exploit
the differences between a law’s goals and its self deﬁned limits (Wu, 2003, pp. 112–6). Consumers’
strategies leading to the avoidance of copyright regulations in fact take both forms: the former being best
exempliﬁed by the application of various types of software enabling anonymity in the network, and the
latter instantiated by the sharing platforms that create an illusion that the ﬁle-sharers are indeed close
friends which would allow them to rely on private copying provisions.

The strategy of change in the case of copyright law was so far reserved to the right holders,
represented mainly by market intermediaries. The reasons for this are to be found in public choice theory
which suggests that when the beneﬁts of law are concentrated, and its costs are diffuse, a small well-
focused interest group (in this case intermediaries in the market for knowledge and artistic goods or
collecting societies) will usually succeed in obtaining passage of the law, even if it does not beneﬁt society
as a whole (Wu, 2003, pp. 116–9). Therefore, traditionally the strategy of change was too burdensome for
consumers as it involved collective action problems, which were difﬁcult to overcome by small or loose
groups. Nevertheless thanks to Internet communication, especially social networking and online petition
services, the difﬁculties associated with the process of supplying public good in the form of the
modiﬁcation of the existing law may be surmounted, and thus the mechanism of change of the onerous
regulations becomes available to consumers as is very well exempliﬁed by the phenomenon of the Pirate
Parties and the power of the anti-ACTA protests in Europe, showing the new lobbying power of the end-
users in copyright issues.

Part II: Cultural Colonialism—or Why Did the Anti-ACTA Protests Start in Poland?

In this part of the paper evolutionary institutional theory will be applied to describe another source of
discrepancy between the current copyright regime and social norms: the fact that social norms, contrary to
the global intellectual property regime, are not universal but have evolved under the inﬂuence of local
factors such as national culture, the particular socio-economic situation of a jurisdiction and historical
contrasts in legal regulations between different territories. In the second subsection of this part of the paper
the Polish case study will be analysed showing how particular local developments led to the evolution of
social norms that are in sharp contrast with the absolute proprietary paradigm present in the current
intellectual property regime, and which led to extremely intensive anti-ACTA protests in Poland. Before

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

45

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

that, however, in the ﬁrst subsection a very short introduction to the evolutionary institutional theory will
be provided.

Concise Introduction to Evolutionary Institutional Theory
This part of the paper is highly inspired by the book on The Evolution of Modern States. Sweden, Japan
and the United States by Sven Steinmo in which the author applies the evolutionary approach to his
analysis of social institutions. In developing his theory, Steinmo primarily claims that social systems are
complex phenomena, which being fundamentally different from inanimate matter, react like living
organisms in that they change, adapt and evolve in response to the modifying reality. A respective social
system is often the unique result of a series of particular unguided interactions at the micro level. The
interaction is the key aspect of an emergent system; therefore, similar factors can have very different
effects in different contexts (Steinmo, 2010, pp. 10–3). Most importantly, however, evolutionary
institutional theory “takes history seriously meaning that when and where something occurs can
fundamentally shape what occurs.” (Steinmo, 2010, p. 13).

Evolutionary institutional theory highlighting the uniqueness of the evolutionary patterns of the
respective social institutions in various countries suggests that there are no global standards that would
prove equally useful in diverse conditions (Steinmo, 2010, pp. 1–30). Law, equal to the economy, in order
to be effective and to respond adequately to social needs must develop in conformity with the
particularities of the local environment.

Evolutionary institutional theory proves useful in describing the development of particular social
norms in the given society that evolved in contrast to the universal legal regulations in the ﬁeld of
copyright law. The most general message stemming from the application of evolutionary institutional
theory, to the analysis of the historical development of copyright law is that intellectual and artistic
creation is one of the innermost spheres of the social reality. Therefore, the attitude towards the protection
of the fruits of human ingeniousness depends on manifold circumstances, the most inﬂuential being:
historical, cultural, religious and socio-economic determinants. Hence, the current trend for international
universal regulations, providing “one—size—ﬁts—all” solutions in the realm of intellectual property law
must be deemed ineffective and inappropriate for the needs of the complex social reality.

The Evolutionary Institutional Analysis of Polish Social Norms With Regard to the Distribution of
Copyrighted Materials
In January 2012 all of Europe witnessed massive protests, both in the streets and on the Internet, opposing
the ratiﬁcation of the ACTA17 agreement. The anti-ACTA movement started in Poland and it was also
here that the protests lasted the longest. It is estimated that around hundred thousand people went to the
streets of dozens of big cities and smaller towns in Poland to show their objection to the ratiﬁcation of the
controversial treaty (Gazeta Wyborcza, Rzeczpospolita of 20 January 2012 to 20 February 2012). They
stayed in the streets for long weeks notwithstanding the extremely unfavourable weather conditions, when

the temperatures were falling to as low as  20˚. It is also in Poland that these protests actually had some

further reaching consequences as they not only changed the initial position of the government with regard
to the ratiﬁcation of this controversial treaty, but actually started the public debate on the role of
intellectual property in the information society. Moreover, as a result of lobbying of various
stakeholders—the Ministry for Administration and Digitization promised the revision of the whole legal
system in order to make sure that the Polish law is suitable to respond to the growing needs of the
information society.

The intensiveness of the anti-ACTA protests has attracted the attention of many social scientists as
Poland had not witnessed such a social mobilisation since the collapse of the communist regime. Poles did
not organise signiﬁcant protests when the whole world was marching against the war in Afghanistan and

46

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

Iraq. There was no “occupy Poland,” and Poles did not have their “indignados” movement. There are
various explanations of the anti-ACTA phenomenon in Poland ranging from the assertion that it was
exactly this lack of earlier reactions that led to the protests as they have given necessary vent to
accumulated frustration (Gazeta Wyborcza, Rzeczpospolita of 20 January 2012 to 20 February 2012), to
the diagnosis that the secret negotiations on the treaty and the unclear position of the Polish government
triggered thinking in terms of conspiracy theories and pushed people to protest even though they were not
aware of the substance of the criticised legal act (Gazeta Wyborcza, Rzeczpospolita of 20 January 2012 to
20 February 2012).

In my opinion one of the most promising explanations of the anti-ACTA phenomenon in Poland
concentrates on the analysis of the social norms with regard to the distribution of cultural and knowledge
goods. The social research shows that only 13% of Poles buy books, music or ﬁlms. As many as 33% gets
hold of them in digital form, in a non-formal manner and for free. If also the “physical” forms of exchange
are included in informal circulations, such as lending books, CDs and DVDs from relatives and friends,
then 39% of Poles participate in it (Filiciak et al., 2011).

If not the whole population but only the most culturally and socially active group is analysed—the
percentage of people engaging in the informal circulation of knowledge and cultural goods increases. The
Polish cultural elite, understood as persons declaring much more interest in the cultural and social life as
compared to the general population, equals more less the group of the active Internet users, thus the
research done on this sample proves very useful18 (Czapin´ski and Panek, 2009, 2011). In 2011 37% of
Polish Internet users declared having gone at least once in the previous month to a cinema, a theatre or
a concert as compared to 6% of non-users (Czapin´ski and Panek, 2011). The Internet users
declared buying three times more books and ﬁlms and even seven times more music than their
counterparts who do not use the Internet (Filiciak et al., 2011). Moreover, if we add the circulation of
culture that requires no expenditure like borrowing books, CDs or CDroms the changes between the users
and non-users grow even bigger: 88% of Polish Internet users participates in the informal circulation of
music, 73% in the informal circulation of books and 78% in the informal circulation of ﬁlms. The informal
circulation in this questionnaire was understood widely as downloading, using the content downloaded by
other members of the family, copying from friends and family, photocopying and scanning (Filiciak
et al., 2011).

If these data are aggregated, we ﬁnd that 72% of Polish Internet users declare that they download ﬁles
with cultural goods either from websites or peer-to-peer networks. If we add streaming and exchange of
ﬁles with friends then already 92% of Polish Internet users participate in this kind of circulation of cultural
goods. If informal circulation also in physical formats is taken into account (photocopying, scanning, but
also exchanging books, CDs and DVDs, including copy versions, with family and friends) then 95%
declares participation. More than 50% of active Internet users admit that the main reason for them to
engage in informal circulation is not the price barrier of the formal market but the wider access to
knowledge and cultural goods as compared to the goods that they could buy (Filiciak et al., 2011).

Moreover, as much as 52% of the whole Polish population agrees with the statement that the free
access to books, ﬁlms and music should be treated as a fundamental right even if it precludes copyright
(Millward Brown SMG/KRC, 2012).19

The data quoted above prove that not only do Poles declare very strong social norms concerning
access to knowledge and cultural goods but also that they act according to them. These norms clash with
the strong proprietary vision of intellectual and artistic creations which was very much present in the
discourse favouring the introduction of ACTA.20

The following section, strongly inspired by evolutionary institutional theory, will attempt to show the
historical and cultural circumstances which have contributed to the development of such strong social
norms favouring unrestricted access to cultural and knowledge goods amongst Poles, which are in sharp

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

47

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

contrast not only with the ACTA treaty, but generally with the whole body of current international
intellectual property law based on the strong proprietary paradigm.

In the ﬁrst part of this paper four important phases, that might be considered as milestones in the
development of law and technology in terms of the production and distribution of intellectual and artistic
creations were described. Although these stages were universal around the globe, in various countries they
took place in different historical moments and in diverse circumstances. In this section, I will focus on the
same three out of four phases,21 but highlighting additional elements of the environment in which both
Polish copyright law and the respective social norms were evolving that were not present in Western
European countries, and that might have contributed to the strong demand for unrestricted access to
knowledge and culture goods amongst the Polish population.

Advent of Print and the Birth of Copyright Law—The Introduction of the Proprietary Paradigm?
Poland was actually in the forefront of countries granting the ﬁrst privileges protecting the interests of
publishers, at the time that the cost of the printing press went down so drastically that the circulation of
unauthorised reprints started ﬂourishing. The ﬁrst privilege was granted to a Polish publisher as early as in
1494 (Benis, 1887, p. 444). The Polish system of privileges had a dual nature as it consisted of the
privileges granted both by the secular and ecclesiastical authorities.22 The privilege system was
developing in Poland very well and as early as in the middle of the sixteenth century the idea of system of
international protection was developed, as the protection granted in the Polish privileges was expanded to
imported books in Hebrew, Greek,23 and Czech24 (Benis, 1887, p. 453). The privileges assured the equal
treatment of those imported books with regard to the Polish ones in terms of scope and the term of
protection. Moreover some privileges granted protection against unauthorised reprint of the translations. It
is also already in that period that some privileges were granted directly to the authors and not to the
publishers (Benis, 1887, p. 453) and that generally artistic works of all types, and not only books were
protected (Benis, 1887, p. 455). The legal doctrine unambiguously treated those privileges as belonging to
the domain of private law, thus enforced only on the right holder’s motion.

By the second half of the eighteenth century the privileges were already standardised and based on the
customary law that developed with the time: they granted 20 years of protection against unauthorised
reprint, translation, compilation, alteration of a work and export of similar or identical works. The sanction
amounted to a ﬁnancial ﬁne, half of which was paid to the right holder, the other half to the treasury
(Benis, 1887, p. 459).

The ﬁrst attempts to regulate copyright in a single general legal act that would replace the system of
privileges were already made in 1776 and 1784. The parliament, however, did not pass the law and so
lost the chance to introduce the ﬁrst Polish copyright act. Poland was at that time partitioned between
Russia, Austria and Prussia hence soon all the copyright issues arising on Polish land were to be regulated
by three various copyright acts originating in the three legal systems of the respective states (Benis, 1887,
p. 459).

To sum up this period of Polish legal history it should be stated that although Poland did not have a
single universal copyright act, the very well-developed system of privileges emerged quite early. The
privileges responded to the need for protecting not only books but also other artistic creations, provided
protection not only for national creations but expanded also to imported and translated works, introduced a
sanction that meant both to cover the damages and to discourage future breach, and last but not least
acknowledged the unique role of the author as different from the publisher. Thus it might be stated that the
initial period of the development of copyright law in Poland, before the change from a system of privileges
to the protection granted in the general legal acts, did not differ much from the processes that took place in
Western Europe. Moreover, the well-developed system of privileges made actually Poland one of the early
movers in the ﬁeld of protecting the fruits of human creation in this region of Europe.

48

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

Nevertheless, already at the moment when the ﬁrst copyright acts on the Polish land were
introduced,25 the Polish case was particular (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000, p. 225). Not only did those
regulations stem from three different legal systems, but they were imposed by the occupants’ hostile
authorities, and moreover were strictly connected with the system of censorship, which in the territory of
partitioned Poland was mainly aimed against Polish patriotic and pro-independence movements.

In Austria the preventive censorship successfully impeded both the circulation and access to Polish
works from 1781 (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000, p. 225). Decisions of censors were irrevocable and strongly
interfered with the integrity of the work: the censors deleted words and phrases forbidden by the law and
replaced them with random expressions (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000, p. 226).

The situation was very similar in the Kingdom of Prussia, where from 1849 all the texts printed in
Polish could only be published and imported from abroad if accepted by the censors. The strength of the
censorship rendered legal circulation of Polish works (especially literature and press) in Prussia nearly
inexistent (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000, p. 225).26

For Poles the most severe, however, was the system of censorship in Russia which was extremely
active in blocking not only the circulation of Polish books and articles but also music, paintings, theatre
and opera performances. Among the authors whose works were either completely banned or seriously
changed by the Russian censors were two Nobel prize winners in literature Reymont and Sienkiewicz,
famous composer Moniuszko, bard of Polish patriotic lyrics Mickiewicz and many other prominent
creators. The interference of censors with the original works was so far—reaching that often authors could
barely recognise their own creations as they were so cut and modiﬁed (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000, p. 227).
This power of the censors conﬂicted not only with the right to integrity of the work but also rendered the
earnings of the authors nearly inexistent as the publishers at the time paid the remuneration to the authors
proportionally to the size of the work, and thus works cut by half or more by the censors brought hardly any
money to the author. The severe sanctions forced those creators, who did not want to compromise on their
works and were courageous enough to object the requirements of censorship, to publish their works under
pseudonyms or anonymously. Due to this fact even the right to paternity of the work was somehow biased.
Thus the strength of the censorship system in all the three territories of partitioned Poland rendered
the copyright protection with regard to Polish creators ﬁctitious, even if the legal acts regulating copyright
issues treated an author as the primordial subject of copyright protection.27 The power of censors to block
the distribution of original works, including the pieces of most prominent Polish creators, led also to the
emergence and fast diffusion of the illegal circulation of Polish literary, artistic and knowledge goods. In
these circumstances the social norms favouring the unrestrained access to intellectual creations were
ﬂourishing, especially given that literature and art were at the time important carriers of Polish national
identity, which was constantly suppressed by the hostile authorities. As copyright law in many instances
did not secure real protection for the Polish creators, and because many of them treated their occupation as
a mission in the ﬁght for independence, authors favoured wide access to their works. The debate on the
“literary property” so powerful in England and France did not have its equivalent amongst the Polish
elites. Moreover, even in the legal doctrine of that period the voices opposing the proprietary vision of
copyright protection, criticising the “literary property” concept born abroad, and favouring the wide
access to art and knowledge were prevailing (Go´rski, 1891).

Hence, as opposed to many Western European countries, the situation in the Polish territory was not
conducive to the general acceptance of the proprietary paradigm and very much favoured the concept of
open access to knowledge and art. At that time the message that was conveyed in the literary and artistic
works was the most important part not only of the creation but also of the distribution process, and every
effort was taken to make it reach the widest possible audience. Thus social norms emerging at that time on
the Polish land although strongly opposing plagiarism (Ferenc-Szydełko, 2000; Go´rski, 1891), did not
condemn the unofﬁcial, and often illegal circulation of knowledge and artistic goods.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

49

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Introduction of Technologies Allowing for Mass Consumer Copying—First Attempts to Strengthen the
Proprietary Paradigm?
The social norms promoting wide access to culture and knowledge, and accepting unofﬁcial, and often
illegal, circulation of intellectual and artistic creations found favourable conditions also in the second
phase of the development of the mutual interactions between technology and copyright norms as analysed
in this paper. When Western European democracies were trying to ﬁnd a balance between the needs of
consumers newly empowered by reproduction technologies, the importance of technological development
and the demands of right holders who desired full control of the copyrighted works—in Poland once again
the informal distribution of cultural and intellectual creations was ﬂourishing. Although the general
political situation has changed drastically since the end of the previous analysed historical period, the
censorship was again very much present and playing a similar role in sustaining social norms favouring
wide access to culture and knowledge, during the time of communism as it did during the partitions of
Poland.

At the time when the ﬁrst technologies allowing for the reproduction of copyrighted materials by
consumers—namely analogue recorders—were introduced, Poland was cut off from the Western world by
the heavy Iron Curtain. The censorship did not allow for import of most Western cultural and knowledge
goods and kept watch and ward not to allow “harmful” trends to be imitated in socialist Poland. “Big-beat”
was banned by the Polish censors not only as a genre of music but also as a word. Wearing clothes
according to Western fashion trends could be perceived as a revolutionary act, such an innocent detail as
colourful socks in the 1950s could cost a cruel interrogation by the security forces. Obviously those facts
triggered resistance, especially on the part of young people. One of the methods of opposing the regime,
and more importantly of trying to live a normal life, involved gaining access to forbidden cultural
creations—mainly music.

The prominent role in the emancipation of many Polish teenagers growing up in communist Poland
was played by Radio Luxembourg, the commercial multilingual radio station based in Luxembourg,
which was at that time shaping the music tastes of young people around Europe. Although listening to this
radio station was forbidden, most youngsters ignored the ban, and not only listened to but also recorded the
broadcasts of Radio Luxembourg using the reel-to-reel audio tape recorders28 (Mann, 2010). With the
political thaw, another source of music recordings emerged—the Polish Radio Program 3. Although it was
a public, state-owned radio station, it was allowed some autonomy, according to the “vent” strategy of the
communist party, which at some point started presupposing some freedom in the least important spheres of
social life as an inevitable protection against the political revolution. The Program 3 introduced broadcasts
that were specially devoted to the recording activities of the audience. The speaker, presenting a list of
most popular Western songs counted down before playing each track so that the members of the public
knew when to start recording. The recordings of music from those radio stations were one of the most
demanded goods in the informal market where both sale and exchange contracts were concluded. Social
esteem and the place in the youngsters’ hierarchy in communist Poland were proportional to the number of
Western musical recordings owned. Most of them were either recorded from the radio stations or copied
from friends.29

Simultaneously, from the 1970s, the informal circulation of the written word was ﬂourishing. Books,
articles and short leaﬂets with political messages were mass reproduced with the use of home-made
duplicating machines30 and distributed through the illegal chains. This phenomenon was so widespread
that it got the name of the “second circulation,”31 as opposed to the ofﬁcial distribution of cultural and
knowledge goods approved of by the state censors. Between 1976 and 1980 “the second circulation”
provided the space not only for political opposition but also for artistic creations the presence of which was
impossible in “the ﬁrst,” ofﬁcial circulation (Pczak, 1988, p.29). The phenomenon of “the second
circulation” was already very well entrenched in the collective consciousness of the Polish intelligentsia in

50

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

the 1970s, and gaining the ever growing popularity among the working class. The information acquired
from the informal chain of distribution with comparison to the ofﬁcial news allowed for developing
critical opinions on the situation in Poland and abroad. Moreover, “the second circulation” was
complimentary to “the ﬁrst” one in terms of the distribution of art and literature, as it provided space for the
works forbidden by the censors, and as such was the real gateway to Western culture (Pczak, 1988, p.29).
In the beginning of the 1980s the phenomenon of “the third circulation” emerged. “The third
circulation” was a publishing and distributing movement of the youngest generation, originating from the
alternative subcultures, mostly punks, opposing both the “ﬁrst” political mainstream, and the “second”
oppositional movements. “The third circulation” did not only deny the communist ideology but also
rejected conservative art, perceived by the youngest generation as compromising with the communist
authorities. It involved unofﬁcial distribution of tape recordings, texts and graphics. “The third circulation”
was not as structurally organised as “the second” in terms of publishing and distribution chains. The works
were mainly circulated via the concerts, festivals, and ad hoc meetings of members of the subcultures. As
the emergence and existence of “the second circulation” was strictly connected with the technological
novelty of the duplicating machines and reel-to-reel audio tape recorders, “the third circulation” was born
with photocopying machines and cassette decks. Due to these technological novelties the form of the
circulating works also evolved. Whereas people involved in “the second circulation” did not learn how to
use the new possibilities provided by these inventions and continued distributing mostly short leaﬂets as the
easiest form to be copied on the duplicating machines, “the third circulation” was mainly concentrating on
the distribution of tape cassettes with alternative music, recorded during live concerts or copied from
master copies and fanzines: non-professional and non-ofﬁcial publications devoted to alternative culture,
sold mainly by post for the cost of delivery. The novelty of photocopying allowed not only for much longer
publications, as compared to the texts distributed within “the second circulation,” but also for much more
interesting graphics and a generally attractive layout (Dunin-Wa˛sowicz, 2013). In the 1980s’ fanzines
distributed within “the third circulation” reached the public of tens of thousands of young Poles between the
age of 17 and 27 (Dunin-Wa˛sowicz, 2013). What is crucial for this analysis, “the third circulation,” equally
in this respect to “the second circulation,” was a non-proﬁt enterprise, where facilitation of the widest
possible dissemination and not ﬁnancial gain was the main incentive for involvement. Needless to say both
“the second” and “the third” circulations were not only unofﬁcial but also illegal as they were developed
outside the censoring system.

Although alternative cultural movements, such as punk subculture, which involved the unofﬁcial
distribution of cultural goods, also existed in Western Europe (especially in the U.K) and the United
States—in Poland this phenomenon was much more inﬂuential, as it involved political opposition of the
youngest generations tired both with the communist regime, and with the (in their opinion inefﬁcient)
“elder” opposition, concentrated around “the second circulation.” The fact that involvement in the
unofﬁcial distribution of cultural and knowledge goods was against the laws on censorship and as such
carried the danger of criminal sanctions, including imprisonment, did not discourage, but quite to the
opposite—added some ﬂavour to these activities, transforming them into the sort of a civil disobedience
movement. The power of civil disobedience actions in creating and sustaining social norms is well known
and cannot be underestimated. Hence the strength of both of the unofﬁcial Polish “circulations” in
reinforcing social norms favouring the unrestricted access to intellectual and artistic creations should not
be found surprising.

When the Western world was discussing the dangers of new technologies in disrupting the copyright
regime, epitomised by well-known slogans like, for example “Home taping is killing music. And it is
illegal”—majority of the Polish population was involved in illegal circulations of cultural and knowledge
goods, treating it as way of combating the hostile political regime. Whereas the West was calling
unauthorised distribution “theft” as early as in the 1980s of the last century—between the 1960s and

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

51

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

beginning of the 1990s at least two generations of Poles, perceived engaging in unofﬁcial circulation of
music, literature and press as a virtue, providing access to objective information and a gateway to Western
culture in the captive nation. The public debates on the limits of copyright monopoly triggered by the
invention of new multiplying technologies that took place in the Western countries as early as in the 1960s
and continued into 1980s and 1990s were absent in Poland in that time. Even the levy system, which might
be perceived as the attempt to maintain a fragile balance between the interests of various stakeholders was
introduced in Poland as late as in 1994.32

In these circumstances social norms approving of the wide dissemination of cultural and knowledge
goods, that were already rooted in the Polish culture, were further reinforced and shared by an ever
growing number of Poles.

The Digital Era—Absolute Property?

As the analysis above shows, Poles entered the digital era already with strong social norms approving of the
wide dissemination of cultural goods, even if such an activity was against the ofﬁcial laws. Contrary to the
situation in Western countries, in Poland it was not only the youngsters, empowered with the new
technological possibilities who suddenly changed their attitude to copyright law and shunned compliance
in response to the power given to them by technology. Poles had a tradition dating back hundreds of years of
unofﬁcial and illegal circulation of cultural goods that was familiar to elder generations as much as it was to
teenagers. Internet and digital technologies of reproduction and dissemination of copyrighted materials
were just another technological mean that replaced tools used so far. Poles not only did not develop strong
social norms opposing the unauthorised distribution of cultural goods, but did not internalise the
proprietary vision of cultural and knowledge goods as in Polish history it was not the private ownership and
the ﬁnancial gain of the creator but the ability to convey important message to the public that was generally
perceived as the incentive to create.33 The copyright law was not as internalised as it was in other countries
also due to the fact that for most of its existence it did not offer any real protection to Polish creators. Poland
also did not witness the important public discussions concerning the nature and function of intellectual
creations, and the scope of their protection, which already had taken place in Western societies in both of
the historical periods analysed above and facilitated the evolution of social norms that would be in line with
copyright regulations. The ratiﬁcation of the ACTA treaty was actually the ﬁrst event that triggered public
debates on that topic, thus the escalation of the dispute should not be a surprise especially as at its core lay a
vital conﬂict between the imposed international regulations and the strongly internalised social norms.
Concluding, the strong social norms favouring unrestricted access to culture and knowledge, in case
of Polish society should not be perceived solely as a new phenomenon triggered by the digital revolution
but also as a general cultural inclination which evolved over time due to the speciﬁc historical
developments.

Conclusion

Application of evolutionary institutional theory allows the conclusion to be reached that the strong
proprietary vision imposed universally through the recent international treaties, which do not take into
account local developments, must necessarily clash with social norms which evolved as a response to
particular historical experiences. The one-size-ﬁts-all formula will never be equally effective in
diversiﬁed world. The law that is detached from social reality will fail to regulate human behaviour, no
matter how severe it may become, as the mechanisms of civil disobedience (no matter whether justiﬁed in
this situation or not) will lead to revolutionary or “martyr’s” behaviours as observed in the Pirate Bay case,
where the accused managed to create the self-image of heroes ﬁghting for the just case and exhorting

52

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

Internet users to follow the suit. However, being a highly political issue, copyright laws nowadays are not
that easily changed.

Both these inferences seem to lead the Polish Ministry for Administration and Digitization that did not
ignore the strong anti-ACTA protests, but launched a round table gathering various stakeholders to
negotiate a potential compromise with regard to copyright law that would satisfy conﬂicting interests,
remaining, however, in accordance with the general framework of international law. The four rounds of
negotiations shown that quite liberal Polish provisions on private use might be further modiﬁed in the
“user-friendly” mode, given that a compromise on the question of the remuneration for the use of content
material in the Internet will be found. The diversiﬁcation between the commercial and non-commercial
use is also a potential option. The most immediate reform is supposed to remain within the current
international regime, using, however, the possible exceptions to the maximum. Nevertheless in the last
part of negotiations suggestion arose that Poland might even be willing to start a campaign on re-
negotiating some international treaties so that they would reintroduce the lost balance of various interests
protected by the copyright regime,34 as this is the only way to restore law’s ability to regulate human
behaviour in the ﬁeld of distribution of artistic and intellectual creations.

About the Author
Katarzyna Gracz, PhD Candidate, Department of Law, European University Institute, Villa
Schifanoia—Via Boccaccio 121, I-50133 Florence, Italy; e-mail: katarzyna.gracz@eui.eu. I am currently
concluding my doctoral thesis Copyright in Decline? Systems Theory, Autopoiesis of Law and the Crisis
of Copyright Law in the Digital Era under supervision of Prof. Giovanni Sartor

Notes

I would like to thank my supervisor Prof. Giovanni Sartor; Prof. Adam Czarnota, Prof. Onwubiko
Agozino, my husband Cyprian Gracz, my colleagues: Anna Ciszek, Angela Daly, Dr Benjamin Farrand,
Bruno Kamin´ski, Dr Adrian Ku¨nzler, Maxime Lambrecht, and the participants of my panel at The 2012
Annual Meeting of the Law and Society Association in Honolulu, the Postgraduate Workshop at Riga
Graduate School of Law and the Conference on the “Intellectual Property in Modern Europe—Tracing the
Expansion of a Concept” in Leipzig for their fruitful comments and all the help they offered in the process
of writing this paper. Dzie˛kuje˛ tez˙ Mamie, Tacie i całej Rodzinie za okazana˛ pomoc i wsparcie. All errors
and conclusions remain mine.
1. Requirement for anti-circumvention laws was globalised in 1996 with the creation of the WIPO Copyright Treaty.
2. See for example, TRIPS Agreement, WIPO Treaties, etc.
3. The expressions used by the opponents of the current international regime of intellectual property law to describe
their actions include: “war,” “consumers’
the users’ rights,” “electronic civil
disobedience,” etc. See for example Rimmer, 2007); See the content of the web page http://thepiratebay.org/:
The whole rhetoric of the Pirate Bay, beginning from the name and ofﬁcial logo of the service (the pirates’ ship) to
the revolutionary statements and symbols (e.g. the pirate-bay ﬁst), indicate belligerent attitude towards the current
copyright regime in general, and right holders in particular. Note especially the language used by the authors of
the Pirate Bay in the responses to the legal threats sent by copyright holders at http://thepiratebay.org/legal
(Accessed 4 April 2012) and the manifesto published on the day when the Pirate Bay’s administrators were
sentenced to prison at http://thepiratebay.se/blog (note from 1 February 2012, Accessed 4 April 2012), stating
“2012 is the year of the storm. (…) Experiencing raids, espionage and death threats, we’re still here. We’ve been
through hell and back and it has made us tougher than ever. (…) In this year of the storm, the winners will build
windmills and the losers will raise shelters. So ﬂex your muscles, fellow pirates, and give power to us all! Build

revolution,” “ﬁght for

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

53

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

more sites! More nets! More protocols! Scream louder than ever and take it to the next level!”; See also: Sebastian
Lu¨tger from the Pirate Cinema referring to the statement by Mark Getty, the owner of Getty Images who in
Lu¨tger’s words is “the largest intellectual proprietor in the world (…) who once said: intellectual property is the
oil of the 21st century” in Lu¨tger’s opinion it is “a fantastic quote, you can condense it to one word, that is: ’war’.
He declared war with that statement, saying we will ﬁght for (…) these completely illusionary rights to images,
ideas, texts, inventions (…) just as we are ﬁghting now for access to natural resources. He declared war.” See Steal
this Film 2, Directed by Jamie King, produced by The League of Noble Peers, released in 2007, available at:
http://www.stealthisﬁlm.com/Part2/ (Accessed 8 May 2011, at 00:05:40 of the ﬁlm). There is an additional irony
to Getty’s statement as he actually comes from a family of billionaires which originally made its money from oil.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Getty (Accessed 8 May 2011).The recent protests against ACTA in some
countries, especially Poland were also full of anger and revolutionary rhetoric that was present both in “real” life
as evidenced by the massive street protests (see the photos at http://wyborcza.pl/duzy_kadr/0,98792.html?

tag¼acta) and in the virtual world that suffered numerous hackers’ attacks organised mostly by the Anonymous

network (e.g. http://ireport.cnn.com/docs/DOC-734863).

4. For a general review of sociological theories dealing with the concept of “social norms” (See: e.g, Horne, 2005,

pp. 3–34).

5. In introducing the model described, an important reservation in terms of the scope of this analysis is in order: it
does not attempt to reconstruct the entire history of copyright law, but instead solely focuses on four important
phases that could be regarded as landmarks in its development.

6. In ancient Mesopotamia as well as among the ancient Jews, scribes belonged to the highest social elites and
enjoyed great esteem. In ancient Egypt the respect towards them was so high that they were considered part of the
royal court and were exempted from tax and military obligations.

7. The level of complexity of the rituals involved in the process of copying the holy texts could be nowadays
illustrated by the procedures followed by sofers—Jewish scribes, who transcribe by hand Torah scrolls and other
religious writings, and are one of the last representatives of this profession in the current era. See for example Ray
(1999) and Kolatch (1994); for a general bibliography on the topic see http://www.sofer.co.uk/html/sources.htm
(accessed 24 January 2013).

8. Although the analysis focuses on the history of the books’ market, the same pattern could be reconstructed with

regard to other creative works.

9. Petrarch in 1363 lamented that the copyists were so eager to make their proﬁt that they reproduced his epic
“Africa” before ﬁnal correction, Bocaccio was similarly concerned to safeguard his texts until he deemed them
ready for circulation.

10. As already mentioned, the libraries with the advent of print decommissioned the obsolete services of scribes and
illuminators and replaced them with printing machines, themselves at the same time turning from intermediaries
coordinating the work of others into publishers.

11. A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors, or Purchasers

of such Copies, during the Times therein Mentioned 1709, 8 Anne c.19, (CJ 16:369).

12. Exemptions for the reproduction of a work in a limited number of copies for the purpose of private practice,
study or use of the person making the copies appeared for the ﬁrst time in early 1900 versions of Dutch and
German copyright statutes, and a provision concerning a private use in French law was introduced as late as in
1957.

13. BGH, 24 June 1955- Aktz.: I ZR 88/54 (Mikrokopien) in GRUR 11/1955.
14. BGH, 29 May 1964—Aktz.: Ib ZR 4/63 in GRUR 02/1965.
15. However, in the UK neither the right to the private copy nor the levy system exist.
16. This part of the analysis is strongly inspired by the article written by Wu (2003).
17. The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) is a multinational treaty for the purpose of establishing

international standards for intellectual property rights enforcement.

54

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

18. Obviously the sheer fact of using an Internet is not enough to explain these dependencies. The Internet users differ
from the non-users in terms of age, wealth, educational background and this whole aggregate of variables explains
why Internet users are more active in social and cultural life than non-users.

19. Opinion poll conducted on 28–29 January 2012 on a representative sample of 1003 Poles by Millward Brown
SMG/KRC. See http://centrumcyfrowe.pl/2012/protest-w-sprawie-acta-to-walka-mlodych-o-wolnosc-w-inter-
necie-potwierdzaja-wyniki-badan/

20. For the sake of this article the fact whether ACTA does or does not change much in the Polish legal system is not
important. What counts, however, is the fact that this treaty is associated with the very strong proprietary vision of
protecting intellectual property rights.

21. The manuscript era is irrelevant for this comparison as there are no important differences between the various

countries to be observed in this period.

22. The most important difference between these two types of privileges was the fact that the ecclesiastical privileges
covered only a particular edition, thus the publishers had to apply for the protection every time they wanted to
reprint another edition of the same work.

23. Due to the growing interest in religious studies, Greek and Hebrew were widely studied in Poland at that period.
24. Czech was at that time a language widely spoken by the Polish elites.
25. The ﬁrst copyright regulations in the Polish territory incorporated to Austria were enacted in 1811, in the parts

partitioned by Russia in 1828 and in the Prussian part—in 1835.

26. A very famous case of a publisher from Poznan´ who was not allowed (under the sanction of arrest) by the censors
to sell the series of postcards and photographs by Artur Grottger titled Polonia and Lithuania proves that the
slightest patriotic message in a Polish work was enough to ban the work from ofﬁcial circulation.

27. The German Copyright Act 1837 determined the author to be the primordial subject of copyright. The § 1 of the
Act held that the right to reproduction, distribution (including remuneration for the distributed works) belongs
“solely to the author” (nur dem Autor derselben). Although similar wording was not included in the ﬁrst Austrian
or Russian copyright acts—the entirety of regulations proved that the author was meant to be the pivot of the
protection system (and not, e.g. a publisher as it used to be in the privilege system).

28. In Polish: magnetofon szpulowy.
29. Very rarely did the recordings originate from the illegal import.
30. In Polish: famous “powielacze” that played an important role in the resistance movement against the communism.
31. In Polish: “drugi obieg.”
32. It was introduced by the Copyright Legal Act in 1994: Prawo autorskie z 1994 r.
33. This vision is still strongly reinforced in Polish schools where literature, and art generally, are described primarily

as the carriers of national identity used in the ﬁght for independence.

34. All the reports from the proceedings of the round table on the reform of intellectual property law in Poland are

available at: http://warsztaty.mac.gov.pl/prawo_autorskie/doku.php?id¼warsztat_2520prawo_2520autorskie.

References

A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors, or Purchasers of

such Copies, during the Times therein Mentioned 1709, 8 Anne c.19., (CJ 16:369).

Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc v The British Phonograph Industry Ltd (1986) FSR 159 (CA) (Grundig Reporter
case) BGH, 24 June 1955- Aktz.: I ZR 88/54 (Mikrokopien) in GRUR 11/1955. (Personalausweise case) BGH,
29 May 1964–Aktz.: Ib ZR 4/63 in GRUR 02/1965.

Benis, A. (1887) Ochrona praw autorskich w dawnej Polsce. Pamie˛tnik Słuchaczy Uniwersytetu Jagiellon´ skiego
Wydany Staraniem I Nakładem Młodziez˙ y Akademickiej Na Urocystos´ c´ Otwarcia “Collegii Novi”. Drukarnia
Uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego pod zarzadem A.M. Kosterkiewicza, Krako´w.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

55

Katarzyna Gracz

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Bicchieri, C. H., Jeffry, R. and Skyrms, B. (eds) (1997) The Dynamics of Norms. Cambridge University Press, New

York.

Booton, D. E. (2010a) Manuscripts, Market and the Transition to Print in Late Medieval Brittany. Ashgate, Farnham,

Surrey, England, Burlington, VT.

Booton, D. E. (2010b) ‘The Librarius and Libraire as Witnesses to the Evolving Book Trade in Ducal Brittany’, Pecia.

Le livre et l’e´ crit, 13, pp. 251–263.

Bain, R. (1937) ‘Technology and State Government’, American Sociological Association. 2(6). pp. 860–874.
Czapin´ski, J. and Panek, T. (eds) (2009) Diagnoza Społeczna 2009. Available at <http://www.diagnoza.com>

[Accessed April 2013].

[Accessed April 2013].

Czapin´ski, J. and Panek, T. (eds) (2011) Diagnoza Społeczna 2011. Available at <http://www.diagnoza.com>
Dunin-Wa˛sowicz, P. Inny Obieg. Available at <http://www.zinelibrary.pl/index.php?option¼com_content&view¼
article&id¼15%3Ainny-obieg&catid¼11%3Ao-zinach&Itemid¼3&fe0c5785f673d3794b20f9d4b6f1b88a¼
e89b83c989def4629733fbccf44dd8b3> [Accessed January 2013].

Durkheim, E. (1915) The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. Free Press, New York.
Durkheim, E. (1951) Suicide. Free Press, New York.
Durkheim, E. ([1903] 1953) ‘The Determination of Moral Facts’, in Durkheim E. (ed.) Sociology and Philosophy.

Cohen and West, London, pp. 36–43.

Ferenc-Szydełko, E. (2000) Prawo Autorskie na ziemiach polskich do 1926 r. Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu

Jagiellon´skiego, Prace z Wynalazczos´ci i. Ochrony Własnos´ci Intelektalnej, Zeszyt 75, Krako´w.

Filiciak, M., Hofmokl, J. and Tarkowski, A. (2011) Obiegi Kultury. Społeczna cyrkulacja tres´ ci report on the basis of
the opinion poll conducted between 20 September to 2 October 2011 based on Computer Assisted Web
Interviewing method regarding a representative sample of 1283 Polish Internet users.

Gentz, G. (1952) ‘U¨ berspielungsfreiheit zum perso¨nlichen Gebrauch?’, GRUR 11/1952.
Go´rski, A. (1891) W kwestyi własnos´ ci literackiej. Odb. z “Biblioteki Warszawskiej”, Warszawa.
Guibault, L., Hugenholtz, P. B. and van Geffen, S. (2003) The Future of Levies in a Digital Environment. Final Report.

Available at <http://www.ivir.nl/publications/other/DRM&levies-report.pdf> [Accessed January 2013].

Homans, G. C. (1961) Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. Harcourt, Brace, New York, p. 12.
Horne, C. H. (2005) ‘Sociological Perspectives on the Emergence of Social Norms’, in Hechter M. and Opp K-.D.

(eds) Social Norms. Russell Sage Foundation, New York, pp. 3–34.

Johnson, P. (1987) A History of the Jews. Harper & Row, New York.
Kolatch, A. J. (1994) This is the Torah. Jonathan David Publishers, Inc., New York.
Luhmann, N. (2008) Law as a Social System. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
MacQueen, H., Waelde, C. H. and Laurie, G. (2007) Contemporary Intellectual Property: Law and Policy. Oxford

University Press, Oxford.

Mann, W. (2010) Rock Mann czyli jak nie zostałem saksofonista˛. Wydawnictwo Znak, Krako´w.
McLain, C. D. (2005) Writing on the Tablet of the Heart: Origins of Scripture and Literature. Oxford University Press,

New York.

Millward Brown SMG/KRC, Opinion poll conducted on 28–29 January 2012 on a representative sample of 1003 Poles

on their attitude towards intellectual property law in general and to ACTA in particular.

Parsons, T. (1952) The Social System. Free Press, New York.
Patterson, L. R. (1968) Copyright in Historical Perspective. Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville, TN.
Pczak, M. (1988) ‘Kilka uwag o trzech obiegach’, Wie˛z´ , 2, (352). pp. 25–36.
Ray, E. (1999) Sofer: The Story of a Torah Scroll. Torah Aura Productions, Los Angeles, CA.
Reinbothe, J. (2003) ‘Private Copying, Levies and DRMs against the Background of the EU Copyright Frameworks’.
Paper presented at the Conference on The Compatibility of DRM and Levies, organised by Rightscom Ltd.,

56

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

Bridging the Gaps Between Social and Legal Norms

Katarzyna Gracz

London, 8 September. Available at <http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/documents/2003-speech-
reinbothe_en.htm> [Accessed January 2013].

Rice, M. (2001) Who’s Who in Ancient Egypt. Routledge, London.
Rimmer, M. (2007) Digital Copyright and the Consumer Revolution: Hands Off My iPod. Edward Elgar Publishing,

Cheltenham.

Rose, M. (1993) Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Steinmo, S. (2010) The Evolution of Modern States: Sweden, Japan, and the United States. Cambridge University

Press, New York.

Teubne, G. (ed.) (1988) Autopoietic Law: A New Approach to Law and Society. W. de Gruyter, Berlin.
Watson, R. (2003) Illuminated Manuscripts and Their Makers. V & A Publications, London.
Wrong, D. (1994) The Problem of Order: What Unites and Divides a Society. Free Press, New York.
Wu, T. (2003) ‘When Code Is Not Law’. Virginia Law Review, 89(4). pp. 103–170.
http://centrumcyfrowe.pl
http://en.wikipedia.org
http://www.sofer.co.uk/html/sources.htm
http://www.stealthisﬁlm.com
http://thepiratebay.org/
http://thepiratebay.se/blog

http://warsztaty.mac.gov.pl/prawo_autorskie/doku.php?id¼warsztat_2520prawo_2520autorskie

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 1–2

57


