The  (2012) Vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 133–154
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2011.00434.x

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises
in Brazil: From Policy Contradictions to Legal
Adjustments

Geoffroy Filoche
Institut de Recherche pour le D ´eveloppement

This article retraces the development of the Brazilian legal framework with regard to access and beneﬁt sharing
and the protection by patent of biotechnological innovations. It demonstrates that 20 years on from the adoption
of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Brazil no longer has the same attitude or the same expectations with
regard to its genetic resources. The control of the State over access procedures and restrictive regimes in terms
of patents are increasingly out of step with the concerns of national researchers and companies alike, and
are the target of both criticisms and reforms. The scientiﬁc community is seeking to acquire prerogatives for
managing genetic heritage, while the State is seeking to strengthen the national biotechnology sector. How is
the legal environment adjusting to new and sometimes contradictory issues? What is the new interplay between
public and private rights when it comes to genetic resources and natural-based products? To what extent are
“commons” systems emerging—both in terms of accessing biodiversity and in terms of protecting innovations?
Keywords biodiversity; access and beneﬁt sharing; patents; commons

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is now 20 years old. On the occasion of this an-
niversary, it may be noted that Brazil’s attitude and expectations with regard to its biodiversity are
radically different from those asserted in 1992 at the Earth Summit negotiations in Rio de Janeiro.

At that time, new uses for biological resources, particularly those emerging from advances
in genetic engineering and biochemistry, as well as free access to these resources by stakeholders
from northern nations with scientiﬁc and technical capabilities that, it was assumed, would add
considerable value to these resources, led to demands by southern nations for an international system
of access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS) (Beurier, 1996; Hermitte, 1992; Stone, 1995). Article 15 of
the CBD was designed to remedy this state of affairs (Glowka, 1997), subjecting access to genetic
resources to Prior Informed Consent on the part of the supplier State and a sharing of beneﬁts derived
from their exploitation (Young, 2006), while also imposing the obligation of facilitating access, even
if this second aspect is often neglected in practice (Grajal, 1999; Straus, 2008).

As a country that is home to immense terrestrial biodiversity in the Amazon region, the Cerrado
and the Mata Atlˆantica, Brazil positioned itself as a southern nation during CBD negotiations.
Biopiracy has been roundly condemned (Aguiar, 2002), even if the uncertain meaning of this term,
its approximate use and the widely differing situations it is used to denounce mean that it is not
always easy to clarify matters or ﬁnd solutions that are satisfactory for all parties (Aubertin and
Moretti, 2007; Chen, 2006). At the same time, during negotiations on intellectual property—whether
in the forum of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) or that of the World Trade
Organization (WTO)—Brazil asserted its refusal to grant intellectual property rights (IPRs) such
as patents to naturally occurring substances, even though rights on cultivars such as those deﬁned
by International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) have been recognized
nationally since 1997.1 This refusal to grant patents stemmed from a number of factors: ethical

C(cid:2) 133

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

grounds (nature is not a commodity), technological grounds (genes and their properties were not
invented by mankind) and socioeconomic grounds (preventing the enrichment of some with nothing
given in return).

Brazilian legal policy, with regard to both ABS and IPR, has been dictated by fear and political
initiative. The fear is that of losing control of genetic resources and natural substances during the
course of innovation processes: these are frequently long, involve many different stakeholders and
make it difﬁcult to identify the original natural items in the ﬁnal outcome. The political initiative
has involved reafﬁrming both Brazil’s sovereignty over biodiversity with regard to third countries
and the pro-eminence of state authorities with respect to its own citizens. The result may be termed
biodiversity fetishism: biodiversity has become an object of economic fantasizing, a mirror of the
national identity and a political taboo, embodied in an ABS regime that has resulted in prevention
of access and failure to use the resources.

However, over the two intervening decades, Brazil has undergone a number of major changes. It is
no longer solely one of the Like-Minded Megadiverse Countries (LMMCs): a “mega-diverse” country
both biologically and geopolitically, acting with other Andean and African states in opposition to
developed nations. Even if it retains something of this stance, as seen in its adoption of the Nagoya
Protocol in October 2010 (Buck and Hamilton, 2011), Brazil is also one of the Brazil, Russia, India,
China and South Africa (BRICS); an emerging nation in scientiﬁc and economic terms, seeking to
add value to its biodiversity through biotechnologies, the development of which is encouraged by
proactive policies enacted by the State.

At the same time, domestically, scientists are becoming unavoidable political players, with in-
creasingly signiﬁcant media inﬂuence, angling to reform national ABS and patent regimes. On the
one hand, researchers feel their legal position is too dependent on others; stuck between the State’s
prerogatives on the one hand (in terms of access permissions), which they feel are illegitimate or
wrongly used, and what are seen as disproportionally broad rights of public and private owners of
land on which genetic resources are found, given that they do nothing to add value to these resources.
On the other hand, a growing number of researchers and biotechnology ﬁrms (sometimes working
closely together) would prefer to see a reform of the outright ban on the patentability of natural
substances, in order to establish incentives for investing in biodiversity. With an eye to the promises
of biotechnology, researchers and companies are debating the consequences of the lack of patentabil-
ity on the nation’s competitiveness, as well as the merits of protecting the interests of the scientiﬁc
community and the general population against overexclusive appropriation of genetic resources and
innovations by any given party, be they local or foreign. Draft legislation reﬂecting these issues is
being examined.

Consequently, two contradictions in biodiversity-related policies may be noted. The ﬁrst contra-
diction may be summarized thus: as much control as possible of resources by the State versus scientists’
mandate to successfully complete their research programmes. Tensions are emerging between the risk
of seeing a resource being utilized with nothing given in return and the risk of obstructing any work
on biodiversity at all. The second contradiction may be stated thus: prohibition of patents on naturally
occurring life forms versus development policies aimed at the biotechnology sector and incentives to pro-
tect innovations. This is a conﬂict between the diffusion and the privatization of resources, scientiﬁc
knowledge and new technologies.

How does the legal framework reﬂect these diverging interests? To what extent is it changing in
the light of these new issues? What is the interplay between various types of rights when it comes
to genetic resources and natural substances? In terms of access to genetic resources, researchers no
longer want biodiversity to be a “no-man’s heritage,” poorly administrated by the State and not
used. In terms of protection of innovations, they want biodiversity-based products to cease to be

134

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

“anybody’s heritage,” that is, freely accessible (even by non-Brazilians), thereby failing to reward
inventors’ work because of the lack of patentability. Their aim is to achieve a shift from an unused
national heritage to a more dynamic heritage whose characteristics would be more along the lines
of a system of common property, with them being the privileged beneﬁciaries. This would involve
facilitating access, allowing exchanges of resources and knowledge between researchers and with
companies, inducing a “network effect” and thus increasing the chances of interesting ﬁndings and
commercial applications. According to this logic, administration of the access to genetic heritage
by the scientiﬁc community and not by the State is held to be more likely to result in scientiﬁc and
economic beneﬁts to be shared. Combining patentability of innovations and sharing them within a
set group (whether at the microlevel of the partners in a speciﬁc project or the macrolevel of, for
instance, all the country’s ﬁrms manufacturing medicines) is held to confer more economic and social
value to this genetic heritage, to the beneﬁt of the country as a whole.

While international treaties entail interlinked property regimes, including commons regimes
(Roa-Rodriguez and van Dooren, 2008), domestic policies and laws structure the relations between
public rights (the State, with its prerogatives in terms of permitting access and regulation of IPRs),
rights common to certain social groups (indigenous communities and research communities) and
private rights (landowners and industries). A commons is a type of property regime, a set of rights
derived from rules or norms held by persons in relation to a good, whether tangible (the natural
substance) or intangible (the innovation). Members of a group regulate access and use of a resource
and have the right to exclude nonmembers (Ostrom and Schlager, 1996). It focuses attention, ﬁrst,
on encouraging the group interactions that foster creativity, and second, on policing the boundary
of behaviors that are disruptive to groups (Rose, 2003).2 Belonging to a group may involve different
categories of access and use rights (Cook-Deegan and Dedeurwaerdere, 2006). Access can refer to
the right to access a resource without being allowed to transform it or do any further research on
it (when a resource is used for educational purposes for instance). Second, accessing a resource can
include the right to transform it and develop new lines of research. Third, permission can be given
to develop and commercialize follow-on applications.

The purpose of this article is to analyze the current interrelations between these bundles of
rights3—public rights, common rights and private rights—with regard to substances as these are
used. It will also seek to reveal trends in how bundles of rights are being restructured in the light
of the new issues emerging for Brazil, and thereby shed light on the changing dialectic between
enclosure and dissemination of genetic resources and biobricks. This will be analyzed in two stages.
The ﬁrst question to be addressed will be whether researchers’ rights to access genetic heritage are
becoming less dependent on public and private-sector stakeholders’ prerogatives and the extent to
which they are acquiring preferential rights in terms of the administration of genetic heritage. This
will be followed by an analysis of the tensions between the private appropriation of innovations
developed from natural substances and the establishment of a national biotechnology industry in the
face of foreign researchers and companies (as well as attempts to reconcile these trends).

Accessing Genetic Resources: Unused Public Heritage or Functioning Commons?
Since its creation in 2000, the Brazilian ABS regime has been the subject of sharp criticism, particularly
by researchers. The State’s prerogatives in terms of access permission have often been seen as being
too exclusive. Serious reservations have been expressed about public authorities’ ability to assess
the potential of scientiﬁc activity in terms of economic outcomes and the way in which the State
decides on beneﬁt-sharing between landowners, public bodies and those who add value to biodiversity
(researchers and companies).

C(cid:2) 135

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Over time, the demands of the scientiﬁc community have been taken into account. Genetic
resources and natural substances have a hybrid status: in spite of the fact that the State retains
signiﬁcant rights and that private rights still exist, the outlines of a system of common property
are gradually emerging. Two conditions are required in order for an ABS scheme to fall into this
category (Schlager and Ostrom, 1992). The ﬁrst is the existence of rights deﬁning that to which a
restricted group has access, under what conditions, and for what purposes. The second condition is
the existence of an institution representing a restricted group that has the power to assign rights and
regulate the system.

To what extent has legislative reform shifted in this direction? First, the framework was reﬁned so
that it corresponded more closely to their concerns and working practices. Increasingly, researchers’
access to genetic resources has been facilitated and sometimes even reserved; movement of resources
has been reestablished and a more operational approach has been taken. Second, to a certain extent
public authorities have delegated their prerogative of permitting access, and sometimes even regula-
tion of the regime, establishing the foundations for self-regulation by scientists through the CNPq
(the National Scientiﬁc and Technological Development Council).4

The ABS Regime: A Consequence and a Source of Controversy
The adoption of the Brazilian ABS regime was precipitated by a controversy with a colossal media
impact. The CBD was ratiﬁed by the National Congress in 1994, and promulgated by the executive
in 1998. As early as 1996, a bill relating to access to genetic resources was drafted and approved by
the Senate, but rejected by the House of Representatives. The same fate befell a number of other bills.
In 1999, Bioamazˆonia (a private-law, nonproﬁt body “social organization”) was set up to implement
PROBEM (the Brazilian Molecular Ecology Programme) as part of the Avanc¸a Brasil Programme.
On 29 May 2000, Bioamazˆonia and Novartis Pharmaceuticals signed an agreement, under the terms
of which Novartis undertook to pay $4 million over a period of 3 years for the right to collect, export
to Switzerland and study 30,000 biological samples from the Amazon rainforest. The terms of the
agreement stated that if Novartis created new products using the samples, the Swiss ﬁrm would hold
all IPRs to these products and the exclusive right to use the extracts for a period of 10 years from
the invention of the products in question. In return, Bioamazˆonia was to receive R$1.6 million for
each clinically tested product, R$750,000 for each patent lodged, R$500,000 on the day on which
any product was put on the market, and 1% of all royalties for a period of 10 years (Scott, 2003).

The agreement instantly drew criticism from NGOs and members of Bioamazˆonia. They de-
nounced the privatization of Brazilian biodiversity by a foreign company, authorized by an organi-
zation that had neither the competency nor the legitimacy to do so (Rocha, 2003). Moreover, the
agreement was not of a nature likely to stimulate Brazilian research, despite this being a founding
principle of the CBD: even if the training of researchers accredited by Bioamazˆonia was involved,
all work on the samples, including extraction of the active chemical principles, was to be carried out
in Switzerland, with Brazil being reduced to the role of supplier of the materials. The agreement was
reviewed in August 2000 and cancelled shortly thereafter.

During this time Provisional Measure no. 2052 was adopted in June 2000, and subsequently
renewed a number of times. Today, it has the status of law, with no need for renewal, and is known
as Provisional Measure no. 2186-16 of 23 August 2001 (MP).5 This MP included creation of the
Conselho de Gest˜ao do Patrimˆonio Gen´etico (CGEN), which became operational in April 2002. The
CGEN is an interministry structure covering the environment, science and technology, agriculture
and so on. The Brazilian environment ministry is responsible for its secretariat, and other institutions
of government and civil society also participate. Its chief remit is to authorize access to the country’s

136

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

genetic resources for commercial purposes (bioprospecting and technological development) (Azevedo
et al., 2005). Although supposedly provisional, this regime has endured through to the present day.
The MP was born out of controversy and went on to give rise to a number of major disputes
itself. Following on from the concerns raised in global scientiﬁc reviews (Jinnah and Jungcurt,
2009), Brazilian researchers criticized the resulting inability to use—or even study—the breadth of
biodiversity on their doorsteps (Marques, 2011). The Sociedade Brasileira para o Progresso da Ciˆencia
(SBPC) reiterated these discussions (Morales, 2010), highlighting the paradox of having research that
was funded but not authorized. Solidarity developed between different researchers, including foreign
nationals (Check and Haydn, 2007), to combat bureaucracy and what were seen as inappropriate
actions on the part of institutions and those responsible for regulations being followed. The rights
of local communities and landowners were not always seen as being legitimate: genetic heritage
was preempted by certain private interests to the detriment of collective interests, represented by
researchers, who could make the potential beneﬁts of this heritage more tangible.

Since Deliberation no. 40 (2002) of the CGEN, the Brazilian Institute for the Environment
and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA) has been the competent body for access to genetic
resources for noncommercial purposes; it has issued a relatively large number of authorizations. Re-
cently, “special authorizations” have even been granted to institutions, including Instituto Butantan,
EMBRAPA and others, to carry out some 40 simultaneous research projects.6 On the other hand,
access permissions for commercial purposes have been delivered far more sporadically by the CGEN.
Between 2002 and 2010, only 73 permissions were granted, 35 for access to genetic heritage and/or
related traditional knowledge, for the purposes of bioprospecting and/or technological development.
Since 2008, some 40 requests for similar purposes have been lodged per year. Over 100 requests for
the same type of purpose are awaiting examination by the CGEN.7 The number of access permissions
granted by the latter in 2010—seven in all—is so low that it appears certain that this procedure is
being bypassed. The random way in which requests appear to be dealt with has drawn criticism: some
permissions take a matter of months, while others have become stuck in the system for years at a
time, with the result that the interested parties have given up making requests.

Toward Clearer, More Adjusted and More Autonomous Rights for Scientists
Under considerable pressure from the scientiﬁc community, the CGEN itself has undertaken a
substantial reform of the regime, thereby exercising its prerogatives under the terms of article 11
of the MP. Could recent changes to the normative framework result in a commons for researchers,
granting them rights that are less dependent on those of landowners and the state? As already noted,
two conditions are required in order for an ABS scheme to fall into this category. The ﬁrst is the
existence of rights deﬁning that to which a restricted group has access, under what conditions, and
for what purposes.

Initially, the scope of the ABS regime was the subject of major misunderstandings (Aubertin

et al., 2007; Santilli, 2005). Article 7 of the MP deﬁnes genetic heritage as follows:

information of genetic origin to be found in samples of all or part of a plant, fungus,
microbe or animal species, in the form of molecules or substances from the metabolism
of these living species or extracts obtained from in situ or ex situ conditions.

This broad deﬁnition, combining materials and information and the molecular and genetic
levels, fuelled scientists’ errors: the latter did not know into which legal category the subject of their
research or activity fell into; it also fuelled approximations by certain NGOs keen to identify a
newsworthy case of biopiracy. Initially, any activity relating to a biological resource was assumed
to be concerned by the access to genetic heritage regime. This regime became a center of gravity, to

C(cid:2) 137

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

which any technical or production-based relationship with the environment was gradually drawn.
In this scheme of things, access to a biological resource entailed the theoretical possibility of having
access to its genetic heritage. Moreover, using a biological resource for any purpose could be seen as
being equivalent to using its genetic characteristics (Tvedt, 2006).

The scope was subsequently clariﬁed, on three separate occasions, progressively relaxing the
State’s hold vis-`a-vis all stakeholders. The ﬁrst, fundamental clariﬁcation involved drawing a distinc-
tion between collecting a biological resource and having access to genetic heritage (CGEN Technical
Orientation no. 1 of 24 September 2003).8 Collecting was deﬁned as the activity of obtaining sam-
ples (or part of an animal or plant) on the basis of in situ conditions. Permission to collect (by
landowners or public institutions, depending on the legal status of the land) was required due to the
need to control the potential impact of collection on the environment. Access to genetic heritage,
on the other hand, was deﬁned as activity carried out on samples collected in situ or obtained ex
situ (germplasm banks, extract libraries, etc.) with “the purpose of isolating, identifying or using
information of genetic origin, molecules, metabolic substances or extracts obtained on the basis
of these samples.” Access permission was required due to the need to control this activity with a
view to sharing its potential beneﬁts. The distinction between collecting and access involved differ-
ent scenarios. For instance, genetic resources could be accessed without collecting if the samples
came from collections or herbaria. Moreover, following IBAMA Normative Instruction no. 154
(20079), while the collection of fauna must be the subject of permission from this institution in
all cases, the same does not apply to ﬂora if they are not native plants of ornamental interest
and do not feature on the list of endangered species. Similarly, there is no need for permission to
collect microorganisms. Contrary to what many critics opposing the Brazilian regime say, there is
no need for secondary school students to obtain permission to pick a blade of grass and study it
under the microscope. Public authorities do not exercise total control over resources, even if exces-
sive zeal on the part of employees responsible for upholding environmental laws—and with little
training in the subtleties of biodiversity law, research practices and botanical science—is sometimes
highlighted.

The second clariﬁcation drew a distinction between access to genetic heritage and certain standard
uses of resources, which doesn’t involve high scientiﬁc input, in order to not disturb basic technical
processes CGEN Resolution no. 29 (of 6 December 200710) excluded development of “ﬁxed oils,
essential oils and extracts” from the scope of access legislation for developments based on isolation,
extraction or puriﬁcation, and if the characteristics of the ﬁnal product were “substantially equivalent
to the original raw material.” For instance, if a party wishes to make an essential oil (such as andiroba)
or use a natural extract (such as stevia) from a biological resource to make beverages, there is no need
to request access permission from any public authority. However, they must request permission from
the private owner of the land from which these resources are taken. The framework is determined on
the basis of processing: the closer the ﬁnal product is to the initial resource, the more it falls under the
standard regime for the use of natural resources. The ABS regime does not seek to prevent artisanal
or standard uses of resources (or even industrial use, in the case of beverages), relating rather to their
more technological—and more mythical—use (pharmaceutical products, genetics).

The regime initially established by the MP was characterized by simplistic conceptions of re-
search practices and objectives. In a third stage of clariﬁcation of the scope, changes to the frame-
work have cast research activity as being less “threatening.” Many scientiﬁc activities no longer
require access permissions. CGEN Resolution no. 21 (of 31 August 200611) removes certain types
of activity such as taxonomic, systematic and phylogenetic research from the scope of the MP:
previously, these counted as access to genetic heritage on the basis that molecular methodology
tools were indeed used, although the objective was not access to genetic heritage in and of itself.

138

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

In such cases, scientists now enjoy preferential access to genetic resources, particularly if these are
to be found in ex situ collections. The impacts of the Nagoya Protocol on this scope are not yet
clear. Where is the limit between the use of resources in the context of ABS12 and the creation
of added value on the basis of commodities which are traded daily in large quantities? Similarly,
will Resolution 21 be held compatible with article 6a of the Protocol13 (Aubertin and Filoche,
2011)?

In addition to progressively qualifying the scope of the ABS regime, the rules relating to beneﬁt
sharing in the event of access for commercial purposes have also been relaxed, at least to some
extent. According to articles 25–29 of the MP, while the landowner or native community must give
prior consent (anuˆencia pr´evia) and sign the Contract for the Use of Genetic Heritage and Beneﬁt
Sharing (Contrato de Utilizac¸ ˜ao do Patrimˆonio Gen´etico e de Repartic¸ ˜ao de Benef´ıcios—CURB) if
access relates to a resource present on their land or their traditional knowledge, ultimately the CURB
has to be validated by the CGEN to ensure it is in the national interest. As originally designed, the
MP required a CURB of this nature to be signed even before research commenced. However, the
reality is that researchers and companies do not know exactly what they are going to ﬁnd, or where,
which prevents them from formulating an appropriate request. In addition, work on the use of genetic
resources extends over both time and space, which entails gradual contractualization (Boisvert and
Vivien, 2005): access to the physical resource, initial tests on chemical activity, increased supplies of
fresh or dry matter and so on. Decree no. 6159 (of 17 July 200714) now makes it possible, in the
event of requests for access for the purposes of bioprospecting, to postpone signature of the CURB
until such time as commercial potential is clearer. Similarly, CGEN Technical Guideline no. 6 (of 28
August 200815) clariﬁed the notion of potential for commercial use. Henceforth, projects involving
access to genetic heritage are only qualiﬁed as bioprospecting (and thus subject to more stringent
rules) if activities seeking to assess the viability of industrial or commercial production of a product
or process are commenced. This makes it easier to transition from one regime to another, and settle
the issue of beneﬁt sharing only once beneﬁts have become more likely. Rights of both researchers
and companies are thus less subject to the rights of landowners and the government, at least initially:
the latter’s rights only come into play after a period, during which there is greater freedom for those
working on the resource. Lastly, Resolution no. 35 (of 27 April 201116) allows for regularization
of illegal access activities. In certain circumstances, this breaks the deadlock for such applications,
allowing the country to enjoy any beneﬁts arising out of any fruitful research. The Nagoya Protocol
is not explicit with regard to all these aspects, designed to relax the rules and free up access. It does
not fully take into account the fact that at the end of the day, the probability of success can best be
improved by multiplying the number of projects. It also appears that the Protocol may not have much
impact on the choices of individuals and institutions with the power to issue access permissions for
genetic heritage.

As a result of these gradual reforms, while public and private rights still exist, the ﬁrst condition
for a system of common property does seem to be present to a certain extent: there are now rights
deﬁning that to which a restricted group has access, under what conditions, and for what purposes.
Henceforth, the less any given research is assumed to have a commercial application, the more
researchers’ access rights to genetic resources are independent of any other consideration. Moreover,
the presumption of a commercial application is becoming more restricted: even research conducted
in direct relationship with companies beneﬁt from this commons approach, at least in the initial
R&D stages. Lastly, as will be seen, the most recent reforms of the regimes have tended to grant
prerogatives in terms of administration of genetic heritage to the research community via its own
institution (the CNPq), even for research with commercial aims.

C(cid:2) 139

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Decentralization of Permission Decisions and Increased Autonomy for the Scientiﬁc Community?
The second condition for an ABS regime to conﬁgure a commons to the beneﬁt of researchers is
the existence of an institution representing a restricted group that has the power to assign rights and
regulate the system.

Initially, the MP had a twofold concern: assigning the prerogative to grant access to a supreme
public body, and taking into account the rights of landowners and/or indigenous and traditional
communities. Initially, rights to resources based on land ownership, rather than on the rights to work
on these resources, are privileged. In the event of access for noncommercial purposes, if the research
can be considered as contributing to “progress with regard to biodiversity,” prior permission from
landowners (anuˆencia pr´evia) is not required (Resolution no. 8, 2003). Nevertheless, those wishing
to access genetic resources must obtain permission to enter the territory in question, although this
procedure is less formal and can even be simply oral. In the case of scientiﬁc activity that is exempt
from permission (Resolution no. 21), the question of whether landowners retain any rights, and if
so which, is not speciﬁed. It may be concluded that the permission to enter the property is what is
applicable. In the case of access to genetic resources for commercial purposes, the prior agreement
(anuˆencia pr´evia) must be obtained from a number of stakeholders (the landowner, community or
public body) in addition to the permission issued by the CGEN. Article 2 of the MP states that
access to genetic heritage may be permitted only with permission of the Union, and that any “use,
commercialization or proﬁt” with regard to the resources is subject to control, restrictions and
beneﬁt sharing. The rights of landowners and local communities are thus framed and validated by
a government institution representing the collective interests of the Brazilian people, which may
refuse to grant access even if the landowners and communities are in favor of it. In this instance,
even if the landowner or community grant their permission for collection and access, the CGEN
has the right to refuse access to the genetic resource or traditional knowledge. Conversely, if the
landowner or community do not grant permission, public institutions have no way of overriding this
position.

Article 16 of the MP has been considerably altered, with the CGEN gradually eliminating its own
prerogatives. Since 2002, access to genetic resources for scientiﬁc research was authorized by IBAMA.
Then, in Deliberation no. 246 (of 27 August 200917), the CNPq acquired jurisdiction with regard to
access for scientiﬁc research, the idea being that it was closer to researchers’ concerns and was more
competent when it came to assessing requests. Contrary to rumor in the scientiﬁc community in 2010,
the CNPq still has to deliver permission, with the same requirements as for the CGEN: the system
does not guarantee that a straightforward declaration by researchers will automatically be accepted.
Recently, Deliberation no. 26818 has gone even further: the CNPq now has the remit to permit access
for commercial purposes. Traditional knowledge remains within the purview of the CGEN, in the light
of its strong symbolism and controversies regarding the activities of certain companies and researchers
(Filoche and Foyer, 2011). Despite this major development, the rights of landowners and indigenous
communities with regard to resources have not changed, and the State is still very much present. On
the one hand, according to article 2 of the Deliberation, the CNPq must abide by the Resolutions and
Technical Guidelines drawn up by the CGEN, even if the vast majority of these texts aim to make the
system more ﬂexible. A number of questions remain unanswered: what criteria for assessing requests
will be developed by the CNPq? Will it manage to overcome the risks of bureaucracy? Will it draw a
distinction between the way that public research institutions and private companies are dealt with?
On the other hand, article 2 of Deliberation no. 268 also states that the CURB remains subject to
approval by the CGEN, which continues to have the role of safeguarding the public interest, even if in
actual fact, the degree of control it exercises varies between two extremes. If the resource comes from

140

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

indigenous or private land, the CGEN simply approves the contract, without seeking to inﬂuence its
contents, unless it identiﬁes a procedural defect or ﬂagrant abuse of power. If the resources are located
on public land, the CGEN examines the clauses of the contract much more closely and may impose its
position.

What changes would have been the result of the Bill of 15 September 2009, sponsored jointly
by the Environment Ministry and the Ministry of Science and Technology? Two key points may
be noted. First, researchers were required to register with the Cadastro Nacional de Biodiversidade
(CNB), set up and administrated by the CNPq. The purpose was to facilitate requests (made on-
line) and to enable information about stakeholders and projects to be monitored and centralized,
making this more visible both within and outside the community. Second, and more importantly,
only activity involving access to genetic resources for the development of products and processes
for commercial and industrial purposes required a license from the CGEN (article 19). Conversely,
(article 26), scientiﬁc research did not require a license; registration with the Cadastro became suf-
ﬁcient. However, project bearers were required to make a declaration after the fact in the event
of research producing commercial applications. Permission implied the existence of discretionary
powers, as opposed to the license, which could be delivered as soon as all the relevant documents
had been ﬁled, without public authorities being able to oppose this. This bill was an undeniable
step forward in institutional terms, since nobody expected the environment ministry and the science
ministry to be able to agree. While the bill was not radically different in terms of reasoning com-
pared to the MP, it nevertheless represented progress in terms of making noncommercial research
a more routine matter: permission became automatic, provided that the relevant documents were
supplied. However, in terms of decentralizing remits, the present system goes further than this bill:
in the bill, permissions for commercial purposes were to be delivered by the CGEN and not the
CNPq.

It is unlikely that this bill will ever be adopted, given the extreme politicization of the debate,
both between ministers and between state authorities and NGOs. However, the silent and gradual
reforms within the CGEN have not given rise to any particular controversy with the latter. At the
same time, certain stakeholders, not content with the adjustments to the MP (such as the SBPC),
are demanding a complete overhaul of the system. Either way, and whatever the reasons (political
maneuvering, a lack of information or a regime that is too complex) the reforms and reﬁnements are
poorly understood by those toward whom they are directed; the latter simultaneously believe that
these reforms go further than they actually do—and fail to comment on the more positive reforms.
CGEN Deliberation no. 268, which marks a completely new departure, is too recent for it to be
possible to establish whether the research community has been satisﬁed or whether the CNPq will
take on a role in which it truly represents researchers rather than being a body closer to the public
authorities.

The access system has thus become a hybrid of public heritage, private property and common
property. First, by virtue of their status of researcher, scientists increasingly enjoy preferential rights
and may have easier access to a given resource, especially in the case of noncommercial research,
even if important private rights and public hold remain. Second, the institution that will now be
responsible for administration of heritage (deciding what to do with it, on what terms and the extent
to which other public and private interests should be taken into account) is indeed one that represents
(at least theoretically) the research community—even if the CGEN retains certain prerogatives. Once
a researcher or research team has access to a genetic resource and carries out the planned work, it
may develop innovations based on this and protect these innovations. This then leads to the issue of
how rights to these innovations, and natural substances by the same token, are allocated.

C(cid:2) 141

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Protecting Innovations: Public Control or Privatization of Biotechnologies?
After the question of access to genetic heritage (the right to grant permission versus the rights of others
to obtain it) comes the question of innovation on the basis of this heritage (the right to appropriate this
resource versus the rights of others to reuse it). Brazil’s changing status, as it shifts from a supplier of
raw resources to a creator of added value through biotechnologies, is perceptible in emerging policy,
and implies a reorganization of the bundle of rights with regard to natural substances. First, the State
is seeking to ensure legal control of innovations not only with regard to foreign countries, but also
with regard to private domestic interests. Second, the State is limiting the degree to which resources
of the basis of innovations can be appropriated, even if these limitations are hotly contested. Lastly,
the State is encouraging the development of the national biotechnology sector: rights sharing takes
place when innovations are transferred from university research to industrial laboratories.

Linking ABS and IPRs to Nationalize Innovation
The emergence of biotechnologies in Brazil concerns a wide number of ﬁelds and does not always
relate to substances found in nature (Rezaie et al., 2008). Nevertheless, there are a great range of
potential uses of the latter: biochemical active principles (which may or may not synthesized) in
a pharmaceutical compound, anti-inﬂammatory, antiparasitical or cosmetic properties of plants,
production of proteins by microorganisms, genome sequencing, identiﬁcation of genes that can with-
stand certain parasites or climatic conditions and so on. At present, generally speaking, exploitation
of these resources has not lived up to the huge hopes raised by the CBD (Ten Kate and Laird, 2002).
Either pharmaceutical ﬁrms have techniques other than bioprospecting for discovering new active
principles (biomimetics, bioinformatics, etc.) or the strategy is to devise inventions on the basis of
known, tested molecules (Firn, 2003; Moretti and Aubertin, 2007). Nevertheless, natural substances
still appear to be indispensable resources for the future (Li and Vederas, 2009).

Since the Rio Summit, the trend has been a gradual extension of the ﬁeld of the patentability of
life forms (Dutﬁeld, 2003; Safrin, 2004). International patentability standards have been crystallized
in the 1994 Trade-Related Aspects of IPRs (TRIPS agreement), which has been adopted by the
WTO. Article 27.3 b) of TRIPS allows States to exclude certain types of invention from patentability
if they so wish: plants, animals and essentially biological processes. However, microorganisms and
nonbiological and microbiological processes must be patentable. TRIPS does not speciﬁcally rule
on patentability of nucleotide sequences, molecules or proteins, for instance, all of which are natural
“objects” that form the basis of innovations that can be protected by patents in the Western world
(Grubb and Thomsen, 2010). In joining the WTO, Brazil has aligned itself with international practice,
but only to a certain extent. While it now authorizes patents on medicines and chemical substances,
natural elements that form the basis of an innovation may not be patented per se, and their use is
free from any IPR.

The 1996 law on industrial property19 (LPI) was adopted amid considerable mobilization shortly
after the Rio Summit, when biopiracy was uppermost in people’s minds (Beas Rodrigues, 2010).
Brazil had recourse to two lines of argument for prohibiting the patentability of naturally occurring
life forms during negotiations to reform TRIPS and adopt a Substantive Patent Law Treaty (within
the framework of the WIPO). One argument was drawn from the “anti-globalization” arsenal. This
argument holds that these life forms are not patentable, not only for ethical reasons (nature is not a
commodity) but also for social and political reasons (the setting up of commons). The other was a
nationalistic argument that sought to defend Brazilian interests by preventing foreign stakeholders
from patenting the properties of certain resources (Nogueira et al., 2010). These arguments have
some similarities—rejecting a foreign hold on biodiversity—but also differ; one does not challenge
the principle of patents at all, but simply seeks to adjust it in favor of the national interest. At the

142

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

same time, patents requests have been lodged by Brazilian researchers and entrepreneurs in United
States and European patent ofﬁces for inventions based on national biodiversity that could not be
patented in Brazil (Balbani et al., 2009; Ryan, 2010).

This is what is at stake in the certiﬁcate of legal origin (also referred to as “mandatory disclosure
of the origin of genetic resources” in the literature), designed to ensure that Brazil, as a public power,
would retain rights over innovations. At the international level, within both the WTO and the WIPO,
Brazil no longer takes the stance of explicitly refusing patentability of naturally occurring life forms.
Rather, it takes the line that if something is to be patentable, the origin of the resource and proof
that it has been acquired legitimately must be speciﬁed. A proposal along these lines was submitted
in April 201120 as part of the reform of TRIPS. The suggested article 29 b 2) read as follows:

where the subject matter of a patent application involves utilization of genetic resources
and/or associated traditional knowledge, Members shall require applicants to disclose:
(i) the country providing such resources, that is, the country of origin of such resources
or a country that has acquired the genetic resources and/or associated traditional knowl-
edge in accordance with the CBD; and, (ii) the source in the country providing the genetic
resources and/or associated traditional knowledge. Members shall also require that appli-
cants provide a copy of an Internationally Recognized Certiﬁcate of Compliance (IRCC)
[as set forth in the Nagoya Protocol]. If an IRCC is not applicable in the providing
country, the applicant should provide relevant information regarding compliance with
prior informed consent and access and fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing as required by
the national legislation of the country providing the genetic resources and/or associated
traditional knowledge [ . . . ].

Domestically, the economy of the patent appears to have been secured, in two respects. First,
access to the genetic resource is controlled by the ABS system, and national control is further
strengthened by the condition (already present from the outset in the MP) of the involvement of a
public research institution or a Brazilian company. In order for a foreign institution or ﬁrm to have
access to genetic heritage, formal cooperation with a national entity is required. The purpose of the
MP is to ensure that Brazilian institutions are positioned as intermediaries between suppliers and
users, and that these institutions receive a share of any beneﬁts and also beneﬁt from the expertise
and resources of foreign partners. Second, the certiﬁcate of legal origin has been implemented since
2010, after many meanderings.21 A certiﬁcate of legal origin enables the party requesting the patents
to prove that the biological resource has been acquired in compliance with the law, that it corresponds
to a speciﬁc location and beneﬁciaries and that Prior Informed Consent has been properly obtained
(Hoare and Tarasofsky, 2007; Pires de Carvalho, 2005). This means that patents registered with INPI,
the Brazilian National Institute of Intellectual Property, are no longer independent from the legal
requirements of ABS, while the CURB enables the State, researchers (through capacity-building
provisions and sharing of IPRs) and landowners to obtain the beneﬁts derived from innovations
made by foreign researchers and ﬁrms. Lastly, this legal control is backed up by the Nagoya Protocol:
article 12 of the latter speciﬁes that foreign user States must ensure that their nationals observe the
law of the supplier State.

Patentability, Availability of Resources and Diffusion of Innovations
To ensure even greater control over biodiversity, the Brazilian State has restricted the ﬁeld of what is
patentable and the implications of patents in terms of exclusive rights to resources. The relationships
between “patents” on life forms and “ownership” of life forms are highly complex. It is impossible
to have an overview of the implications of patents, whether in terms of legal and economic control

C(cid:2) 143

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

of the resource that forms the basis of the invention (or which may even actually be the invention)
or in terms of the possibilities for other stakeholders to have access to the resources to create other
innovations. Rather, an attempt will be made here to present the huge number of variables and their
impact.

First, a continuum can be noted in the way life forms are apprehended corresponding to the
various disciplines of researchers: these range from work at the level of the genome, the proteome
(proteins expressed within a cell) or metabolome (small molecules that exist within organisms). The
subjects of scientiﬁc research range from genetic sequences producing amino acids through to
the chemical compounds to be found within macromolecules. The diversity of scientiﬁc activity
relating to life forms, and the potential applications of this work, result in a nesting “Russian doll”
system in which life forms may be split up, in both scientiﬁc and legal terms, into a number of objects,
with multiple uses for each object. Legal reductionism is made easier by scientiﬁc simpliﬁcation:
outside the community, scientists communicate simpliﬁed concepts of the subjects on which they are
working in order to ensure they retain better legal control of them (Torrance, 2010).

Running alongside this splitting up of life forms runs a continuum of legal powers relating to
life forms. For a protein produced by a given genetic sequence, the protection afforded by the patent
may relate to the protein itself, the organism which allows it to be produced, the use of the protein
in general or in particular, or on the composition which contains the protein, without allowing
appropriation of the latter (Jannuzzi et al., 2008). Its strength may vary on the basis of how forceful
the claims are, whether or not they are permitted (some substances may be considered prior art and
fall into the public domain) and depending on regulations produced by the State: claims may be
more or less broad (relating to a particular species or an entire genus), and relate to structures or
functions, while some stakeholders may override the protection (exemptions exist for pure research),
different stakeholders may protect the same natural object if it has multiple functions and so on. To
varying degrees, all this may or may not end up restricting invention based on natural objects (Boyle,
2003; Eisenberg, 2000), and generate a bundle of rights for a same resource that are more or less
interdependent.

Third, IPRs are deployed amid a range of strategies and economic contexts in which strict
observance of ownership is not always ensured. The fact that legal control of the uses of a gene or
properties of a molecule exist does not necessarily mean that there are economic beneﬁts at stake.
Similarly, the existence of legal control of certain aspects of life forms does not necessarily imply
control of the economic process in which the invention is developed and produced. What is more,
patents are not actually “that” important: researchers, and even companies, do not always seek to
take action against patent violations, and voluntary licenses are regularly negotiated, sometimes free
of charge or against token payment.

In Brazil, article 10-IX of the LPI states that the following are not considered as inventions:

all or part of natural living organisms and biological material to be found in nature, or
isolated from nature, including the genome or germplasm of any natural living organism
or natural biological processes.

Similarly, according to article 18-III, the following may not be patented:

all or part of natural living organisms, with the exception of transgenic microorganisms
which fulﬁl the three conditions of patentability: novelty, an inventive step and industrial
applicability ( . . . )—and which are not simply discoveries.

Irrespective of the reasons for which the law has sought to prohibit patentability of natural
elements, it uses the argument of an absence of an inventive step, which is legally above reproach

144

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

in terms of TRIPS and at the very heart of the intellectual property system. Isolating a gene and
explaining its useful properties in an industrial context does not count as an inventive step, but
as a discovery (Dal Poz and Barbosa, 2007). Nucleotide sequences (which make up genes) and
peptide sequences (the protein produced by genes) that have been isolated from natural life forms,
and their functions for any given purpose or in a given context, are not patentable; neither are
extracts, molecules, substances or mixtures obtained from animals, plants or microorganisms that
exist in the natural state. None of these innovations may be considered an invention that satisﬁes the
criteria of an inventive step, even if the researcher supplies evidence of this in their patent application
(Del Nero, 2008). In the Brazilian patent system, biology takes precedence over chemistry. Life
forms have an intrinsic quality which is different from that of a chemical compound. Particularly in
the United States, the opposite approach is taken: laboratory work by scientists makes it possible
to differentiate chemistry from biology, and thus reduce life forms to mere chemical compounds
that may be patented (Calvert and Joly, 2011). Moreover, contrary to the speciﬁcations of TRIPS,
natural microorganisms are not patentable in Brazil. No intellectual property is possible except for
transgenic microorganisms, which are considered to be the result of genuine human intervention.
Similarly, processes and methods for obtaining natural extracts (in biochemistry) and isolating genes
and proteins (in molecular biology), pharmaceutical compositions and the methods for obtaining
them, and vectors (recombinant DNA) with their nucleic acid sequences are patentable (GTEB,
2007).

INPI, the Brazilian agency for issuing patents, is currently examining applications from the ﬁeld
of biotechnology that were ﬁled 10 years ago. Consequently, the only solution at present is to analyze
legislation and technical memoranda supplied to patent examiners. The LPI may be interpreted in
diametrically opposing ways. For some (including Almeida M¨uller et al., 2002), while the natural
extract itself may not be patented, the same is not true of its use to resolve a given technical issue. In
this perspective, the process encompasses the natural compound. Others (including INPI’s GTEB)
hold that this is not the case: the use of a natural object for precise functions does not constitute a
process. Only traditional processes and methods (extraction, isolation, microorganism culture, etc.)
may be patented. When patents are issued, and when their validity is challenged in court, these
arguments come head to head. Similarly, there are a number of ways of getting round the prohibition
on patenting natural substances. For instance, for molecules, genes and proteins, the examiner must
prove that there is no natural equivalent, which is very difﬁcult to do in practice. At the same time,
it is always possible to alter the molecular structure of a compound, particularly by using certain
processes. In addition, the guidelines for examining biotechnology patents (INPI, 2002) call on patent
examiners to be particularly vigilant: claims may encompass the molecule and the compound, if the
compound only contains this molecule.

Nonpatentability of the functions and use of natural substances leads to the following state
of affairs: biobricks and their properties may not be privatized, thus enabling all researchers and
companies to work without a license on a substance, and use it to make another product, even if the
patentability of processes can halt research and development of products to a certain extent. In other
words, on the one hand, natural substances have a commons-like status: researchers and companies
have fewer rights (compared with the situation in the EU and United States) with regard to natural
elements, but they have access to a larger and more open “common-pool,” and the possibility of
patenting the ﬁnal product, without others being prevented from following the same path. On the
other hand, anyone—including foreign researchers and ﬁrms—may have access to biodiversity-based
innovations and develop (more or less) new products (a medicine using the same active principle but
which composition is different for instance) which can also be protected by patent, to a slight degree

C(cid:2) 145

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

in Brazil and to a much greater extent elsewhere, in jurisdictions where naturally occurring life forms
can be appropriated.

This situation does not suit a certain number of scientists and companies. In the ﬁelds of molecu-
lar biology, biochemistry and agricultural biotechnologies (which have major economic implications
today), the desire to protect innovations—and the natural elements which underpin them—by patents
is increasingly in evidence.22 Theses actors argue that patents offer incentives to the private sector to
invest and transform knowledge into products and allow better competitiveness on a highly compet-
itive market. It appears that the public authorities are indeed receptive to such arguments. However,
with patentability the specter of biopiracy also reappears, and with it the private appropriation
of resources by foreign and domestic economic interests, much feared by the State and by NGOs
alike. Moreover, patents are being applied at ever-earlier stages of research, which is liable to lead
to the tragedy of the anticommons (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998), even if little empirical research
has been conducted in domains such as pharmacogenomics (Paci et al., 2010), molecular biology or
biochemistry. In any event, for the time being at least, the State intends to retain a certain degree of
control over resources and innovations shifting toward the private sector, even if it is opening up the
possibility of private–public partnerships and commons.

Organization of the Biotechnology Sector: Toward a New Rights Sharing System?
Innovation in biotechnology has been overseen solely by the federal or federated State (Gouvea
and Kassicieh, 2005), which implements incentive policies. The political process began in 2003 with
the Prospectiva Consultoria Brasileira de Assuntos Internacionais. The document identiﬁes biotech-
nologies as one of the key sectors. Legislation was subsequently adopted. In 2007, the government
published a Pol´ıtica de Desenvolvimento da Biotecnologia (PDB).23 President Lula was very clear in
his ofﬁcial presentation of the decree:

“Brazil is not, and will never again be a mere supplier of raw materials for the global
market. ( . . . ) The goal is to concentrate on biotechnologies, investing in research into
DNA sequencing, neuroscience, stem cell research, nanobiotechnology and biopharma-
ceuticals.” (Lula da Silva, 2007).

From 2007 onwards, R$6 billion (approximately $3.5 million) were to be invested in R&D by
public bodies over 10 years. At the same time, the government attempted to encourage private-sector
ﬁrms to provide R$4 billion worth of investment. To achieve this, a Comitˆe Nacional de Biotecnologia
was set up, with the Forum de Competitividade de Biotecnologia, set up in 2003 by the federal
government, representing the interests of the private sector. While it remains very general, article 3
of the PDB seeks to encourage diffusion of innovations, specifying that the State must ensure that
biotechnology and technological and economic cooperation are accessible to society as a whole. PDB
calls explicitly for increasing the number of biotechnological patents owned by Brazilians, both in
Brazil and abroad. It also seeks to harmonize practices for managing the intellectual property of
federal and state research and development support agencies so as to facilitate the transfer of the
technologies developed by science and technology institutions to the private sector, while preserving
the rights and remuneration due to these science and technology institutions and, where applicable,
to the supporting agencies.

It is in this context that demands for a reform of the legal framework have been made, to
shift the status of nature-based innovations from that of commons with a low degree of exclusiv-
ity to one favoring a greater degree of ownership (whether private or common). One of the most
active lobbies, the Brazilian Association of Biotechnology Enterprises (ABRABI), is demanding
protection of “small natural molecules currently unknown to chemistry which are the result of sci-

146

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

entiﬁc creativity in terms of their isolation and determination of their biological activity” (Paes
de Carvalho, 2005). In its Resolution no. 61, the Brazilian Association of Intellectual Property
(ABPI) uses arguments based on legal technique. With regard to a 2003 bill that would have re-
quired applicants to supply proof of the inventive step involved in their activity and the industrial
applicability of their invention, ABPI held that this was unfair to scientists and entrepreneurs,
and that the inventive step should simply be described in the patent application, as is the case
elsewhere.

Many bills exist that tend toward the patentability of life forms. The arguments in favor of
this are aired in parliamentary debates: for instance, it would avoid importing synthetic chemical
substances, which may be patented, since similar natural molecules exist in Brazil; and it would im-
prove the competitiveness and revenues of domestic industries with respect to foreign competitors.24
The bill that has made the most progress through the legislative process is Bill no. 4161, spon-
sored by Member of Parliament Antˆonio Thame. This calls for patents on the following to be
prohibited:

all or part of natural life forms and biological material to be found in nature, including the
genome or germplasm of any natural living organism and natural biological processes,
with the exception of biological substances and materials obtained, extracted or isolated
from nature which fulﬁl the conditions of patentability and abide by the stipulations of
legislation with regard to access to genetic resources.

The inventive step is no longer presumed not to exist, and this establishes a link with the issue
of ABS. Like the LPI, Bill no. 4961 establishes exemptions to allow pure research on the patented
invention, as well as private-sector uses of the resource for noncommercial purposes. However, it does
not explicitly seek to introduce new possibilities for holding knowledge and innovation in common.
If parliamentary debates are anything to go by, politicians and public authorities are aware
that innovations may be developed in the private sector without tangible advantages of exploiting
biodiversity (such as increasing capacity in academic training and research) being created. Similarly,
debates on patents lodged for incremental innovations based on chemical molecules or pharmaceu-
tical compounds that have already been patented offer evidence that the current dilemma25 could be
further exacerbated in the event of naturally occurring life forms becoming patentable. The call for
private rights to innovations appears to go hand in hand with a concern to make scientiﬁc and tech-
nological commons available in the long term against a backdrop of global competition in the ﬁeld of
biotechnology. There is sometimes convergence between the positions of researchers, entrepreneurs
and the State on this question. Public-sector researchers wish to see common rights restricted to
Brazilian researchers and their private-sector (or indeed foreign) partners. Companies are aware of
the interest of creating partnerships with universities that have signiﬁcant human resources and tools
that are frequently expensive. The shared aim, which resonates with the desire of the States to develop
national research and industry, is thus to beneﬁt from each other’s innovations and face up to those
foreign stakeholders with which no partnerships exist.

The Organization for Nucleotide Sequencing and Analysis (ONSA) programme was funded by
the State of S˜ao Paulo from 1997, and beneﬁted from an innovative institutional organization.
Some 30 university laboratories were networked to collaborate on sequencing the genome of xylella
fastidiosa, a bacteria that cause signiﬁcant damage to orange trees. Organization involved sharing
worktools and research ﬁndings. These ﬁndings were made freely accessible to the public over the
internet. The argument ran as follows: since funding came from the public sector, the results could
not be privatized, by any researcher (including public-sector researchers) or company. At the same
time, other innovations (bioinformatic tools and sequencing techniques) were the subject of patent

C(cid:2) 147

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

applications. However, many researchers were of the opinion that this organization made genetic
sequences available to northern country stakeholders free of charge, without the latter having con-
tributed anything to this common network. To address this problem, some parties sought for an
EU-style patentability of nucleotide sequences, while others argued in favor of patentability with
open licenses destined for universities and private-sector ﬁrms involved in the projects, while others
again proposed commons-based models (Octaviani, 2010).

Brazil is as yet far removed from the European and American experiences of institutional sharing
of research and patented natural objects, particularly in the ﬁeld of microorganisms (Dedeurwaerdere,
2010). Nevertheless, the December 2004 law on innovation26 has created instruments that may be
used for this purpose. Law and Decree no. 5.563 of 11 October 2005 sought to achieve three aims:
encouraging empowerment of researchers and companies, achieving “technological autonomy” with
respect to third countries and promoting the nation’s industrial development. While the law was
designed to enable scientiﬁc knowledge to move to an industrial environment, it is directed ﬁrst and
foremost at public institutions. Universities are required to have intellectual property units (N´ucleos
de Inovac¸ ˜ao Tecnol´ogica) in order to encourage their researchers to lodge patents and not simply
publish their results in scientiﬁc journals. The role of these units may be to provide legal advice to
researchers, but may also involve dissuading the latter from lodging a patent application if there is
little chance of it being used given the lack of industrial take-up or market conditions (Querido et al.,
2011). These units may also decide on strategies for holding patents in common, within a university
(between laboratories) or between universities. Furthermore, the law seeks to frame public-private
partnerships, establishing two goals. The ﬁrst goal is the diffusion of innovation: universities and
public research institutions can sign technology transfer contracts and operating licenses with other
public institutions or private-sector ﬁrms (article 6 of the law). They may do so free of charge or
against payment, in order to have access to other innovations through a cross-licensing mechanism,
or to enable low-cost production for the purposes of public health or access by the population
to national products that are cheaper than imported products. Second, partnership agreements
between public institutions and private-sector companies are permitted, enabling IPRs to be shared
(article 9).

Individual rights of inventors have also been strengthened, which, depending on practice, could
clash with the concern to hold innovations in common at the scale of public institutions and their
partner ﬁrms. This means that henceforth, public-sector researchers, as individuals, are entitled to a
percentage of royalties derived from the use of patents (article 13), and may even be granted exclusive
ownership of the patent (article 11), even if the institution retains the prerogative for awarding them
this right. This legislation also makes it possible for researchers to be released from their public-sector
institution to set up a business. However, as the arbiter of various sectors of the national interest, the
State reserves the right to impose other rules in the event of “national necessity.” It may also require
the research institution to carry out technology transfer or grant an operating license. However, any
such transfer of rights may not be made to a single company (article 6 §5), apparently with a view to
preventing monopolies.

This law on innovation is too recent to allow a proper assessment. However, a number of
comments may be made. Above all, it is public universities and public research institutes that beneﬁt
from the credits and incentives and that lodge patent applications with INPI (Moreira et al., 2006).
Furthermore, three key characteristics may be noted: the relative lack of partnerships with the
private sector, a dearth of technological implementations and the fact that non-Brazilians lodge the
overwhelming majority of patents with INPI, which is seen as a problem by the authorities (Uchˆoa
et al., 2011).

148

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

Conclusions
A number of important lessons may be learned from the Brazilian example, on two levels.

First, there are lessons to be learned regarding the issues raised by applying the CBD when
it comes to scope (the deﬁnition of what constitutes a genetic resource, what types of use and
user are concerned, etc.) and control. When the regime was set up, nationalization of resources
and public centralization of the power to grant access was observed (CGEN), even if some private
rights remained. The framework privileged the “land” approach (rights of owners to the physical
resource) rather than the “activity” approach (the right of researchers to work on resources), and
decision making at a level that was assumed to be impartial but which could be out of sync with
the realities on the ground. In actual fact, the existing ABS framework led to a lack of access and
therefore an absence of use. Subsequently, there was a shift toward a more commons-like system: a
regime facilitating scientiﬁc activity and offering greater ﬂexibility to move forwards from a regime of
noncommercial use to that of commercial use, allowing activities to develop without being restricted
by the rights of public authorities and individuals. Similarly, faced with problems of congestion in
terms of procedures and assessment of the potential risks of research (in terms of too much private
appropriation or control of the R&D process), a tendency of researchers to self-regulate the process
of granting permission and arbitrating between interests has been observed.

Second, there are lessons to be learned when it comes to the bundles of rights relating to
biodiversity. The legal status of a resource shifts and becomes more complex as it circulates and is
transformed. The actual subject in law changes: physical resources (a plant sample or microorganism),
nonmaterial resources (information contained in the genetic sequence) and intellectual resources (the
scientiﬁc knowledge relating to a resource and industrial processes). This gives rise to interlocking
rights with regard to the same resource when it comes to access (a mix of public permissions, private
rights and emerging common rights, and a desire to decentralize to grant more power to research
institutions) and when it comes to lodging a patent (a mix of public control, private rights and
making innovations available to the scientiﬁc community or the “public,” more or less broadly
deﬁned).

Brazil is currently seeking to restructure these bundles of rights on nature-based innovations as
part of legislative reforms that are in all likelihood imminent. In the political, scientiﬁc and industrial
circles in question, the debate currently comes down to the following question: is an absence of
patentability of naturally occurring life forms compatible with development of the biotechnology
sector? If Brazil allows IPRs on natural elements in the near future, the question will then become
the following: in what conditions will appropriation of innovations and natural elements through
patents make it possible to develop the national biotechnology sector, and how will this redeﬁne
relations between the public and private beneﬁts of biodiversity? ABS is not simply an issue when it
comes to North-South relations on the international scene: it may also unite or divide within a single
nation.

About the Author
Geoffroy Filoche is a Senior Research Fellow at the Institut de Recherche pour le D´eveloppement
(IRD—UMR GRED, France). He is currently a Visiting Professor at the Universidade Federal de
Goi´as (UFG—IESA, Brazil). He holds a Doctorate in Public Law (Universit´e de Nantes, France).
His work focuses on biodiversity law, intellectual properties standards and multicultural policies
directed at indigenous and local peoples in South America; e-mail: geoffroy.ﬁloche@ird.fr

C(cid:2) 149

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Notes
This article draws on research carried out as part of the BioTEK Program (2008–11) funded by the ANR Suds
(France), in cooperation with the Instituto de Estudos S´ocio-Ambientais (IESA, Universidade Federal de Goi´as,
Brazil). I would like to thank Catherine Aubertin and Florence Pinton, with whom some of the ﬁeldwork was
conducted. The article beneﬁted from stimulating discussions with the other members of the BioTEK team:
Fr´ed´eric Thomas, Val´erie Boisvert, Christophe Bonneuil, Elise Demeulenaere and Jean Foyer. In particular, I
would like to thank the following for sharing information and ideas: Camila Neves Soares Oliveira, Fernanda
Alvares da Silva, Fabiane Pereira Ramos Figueiredo, Karla Kovary, Chang das Estrelas Wilches, Ana Paula
Caldeira, Juliana Santilli, Henry Iba˜nez de Novion, Marcelo Dias Varella, Denis Borges Barbosa and Celso
Lage.

1 The speciﬁc issue of agricultural biotechnologies (with the major incidence of GMOs [genetically modiﬁed
organisms] and the existence of rights for new plant varieties, which are very different from patents) is not
discussed here. On this point, see for instance, Carvalho et al. (2006) and Thomas (2006).

2 Rights relating to traditional knowledge that recognize customary systems of indigenous common property

are not discussed here. On this issue, see for example, McManis (2007) and Filoche (2007, 2009).

3 The bundle metaphor is useful in capturing analytically the total range of rights and obligations, the
potential totality of “sticks’ that can be bundled and distributed over different holders of rights and
obligations. See Benda-Beckmann et al. (2006).

4 The CNPq is an agency of the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology whose aim, particularly
through the funding of calls for projects, is to encourage scientiﬁc and technological research. Researchers
form part of the agency’s policymaking and assessment bodies.

5 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 11, 24/08/2001.
6 IBAMA reports can be viewed on the http://www.ibama.gov.br website.
7 CGEN reports can be viewed on the http://www.mma.gov.br website.
8 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 79, 24/10/2003.
9 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 57, 2/03/2007.
10 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 167, 27/12/2007.
11 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 118, 12/09/2006.
12 The use of genetic resources is broadly deﬁned by the Protocol as “to conduct research and development
on the genetic and/or biochemical composition of genetic resources, including through the application of
biotechnology as deﬁned in Article 2 of the Convention” (article 2c).

13 “In the development and implementation of its access and beneﬁt-sharing legislation or regulatory re-
quirements, each Party shall create conditions to promote and encourage research which contributes to
the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, particularly in developing countries, including
through simpliﬁed measures on access for non-commercial research purposes, taking into account the need
to address a change of intent for such research.”

14 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 1, 18/07/2007.
15 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 120, 29/09/2008.
16 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 77, 23/05/2011.
17 Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 96, 16/09/2009.
18 Dates from 9 December 2010 but published in the Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao on 5 September 2011.
19 Lei n

9.279/96 de 14 de Maio de 1996 (com alterac¸ ˜oes oriundas da Lei N

◦

◦

10.196 de 14 de fevereiro de

2001), Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, 15/5/1996.

20 Draft Decision to enhance mutual supportiveness between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Communication from Brazil, China, Colombia, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Peru,
Thailand, the ACP Group, and the African Group, TN/C/W/59, Trade Negotiations Committee, WTO,
19/04/2011.

150

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

21 Although the principle existed right from the 2001 MP, a large amount of legislation had to be produced:
CGEN Resolution no. 23 (November 2006), INPI Resolutions no. 134 and 135 (December 2006), CGEN
Resolution no. 34 (February 2009) and INPI Resolution no. 207 (April 2009).

22 The current framework is also deemed unsatisfactory by opponents of patentability. For instance, in 2001,
one project sought to prohibit patentability of any product or process, including recombinant DNA.
However, civil society, in favor of patentability, has organized itself more effectively and its initiatives are
taken into account by public authorities.

23 Decreto 6.041/2007, 08/02/2007, Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 1, 09/02/2007.
24 Di´ario da Cˆamara dos Deputados, pp. 58679–85, 22/10/2009.
25 “( . . . ) Permissive regimes that grant patents to non-deserving innovations may elicit sharp reactions from
groups ( . . . ) that are principally users of knowledge. Yet restrictive regimes that deny many applications
risk alarming and alienating ( . . . ) local industrial and scientiﬁc communities that fear having their own
innovative endeavors frustrated and their own patent applications denied on account of being insufﬁciently
inventive (i.e., trivial rather than innovative) (Shadlen, 2011, p. 145).”

26 Lei 10.973/04, 2/12/2004, Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao, Sec¸ ˜ao 1, p. 2, 3/12/2004.

References
Aguiar, R. C. (2002) Adeus ao para´ıso: a internacionalizac¸ ˜ao da Amazˆonia. Paralelo 15, Bras´ılia.
Almeida M¨uller, A. C., Pereira Jr., N. and Antunes, A. M. S. (2002) ‘Protecting Biotechnological Inventions
in Brazil and Abroad: Draft, Scope and Interpretations of Claims’, Albany Law Journal of Science &
Technology, 13, 145–72.

Aubertin, C., Boisvert, V. and Nuzzo, V. (2007) ‘L’acc`es aux ressources g´en´etiques et le partage des avantages:
une question conﬂictuelle. Exemples du Br´esil et de la Bolivie’, in C. Aubertin, F. Pinton and V. Boisvert
(eds.), Les march´es de la biodiversit´e. IRD Editions, Paris, pp. 121–47.

Aubertin, C. and Moretti, C. (2007) ‘La biopiraterie, entre ill´egalit´e et ill´egitimit´e’, in C. Aubertin, F. Pinton and

V. Boisvert (eds.), Les march´es de la biodiversit´e. IRD Editions, Paris, pp. 91–120.

Aubertin, C. and Filoche, G. (2011) ‘The Nagoya Protocol on the Use of Genetic Resources: One Embodiment

of an Endless Discussion’, Sustentabilidade em Debate, 2(1), 51–63.

Azevedo, C., Lavratti P. C. and Moreira T. C. (2005) ‘A Convenc¸ ˜ao sobre diversidade biol´ogica no Brasil:
considerac¸ ˜oes sobre sua implementac¸ ˜ao no que tange ao acesso ao patrimˆonio gen´etico, conhecimentos
tradicionais associados e repartic¸ ˜ao de benef´ıcios’, Revista de Direito Ambiental, 37, 113–43.

Balbani, A. P., Silva, D. H. S. and Montovani, J. C. (2009) ‘Patents of Drugs Extracted from Brazilian Medicinal

Plants’, Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents, 19(4), 461–73.

Beas Rodrigues Jr., E. (2010) Tutela jur´ıdica dos recursos da biodiversidade, dos conhecimentos tradicionais e do

folclore. Elsevier, Rio de Janeiro.

Benda-Beckmann, F., von, Benda-Beckmann, K. and Wiber, M. (2006) ‘The Properties of Property’, in F.
von Benda-Beckmann, K. von Benda-Beckmann and M. Wiber (eds.), Changing Properties of Property.
Berghahn Books, New York, pp. 1–39.

Beurier, J.-P. (1996) ‘Le droit de la biodiversit´e’, Revue Juridique de l’Environnement, 1–2, 5–28.
Boisvert, V. and Vivien, F.-D. (2005) ‘The Convention on Biological Diversity: A Conventionnalist Approach’,

Ecological Economics, 53, 461–72.

Boyle, J. (2003) ‘Enclosing the Genome: What the Squabbles over Genetic Patents Could Teach Us’, Advances

in Genetics, 50, 97–122.

Buck, M. and Hamilton, C. (2011) ‘The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and
Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity’,
Review of European Community & International Environmental Law, 20(1), 47–61.

C(cid:2) 151

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Calvert, J. and Joly, P.-B. (2011) ‘How Did the Gene Become a Chemical Compound? The Ontology of the Gene

and the Patenting of DNA’, Social Science Information, 50(2), 1–21.

Carvalho, S. M. P., Salles-Filho, S. L. M. and Paulino, S. R. (2006) ‘Propriedade intelectual e dinˆamica de

inovac¸ ˜ao na agricultura’, Revista Brasileira de Inovac¸ ˜ao, 5(2), 315–40.

Check, E. and Haydn, T. (2007) ‘Strike Threat over Jailed Primatologist’, Nature, 448, 634.
Chen, J. (2006) ‘There’s No Such Thing as Biopiracy . . . And It’s a Good Thing Too’, McGeorge Law Review,

37, 1–36.

Cook-Deegan, R. and Dedeurwaerdere, T. (2006) ‘The Science Commons in Life Science Research: Structure,
Function, and Value of Access to Genetic Diversity’, International Social Science Journal, 58(2), 299–
317.

Dal Poz, M. E. and Barbosa, D. B. (2007) ‘Incertezas e riscos no patenteamento de biotecnologias: a situac¸ ˜ao
brasileira corrente’, in V. Iacomini (ed.), Propriedade intelectual e biotecnologia. Juru´a Editora, Curitiba,
pp. 93–138.

Dedeurwaerdere, T. (2010) ‘Global Microbial Commons: Institutional Challenges for the Global Exchange and

Distribution of Microorganisms in the Life Sciences’, Research in Microbiology, 161, 414–21.

Del Nero, P. (2008) Biotecnologia. An´alise cr´ıtica do marco jur´ıdico regulat´orio. Editora Revista dos Tribunais,

S˜ao Paulo.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2003) Intellectual Property Rights and the Life Science Industries. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Eisenberg, R. (2000) ‘Re-examining the Role of Patents in Appropriating the Value of DNA Sequences’, Emory

Law Journal, 49, 783–800.

Filoche, G. (2007) Ethnod´eveloppement, d´eveloppement durable et droit en Amazonie. Bruylant, Bruxelles.
Filoche, G. (2009) ‘Les connaissances, innovations et pratiques traditionnelles en mati`ere de biodiversit´e: un

kal´eidoscope juridique’, Droit et Soci´et´e, 72(2), 433–56.

Filoche, G. and Foyer, J. (2011) ‘La bioprospection au Br´esil et au Mexique, un eldorado? Entre instabilit´e des

pratiques et permanence des repr´esentations’, Revue d’Anthropologie des Connaissances, 5(2), 234–59.

Firn, R. D. (2003) ‘Bioprospecting—Why Is It So Unrewarding?’, Biodiversity and Conservation, 12(2), 207–

16.

Glowka, L. (1997) ‘The Next Rosy Periwinkle Won’t Be Free: Emerging Legal Frameworks to Implement Article

15’, Environmental Policy and Law, 27, 441–58.

Grajal, A. (1999) ‘Biodiversity and the Nation State: Regulating Access to Genetic Resources Limits Biodiversity

Research in Developing Countries’, Conservation Biology, 13(1), 6–9.

GTEB (Grupo de Trabalho Especial em Biotecnologia) (2007) Estudo Comparativo dos Crit´erios de Patente-
abilidade para Invenc¸ ˜oes Biotecnol´ogicas em Diferentes Pa´ıses. DART/CEDIN/DIESPRO, INPI, Rio de
Janeiro.

Gouvea, R. and Kassicieh, S. (2005) ‘Using Resources in R&D Policy Planning: Brazil, the Amazon and

Biotechnology’, Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 72, 535–47.

Grubb, P. W. and Thomsen, P. R. (2010) Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals, and Biotechnology. Fundamentals

of Global Law, Practice, and Strategy, 5th edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Heller, M. and Eisenberg, R. (1998) ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical Research’,

Science, 280, 698–701.

Hermitte, M.-A. (1992) ‘La Convention sur la Diversit´e Biologique’, Annuaire Franc¸ais de Droit International,

38, 844–70.

Hoare, A. L. and Tarasofsky, R. G. (2007) ‘Asking and Telling: Can ‘Disclosure of Origin’ Requirements in

Patent Applications Make a Difference?’, , 10(2), 149–69.

INPI (Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial) (2002) ‘Diretrizes para o exame de pedidos de patente nas
´areas de biotecnologia e farmaceutica depositados ap´os 31/12/1994’, Revista da Propriedade Intelectual,
1648, 1–14.

152

C(cid:2) Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Geoffroy Filoche

Jannuzzi, A. H. L., Vasconcellos, A. G. and Gomes de Souza, C. (2008) ‘Especiﬁcidades do patenteamento
no setor farmacˆeutico: modalidades e aspectos da protec¸ ˜ao intelectual’, Cadernos de Sa´ude P´ublica, 24(6),
1205–18.

Jinnah, S. and Jungcurt, S. (2009) ‘Could Access Requirements Stiﬂe Your Research?’, Science, 323, 464–5.
Li, J. W. H. and Vederas, J. C. (2009) ‘Drug Discovery and Natural Products: End of an Era or an Endless

Frontier?’, Science, 325, 161–65.

Lula da Silva, Presidente Luiz In´acio (2007) Discurso na cerimˆonia de lanc¸amento da Pol´ıtica de Biotecnologia.
Pal´acio do Planalto, 22 de fevereiro de 2007. Available at <http://www.info.planalto.gov.br>, search by
date [Accessed 21 July 2011].

Marques, F. (2011) ‘Bioprospecc¸ ˜ao: emaranhado burocr´atico’, Pesquisa FAPESP, 179, 28–33.
McManis, C. (ed.) (2007) Biodiversity and the Law: Intellectual Property, Biotechnology and Traditional Knowl-

edge. Earthscan, London.

Morales, A. P. (2010) ‘Bioprospecc¸ ˜ao: burocracia ainda emperra acesso ao patrimˆonio gen´etico nacional’,

Ciˆencia e Cultura, 62(3), 8–10.

Moreira, A. C., Almeida M¨uller, A. C., Pereira Jr., N. and Antunes, A. M. S. (2006) ‘Pharmaceutical Patents

on Plant Derived Materials in Brazil: Policy, Law and Statistics’, World Patent Information, 28, 34–42.

Moretti, C. and Aubertin, C. (2007) ‘Strat´egies des ﬁrmes pharmaceutiques : la bioprospection en question’, in
C. Aubertin, F. Pinton and V. Boisvert (eds.), Les march´es de la biodiversit´e. IRD Editions, Paris, pp. 27–54.
Nogueira, R. C., Cerqueira, H. F. and Soares, M. B. P. (2010) ‘Patenting Bioactive Molecules from Biodiversity:

The Brazilian Experience’, Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents, 20(2), 1–13.

Octaviani, A. (2010) ‘Biotechnology in Brazil: Promoting Open Innovation’, in L. Shaver (ed.), Access to
Knowledge in Brazil. New Research on Intellectual Property, Innovation and Development. Bloomsbury
Academic, Basingstoke, pp. 79–102.

Ostrom, E. and Schlager, E. (1996) ‘The Formation of Property Rights’, in S. Hanna and C. Folke (eds.), Rights
to Nature: Ecological, Economic, Cultural and Political Principles of Institutions for the Environment. Island
Press, Washington, DC, pp. 127–56.

Paci, D., Hopkins, M. M., Zika, E. and Ibarreta, D. (2010) ‘Impact of DNA Patents on Pharmacogenomics

Research and Development: Economic and Policy Issues’, Drug Development Research, 71, 485–91.

Paes de Carvalho, A. (2005) ‘Biotecnologia, biociˆencias e sustentabilidade’. Paper presented at the Sustent´avel
2005 (Congresso Ibero-Americano sobre Desenvolvimento Sustent´avel), 31 May to 2 June, Rio de Janeiro.
Pires de Carvalho, N. (2005) ‘From the Shaman’s Hut to the Patent Ofﬁce: In Search of a TRIPs-Consistent
Requirement to Disclose the Origin of Genetic Resources and Prior Informed Consent’, Washington
University Journal of Law and Policy, 17, 111–86.

Querido, A. L. S., Lage, C. L. S. and Vasconcellos, A. G. (2011) ‘What is the Destiny of Patents of Brazilian

Universities?’, Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, 6(1), 46–57.

Rezaie, R., Frew, S. E., Sammut, S. M., Maliakkal, M. R., Daar, A. S. and Singer, P. A. (2008) ‘Brazilian Health

Biotech—Fostering Crosstalk between Public and Private Sectors’, Nature Biotechnology, 26(6), 627–44.

Roa-Rodriguez, C. and van Dooren, T. (2008) ‘Shifting Common Spaces of Plant Genetic Resources in the

International Regulation of Property’, , 11(3), 176–202.

Rocha, F. A. N. G. (2003) ‘Regulamentac¸ ˜ao jur´ıdica do acesso `a biodiversidade’, Revista de Direito Ambiental,

29, 167–85.

Rose, C. M. (2003) ‘Romans, Roads, and Romantic Creators: Traditions of Public Property in the Information

Age’, Law and Contemporary Problems, 66, 89–110.

Ryan, M. P. (2010) ‘Patent Incentives, Technology Markets, and Public-Private Bio-Medical Innovation Net-

works in Brazil’, World Development, 38(8), 1082–93.

Safrin, S. (2004) ‘Hyperownership in a Time of Biotechnological Promise: The International Conﬂict to Control

Blocks of Life’, American Journal of International Law, 98, 641–85.

C(cid:2) 153

Geoffroy Filoche

Biodiversity Fetishism and Biotechnology Promises in Brazil

Santilli, J. (2005) Socioambientalismo e novos direitos. Peir´opolis, S˜ao Paulo.
Schlager, E. and Ostrom, E. (1992) ‘Common Property and Natural Resources: A Conceptual Analysis’, Land

Economics, 68(3), 249–52.

Scott, R. L. (2003) ‘Bio-Conservation or Bio-Exploitation: An Analysis of the Active Ingredients Discovery
Agreement between the Brazilian Institution Bioamazonia and the Swiss Pharmaceutical Company No-
vartis’, George Washington International Law Review, 35, 977–1000.

Shadlen, K. C. (2011) ‘The Political Contradictions of Incremental Innovation: Lessons from Pharmaceutical

Patent Examination in Brazil’, Politics & Society, 39(2), 143–74.

Stone, C. D. (1995) ‘What to Do about Biodiversity: Property Rights, Public Goods, and the Earth’s Biological

Riches’, Southern California Law Review, 68, 577–620.

Straus, J. (2008) ‘How to Break the Deadlock Preventing a Fair and Rational Use of Biodiversity’, Journal of

World Intellectual Property, 11(4), 229–95.

Ten Kate, K. and Laird, S. A. (eds.) (2002) The Commercial Use of Biodiversity: Access to Genetic Resources and

Beneﬁt Sharing. Earthscan, London.

Thomas, F. (2006) ‘Biodiversit´e, biotechnologies et savoirs traditionnels. Du patrimoine commun de l’humanit´e

aux ABS’, Revue Tiers Monde, 188, 825–42.

Torrance, A. W. (2010) ‘Gene Concepts, Gene Talk, and Gene Patents’, Minnesota Journal of Law, Science &

Technology, 11(1), 157–91.

Tvedt, M. W. (2006), ‘Elements for Legislation in User Countries to Meet the Fair and Equitable Beneﬁt-Sharing

Commitment’, , 9(2), 189–212.

Uchˆoa, N. N., de Paiva Ferreira, R., Sachetto-Martins, G. and M¨uller, A. C. (2011) ‘Ten Years of the Ge-
nomic Era in Brazil: Impacts on Technological Development Assessed by Scientiﬁc Production and Patent
Analysis’, World Patent Information, 33, 150–6.

Young, T. (2006) ‘An Implementation Perspective on International Law of Genetic Resources: Incentive, Con-

sistency, and Effective Operation’, Yearbook of International Environmental Law, 15, 3–93.

154

C(cid:2) 
