The  (2008) Vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 29–57

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2008.00333.x

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge:
Intellectual Property, Culture, Power and
Politics

Chidi Oguamanam
Dalhousie Law School

Discourses of local knowledge and categories of rights claimants thereto are embroiled in
complex conceptual and analytical morass. The conceptual quandary around local knowl-
edge is diversionary from the historically rooted hierarchies of culture, power and politics
that have subjugated it. Claims to local knowledge are challenged from several dimensions,
including arguments from cultural cosmopolitanism, intellectual property rights and aspects
of liberal democratic principles. An interesting new site for this power play is the emergent
bioprospecting framework of access and beneﬁt sharing. In this context, sophisticated
external intermediaries, who have asymmetrical power relationships with custodians of local
knowledge, now constitute a new threat to the genuine aspirations of indigenous and local
communities. Recently, local knowledge claims are conﬂated with propertization of culture
raising concerns over the asphyxiation of the public domain. Making the claims or claimants
to local knowledge the scapegoats of our troubled public domain undermines the source of
the problem. In a way, the current anemic state of our public domain can be blamed on
unwholesome expansion of intellectual property and unidirectional appropriation of local
knowledge by external
interests. The reality of cultural cosmopolitanism requires an
intellectual property order that is responsive to the contributions of local knowledge.

Keywords local knowledge; intellectual property; culture; indigenous and local communities

The story of the West’s relationship with its ‘‘other’’ (Darian-Smith and Fitzpatrick,
1999, p. 1) is an ongoing narrative. Whether the focus is on the ‘‘colonial’’ or the
latter’s various preﬁxes in academic discourse, including pre-, post- and neo- or any
other convenient historical, ideological or analytical reference point, such a project
continues to feed and occupy a vast range of academic disciplines. These include a
number of subjects under the umbrella of social sciences, notably history, political
science, anthropology, sociology, philosophy, policy/development studies and law.
Indeed, discourses of the West and its other are fertile sites of interdisciplinary
encounters across diverse disciplines, including those on the margins. Such exchanges
highlight some of the limitations of disciplinary ﬁxations and disciplinary boundary-
marking in subtle and often non-subtle ways. However, no single disciplinary
approach can grasp the complexities of the colonial relation and its aftermath.
Perhaps nowhere are the foregoing sentiments truer than in the discourse about local
knowledge. In this complex subject, the harder you look, the less you see.

From the late twentieth century, local knowledge has become a theatre for
viewing the dramatization—literally and ﬁguratively—of aspects of the contemporary

r  r 29

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

relationships between the West and its other.1 As a site of analysis of the West’s
relation with non-Western others, knowledge is also a corollary platform for
gauging indigenous peoples’ relations with the mainly modern liberal democratic
states or pretenders thereto in which they are constituted. Most of these states were
born out of empire, conquest and colonialism.

Unsuspectingly, developing countries, including particularly their indigenous
and local communities and the latter’s counterparts in the industrialized world,
have seized the present momentum by deploying ‘‘knowledge’’ as a site for multi-
farious contestations and resistance (Oguamanam, 2004a). They challenge the
derogation and denial of their contribution to knowledge as they seek to explore
the opportunity presented by local knowledge for their emancipation in the
re-enactment of a historical struggle of colonized peoples all around the world.

Drawing from discourses on indigenous or local knowledge,

intellectual
property rights, culture, power and politics, this article highlights the various ways
in the post-colonial and global knowledge economy in which knowledge is
implicated and deployed in the indigenous peoples’ engagement with the modern
state. It articulates the dilemmas, the contradictions and some challenges that assail
indigenous peoples and other loose categories of non-Western others in their bid to
use local knowledge to leverage diverse economic, political and cultural interests.
In exploring these webs of challenges, this article nuances the potential of the
present focus on local knowledge to yield counterproductive effects. The intensity of
indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ commitment to defending their knowl-
edge and leveraging their overall contributions to the global knowledge basket is a
progressive attempt at calling attention to historical and ongoing injustice. How-
ever, reﬂective consciousness over the exploitation of the unique composition of the
global custodians of local knowledge and the slippery conceptual frameworks of
intellectual property, culture and the politicophilosophical ideals of liberalism to
emasculate the campaign for local knowledge are as equally important. Proponents
of local knowledge should take seriously the inherent complexities of their cause
and strategize on how not to allow those to divert attention from the substantive
issues. They should be pragmatic and preemptive to avoid real or potential, albeit
nuanced, cultural, legal and political bushwhacks that lurk over their cause.

Local Knowledge: Of Contestation and Resistance

The emergence of local knowledge at the front burner of indigenous peoples’ and
other local communities’ engagement with the state, nationally and internationally,
can be rationalized on several theoretical and practical grounds. Not the least
of such grounds is contemporary anthropological views of culture and knowledge
insights from the sociology of science (Ellen et al., 2000;
as well as critical
Zuckerman, 1998). Also, equally important are theorizations on globalization that
underscore the intermeshing and transformations of knowledge and information
across borderless cultural systems (Giddens, 1990; Kymlicka, 1989; 1995; Suoza

30

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

Santos, 1995). Collectively, these insights not only question the basis for strict
compartmentalization of knowledge systems, ironically they also call attention to
the contributions and applications of local knowledge in the new global knowledge
economy.

However, in addition to or beyond the theories, there are few direct, albeit
overlapping, practical triggers that are implicated in locating knowledge at the
centre of the contemporary discourse on indigenous experiences in the national and
global transformative processes. The ﬁrst trigger is the increased concerns in the late
twentieth century over the global environmental and biodiversity crisis.2 A notable
outcome of the ensuing international deliberations on the environment was the
strategy of inward-looking into indigenous environment-related knowledge, prac-
tices and stewardship, and the cooptation of indigenous peoples into the policy
clich ´e of ‘‘environmental sustainability’’ (Hodgson, 2002, p. 1041). Given the
encompassing nature of the environment, this approach helped focus attention on
indigenous or traditional agricultural practices, biodiversity and general conser-
vation experience and associated local knowledge.

The second trigger is the radical shift in the life sciences to the deployment of
animal, human and plant genetic resources in basic and applied research, especially
in health, agriculture, drug production, crime and environmental management and
other more general industrial and service applications (Mehta, 2005). This ‘‘bio-
revolution’’ is evidenced in the progress of biotechnology—an interdisciplinary
endeavour that aggregates the potentials of many conventional life science dis-
ciplines. The wealth of local knowledge over endemic biodiversity, including animal
and plant genetic resources, is critical to biotechnology. Over 70% of the world’s
biological resources are located in local and indigenous communities globally
(Oguamanam, 2006a, p. 23).

The third trigger is the computer-driven digital or information revolution of the
same era, which is complementary to biotechnology. By facilitating the generation,
processing, diffusion, manipulation and application of sensitive information on
biological resources, digital technology is intertwined with biotechnology and
facilitates the transfer of local biodiversity-related knowledge to Western industrial
and scientiﬁc complexes, a trend that symbolizes, in part, what some analysts have
tagged the birth of the global knowledge economy3 (Chartrand, 2006; Drahos and
Braithwaite, 2003).

Developments since the 1990s in international intellectual property lawmaking
constitute the fourth trigger. That period marked a paradigmatic shift from the
status quo when intellectual property issues which hitherto were the subject matter
of national laws and instruments of national and social policy were located to the
World Trade Organization (WTO)-supervised international trade regime. As an
event and as a process, the entrenchment of intellectual property as a subject matter
of trade into the WTO framework via the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) left a sour taste in the mouths of indigenous
and local communities as well as in developing countries of the South (Reichman,

r  r 31

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

2000). Despite coercing developing countries and, by implication, indigenous and
local communities to commit to minimum universal standards of intellectual
property protection, TRIPS did not accommodate local knowledge. Perhaps, more
accurately, the extent to which TRIPS accommodates local knowledge is debatable.
TRIPS’ disregard for local knowledge translates to leaving several categories of that
knowledge form unenclosed and open to unbridled appropriation (Chander and
Sunder, 2004). It is a trend that sharply contrasts with how the giant strides in the
life sciences and biotechnologies (that rely on the biological resources and some-
times local knowledge of non-Western peoples) are aggressively protected or
enclosed as private property in what has been termed the ‘‘enclosure movement’’
of the public domain and international policy space for intellectual property (Boyle,
2003; Yu, 2007).

Collectively, these four triggers provided the impetus for local knowledge
holders and their advocates around the globe to embark on a counter-narrative
of appropriation, also known as ‘‘biopiracy’’ (DeGeer, 2003; Mgbeoji, 2005; Shiva,
1997). Like protection of local knowledge, biopiracy is now a touchstone for
solidarity among indigenous peoples and former colonies in the South (Oguama-
nam, 2004a) in their resistance to Western knowledge hegemony or what Drahos
and Braithwaite (2003) call
information feudalism. Remarkably, that counter-
narrative has yielded signiﬁcant regime shifting in international intellectual prop-
erty and local knowledge discourses to multiple arenas including biodiversity
conservation and the environment; health, access to drugs and human rights;
and agriculture and food security (Helfer, 2004; Oguamanam, 2006b; Okediji,
2004; Yu, 2004).

Perhaps the source of conﬂict in TRIPS between the developed or industrialized
countries on the one hand, and indigenous and local communities and developing
countries on the other, is not so much what TRIPS did as what it did not do. That
singular omission continues to drive discussions around intellectual property policy
globally and provides the stimulus for resistance by indigenous peoples and local
communities. This is so because, in theory, intellectual property is a primary
mechanism for allocation of rights over knowledge in general. TRIPS’ perceived
silence over local knowledge is therefore deafening but nonetheless easy to under-
stand in historical and neocolonial contexts. It would not require a long piece of
revisionist history to show that TRIPS reﬂects the historical legacy of colonial
disdain, exclusion, derogation and appropriation as a policy framework for dealing
with local knowledge (Arewa, 2006a; 2006b; 2007a; Mgbeoji, 2007).

Local Knowledge in the Hierarchies of Culture and Power
Knowledge and culture are two elusive but fused phenomena; a detailed analysis of
their relationship, although desirable, is outside the scope of this article. Any
attempt at investigating that fusion confronts an inherent conceptual stalemate.
Knowledge thrives in the agency of culture and vice versa. Early modern concep-
tions of culture were premised on progressive accounts or theories of human

32

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

development (Arewa, 2006a; Ivison, 2002). In the popular and conventional
versions of this account while Europeans were at the peak, non-Western peoples
were located at the lowest rung of this cultural ladder. The West’s ‘‘other’’ were
mainly depicted in derogatory terms such as wild, primitive, undomesticated
hunter-gatherers, savages and barbarians who were in dire need of civilization
and transformation into decent or modern societies (Arewa, 2006a, p. 35; Stocking,
1982). Indeed, ‘‘[t]he rise of biological and evolutionary theory by the end of the
eighteenth century’’ only helped to consolidate the linkage ‘‘between the superiority
of European culture and the cultural (racial) inferiority of other peoples’’ (Ivison,
2002, p. 35). It also provided the basis and justiﬁcation for political domination in
all its coloration (Arewa, 2006a, p. 43),4 including the messianic assumption of the
white man’s moral burden, that is to bring civilization to the God-forsaken ends of
the world (Mgbeoji, 2007; Oguamanam, 2004b).

For the most part, in the eyes of Europe, human development was premised on
the assessment of the worth of different cultures and their sense of civilization in
relation to European values (Ivison, 2002). For example, in the observation of
anthropologist Carlo Severi (1998, p. 215), ‘‘when the cultural contact happens
under the control of Western religions, we call it ‘‘syncretism’’; when it escapes it,
we call it ‘‘blasphemy’’’’.5 According to Duncan Ivison (2002, p. 35), ‘‘[e]ven when
the emphasis on the proper development of mankind was modiﬁed in favour of
some form of comparative relativism, there was still a tendency to see primitive or
non-Western cultures as existing in a kind of exotic cultural aspic, either to be
preserved or ‘‘helped’’ into modernity’’.

It is quite logical and hardly surprising that emboldened by the mindset of its
cultural (racial) superiority, Europe treated indigenous and other non-Western
cultures and local knowledge practices with derogation, especially in the colonial
project. According to Arewa (2006a, p. 43), the entrenched hierarchies of cultures
that located non-Western peoples at the dregs ‘‘were ultimately linked to the
nineteenth century global hierarchies of power’’.6 These power dynamics were
serviced by imperial and colonial structures that facilitated the appropriation of
economic values in local knowledge of colonized peoples, for instance through the
colonial division of labour.7 The uncivilized European others were depicted as
incapable of intellectual engagement or output in their dealings with the natural
resources around them. That claim took the appearance of an evident truth with the
advent of the industrial revolution. The accounts of the origins of various regimes of
intellectual property rights trace the phenomena to Europe, understandably, with-
out any mention of knowledge protection regimes in other civilizations (Mgbeoji,
2003; Mossoff, 2001; Yu, 2006). Intellectual property and, in some cases, classic
property regimes in the colonies were mere extensions of what existed in the colonial
powers. After all, before the European encounter, indigenous territories were terra
nullius, and when a people were colonized, their resources, knowledge systems and
ways of life were not exempt (Smith, 1999). Because indigenous peoples operated
outside the market economy, their economic system was perceived as inefﬁcient and

r  r 33

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

in urgent need of abrogation and substitution with a civilized economic model
(Martin and Vermeylen, 2005).

Early attempts at the internationalization of intellectual property excluded all
but the colonial powers (Bently, 2005; Sherman and Bently, 1999). Not surprisingly,
indigenous peoples and the far-ﬂung colonies were not involved in the process of
adoption of initial key international intellectual property treaties, namely the Paris
and Berne Conventions of 1883 and 1886. In this regard, again, Arewa (2006a,
p. 45) notes that ‘‘[h]ierarchies of power reinforced the exclusion of local knowledge
from the global intellectual property framework, partly by replicating and continu-
ing the exclusion of representatives of the vast majority of the world’s population
from the negotiating table’’. For example, it was only after the Second World War,
when most of the former colonies became independent, that they began to introduce
indigenous and local knowledge-sensitive issues that diverged from the strategic
interests of the colonial powers to the intellectual property debate. Notably, India
championed the 1971 revisions of the Berne Convention to allow for the protections
of folklore by member states (Arewa, 2006a, p. 45; Bently, 2005). In recent times,
frontline countries of the South, notably India and Brazil, continue to articulate
alternative voices for an equitable global intellectual property regime.

TRIPS’ silence over local knowledge is therefore consistent with a historical
pattern that reﬂects the exclusion, derogation and relation of local knowledge
within the matrix of colonial culture and power hierarchies. It is interesting that the
debate over folklore (which is not the subject of this article) has continued in
different incarnations and transformations in international intellectual property
and cultural policy fora to the present day. In recent times, the debate has
crystallized in at least four symbolic but overlapping contexts, namely, the
continuing consultations over the revisions of 1982 United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization–World Intellectual Property Organization
(UNESCO-WIPO) Model Provisions for National Laws on the Protection of
Expressions of Folklore Against Illicit Exploitation and other Prejudicial Actions,
the 2003 UNESCO Convention on the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural
Heritage, the ongoing deliberations at WIPO’s Intergovernmental Committee on
Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore
(IGC) and at the activities of the United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD).

European self-location at the pinnacle of cultural hierarchies and its positioning
of non-European others at the bottom provided the basis for its derogation and
appropriation of local knowledge. This historical interplay of hierarchies of culture
and power, especially in the colonial and the post-colonial projects, has inadver-
tently made the legal and policy treatment of local knowledge a ﬂashpoint of
tension and resistance and one that irresistibly conditions for a revisionist history of
colonial relations. As indigenous peoples and local communities challenge the
derogation, relegation, exclusion and appropriation of their knowledge, what are
some of the conceptual and framing issues that threaten to subsume and conﬂate

34

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

the local knowledge debate? In the next section I broach a few of those issues and
how they are implicated in the various counter-narratives in the extant struggle for
local knowledge and their ramiﬁcations for indigenous and local communities’
relations with the modern state.

The Terminological Trap

Any serious discourse of local knowledge with regard to indigenous and local
communities in the context of the historical relations of power and culture between
the West and its other, is akin to walking a battleﬁeld littered with academic
landmines. Already, in the above paragraphs, I have deliberately thrown in terms
and phrases in random fashion and drawn on usages and words that provoke the
interrogative instincts of a discerning reader. It is the norm that the majority of
writings on this complex subject devote substantial effort to the clariﬁcation of
terms (e.g. Brush and Stanbinsky, 1996; Ellen et al., 2000; Oguamanam, 2006a).
Without doubt, clariﬁcation of key terms is congruous to analytical integrity and
guards against misleading assumptions. In some contexts, however, it may portend
some form of red herring or escapist expedition from the substantive question,
especially if every given phrase or term is a contested one.

The rank of contested terms includes the following: indigenous, traditional,
local, folk, etc., as well as their diverse uses in conjunction with a myriad of preﬁxes.
More elaborate analyses probe the often contested demarcation of ranges of such
knowledge frameworks into subcategories premised after the yet contested Western
disciplinary and pedagogical conventions, such as ecological, biological, musicolo-
gical, agricultural, botanical, environmental, etc. or their ‘‘ethno’’-compounding.
Similarly objectionable are the conceited assumptions that underlie such practices
(Battiste and Henderson, 2000, p. 38). Other contested terms include indigenous
peoples, aboriginal peoples, ﬁrst nations, native or original peoples, local commu-
nities, developing countries, industrialized or developed countries, the West, North
and South—those are not directly addressed in this article.

The contestation over the appropriateness of the terms in the ﬁrst enumerated
categories above reﬂects attempts to both resist and disburden them of their
derogatory connotations in the colonial hierarchies of culture and power. Equally,
it nuances the dichotomization of interests in the rank of claimants. Also,
it
represents an attempt to re-characterize the nature of such knowledge forms as
dynamic and progressive in accordance with contemporary legal, sociological and
anthropological insights. For non-Western peoples, in the campaign for the recogni-
tion of their knowledge in the context of their relationship with the modern state, the
characterization of that knowledge is a crucial site for resistance. For instance,
according to the Four Directions Council (FDC), a Canadian First Nations
organization, ‘‘[w]hat is traditional about traditional [or indigenous] knowledge is
not its antiquity but the way it is acquired and used . . . much of the knowledge is
quite new, but it has a social meaning and legal character, entirely unlike the

r  r 35

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

knowledge indigenous people acquire from settlers and industrialized societies’’
(Four Directions Council, 1996).

Among anthropologists, legal scholars and analysts in general, it is the norm to
justify the choice of one or the other of the diverse preﬁxes to knowledge in their
analyses (Arewa, 2006a; Blakeney, 2000; Ellen et al., 2000; Oguamanam, 2006a).
Even though for the most part there is a tendency to conﬂate the use of such
preﬁxes, attempts at distinguishing them are driven by subtleties of exclusion and
inclusion and boundary marking in relation to the legitimate claimants to speciﬁc
knowledge forms as between two equally contested categories: indigenous peoples
of the enclave territories and local communities of the Third World. For instance,
Arewa (2006a, p. 7) notes that ‘‘[l]ocal knowledge is more strongly associated with
countries in the Third World as well as indigenous peoples in the Third World and
the West’’. Elsewhere, I have remarked that ‘‘[t]he term ‘‘traditional knowledge’’ is
persuasive chieﬂy because of its non-limiting nature and its deﬂection of contro-
versy over indigeneity’’ and argue that the ‘‘preference [for traditional knowledge
over indigenous knowledge] is based on its depiction or characterization of the
‘‘other’’ in contradistinction to the dominant culture. It facilitates a less divisive
reference to the world’s disempowered peoples who share a near common experi-
ence and for whom the knowledge question provides a rallying point for survival’’
(Oguamanam, 2006a, p. 24). These two approaches are clearly inclusive. The
inclusive approach appears to be endorsed by the CBD through the recurring
association of knowledge in its text with an elastic phraseology: ‘‘indigenous and
local communities’’.8

On the other hand, in a clearly exclusive approach, anthropologists Ellen et al.
(2000, p. 3) argue that ‘‘[t]hose to whom we attribute indigenous knowledge must be
indigenous peoples . . .’’. But, they acknowledge that the terminological morass
inherent in that claim implicates ‘‘a veritable semantic, legal, and cultural mine-
ﬁeld’’ (Ellen et al., 2000). In an apparent attempt to mediate the conﬂation of terms
while not completely disclaiming this exclusive approach, WIPO declares that
indigenous knowledge ﬁts into the traditional category, but that traditional knowl-
edge is not inherently indigenous. WIPO’s position is that indigenous knowledge is
a subset of traditional knowledge that applies to indigenous peoples (World
Intellectual Property Organization, 2001, p. 23). There is a conceptual ﬂuidity that
melds attempts at strict dichotomization of indigenous, traditional,
local, etc.
knowledge forms.

The exclusive and inclusive conceptual framework for knowledge analysis has
direct impact on two constituent claimants. Ironically, the issue of accurate
articulation of those claimants provides an entry point into the next terminological
trap, namely how to deﬁne indigenous peoples and other subset references
within peculiar national contexts like Canada, the United States, the Australasian
subcontinent and elsewhere. The subtle peculiarities of those national contexts will
not detain us here. Internationally, an acceptable deﬁnition of indigenous peoples
has proven elusive. Bold attempts under treaty (such as the International Labour

36

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

Convention No. 169 of 1989) and by scholars (e.g. Anaya, 1996; Cobo, 1986) to
deﬁne indigenous peoples vacillate between extremely under-inclusive conceptions
and overly inclusive conﬁgurations (Wiessner, 1999). References to criteria of
colonization, conquest, domination, cultural distinctiveness, continual afﬁliation
with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies, geographical
locations, etc. have
proven to be inconclusive in the deﬁnition of indigenous peoples (Oguamanam,
2006a, pp. 20–2; Wiessner, 1999). In this regard, Daes (2001) argues that a precise
deﬁnition that accommodates the historical experiences and checkered political
trajectories of indigenous peoples globally is not feasible. For Arewa (2006a, p. 12)
a group’s indigenous status or claims thereto is context dependent. Similarly,
De Koning (1999) surmises that an attempt to deﬁne indigenous peoples may be
counter-productive as it essentializes and marginalizes them, and shifts attention
from the real issues.

The other logical claimants to knowledge who are implicated in the inclusive or
exclusive deﬁnitions are in some ways an open-ended category. They are depicted in
a more neutral term, namely ‘‘local communities’’—a term that, like ‘‘indigenous
peoples’’, assumes a non-literal meaning. Loosely speaking, they are mainly
colonized peoples of the global South presently found within the borders of
countries now classiﬁed under neo-liberal economic standards as developing
countries. Whether they are recognized ofﬁcially as indigenous or not, most of
the present inhabitants of these countries were subjected to colonialism. As
presently constituted, in the modern system of Westphalian liberal democratic
independent states, which assume the agency of their constituent populations, there
is a discernible similar lack of unity of purpose between the ruling elites of the states
and their indigenous/local populations to the experience of indigenous peoples in
the developed countries of the West (Dove, 1996). However, the overall divergence
of interests between these states and the rest of the colonial powers and the new
industrialized states in the international arena readily subsumes the complexly
layered compositions of developing countries in the international arena.

The short point here is that the discussions about local knowledge are riddled
with terminological traps at almost every turn. There is no intention here to
undermine the signiﬁcant, albeit academic, subtleties inherent in the uses of these
contested terms. However, undue concentration of analysis on these slippery and,
characteristically, inexact terms translates to little or no practical consequence. Such
an exercise threatens to divert attention from the substantive issue of the historical
burden of the colonial relationship of power and the cultural hierarchies that
historically marginalized, and continue to marginalize, non-Western peoples and
their contributions to progress and human development.

Dichotomization: Futility and Dangers
There are two important but related questions. First, should the dubious distinction
over knowledge forms be credible grounds for effective dichotomization or, in the
alternative, what is the basis for the isolation of indigenous knowledge from the rest

r  r 37

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

of the non-Western knowledge framework? Second, what is the essence of dichot-
omization of claimants to local knowledge?

Having characterized the strict distinctions over local knowledge forms as
dubious, it is difﬁcult conclusively to answer the ﬁrst question in the positive. In the
hierarchies of culture and power discussed earlier, the West’s other were differ-
entiated on the basis of their cultural distinction in relation to Europe. Without
doubt this is a questionable premise. However, insofar as it alludes to the loosely
identical cultural and general worldviews among non-Western peoples,
it has
some merits. This distinction is analogous to the convenient and yet contested
separation of formal science from informal or local knowledge systems (Johnson,
1990; Oguamanam, 2006a). Such distinctions are often based on the non-
conclusive and yet ambiguously overlapping attributes of those two knowledge
frameworks.

There is no doubt that at virtually all points in history, peoples of the West have
been subject to different cultural and historical experience; the same is equally true
of the West’s other. Thus, the myth of cultural homogeneity applies to the West as
well as its other.9 Nonetheless, the commonality of worldviews in relation to the
West of cultural traditions of non-Western peoples conditions for an analytical,
albeit convenient, categorization of their knowledge forms (subject of course to
variations). Categorization of knowledge systems is an unfashionably controversial
adventure many are backing away from. Safe to say, it is hardly an absolute
exercise. Evidently, the reference to the FDC speaks of difference(s) in indigenous
ways of doing things in relation to the knowledge acquired from European settlers
and the industrialized societies. Insofar as indigenous and other non-Western
peoples identify some common distinguishing features or attributes of their knowl-
edge, their cultural practices represent the site for local or so-called non-cosmopo-
litan knowledge, especially in relation to Western scientiﬁc paradigms10 and their
questionable pretension to universalism. Part of the shared distinguishing feature of
non-Western peoples’ knowledge forms in relation to industrialized societies is the
peripheral treatment or exclusion of local knowledge in the conventional intellectual
property regime (Arewa, 2007a, p. 9).

Perhaps most important is that in most indigenous and non-Western popula-
tions, knowledge is largely an experiential process in which a direct relationship
with and dependence on the natural environment is the norm. It does not matter so
much that such a norm continues to be threatened by rapid globalization of culture
and trafﬁcking in knowledge. Local knowledge or indigenous knowledge deﬁes an
accurate or comprehensive deﬁnition (Battiste and Henderson, 2000, p, 41). But a
sustained consensus is that it is generated mostly and driven by cultural and
ecological relations, distinct belief systems and worldviews. It results from these
sophisticated relationships in a culturally driven and complexly layered and
contested ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ experience (Cajete, 1999). It is ‘‘a complete knowledge system
with its own concepts of epistemology, philosophy and scientiﬁc and logical
validity’’ (Battiste and Henderson, 2000, p. 41). It is characterized by limited

38

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

mechanical, industrial or formal scientiﬁc mediations of the Western industrialized
societies. In sum, the conceptual attempt to dichotomize indigenous knowledge
from the rest of the non-Western bloc is an inelegant approach. It diverts attention
from the substantive issues in the debate over local knowledge.

In the second question lies perhaps the real issue behind the fact of dichot-
omization. It requires a nuanced answer that is both sensitive to the constitution
and diverging priorities of claimants to local knowledge, as well as recognizing the
propensity of such distinctions to divert attention from common interests. Custo-
dians of local knowledge share identical historical and political experiences espe-
cially under colonialism and, to some degree, in the post-colonial arena. However,
the different trajectories of that experience, and the dynamics of indigenous peoples’
contemporary relationships with modern states, condition for different priorities in
the post-colonial landscape. Thus, there is a divergence of interests in the way local
knowledge is used by its custodians to negotiate relationships with modern states at
both national and international arenas (Arewa, 2006a; Coombe, 2001, p. 277;
Oguamanam, 2004a).

For example, three quarters of global bioresources are found in gene-rich
countries of the South, which is also home to about 75% of the world population.
According to the United Nations, indigenous peoples of the enclave territories are
estimated at about 300 million or 4% of the global population (Oguamanam,
2006a, p. 23). For this category, which in many cases constitutes a less signiﬁcant
percentage of their national population within the post-colonial states, the issue of
local knowledge is critical to their self-identity, cultural preservation and survival,
as well as constituting aspect of their self-determination as a people. Their lands,
ancestral territories, resources and ways of life have been directly under sustained
threats ‘‘by colonial and postcolonial state interventions, capitalist industry and
other incursions’’ (Hodgson, 2002, p. 1041).11 Only in a few isolated or scattered
cases in the countries of the South do segments of the population directly ﬁt this
proﬁle.12

On the other hand, the current tempo for local knowledge in the developing
countries of the South is approached primarily as a matter for mainly leveraging
economic interests that attach to their mega-biodiversity rich status (Coombe,
2001). The dominant argument for cultural survival by indigenous peoples in the
West is in part premised on their feared extinction or cultural decimation. In
virtually all cases indigenous peoples double as minorities within the modern
states.13 The urgent attempt to use knowledge as an instrument for cultural survival
and for the negotiation of political relations of self-determination does not have the
same resonance in the South that it has with indigenous peoples elsewhere.

Political independence was extended to most of the countries of the South
around the 1960s, an exercise that excluded indigenous peoples of the enclave
territories. This singular development, which is referred to as the Blue or Salt water
doctrine in international law, marked a divergence of interest at the international
level in the priorities and, to some extent, overall circumstances of colonized peoples

r  r 39

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

(Oguamanam, 2004a; Wilmer, 1993). The struggle of indigenous peoples of the
enclave territories prioritized political objectives of self-determination as a multiple
relational, as opposed to an end-state or separatist, process (Daes, 2001). For their
counterparts elsewhere, having secured political independence, the focus of deco-
lonization shifted. In addition, the concentration of biological resources and
attendant local knowledge in the South and their economic signiﬁcance in the era
of biotechnology crystallizes the interest in developing countries to use local
knowledge to leverage economic objectives, seek regional political clout and other
opportunities.

Even where differences in the objective for protection of local knowledge are
not driven by the foregoing considerations, stakeholders often have varied goals,
approaches and expectations from local knowledge protection (Davis, 2003). The
range of goals includes access to ﬁnancial proceeds from products embodying local
knowledge, preventing inappropriate exploitation of sacred or secret cultural
processes, products or symbols and the desire to control attribution of sources of
valuable local knowledge (Arewa, 2007a, p. 24). In some other cases, the pivotal
objective is defensive—to thwart the appropriation of local knowledge by second
comers who take advantage of gaps in the prevailing intellectual property regime.
Invariably, stakeholders’ objectives may be determined by the type of local knowl-
edge at issue.

These divergent approaches and objectives have implications for how different
stakeholders engage with the debate over local knowledge. Also, they often
constitute sources of dilemma regarding the strategic choices or options for the
custodians of local knowledge in a way that exposes the case for local knowledge to
counter-narratives. This trend plays into the hands of diverse interests that beneﬁt
from the subjugation of local knowledge. A few illustrations can be made from both
strict legal and fused cultural analytical frameworks as well as from aspects of
liberal democratic ideological critique of the discourse about local knowledge.

Legal Framework

The principal legal platform for knowledge protection in the West is intellectual
property rights. Through colonial relationships of power and neo-liberal economic
frameworks, Western intellectual property is now the subject of a global application
pursuant to the WTO TRIPS Agreement. But that has not been without resistance of
some sort. In its different and ever-expanding regimes, intellectual property super-
vises the allocation of rights, beneﬁts and sometime responsibilities incidental to
claims over knowledge, its products and its applications. I have noted that the
historically rooted exclusion of local knowledge from intellectual property as evident
in TRIPS has decentralized the locus for such resistance. But the real issue is not the
recent and earlier omissions of local knowledge or folklore from treaty documents.
Rather, the fact that both legal and conceptual frameworks for intellectual property
and the general nature of local knowledge have been difﬁcult to reconcile remains

40

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

problematic (Drahos, 2000; Farley, 1997; Roht-Arriaza, 1996). This singular issue
has polarized the debate over local knowledge and intellectual property.

Without doubt, there are many credible arguments to be made on the nature of
intellectual property in relation to local knowledge. With regard to the patent
regime, for example, the overlapping criteria of originality, inventiveness, human
ingenuity, obviousness, newness, product of nature,
individual as opposed to
community focus, etc. have been invoked to exclude local knowledge from
intellectual property protection (Jaszi, 1991; Mgbeoji, 2001). Similar sentiments
obtain in relation to copyright, especially with regard to the requirement of writing
and ﬁxation (Farley, 1997), and lately the extent and nature of cultural claims
(Arewa, 2007a; Brown, 1998). In the trademark arena, indigenous sacred cultural
symbols are often appropriated for contested meaning-making constituting a site of
asymmetrical power relations and resistance (Coombe, 1998).

Most of these exclusionary criteria do not stand up well to scrutiny and are
premised on over-generalized notions of local knowledge and questionable assump-
tions about intellectual property. In addition, the evolutionary and instrumental
nature of intellectual property provides equally credible bases to fault the exclusion
of local knowledge from the intellectual property framework (Mgbeoji, 2001;
Sherman and Bently, 1999).

But a number of factors continue to lend dubious credibility to the fac¸ ade of the
irreconcilability of intellectual property with local knowledge. They include, ﬁrst,
the lack of political will by industrialized countries that beneﬁt from continued
appropriation of local knowledge. The second is the suspicious notion of the
epistemic divide between formal scientiﬁc or industrial approach to knowledge
generation on the one hand, which is fostered by intellectual property (especially
through the patents procedure), and the informal process of local knowledge on the
other. The third is the asymmetrical relationship of power between industrialized
powers and custodians of local knowledge and the lack of political and economic
clout on the part of the latter to press for the integration of local knowledge into
intellectual property processes or to modify the conceptual framework of intellec-
tual property. Fourth, intellectual property is seen as a capitalist instrument and is
not suited to societies that operate in a mainly communal model outside or on the
fringes of the contested paradigms of the market economy framework (Oguamanam,
2004c). The ﬁfth is the fear of potential epistemic transposition, co-option or
subsuming of local knowledge into Western science under the intellectual property
framework (Agrawal, 1999). The last point is fast losing favor with contemporary
views in anthropology and the sociology of science.

These supposedly uncomfortable relationships between intellectual property
rights and local knowledge provide the impetus for several propositions generally
classiﬁed as sui generis (intellectual property) options for local knowledge (Halewood,
1999). Some of the propositions include variegated reward schemes for local
knowledge even if they fall outside the intellectual property process. For custodians
of local knowledge in developing countries, there is almost a no holds barred

r  r 41

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

approach in the pursuit of intellectual property and other economic-driven options
for rewarding local knowledge. This is especially so in the areas of traditional
medicine, agriculture and pharmaceutical production. For example, there are
outright attempts to obtain local knowledge-related patents or to seek other forms
of economic-based contractual incentives to every conceivable form of local knowl-
edge or resources of economic value.

On a comparative level, indigenous peoples of the enclave territories are more
likely to approach the intellectual property option with trepidation and suspicion.
For instance, despite occasional dissonance, notable position statements of indi-
genous peoples at different fora on the relationship between their knowledge and
intellectual property warn of the adverse potential of the intellectual property
rhetoric to the indigenous cause (Oguamanam, 2006a, pp. 153–4). Remarkable
areas of concern include intellectual property’s potential to undermine the integrity
of indigenous knowledge and the sanctity of indigenous cultural practices. Equally,
of some apprehension is that, as a commoditization process, intellectual property
potentially jeopardizes institutionalized secrecy (Posey, 2002) and access thereto, as
well as undermining exclusive privileges of cultural membership14 and ultimately
indigenous aspiration to cultural self-determination. Here, there is a tendency,
informed by survivalist necessity to resist unbridled valuation of knowledge and
culture on a strict economic scale of values via the intellectual property process. For
the most part, this sentiment contrasts with the trend in developing countries.

For example, recent initiatives regarding the documentation or digitization of
traditional medicinal practices are championed mainly by developing countries.15
This is chieﬂy an anti-biopiracy policy as well as a strategy to exploit opportunities
for joint ownership of intellectual property with foreign seekers of local knowledge
(Gupta, 2007; Krumenacher, 2004). This approach has the inherent potential to
decontexualize the process of local knowledge generation and to strip it of its
cultural content. Also, it draws local knowledge fully into formal scientiﬁc processes
and consequently facilitates their co-option into the conventional
intellectual
property process (Agrawal, 1999; Yano, 1993). Yet developing countries are
determined to pursue this option mainly because of its economic promise. This is
quite attractive albeit in the interim, perhaps, since the urgency of cultural survival
and cultural self-determination in developing countries is not as intense in compar-
ison with indigenous peoples of the enclave territories and elsewhere. The important
point here is that there is an apparent dilemma with regard to what end or extent
local knowledge custodians are prepared to apply intellectual property frameworks.
The different historical exigencies and factors of present political and economic
priorities inﬂuence the apparent divergences in the approaches custodians of local
knowledge seem to have taken.

Cultural Framework
Renowned anthropologist Michael F. Brown, in a celebrated 1998 article, calls for
reﬂection on the danger of legal schemes being placed at the disposal of indigenous

42

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

peoples to control or resist cultural appropriation. He decries speciﬁcally the
tendency by many in the rank of legal scholars, native activists, anthropologists
and those he calls romantic social critics to lend support to indigenous peoples to
copyright ideas, as opposed to the latter’s tangible expressions, and to claim cultural
property rights ad inﬁnitum over some cultural heritages.16 In his view, this trend
amounts to radical expansion of the notion of copyright and ‘‘ignore[s] the broader
crisis of intellectual property rights and the already imperiled status of the public
domain’’ (1998, p. 193). In general, he expresses skepticism over indigenous peoples’
claim to cultural property rights or copyrights in their cultural objects in museums
or other public places, and in their knowledge.

While appreciating the attraction of framing indigenous demands in terms of
copyright and a broadened deﬁnition of cultural property, Brown is not persuaded
because of their implication for the enclosure of the public domain. Brown’s is not a
lone voice of concern over the adverse and broader implications of intellectual
property and cultural propertization of indigenous or local knowledge both on its
claimants and on the public domain (e.g. Arewa, 2007a; 2007b; Osborne, 2003–4;
Sunder, 200017). Speciﬁcally, however, indigenous peoples’ willingness to deploy the
revisionist arguments of cultural appropriation under colonialism to lay claims and
set terms of access to cultural properties in the museums and elsewhere does not ﬁnd
favor with Brown.

He draws from contemporary theoretical developments in anthropology to
argue that ‘‘culture is not a bounded static entity but a constantly renegotiated
process’’. In the post-modern environment, Brown (1998, p. 196) avers, the
‘‘processual nature of culture’’ gives rise to ‘‘creative mixing (‘‘creolization’’) or
invention of traditions’’ that does not stand up to the discredited static concept of
culture from which contemporary anthropologists are now backing away. In his
view, there is an apparent clash between the indigenous and cosmopolitan view of
culture such that the indigenous appeal to intellectual property in relation to local
knowledge ignores that there are no clear-cut spatial and temporal boundaries for
the demarcation of culture and knowledge. Sociologists of science are wont to make
similar arguments in relation to local knowledge and formal Western science (Ellen
et al., 2000; Zuckerman, 1998). Yet the role of Western science and intellectual
property in impoverishing the public domain does not seem to attract a more urgent
call for reﬂection over our doomed public domain. In essence, Brown considers
attempts to extend intellectual property to local knowledge to be ﬂawed in many
respects. Of speciﬁc interest to him is that such initiatives have the potential to
freeze up or, at best, constrain the ﬂuidity of information and enclose the public
domain in ways that are antithetical to the theoretical underpinnings of both culture
and intellectual property rights.

Contrary to the overall impression of Brown’s thesis, the elusive conceptual
quagmire around the phenomenon of culture and the ﬂuidity of information
exchange or borrowings across knowledge systems does not in and of themselves
dissolve legitimate claims to cultural spaces. Nor do they account for the dissolution

r  r 43

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

of cultural identities in absolute terms. The discrete and autonomous notions of
culture may be obsolete, but the processual emergence of a cosmopolitan cultural
and epistemic regime is an afﬁrmation of the existence and, to some degree, the
vibrancy of the insular cultural locale that is critical in sustaining our postmodern
cosmopolitan cultural world (Hannerz, 1990; Kymlicka, 1989; 1995; Sousa Santos,
1995, p. 26418; cf. Waldron, 1995).

Indeed, in the extant information technology and globalization era, the trafﬁc
of knowledge and information from indigenous and local communities to the
cosmopolitan arena is self-evident. For example, in diverse epistemic sites, ranging
from music, medicine, phytomedicine, pharmacology, arts to agriculture and
environmental management, insights from local knowledge have continued to feed
hi-tech activities,
including digital and biotechnologies. Indigenous and local
communities’ interest in seeking reward, protection, recognition and control or
otherwise wanting to be active participants in the debate about their contribution to
processual evolution of knowledge and culture needs to be carefully distinguished
from the cultural propertization debate. Such aspiration is not necessarily a threat
to a vibrant public domain. Neither is it, on its face, antithetical to the culture of
borrowing, which is an important ingredient for progressive generation of knowl-
edge in a processual and cosmopolitan cultural world (Arewa, 2007a; 2007b;
Sunder, 2000). Contrary to the impression by Brown, the housing of sacred
indigenous cultural properties in Western and Western-style museums should not
be taken as their only gateway to the public domain. In the public domain there are
many publics, not the least of which are such publics as may be determined by
indigenous or traditional customary access regimes. Indigenous and local commu-
nities have the capacity and legitimacy to determine terms of access to sacred
cultural objects and general issues around sacralization of their cultural forms.

Similarly, while the tendency by segments of indigenous and local communities
to exercise rights over their cultural properties on an indeﬁnite basis is antithetical
to term limits and broader policy considerations of intellectual property, recent
developments in patent and copyright jurisprudence show a progressive extension
of the terms of those rights under legislative, judicial and industry connivance
(Crews, 2005). Surely, the public domain is imperiled. But local knowledge is among
the ﬁrst casualties of our imperiled public domain. Its custodians, the indigenous
and local communities, have only joined the debate belatedly. To make them the
scapegoats of our imperiled public domain is perhaps an uneven approach to a
complex problem. That approach echoes the colonial hierarchies of culture and
power that have historically subjugated indigenous and local knowledge.

The beauty of Brown’s argument is that it can be ‘‘appropriated’’ by indigenous
and local communities in support of their opposition to the radical and unidirec-
tional enclosure of their contributions to the basket of knowledge. Especially, this is
relevant in regard to the application of information or insights from them in
biotechnology-related inventions in agriculture, pharmaceuticals and other indus-
trial applications and sites of knowledge transmission. If indigenous claims to

44

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

intellectual or cultural property constitute a threat to the public domain, how much
more of a threat is the patenting of information or insights from the local peoples by
second comers to the indigenous cultural process? This is even so because hitherto,
rightly or wrongly, such insights have been treated as being within the sphere of
common heritage and as part of the public domain. While the ‘‘postmodern realities
of globalization, transnational ﬂows and creative mixing’’ depict culture as ‘‘a
dynamic and constantly renegotiated process’’ (Brown, 1998, p. 126),
it also
demonstrates the competition for cultural or knowledge transfer, transposition,
enclosure and appropriation along contested directions.

Because of the rapid transformation in the generation and manipulation of
information, in the contemporary global knowledge economy, greater amounts of
insight from local knowledge have been ‘‘creolized’’ in or meshed into Western
industrial and scientiﬁc complexes than perhaps any other time in modern history.
If the attempt by indigenous and local communities to tap into intellectual property
threatens to shrink the public domain, it will be perhaps by far less magnitude than
the continued enclosure of the public and policy space through the constant
expansion of intellectual rights claims, especially in the bio- and digital environment
(Boyle, 2003; Yu, 2007). But, as they say, hardly would two wrongs make a right.
Indeed, the last four decades have witnessed the enclosure of the public space by
private proprietary claims (Chander and Sunder, 2004; Drahos and Braithwaite,
2003; Lessig, 2003; Maskus and Reichman, 2004) and by a re-conceptualization of
intellectual property rights that paves the ground for the scramble for indigenous
knowledge forms hitherto in the public domain.19 The belated and inchoate
response of indigenous and local communities is only a reactionary attempt at
cultural self-preservation and economic justice.

The contemporary anthropological thinking on the issue of knowledge and
culture foists a compelling and corresponding re-thinking of intellectual property
jurisprudence that indigenous and local communities have historically called for. If
culture is a dynamic and negotiated process, it then means that insofar as all of us—
the West and its other—are partners in the processual nature of knowledge and
cultural evolution, we must also be joint stakeholders and claimants in the accruing
rights to knowledge. We need an intellectual property regime that facilitates or
mediates an equitable negotiation of that process for all stakeholders. Therefore,
the challenge of intellectual property in a cosmopolitan cultural world is to secure
for each contributor to the multiple and complexly layered basket of knowledge
adequate recognition and reward for their contribution. Because of the diverging
interest, objectives and approaches of the custodians of local knowledge to its
protection, intellectual property is not necessarily the only option (Drahos, 1997).
For instance, the skepticism of indigenous peoples of the enclave territories over
intellectual property is already noted.

Beyond directly importing intellectual property into local knowledge, there are
other options for indigenous and local communities to negotiate around their
cultural and knowledge practices in ﬂexible ways that accommodate their diverging

r  r 45

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

priorities. In recent times, access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS) and other contractual
frameworks for the exploration of local knowledge between indigenous and local
communities and second comers are as diverse as there are such communities,
speciﬁc projects, collaborating industries, universities and other research organiza-
tions (Dutﬁeld, 2000).20 Criticisms of these initiatives are not lacking (Rural
Advancement Foundation International, 2002). For the present purpose,
it is
sufﬁcient to mention that these arrangements are fraught with a signiﬁcant crisis
of legitimacy for these intermediaries (which also include lawyers, ethnographers,
ethicists, and academic and applied researchers) and the propriety of their agency as
brokers of indigenous resources in negotiating or mediating access to and transla-
tion of local knowledge. For example, the intermediaries’ role when there are cross-
cutting or different claims to local knowledge on a particular piece of genetic
material or expressive culture by more than one indigenous or local community or
other actors may be quite signiﬁcant and problematic (Barnes, 1998; Brown,
2003).21 More so would be the challenge this scenario poses for ABS protocols
(Dutﬁeld, 2007). The majority of these intermediaries and sponsoring or processing
institutions are foreigners to indigenous and local communities. They operate
within historically entrenched gaps in cultural hierarchies of power consciously
and unconsciously exploiting them in interpreting, transcribing and analysing local
knowledge in ways that ultimately inﬂuence the allocation of rights and determina-
tion of boundaries of claims thereto. According to Cory Hayden,

The ethnography of [bioresource] prospecting [in indigenous and local
communities] is, primarily, an ethnography of science: it treats scientiﬁc
research practices as key points of entry into prospecting play of
resource extraction and compensation . . .
researchers are both
mediators of and participants in this international collaboration, and
their research practices are crucial sites of political negotiations. When
. . . ethnobotanists collect plants,
they are also collecting beneﬁt
recipients, when the . . . chemists test collected plants for industrial
potential, they are also helping to broker new kinds of distribution of
industry mediated ‘‘value’’ . . . routine decisions about which plants to
collect, or what kingdom to scan for potential value, become
inextricably laced with the explosive question of who shall become the
‘‘beneﬁciaries’’ of a new international politics of biodiversity
entrepreneurialism and on what basis . . . beneﬁt-sharing contract
transforms and is transformed by scientiﬁc research practices and
relations between scientist and local people—urban plant vendors,
indigenous collectives, rural collectors—whose interests they now
represent (2003, pp. 6–7).

The diverging priorities of segments of indigenous peoples and local commu-
nities in the discourse on local knowledge are crucial to the way such knowledge is
represented in the cosmopolitan epistemic environment. Thus indigenous and local

46

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

communities have a challenge to determine the nature of their relationship with the
intermediaries such that their own narrative of their knowledge system is not
subsumed or supplanted by extraneous considerations and by sophisticated and yet
less knowing intermediaries.

Liberal Democratic Framework
Aspects of indigenous and local communities’ claims to and demands in relation to
local knowledge are perceived as being in conﬂict with liberal democratic principles
and ultimately antithetical to indigenous interests. Speciﬁcally, the demand for
restricted access to information about local knowledge and customary secrecy
regimes thereto are said to ‘‘contradict the ideals of Western liberal democratic
principles’’ (Brown, 1998, p. 198). That ever-slippery politicophilosophical ideol-
ogy is eulogized over its foresight or experience or both in recognizing that
institutionalized secrecy is a recipe for abuse of power. Hence, a crucial aspect
of liberal democracy is guaranteed access to information under carefully nego-
tiated restrictions.

Intellectual property rights claims are circumscribed by aspects of those
negotiated restrictions recognized under liberal ideology such as term limit, research
exemption, fair use allowance, compulsory licensing and other exemptions dictated
by social policy considerations to mention a few. There is then a presumption that if
protection of local knowledge is channeled via conventional intellectual property, it
will be less susceptible to the dangers of institutionalized secrecy or unmitigated
tendencies that are incongruous to liberal democratic ideals. The erroneous
presumption is that the principal goal of intellectual property accords with liberal
democratic ideals in ensuring that information or knowledge efﬁciently enters the
public domain without compromising creators’ entitlement to ﬁnancial or other
beneﬁts from their original works (Brown, 1998, p. 196).22 On the contrary,
intellectual property inherently imposes artiﬁcial scarcity over information and
knowledge. In the knowledge economy, intellectual property is extremely pliable to
retard the transformation of information to the public domain. Today, it constitutes
a resounding threat to access to information and efﬁcient management of resources
in liberal democratic and neo-liberal economic systems (Heller and Esienberg, 1998;
Lessig, 2003; Mgbeoji and Allen, 2003).

Similarly, there is also an erroneous presumption that when intellectual
property collides with key principles of liberal democracy, such as free speech or
human rights in general, the latter will prevail (Brown, 1998, p. 196). That
optimistic claim is perhaps an idealist appeal to a theoretical expectation. The
radical extension of intellectual property to virtually all spheres of culture and
knowledge and the consequential enclosure of the public domain empower private
proprietary interests over moderating considerations whether rooted in liberal
democracy or general public policy. For instance, the human rights implications
of pharmaceutical patents with regard to drug access, and the resulting public
health care crisis in indigenous and local communities in developing countries and

r  r 47

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

elsewhere is indicative of where the balance has tilted (Eppich, 2002; Gathii, 2002).
Even more revealing is the extension of intellectual property to human cell lines and
human DNAs, even those of isolated indigenous communities under the threat of
extinction (Amani and Coombe, 2005). The short point is that liberal democratic
considerations have not inﬂuenced intellectual property enough in ways that
adequately balance competing considerations or in ways that keep knowledge in
the public domain open and accessible. The expectation or presumption that, under
conventional intellectual property, claims over local knowledge could not collide
with liberal democratic principles is presumptuous and untenable.

When indigenous and local communities seek the accommodation of their local
knowledge forms within existing or special protective regimes, it takes the appear-
ance of demand for special treatment that impliedly runs counter to the ideal of
equity under liberal democracy. For instance, when they press for restricted access
or control of sacred cultural property or knowledge forms, inevitably, in relation to
others, this yields a form of discrimination that puts indigenous and local commu-
nities on a collision course with liberal democratic principles. With regard to the
United States, Brown (1998, p. 198) observes that ‘‘Native values and the American
legal system are prone to collision over the question of retroactive secrecy, the
disposition of information that was obtained in the past and had long resided in the
public domain’’. Should a potential user’s race or ethnicity be used to deny them
access to an archived sacred indigenous material or cultural property, Brown (1998,
p. 198) argues that ‘‘[s]uch selective restrictions would surely qualify as a form of
illegal discrimination’’.

Similarly, Arewa (2007a, p. 58) warns that ‘‘[t]he existence of claims of ethnicity
or cultural heritage as basis for compensation may in fact harden ethnic distinc-
tions, potentially further solidify ethnic identity and may in fact play a role in the
shaping of ethnic and cultural identify itself’’. Particularly, where they have the
status of minorities, indigenous and local communities are reminded to be wary of
the extent to which they could explore liberal democratic principles to seek
accommodation. Their claims and arguments can be readily reversed or corrupted
both to exculpate their ongoing predicament under liberal democratic dispensations
and to circumvent their entitlements thereto.

Without delving into the trouble with liberalism, the last observation under-
scores liberalism’s long-standing difﬁculty and ambiguity in dealing with minority
rights,
indigeneity and multiculturalism (Kymlicka, 1989; Paine, 1999; Taylor,
1994). From its tainted colonial past to its continued complicity in the hierarchies
of culture and power, liberalism has opened up indigenous and colonized peoples to
rights discourses on culture, human rights, identity, political sovereignty, justice,
property (Ivison, 2002, p. 3), even intellectual property. Part of liberalism’s conceit
is that it deploys the agency and framework of the state to impose its ideals on non-
Western peoples and societies as universally received wisdom thus subjugating,
distorting and marginalizing the cultural and political potentials within those
societies (Alfred, 1991). Consequently, liberalism becomes a double-edged sword

48

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

and a suspect ideological ally in the hands of indigenous and local communities
trapped within the dominant states and institutions of liberal democracy. As
politicophilosophical ideology, liberalism’s anomalous relations with non-Western
peoples makes it a dubious or equivocal partner in support of arguments for local
knowledge and other indigenous and local community claims.

Despite its superﬁcial appeal, liberalism is a political expression of one set of
cultural values over others.23 It reinforces the obstacles or coerced universalistic
presumptions24 that stand in the way of indigenous and non-Western peoples being
effective participants in the global constitutive and transformative processes.
Liberalism is pliable to the debate on local knowledge but there is no guarantee
as to its outcome. Nonetheless, liberal principles can be deployed to blunt or
bushwhack non-Western peoples’
long standing expectations from their local
knowledge.

Conclusion

Current debates about local knowledge inevitably evoke some degree of revisionist
history of colonial relations. Local knowledge is trapped in the hierarchies of
culture, power and politics that have historically deﬁned the relationship between
the West and its indigenous and non-Western others. As local knowledge becomes
attractive in the new knowledge economy, indigenous and local communities have
become proactive and, albeit, belated participants in the debate over their con-
tribution to the global knowledge basket.

Despite its strength, the case for local knowledge is not a free ride to the
Promised Land for its proponents. A number of factors compel the need for a
reﬂective consciousness about potential or real counter-narratives to indigenous
and local communities’ claims to local knowledge. First, claimants to local knowl-
edge have to contend with the realities of their diverging historical trajectories,
which are factors in the perceived differences in their priorities in, and expectations
from the local knowledge project. Similarly, they need to be conscious of the
diversionary potentials of terminological hairsplitting over pivotal but inherently
inexact terms used in the discourse of local knowledge.

Second, contemporary anthropological insights are quick to appeal to the
often-exaggerated cosmopolitan and processual nature of culture, thus blackmail-
ing claims to local knowledge as both unrealistic and imperiling the public domain.
This approach undermines the unidirectional transfer of knowledge from indigen-
ous and local communities to Western industrial complexes and the unbridled
extensions of intellectual property as the real factors that endanger the public
domain. Without doubt, the reservations about our anemic public domain and
dangers of cultural propertization are well founded. However, contrary to the
impression in some quarters, local knowledge and its custodians are more appro-
priately victims of these phenomena than their scapegoat.

r  r 49

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Third, similar to the blackmail from anthropology, the principles of liberalism
as a politicophilosophical ideology represent a source of unsuspecting challenge to
local knowledge. Fourth, also, not left out is the long running battle about an
appropriate conceptual framework of legal right to intellectual property capable of
accommodating local knowledge. The intellectual property challenge has opened up
other options for local knowledge protection via beneﬁt sharing models. Unfortu-
nately, a notable drawback to these alternatives is the legitimacy and role of
intermediaries, as brokers of indigenous knowledge and resources, who exploit
the power gaps in their relationships with indigenous and local communities.

Even in a cosmopolitan cultural order, claims to local knowledge symbolize the
historically rooted struggle of indigenous and local communities in their search for
a responsive knowledge protection system that recognizes their contributions in
a creolized knowledge generation process. Such a regime will represent a major step
forward in the long tortuous road to free local knowledge from the traps of the
conventional intellectual property regime, culture, power and politics.

About the Author

Chidi Oguamanam, LL.M, Ph.D. (British Columbia) is the Director of the Law and
Technology Institute, Dalhousie University Law School, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada; e-mail: Chidi@Dal.Ca

Notes

An earlier version of this article was presented at the panel on Indigenous Peoples and the
Modern State at the Law and Society Conference in Berlin, Germany, 25–28 July 2007.
Thanks are due to Professor Jane McMillan for organizing the panel and to other panel
presenters and discussants for their feedbacks. Thanks are also due to Brendan T. Gray for
outstanding research assistance. This article is dedicated to Professor Brian Noble, a great
friend, who gets me stimulated and thinking after every conversation around our shared
scholarly interests.

1 For the present purpose, the West’s other is a convenient reference to the indigenous and
local communities of both the enclave territories (where there was no settler withdrawal)
and their counterparts in the rest of the developing countries (the so called global South)
or the Third World.

2 This is exempliﬁed by a few signiﬁcant international legal instruments on the environment

that were signed in the 1990s, including speciﬁcally those emerging from the 1992 Rio
Earth Summit such as Agenda 21, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the
Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought
and/or Desertiﬁcation, Particularly in Africa.

3 Knowledge economy characterizes

the ascendancy and rapid transformation of

information, its generation and management mainly with the help of computer-driven
digital technologies in all spheres of economic, research, administrative, service and
industrial activities. The result is that knowledge or information now constitutes perhaps

50

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

the most crucial factor of production and the single most important matrix in overall
economic development since the late twentieth century.

4 Citing Simon J. Bronner (1998).
5 Response to Brown (1998).
6 Citing Ruth Gana (1995).
7 Colonial division of labor is colonialism’s unofﬁcial economic blue print in which
colonized regions of the world were sources of raw materials, while the colonial powers
reserved exclusive industrial power for the conversion of the raw materials into ﬁnished
products.

8 For example, preamble paragraphs and article 8(j) of the CBD text.
9 Arewa (2006a, p. 59) note that ‘‘local knowledge is also not locally homogenous and
differences exist along categories including gender, age, class, occupational and other
markers’’ (references omitted).

10 The reference to local or non-cosmopolitan knowledge is an acknowledgment of the
culture-speciﬁc aspects of non-Western knowledge forms. I share the view that, like
science, such knowledge forms are culture sensitive but I do not subscribe to the
suggestion that in contrast to local knowledge, science is ‘‘decultured’’. Compare Brush
and Stabinsky (1996, p. 4).

11 As a collective, however, non-Western peoples are now a new transnational underclass as
a result of the impacts of hegemonic forces of economic neoliberalism and globalization.
12 For example, the Pastoral Massai of Kenya, the Pygmies of Central Africa and the San
and Khoi peoples of Southern Africa. Often, Nigeria’s Ogoni ethnic minority in the Niger
Delta (who struggle against state-sponsored corporate exploitation of their oil resources
and attendant environmental degradation) is cited in conﬂation of indigenous and
minority rights. However, it is doubtful if the Ogonis could claim to be indigenous to the
exclusion of other minority groups in the Niger Delta region.

13 That is not the case however in Mexico, Bolivia and Fiji. Also, an entire country

population may be indigenous such as in Iceland, Tonga and Papua New Guinea.
14 Brown (1998, p. 197) argues that ‘‘human beings are members of a society but not
‘‘members of’’ a culture, which is a ﬂexible set of understandings, dispositions, and
behavioral scripts that change through time and freely inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by
social interactions with other groups’’ (reference omitted). However, the enigmatic nature
of the phenomenon of culture and its intricate relationship with the concept of society as
evident in this remark makes the distinction on the basis of ‘‘membership’’ quite
reductionist. Compare Kymlicka (1989) (alluding to the primary loyalties of peoples to
cultural memberships in the midst of centrifugal inﬂuences).

15 Documentation of traditional knowledge in a traditional knowledge digital library

(TKDL) format is a program championed by India as a strategy to safeguard its Unani,
Ayurvedic and Sidha medical heritages that have been subject to biopiracy in recent times.
This initiative has proven successful and is now globally recognized. Many developing
countries and regional organizations are understudying the Indian project with a view to
adopting it.

16 The dichotomization of ideas and their expression as a principle of the Western copyright

regime of intellectual property right ignores the ﬂuidity of relations and
interconnectedness of phenomena in the indigenous holistic worldview. In many
indigenous communities the idea and its expression, the creator, the created and the

r  r 51

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

objects of creation are inseparably linked in a holistic order. The extension of the
copyright analogy to indigenous claims readily ignores these conceptual facts of
indigenous world order.

17 Noting that discourses of intellectual property for local knowledge often ignore the

ﬂuidity of knowledge boundaries.

18 Arguing that ‘‘cosmopolitanism is nothing more than networking of local progressive

struggles with the objective of maximizing their emancipatory potentials in locu through
translocal/local connections’’.

19 Notable examples include the displacement of patent exemption on nature or products of

nature, the extension of patent regime to life forms, including plants, animals, their
genetic components and even human genomes and DNAs of isolated indigenous tribes on
the verge of extinction. Others are the extension of copyright claims on matters hitherto
considered facts and the lowering of the threshold for originality to accommodate the
ﬂuidity of information manipulation in the digital environment.

20 Notable initiatives include the moribund Shaman Pharmaceutical beneﬁt-sharing

program, the International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups initiative (involving a
consortium of US and Third World offshore research institutions), the Merck
Pharmaceutical initiative and the Costa Rican Government, etc. These access and beneﬁt
sharing programs are intensively promoted by the CBD and they have made their ways
into the legislative framework of many bioresource rich developing countries.

21 Barnes’ observation was in a response to Brown (1998, p. 206). Interestingly, this issue is

also broached by Brown in his 2003 book: Who Owns Native Culture?

22 In 1999, the Canadian Supreme Court echoed a similar sentiment in Cadbury-Schweppes v

FBI Foods [1999] 1 SCR 142 at 171–2, z26.

23 Taylor (1994, p. 62) notes that ‘‘Liberalism is not a meeting ground for all cultures . . .’’.
24 Such as the principles of autonomy and individual liberty, democracy, social justice, etc.

References

Agrawal, A. (1999) ‘On Power and Indigenous Knowledge’, in D. Posey (ed.), Cultural and

Spiritual Values of Biological Diversity. UNEP, Nairobi, pp. 177–80.

Alfred, T. (1991) Peace, Power and Righteousness, an Indigenous Manifesto. Oxford

University Press, New York.

Amani, B. and Coombe, R. J. (2005) ‘The Human Genome Diversity Project: The Politics of
Patents at the Intersection of Race, Religion and Research Ethics’, Law and Policy, 27,
152–88.

Anaya, J. (1996) Indigenous Peoples in International Law. Oxford University Press, New

York.

Arewa, O. B. (2006a) ‘Piracy, Biopiracy and Borrowing: Culture, Cultural Heritage and the

Globalization of Intellectual Property’ [online], Selected Works of Olufunmilayo B.
Arewa, Bepress Legal Series. Available at hhttp://works.bepress.com/o_arewa/4/i
[Accessed July 2007].

Arewa, O. B. (2006b) ‘TRIPS and Traditional Knowledge: Local Communities, Local

Knowledge in Global Intellectual Property Frameworks’, Marquette Intellectual
Property Review, 10, 155–80.

52

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

Arewa, O. B. (2007a) ‘Culture as Property: Intellectual Property, Local Norms and Global

Rights’ [online], Selected Works of Olufunmilayo B. Arewa, Bepress Legal Series.
Available at hhttp://works.bepress.com/o_arewa/9i [Accessed July 2007].

Arewa, O. B. (2007b) ‘The Freedom to Copy: Copyright, Borrowing and Context’ [online],
Selected Works of Olufunmilayo B. Arewa, Bepress Legal Series. Available at hhttp://
works.bepress.com/o_arewa/i [Accessed July 2007].

Barnes, J. A. (1998) ‘Comment’ on Michael F. Brown, ‘Can Culture Be Copyrighted?’,

Current Anthropology, 39, 206–7.

Battiste, M. and Henderson, J. (2000) Protecting Indigenous Knowledge and Heritage:

A Global Challenge. Purich, Saskatoon.

Bently, L. (2005) ‘Copyright, Translations and Relations Between Britain and India,

1880–1914’. Paper presented at the Association for Teaching and Research in
Intellectual Property (ATRIP) Conference, University of Montreal, 11–13 July (on ﬁle
with the author).

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1886) 25 UST 1341 (as

revised in 1971).

Blakeney, M. (2000) ‘The Protection of Traditional Knowledge Under Intellectual Property

Law’, European Intellectual Property Review, 20, 251–61.

Boyle, J. (2003) ‘The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public

Domain’, Law and Contemporary Problems, 66, 33–74.

Bronner, S. J. (1998) Following Tradition: Folklore in the Discourse of American Culture. Utah

University Press, Logan, UT.

Brown, M. (2003) Who Owns Native Culture? Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Brown, M. F. (1998) ‘Can Culture be Copyrighted?’, Current Anthropology, 139, 193.
Brush, S. and Stanbinsky, D. (1996) Valuing Local Knowledge: Indigenous Peoples and

Intellectual Property Rights. Island Press, Washington, DC.

Cajete, G. (1999) Native Science: Natural Laws of Interdependence. Clear Light, Santa Fe,

NM.

Chander, A. and Sunder, M. (2004) ‘The Romance of the Public Domain’, California Law

Review, 92, 1331–7.

Chartrand, H. M. (2006) The Competitiveness of Nations in the Global Knowledge-Based

Economy [online]. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Interdisciplinary Studies, University
of Saskatchewan. Available at hhttp://www.compilerpress.atfreeweb.com/
b.%20Pro%20Forma%20ToC.htmi [Accessed July 2007].

Cobo, M. (1986) ‘Study of the Problem of Discrimination against Indigenous Populations’,

UN-Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
UN Doc.E/CN.4 sub.2/1986/7/Add.4.

Convention Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (1989) 21

ILM 1382.

Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003) (MISC/2003/CLT/

CH/14).

Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) 31 ILM 818.
Coombe, R. J. (1998) ‘Intellectual Property, Human Rights and Sovereignty: New Dilemmas

in International Law Posed by the Recognition of Indigenous Knowledge and the
Conservation of Biodiversity’, Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies, 6, 59–115.

r  r 53

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Coombe, R. J. (2001) ‘The Recognition of Indigenous and Local Communities’ Knowledge

in International Law’, St. Thomas Law Review, 14, 275–86.

Crews, K. D. (2005) ‘Copyright Duration and the Progressive Degeneration of a

Constitutional Doctrine’, Syracuse Law Review, 55, 189–250.

Daes, E. (2001) ‘The Concept of Self-Determination and Autonomy of Indigenous Peoples in
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples’, St. Thomas Law
Review, 14, 259–70.

Darian-Smith, E. and Fitzpatrick, P. (eds) (1999) Laws of the Postcolonial. University of

Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.

Davis, M. H. (2003) ‘Some Realism About Indigenism’, Cardozo Journal of International and

Comparative Law, 11, 815–30.

DeGeer, M. E. (2003) ‘Biopiracy: The Appropriation of Indigenous Peoples’ Cultural

Knowledge’, New England Journal of International and Comparative Law, 9, 179–208.

Dove, M. R. (1996) ‘Center, Periphery and Biodiversity: A Paradox of Governance and

Developmental Challenge’, in S. Brush and D. Stabinsky (eds), Valuing Local Knowledge
Indigenous Peoples and Intellectual Property Rights. Island Press, Washington, DC,
pp. 41–67.

Drahos, P. (1997) ‘Indigenous Knowledge and Duties of Intellectual Property Owners’,

Intellectual Property Journal, 11, 179–209.

Drahos, P. (2000) ‘Indigenous Knowledge, Intellectual Property and Biopiracy: Is a Global

Bio-Collecting Society the Answer?’, European Intellectual Property Review, 22,
245–50.

Drahos, P. and Braithwaite, J. (2003) Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge

Economy? New Press, New York.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights Trade and Biodiversity: Seeds and Plant

Varieties. Earthscan, London.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2007) ‘Prior Informed Consent and Indigenous Peoples in a Multicultural

World’. Paper presented at the Conference on Intangible Cultural Heritage and
Intellectual Property Under the 2003 UNESCO Convention, New Delhi, 25–27 March
(on ﬁle with the author).

Ellen, R. F., Parkes, P. and Bicker, A. (2000) Indigenous Environmental Knowledge and Its

Transformations: Critical Anthropological Perspectives. Harwood, Amsterdam.

Eppich, C. K. (2002) ‘Patenting Dilemma: Drugs for Proﬁt Versus Drugs for Health’, Santa

Clara Law Review, 289–318.

Farley, C. H. (1997) ‘Protecting Folklore of Indigenous Peoples: Is Intellectual Property the

Answer?’, Connecticut Law Review, 30, 1–48.

Four Directions Council (1996) ‘Forests, Indigenous, Peoples and Biodiversity’

(Contribution of Four Directions Council to the Secretariat of the Convention On
Biodiversity (Lethbridge, AB: FDC, 1996)); also referenced in Oguamanam 2006a at
p. 25 n. 92.

Gana, R. (1995) ‘Has Creativity Died in the Third World? Some Implications of

Internationalization of Intellectual Property’, Denver Journal of International Law and
Policy, 24, 109–44.

Gathii, J. T. (2002) ‘Rights, Patents, Markets and Global AIDS Epidemic’, Florida Journal of

International Law, 14, 261–72.

54

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

Giddens, A. (1990) The Consequences of Modernity. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto,

CA.

Gupta, V. K. (2007) ‘India’s TKDL: Deﬁnition and Classiﬁcation of ICH and TK in the

Context of Inventory Making’. Paper presented at the conference on Intangible Cultural
Heritage and Intellectual Property Under the 2003 UNESCO Convention, New Delhi,
25–27 March (on ﬁle with the author).

Halewood, M. (1999) ‘Indigenous Knowledge in International Law: A Preface to Sui Generis

Intellectual Property Protection’, McGill Law Journal, 44, 953–98.

Hannerz, U. (1990) ‘Cosmopolitans and Locals in World Culture’, Theory Culture and

Society, 7, 237–51.

Helfer, L. (2004) ‘Regime Shifting: The TRIPs Agreement and New Dynamics of

International Law Making’, Yale Journal of International Law, 29, 1–89.

Heller, M. A. and Esienberg, R. S. (1998) ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons

in Biomedical Research’, Science, 280, 698–701.

Hodgson, D. L. (2002) ‘Comparative Perspectives on Indigenous Rights Movement in Africa

and the Americas’, American Anthropologist, 104, 1037–50.

Intergovernmental Committee on Genetic Resources (2003) Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore Traditional [online]. WIPO, Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/tk/en/igc/i
[Accessed July 2007].

Ivison, D. (2002) Postcolonial Liberalism. Cambridge University Press, London.

Jaszi, P. (1991) ‘Toward a Theory of Copyright: The Metamorphoses of Authorship’, Duke

Law Journal, 455–502.

Johnson, M. (1990) Traditional Ecological Knowledge. Dene Cultural Institute & IDRC,

Ottawa.

Koning, M., De (1999) ‘Biodiversity Prospecting and Equitable Remuneration of

Ethnobiological Knowledge: Reconciling Industry and Indigenous Interests’, in M.
Blakeney (ed.), Intellectual Property Aspects of Ethnobiology. Sweet & Maxwell,
London, pp. 23–42.

Krumenacher, T. (2004) ‘Protection of Indigenous Peoples and their Traditional Knowledge:

Would a Registry System Reduce the Misappropriation of Traditional Knowledge?’,
Marquette Intellectual Property Review, 8, 143–60.

Kymlicka, W. (1989) Liberalism, Community, and Culture. Clarendon, Oxford.

Kymlicka, W. (ed.) (1995) The Rights of Minority Cultures. Oxford University Press, New

York.

Lessig, L. (2003) ‘The Creative Commons’, Florida Law Review, 55, 763–78.

Martin, G. and Vermeylen, S. (2005) ‘Intellectual Property, Indigenous Knowledge and

Biodiversity’, Capitalism, Nature and Socialism, 27–48.

Maskus, K. and Reichman, J. (2004) ‘The Globalization of Private Knowledge Good and the

Privatization of Global Public Goods’, Journal of International Economic Law, 7,
279–320.

Mehta, M. D. (ed.) (2005) Biotechnology Unglued. UBC Press, Vancouver.

Mgbeoji, I. (2001) ‘Patents and Traditional Knowledge of the Uses of Plants: Is a Communal

Patent Regime Part of the Solution to the Scourge of Biopiracy?’, Indiana Journal of
Global Legal Studies, 9, 163–86.

r  r 55

Chidi Oguamanam

Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Mgbeoji, I. (2003) ‘The Juridical Origins of the International Patent System: Toward the

Historiography of the Role of Patent in Industrialization’, Journal of History of
International Law, 5, 403–22.

Mgbeoji, I. (2005) Global Biopiracy: Patents, Plants and Indigenous Knowledge. UBC Press,

Vancouver.

Mgbeoji, I. (2007) ‘An Overview of Indigenous Knowledge and African Patent System’, in
E. Boon and L. Hens (eds), Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Sustainable Development:
Relevance for Africa. Kamla-Raj, Delhi.

Mgbeoji, I. and Allen, B. (2003) ‘Patent First, Litigate Later! The Scramble for Speculative

and Overly Broad Genetic Patents: Implications for Access to Health Care and
Biomedical Research’, Canadian Journal of Law and Technology, 2, 83–98.

Mossoff, A. (2001) ‘Rethinking the Development of Patents: An Intellectual History,

1550–1800’, Hastings Law Journal, 1255–1322.

Oguamanam, C. (2004a) ‘Protecting Indigenous Knowledge in International Law: Solidarity

Beyond the Nation-State’, Law Text Culture, 8, 191–230.

Oguamanam, C. (2004b) ‘Indigenous Peoples and International Law: The Making of

a Regime’, Queens Law Journal, 30, 348–99.

Oguamanam, C. (2004c) ‘Localizing Intellectual Property in the Globalization Epoch:

The Integration of Indigenous Knowledge’, Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies,
11, 135–70.

Oguamanam, C. (2006a) International Law and Indigenous Knowledge: Intellectual Property,

Plant Biodiversity and Traditional Medicine. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.

Oguamanam, C. (2006b) ‘Regime Tension in the Intellectual Property Rights Arena: Farmers
Rights and Post TRIPS Counter Regime Trends’, Dalhousie Law Journal, 29, 413–54.

Okediji, R. L. (2004) ‘The Institutions of Intellectual Property: New Trends in an Old

Debate’, American Society of International Law Proceedings, 98, 219–22.

Osborne, S. D. (2003–4) ‘Protecting Tribal Stories: The Perils of Propertization’, American

Indian Law Review, 28, 203–36.

Paine, R. (1999) ‘Aboriginality, Multiculturalism and Liberal Rights Philosophy’, Ethnos, 64,

325–49.

Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1883) 21 UST 1583.
Posey, D. A. (2002) ‘Commodiﬁcation of the Sacred Through Intellectual Property Rights’,

Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 83, 3–12.

Rural Advancement Foundation International (2002) ‘Bioprospecting/Biopiracy and
Indigenous Peoples’ [online]. The Latin American Alliance. Available at hhttp://
www.kahea.org/gmo/pdf/bioprospecting_people.pdfi [Accessed July 2007].

Reichman, J. H. (2000) ‘The TRIPS Agreement Comes of Age: Conﬂict or Corporation with
Developing Countries?’, Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, 32, 441–70.

Roht-Arriaza, N. (1996) ‘Of Seeds and Shamans: The Appropriation of Scientiﬁc and

Technical Knowledge of Indigenous and Local Communities’, Michigan Journal of
International Law, 17, 919–66.

Severi, Carlo (1998) ‘Comment’ on Michael F. Brown, ‘Can Culture Be Copyrighted?’,

Curent Anthropology, 39, 214–15.

Sherman, B. and Bently, L. (1999) The Making of Modern Intellectual Property Law: The

British Experience, 1760–1911. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

56

r  r Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge

Chidi Oguamanam

Shiva, V. (1997) Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature and Knowledge. South End Press, Boston,

MA.

Smith, L. T. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. Zed

Books, London.

Souza Santos, B. (1995) Towards a New Common Sense: Law, Science and Politics in

Paradigmatic Transition. Routledge, London.

Stocking, G. W., Jr. (1982) ‘The Dark-Skinned Savage: The Image of the Primitive Man in
Evolutionary Anthropology’, in G. W. Stocking Jr. (ed.), Race, Culture and Evolution:
Essays in the History of Anthropology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp.
110–32.

Sunder, M. (2000) ‘Intellectual Property and Identity Politics: Playing with Fire’, Journal of

Gender, Race and Justice, 4, 69–98.

Taylor, C. (1994) ‘The Politics of Recognition’, in A. Gutmann (ed.), Multiculturalism.

Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 25–73.

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Agreement (1994) 33 ILM 1197.
Waldron, J. (1995) ‘Minority Cultures and Cosmopolitan Alternative’, in W. Kymlicka (ed.),

The Rights of Minority Cultures. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 93–119.

Wiessner, S. (1999) ‘Rights and Status of Indigenous Peoples: A Global Perspective and

International Legal Analysis’, Harvard Human Rights Journal, 12, 57–128.

Wilmer, F. (1993) Indigenous Voices in World Politics: From Time Immemorial. Sage,

Newbury Park, CA.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2001) Fact Finding Missions on Intellectual

Property and Traditional Knowledge 1998–1999. WIPO, Geneva.

Yano, L. (1993) ‘Protection of Ethnobiological Knowledge of Indigenous Peoples’, UCLA

Law Review, 41, 443–86.

Yu, P. K. (2004) ‘Currents and Crosscurrents in the International Intellectual Property

Regime’, Loyola Los Angeles Law Review, 38, 323–444.

Yu, P. K. (2006) ‘Of Monks, Medieval Scribes and Middlemen’, Michigan State Law Review,

1–32.

Yu, P. K. (2007) ‘The International Enclosure Movement’, Indiana University Law Journal,

82, 828–907.

Zuckerman, H. (1998) ‘The Sociology of Science’, in N. J. Smelser (ed.), The Handbook of

Sociology. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA, pp. 511–74.

r  r 57


