The Threat of Domain Names to the Trademark 

System 

Assafa ENDESHAW* 

INTRODUCTION 

The initial purpose of domain names was to assign a unique address to a computer 
connected to a network. In its earlier form, the address (also known as Internet Protocol, 
or IP address, for short), was a stream of digits. It was very difficult to remember those 
dqgts and hence it became necessary  to have an alphanumeric representation that was 
easy to commit to memory, recall  or recite. That is how the current form of domain 
names emerged. Every time someone accesses  a  site using a  glven domain name,  the 
Web browser translates (or, using the  technical term,  “resolves”) that  name into  the 
numerical equivalent and unveils the information available at that address. Thus, in the 
author’s IP address, 155.69.4.53, there are four sets of numbers. The first set indicates a 
geographic region; the  second signifies a  specific Internet  Service Provider (IsP);  the 
third  refers to  a  large  computer  network  (the University), followed by  the  author’s 
computer, arranged in order of more specificity. The same IP address is represented by 
a domain name system (DNs). In the author’s Web address  (or, as it is properly called, 
cthttp://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/aendeshaw/ 
the  uniform  resource  locator-URL) 
Assafa.htmn, the first two sections inhcate the language (protocol) used and the host or 
place  (www) where  the  UEU is  found;  the  next  chunk,  “ntu.edu.sg”,  refers  to  the 
unique registered address of the University to which the author is attached. 

The manner of transmitting electronic messages from one IP address to another is 
undertaken by putting them together in packets carrying a time stamp and a destination 
address. Since the IP addresses are unique, any packet would be sent from one point to 
another without confusion or difficulty. In terms of level of use, the highest or topmost 
domain names are those which have suffixes such as tt.orgw  (for organizations), cc.edu)) 
(for educational institutions), tc.com,,  (for commercial entities) attached to, or associated 
with, them.  These are called top level domain names  (TLDs). TLDS are of two types: 
generic  (those just  cited  which  are  used  internationally or  have  no  fured  national 
reference); and those restricted to countries like (c.uk,), ((.us)) and ct.etu. In the domain- 
name example cited above, ccedu.sg) are TLDS and (cntu)) is an SLD (second-level domain 
name). The specific particulars of the  author  (sometimes referred to  as  tertiary level 
* Ph.D., LLM (London University); LL.B  (Adds Ababa University); Associate Professor of Law, Nanyang 
The author can be contacted at: ccaendeshaw@ntu.edu.sgn. 

Business School of the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 

324 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

domain names, or simply, subdomains) follow in descending order of generality, to the 
very last  page  of Web &splay.  Thus  the herarchy  of files  at the  author’s connection 
appear at the end of the URL as subdomains. 

The registration, as well as the use, of unique identifiers (addresses) on the Internet, 
particularly by businesses trading in goods and services, has opened up a can of worms for 
one area of law, namely  that of trade and service  marks  (jointly referred to, hereafier, as 
“marks”). The major source of this problem is that those intendmg to use domain names 
have reverted to existing, indeed well-known, marks; increasingly, businesses with well- 
established marks have recopzed the value of adopting the same marks for use as domain 
names. In a way, the identrfiers also resemble trade names; hence, companies which have 
trade names may  want to use  them as  domain names.  Not surprisingly, some businesses 
which set themselves up on the Internet have snatched well-known brand names, marks or 
trade names belonging to other entities to serve them as their domain names. The resulting 
overlap of domain names with marks or trade names, as well as the mix-up  between them, 
has produced a number of problems, both of a conceptual and practical nature. 

For  one  thing,  marks  have  legal  effect  only  in  the  specified  territories  they are 
registered for, or, if non-registered,  have established themselves, while domain names 
are virtually global in their scope as  no territorial restrictions can be imposed on their 
use. Secondly, and flowing from the first point, it is possible  to have various proprietors 
of the same mark, while domain names can only belong to one entity. This is with the 
assumption that only one mode of registration is applied or used world-wide. As soon 
as  national  registration becomes  possible  and  the  conditions for  multiple  centres  or 
protocols emerge, the problem will assume a more ominous proportion. 

Thirdly, the functional overlap between domain names and marks confounds the 
problem further because the former more and more assume the role of the latter without 
relinquishing their original purpose as mere addresses. This is regardless of the fact that 
the latter start off as registered (or already deployed) marks or that a reverse process can 
set in whereby “novel” domain names develop into indicators of quality of goods or 
services  offered  online.  It  would  then  be  incumbent  on  the  trademark  system  to 
recognize the new form of indications of goods or services and accord it a full status, 
alongside “offline” marks, or ignore it at its own peril. 

This article examines the quandary the trademark system has been placed in as  a 
result of the rise of domain names. It defines the problem in Section I,  before outlining 
the relevant treaty or legislation in Section II  as well as the reaction of the courts in the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States in  Sections  III  and  IV,  respectively,  before 
coming to the Conclusion. 

I.  THE PROBLEMS ENGENDERED BY  THE OVERLAP OF DOMAIN NAMES WITH MARKS 

As  already  mentioned,  the  Internet  Protocol  addresses  that  are  given  to 
organizations or individuals on a network started off as mere locators (of files or other 

DOMAIN NAMES AND THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

325 

resources), and, because of the preference for numbers and alphabets to designate such 
locators, the addresses increasingly became nicknames or mnemonics for the addresses. 
The fact that the nicknames could at the same time be registrable as, or replicate, known 
marks meant that such domain names have the capacity to represent the same functions 
as that of trade and service marks, at least in terms of inlcating the source of goods and 
services.  Although  they  started  off  as  alternative  designators,  in  lieu  of  hard-to- 
remember, long sequences of  numbers, their  potential  to  indicate a  link to  specific 
services or goods has created the potential overlap. 

Another factor that adds to the significance of domain names qua marks, particularly 
when  the latter are well-established, is  the  fact  that  goods offered online cannot be 
inspected before purchase and, consequently, the buyer would more often rely on the 
experience she has of the specific mark now being used as a domain name. The level of 
trust and reputation that well-known  marks and brands enjoy among consumers will 
induce a preference for goods or services indicated by domain names which replicate 
the known brands or marks. Furthermore, the information pertaining to the quality or 
functions of the product or service supplied through the established mark could trigger 
instinctive preferences for associated goods whether or not they were the original goods 
for which the marks were registered. It would not seem that, even where consumers 
can make use  of more “intelligent” Web search engmes that help them identifj. goods 
or  services  on  the  basis  of  their  own  preferences  and  specifications, branding  and 
trademarlung would totally lose their significance; for, although consumer taste might 
be better addressed by such software, it does not necessarily follow that the reliance on 
established brands (and hence, indirectly, the value of domain names) wrll diminish.’ 

Added  to  this  is  the  current  tendency  to  allow  an  ever-expanlng  scope  of 
protection, initially by way of defence but later on in the interest of maintaining market 
dominance? for well-established (also known variously as “famous” or “international”) 
marks3  and  to  prevent  the  use  of  the  same  mark  for  goods  that  have  no  possible 
connection with  the  earlier class  of  goods registered by  the  owner. The possibility, 
therefore, of domain names becoming valuable for registrants, independent of the type 
or place of goods or services that they might or might not represent, is in line with the 
trend or the shift from the long-standing position of marks acquiring value only when 

See Dan L.  Burk,  Trademark Doctrinesfor Global Electronic  Commerce, 49  South Carolma Law Review 695, 

Summer 1998, at 699. Available online from LEXIS-NEXIS. 

U.S. cases have considered and recognized the legitimacy of claims for “zones of expansion” for trademarks; 
an example is  Tally-Ho, Inc. v. Coast Community College Dist., 889 F.  2d 1018 (11th Circuit, 1989). In the United 
Kingdom, Section lO(2) ofthe Trade Marks Act 1994 has introduced a wider test ofihngement, namely, whether 
there is a “likelihood of association” between the relevant marks in the minds of the public. The Court considered 
ths issue in  Wagamama Limited  v, City Centre Restaurants PLC and  Others, I19951 F.S.R. 713, but rejected it for the 
conventional (“first-principles”) test of the likelihood of confusion among the public. If the decision had relied on 
the  wider  test  (although the Judge  found for the  plaintifi),  it would  certainly have  extended  the  ground for 
infiingement of a mark and granted a much broader monopoly for trademark owners. 

3  Thus the World Intellectual Property Organization has sought to bolster the position offamous names based 
on the apparent thinking that the Paris Convention formula for their protection has remained virtually unrealisable. 
The drafi proposals, first discussed in 1995, were expected to be placed before the Assemblies of the Member States 
of Wwo on September 1999, for their adoption: see, Wr1Jo:Joint Resolution  Concerning  Provisions  on the Protection of 
Well-Known Marks, 4 August 1999, available at c(http://www.wipo.org/eng/main.htm>), document A/34/13. 

326 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

used in the course of trade and on specific classes of goods to that of becoming valuable 
in themselves. 

The type and nature  of goods to be  sold online d also  have  a bearing on the 
preference  for  domain  names  with  a  reputed  background.  Digtal  or  informational 
goods, such as software, data, music and others, whether or not they can be transmitted 
exclusively online or have stdl to rely on additional means like shipping, d require 
assessment  by  the buyer  or  someone with  expertise; if the  buyer  has  never  had  any 
previous  experience, such  transactions could  only  be  expedted through  the  use  of 
established marks and the reputation of the supplier. 

The impact of domain names is certainly not on all forms of marks. Because of the 
nature of onhne networks (at least for the moment) the only forms of marks that will be 
susceptible to confusion are those with  audio and visual  characteristics. Furthermore, 
the inability to differentiate, on the Net, between the same marks which otherwise, in 
“real space”, could be set apart by  the use  of capitahation, font size, colour or even 
graphic designs and the like, aggravates the impact of the domain-name system on marks 
with visual characteristics. On the other hand, the newly evolving types of marks, such 
as  those  incorporating  smell  and  touch  (texture)  arguably  will  not  be  affected  by 
domain  names  for  some  time  to  come,  ongoing  research  into  touch-technology 
notwithstanding. 

The gravity of the problem of confusion inherent in the use of domain names as a 
new form of marks is not appreciated to the same extent by all writers. One writer, for 
instance, argues for the possibility of effecting market segmentation (“virtual enclaves”) 
through concurrent usage and recognizing such in the registration process: 

“Just as the Trademark Office has long registered marks with geographic carve-outs,  it could 
just as well register marks with virtual carve-outs.”4 
It may, of course, be technologically possible (through passwords or cryptographic 
authentication, for  example,  or by  establishing shopping malls  dedicated to  distinct 
goods or services or those accessed by certain types of consumers)5 to include or exclude 
the  use  of  any  domain  names  on  any  network  and  therefore  to  carve  out  market 
segments for differing types  of goods and services-thereby  making it less possible  for 
confusion to arise. 

The argument, in essence, is  that  there  is  no need for a  different type  of law to 
resolve this  overlap as  current trademark law can cope with it. Yet, it is  apparent that 
the problem arising from the possibility of trademarks being converted, or co-opted, 
into becoming domain names may be easily reversed where the latter are registered first. 
Indeed,  the  cross-over  from  a  domain name  to  a  trademark  and from  one  national 
territory  to  another  will  not  be  as  difficult  or  take  as  long  for  domain  names  in 
cyberspace as it has been for trademarks. Hence, any attempt to contain cross-overs  in 

4  Burk, footnote 1, above, at 714. 
5  For a discussion of technological zoning for the protection of intellectual property,  see Lawrence Lessing, 

Intellectual  Property and Code, 11 St. John Journal ofLegal Comment 635, 1996, available online from LEXIS-NEXIS. 

DOMAIN NAMES AND THE TRADEMARK  SYSTEM 

327 

through 

the  use  of  domain  names 
technological  compartmentalization  (or 
segmentation) d not  necessarily,  least  of  all  totally,  prevent  the  confusion  of 
consumers. On the  contrary, such a  practice may  only end up  in slowing down the 
impact  of  domain  names  on  marks  and  on  the  obsolescence  of  the  conception, 
functioning and administration of the current trademark system. Certainly, it will put 
up obstacles to the rapid progress of online commerce by erecting pockets of markets. 
Besides, proprietors and users will be forced to go through more formalities and incur 
costs to supply or obtain the same type of goods from a range of pockets in much the 
same way as  merchants had  to  traverse the disparate customs zones that plagued pre- 
unified Germany in the nineteenth century until the zones were combined through the 
Zollverein. It would, therefore, appear more rational to recognize the inevitability both 
in the rise of domain names as indicators or as a means to get hold of goods and services 
as well as the resulting problem of overlap or parallel use of marks and domain names. 
On top  of all  this,  the  fact that  any  legal  protection  of such  domain names,  if 
achieved,  would  be  on  a  global  level  removes  the  necessity  of  applying to  several 
intermediary offices in national temtories-thus  departing from the current practice for 
the  registration  of  marks.  Such  an  approach  provides  each  domain  name  with  an 
absolutely unfettered and complete territorial plane throughout cyberspace (the virtual 
world). Coupled with their increased use, the legal recognition of domain names wdl 
not only usher in a new aspect to the protection of signs and symbols representing goods 
and services, but  push  towards  a  transformation of  the  nature  and  scope  of current 
marks.  The  dlrect  consequence of  such legalization and  standardization of  domain 
names d be to supply a conceptual and practical prop for the realisation of the long- 
standing quest for universal marks. It is not inconceivable that a transformation in the 
nature  and  legal  standing  of  domain  names  would  make  universal  marks  not  only 
imperative but also achievable at a stroke. 

However,  the  transition  towards  universality  of  marks,  particularly  of  those 
originating in the terrestrial space and possessing an established reputation, will  not be 
smooth, as each owner in every nation will have contributed towards, and expect to 
reap from, the geographic spread of its own famous mark(s). There w d  inevitably arise 
a claim for global recognition and prominence by all sides. The ways in which the law 
will decide the contest and counter-claims for prominence have yet to be worked out. 
The tentative steps being taken towards establishing the institutional basis for domain- 
name administration are only the beginning, and by no means represent the end of the 
knotty problem that will continue to unfold in the months ahead. 

11.  LEGAL RESPONSES  TO THE PROBLEM OF OVERLAP 

One  might  expect  that  the  law  would  keep  up  with  the  new  developments 
impacting on the  use  of marks  and names  arising from the  rapid  spread of  Internet 
technology in general and the widespread use of domain names in particular. However, 

328 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

needless to say it is  stdl uncertain  how,  or even whether,  the law needs to adapt. An 
examination of the relevant treaties or legislation that were in place before the onset of 
domain names, and the courts’ attempts to grapple with the issues that  domain names 
continue to throw up will demonstrate this. These will be examined shortly. 

Pertinent  Treaties and Legislation 

The protection of famous marks is guaranteed both under the Paris Convention for 
the Protection of Industrial Property and the Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of 
Intellectual Property  Rights  (TRIPS). Article 6bis(l) of the Pans Convention provides 
for the  protection  of well-known  marks by  making  it  an  obligation of the  Member 
States, at the request of an interested party: 

“ ... to refuse  or to cancel the registration, and to prohbit  the use,  of a trademark which 
constitutes a  reproduction, an  imitation,  or  a  translation, liable to create confusion, of a 
mark considered by the competent authority of the country of registration or use to be well 
known in that country as being already the mark of a person entitled to the benefits of t h s  
Convention and used for identical or similar goods. These provisions shall also apply when 
the essential part  of the mark constitutes a reproduction of any such well-known mark or 
an imitation liable to create confusion therewith.” 
Article 16 of TRIPS defines the rights conferred by registration of a mark in general 
(namely, to prevent unauthorized use by thud parties, “in the course of trade”, of similar 
or identical “signs” to the registered mark, “where such use would result in a likelihood 
of confusion”6) and reinforces Article 6bis of the Pans Convention on the protection of 
famous marks. Indeed, besides extending the scope ofprotection to cover service marks, 
Article 16(2) of TRIPS requires that the determination by Member States of whether a 
trademark is well known “shall take account of the knowledge of the trademark in the 
relevant sector of the public, including knowledge in the Member concerned which has 
been obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark.” Moreover, the extension 
of the scope of protection goes beyond that normally allowed to marks (prohibition of 
unauthorized  use  on  sirmlar  or identical  goods  in  respect  of  which  a  trademark  is 
registered) by implicitly prohibiting use on non-similar goods or services “provided that 
use of that trademark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection 
between  those  goods  or  services  and  the  owner  of  the  registered  trademark  and 
provided that the interests of the owner of the registered trademark are to be damaged 
by such use.”7 

The most obvious significance of the provisions relating to famous marks in the 
Pans Convention and TRIPS is the cushion they provide them from encroachment by 
defendants who are sailing as close as they possibly can to those marks.8 In that sense, as 

TRIPS,  M c l e  16(1) 
TRIPS, Article 16(3). 
*  Aaicle 4 of Annex I  in the WIPo-proposedjoint  Resolution, footnote 3 above, provldes that protection  will 
be sought from any mark “or an essential part thereof [that] constitutes a reproduction, an imitation, a  translation, 
or a transliteration, liable to create conhion of the well-known  mark.” 

DOMAIN NAMES AND THE TRADEMARK  SYSTEM 

329 

far as domain names are concerned, the purpose of the treaties seems to be to block their 
use where those names encroach on established or famous marks. Consequently, as both 
the  Pans  Convention  and  the  TRIPS Agreement  stand,  their  application  for  the 
protection of domain names is not a foregone conclusion. For one thing, although States 
are obliged to introduce mechanisms for the protection of famous marks consistent with 
their treaty obligations into national law, the issue of whether domain names should be 
considered proper subject-matter for protection (presumably as a form of marks) has still 
to  be  decided.  Secondly, should  an  understanding emerge  that  domain  names  are 
protectable on a par with famous names, it will be  all the more necessary  to establish 
why a dfferentiation has to be made among domain names as, functionally, they are all 
the same-and 
the law would be concerned with their functions and not their level in 
the domain-name hierarchy.9 Thirdly, there is no consensus on whether domain names 
are a species of intellectual property and, consequently, deserving of integration into the 
existing forms or structures of protection  or some sort of new approach (conception, 
form of protection, and the like). 

Just as the first  dlspute case prompted by  the conflict between domain names and 
marks started to be heard, and before the continuing indecision (perhaps confusion) as to 
what  needs to be  done for domain names surfaced, the United  States  came out with 
further legislation,  the  Federal Trademark  Dilution  Act  of  1995,lO strengthening the 
status of trademarks, in particular that of famous ones, and thus raising anti-dllution law 
fi-om its  previous, largely state-bound  scope, to  a  federal level.”  Evidently,  the  U.S. 
Congress intended it not only to provide additional protection to those (famous) marks 
but also to address the dlsputes which began to emerge when marks were “pirated” by 
registrants of domain names. From that point of view, the Act might surely be considered 
as  the first step in tackhng the problem of overlap of domain names  with marks. Yet, 
there  are  no  signs  that  it  will  pave  the  way  for  more  refined  and  comprehensive 
legislation for other natiohs to follow, in consonance with the trend in recent decades 
where the United States set the pace in legislation for new technologies and the rest of 
the world grudgingly acquiesced. This is notwithstandmg the fact that U.S. courts have 
applied the Act extensively to resolve the rising number of dlsputes born of the overlap. 
In terms of its content, the Federal Trademark Dilution Act  specified, under S 3, 
remedes of injunction and other relief that courts might find justifiable against the use 
by a non-owner  of a famous mark where such use “causes dilution of the distinct quality 
of the mark”. A plaintiff alleging a violation of the Act needs to prove that: 

-  its mark is famous; 
-  the defendant has made a commercial use of the mark in commerce; 

9 

It is to be noted that the WIPO proposals referred to the irrelevance of levels of hierarchy  to functions of 
the  WIPO Internet  Domain Name Process,  30 April  1999; 

domain names:  see WIPO Final Report,  Final Report  of 
available at ~http://wipo2.wtpo.int/process/eng/processhome.h~~~. 

lo  104 15 U.S.C. 1125. 
1’  For the evolution of that aspect of the law and its impact to date, see Lynda J. Oswald,  “Tarnishment” and 
“Blurting” under the Federal  Trademark Dilution Act of 1995, 36 American Business Law Journal 255, Winter, 1999, 
available o d n e  &om LEXIS-NEXIS. 

330 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

- 
- 

the defendant’s use began after the mark became famous; and 
the defendant’s use of the mark ddutes the quality of the mark. 

The Act lists the factors that might be taken into account to determine whether a 

mark is distinctive or famous: 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness; 
duration and extent of use on specific goods or services; 
duration and extent of advertising and publicity; 
the geographic extent of use of the mark; 
the channels of trade for the goods and services; 
the degree of recognition of the owner’s mark and that of the other user; 
the nature and extent of the use of the same or similar marks by third parties; 
and 
whether the mark was registered. 

It further defines  “ddution”, in  Section 4, as  “the lessening of the  capacity of a 
famous mark to identify and hstinguish goods or services, regardless  of the presence or 
absence of (1) competition between the owner of the famous mark and other parties, or 
(2) likelihood of confusion, mistake, or deception.” 

As  shall be seen later on, the application of this Act by the U.S. courts has led to 
several decisions, nearly all of which have sought to exclude any right of domain-name 
registrants,  irrespective  of  their  intent,  in  so  far  as  the  name  was  preceded  by  (or 
originally) a famous mark. None of the U.S. decisions pondered on the fallout of such 
an approach, in particular in extending the scope ofprotectability of marks that had built 
their  distinctiveness  through  continuous  use  and  advertising  and  not  by  virtue  of 
registration.  In  other  words,  the  effective  abolition  of  the  “Part  B”  v.  “Part  A ’  
(respectively) differentiation for registration that used  to have pragmatic value in  the 
pre-1994  trademark law in the United  Kingdom. This further makes it imperative to 
enquire into  the wisdom of applying an anti-dilution  law  conceived in  the  realspace 
context to problems arising in cyberspace. 

111.  U.K.  COURT DECISIONS 

Just  like  in  the  United  States,  courts  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  initially 
confronted  with  lsputes  triggered  by  defendants  who  had  taken  the  liberty  of 
registering established corporate  names  or trademarks as  domain  names.  The  courts 
seemed to be reacting instinctively to  the brazen  attempt to reap where  one has  not 
sown. Hence, what one might call  a  “fairness” approach was  employed in the  Glum 
case12 where a shelf company, GlaxoWelIcome, was registered by  the defendants, in an 
apparent move to pre-empt the use of that company name by the plaintiffs (Glaxo PLC 
and  Wellcome  PLC), who  were  going  through  an  impending  merger.  The Judge 

12  GIaxo PI.C  and Another v.  GIaroWellcome Ltd. and Others, [1996] F.S.R. 388. 

DOMAIN NAMES AND THE TRADEMARK  SYSTEM 

331 

referred  to  the  defendants’  “&shonest”  activities as  well  as  their  demand  fiom  the 
plaintiffs for a ‘‘totally unwarranted sum of money”-~100,000 
instead of the  usual 
L1,OOO they routinely demanded for shelf companies-to 

rule against them: 

“The Court will not countenance any such pre-emptive strike of registering companies with 
names  where  others  have  the  goodwill  in  those  names,  and  the  registering party  then 
demandmg a price for changing that name. It is  an abuse  of the system of regutration  of 
companies’ names. The right to choose the name with which a company is registered is not 
given for that purpose.”*3 
Accordingly, the Judge granted a mandatory injunction against  the defendants to 
“take all steps as lie within their powers to change or facihtate the change of name.”*4 
Although the registrants had not sought to make money out of the plaintiffs’ neglect of 
obtaining a domain name for themselves, still the  thrust of the  argument against  the 
usurpation  of another’s name has  relevance to domain-name issues.  In  the particular 
instance, the Court considered the request for money in return  for handing over the 
company names to be a ransom, as the registration was not done with a lawful purpose. 
The rationale of the  decision could therefore be extended to  the  sirmlar activities of 
“squatters” without &fficulty. 

Another approach of the U.K. courts was to decide on technicalities without going 
into the merits of the cases presented to them. Such an approach was applied in Harrods 
v.  U.K.  Network  Services  Ltd.  and  Others,  9  December  1996,’s  where  the  Judge 
pronounced  his  simple judgment,  in the absence of the defendants fiom the hearing, 
that Harrods should be given back  the domain name registered by the total strangers 
(c(harro&.com,))  although 
their  own, 
ccharrods.co.uk),.  Otherwise the Court would have had to resolve the plaintiffs claim 
that  the  use  of the  “Harrods” trademarks for various goods  amounted  to  trademark 
infi-ingement, per  Section lO(2) of the  Trade Marks Act  1994, and passing  OK This 
would have presented a difficulty to the Court as the defendants had not yet set up a 
Web site (thus not creating a reference to goods) and any access to the domain name 
merely gave details of the owners of the name and contacts. By contrast, the U.S. courts 
have pronounced a series ofjudgments, such as in Panavision  Int’l v. Toeppen,16 in favour 
of plaintiffs allegmg the same. 

the  plaintiffs  had  already  registered 

In  Avnet  lnc.  v.  lsoact  Ltd.,’? the  defendants had  been  using  the  domain  name 
ccavnet.co.uk,,  although the plaintiffs had registered the mark “Avnet” for “advertising 
and  promotional  seMces”  (in  the  sale  of  electronic  components  and  software  by 
catalogue). The Judge resorted to the  construction of the registration for the  specific 
class  of goods by  the plaintiffs and refused to  grant  an  injunction  against  the  alleged 

Ibid., at 391. 
14  Ibid.. at 392. 
. . ~ ~  
‘5  [1997] 4 E.I.P.R. D-106. 
‘ 6   938 F.  Supp. 616 (C.D. Cal. 1996); affirmed by the  Court of Appeal for the Ninth Circuit in Panavision 
International.  L.P. v.  Dennis  Toevven; Network  Solutions.  Inc..  1998 U.S.  ADO. LEXIS 7557, available o d n e  &om 
LEXIS-NEXIS. Discussed below 

Section IV. 

[1998] F.S.R. 16. 

332 

THE JOURNAL OF WOKLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

“infringement”. The Judge relied on a strict reading of the Trade Marks Act 1994 and 
the practices of the Trade Mark Regstry without giving due consideration to the nature 
of the new animal and the dire consequences to the plaintiffs of the effective exclusion 
of their mark from any use  on the Net. Although the plaintiffs did not  allege that the 
defendant had snatched their mark, it seemed to the Court to be an irrelevant issue as 
to who would have legitimacy in having their presence on the Net represented by the 
domain name which incorporated the mark  “Avnet”. This is all the more puzzling in 
view of the fact that the plaintiffs, too, had a Web presence, though it appears that the 
mark “Avnet” did not figure at all in their domain name. 

While the adventurous deeds of phoney registrants have gven the U.K. courts a 
way out, the reference to “dishonesty” or a general antipathy to acts of defendants who 
had no apparent justifiable basis to pirate others’ established names, might not help them 
resolve the problem of legitimate or bona fide  users  of an established mark or business 
name  as  a  domain  name.  In  such  situations,  the  courts  may  be  unable  to  order  a 
reassignment. A case in point is Prince PLC v. Prince Sports Group Inc.18 The plaintiffs were 
in  the  business  of  services  in  computers,  while  the  defendants’ mark  was  used  in 
connection  with  tennis  rackets,  squash  rackets,  sporting  items  and  clothing.  The 
plaintiffs had regstered with Network  Solutions Inc.  (NsI) ccprince.com)) as a domain 
name  in  1995; after receiving a letter  alleging that  they were involved in  trademark 
infringement and llution of the defendants’ mark ((PRINCE)), registered throughout the 
world  as  well  as  in  the  United  Kingdom,  they  brought  proceedings  claiming 
unjustifiable threat (under S 21 of the  1994 Trade Marks Act). The plaintiffs sought a 
declaration that their registration and use  of the domain name was  not  infringing, an 
injunction against such threat firom the defendants, and damages. 

declaration of non-infringement- 

The Court  considered at length whether  the  defendants’ letter was  a threat and 
granted a  declaration to  that  effect and an  injunction  against  any further  threats, but 
refrained from granting the further relief sought-a 
ostensibly because the plaintiffs had  not  provided evidence in support of their claim. 
The defendants’ reluctance to engage the plaintiffs fully (that is, their unwdingness  to 
offer an undertalung in lieu of injunction) may have accounted for the incompleteness 
of  the  relief  that  the  Court  granted.  The  caution  that  the  Court  exercised  in  not 
attempting to delve into the substantive issues that the plaintiffs raised  (in particular that 
of non-infnngement)  was  premised on its perception  of the pointlessness of such an 
exercise under the cited Section 21-the 
danger that U.S. courts might consider such a 
step to be a “pointless relief to grant” and the inconveniences that the defendant might 
suffer (that any “further declaration could be invoked unfairly against the defendant”l9). 
Yet, it seems overall that the Court was not convinced of the merits of a declaration as 
well as, perhaps, of the existence of any possible grounds to sustain such in view of the 

l R  [1998] F.S.R. 21 
’ 9   Ibid., at 41. 

DOMAIN  NAMES  A N D  THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

333 

novelty  of  the  underlying  dispute  between  the  parties.  The  Court’s  resort  to 
technicalities and avoidance of the real issues was hence conveniently cloaked. 

The  Court  of Appeal  also  got  its  chance  to  take  a  position  on  this  emerging 
conundrum. It confirmed the decision of the High Court granting injunctions against 
two individual dealers in Internet domain names who had registered the names of five 
well-known  companies (Ladbroke, BT, Virgin Enterprises, J. Sainsbury and Marks & 
ordering them  to pay  costs and take  steps to  assign  the  domain  names  so 
registered to the plaintiffs. The defendants had adrmtted that they had no intent to use 
the registered domain names but got registrations by way of making a profit either by 
selling them to the owners of the goodwill or to other buyers or collectors. The Court 
took  this  as  “explicitly” establishing  “a  threat  to  sell  a  name  which  was  inherently 
deceptive to a person not connected or associated with the goodwill attaching to the 
name.”2’ 

With  respect  to  Marks  G Spencer,  the  Appeal  Court  reasoned  that  the  false 
representation of association or connection with the plaintiffs (owners of the goodwill) 
constitutes passing off. Rejecting the arguments of the defendants that mere registration 
of Marks & Spencer would not amount to passing off (as no proof of any damage or its 
likelihood  was  presented  by  Marks  & Spencer),  the  Court  contended  that  the 
registration of a domain name includmg the names of the plaintiffs is “an erosion of the 
exclusive  goodwill  in  the  name  which  damages  or  is  likely  to  damage”  Marks  & 
Spencer.22 

For the same reasons, the Court rejected the arguments of the defendants regarding 
the existence of individual names (partly or firlly) similar to those of the plaintiffs, and 
that the registration of the names as domain names would not be deceptive, nor become 
an instrument of fraud or lead to passing OK It referred to the fact that the defendants’ 
registration of the names: 

“ _  . . without any distinguishing word [was] because of the goodwill attaching to those names. 
It was the value of that goodwill, not the fact that they could perhaps be used in some way 
by a third party without deception, which caused them to register the names.”23 
It  therefore  concluded  that  the  registrations  were  instruments  of  fraud,  and 
injunction  was justifiable.  It  is  apparent  that  the  Court’s decision  was  not based  on 
passing  off  as  claimed  by  the  plaintiffs,  because  it  did  not  see  mere  registration  as 
amounting to that, but on an “obvious” threat towards it-hence 
its grant of injunction 
to stop passing off from occurring. 

Regarding  the  allegation  of infringement  of a  trademark  owned  by  one  of the 
plaintiffs, BT, in BT  v.  One in a MiZIion,24 the Court again did not directly answer the 

2”  British  Telecommunications  PLC v.  One in a Million  Ltd. and  Others;  Virgin Enterprises  PLC u.  One in  a Million 
Ltd.;J. Soinsbury  PLC u.  One in a Million Ltd.; Marks  G Spencer PLC u.  One in a Million Ltd.; Ladbroke  PLC  u.  One in 

Million Ltd., [1999] F.S.R.  1. 

z1  Ibid., at 21. 
2*  Ibid., at 23. 
Z3  Ibid., at 24. 
24  Footnote 20 above. 

334 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

question  in  the  affirmative. It  would  seem  that  the  Court  did  not  consider it  even 
plausible that  mere  registration  could  be  an  infringement,  although  it  repeated  the 
argument of “threat” in the  context of infnngement  of trademarks. Interestingly, the 
Court, at the same time, seemed bent on adopting an elastic interpretation of S lO(3) of 
the Trade Marks Act 1994 by referring to domain names as inhcators of origin, and in 
the particular instance, possibly  being used in relation to services by  registrants. The 
Court  referred  to  the  intention  of the  defendants to  use  domain  names  confusingly 
similar  to  trademarks  as  being  sufficient  to  bring  their  action  within  that  Section, 
although the use of the names for registration could arguably be beyond that Section. 
On the whole, the Court capitalized on the deceptiveness of the activities of the 
registrants to emphasize its argument based on threat, and hence adopt a way around the 
mfficulty of confronting fully  the  problem of overlap of domain names.  Indeed, the 
Court of Appeal’s  confirmation of the  lower  court Judge’s reliance on the  ruling in 
Direct Line  Group Ltd.  (and  Others) v. Direct Line Estate  Agency  Ltd. and  Othersz5 to find 
that there was  a  threat of passing off in t h s  case, indicates their wdhngness to extend 
passing-off law to determine issues arising from the overlap between marks and domain 
names. The Court in Direct Line considered the plaintiffs’ request for grant of injunction 
against infringement and passing off through the surreptitious use by the defendants of 
the Judge’s own words, “. . . a  scam  designed to  make 
another  company’s name-in 
illegitimate use  of other companies’ trademarks” or engaging in  “illicit activity”.Zh By 
contrast, the Court’s obvious refrain from using the Trade Marks Act  1994 suggests its 
lack of conviction in the relevance of that Act to domain names. 

A  slightly ddferent  twist  to  the  type  of  contentions  engendered by  the  use  of 
domain names in the United Kingdom was presented in the Bell Atlantic Corporation and 
Another v.  Bell  Atlantic Communications PLC and  Another.27  The plaintiffs were the Bell 
group of companies established in the  United  States but  with a  world-wide presence 
including through  the  registration  of  the  Bell  trademark,  “a  bell  in  silhouette and 
surrounded by a circle”. The defendants had sought to register trademarks in the name 
of “Bell Atlantic” with  a similar logo to that of the plaintiffs. They had succeeded in 
obtaining a domain  name,  c(BellAtlantic.co.uk)) parallel to  that  of the plaintiffs’ ((Bell 
Atlantic.com,).  The  plaintiffs  started  proceedmgs  against  the  defendants  seeking 
injunction to restrain them  from passing  off their business  as that  of the  plaintiffs by 
using the mark “Bell Atlantic” as well as  the domain name, and from infringing their 
mark registered in the United Kingdom. The defendants gave undertalungs not to use 
the plaintiffs’ mark, without  permission, on telecommunication equipment  and parts 
and altered the logo they had been  using  (to a  square shape). However,  the plaintiffs 
proceeded to obtain an injunction from the High Court which the defendants appealed 
against. 

The  Appeal  Court  agreed  with  the  lower  court’s  finding  that  the  use  of  the 

25  [I9971 F.S.R. 374. 
26  Ibid., at 376. 
*7  Decided on 15 February  1999; transcript of the decision available online from LEXIS-NEXIS. 

DOMAIN NAMES  AND  THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

335 

plaintiffs’ mark was  undertaken in “a deliberate attempt to appropriate the goodwill of 
the  plaintiff’  name  and  device”Z8 and  rejected  the  defendants’  argument  that  the 
plaintiffs had no goodwill in the United Kingdom. As  to the question of infnngement, 
the Appeal Court also agreed with  the  High  Court  that the use  of a  mark so  nearly 
identical or similar to that of the  plaintiffs constituted infringement under  the  Trade 
Marks Act  1994. 

In conclusion, it would appear that the Court took the general view of the overlap 
between  the  two marks  and  did  not  at  any point  single  out  the  domain  name  for 
consideration.  The decision was  also  affected by  the  Court’s view of the  defendants’ 
“deliberate use”29 of the plaintiffs’ logo (prior to their undertaking and adjustment of 
the  logo)  and  the  apparent  attempt  to  wriggle  out  of  the  problem  they  had  got 
themselves into (despite the fact that their own lawyers had pointed it out to them). All 
in all, therefore, while the Court was determined to rule on the general proof available 
to support a finding of passing off and infringement of trademark, it did not occur to 
anyone to reflect on the specific problem of using a portion of the plaintiffs’ established 
name as part of a domain name.3O A hscussion along that line would surely have thrown 
light on  the justifiability, or lack  of it,  of the  multiplicity of forms in  domain  name 
regstration that a single mark could lend itself to. 

It should have  become  apparent, by  now,  that  the  U.K.  courts’ decisions have 
tended towards protecting established trademark interests, mostly from wily crusaders 
(“pirates”) who may have detected that the law was deficient on that score but had not 
suspected that trahtional rules of passing off or actions against  “threats” of ownership 
could catch up with them. It would, perhaps, be inappropriate to expect of the courts 
anything but a gradual crawl towards a rationale for or against the nature and scope of 
domain-name  registration  !&om a  jurihcal  point  of  view-it 
being  an  established 
tradition of common-law  courts to restrain themselves from engagng in law-making. 
However, it would not have been beyond the U.K.  courts’ powers to have attempted 
to  examine  whether  domain  names  could  qualifi  as  marks  themselves  and, 
consequently, if at least the protection available to unregstered marks and signals could 
not be available  to them. The recognition gven to some domain names consisting of 
ordlnary names or words as having more legitimacy (or priority) than others with similar 
or identical words or names (Prince v. Prince31) flatly contradicts long-established case-law 
that has instituted the legitimacy of using ordinary names or words by any number of 

28  Id. 
z9  See Bell  Atlantic  Corporation and  Another  v.  Bell  Atlantic  Communications  PLC and  Another,  decided  on 21 

December 1998 at the High Court. Transcript available online &om LEXIS-NEXIS. 
In Ths is not to say that the problem is easy to resolve. The registration of variations of existing domain names 
has been a cause for various actions. Thus, Microsoft sued unauthorized regstrants of ccmicrosoflwindows.com,, and 
rmicrosoftoffice.conu, in Texas as pirates and cybersquatters. The defendants apparently registered similar domain 
names of other companies with  high  profiles  such as  ccAssociatedPress.comn. Microsoft Files  Suit  in  Dispute  over 
Internet Domain Names, Dow Jones Business News, 31 December 1998, available onhne from Dowjones Interactive. 
The Court ordered the defendants to relinquish the registered domain names to Microsoft but did not award any 
damages: see cchttp://www.domainhandbook.com/dd-1 .html#microsoftn. 

3’  Footnote 18 above. 

336 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

persons  so long as  each person keeps off the  goodwill developed by  the  “owners” or 
associated with the common symbols or words. 

It is submitted that the U.K. courts’ interpretation of passing-off  law, or trademark 
law for that matter, with the inevitable effect of shutting the door firmly on any category 
of creativity in symbols, signs and names,  albeit in  the std-developing  but  ephemeral 
context of virtual space, demands not just some level of tempering but a re-think. It is 
not difficult to see the consequence of such an approach: extension into cyberspace of 
monopoly interests already established in realspace simply because the existing laws were 
conceived and developed in that context. It would seem an urgent necessity to rectify 
this anomaly before the slide towards instinctive rejection of the application of what, in 
actual fact, are issues based  on “first principles”-namely, 
should a mark that got onto 
the trademark register by establishing some distinctiveness through years of advertising 
and promotion or the quality of goods or services, become an unfettered means of global 
market spread just because it coincides with the notion  of unfairness in one particular 
respect? 

Although it is still possible that the U.K. courts might reverse the emerging line of 

the authorities-achieved  by  clinging onto the well-trodden  path, criticized above- 
and  find  it permissible for  a  bonajide  use,  in  cyberspace, of such  ordinary names as 
“prince” in the future, it cannot be taken for granted that the current spate of decisions 
towards strengthening existing rights in realspace would be arrested at some stage. This 
may,  of course, be an indication that perhaps the way out is not through the crawling 
pace of the traditional or common law but through that of legislation. Nevertheless, we 
have yet to see anything substantive being proposed anywhere or in that direction. The 
U.S. attempt to lend legislative support to the problem of ddution of famous names is 
being extended to domain names but that was not a forethought but an accident. 

IV.  U.S. COURT DECISIONS 

In the earliest U.S. case, in  1994, MTV-dlegmg 

trademark violation and breach 
of an employment contract-sought to reclaim the ctmtv.com)) domain name that was 
registered, with its consent, by its employee (who left the company aftenvards).32 They 
settled out of court with the ex-employee  relinquishing the ccmtv.com,) domain name 
to  MTV on  undisclosed  terms.  Other  registrations obtained by  “poaching”  existing 
names  were  done  more  in  jest  than  to  use  the  resulting  domain  names.  Thus 
c(McDonalds.com,, was  acquired by  a magazine writer on discovering that the famous 
fast-food  business  had  not  registered  it;  he  appeared  to  have  done  it  to  goad  the 
company into action.33 Needless to say, it sought to reclaim its name-and  agreed to pay 
a sum of money to charity to avoid embarrassment! 

Other  more  serious disputes emerged when  the  defendants stood their  ground. 

32  M r v  867 F.  Supp. 202 (S.D. N.Y. 1994). 
31 Ric  Manning,  Hard  Drives  a  Thing  .f the  Past  ar  CD Program  makes  Travel  Easy,  The Courier-Journal 

Louisville, 18 September 1994, available online from Dowjones Interactive. 

DOMAIN NAMES AND  THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

337 

Thus in Intermatic  v.  T ~ e p p e n ~ ~  
and Panavision Int’l  v.  Toeppen,35 the plaintiffi sued the 
same defendant (who had apparently registered two hundred and forty domain names, 
some of which had been established corporate names) alleging trademark ddution and 
inhngement  as  well  as  other  wrongs.  In  Internutic,  the  U.S. District  Court  for  the 
Northern District of Illinois ruled that the defendant’s registration of the plaintiffs’ mark 
with  the  specific purpose  of selling it back to them  or to  other buyers amounted  to 
“commercial use”.  As  regards  the  issue  of  dilution,  the  Judge  also  ruled  that  the 
defendant’s registration of the plaintiffs’ mark  “lessened the  capacity of Intermatic to 
identify and dstinguish its goods and services by means of the Internet.”36 The Court 
added 

“If Taeppen were allowed to use ccintermatic.comn, Intermatic’s name and reputation would 
be at Toeppen’s mercy and could be associated with an unimaginable amount of messages 
on Toeppen’s Web page.”37 
The Judge, therefore, characterized the defendant as a “cybersquatter” and granted 
a summary judgment, enjoining him from using, or preventing the registration of, the 
plaintiff’ mark. 

The expansive approach that the Court adopted in the definition of “commercial 
use”  (mere registration of the mark without  intending to use  it directly) as well as its 
proscription of any form of association (even in messages on the Web!) is evident. It is 
apparent that the Court went beyond even the most elastic interpretation of the class of 
goods that the mark wdl have been registered for (cf  the U.K. decision in Avnet Inc. v. 
Isoact  Ltd.38)  and  the  broadest  allowance  for  the  plausible  boundary  of  the  specific 
(famous) mark.  It  is  as  if  the  status of famousness would  accord any mark  absolute 
protection even from display or some form of association in such a novel medmm as the 
Internet. 

In Punavision, the U.S. District Court for the Central District of Cahfornia had to 
examine Panavision’s  allegation that Dennis Toeppen was  a  “cyber pirate” who  stole 
valuable trademarks and established domain names for the purpose of selling them to the 
rightful owners. Following the same arguments as in Intermutic, the District Court ruled 
that: 

-  the mark was famous; 
-  Toeppen’s registration of ccpanavision.com,,  had lessened the  capacity of the 

- 

mark “to identi@ and htinguish goods and services”; 
Toeppen’s offer to sell the domain name (including to the mark owners) was 
commercial use, though the defendant never used the domain name to offer 
goods or services but to display an aerial view of a part of Illinois. 

34  947 F. Supp. 1227 (N.D. Ill.  1996). 
35  938 F. Supp. 616 (C.D. Cal. 1996). 
36  Footnote 34 above, at  1240. 
3’  Id. 
38  Footnote 17 above. 

338 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

To make matters worse, after Panavision refbsed his demand for payment, Toeppen 
registered  Panavision’s  other 
the  domain  name 
c(Panaflex.com,>. The Court dubbed Toeppen  a “spoiler”  who prevented  “Panavision 
and others from doing business on the Internet under their trademarked names unless 
they pay his fee.”39  The Court accordmgly granted Panasonic a preliminary  injunction 
and ordered the defendant to transfer the name to the plaintiffs. 

trademark,  “Panaflex”,  as 

The US. Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit considered Toeppen’s appea140 on 
two grounds: the District Court’s lack of personal jurisdiction over him; and the absence 
of “commercial use” and dilution of Panavision’s trademarks. The following discussion 
will be confined to the Court’s deliberations on the latter issue. 

The Appeal Court noted that Toeppen  did not deny that the plaintiffs’ trademark 
was famous, nor that the domain name he registered was registered after the mark had 
become famous. However, although Toeppen did not oppose the lower court’s fin&ng 
that his use of the domain  name  was  “in commerce”,  he contended  that it could not 
constitute a commercial use under the Act. H e  based this on the simple argument that 
a domain name is only an address or means of accessing a Web page, without necessarily 
providing information  about the plaintiffs. Consequently,  according to him, there was 
no likelihood of associating the Web page to the plaintiffs. The Court rejected this line 
of argument  by  resorting  to  the view  that  registration  of the  plaintiffs’ trademarks as 
domain  names  in  order  to  sell  them  to  the  rightful  owners  constituted  “commercial 
use”: 

“. . . Toeppen traded  on the value  of  Panavision’s marks.  So long as  he  held  the  Internet 
registrations,  he  curtailed Panavision’s exploitation of the value  of its trademarks on  the 
Internet, a value which Toeppen then used when he attempted to sell the c(Panavision.com)) 
domain name to Panavision.” 

The Court considered it immaterial that the defendant did not attach the marks to 
a  product  as  “Toeppen’s  commercial  use  was  his  attempt  to  sell  the  trademarks 
themselves. ” 

Furthermore, the Appeal Court rejected Toeppen’s contention that his registration 
&d  not  &lute  the capacity of the  plaintiffs’ marks  to identifj. their  goods  or services 
because they could s t d  promote them by talung up some other “address” to create their 
own Web page using their trademarks: 

“The domain name serves a dual purpose. It marks the location of the site within cyberspace, 
much  like  a  postal  address  in  the  real  world,  but  it  may  also  indicate  to  users  some 
information as to the content of the site, and, in instances of well-known trade  names or 
trademarks, may provide information as to the origin of the contents of the site. Moreover, 
potential customers of Panavision will be discouraged if they cannot find its Web page by 
typing in ctPanavision.comn, but instead are forced to wade through hundreds of Web sites. 
This dilutes the value of Panavision’s trademark.”41 

39  Footnote 35 above, at 621. 
JO Id. 
41  Id. 

DOMAIN NAMES  A N D  THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

339 

The Court hence concluded that Toeppen’s registration of Panavision’s trademarks 
as his own domain names “to extort money ti-om Panavision by tradmg on the value of 
those  names”42  diluted  those  marks.  Consequently  it  affirmed  the  District  Court’s 
summary judgment in favour of Panavision. 

A  similar approach  was  adopted  by  the  same  circuit court,  the  U.S.  Court  of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in Interstellar Starskip Service5 Ltd. v. Epix Inc.43 That Court 
considered  an  appeal from  a  summary judgment  given  to  the  plaintiffs at  the  U.S. 
District Court for the District of Oregon. Epix was engaged in the manufacture and sale 
of video imaging hardware  and  software and  the provision  of consulting services to 
customers of its products. Epix had registered the “EPIX” trademark in 1990 which had 
become  incontestable  in  December  1996.  Epix  claimed  to  have  used  the  mark 
commercially for services, although no decision had been made on its application to the 
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTo) to register it as a service mark. On the other 
hand, Interstellar Starship Services Ltd.  (Iss)  claimed it had applied for registration of 
“EPIX” as  a trade and service mark to be used on computer graphics and design services 
in  November  1996. At  the  same  time, it  had  been  using an  ttepix.comu Web  page, 
although the nature of its business or the use of the Web page could not be established 
at the lower court. 

On presentation of a certified copy of its registration of the “EPIX” trademark, Epix 
requested NSI to cancel the ccepix.comn registration, in accordance with NSI policy at 
that  time.  NSI consequently advised  ISS  to  obtain  a  declaratory judgment  of  non- 
infringement of Epix’s trademark if it did not want to lose the right to use ctepix.comn. 
In  response  to  ISS’S  action for  declaratory judgment,  Epix  counterclaimed, allegng 
trademark  infringement and  unfair  competition  under  the  relevant  state  and federal 
statutes. Both parties sought summary judgment on their respective claims. 

The lower court ruled that the plaintiff’ maintenance of a Web page  ttepix.com,) 
&d  not  infimge  Epix’s  registered  trademark,  ‘‘EPIX”,  and  granted  a  declaratory 
judgment to them. It reasoned that there could be initial confusion, among consumers, 
between the domain name and the products of the defendants but that such confusion 
would not  occur because their products were dissimilar  (the latter being in electronic 
goods and the former in promoting theatrical groups) and the consumers would quickly 
become  “aware of the source’s actual identity and no purchase [would be] made as a 
result of the confusion.” Epix appealed. 

While  agreeing with  the  District  Court’s determination that  “a  word  used  as  a 
second-level  domain  name  in  a  Web  site address can  present  a  cause  of  action for 
trademark  infringement”,  the  Appeal  Court  pointed  to  the  possible  inference  of 
competition  between  ISS’S  use  of  the  ccepix.com)) site  “only  as  a  repository  for 
photographs” and Epix’s video-imaging business, and that the use of the EPIX mark by 
the plaintiffs as a domain name might permit them “to capitalize on the goodwlll Epix 

42  Id. 
43  Znterstellar Starship  Services,  Limited  u. Epix Incoyorated, and Michael  R. Tchou u.  Epix Incoyorafed; US. App. 

LEXIS 16536, available online from LEXIS-NEXIS. 

340 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

developed in its trademark-ven 
if the customer is never confused about Epix’s lack of 
connection to ccepix.com)).” It further referred to the District Court’s conclusion that 
Epix’s trademark, “EPIx”, was both valid and undisputed. It therefore concluded that, 
since the evidence would suggest a likelihood of confusion, a summary judgment to ISS 
was inappropriate and that the defendants should have been given the chance to prove 
their claims of trademark infringement and unfair competition. 

. 

The Ninth Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals considered and decided, on 22 
April 1999, issues originating from the overlap in the use by different parties of common 
surnames as marks and domain names in Avery Dennison Cotporation v. Jerry Sumpton; Free 
View Listings Ltd.44  Sumpton was the President of Freeview, in the business of providng 
Internet e-mail  services under  the  name  of  “Mailbank”. Mailbank  offered  “vanity” 
e-mail addresses and had registered thousands of domain names, including ccavery.net,> 
and ccdennison.net,). The registered trademarks of the plaintiffs, engaged in the sale of 
office products and industrial fasteners, happened to be “Avery” and “Dennison”. The 
plaintiffs advertised their products using the registered trademarks while also securing a 
Web  presence  through  their  c(avery.com) and  ccaverydennison.comn domain names. 
Avery Dennison sought an injunction against the defendants in the U.S. District Court 
for  the  Central District  of  Cahfornia alleging trademark  dlution  and  infringement. 
They  also  sued  Nsr  in  a  contributory  capacity.  The  District  Court  granted  the 
injunctions, whereupon the defendants appealed. 

The  Appeal Court  compared the  decision in  Panuvision  to  the  current  case  by 
referring to fact that the defendant there d d  not challenge his registration of the domain 
name  using  the  famous trademarks and  h s  objective of malung a  profit  out  of the 
exercise. In the current case, the defendants had contested the claim of famousness of 
the plaintiffs’ marks and pointed to the dvergence in their respective businesses as well 
as in their top level domain-name registration-cc.netn  as opposed to cc.com,). 

Regarding the  issue  of famousness, the  Court was  prepared  to  accept that  the 
plaintiffs’ maintenance of both “Avery” and “Dennison” on the register was primafacie 
evidence  of  those  marks  having  achieved  a  secondary meaning,  that  is  a  level  of 
dstinctiveness but nothing more. As  far as the Court was concerned: 

“Dilution is a cause of action invented and reserved for a select class of marks-those  marks 
with such powerful consumer associations that even non-competing uses  can impinge on 
their value.” 
Consequently, “to  meet  the  threshold  element  of fame”, the  plaintiffs  had  to 
demonstrate  that  their  marks  had  acquired  more  than  the  presumptive  secondary 
meaning.  It  opined  that  proof  of  distinctiveness was  required  for  protection  &om 
infringement and unfair competition but would not be sufficient to support the claim 
of famousness necessary in the specific case. 

With respect to the “commercial use” requirement, the Court referred to Internutic 

44  1999 U.S. App. LEXS  19954, available online &om LEXIS-NEXIS. 

DOMAIN NAMES AND THE TRADEMARK SYSTEM 

341 

where  the  phrase  was  interpreted  as  the  defendant’s  “intention  to  arbitrage”45  a 
plaintiffs registered mark included in a domain name, as well as to Panuvision where the 
defendant was  found by  the District Court to have  “traded on the value  of marks as 
marks”.46 However, the Court concluded that the defendants’ registration of common 
surnames in  domain-name  combinations and  the  licensing of e-mail  addresses  using 
those surnames with the intention of capitalizing on the surname status of “Avery” and 
“Dennison” did not constitute use  of “trademarks qua trademarks” or, in other words, 
as “commercial use”. It pointed out that the defendants used  “words that happen to be 
trademarks for their non-trademark  value” and therefore the District Court had erred 
in  holding  to  the  contrary.  The  Court  also  pointed  to  the  differences in  the  TLD 
registrations  of  the  parties  (cc.com,)  versus  ((.net,)) as  inconclusive  bases  to  find  an 
occurrence of dilution, partly  also because  most  ddution  causes  of action  concerned 
cctrademark.com)). The Court ruled that the lower court should not have resorted to a 
summary judgment  in  favour  of  Avery  Dennison.  It  also  ruled  that  the  issue  of 
tarnishment arising from the defendants’ possession of lewd domain-name registrations 
which might create unfavourable associations with  the plaintiffs’ marks could not  be 
decided on summary judgment. 

The Court’s decision was immediately seen by commentators as being “a boon for 
cybersquatters,  but  bad  news  for  corporations  with  registered  trademarks.”47 
Nevertheless, the decision of the Court was in line with its strict reading of the federal 
anti-ddution  law  where  the  pre-condition  for  granting  or  denying  redress  to  any 
proprietor of a mark is  the existence of famousness. As  in nearly all the cases that the 
Circuit  Courts  of Appeal  considered, the  decisions were  centred  on  proof,  or lack 
thereof,  of  famousness afier  which  the  other  tests  could be  decided  without  much 
doubt. Even where the registration of a domain name &d not lead to any Web-based 
activity by the proverbial pirate, the courts have been quick to find “commercial use” 
and “dilution” and, consequently, to grant or affirm injunction in favour of the mark 
owner. 

Such  a  clear  tilt  in  the  developing  U.S.  case-law  against  registrants  of  domain 
names,  irrespective of their mode  of use,  other  circumstances and the  motive  of the 
registrants, is perhaps in fulfilment of the objectives set by the U.S. Congress to provide 
a  further  means  of  protecting  marks  and,  in  particular,  shielding  them  from  the 
perceived corrosive impacts of domain names. However, a persistent reading of the law 
in favour of famous marks on the one hand, and the reluctance to see if the trademark 
system needs to accommodate the new species of “marks”, namely domain names, on 
the other, does not augur well for the future of the domain-name  system, or, for that 
matter, for ordinary marks. It is  evident that, judging from the rapidq in  the rise in 
number and use of domain names, this stance of the US. courts cannot possibly lead to 

45  Footnote 34 above, at 1239. 
46  Footnote 16 above, at 1303. 
47  Davan Maharaj  and Karen Kaplan,  Technology Ruling  Curbtrbs  Net  Trademark  Protection,  Los Angeles Times, 

24 August 1999, available online €-om  LEXIS-NEXIS. 

342 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

fewer problems simply because  the  concerted  effort  to  contain  the  rise  in  abuse  of 
famous names by domain-name regstrants achieves some level of success-if 

at all. 

Until the courts and/or the legislature address the overlapping and conflicting roles 
of domain names and marks-whether 
their entirety and not just in 
connection with famous marks, the stringent application of existing laws to hammer at 
domain  names  at  every  opportunity  that  they  appear  to  encroach  on  established 
realspace marks will achieve very little. At best, it will postpone the need to resolve the 
problem in earnest and in a comprehensive fashion-such 
as in applying identical or, at 
least comparable, legal standards and registration facilities to both. 

famous or not-in 

CONCLUSION 

This review started with the outlining of the nature of the overlap between domain 
names  and marks  and  underlined  that  the  overlap  is  not  a  passing  phase.  Far  more 
important than the generally accepted and growing problem thrown up by the overlap, 
is  the study’s findmg of the undeveloped state of the legal  response.  In particular, the 
perusal of the legislative and case-law  developments has  demonstrated the continuing 
paucity-in 
comprehensive 
legal instruments, whether  legislative or judicial,  that  regulate  (and protect)  domain 
names,  as  well  as  resolve  the problems  engendered by  the  unavoidable overlap with 
marks. 

spite of the progress attained in U.K. and U.S. courts-of 

Neither does it appear possible that the national courts, or, indeed, the legislature, 
will  be  able  to  sort  out  this  problem  independently  of  each  other.  The  attempt  of 
national governments, such as the United States, to provide extended protection to their 
marks  on a global level (in the  case  of the United  States, to  “famous” marks  of US. 
origin, irrespective of the route by which those marks attained famousness) will remain 
declaratory in  so  far  as  there  are  no  equivalent  legal  schemes  which  can  be  made 
applicable in the sector of cyberspace that is not governable by the specific nation. 

Consequently, in  spite  of  the  widely  expressed  desire  to  leave  the  burgeoning 
development of  cyberspace  (and electronic commerce)  without  “unnecessary” legal 
trappings, the need to lay at least some hndamental legal parameters cannot be wished 
away.  Without  them,  the  current  fierce contests for  ownership and use  of  marks  as 
against domain names registered at generic TLD levels will be compounded further by 
registrations at increasingly lower and lower levels. It would, therefore, appear sane and 
logical to forestall the danger through appropriate, perhaps treaty-based, formulas before 
the sporadic conflicts degenerate into an all-out  war  by  contestants of all shapes  and 
sizes, at all levels. 


