The  (2008) Vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 63–104

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2008.00335.x

International Nonproprietary Names and
Trademarks: A Public Health Perspective

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam
Centre for Trade and Development, New Delhi

International Nonproprietary Name (INN) is a system of international nomenclature for
pharmaceutical substances that is recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO).
Commonly known as generic names, an INN may be used for marketing purposes by any
manufacturer of a particular medicine without excluding other manufacturers of the same
substance from doing the same. However, to maintain the nonproprietary nature of INNs
and to ensure the future development of related INNs, it is necessary that INNs are not
appropriated as trademarks. Hence, resolution 46.19 of the World Health Assembly of the
WHO exhorts member states to regulate the use of INNs and discourage their use as
trademarks. The Trade Marks Act of India speciﬁcally prohibits the registration of names
that are deceptively similar to INNs. Nevertheless, there are reported incidents of marketing
of drugs under names that are similar to INNs. The WHO has brought the same to the
attention of the Drug Controller General of India. In this context, this study examines the law
and policy relating to the use of INNs in different countries with speciﬁc reference to India,
identiﬁes deﬁciencies in the international and domestic institutions responsible for the
regulation of INNs and makes some policy recommendations.

Keywords International nonproprietary names; trademarks; pharmaceutical substances;
WHO

Drugs are generally marketed and prescribed under brand names. However, for
purposes such as international trade in drugs, or in international expert committee
lists such as the World Health Organization (WHO) List of Essential Medicines,
and for all pharmaceutical exchanges and scientiﬁc research methods, reference to
drugs is made by their generic names (Phadke, 2005). Civil society organizations
and individuals engaged in public health issues are also lobbying vigorously for the
use of only generic names for the sale of drugs. They have urged the government to
abolish the widespread use of brand names and instead promote the use of generic
names to describe the drug along with the name of the manufacturer (Phadke,
2005). This will enable consumers to choose from multiple sources of the same
pharmaceutical substance in a cost-effective manner.

The WHO administers an international generic nomenclature system called
International Nonproprietary Names (INN). This programme evolved when the
WHO Expert Committee on the Uniﬁcation of Pharmacopoeias drew up rules
of nomenclature that were adopted by the 1950 World Health Assembly
(WHA) resolution 3.11 (WHO, 1997, p. 13). Once the WHO recommends an

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 63

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

INN for a pharmaceutical substance, the INN may be used for marketing purposes
by all manufacturers of that substance. Moreover, pharmacologically related sub-
stances that may be developed in the future should also have an INN that can
establish its pharmacological family. Thus, all INNs for medicines used for treating a
particular condition must have a common stem. Therefore, INNs should be protected
from being appropriated as trademarks. Hence, WHA resolution 46.19 of 1993 calls
upon member states to take necessary measures to regulate the use of INNs and to
discourage the use of names derived from INN stems as trademarks (WHO, 1993).
While many countries have legal or administrative measures in place for regulating
the use of INNs or generic names, the use of brand names that are similar to INNs in
the market has been reported. Moreover, the INN system can also be threatened by
provisions in free trade area (FTA) agreements that may accord a position of pre-
eminence to the use of trademarks over INNs. For instance, the agreement on the
FTA of the Americas states that the requirements relating to the use of trademarks in
relation to the common names (INN) must not impair the use or effectiveness of the
trademark (Red Colombiana de Acci ´on frente al Libre Comercio y el ALCA, 2007,
p. 4). This could restrict the use of INNs as an instrument for consumer drug
information and limit the adoption and implementation of provisions that encourage
the use of INNs. This can also lead to an escalation in health care expenditure due to
an increase in the prices of branded medicines (Gamba, 2006, p. 6).

This study attempts to understand and examine the legal and policy measures
relating to the use of INNs for the marketing of drugs and how they are being
implemented. This analysis has been conducted in the context of the current
discourse on the use of generic names for marketing of pharmaceutical products.
A detailed analysis of these issues is undertaken in the light of the international legal
framework for the protection of INNs. It also discusses the implementation of
safeguards against the misappropriation of INNs and, based on the ﬁndings,
suggests options to improve the existing regime. The analysis in this study comprises
a general overview of the law and policy on the use of INNs in different countries
like the United Kingdom (UK), the United States and the European Union (EU).
However, the study speciﬁcally focuses on the legal and policy regime pertaining to
the use of INNs in India because proper implementation of INN safeguards in India
can have a signiﬁcant impact on access to medicines. This is because India is a
leading manufacturer of pharmaceutical products, with the presence of a large
number of generic drugs with regard to a single pharmaceutical substance. There is
also an explicit provision in India’s Trade Marks Act that safeguards INNs from
being appropriated as trademarks. Hence, the proper implementation of this
safeguard may enhance the ability of consumers to choose an affordable substitute
for a particular brand of medicine based on its INN. Nevertheless, there have been
reported instances of drugs being marketed in India under brand names that are
similar to INNs. This makes it necessary to examine the reasons why such practices
have taken place in spite of the explicit safeguards in the law and to suggest possible
solutions that may help strengthen the regime.

64

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

The INN System

Until the Second World War, most drugs were extracts of natural products. After
the War, however, synthetic drugs became more common. As the chemical names of
these drugs were too lengthy and complex,
they became incomprehensible
for general use. It was necessary, therefore, to develop simple names that would
help to identify the chemical composition of drugs. To address this need,
the UK established the system of British Approved Names (BANs) in 1948 to
provide convenient generic names by which the increasingly complex compounds
for pharmaceutical substances could be identiﬁed (Thompson, 2001, pp. 223–4).
Thereafter, the United States, France, Italy and Japan also developed similar
systems.1

Need for an International System of Nomenclature
The most important criterion relating to the use of names for a pharmaceutical
substance is to avoid names that create confusion about the ingredients and
usage of the drug. Hence, generic names are selected with the objective of enabling
easy identiﬁcation of the active pharmaceutical substances contained in a medi-
cinal product. As a result, there is a need to ensure that the same substance does not
carry different generic names in different countries. For example, a person
consuming a drug having a particular generic name in country A may be confused
when buying the same drug bearing a different generic name in country B. In a
world with very few national generic nomenclature systems, it may not be difﬁcult
to ensure that the same substance does not have different generic names. However,
with the existence of different national nomenclature systems, the necessity for an
internationally standardized system assumed greater signiﬁcance. The WHO-INN
Programme was developed to address this need. In this study, we have used the
abbreviation ‘‘INN’’ to include all generic names including those that are recom-
mended as INN by the WHO.

The purpose of the INN system is to identify pharmaceutical substances
or active pharmaceutical
ingredients. The system aims to provide a unique
and universally available designated name to identify each pharmaceutical sub-
stance. Clear identiﬁcation on the basis of INN helps in ensuring safe prescription
and dispensing of medicines to patients. INNs also facilitate communication
and exchange of information among health professionals, scientists and other
interested people throughout the world. Because INNs are unique names, they
should be distinctive and not liable to confusion with other names in common use.
As the word ‘‘nonproprietary’’ suggests, the WHO has formally placed these names
in the public domain (WHO, 1997). Hence, an INN is open to being used by all
manufacturers of the pharmaceutical substance to which it relates. While such
names can also be used for commercial purposes, no private proprietary interest
may be acquired over these names. In other words, nobody can claim exclusive
rights to an INN or any part thereof through intellectual property protection.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 65

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Mandate of the WHO on INNs
The mandate for the INN Programme can be traced to the constitutional objectives
of the WHO, which was established in 1948. One of the constitutional objectives of
WHO is the ‘‘. . . attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health
(WHO, 1946)’’. In accordance with this objective, the WHO is mandated to:

act as the directing and coordinating authority on international health work; and
 develop, establish and promote international standards with respect to food,

biological, pharmaceutical and similar products (WHO, 1946).

By virtue of this mandate, the WHO sought to coordinate the activities of the
national nomenclature commissions to achieve international standardization in drug
nomenclature. In 1948, the ﬁrst WHA resolution 1.27 requested the WHO to work
towards the uniﬁcation of pharmacopoeias and the preparation of an International
Pharmacopoeia. As an extension of this programme, the WHO developed a pro-
gramme on the selection of INNs. In 1949, the WHO Expert Committee on
Uniﬁcation of Pharmacopoeias drew up a plan for preparing general rules of
nomenclature. This was adopted in 1950 by resolution 3.11 of the WHA. In 1953,
the ﬁrst list of INNs was published, which formally established the INN Programme
of the WHO (WHO, 1997, p. 13). The INN Programme is administered by the WHO
Secretariat located in Geneva, Switzerland. Members of the WHO Expert Advisory
Panel on the International Pharmacopoeia and Pharmaceutical Preparations, No-
menclature Section, select nonproprietary names on a bi-annual basis. This advisory
panel comprises representatives from national nomenclature groups and experts in
various ﬁelds (i.e. medicinal nomenclature, chemistry, pharmacology, pharmaceutical
chemistry, biology, etc.) (see the American Medical Association (AMA) website).

Selection of INNs
The selection process is initiated through an application proposing an INN for a
new pharmaceutical substance by its manufacturer or inventor. Generally, the
applicant has to suggest three possible names to be recommended as an INN.
Proposals of INNs are to be submitted by the Director-General of the WHO to the
INN Expert Group. Experts from the WHO Expert Advisory Panel on the
International Pharmacopoeia and Pharmaceutical Preparations then review the
application. The selection process has the following stages:
 ﬁrst, an application for an INN is submitted by the manufacturer or the inventor





of a pharmaceutical substance;
second, a review of the application is followed by the selection of a proposed
INN and its publication for comments; and
after a period of time allowed for opposing the proposed INN, the name obtains
the status of recommended INN and is published as such (WHO, 1997, p. 2).

The proposals are considered in accordance with the ‘‘General principles for
guidance in devising INNs for pharmaceutical substances’’. In principle, the name

66

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

used by the person discovering or ﬁrst developing and marketing a pharmaceutical
substance shall be accepted, unless there are compelling reasons to the contrary
(WHO, 1955). Where the name suggested does not seem to be appropriate, there
may be consultations between the WHO and the manufacturer/inventor. Following
this examination, the proposed INN will be notiﬁed in the WHO Chronicle and
communicated to all the member states, the national pharmacopoeia commissions
or other designated bodies. Following the publication of a proposed INN, an
interested person who considers that the proposed INN is in conﬂict with an
existing trademark may ﬁle a formal objection or give comments on the proposed
INN within 4 months from the date of publication. Thus, during the process of
selecting an INN, the rights of trademark owners are respected and protected. In
case of objections, the WHO tries to arrange for the withdrawal of the objection or
it reconsiders the proposed INN. Once the objection is withdrawn, the proposed
INN is published as a recommended INN (WHO, 1955). This is also communicated
to the national authorities, requesting them to recognize the INN and to take
necessary measures to prevent the acquisition of proprietary rights over the INN,
including the registration of the name as a trademark or a trade name (WHO,
1955).

Components of INNs
Usually, an INN consists of two parts—a randomly selected, fancy term and a stem.
Stems are those parts of a group of pharmacologically related INNs that indicate
the relationship between two pharmaceutical substances using a common element
or a compound. For instance, the INN clopidogrel comprises the stem—grel and the
fancy term clopido. Table 1 provides further examples of the use of stems and fancy
terms in INNs.

In the initial years, many countries used shortened chemical names as generic
names. This system was found to be very limited, as many molecules contain similar
elements and groups such as phenol, chlor, methyl or benzene rings in their
chemical structures (WHO, 1955). Hence, it seemed to be reasonable to develop
names that helped to identify such common elements and groups. This rationale led
to the use of common stems in the selection of INNs.

Table 1: INN Stems and their Deﬁnitions

Deﬁnition

Antihyperglycaemics
Platelet aggregation inhibitors
Diazepam derivatives
Antacids

INN stem

Gli
-grel
-azepam
-aldrate

Source: WHO (2004).

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 67

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

The purpose of having common stems in INNs is to identify the common
elements that are present in different molecules. Hence, INNs of different drugs that
are pharmacologically related have a common stem. There is no authoritative
interpretation on what constitutes a common stem. However, each stem has its own
technical deﬁnition that explains its function.

For instance, beta-adrenoreceptor blocking drugs (beta-blockers) block the beta-
adrenoreceptors in the heart, peripheral vasculature, bronchi, pancreas and liver.
While many varieties of beta-blockers are available, there are differences between
them that may affect choice in treating particular diseases. Hence, there is a necessity
for such substances to have distinct names with stems that help to identify them as
beta-blockers. This is where the system of using common INN stems is helpful. The
stem for beta-blockers is ‘‘olol’’. Different beta-blockers contain this stem in their
INN, for example propranolol, acebutolol, atenolol, etc. An INN is generally desig-
nated for the active part of the substance. Where an active ingredient is used with a
combination of some other salt, ester, etc. the user has to create a modiﬁed INN
(INNM) on their own (e.g. mepyramine maleate is an INNM that comprises a salt of
mepyramine with maleic acid). When this procedure leads to the use of long and
inconvenient names for the radical part of the INNM, the INN Programme selects a
short name for the radical (e.g. mesilate for methanesulfate) (WHO, 1997, p. 4).

Generally, stems are used as sufﬁxes but sometimes they are used as preﬁxes.
Combinations of inﬁxes and sufﬁxes are also used. Table 2 illustrates the use of stems.
Stems are thus the most important component of INNs. The basic functions of INNs
are served through the use of stems to avoid confusion in drug nomenclature.

INNs are assigned to well-deﬁned pharmaceutical substances and not to
mixtures or combinations. The rules for the use of INNs in relation to ﬁxed-dose
combination (FDC) drugs are not clear. Manufacturers of generic drugs can
develop FDCs of different generic drugs more easily than manufacturers of branded
drugs. Thus, generic companies can market FDCs under brand names. For
instance, Ranbaxy markets an FDC of lamivudine 150 mg+stavudine 30 mg+
nevirapine 200 mg, under the brand name Virolans/Triviro. However, in coining
such brand names, companies sometimes use parts of INNs. For instance, the

INN

Clopidogrel
Ramipril
Lisinopril
Glimepiride
Glicazide
Escitalopram

Table 2: The Use of Stems in INNs

Fancy term

Clopido
Rami
Lisino
Mepiride
Cazide
es-(stem)-opram

Stem

Grel
Pril
Pril
Gli
Gli
-cital-

Source: WHO, various lists of recommended INNs.

68

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

brand Zidovex-L of Aurobindo Pharma Ltd is an FDC of zidovudine 300 mg+
lamivudine 150 mg. This brand name uses the ﬁrst part of the INN zidovudine in
the brand name. Both US Approved Names (USANs) and BANs have attempted to
name FDCs, but the idea was abandoned for various reasons. At present, there is no
nomenclature system for FDCs and this is cited as a lacuna of the INN system.

Harmonization of Nomenclatures
Nomenclature systems vary in different parts of the world and there is a necessity to
harmonize these systems with the INN system. For instance, under the EU
legislation, the British Pharmacopoeia has to be harmonized with the European
Pharmacopoeia. Because INNs have been adopted across the EU, BANs are now
the same as INNs in all cases. However, the guiding principles for the adoption of
BANs still state that a recommended INN will be adopted as the BAN when
necessary (see the BAN website). The USAN Council’s rules for coining names state
that a USAN should be free from conﬂict with other nonproprietary names (see the
AMA website). The reference to other nonproprietary names includes INNs. Thus,
when a tentatively adopted USAN has been selected, the USAN Secretariat
forwards this name and appropriate background information to the WHO-INN
Committee Secretariat. The INN Committee then undertakes an evaluative proce-
dure not unlike that conducted by the USAN Council, and this process takes
approximately 5 months, but may extend longer. A formal negotiation is initiated to
accept the tentative USAN or to consider an INN counterproposal if there is a
problem with the use of the original name in other countries. Only when it becomes
apparent that the tentative name is acceptable to the USAN Council, to the
submitting manufacturer and to the INN Committee will it be formally adopted
as a USAN and published as an INN (see the AMA website).

Because generic names help to identify the chemical composition of a drug, it is
necessary to ensure that such names, devised in different national systems, do not
cause confusion. Hence, there is a need to create an international nomenclature
system. The selection process of an INN seeks to ensure that a new INN does not
conﬂict with an existing one or a trademark. Whenever an INN is proposed or
recommended by the WHO, national authorities are also informed to ensure
adequate protection for the INN. An important aspect of INNs is the use of
common stems to help identify pharmacologically related elements or groups in the
molecule of a pharmaceutical substance. However, stems are determined on the
basis of technical considerations and there is no general rule for determining which
part of an INN constitutes a stem. Therefore, it would be pertinent to examine how
INNs have actually been used for commercial purposes by pharmaceutical companies.

INNs and Brand Names

The commercial success of pharmaceutical products depends not only on their
therapeutic efﬁcacy but also on their popularity through marketing. To increase the

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 69

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

popularity of a product, companies use different marketing strategies. The most
important strategy is to market the drug under a brand name in order to build the
brand loyalty of the consumer. As a result, drugs that have the same generic name
may have different brand names. For instance, Crocin and Calpol are two different
brand names for the same generic substance paracetamol.

Brand names and generic names differ in their legal status. Brand names are
proprietary in nature, conferring upon the owner the exclusive right to use the
name. Hence, the owner can restrain others from using the brand name or part of it,
if the proposed name is deceptively or confusingly similar to the brand name. On
the other hand, proprietary rights over generic names are not recognized, because
such names are always kept in the public domain, their purpose being to enable
identiﬁcation of the pharmacological properties of the product. Hence, all manu-
facturers of the same generic product can freely use the same generic name, because
generic names are nonproprietary in nature. Therefore, generic names are also
called nonproprietary names.

Choosing and registering a brand name is a long and expensive process. Often,
companies utilize the services of advertising and other name creation agencies to
source some good ideas for a brand name that is both distinctive and will remain in
the consumer’s mind. Sometimes, the selection of brand names is an internal process,
wherein the marketing department of the company develops a branding strategy for
each product. The primary criteria for choosing brand names are as follows:
 The name should be memorable, easy to pronounce and different.


It may reﬂect the mode of action, the therapeutic area or part of the body for
which the medicine will be used (Thompson, 2001, pp. 223–4).

In the pharmaceutical industry, it is believed that a brand name is in some sense
the very identity of the product and hence a great brand name can salvage a
mediocre product while a poor name can hamper an excellent product. Most
pharmaceutical companies spend considerable time and resources in selecting the
right brand name and have deﬁnite philosophies on how a brand name should be
developed. A distinctive proprietary name confers the following beneﬁts on the
owner of the brand:





It helps in distinguishing the owner’s product from competing products.
It has a greater recall value due to its uniqueness.
It indicates the quality of the product by reputation.
It creates brand loyalty, thereby increasing the sale of the product (Boring, 1997,
p. 627).

Once the marketing department chooses a brand name on the basis of its
branding strategy, the legal department looks into the availability of the name and
the permissibility of using it. Thereafter, companies may register the brand name as
a trademark, or they may introduce the brand in the market without registering the
same as a trademark.

70

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

However, from a public health perspective, this practice of promotion and
marketing of pharmaceutical products, especially drugs, is viewed with considerable
scepticism. The reasons for this scepticism can be summed up as follows:
 First, brand loyalty may often lead doctors to prescribe drugs according to their
brand names instead of generic names. Consequently, consumers cannot choose
the lowest-priced generic drug available in the market.

 Second, brand promotion requires substantial investments in advertising and

marketing, which in turn increases the price of the drug.

 Third, aggressive brand building suppresses the competition by seizing a
substantial share of the market and thus creates a monopoly. This again reduces
the consumer’s choice.

On the other hand, the use of generic names enables consumers to choose a drug
from different companies based on its cost-effectiveness. This may help to bring down
the cost of medicines and promote peoples’ access to medicines at affordable rates.
Therefore, many countries have adopted various measures to promote generic names
ranging from banning the use of brand names, to discouraging the use of such names
through various disincentives. For instance, Bangladesh had banned the use of brand
names for marketing of pharmaceutical products, but this was later withdrawn. In
Nigeria, doctors have the legal obligation to prescribe by generic name (Knaus, 1992).
In some countries, consumers have the right to ask for a generic or a brand name
prescription. Moreover, health insurance companies generally do not support brand
name prescriptions to the same extent as generic prescriptions. It is also interesting to
note that in India, the Report of the Committee on the drugs and pharmaceutical
industry, 1975 (the Hathi Committee), had recommended the abolition of brand
names in India in a phased manner (Government of India, 1975, p. 254). Recently,
the Proneb Sen Committee has also recommended that all public health facilities
should be encouraged to prescribe and dispense drugs under the generic names
(Government of India, 2005a). The Committee also recommended that public
procurement and distribution of drugs through the public health system should
preferably be on the basis of generic names (Government of India, 2005a). However,
at present, there is no law or policy guideline making it mandatory to procure and
distribute drugs by their generic names.

Companies have different strategies for selecting brand names. Brand names
are derived from syllables of nonproprietary names, or by using words that help to
identify the therapeutic action, the name of the company, the route of adminis-
tration, the dosage schedule or the dosage form. Sometimes brand names are
developed as completely unique, eye-catching words including palindromes
(Boring, 1997, p. 628, Table 1). Generally, brand building is not required
in a market where the product is protected by product patents, because during
the patent period there is sufﬁcient time to build the brand name without any
competition. However, when the brand name drug becomes off-patent, other
companies may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to cut into the monopoly of the established brand

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 71

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Table 3: Use of INNs to Coin Brand Names

INN

Stem

Brand name

Company

Vinleurosine
Iisinopril
Abacavir
Glimepiride
Alprazolam
Epirubicin

-osine
-pril
-cavir
gli-
-zolam
-rubicin

Virosine DR
Zestril
Trizivir
Gliride
Alzolam
Alrubicin

Ranbaxy
AstraZeneca
GSK
Varun Continental
Sun Pharmaceuticals
Alembic

Country

India
UK
UK, USA
India
India
India

Source: Websites of respective companies.

without using parts of the generic name in their brand name (Centre for Trade and
Development (Centad), 2006f). Therefore, as a new entrant in the market, compa-
nies may use two techniques to establish their own brands. First, they may take a
part of an already successful brand (the patented drug). For instance, ‘‘Penagra’’
and ‘‘Kamagra’’ are two brand names for sildenaﬁl citrate derived from the original
brand ‘‘Viagra’’. Second, companies also select brand names that help to relate the
name with the molecule used in the drug. In the process, companies may follow the
INN nomenclature in selecting brand names. However, companies also use INNs in
coining their brand names. For instance, the brand name ‘‘Lipitor’’ may have been
derived from the INN atorvastatin (Table 3). The brand names ‘‘Trizivir’’ and
‘‘Zestril’’ are derived from the INNs abacavir and lisinopril, respectively.

Companies follow different strategies for using INNs in the brand name. Brand
names may be coined by using different parts of INNs or other generic names. Some
names are coined by combining only the ﬁrst and the last parts of a generic name and
deleting the middle part, while others use the ﬁrst, the middle or the last part of the
generic name along with a preﬁx that may identify the name of the company or the
therapeutic area of the drug. By following this strategy, brand names are derived not
only from INNs but also from other national nomenclature systems. Table 3
illustrates how some brand names have used INNs. For instance, the brands
‘‘Virosine’’, ‘‘Gliride’’ and ‘‘Alzolam’’ use the ﬁrst and the last parts of the INN
virosine, glimepiride and alprazolam, respectively. The brand names ‘‘Zestril’’ and
‘‘Trizivir’’ use the last three letters of their INNs lisinopril and abacavir, respectively.
Moreover, -tril is also the stem for endopeptidase inhibitors. ‘‘Alrubicin’’ takes the
sufﬁx -rubicin from the INN epirubicin and uses the preﬁx ‘‘Al’’ from the company
name Alembic. ‘‘Virosine DR’’ uses the stem -osine of the INN vinleurosine.

Besides using INNs and INN stems for coining brand names, some companies
also resort to the use of names derived from INNs as internet domain names. In
respect of domain name registrations that are similar to INNs, the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has proposed a set of recommendations
that seek to prohibit and exclude the registration of domain names that are similar
to INNs, with retrospective effect. The WHO has also pointed out to the WIPO that
the use of INNs in domain names could easily lead to a disruption in the consistent

72

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

association of an INN with scientiﬁcally established characteristics and the mis-
information and confusion in prescribing and dispensing of medicines (WIPO,
2004). In Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries Limited v BLTC Research, the WIPO
Administrative Panel concluded that INNs are not trademarks and they fall outside
the scope of the WIPO’s Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy
(UDRP).2 The Second WIPO Domain Name Registration Process 2001 addressed
this issue and recommended that there should be a prohibition against the
registration of exact INNs as domain names in deference to the integrity of INNs.
Although it did not recommend the prohibition of registration of domain names
using parts of INNs because of the lack of convincing evidence of damage caused by
such use, it did not rule out the possibility of re-visiting the issue in future (WIPO,
2001).

The practice of coining brand names using INNs threatens the principle that
INNs are public property and may create confusion in drug nomenclature by virtue
of the fact that brands attract the minds of customers. Hence, a popular brand
name that is using an INN might eventually push the INN into oblivion. For
example, the brand name Aspirin has become a de facto generic name for
acetylsalicylic acid. Moreover, because INNs do not become popular in the market
unless they are used for a long time, they tend to become less attractive compared
with brand names that are aggressively marketed and become popular in a shorter
time. Further, when a new INN is to be created, the existence of a brand name that
uses a part of the stem to be used in the new INN may threaten the creation of the
new INN by enabling the owner of the brand name to oppose the new INN by
virtue of his proprietary right over the brand name coined from a nonproprietary
name. Thus, the use of stems as trademarks can frustrate the rational selection of
further INNs for future substances. The use of INNs or parts thereof as brand
names results in their appropriation by companies/individuals and tends to dilute
the status of INNs as names that are in the public domain. Hence, this practice
threatens the public domain status of INNs and it may compromise the safety of
patients by creating confusion in drug nomenclature. Moreover, the confusion
created by the use of INNs, especially INN stems in brand names, may lead to
medication errors where the doctors may be misled about the true nature of the
drug. This would not only threaten the life of the patients but also expose the
doctors to claims for damages due to medical negligence. Therefore, the erosion of
INN safeguards in trademark law can have serious implications for public health
and access to medicines.

The WHA Resolution on INNs

The WHO’s concern pertains to the use of INNs as trademarks in general as well as
the use of INN stems as trademarks in particular. The WHO Expert Committee on
the Use of Essential Drugs took note of this and observed that instead of market-
ing pharmaceutical products under generic names, many companies apply for a

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 73

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

trademark derived from an INN and, in particular, including an INN common stem
(WHO, 1997, p. 7). Furthermore, the committee states that ‘‘trademark appli-
cations are disallowed . . . only when they are identical to an INN. A case for
increased protection of INNs is now apparent as a result of competitive promotion
of products no longer protected by patents’’. Therefore, the Committee has taken a
stand that ‘‘. . . it would be appreciated if trade-marks were not derived from INNs
and if INN stems were not used in trade-marks’’ (WHO, 2004a, p. 6).

On the basis of the recommendations of the committee in 1991, the WHA
unanimously adopted resolution 46.19 on ‘‘Nonproprietary Names for Pharmaceu-
tical Substances’’ in 1993. The resolution contains a preamble and two operative
paragraphs. In its preamble, the resolution noted the current trend of marketing
products with the same active ingredient as a product currently on the market, under
trademarks or brand names derived from stems or other parts of INNs. It pointed out
that such a practice, particularly in respect of single-ingredient prescription drugs,
may compromise the safety of patients by creating confusion in prescribing or
dispensing medicines and by interfering with the development of nomenclature for
INNs. Paragraph 1 of the resolution states that the WHA requests member states:


to enact rules or regulations, as necessary, to ensure that INNs (or the equivalent
nationally approved generic names) used in the labelling and advertising of
pharmaceutical products are always displayed prominently;
to encourage manufacturers to rely on their corporate name and INNs, rather
than on trademarks, to promote and market multi-source products introduced
after patent expiration; and
to develop policy guidelines on the use and protection of INNs, and to
discourage the use of names derived from INNs, and particularly names
including established INN stems as trademarks (WHO, 1993).





A close perusal of all the three clauses of paragraph 1 of the resolution shows
that the resolution does not request member states to prohibit the use of INNs or
INN stems as part of brand names. The resolution, in fact, promotes the basic
objective of the INN system, namely that for the purpose of ensuring safety in drug
consumption, it is imperative to use such names in the pharmaceutical industry that
do not cause confusion in the mind of the average consumer. In furtherance of this
objective, clause (1) of paragraph 1 of the resolution exhorts member states to enact
appropriate rules and regulations for ensuring that INNs are always displayed
prominently in drug labelling and advertising. Clause (2) calls upon states to
encourage manufacturers to use INNs along with their corporate name, rather
than using trademarks. For instance, a Canadian company called Apotex markets
its products under names that use the whole generic name along with the acronym
‘‘Apo’’ for the company Apotex as preﬁx. Therefore, instead of developing a brand
using part of the INN acebutolol, for example, ‘‘X-olol’’, the company uses the
name ‘‘Apo-acebutolol’’. Clause (3) requests member states of the WHO ‘‘. . . to
develop policy guidelines on the use and protection of INNs, and to discourage the

74

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

use of names derived from INNs . . . particularly names including established INN
stems as trade marks’’ (WHO, 1993). Thus, WHA resolution 46.19 shifted the focus
from the need to develop and harmonize the INN system with national nomen-
clature systems to the more pressing issue of ensuring the sustainability of the INN
system through better protection of INNs from misappropriation.

Paragraph 1(3) of the resolution requests member states to take two kinds of
actions. In the ﬁrst place, it calls upon member states to develop policy guidelines
relating to the use of INNs and their protection. It should be noted here that
member states are called upon to develop only policy guidelines and not a legal
regime for the use and protection of INNs. Furthermore, the word ‘‘use’’ may have
two meanings: ﬁrst, it may be a policy guideline explaining how INNs may be used
for coining the brand name. This interpretation is supported by the fact that the
resolution does not request member states to prevent the use of INNs in brand
names. Second, the word ‘‘use’’ may imply only the permissible use of INNs, for
instance, as branded generics,3 as mentioned in paragraph 1(2) of the resolution.
This interpretation would suggest that while INNs may be legitimately used for
commercial purposes, the use of INNs as proprietary marks needs to be discour-
aged. The second part of paragraph 1(3) of the resolution supports this argument.
The second part of this paragraph addresses two speciﬁc concerns in respect of
INNs, that is discouraging the use of names derived from INNs, and particularly
registration of names including established INN stems, as trademarks. The use of
the word ‘‘discourage’’ suggests that any use of INNs in contradiction to the basic
objectives of the INN system should be restrained. Even though the word
‘‘discourage’’ does not per se prohibit the use of INNs as brand names, it gives
some ﬂexibility to countries to determine ways and means of regulating the use of
INNs,
including prohibiting the use of INNs in brand names. However, as
mentioned earlier, the nonproprietary commercial use of INNs is not discouraged.
In some legal systems, such as common law systems, a trademark can be used
with or without registration. The word ‘‘use’’ in this provision implies all kinds of
trademark use, including the use of brand names as registered or unregistered
trademarks. In some legal systems, there is a distinction between trade names
and trademarks. The resolution covers both types of uses. In order to implement
the requirements of the resolution, it would be necessary to regulate all use of
INN-derived names. The word ‘‘particularly’’ in the second part of the paragraph
conveys that while any kind of use of names derived from INNs is to be
discouraged, the use of such names that include established INN stems as trade-
marks should be restrained on an urgent basis. The broader objective of discoura-
ging the practice of deriving brand names from INNs is to be achieved in a
progressive manner. Because the WHO cannot force the issue with member states, it
has to adopt a ﬂexible approach. Therefore, in general terms, member states are
called upon to discourage the use of names derived from INNs. Nevertheless, the
increasing use of INN stems threatens the future development of the INN system.
This challenge needs immediate attention.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 75

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

One of the major challenges identiﬁed by the Expert Committee was the
registration of trademarks using names derived from INNs. The committee
observed that:

. . . trademark applications are disallowed . . . only when they are identical
to an INN. A case for increased protection of INNs is now apparent as a
result of competitive promotion of products no longer protected by
patents. Rather than marketing these products under generic names,
many companies apply for a trademark derived from an INN and, in
particular, including an INN common stem (WHO, 1997, p. 7).

However, the resolution does not use the words ‘‘derived from an INN’’
while discouraging its use as a trademark. As a result, a trademark ofﬁce can still
continue with the practice of disallowing registration of only those names that are
identical to INNs.

The resolution also calls upon states to discourage the use of established INN
stems. Therefore, it conveys the meaning that there is a distinction among INN
stems. It is not clear as to what constitutes an established INN stem. How does an
INN stem become established? Does a stem become established by virtue of its
publication by the WHO? Or does it become established by long usage? WHO
ofﬁcials hold that a stem becomes established by virtue of its publication after
ofﬁcial approval of the INN Expert Group (Matavelli, 2006). However, there is no
authoritative interpretation of this point and further elaboration and explanation of
this aspect of the resolution are required through explanatory guidelines.

Resolution 46.19 of the WHA is a unanimously adopted resolution of an
international organization and it reﬂects the collective will of the community of
nations on the issue of the use and protection of INNs. Being merely a resolution of
an international organization, it does not create an obligation similar to that under
an international treaty, although it may mark a process towards the development of
an international treaty law on the subject. Therefore, WHA resolution 46.19 creates
an international responsibility for all member states, not amounting to an inter-
national obligation, to endeavour to implement the mandate of the resolution.
However, resolutions of international organizations are not binding upon the states.
At best, they are only soft law obligations that a state endeavours to respect.
Nevertheless, the collective action of states in international organizations, repeated
and acquiesced to by sufﬁcient members with sufﬁcient frequency, eventually
attains the status of customary international law.

There is a view that the resolutions of international organizations such as the
WHO are often regarded by states as being as important as traditional sources of
international law. In areas such as health and employment, where customary law is
scarce, recommendations are as important as treaties. Hence, it may be inappropri-
ate to dismiss such resolutions as simply a source of state practice when examining
customary international law. They can in themselves be independent sources of law,
albeit with a weak structure. Indeed, the resolutions and recommendations of the

76

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

UN Human Rights Commission are not mandatory in nature. Nevertheless, the
commission has compliance mechanisms such as monitoring and periodic review of
reports from states on the implementation of its resolutions and recommendations.
The system of reporting and monitoring makes states aware that while they
cannot be compelled to implement international soft law obligations, they would be
required to give plausible reasons for noncompliance. Although slow, such mechan-
isms have proved effective. It should be noted that WHA resolution 46.19 does not
create any reporting and monitoring mechanism for ensuring compliance. It would
be pertinent to examine whether the WHO-INN Programme has a mechanism for
ensuring compliance with the requirements of WHA resolution 46.19.

As pointed out earlier, whenever the WHO recommends an INN, the national
authorities designated to the WHO by respective governments are informed about
this, through letters issued by the WHO calling upon them to ensure that the INN is
not misappropriated. The INN Programme does not provide any reporting
mechanism for ensuring compliance with WHA resolutions on INNs, because it
has only an advisory role. Nevertheless, all action taken by the country and notiﬁed
to the WHO is recorded and treated conﬁdentially (Centad, 2006). The WHO’s
INN Programme collaborates with different groups and organizations such as the
European Medicines Agency, also known as the European Medicines Evaluation
Agency (EMEA), the WIPO, national authorities and trademark ofﬁces for
monitoring the implementation of WHA resolutions on protection of INNs
(Centad, 2006).

Regulation of INNs in the UK, the United States and the EU

In principle, countries should defer to INNs in the process of trademark registration
of brand names for pharmaceutical products. As mentioned earlier, WHA resolution
46.19 requested member states to develop policy guidelines on the use and protection
of INNs and to discourage the use of names derived from INNs, particularly names
that included established INN stems, as trademarks (WHO, 1993). This resolution
has been implemented in many countries including India. The legal and policy regime
for the use of INNs in India is discussed in the next part of the study.

In the UK, the BAN guidelines for the construction of pharmaceutical trade-
marks state that the requirements of WHA resolution 46.19 should be observed
while creating trademarks for pharmaceutical products (see the BAN website). The
UK trademark ofﬁce has a policy of rejecting applications for pharmaceuticals and
related substances for names that are internationally recognized as nonproprietary
names. Such names are called ‘‘reserved words’’ and registration of trademarks that
use these words is objected to (UK Intellectual Property Ofﬁce, 2006). In the United
States, the Trademark Act 1946 states that a petition to cancel the registration of a
mark may be ﬁled at any time if the registered mark becomes the generic name for
the goods or services, or a portion thereof, for which it is registered. The US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) also plays a role when a manufacturer seeks to

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 77

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

register a trademark (proprietary name) for a drug entity that has been assigned a
nonproprietary name. Within the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
(CDER)4 of the FDA, the Labelling and Nomenclature Committee (LNC) provides
recommendations on the acceptability of proposed proprietary names. One of the
criteria for rejection is the use of USAN syllables or stems in the proposed
trademark (see the AMA website).

One can obtain a marketing authorization for a medicinal product throughout
the EU. Such authorization is granted on the basis of the invented name of the
medicinal product. If applicants submitting applications under the centralized
procedure do not wish to use the invented name, common name or a scientiﬁc
name, under article 1.2 of the European Council (EC) Directive 92/27/EEC, a
marketing authorization application can be submitted using such a name together
with a trade name or the name of the manufacturer. In terms of article 1(20) of the
EC Directive 2001/83/EC, the name of the medicinal product may be either an
invented name, or a common or scientiﬁc name accompanied by the trade name or
the name of the marketing authorization holder (MAH) (EC, 2001). The common
name of a medicinal product is the INN, or where the INN does not exist, the usual
common name of the substance (EC, 2001). Article 1(20) also states that the
invented name should not be liable to confusion with the common name. Thus,
while proposing an invented name, applicants/MAHs are advised to take into
consideration the provisions of WHA resolution 46.19. The applicant/MAH has
to identify whether the proposed name has any similarity to an INN or an INN
stem. Where there is any similarity between an INN or an INN stem and the
proposed name, the applicant/MAH has to justify its use. In case the proposed
name is similar to an existing INN, the following criteria may be considered for
justifying its use:




the closeness of the INN and proposed name in speech or in writing;
the general use, indications, etc. of the medicinal product;
the conditions of use of the product, that is whether restricted to hospitals,
specialists, etc.; and
the routes of administration of the product and, where possible, the concerned
pharmaceutical form (EMEA, 2005).



Where the applicant/MAH identiﬁes that its proposed invented brand name
includes an INN stem, a justiﬁcation should be provided addressing the following
criteria:
 whether the INN stem and the medicinal product are from the same pharma-

cological class;

 whether the INN stem is in accordance with the location of the WHO-INN
stems, that is whether they are used as preﬁxes or sufﬁxes as they are used in the
INN nomenclature;
the general use, indications, etc. of the medicinal product;



78

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam





the conditions of use of the product, that is whether restricted to hospitals,
specialists, etc.; and
the routes of administration of the product and, where possible, the concerned
pharmaceutical form (EMEA, 2005).

In 1998, the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products (CPMP) of the
EMEA agreed to a guideline on the acceptability of trade names for human
medicinal products. Paragraph 3 of the guideline strongly advises applicants to
take into account the concerns of the WHO in terms of WHA resolution 46.19
(EMEA, 2002).

There is also evidence of countries protecting INNs even as far back as the
1980s. For instance, in a German case relating to Godecke A.G.’s application to
register a trademark, the German patent ofﬁce refused to register the trademark as
it was very similar to an INN. In that case, trademark registration of a brand name
Prazepamin was refused on the grounds of its similarity to the INN prazepam or
prazepaum. It was held that not only INNs but also words that were apparently
modiﬁcations of INNs must be refused registration. The German Supreme Court
upheld the decision of the patent ofﬁce and observed that modiﬁcations of INNs
without any characterizing individuality are not liable to be registered because of
the lack of distinctiveness where the INN is known among experts. Even where the
INN is not well known, a modiﬁcation of the INN is not to be registered because in
case of new INNs, some time will naturally pass before a new substance is generally
known. During this period, it is necessary to ensure that the name is not mono-
polized by a single party.5

However, it should be noted that these countries have not legally prohibited the use
of INNs or parts thereof in brand names. In spite of there being substantive provisions
regarding the use of INNs and the prevention of trademark registration of names that
are similar to INNs, there are instances of brand names being derived from INNs in
these countries as well. A perusal of brand names used in the UK and the United States
shows that there are instances of names that are similar to INNs (Table 4).

Table 4: Brand Names Similar to INNs

INN/BAN/USAN

Lisinopril
Diltiazem
Streptokinase
Riluzole
Abacavir
Carboplatin
Diltiazem
Glipizide

Stem

-pril
-azem
-kinase
-uzole
-cavir
-oplatin
-azem
gli-

Brand

Zestril
Dilzem XL
Streptase
Rilutek
Trizivir
Paraplatin
Cardizem
Metaglip

Source: British National Formulary and USFDA.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Country

UK
UK
UK
UK
UK
USA
USA
USA

79

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

WHA resolution 46.19 requests member states to discourage the practice of
deriving brand names from INNs. It particularly calls upon them to discourage the
use of such names or names using established INN stems as trademarks. Although
resolution 46.19 does not impose any binding obligation under international law
upon member states, they nevertheless have the responsibility to report the steps
taken by them to ensure compliance with the resolution. However, the use of INNs
as brand names has not been legally prohibited in the UK, the United States and
Europe. In this context, it will be pertinent to examine the regime for the use and
protection of INNs in India.

Regulation of INNs in India

This section examines the legal and policy regime pertaining to the use of INNs in
India in the context of the discussions in the preceding section. Speciﬁcally, the
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and the National Pharmaceutical
Policy and the Trade Marks Act 1999 are analysed here.

The Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945 as
amended from time to time, regulate the marketing approval, manufacture and
distribution and sale of drugs in India. Under section 18 of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, the manufacture or the sale of any misbranded drug is prohibited
(India, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940, [18.a.i]). The act also states that a drug
shall be deemed to be misbranded if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner
(India, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940, [17.b]). The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules
1945 deal with the requirements of labelling of drugs in India. Under the Rules, no
drug, whether proprietary or otherwise, can be sold or distributed in India unless it
is labelled in accordance with these Rules (India, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules
1945, [95]). Rule 96 states that the name of the drug must appear conspicuously on
the cover of the drug. This rule also states that the proper name of the drug must be
written or printed more conspicuously than the trade name. The trade name shall
appear immediately after or under the proper name (India, the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules 1945, [96.1.i]). INNs are considered to be the proper name of
the drug only where the drug in question does not have any name under Schedule F,
the ofﬁcial pharmacopoeia or the National Formulary of India (NFI) (India, the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945, [96.1.i.a–d]). Thus, the provisions of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act and the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules fulﬁl the basic requirements
of paragraph 1(1) of WHA resolution 46.19, because they place greater emphasis on
the generic name and require that it should be printed more prominently than the
brand name (trademark).

India has a decentralized drug regulatory structure, with separation of powers
at the federal and state levels. The Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) heads
the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) and discharges the
functions attached to the Central Government. The DCGI is a statutory authority

80

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

under the act and has port ofﬁces, zonal ofﬁces with drug inspectors and drug testing
laboratories functioning under it (Government of India, 2003a). The DCGI also has
the responsibility of laying down regulatory measures and amendments of the act and
rules, laying down standards for drugs, cosmetics, diagnostics and devices and
updating the Indian pharmacopoeia, coordinating the activities of the states and
advising them on matters relating to uniform administration of the act and rules in
the country (Government of India, 2003a). The state regulators are responsible for
the licensing of manufacturing establishments and sales premises (Government of
India, 2003a). In the present situation, the DCGI only gives an initial marketing
approval to a pharmaceutical substance, while manufacturing approval and subse-
quent marketing approvals fall within the domain of the state regulators.

The DCGI has the responsibility of approving new chemical entities introduced
in the country. Generally, 4 years from the date of ﬁrst approval by the DCGI,
individual state drug regulatory authorities issue marketing approval and manufac-
turing licences. However, irrespective of the state where the marketing approval is
obtained, the product can be marketed throughout India. The company has a choice
to either market the drug by a brand or a generic name. If the company wants to
market the drug under a brand name, it has to disclose the brand name along with the
generic name. Hence, the various state drug regulatory authorities can regulate the
use of INNs in coining brand names. However, there is no regulation or guideline on
how INNs are to be used in drug nomenclature in India. The DCGI is of the opinion
that his ofﬁce has a limited mandate, with its role being restricted to ensuring the
safety of the drugs that are given marketing approvals (Centad, 2006k). However,
paragraph 1(3) of the WHA resolution directs that member states should develop
policy guidelines on the use and protection of INNs and discourage the use of names
derived from INNs. There is a necessity to develop clear guidelines on the use and
protection of INNs in accordance with the WHA resolution. Because trademark
registration of brands is not compulsory in India, many brands may escape regulation
in terms of INN compliance unless they are subjected to compulsory registration of
the brand name with the drug regulatory authority.

The National Pharmaceutical Policy
The existing drug policy in India is silent on the use of nonproprietary names in
drug nomenclature. The Draft National Pharmaceutical Policy points out that the
present system of brand approval for pharmaceutical substances is inappropriate.
The draft policy identiﬁes two areas of concern. First, there are several brand names
that are very similar. Second, in many instances the composition has been changed
without any change in the brand name. In the context of these two concerns, the
draft policy holds the view that branding of drugs should be brought under a central
drug regulatory system. The Drug Regulator must be required to maintain a
database of brands and their compositions. All brand registrations must be
compulsorily approved (Government of India, 2005b). The Proneb Sen Committee
recommends that the government or its designated authority should have the power

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 81

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

to approve a brand name for a speciﬁc product so as to determine the nomenclature
under which the brand can be marketed (Government of India, 2005a).

The Trade Marks Act 1999
Like any other legal regime in India, the trademark law in India follows the
common law system. Under this system, both registered and unregistered trade-
marks are protected. Registered trademark owners have exclusive rights over the
mark and can take legal action for infringement of the mark. On the other hand,
owners of unregistered marks can also ﬁle a civil action against any person passing
off the goods under the unregistered mark as his own.

The law relating to trademarks in India was contained in the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act 1958. The Trade Marks Act 1999 replaced that statute.
Sections 9 and 11 of the act lay down the absolute and relative grounds for refusal
of registration of a mark as a trademark. Section 9 states that trademarks that do
not have any distinctive character, or that are exclusively of a descriptive nature, or
that have become exclusively customary in the current language or in the estab-
lished practice of the trade, cannot be registered. Section 11 of the act prohibits the
registration of a mark if its use would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.

Section 13 of the Trade Marks Act 1999 lays down speciﬁc provisions
restraining trademark registration of words that are similar to INNs. Section 13
states that:

No word–

(a)

(b)

that is the commonly used and accepted name of any single chemical
element or any single chemical compound (as distinguished from a
mixture) in respect of a chemical substance or preparation, or
that is declared by the WHO and notiﬁed in the prescribed manner by the
Registrar from time to time, as an INN or that is deceptively similar to
such a name,

shall be registered as a trademark and any such registration shall be deemed for the
purpose of section 57 to be an entry made in the register without sufﬁcient cause or
an entry wrongly remaining on the register, as the circumstances may require.

In terms of this provision, commonly used or accepted names of any single
chemical substance, or any word that has been declared as an INN by the WHO
cannot be registered as a trademark. Any such registration will be removed from the
register as per the requirements of section 57. Section 57 of the act states that:

Any person aggrieved by any entry made in the register without
sufﬁcient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the register, or
by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the
prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the
tribunal may make such order for expunging or varying the entry, as it
may think ﬁt (the Trade Marks Act 1999, [57.2]).

82

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

Section 57 (4) of the act empowers the tribunal to remove such entries on its own.
Section 13(b) of the Trade Marks Act 1999 clearly states that no word that is an
INN or is deceptively similar to it shall be registered as a trademark, and any such
entry will be deemed to be an entry wrongly made or wrongly remaining in the
register. It is worth noting that the WHA resolution does not call upon member
states to develop legal regimes for the protection of INNs from being used as
trademarks. Rather, it only calls upon member states to discourage such use.
Section 13(b) not only discourages the use of INNs as trademarks, it imposes a legal
restraint on trademark registration of words derived from INNs. Thus, section
13(b) prohibits the use of INNs as trademarks, going beyond the requirements of
the resolution. Even though the act does not make any mention of INN stems, the
same may fall within the scope of section 13 if such use is deceptively similar. This
point is discussed at length later in this section.

Under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act 1958 use of common or generic
names as trademarks was permissible when the word was used to denote the brand
of the element or the compound made by a person, in association with a suitable
name or description open to public use. Under section 13 of the Trade Marks Act
1999, no registration of such common names for chemical substances is permissible.
Although there was no provision for protecting INNs from appropriation through
trademark registration under the Trademarks and Merchandise Act 1958, there is a
view that the prohibition of trademark registration words declared by the WHO as
INNs was being followed by the Registrar (Narayanan, 2004, p. 253). The Trade
Marks Act 1999 introduced a speciﬁc provision for the protection of INNs from
trademark registration. Thus, the Trade Marks Act 1999 marks a deﬁnite improve-
ment over the law of 1958 with regard to INNs.

Scope of Section 13
Section 13(a) of the Trade Marks Act 1999 not only restrains the trademark
registration of words that are derived from INNs, it also restrains the trademark
registration of any word ‘‘. . . which is the commonly used and accepted name of
any single chemical element or a single chemical compound for a chemical
substance or preparation’’. As all synthetic pharmaceutical substances are essen-
tially chemical substances, generic names that are not INNs are also covered within
the scope of section 13 of the act.

The application of section 13(b) to INNs is qualiﬁed by two words—‘‘declared’’
by the WHO and ‘‘notiﬁed’’ as such by the Registrar. The WHO does not ‘‘declare’’
a word as an INN. It only recommends certain names found to be acceptable by it
as INNs. Both proposed and recommended INNs are published and hence it may
be said that the WHO declares them as proposed or recommended INNs. Thus, it is
not certain whether the term ‘‘declared INNs’’ under section 13(b) applies to both
proposed as well as recommended INNs. Trademark lawyers are of the opinion that
this phrase refers to only recommended INNs (Centad, 2006b).

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 83

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Even where the WHO recommends a name as an INN, it does not come within
the protection of section 13(b) unless it is notiﬁed as such by the Trade Marks
Registrar. As informed by trademark lawyers and the trademark ofﬁce, no INN has
been notiﬁed by the Registrar (Centad, 2006b; 2006d). Thus, in the absence of any
notiﬁcation, section 13(b) cannot become operational. The possible option of
restraining the use of INNs as trademarks lies under section 13(a), under which
the commonly used or accepted name of any single chemical entity cannot be
registered. However, INNs are not chemical names in the strict sense; they are
names that identify the chemical composition of the drug and help to replace long
and unwieldy chemical names. Hence, it is not clear whether INNs come within the
scope of section 13(a). Furthermore, section 13(a) cannot prevent the registration of
words derived from INNs including INN stems, on the grounds of deceptive
similarity to such names, because deceptive similarity is determined on the basis
of the proprietary nature of another mark. Because INNs are nonproprietary, the
test of deceptive similarity may not apply. Deceptive similarity has been interpreted
by the courts in accordance with its deﬁnition under section 9 of the act. Thus, to
determine what constitutes deceptive similarity under section 13 of the act, it may be
relevant to study how the courts have interpreted this phrase.

Section 9 of the Trade Marks Act 1999 lays down the absolute grounds for
refusal of registration of a trademark. This section states that the Registrar of Trade
Marks shall refuse to register a trademark if it is of such a nature as to deceive the
public or cause confusion (India, Trade Marks Act 1999, [9.2.a]). Thus, it would be
pertinent to examine what constitutes deceptiveness under the trademark law.
According to the Trade Marks Act, ‘‘A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively
similar to another mark if it so nearly resembles another mark as is likely to deceive
or cause confusion’’ (India, Trade Marks Act 1999, [2.1.d]). Therefore, for deciding
whether a trademark is deceptively similar to another mark, it has to be determined
whether the mark is likely to deceive or cause confusion. In the case of F. Hoffman-la
Roche & Co. Ltd v Geoffrey Manners & Co. Pvt. Ltd, the Supreme Court of India
followed the explanation given by Lord Denning to these words in the case of Parker
Knoll Ltd v Knoll International Ltd.6 According to Lord Denning, the basis of
deceptiveness is the making of a false representation, intentional or otherwise,
thereby causing a person to believe a thing to be true that is false. However,
confusion may be caused without making any false representation, because of the
lack of knowledge or ability of the people to whom such representation is made, to
understand the difference between one mark and another similar mark.

In SBL Ltd v Himalaya Drug Co., the Delhi High Court held that a trademark
is likely to deceive or cause confusion by its resemblance to another trademark
already on the register.7 Two important issues for determining deceptive resem-
blance are as follows:

(a) ﬁrst, who are the persons whom the resemblance is likely to deceive or confuse;

and

84

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

(b)

second, what rules of comparison are to be adopted in judging whether such a
resemblance exists.

The court also observed that in the case of pharmaceutical preparations, where
trading is governed by statutory rules or regulations, additional considerations are
relevant. These include:
 ﬁrst, the manner in which the trade is carried on, such as sales being made only
by authorized or licensed vendors with special knowledge of medicines and
pharmacy; and
second, the class of persons who would be the purchasers, whether they would
be accompanied by doctors’ prescriptions and also would in all probability
remain in touch with the doctor while consuming the medicine.



Even in the case of F. Hoffman-la Roche & Co. Ltd, the Supreme Court observed
that the question of deceptive similarity must be decided on the basis of the class of
goods to which the trademarks apply.8 Therefore, in the case of trademarks for
pharmaceutical products, the issue of likelihood of deception or confusion between
two marks is relative to the determination of who is the consumer of the product.
Generally, pharmaceutical companies market their products to the doctors who
prescribe them to their patients. Thus, from the perspective of the companies, the
doctor is the consumer and hence, the likelihood of deception or confusion is to be
determined in the context of the knowledge that can be reasonably expected of a
doctor. However, this may not be reﬂective of the ground reality where many
prescription drugs are directly sold over the counter to the end users.

In this context, it is important to examine whether proprietary rights can be
acquired through trademarks over names that are in the public domain. The legal
position in India, as it has evolved through judicial interpretations, is that no one
can claim an exclusive right over a generic name. This consequently allows every-
body to use parts of generic names in their trademarks even if there is an existing
trademark using part of the generic name, provided it satisﬁes other requirements of
the Trade Marks Act 1999. In the SBL Ltd case, the court observed that ‘‘. . . In the
trade of drugs it is common practice to name a drug by . . . the main ingredients of
the drug. Such ingredient . . . being generic cannot be owned by anyone as a
trademark’’.9 In Griffon Laboratories (P) Ltd v Indian National Drug Co. P. Ltd,
there was a dispute on using the trademarks ‘‘Sorbiline’’ and ‘‘Sorbitone’’, by two
rival companies, both names being derived from the generic ‘‘sorbitol’’.10 The
Calcutta High Court held that as several medicines were being manufactured with
the preﬁx ‘‘sorbi’’, it was a common practice in the medical world. Therefore, it
cannot be said that the objective of using ‘‘sorbi’’ is to cause confusion.

Relying upon this decision, the Delhi High Court in Panacea Biotech Ltd
v Recon Ltd, held that it is well settled that no person can claim the exclusive use of
generic terms.11 Hence, a trademark on Nimulid derived from nimesulide cannot
prevent a trademark on Remulide, also derived from nimesulide. Subsequent

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 85

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

trademarks using parts of generic names cannot be prevented on the ground of
deceptive similarity to an existing trademark. However, this interpretation will not
help in preventing the misuse of INNs. It only prevents the acquisition of
proprietary rights over INNs. Therefore, to prevent the misappropriation of INNs
through trademarks, it is necessary to pre-empt the registration of such names. This
is where the implementation of section 13(b) of the Trade Marks Act 1999 assumes
critical importance.

Section 13 of the Trade Marks Act 1999 speciﬁcally restrains the trademark
registration of words that are derived from INNs. Even though the registration of
common names of chemical substances is prohibited under section 13(a), the
registration of names using INNs is dependent on the INN concerned being notiﬁed
by the Trade Marks Registrar under section 13(b). In the absence of such a
notiﬁcation, the only remedy that is partially available is under section 13(a).
However, section 13(a) cannot comprehensively prevent the registration of names
derived from INNs. The judicial interpretation of the use of terms in the public
domain, especially in relation to pharmaceutical products, shows that no person can
claim an exclusive right to commonly accepted public names by registering words
having elements of the same as trademarks. However, this per se does not restrain
any person from registering a trademark derived from a generic name. By allowing
names in the public domain to be used by all, the legal position in India prevents the
appropriation of INNs through intellectual property. However, this does not
address the issue of removal of confusion in drug nomenclature.

It has been suggested that a possible way of preventing trademark registration
of names using INNs or parts thereof may be found under section 9 of the Trade
Marks Act 1999. Section 9 lays down the absolute grounds for refusal of regis-
tration of a mark. Among other grounds, it speciﬁcally states that trademarks that
consist exclusively of marks or indications that may serve in trade to designate the
kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values, geographical origin or the time of
production of the goods or other characteristics of the goods shall not be registered
(the Trade Marks Act 1999). If this provision is read with section 13(b) of the act, it
may be interpreted that because INNs are names that designate the kind of chemical
substance used in the drug, registration of such names must be absolutely refused.
However, the provision in section 9 is qualiﬁed by the use of the word ‘‘exclusively’’,
implying that words that use only a part of INNs including INN stems, along with
some unique preﬁx, sufﬁx or inﬁx, may not come under the ambit of section 9.
Hence, it has been suggested that the word ‘‘exclusively’’ be removed from section 9
and the provision of section 13(b) may be appended as an explanation to section 9
in relation to INNs (Amin, 2006).

Moreover, the proviso to section 9(1) states that a mark cannot be refused
registration if before the date of application of the registration the mark acquires a
distinctive character as a result of the use of the mark, or it acquires the status of a
well-known trademark. This provision is in consonance with the general principle
that a well-established mark or a mark that becomes distinct by long usage can be

86

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

regarded as a unique trademark. Therefore, even if a mark is wrongly registered, its
removal from the register under section 57 does not prevent it from acquiring a
distinctive character by long use as an unregistered mark.

Section 57 of the act empowers the Registrar or the Appellate Board,
established under section 83 of the act, to pass appropriate orders for cancelling
or varying the registration of a trademark on the grounds of any contravention or
failure to observe any condition entered in the register in relation to the mark. The
Appellate Board or the Registrar discharges this function working as a tribunal.
Any aggrieved person can complain to them that a mark has been registered
without sufﬁcient cause, or has been entered wrongly in the register. Section 13
states that any entry made in the register in contravention of the provisions of that
section shall be deemed to be an entry wrongly remaining in the register or an entry
made without sufﬁcient cause. Therefore, if a complaint is made to the Registrar or
the Appellate Board in relation to registration of a trademark coined from INNs,
the entry in the register may be expunged or varied. Moreover, under section 57(4),
the tribunal may decide such issues on its own motion. According to section 2(ze),
the tribunal means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate Board, before
which the concerned proceeding is pending. Thus, the Registrar is empowered to
remove such marks from the register even without any complaint from any person,
and can rectify any violation of section 13 even after the registration of such marks.
However, the tribunal has the discretion to initiate such an action.

Compliance with INN-Related Regulations in India

In spite of the fact that the trademark law explicitly prohibits the registration of
words derived from INNs as trademarks, there are instances in India of brand names
being derived from INNs. The pharmaceutical industry in India ranks fourth in the
world in terms of volume. In terms of value, it is ranked thirteenth. The pharma-
ceutical market in India is highly fragmented with about 20,000–25,000 entities
spread across small, medium and large scales (Piribo, 2005). In such a vast and
fragmented market, brand names are widely used for the marketing of drugs. Indeed,
there are a large number of brands for a single pharmaceutical substance (Table 5).

Table 5: Number of Brands Associated with a Single Generic Name

Generic name

Amoxicillin
Amoxycillin+other substances
Glimepiride
Clopidogrel
Atorvastatin
Betamethasone

Source: Indian Drug Review 2005.

No. of brands

86
102
32
45
69
66

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 87

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

There are instances where pharmaceutical substances in India have been
marketed under brand names that are very similar to INNs, some of which use
INN stems. In some speciﬁc cases, the WHO has issued INN protection letters to
the DCGI, requesting that steps be taken to ensure that such names are not
registered as trademarks. Table 6 contains an illustrative list of instances where the
WHO has issued INN protection letters to the DCGI.

From a perusal of the list of INN protection letters issued by the WHO, it is
evident that most of the alleged cases involve misappropriation of INN stems
(Figure 1). The INN stem in respect of which most INN protection letters have been
issued by the WHO is ‘‘-grel’’, followed by ‘‘-prazole’’, ‘‘-pride’’ and ‘‘gli-’’. While ‘‘-
grel’’ and ‘‘-sartan’’ are stems for cardiovascular drugs, ‘‘-prazole’’ is a stem for
drugs used to treat gastro-oesophageal diseases, ‘‘-pride’’ is a stem for antidepres-
sants, ‘‘gli-’’ is a stem for antidiabetic drugs, while ‘‘-platin’’ and ‘‘cef-’’ are stems for
oncology drugs. This shows that a large number of cases of alleged misappropria-
tion of INNs in India involve drugs for heart diseases, diabetes and cancer.

There are also brands in respect of which INN protection letters have not been
issued for several other brands. Table 7 gives a list of some such brands. Some
brands with similarity to INNs are among the top-selling brands in India.

INN protection letters issued by the WHO-INN Programme to the DCGI show
that brand names have been coined from INNs primarily by small pharmaceutical
companies. However, a survey conducted among the leading pharmaceutical
companies in India shows that even these companies have coined about 10% of
their brands from INNs (Table 8). Leading companies have largely concentrated on
deriving brand names from INNs in therapeutic areas such as diabetes, and
cardiovascular and antihypertensive drugs. The beneﬁts and disadvantages of this
practice from a public health perspective need to be examined in detail.

Institutional Deﬁciencies

The loopholes in the implementation of the legal and policy regime are given below
and possible deﬁciencies at the various levels that enable this situation to ﬂourish
are identiﬁed. The views of the major stakeholders such as industry, legal prac-
titioners, health professionals and public health groups are also presented.

Limitations of the WHO-INN Programme
WHA resolution 46.19 has not been authoritatively interpreted. Hence, there is a
lack of awareness about the meaning and content of the resolution, leading to a lack
of consistency in the regime for the use and protection of INNs in member states.
As the resolution does not have any legal binding under international law, it would
be appropriate in the long run to develop an international convention on the use
and protection of INNs.

As WHA resolution 46.19 does not establish a reporting and monitoring
mechanism in relation to INNs, the WHO does not have a mandate for establishing
a reporting and monitoring mechanism in relation to INNs. As a result, the WHO

88

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

r
e
t
t
e
l

O
H
W

f
o

e
t
a
D

m

r
i
F

r
e
b
m
u
n
M
T

M
T

m
e
t
S

I

G
C
D
e
h
t

o
t

O
H
W

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
u
s
s
I

s
r
e
t
t
e
L
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
P
N
N

I

:
6

e
l
b
a
T

4
0
0
2
/
2
0
/
2
0

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
8
0

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
8
0

4
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
2
1

5
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
6
0

3
0
0
2
/
8
0
/
2
1

3
0
0
2
/
1
1
/
1
1

3
0
0
2
/
1
1
/
1
1

3
0
0
2
/
9
0
/
2
2

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
2
2

3
0
0
2
/
9
0
/
2
2

2
0
0
2
/
0
1
/
2
0

3
0
0
2
/
8
0
/
3
1

3
0
0
2
/
8
0
/
3
1

4
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
5
2

5
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
3
2

5
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
3
2

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
8
0

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
2
2

5
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
9
0

1
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
1
2

5
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
6
0

5
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
0
1

5
0
0
2
/
6
0
/
8
0

5
0
0
2
/
7
0
/
9
1

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
8
0

5
0
0
2
/
1
1
/
3
0

5
0
0
2
/
2
1
/
7
0

4
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
2
2

i
a
b
m
u
M

i
v
a
N

,

d
t
L
e
t
a
v
i
r
P

l
a
c
i
m
e
h
C

t
a
i
v
A

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
s
e
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
I

.
s

m
r
a
h
P
m
e
h
c
o
B

i

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
l
a
t
n
e
n
i
t
n
o
C
n
u
r
a
V

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
s

m
r
a
h
P

y
e
l
d
e
M

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
a
i
d
n
I

l
a
m
a
r
i
P

s
a
l
o
h
c
i
N

d
a
b
a
d
e
m
h
A

,
e
r
a
C
h
t
l
a
e
H
a
l
i

d
a
C

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
.

m
e
h
C

t
a
i
v
A

i
a
n
n
e
h
C

,
.

m
r
a
h
P

h
c
r
a
e
s
i
d
e
M

i
a
b
m
u
M

,

V
S
U

n
o
a
g
r
u
G

,

d
t
L

.

m
r
a
h
P
&
s
g
u
r
D
n
a
i
d
n
I

y
a
b
m
o
B

,

d
t
L

.
e
t
a
v
i
r
P

.

m
e
h
C
c
ﬁ
u
G

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
t
a
g
a
h
B

l

u
p
V

i

i
v
j
a
R

i
a
n
n
e
h
C

,
s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L
x
e
p
A

s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L
s
’
y
d
d
e
R
r

D

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
t
a
g
a
h
B

l

u
p
V

i

i
v
j
a
R

a
t
a
k
o
K

l

,

d
t
L
t
v
P

.
s
b
a
L
a
i
c
a
m
r
a
h
P

.

N
A

.

i

h
l
e
D
w
e
N

,

d
t
L
a
i
d
n
I

o
c
l
i
s
a
B

i

h
l
e
D
w
e
N
D
T
L
T
V
P

s

i

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
B
h
c
e
t
o
r
P

i
a
b
m
u
M

,

n
a
d
r
a
V

l
a
w
s
i
a
J

i
j

m
a
R

e
r
o
d
n
I

,

d
t
L
e
r
a
c
h
t
l
a
e
H
m
o
c
n
y
S

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L
k
r
a
m
n
e
l
G

d
a
b
a
d
e
m
h
A
e
r
a
c
h
t
l
a
e
H
a
l
i

d
a
C

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
a
m
r
a
h
P

a
t
n
a
j
A

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
a
m
r
a
h
P

a
t
n
a
j
A

e
r
o
l
a
g
n
a
B

,
s
b
a
L
o
r
c
i

M

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
t
a
g
a
h
B

i
a
b
m
u
M

,
t
a
g
a
h
B

l

u
p
V

i

l

u
p
V

i

i
v
j
a
R

i
v
j
a
R

i
a
b
m
u
M

t
a
g
a
h
B

l

u
p
V

i

i
v
j
a
R

d
e
t
i

i

m
L
a
l
p
C

i

1
4
5
7
2
0
1
B

3
9
8
5
6
9
B

8
6
8
6
5
0
1
B

0
5
8
7
8
9

9
3
1
5
5
9

4
7
8
7
3
9

9
7
9
5
0
9

7
0
9
5
9
0
1

0
6
8
5
8
0
1

6
8
8
6
3
1
1

8
4
8
6
9
6

6
0
5
6
0
9

5
0
1
3
1
9

7
7
5
3
1
6

1
2
2
2
8
1
1
B

4
4
1
1
3
2
1

4
4
1
1
3
2
1

2
1
4
9
4
1
1

9
6
5
4
3
1
1
B

2
1
1
9
1
1
1

7
1
5
8
1
0
1

7
1
5
8
1
0
1

5
0
2
1
0
3
1

6
7
2
4
1
2
1

0
0
8
8
9
8

4
3
9
8
2
1
1

1
3
8
0
3
3
1

1
2
0
3
7
7

5
3
1
8
4
7

e
d
i
r
e
m

i
l

G

e
d
i
r
i
l

G

t
i
r
e
m

i
l

G

l
e
r
g
o
d
P

i

l
e
r
g
o
C

l

e
d
i
r
i
l

G

e
m

i
l

G

l
e
r
g
i
p
o
C

l

l
e
r
G
C

-

l
e
r
g
o
d
I

n
i
c
y
m
o
r
h
t
x
o
R

0
1

n
i
t
a
t
s
o
L

n
i
c
y
m
y
x
o
R

o
r
h
t
i
x
o
R

n
i
t
a
l
p
O

n
i
t
a
l
p
i
x
O

n
i
t
a
l
p
i
x
O

l

o
z
a
r
p
n
a
P

e
l
o
z
a
r
p
O

d
i
r
p
o
M

e
d
i
r
p
a
u
G

e
d
i
r
p
a
u
G

e
d
i
r
p
i
r
T

e
d
i
r
p
m
A

i

i

l
i
r
p
m
o
L

e
l
o
z
a
r
P

l
i
r
p
m
a
R

i
r
p
m
a
R

n
a
t
r
a
S

i
l

G

i
l

G

i
l

G

i
l

G

i
l

G

l
e
r
G

l
e
r
G

l
e
r
G

l
e
r
G

l
e
r
G

n
i
t
a
t
s
a
V

n
i
c
y
M

n
i
c
y
M

n
i
c
y
M

n
i
t
a
l
P

n
i
t
a
l
P

n
i
t
a
l
P

e
l
o
z
a
r
P

e
l
o
z
a
r
P

e
l
o
z
a
r
P

e
d
i
r
P

e
d
i
r
P

e
d
i
r
P

e
d
i
r
P

e
d
i
r
P

l
i
r
P

l
i
r
P

l
i
r
P

n
a
t
r
a
S

e
d
i
r
i
p
e
m

i
l

G

e
d
i
r
i
p
e
m

i
l

G

e
d
i
r
i
p
e
m

i
l

G

e
d
i
r
i
p
e
m

i
l

G

N
N

I

l
e
r
g
o
d
p
o
C

l

i

l
e
r
g
o
d
p
o
C

l

i

l
e
r
g
o
d
p
o
C

l

i

n
i
c
y
m
o
r
h
t
i
x
o
R

n
i
c
y
m
o
r
h
t
i
x
o
R

n
i
c
y
m
o
r
h
t
i
x
o
R

n
i
t
a
l
p

i
l
a
x
O

n
i
t
a
t
s
a
v
o
L

e
l
o
z
a
r
p
o
t
n
a
P

e
d
i
r
p
u
s
i

l

m
A

i

l
i
r
p
m
a
R

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r .
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
P
N
N

I
-

O
H
W

:
e
c
r
u
o
S

89

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

s
m
e
t
i
/
s
r
e
t
t
e
l
 

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
P

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

grel

pril

pride

gli mycin

pril
Conflict with INN-Stem/INNs

platin

sar

cef

con

Figure 1: Reported use of INN stems as trademarks in India.
Source: WHO-INN Programme.

Table 7: Other Brand Names Coined from INNs

INN

Vinleurosine
Piracetam
Epirubicin
Lovastatin
Alprazolam
Ramipril

Stem

-osine
-acetam
-rubicin
-vastatin
-zolam
-pril

Brand name

Company

Virosine DR
Alcetam
Alrubicin
Lostatin
Alzolam
Codiopril

Ranbaxy
Alkem
Alembic
Dr Reddy’s Laboratories
Sun Pharmaceuticals
Dr Reddy’s Laboratories

Source: Websites of surveyed companies.

receives reports of misappropriation of INNs from a variety of sources such as
trademark ofﬁces, national drug regulators and pharmaceutical companies. Where
a trademark ofﬁce notiﬁes the WHO, the WHO-INN Programme informs the
trademark department that appropriate action has been taken with the responsible
national authorities. The WHO obtains information about the use of trademarks
derived from INNs in India from similar sources. However, the WHO is unable to
state the speciﬁc sources from which it obtains information as this is conﬁdential
(Matavelli, 2006). There is a possibility that in many cases, the WHO might have
received such reports from pharmaceutical companies, because authorities in
countries that do not have strong substantive or procedural legal regimes for
preventing misappropriation of INNs can hardly be expected to report cases of
misappropriation, which they themselves could not detect.

The WHO-INN Programme issues INN protection letters to the DCGI. The
DCGI has not responded to any communication from the WHO (Centad, 2006).
Under the present circumstances, the DCGI is reactive rather than being proactive.
Hence, it would be more useful for the WHO to write about INN misappropriation
to the Trade Marks Registry rather than the DCGI (Health Action International,

90

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

Table 8: Number of Brand Names and Therapeutic Areas Coined from INNs by Large

Pharmaceutical Companies

No. of
brands
surveyed

No. of brands
derived
from INNs

Therapeutic areas where names
have been coined from INN

Company

Ranbaxy

Cipla
Dr Reddy’s Labs.

184

97
189

Sun Pharmaceuticals

400

Nicholas Piramal

Lupin Ltd
Aurobindo

Cadila Healthcare

156

150
116

78

8

17
15

90

56

20
10

24

Anti-infectives, cardiovascular,
diabetes, anti-retroviral
-ditto-
Antihypertensive, cardiovascular,
diabetes
Diabetes, anti-infectives, cardiology,
oncology, anti-histaminic
Cardiovascular, central nervous
system, diabetes
Antihypertensive, antiretroviral
Antihypertensive, diabetes,
anti-infective
Antihypertensive, diabetes,
cardiovascular

Source: Websites of surveyed companies.

2004, p. 15). However, the WHO-INN Programme Manager is of the view that the
WHO can issue protection letters only to the national information ofﬁcer desig-
nated by the national authority and it is their responsibility to decide whether they
want to take action with the persons responsible at the national level (Matavelli,
2006). The WHO can only work with the trademark ofﬁce if requested by the
national authorities responsible to the WHO. It may be pertinent to mark a copy of
INN protection letters to the trademark ofﬁces.

Although WHA resolution 46.19 speciﬁcally calls

the protection
of INN stems,
it is not clear as to how a stem is deﬁned for determining
which part of the INN constitutes the stem. The WHO publishes a list of INN
stems (WHO, 2004b) from time to time, but trademark ofﬁcials would be largely
unaware of this. The information leaﬂet for trademark departments issued by
the INN Programme does not mention that the use of INN stems should be
discouraged.

for

The Trade Marks Ofﬁce
The basic requirement of section 13(b) of the Trade Marks Act 1999 is that INNs
must be notiﬁed by the Registrar. However, as mentioned earlier, no such notiﬁcation
has been issued. During informal interactions, senior trademark ofﬁcials informed us
that although INNs are not notiﬁed, the computerized database of the Registry

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 91

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

contains INNs that are fed in from time to time. However, this does not satisfy the
legal requirements because INNs must be formally notiﬁed under section 13(b).

There is no speciﬁc provision either in the Trade Marks Act 1999 or in the
Trade Marks Rules 2001 relating to the procedure for examining whether an
application for a trademark for a pharmaceutical substance has any similarity to
an INN. The Trade Marks Rules merely state ‘‘that the Registrar shall publish from
time to time in the Trade Marks Journal, the words which are declared by the WHO
as INNs referred to under Section 13(b)’’ (the Trade Marks Rules 2001, [121]).
Hence, while section 13 of the act speaks of words that are declared by the WHO as
INNs and are notiﬁed as such by the Registrar, the Trade Marks Rules state that
such notiﬁcation has to take place from time to time by publication of INNs in the
Trade Marks Journal. However, to date, no such notiﬁcation has been made. In the
absence of formal notiﬁcation of INNs, section 13(b) is not in force and therefore
not applicable.

A formal notiﬁcation may render marks derived from INNs as violative of
section 13. Although INNs are not notiﬁed formally at present, either the govern-
ment or the court may start this at any time, because the formal notiﬁcation of
INNs is a statutory requirement. In this event, INN-derived marks that are
currently registered would be exposed to the threat of legal challenge by any public
interest group or other interested person or the Registrar under section 57 of the
Trade Marks Act 1999. This would lead to litigation costs for pharmaceutical
companies and might damage their business including their brand equity. Hence, it
is in the interest of all parties that the Trade Marks Registry should discourage such
registration and notify INNs at the earliest opportunity.

With regard to the procedure for registration of trademark applications, the
Trade Marks Rules state that the application should, with sufﬁcient precision, give a
description of the trademark in words, if necessary, to determine the right of the
applicant (the Trade Marks Rules 2001,
[25.12.a]). On receipt of a trademark
application, the Registrar shall cause a search to be made to ascertain whether there
is any identical or deceptively similar mark on record. Such a search shall be carried
out among registered trademarks and pending trademark applications (the Trade
Marks Rules 2001, [37.2]). Thus, there is no requirement under the Trade Marks
Rules 2001 to conduct a search among INNs that may be notiﬁed in the journal.

However, chapter 6 of the Practice and procedure manual for the administration
of the Trade Marks Act 1999 lays down certain guidelines to be followed by
trademark examiners in respect of section 13(b) of the Act. It states the grounds for
refusal to register a trademark under section 13(b): if a trademark to be used in
relation to a pharmaceutical substance is the same or is confusingly similar to a
notiﬁed INN or other generic drug name. For the purpose of examination, the
examiners shall refer to the INNs maintained in the Trade Marks Registry
(Government of India, 1999).

The Manual also states that a ground for refusal under section 13(b) exists
where the trademark and INN are identical or deceptively similar. It states that if

92

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

such a mark were applied to the substance that has an INN, the mark would not be
capable of distinguishing between the goods of the proprietor and similar sub-
stances identiﬁed as INNs. Moreover, if such a mark were used on goods with
different constituents, it would be deceptive.

With regard to the use of INN stems, the Manual states that it would be
appropriate to impose some restrictions on the use of the mark to ensure that its use
accords with the descriptive signiﬁcance of the stem used. Thus, the Manual does
not speciﬁcally instruct examiners to refuse the registration of marks using INN
stems. Consequently, this dilutes the prohibition of trademark registration of any
word that is deceptively similar to INNs in terms of section 13(b) of the act.

Nevertheless, the existence of a large number of trademarks that are similar to
INNs points to the fact that a close scrutiny rarely takes place of trademark
applications in terms of section 13(b) of the act. On the basis of informal
interactions with trademark examiners, it is learnt that all names applied for are
checked with the computerized database of the Registry. In view of the existing state
of affairs, therefore, it seems that there is no mention of INNs in the database. It is
also learnt that, in spite of there being a manual for examiners, most examiners are
unaware of the requirements of section 13(b) and are not imparted any training in
this matter. The few instances of rejection of trademark applications on the grounds
of deceptive similarity with INNs may be because the examiner who dealt with the
matter was aware of INNs, or because some other person raised an objection. A few
instances of rejection of trademark applications occurred in the early 1980s. In ICI v
Cipla, the Trade Marks Registry refused to register the mark Atenolar on the
ground of the mark being similar to the generic name atenolol.12 A possible reason
for this could be that before 1981, rule 96 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945
required that the label of drugs only carry the generic name of the drug or the INN
and not the trade name. For this reason, the Trade Marks Registry as a rule
included a requirement for ﬁling an afﬁdavit for marks in class 5, under which
pharmaceutical products are registered, stating that the application is not for any
notiﬁed generic drug. However, in the case of Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and
others v Government of India and others,
the decision of the High Court of Delhi
prohibiting the use of trade names under the power conferred by sections 12 and 33
brings the impugned portion of rule 96 in conﬂict with the provisions of the Trade
Marks Act 1999.13 In view of this, the requirement for ﬁling an afﬁdavit with the
Trade Marks Registry has also been done away with (Centad, 2006b; 2006d). Thus,
it may be appropriate to make it mandatory for all applications in class 5 to disclose
the generic name of the substance for which a mark is sought to be registered. This
will make it easier for the examiners to ascertain whether the name has been derived
from a generic name or an INN. This is more signiﬁcant as the majority of
trademark applications fall under class 5, that is for pharmaceutical substances
(Government of India, 2002; 2003b).14

The format of the trademark examination report contains a column to
record objections under section 13. However, the examiners revealed that to their

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 93

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

knowledge no such objection has been raised. According to them, the use of a part
of the generic name may be permissible. To ascertain whether the examination of
applications for trademark registration of pharmaceutical substances includes an
examination of the marks under section 13, a trademark search was conducted with
19 names including new INNs and some INN stems. The search report revealed that
while objections were raised in all cases on the grounds of existence of similar
marks, no objection was raised under section 13. For instance, the report states that
the INNs apixaban and dapliclermine cannot be registered as trademarks because
of the existence of similar marks such as Apix, and Dap-AC and Dapco,
respectively. The search report also reveals that many marks have been derived
from INN stems. For instance, the report states that the stem ‘‘cef’’ cannot be
registered because of the existence of similar marks such as Cefdor, Cefex, Ceﬁn,
etc. This clearly establishes that there is a general
lack of awareness among
examiners about the requirements of section 13, as well as the public health
implications of INNs. This indicates a lack of specialization of examiners on
INN-related issues.

Deﬁciencies in the Drug Regulatory System
There is no speciﬁc mandate of the DCGI for regulating the use of INNs in India.
However, such a mandate may be accorded by implication, because the DCGI is the
nodal agency representing India before the WHO and because the DCGI has a
speciﬁc mandate to lay down regulatory measures and standards for drugs. In this
context, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945 require that generic names should be
printed prominently (usually double the font size of brand names). However, this
requirement is often overlooked and the brand name is printed in bold letters and
attractive colours. The laws regarding labelling ought to be implemented more
stringently.

At present, there is no speciﬁc policy guideline on the use and protection of
INNs in India. As there is no mandatory requirement to register brand names as
trademarks, prevention of trademark registration by itself will not curb the practice
of using brand names derived from INNs. In many cases, pharmaceutical brands
are launched in the market even before their trademark registration either to avoid
delay in trademark registration or to bypass objections under the trademark law.
Therefore, it is essential to develop a detailed policy guideline on the use of INNs as
well as disincentives for brands using parts of INNs.

There is no centralized mechanism for the registration of brand names of drugs
in India. Currently, drug companies register their brand names with the respective
state regulators. Interactions with the DCGI revealed that the DCGI’s ofﬁce does
not maintain a database of all the brand names registered in the country. Thus,
without changing the brand registration system, introduction of INNs alone will
not be effective. A centralized directory should be developed of brand names
approved by state regulatory authorities. With the availability of the internet, state
regulators can be asked by the DCGI to post all drugs approved by them on the

94

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

website, which can serve as a centralized database. The draft National Pharmaceu-
tical Policy has suggested that:

. . . branding of drugs . . . should be brought under the Central drug
regulatory system. The drug regulator must be required to maintain a
data base on brands and their compositions, and all brand registration
of drugs must compulsorily be approved by the drug regulator
(Government of India, 2005b, pp. 23–4).

State drug regulatory authorities have a predominant role in granting manu-
facturing and marketing approvals for pharmaceutical substances. Hence, state
drug regulators should ensure that drugs with brand names coined from INNs are
not marketed. However, state drug regulatory authorities hardly have the technical
capability to deal with this situation. Therefore, it is imperative to devise a policy
guideline for state regulators to ensure that marketing approvals are not given for
such brands.

During personal interviews, it was conveyed by the DCGI that although there is
no legal obligation, the DCGI’s ofﬁce respects the spirit of WHA resolution 46.19
and hence, the DCGI does not have any role in the approval of any brand name.
This falls within the domain of the state regulators. The primary concern of the
DCGI’s ofﬁce is the safety of drugs. When an application is made for the approval
of a new drug, the DCGI decides this on the basis of the generic name. It is also
learnt that whenever the WHO issues an INN protection letter to the DCGI, it is
communicated to the state drug regulators, the Trade Mark Registry and pharma-
ceutical companies and pharmaceutical associations (Centad, 2006h). Our ﬁeld
study showed that state regulators also forward such communications to the
pharmaceutical companies. As mentioned by the DCGI, no response has been
received on these communications. Hence, there is little information on what
speciﬁc action has been taken by the concerned authorities with regard to the use
of INNs in brand names. There is no formal coordination mechanism between the
DCGI and the trademark ofﬁce with regard to INNs. An administrative mechanism
for better coordination between these ofﬁces should be devised.

The DCGI also urged state regulators to take into account the issue of INNs.
INN was a speciﬁc item on the agenda of the thirty-sixth Drug Consultative
Committee, 2005 meeting between the DCGI and state regulators. No other
organization besides the WHO has sent any communication regarding the mis-
appropriation of an INN to the DCGI. The DCGI has not received any reply to its
communications in this connection to the Trade Marks Registry. Apart from the
action it has taken, the DCGI can do little in view of the inadequate infrastructure
and lack of a speciﬁc mandate (Centad, 2006k).

Perspectives of Major Stakeholders
A questionnaire-based ﬁeld survey was conducted, and formal and informal
interactions were held with the pharmaceutical industry, trademark attorneys, civil

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 95

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

society organizations and pharmacologists to ascertain the perspectives of major
stakeholders on this issue. While most respondents were aware of the objectives of
the INN Programme and that the trademark use of names derived from INNs was
undesirable, they revealed a general lack of understanding about what constitutes
legitimate use of INNs and INN stems. The respondents had different opinions on
the desirability of using INNs in brand names.

People associated with the pharmaceutical industry believe that deriving brand
names from INNs is a worldwide practice (Centad, 2006f). In India, a mark is
coined from the pharmacopoeial name to provide the doctor an indication of the
use of the drug. This strategy is based on the industry’s perception of the doctor as
the customer. Because, in India, a single pharmaceutical substance has many brand
names, it is easier and less expensive to develop brand names derived from INNs
(Centad, 2006g). An initial entrant in the market usually indulges in this practice to
enable doctors to easily recall the drug and subsequent entrants follow suit.
However, the prevalence of a large number of brand names derived from INNs
may discourage a new entrant from using such names and they may wish to develop
unique, stand-alone names (Centad, 2006i). Unlike large companies, small phar-
maceutical companies do not have the capacity to push a unique brand name in the
market (Centad, 2006c). Most INN protection letters have been issued for brands of
small pharmaceutical companies.

It may be easier to make inroads into the monopoly of a brand as soon as it
becomes off-patent by using a part of the generic name in the brand name (Centad,
2006f). In a product patent regime, the patent holder is enabled to build up
the brand loyalty using the patent monopoly. As a result, the new entrant may
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to break the brand loyalty of the customer after expiry of the patent.
This assumes relevance in the future because of the introduction of product patents
in India. To avoid such a situation the patent holder should be required to market
the patented product using only the generic name for the duration of patent
protection.

Responding to the speciﬁc question of whether the practice of using INNs in the
brand name can retard the creation of new INNs using the same stem in future,
some health professionals were of the view that although this can discourage the
creation of new INNs in future, clinically it may not have any signiﬁcant impact. If
a unique brand name is pushed aggressively in the market, it can have better sales
than another brand name that uses part of the INN. In such an event, subsequent
companies launching the same molecule may not bother about selecting names that
are similar to INNs (Centad, 2006j).

Under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945 INNs are required to be written in
bolder letters than the brand name. Hence, there could be no confusion even if the
brand name is derived from a generic name. Moreover, the WHO requests member
states to only prevent trademark registration of INNs. It does not say that a trade
name should not be derived from a generic name. As long as the brand name is not
the exact reproduction of the INN, there should be no objection to it (FDA

96

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

Maharashtra, 2005). The industry holds that by using generic names to coin
brand names instead of a stand-alone one, it actually promotes the use of generic
names, especially because these are more prominently printed on the label (Centad,
2006).

Some representatives of civil society organizations working on health issues
have pointed out that the issue of INNs is at best a peripheral issue in India. If the
objective of INNs is to ensure that there is no confusion regarding the names of
pharmaceutical substances, the use of INN stems may be promoting that objective
rather than violating it (Centad, 2006e). The use of common stems may be a half-
way house to the ultimate goal of marketing and identifying drugs only by their
generic names. Using brand names that are totally unrelated to the INN (e.g. AZ-1
for azithromycin and AZ for albendazole) can create further confusion in a country
such as India, where anarchy prevails in the medicines market due to the prolifera-
tion of brand name drugs, many of which are irrational combination drugs. Using
totally unrelated brand names would help only large pharmaceutical companies
with marketing clout to induce brand name recall among prescribers and end users.
Small- and medium-scale companies will have to spend more money to build up a
unique brand name, which will be reﬂected in even higher prices and probably
eventually wipe them out (Srinivasan, 2006). The practice of deriving brand names
from INNs is resorted to because companies can avoid substantial expenses in
selecting brand names. Therefore, rather than discouraging the use of INNs, it
would be wiser to discourage the use of brand names as such.

On the one hand, it may be argued that deriving brand names from INNs helps
in easily identifying the drug with its molecule and avoids confusion. On the other
hand, the use of INN stems in brand names can lead to confusion within brand
names, particularly in cases where the brand names become more popular than the
generic names. This increases the danger of pharmacists giving the wrong medicine
to patients as two brands derived from the same INN stem may sound and look
alike. It is suggested that if doctors have a brand preference, they should write the
brand name in brackets along with the generic name (Centad, 2006a).

The legal fraternity is aware of the law relating to drug nomenclature in India,
and should be proactive in instilling in their clients a sense of awareness about the
need to respect INNs. Because doctors are regarded by the pharmaceutical industry
as the customers of pharmaceutical products, awareness needs to be generated
among doctors regarding the public health implications of using INNs. Doctors
should also be discouraged from prescribing only by brand name. Medication
errors due to confusion created by INN-derived brand names can make doctors
liable for damages. Thus, there is a necessity to sensitize doctors and medical
students regarding INNs.

Hence, both trademark attorneys and doctors need to be engaged in the
discourse on INNs. Civil society organizations can also help in ensuring effective
implementation of the law and policy relating to the use of generic names including
INNs.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 97

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Conclusions and Suggestions

INNs are unique names that help to identify the complex chemical compositions of
pharmaceutical substances. Common elements in pharmacologically related sub-
stances are reﬂected in INNs through the use of words called stems, which are
mostly sufﬁxes to randomly selected preﬁxes. Thus, the most important part of an
INN is its stem because this helps in establishing a pharmacological relationship
between two substances and in naming new pharmacologically related substances in
the future. While selecting INNs,
it is ensured that these are not similar to
trademarks. Hence, there is a reciprocal necessity for national trademark autho-
rities to ensure that trademarks approved in their country are not derived from
INNs. WHA resolution 46.19 of 1993 exhorts member states to develop legal and
policy regimes to address this need.

Although WHA resolution 46.19 is nonbinding in nature, India has substan-
tially implemented its requirements under section 13(b) of the Trade Marks Act
1999. Nevertheless, no INN has been notiﬁed by the Trade Marks Registry in the
Trade Marks Journal. Presently, an objection to a mark on the ground of its
similarity with an INN can be raised only if the individual examiner is aware of
what INNs are. Very few, if any, examiners are aware of INNs. Even at the
substantive level, the use of INN stems is not prohibited in India.

The INN protection letters issued by WHO show that the organization is
singularly concerned with trademark registration of names derived from INNs.
However, it is not clear whether a part of the INN stem may be used in the brand
name. The WHO-INN Programme does not have an effective monitoring and
reporting mechanism for INNs.

The national drug regulatory authority in India, the DCGI, does not have any
speciﬁc mandate to ensure that brand names are not derived from INNs. Except for
the initial marketing approval, approval for manufacturing and subsequent market-
ing approvals fall within the domain of state regulators. With its insufﬁcient
infrastructure, the DCGI is unable to play more than a persuasive role in this matter.
The pharmaceutical industry in India is of the view that deriving brand names
from parts of generic names is common practice throughout the world. It has been
reasoned that using parts of INN stems does not cause confusion because the Indian
regulations require the generic name to be shown more prominently than the brand
name. It has been argued from a public health perspective that the use of stems in
brand names may help in easy identiﬁcation of the brand with the generic substance.
It may also be cost-effective for small companies to use a brand name having a part of
an INN without having to invest substantially in developing unique brand names.
However, the practice of using INN stems in brand names may lead to confusion as
different drugs with parts of the same INN stem may sound and look alike.

Suggestions
There are gaps in the legal and policy regime on the use and protection of INNs in
India. These gaps are present at various levels—the WHO, the Trade Marks

98

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

Registry, the DCGI and others. On the basis of the ﬁndings of the study, we offer
the following suggestions to address these gaps.

The WHO
 For the effective and transparent implementation of WHA resolution 46.19, a

reporting and monitoring mechanism should be established.

 Because resolution 46.19 is nonbinding,

it would be appropriate to work
towards the development of an international convention on the use and
protection of INNs for pharmaceutical substances. Because there is no auth-
oritative interpretation of WHA resolution 46.19, the development of an inter-
national convention may help to codify the international legal regime for the use
of INNs and make it mandatory in nature. At present, there is little transpar-
ency in the compliance mechanism of the INN Programme. The proposed
convention should also have a mandatory requirement for all member states to
send periodic reports to the WHO informing it about the steps they have taken
to ensure compliance with the international legal regime.

 The use of INNs should be treated as an issue of brand registration rather than
the one concerning trademark registration. Thus, the INN Programme should
focus on the use of brand names derived from INNs rather than focusing only
on trademark registration.

 The rules for the use of INNs in relation to FDCs should be clariﬁed.
 The communications from the WHO to the DCGI do not state the importance
of INNs. Further, there is a lack of clarity on rules relating to the use of INN
stems. The leaﬂet prepared by the WHO for trademark ofﬁces does not make
any mention of discouraging the use of INN stems. Therefore, clear and
effective communication is needed from the WHO to the responsible national
authorities for creating awareness about all issues pertaining to the use of INNs.
 The WHO should informally coordinate with the trademark ofﬁces in India on

this issue.

The Trademark Authorities
 The trademark authorities should notify INNs recommended by the WHO in

the Trade Marks Journal.

 Procedural rules for trademark registration like the Trade Marks Rules in India
should speciﬁcally require an examination of new applications in class 5 to
determine whether they are derived from INNs.

 All applications for registration of trademarks on medicines should disclose the

generic name of the mark applied for.

 The examiners should be imparted training on INNs, especially on its public

health implications.

 The trademarks ofﬁces must respond to communications from the national drug

regulatory authorities on the protection of INNs.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 99

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Drug Regulatory Authorities
 Guidelines on the use of INNs should be developed by the federal drug
regulatory authority in accordance with the requirements of WHA resolution
46.19 and communicated to the state drug regulatory authorities.

 A database of brand names registered throughout the country should be main-

tained on the internet.

 There should be effective coordination with the WHO. Action taken by the drug
regulatory authority in response to WHO letters should be communicated to the
WHO.

 There should be better coordination between the drug regulatory authorities

and the trademarks ofﬁces on the use and protection of INNs.

 There should be capacity building at the level of state drug regulatory authorities.

Other Stakeholders
 There is a need to generate awareness in the pharmaceutical industry on the use

of INNs.

 Pharmaceutical industry should develop guidelines for the use of INNs.
 Medical and legal professionals should be sensitized on this issue.

About the Authors

K. M. Gopakumar is a Research Ofﬁcer at the Centre for Trade and Development,
New Delhi. His research interests include trade and public health, access to
medicines and intellectual property rights.

Nirmalya Syam is a Research Consultant at the Centre for Trade and Development,
New Delhi, and a doctoral scholar at the Centre for International Legal Studies at
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi.

Notes

The authors wish to thank Krisantha Weerasuriya from WHO SEARO, Sunil Nandraj from
the WHO India, Dr Rafaella B. Matavelli from the WHO-INN Programme and Mr Jacob
Robin from Intelvita for their support and comments. The authors also thank the Drugs
Controller General of India and the Trademarks Registry, New Delhi and Mumbai, for their
cooperation.

1 For example, the UK developed the system of BAN and the United States developed the

system known as USAN. BAN is also used as the ofﬁcial name of pharmaceutical
substances in many other countries throughout the world, especially in countries
belonging to the British Commonwealth. BANs are assigned for combination as well as
single-drug preparations. BANs are approved on the basis of applications made by the
inventor or manufacturer of the pharmaceutical substance. All national nomenclature
systems as well as the WHO-INN Programme follow this procedure. The USAN system
is administered by the USAN Council to serve American health professionals by

100

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

selecting simple, informative and unique nonproprietary names for drugs by establishing
logical nomenclature classiﬁcations based on pharmacological or chemical relationships.
Three entities, the AMA, the United States Pharmacopeial Convention (USPC) and the
American Pharmacists Association (APA), sponsor the USAN Council. The USAN
Council works closely with the WHO-INN Programme and various national
nomenclature groups, and aims at global standardization and uniﬁcation of drug
nomenclature and related rules for ensuring that drug information is communicated
accurately and unambiguously to the WHO-INN Programme.

2 Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries Limited v BLTC Research, Case No. D2005-0113, 2005,

WIPO Arbitration and Media Center, Geneva.

3 The term ‘‘branded generic’’ here means products that have brand names using a part of

the company’s name along with the generic name or INN.

4 The CDER is responsible for ensuring the availability of safe and effective drugs in

America.

5 In Re Application by Godecke A.G. [1980] 5(2) IPLR 64.
6 F. Hoffman-la Roche & Co. Ltd v Geoffrey Manner & Co. Pvt. Ltd, MANU/SC/0302/

1969. Parker Knoll Ltd v Knoll International Ltd [1962] RPC 265, 274.

7 SBL Ltd v Himalaya Drug Co. [1997] (17) (DB) PTC 555–8.
8 F. Hoffman-la Roche & Co. Ltd v Geoffrey Manner & Co. Pvt. Ltd, MANU/SC/0302/

1969.

9 SBL Ltd v Himalaya Drug Co. [1997] (17) (DB) PTC 555–8.

10 Griffon Laboratories (P) Ltd v Indian National Drug Co. P. Ltd [1989] 14 IPLR 14.
11 Panacea Biotech Ltd v Recon Ltd [1996] (16) PTC 583.
12 ICI v Cipla [1980] 5 IPLR 90.
13 Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd and others v Government of India and others [1982] 7

IPLR 1.

14 The Annual report 2002–03 of the Trade Marks Registry states that most of the

applications for the preceding year have been received in class 5 for pharmaceutical,
veterinary and sanitary substances (23.86%, a total of 22,462 applications). As per the
Annual report 2001–02, the largest number of applications for registration of trademarks
was received in respect of goods in class 5 (24.42%, a total of 22,036 out of 90,236
applications).

References
American Medical Association Rules for Coining Names [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/print/4769.htmli [Accessed March 2006].

Amin, T. (2006) Commentary on the presentation of a Study on the Use of International

Nonproprietary Names in India by K. M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam at a
workshop organised by Centad, New Delhi, 29 March.

British Approved Names British Approved Names: Guiding Principles [online]. Available at

hhttp://pharmacopoeia.org.uk/guiding.cfmi [Accessed March 2006].

British Approved Names Guidelines for the Construction of Pharmaceutical Trademarks

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.pharmacopoeia.org.uk/trade.cfmi [Accessed
March 2006].

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 101

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Boring, D. (1997) ‘The Development and Adoption of Nonproprietary, Established, and

Proprietary Names for Pharmaceuticals’, Drug Information Journal, 31, 621–34.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006) Interview with Rafaella Balocco Matavelli, INN

Programme Manager, World Health Organization (New Delhi), 25 January.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006a) Interview with B. Ekbal, former Vice-Chancellor,

Kerala University (New Delhi), 7 February.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006b) Interview with Shailamanyu Singh Rathore,

Attorney, Remfry & Sagar (New Delhi), 7 February.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006c) Interview with C.M. Gulhati, Editor,

MIMS-India (New Delhi), 12 February.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006d) Interview with Ruchika Sukh, Associate, K&S

Partners (New Delhi), 12 February.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006e) Interview with Amit Sengupta, Jan Swasthya

Abhiyan (New Delhi), 14 February.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006f) Interview with Gajanan Wakankar, Executive

Director, Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (New Delhi), 23 February.
Centre for Trade and Development (2006g) Interview with Homi Bhaba, Director,

Organization of Pharmaceutical Producers of India (Mumbai), 1 March.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006h) Interview with Rita Teaotia, Joint Secretary,

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India (New Delhi), 2 March.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006i) Interview with Abhay Gandhi, Senior Vice-

President (International Marketing), Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Limited (Mumbai),
2 March.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006j) Interview with Sampada Patvardhan, In Charge,
Drug Information Centre, Maharashtra State Pharmacy Council (Mumbai), 3 March.
Centre for Trade and Development (2006k) Interview with Ashwini Kumar, Drug Controller

General of India (New Delhi), 10 March.

Centre for Trade and Development (2006l) Interview with Gopakumar Nair, former

President, Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (Mumbai), 27 March.

European Council (2001) Council Directive (EC) 2001/83 concerning the Community Code

Relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use [2004] OJ L311/67.

European Medicines Evaluation Agency (2002) Guideline on the Acceptability of Invented

Names for Human Medicinal Products Processed through the Centralised Procedure,
CPMP/328/98, Revision 3.

European Medicines Evaluation Agency (2005) Guideline on the Acceptability of Invented

Names for Human Medicinal Products Processed through the Centralised Procedure,
CPMP/328/98, Revision 4.

Food and Drug Administration Maharashtra (2005) ‘Submissions of Indoco Remedies Ltd.
to the Commissioner, Food & Drug Administration, Maharashtra’, FDA Maharashtra
(mimeo), 14 June.

Gamba, M. E. C. (2006) ‘Intellectual Property in the FTA: Impacts on Pharmaceutical

Spending and Access to Medicines in Colombia’, Mision Salud, Fundacion IFARMA,
Bogota, October.

Government of India (1975) Report of the Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industry,

Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals, New Delhi.

102

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

Government of India (1999) Practice and Procedure Manual for the Administration of the

Trade Marks Act, 1999, Controller General of Patents, Designs, Trade Marks and
Geographical Indications.

Government of India (2002) Annual Report of the Controller General of Patents, Designs,

Trade Marks and Geographical Indications, 2001–02, Government of India Press,
Nashik.

Government of India (2003a) The Interim Report of the Expert Committee on a Comprehensive
Examination of Drug Regulatory Issues, including the Problem of Spurious Drugs, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi.

Government of India (2003b) Annual Report of the Controller General of Patents, Designs,

Trade Marks and Geographical Indications, 2002–03, Government of India Press,
Nashik.

Government of India (2005a) Recommendations of the Task Force constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Proneb Sen to explore issues other than Price Control to make
available Life-saving Drugs at Reasonable Prices, New Delhi.

Government of India (2005b) Draft National Pharmaceutical Policy, Department of

Chemicals and Fertilizers, New Delhi.

Health Action International (2004) HAI News: The Newsletter of Health Action

International, July–September, 15.

Indian Drug Review (2005) November–December. The data given in the table in the text is
collated from reviews of various drugs approved for marketing that have been published
in that issue.

Knaus, H. (1992) Rx for the Third World [online]. Available at hhttp://

multinationalmonitor.org/hyper/issues/1992/05/mm0592_07.htmli [Accessed
December 2007].

Matavelli, R. B. (2006) Statement by Rafaella Balocco Matavelli (personal email

correspondence), 24 April.

Narayanan, P. (2004) Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off, 6th edition. Eastern Law House,

Kolkata.

Phadke, A. (2005) ‘Proﬁteering in the Pharmaceutical Sector’, InfoChange News & Features

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.infochangeindia.org/analysis78.jspi [Accessed
July].

Piribo (2005) Indian Pharmaceutical Industry: Issues and Opportunities [online]. Available at

hhttp://www.piribo.com/publications/country/indian_pharma_issues.htmli [Accessed
March 2006].

Red Colombiana de Acci ´on frente al Libre Comercio y el ALCA (2007) ‘There’s no Right to
Health in the FTA’, The Truth about the Colombian FTA, Colombian Action Network in
Response to Free Trade and FTAA, 15 June [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.recalca.org.coi [Accessed December].

Srinivasan, S. (2006) Statement by S. Srinivasan (personal email correspondence), 2 April.
Thompson, F. (2001) ‘Where Do Generic and Brand Names Come From?’, The

Pharmaceutical Journal [online], 267 (7161), 223–24. Available at hhttp://
www.pjonline.com/Editorial/20010818/news/news_brandnames.htmli [Accessed March
2006].

UK Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (2006) Manual of Trade Marks Practice [online]. Available at

hhttp://www.ipo.gov.uk/tmmanual-chap3-exam.pdfi [Accessed March 2008].

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 103

Kappoori M. Gopakumar and Nirmalya Syam

International Nonproprietary Names and Trademarks

World Health Organization (1946) Constitution of the World Health Organization [online].
Available at hhttp://www.who.int/governance/eb/who_constitution_en.pdfi [Accessed
March 2008].

World Health Organization (1955) ‘Procedure for the Selection of Recommended

International Nonproprietary Names for Pharmaceutical Substances’, Text adopted by
Executive Board of WHO in Resolution EB 15.R7, 1955 and amended by Resolution EB
43.R9, 1969.

World Health Organization (1993) ‘Nonproprietary Names for Pharmaceutical Substances’,

Resolution 46.19 of the World Health Assembly, 12 May, Geneva.

World Health Organization (1997) Guidelines on the Use of International Nonproprietary

Names for Pharmaceutical Substances. World Health Organization, Geneva.

World Health Organization (2004a) The Use of Stems in the Selection of International
Nonproprietary Names (INN) for Pharmaceutical Substances, WHO/EDM/QSM/
2004.5, World Health Organization, Geneva.

World Health Organization (2004b) List of Ofﬁcial Stems [online]. Available at hhttp://

whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2004/WHO_EDM_QSM_2004.5.pdfi [Accessed January 2006].

World Health Organization (1997) Guidelines on the Use of International Nonproprietary

Names (INNs) for Pharmaceutical Substances [online]. Available at hhttp://
whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1997/WHO_PHARM_S_NORM_1570.pdfi [Accessed February
2006].

World Intellectual Property Organization (2001) Report of the Second WIPO Internet Domain
Name Process [online]. Available at hhttp://arbiter.wipo.int/processes/processes2/report/
html/report.htmli [Accessed June 2006].

World Intellectual Property Organization (2004) ‘Second Special Session on the Report of the
Second WIPO Internet Domain Name Process’ of the ‘Standing Committee on the Law
of Trademarks, Industrial designs and Geographical Indications’, World Intellectual
Property Organization, Geneva.

104

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 
