Net Law 

A Cyberspace Agenda for  Publishers: NETLAW FIVE 

Charles CLARK* 

PREFACE 

“We had  to understand where business was going and how we could play a vital role. We 
had to learn, adapt and be open to new ideas. We  set out to build a 747 in mid-air while 
piloting a DCIO; we couldn’t stop or refuel, we couldn’t deviate off course. We had to run 
a business while we built a new one.” 
Many publishers will recognise, with some wryness, that analogy recently made by 
Ms  Coccoli Palsho, President of Dow Jones  Interactive Publishing, on moving from 
print-on-paper  to  digital publishing.  And  that  quite  remarkable feat  has  had  to  be 
accomplished in unprecedentedly fast time.  The overall context, often quoted, is that 
ra&o took thirty-seven years to reach its first 50 d i o n  listeners. TV took fifteen years 
to reach the same target. The World Wide Web took just three years. Internet use keeps 
growing at an astonishing annual rate of approximately 45 percent.  Accordmg to the 
most recent annual survey from Network Wizards, about 43 million machines are now 
connected to the Internet. 

The available statistics increasingly suggest that growth is becoming global, and no 

longer confined to the United States and Europe. Some recent reports inhcate: 

- 

- 

China will become one of the world’s largest Internet markets as early as 2003. 
China is already the fastest growing Net market in Asia, with the number of 
online users expected to reach 6.7 million by the end of 1999. 
In  Australia,  the penetration  of the  Internet  continues  to  grow; almost  1.3 
million, or 18 percent, of households had Internet access in early 1999. 

-  Even in Arabia, nearly 1 million people now have Internet access. 
This  fifth version  of NETLAW has  been  drafted at a time  of enormous  and still- 

London; General Counsel, International Publishers Copyright Council, London, U.K. 

increasing concentration  by  very many  national, regional and international  bodies- 
both  business  and  governmental-on 

the  place  of intellectual property  rights  in  the 
*  Copyright Adviser to The Publishers Association, London and to the  Federation of European  Publishers, 
Warmest thanks are due to Lex Lefebvre of the International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical 
Publishers (STM), Benoit Mtiller of the International Publishers Association (IPA) and Anne Bergman-Tahon of the 
Federation of European Publishers (FEP) for their thoughtful  support and input (including much documentation) 
throughout the drafts of NETLAW; to Richard Swetenham of DG-XIII whose Quick Links and LABNEWS services 
have provided essential news terms; and finally and firstly, to Marian Donne of The Publishers Association, without 
whose tireless, constant and most generous help NETLAW FIVE would never have been finished! 

A list of contents can be found at the end of &s  article. 

98 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

evolution of the digital, global society. For example, the drafting immediately follows 
the major International Conference on Electronic Commerce and Intellectual Property 
held by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in Geneva.’ 

The prime aim  of NETLAW is  to promote  security of investment and trading by 
publishers through recognition of copyright as the tradmg system for works of the mind. 
Only through such recognition can publishers invest with  confidence in value-added 
information services and  then  deliver them  to the  benefit  of users  with  all  kinds  of 
interests.2 

SECTION ONE: The Latest  Standards for Copyright 
A. 
1. 

IMPLEMENTING THE WIPO AGENDA 
INTRODUCTION 

The adoption by  the  European Commission on 10 December  1997 of the  draft 
Directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the 
Information Society was an important event in the evolution of the copyright system in 
the  new  hgital  world.  The  overall aim  of the  draft  Directive  is  given  early in  the 
Explanatory  Memorandum  which  accompanies  the  draft-“to 
present  harmonising 
measures in  order to  bring about  a  coherent  and favourable environment for  creativity  and 
investment  in the framework  of  the Internal  Market.”  The emphasis of that language on a 
coherent and favourable environment for creativity and investment is most welcome to 
authors and publishers, and should be used by them as a measure against whch to judge 
the detailed provisions of the  draft Directive, as  the text  comes now, as  an Amended 
Proposal, under detailed scrutiny in the Council of Ministers. 

The Explanatory Memorandum also sees the draft Directive as implementation of 
a significant number of the new international obligations in the two new WIPO Treaties, 
the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty: “The 
proposal implements and integrates the obligations under the new WIPO Treaties in the 
light of the acquis communautaire and of the needs of the Internal Market.” 

For publishers, there are four key sets of provisions in the WIPO Copyright Treaty: 
-  the right of reproduction; 
- 

the right of communication to the public; 
the right of distribution; and 

- 
-  obligations  concerning  technological  measures  and  rights-management 

information. 

from 14 to  16 September 1999. It is frequently referred to in this article. 

1  The WIPO International  Conference on Electronic  Commerce and  Intellectual Property, held  in Geneva 
2  For  NETLAW FIVE, apart from  a heavy amount  of general updating  (even although  NETLAW FOUR was 
published only in May 1999). the former Section Two, Liability in  Cyberspace, has been incorporated into Section 
Four,  Towards  Global Electronic Commerce. The former  Section Three becomes  Section Two, and  a  new Section 
Three has been added to reflect the changing perspectives of the leaders of collective management of rights, as the 
collecting societies explore their potential roles in the digital world. 

NET LAW 

99 

This fifth version  of NETLAW 

is  offered as  the draft Directive  moves,  following a 
First  Reading in the European  Parliament,  to  the  Council of  Ministers,  with  a  text 
revised by the Commission in the light of Amendments  approved by a Plenary  Session 
of Parliament  on 10 February  1999. In the detail which follows, the text of the fourth 
version  of  NETLAW has  been  updated  to  reflect  the  latest  representations  by  the 
Federation  of European Publishers and the Rightholders  Coalition  to  the Council  of 
Ministers Working Party. 

The  emphasis  in  the  Exploratory  Memorandum  on  acquis  commirnautaire  is 
important.  A Communication from DG-xv  of November 1996 specifically stated with 
respect to the reproduction right: 

“ ... the guiding principles  can  be  derived  &om the  acquis  communautaire. Accordmgly, the 
right  of reproduction should be adapted to the digital environment. In more cases than  at 
present,  therefore,  rightholders may  enjoy,  without  limitation,  the  exclusive  right  to 
authorise or prohibit acts of reproduction.” 

2.  FROM COPYRIGHT  TO CONTRACT 

It is this very welcome perception  that digital is indeed different which lies behind 
the  equally  welcome  emphasis  on  contractual  solutions.  In  relation  both  to  the 
reproduction  right  and  to  the  communication  to  the  public  right,  the  Explanatory 
Memorandum shifts the  focus  of attention  away  from  the  bundle  of limitations  and 
exceptions which  has  developed  over many years in the print-on-paper  environment 
towards contractual licensing solutions. As to reproduction, the Memorandum states: 

“ ... with  respect  to  the  use  of  digtized  material  by  libraries,  online  as  well  as  offline, 
initiatives are ongoing in a number of Member States, notably the United Kingdom, where 
library privileges are most developed, to arrive at more flexible contractual solutions.” 
As to communication, the Memorandum states: 
“In view of the significant economic importance of the use of dgitized works by libraries and 
equivalent bodies and their users, a number of ‘library initiatives’ are being undertaken, with 
a view to arriving at new solutions involving licences based on contracts. Their aim is to ensure 
adequate control and a fair economic return to the rightholders involved, while enabling 
users of protected material, such as non-profit libraries, to provide their information services 
even more efficiently and at affordable cost. First results appear to be promising, as it seems 
that it is possible to arrive at mutually satisfactory solutions for all parties involved, including 
libraries.” (emphasis added). 

The United  Kingdom,  as  indxated  by  the  Commission,  is  leading  the  way  in 
Europe  in  developing  “flexible  contractual  solutions”,  especially between  publishers 
and librarians. It may be helpful to remind ourselves that although we tend to talk about 
libraries in general, there  are at least four different library sectors and each has its own 
agenda: 
- 
- 

national libraries, whose agenda is driven by deposit and archive issues; 
libraries in  higher  education  institutions  (HEIS), whose  agenda  is  dnven by 

100 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

- 

- 

teaching,  learning  and  research,  and  covers  collective  licensing,  the 
authorisation of course packs etc., for the academic and student body; 
public libraries, whose main concern is access by their members, the public, to 
information and knowledge; 
libraries in the for-profit R&D-driven industries, for whom privacy over what 
information they are accessing is  seen as  critical in their highly competitive 
environment. 

The Publishers Association (PA) has taken the lead in establishing working groups 
with  the Joint  Information  Systems Committee  (JIsc), a  grouping  of senior higher 
education academics and librarians, which has led to two major documents: 

- 

- 

A  Framework for  Material  Supplied  in  Electronic  Form-basically, 
higher education site licensing; and 
Guidelines for Fair Dealing in the Electronic Environment. 

a  model  for 

That PA/JIsc model has recently been developed into four sets of model licences 

by John Cox Associates on behalf of a group of senior subscription agencies: 

for academic single institutions; and 

-  for public libraries; 
-  for academic consortia; 
- 
-  for corporate uses. 
Outside the United  Kingdom in Europe, the Netherlands has made a similar and 
important initiative, noted in a joint Press Release of 9 July 1998 from the Scientific and 
Professional Publishers of the Dutch Publishers Association and Innovation Scientific 
Information Supply. The Release reads in part: 

“The commercial publishers of professional and scientific information (‘publishers’) and the 
scientific education and research institutions (‘institutions’) aim to provide, each from their 
own  perspective,  authorised  users  (as  defined  in  the  licence)  with  wide-ranging  and 
unrestricted access to information. The institutions and publishers wish to work  together 
and have fiuitfd negotiations to realise a better service to students, lecturers and researchers 
on a sound economic basis for both parties. 
The  transition  period  &om  a  ‘print  environment’  to  electronic  information  requires 
considerable investments of both publishers and institutions. 
The institutions recognise that  payment  is  required  for information  that  is published by 
commercial publishers, because they have to receive reasonable remuneration for the value 
they add to the information and to cover the costs they thereby incur. Both publishers and 
institutions aim to draw up licensing condtions and price models that on the one hand meet 
the need for publishers to operate on a sound commercial basis, while on the other hand 
conforming with what the institutions are able to afford within reason.” 

These  initiatives  are  strongly  encouraged  by  two European  Parliament  First 
Readmg Amendments at Recitals 28 and 29  bis,  both  of which are part  of the  draft 
Directive in  Amended Proposal form, presented to  the  Council, and dated  21 May 
1999. Recital 28 concerns the interests of non-profit-malung libraries; the First Reading 
Amendment 21 to the Recital reads: 

NET  LAW 

101 

“. . . whereas, therefore, specific contracts or licences should be  promoted which, without 
creating imbalances, favour such establishments and the disseminative purposes they serve.” 
Recital  29bis  is  new,  and  follows  Recital  29  which  concerns  the  scope  of 

exceptions. Recital 29bis, as First Reading Amendment 24, reads: 

“. . . whereas the exceptions referred  to in Article  5(2) and  (3) must not, however, prevent 
the definition of contractual relations designed to ensure fair compensation for the holders 
of copyright and related rights.” 

The above initiatives,  encouraged by  the Parliament  and the Commission  of the 
European Union, represent  important,  constructive bridge-building  at a time when a 
debate  on contracting  is  spreading  from  the  United  States. One overall  context  has 
recently been offered by Professor Gail Evans, an Australian academic: 

“The advent of information licensing signals a  dramatic transformation in the ordering of 
information in our society. Since the age of the printing press, the law of copyright, a system 
of granting statutory monopolies for sufficiently innovative works, has  been  the primary 
form of legal protection  accorded to information. However, the ascendancy  of contract 
over copyright is  a  reflection of information as  the most  valuable  economic unit.  In the 
information age, there is every indication that the legal ordering concept of contract is being 
used to sustain a society based on the commodification of information.” 
Professor  Evans  is  clearly  aiming  at  the possible  development  of possibly  unfair 
licensing practices which may possibly in the global economy require transnational user 
and consumer protection. Possible and possibly are stressed here, but publishers should be 
aware that in Europe the debate has begun.3 

The  main  features,  for  publishers’  interests,  of  the  Amended  Proposal  for  a 
Directive on Copyright and Related Rights in the Information Society, currently being 
debated in the Council Working Party will now be reviewed. 

3.  REPRODUCTION  RIGHT 

Article  2  of the Amended  Proposal  provides  that  Member  States shall  grant  to 
authors  “the exclusive right  to authorise or prohibit  drect or indirect,  temporary  or 
permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or in part.”  This text 
is close to that proposed in the Chairman’s draft text for the Diplomatic Conference in 
Geneva in December  1996: “drect and indirect  reproduction,  whether  permanent  or 
temporary, in any manner or form”. That formula was not adopted by the Conference, 
so  that  the  re-assertion  by  the  Commission  of  the  wide  scope  of  the  right  of 
reproduction,  especially in relation  to acts  of digital reproduction,  in Article  9 of the 
Berne Convention is welcome. 

3  Recent relevant publications are: Legal Licensing or Contested Copyright by David Nimmer at the IMPRIMATUR 
F o m  in June 1999 in London; and  Code as Code by Professor Bernt Hugenholz of the Institute for Information 
Law, University of Amsterdam, presented at the September 1999 meeting ofthe Legal Advisory Board of DG-xu; 
finally, the International Coalition of Library Consortia issued in April 1999 an important set of draft Guidelinesfor 
Technical Issuesfor  Contract Negoh’ationz. 

102 

THE  

4.  COMMUNICATION TO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-INCLUDING 

THE RIGHT OF MAKING 

AVAILABLE  WORKS OR OTHER SUBJECT-MATTER 

As  the Explanatory  Memorandum  notes: “In economic terms,  the interactive on- 
demand  transmission  is  a  new  form  of  exploitation  of  intellectual  property.”  The 
recognition of that phenomenon and the consequent fashioning of the new generalised 
Communication  to the Public Right in the WIPO Copyright Treaty may well be seen 
as the major achievement ofthe Diplomatic Conference. The text ofArticle 3.1 follows 
tlosely Article 8 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty. Article 8 reads: 

“1.  Member States shall provide authors with an exclusive right to authorise or prohibit 
any communication to the public of the originals and copies of their works, by  wire 
or wireless means, including the making available to the public of their works in such 
a  way  that  membee  of  the  public  may  access  them  &om a  place  and  at  a  time 
individually chosen by  them.” 

The  text  seems  to  recognise  that  individual  users  accessing data  from  different 
places at different times  constitute  “the public”.  However,  there is  some ambivalence 
throughout  the Explanatory Memorandum  and the Considerunts clauses concerning the 
publidprivate issue. 

Article 3.3 restates, in effect, the Community case-law that the provision of services 
does  not  give  rise  to  exhaustion  of  rights.  Thus,  as  the  Explanatory  Memorandum 
correctly asserts: 

‘ I . .   . the communication to the public of a work or other subject-matter, whether by wire or 
by  wireless means, is an act which can be repeated an unlimited number of times and will 
always require authorisation, within the limits set out by  the law.” 

A new Article 3.4 states: 
“The mere provision of physical facilities for enabling or making a communication does not 
in  itself  amount  to  an  act  of  communication to  the  public  within  the  meaning  of this 
Article.” 
The wording  of this Amendment  shadows the wording of an “Agreed  Statement 
Concerning Article 8” of the WIPO Copyright Treaty which  emerged from the WIPO 
Diplomatic Conference of December  1996. 

5.  EXCEPTIONS TO THE RESTRICTED ACTS OF REPRODUCTION  AND OF 

COMMUNICATION TO THE PUBLIC 

The Commentary  on Article 5, which  deals with  exceptions to the restricted  acts 
of reproduction,  of communication  to the public and of dstribution, makes the very 
important point that Article 5 sets out a list ofpermitted exceptions which is exhaustive: 
‘‘Member States  will  not  be  allowed  to provide for  any  exceptions  other  than  those  enumerated.” 
(emphasis added). 

NET  LAW 

103 

To what extent Member States would need to revise their present laws to eliminate 
any limitations/exceptions  which lay outside  the listing of Article  5 is a matter which 
will need careful study in the months ahead. There are certainly major problems for the 
United  Kingdom  in  Article  5.  Chapter  111  of the  U.K.  Act  of  1988 sets  out  “Acts 
Permitted in Relation to Copyright Works”, and runs from Section 28 to Section 76! 
A Note from the German Presidency, dated 30 June 1999, reflects in great detail 
the discussion on Article 5 during its Presidency, which, indeed, ended on 30 June 1999. 
It is clear from the Note that the Council Working Party is, as the Finnish Presidency 
gets into its stride, far away from consensus. Indeed, there is a clear indication in a draft 
for a new Article 5.3(k) that the search for harmonisation may be effectively abandoned. 
The draft of that Article reads: 

“Use  in  certain  other  cases  of  minor  importance where  exceptions already  exist  under 
national law  provided that  they  only  concern analogue  uses  and  do  not  affect the  free 
circulation  of  goods  and  services  within  the  Community,  without  prejudice  to  the 
exceptions and limitations contained in this Article.” 
One exception to the right of reproduction is mandatory: 

(a)  Article  5.1-Temporary  Acts $Reproduction 

“Temporary acts of reproduction referred to in Article 2, such as transient and incidental acts 
of reproduction which are an integral and essential part of a technological process, including 
those which facilitate effective functioning of a transmission system, whose sole purpose is 
to enable use to be made of a work or other subject-matter, and which have no independent 
economic si&icance, 
Firstly, the new language,  “such as”, has  the  effect of broadening  the exception 
when it needs to be, in the interests of rightholders,  as  narrow as possible. Secondly, a 
comma needs to be inserted after the phrase “incidental acts of reproduction” and before 
the  following  phrase  “which  are  an  integral  and  essential part”.  The word  “which” 
qualifies temporary acts of reproduction. 

shall be exempted fiom the right set out in Article 2.” 

The  failure  by  the  Commission  to  incorporate  the  wording  proposed  by  the 
uses must be authorised by the rightholders  or 
Parliament  on Amendment  33-“such 
permitted by law”-leaves 
a major issue unresolved.  There is all the difference in the 
world between  stating here that certain  acts of copying are not acts of copying (when 
the act of copying is the basic act protected by copyright) and the approach of the draft 
Directive on E-Commerce  (see Section Four, 3, below). Recognising  that a copy is a 
copy is a copy, the E-Commerce  Directive states that there is liability, but then sets up 
watertight defences for transient  acts of copying carried out in the course of provihng 
a copy to a lawful user. 

The new wording includes a new phrase: “including those which facilitate effective 
functioning of transmission systems.” This language appears to exempt all acts of caching 
fi-om the  scope  of the  right  of reproduction.  This  view  is  supported  by  Recital  23, 
which reads: 

104 

THE  

“Whereas the  exclusive right of reproduction should  be  subject  to an exception to allow 
certain acts of temporary reproduction, such as transient and incidental reproductions, forming an 
integral part ofand essential  to a technological process carried out for the sole purpose of enabling 
the use  .fa  work  or other protected subject-matter, and which have no separate economic 
value on their own; whereas under these conditions this exception should include acts of 
caching or browsing.” (emphasis added). 
There is, however, a hstinction between transient copies that make a transmission 
feasible and transient  copies which facilitate.  And the new Explanatory  Memorandum 
seems to confine the  exception to copies which  make  the transmission  feasible. The 
relevant  sentence reads:  “At  the  same  time,  it  is  now  explicitly  confirmed  that  this 
condition is also &lfilled by those copies that make the transmission feasible.” 

is the essence of caching-is 

As Darrell Panethiere has explained in his comprehensive article: 
“This issue of  caching, which is  much in  the news, provides  a useful  example of a policy 
argument being advanced in the guise of an alleged technical issue. It is often said that the 
copying of complete works on the hard drive of a computer to facilitate the later retrieval 
technically necessary to the operation 
of those works-which 
of the Internet. This is  not really the case. The Internet operated for years before caching 
was  introduced as  a  measure  to  improve efficiency  and speed  of operation.  Caching is 
simply  an  extremely efficient  means  of  creating a  digital  warehouse of copies  (with or 
without authorisation) in order to avoid  the trouble of having  to go back  to  the source 
whenever retrieval is desired. 
It is  always, of course, more quick and efficient from the copier’s point of view simply to 
copy  the works  of others than to  obtain permission  in  advance to  do  so.  Caching only 
presents a question of degree-a policy issue-as  to whether this new, additional form of 
copying  should  be  allowed  free  of existing liability  for the  copier. Caching presents no 
question of ‘technical ability to control copying’, even though it is  universally presented as 
such an issue.”4 

There must be some question mark over the extension of this exception at Article 

5.1 to all acts of caching.5 

The major  unresolved  issue of whether the uses  which  follow the  definition  of 
“temporary acts”  in Article  5.1 should be uses authorised by the rightholders  requires 
in-depth  analysis by the Council Working Party of the relationship between Articles 2 
and 5.1. Not once, but twice in Article 5.1 back-reference  is made to Article 2, where 
the right of reproduction is defined as an “exclusive right to authorise . . . reproduction.” 
It is  arguable, therefore, that the exemption of Article 5.1 is,  on the present  worchng 
itself, only exercisable in relation to reproductions authorised by authors of their works. 

(b)  Article  5.2 

Member States may provide for limitations  to the exclusive right  of reproduction 

provided for in Article 2 in the following cases: 

“5.2(a). In respect of reproductions on paper or any similar medium, with the exception of 

4  T h e  Basisfor  Copyright Iflfringement  Liability, 13 E.I.P.R., London, 1997. 
5  For a f d  analysis of caching, see Professor Bernt Hugenholz, the Legal Report fo the DIPPER Project. 

NET LAW 

105 

musical works in published form, effected for the use of any kind of photographic technique 
or by some other process having similar effects, provided that the rightholders receive fair 
compensation.’’ 
The Federation of European  Publishers  (FEP) has welcomed  the addtion by  the 
Commission, following the European Parliament, of the condition of fair compensation 
for reprography. Most EU Member States have reprographic regimes which provide for 
compensation for the rightholders, i.e. authors and publishers.  It is therefore important 
that the Copyright Directive recognises the situation. 

“5.2(c).  In  respect  of  specific  acts  of  reproduction made  for  archiving or  conservation 
purposes, by  establishments which are not for direct or indirect economic or commercial 
advantage, such as, in particular, libraries and archives and other teaching, educational or 
cultural establishments.” 
This  exception,  basically  for  libraries,  has  been  too  widely  expanded.  The 
broadening  of  the  list  of  exempted  establishments  now  includes  virtually  all 
establishments. 

O n  the other side, the FEP has welcomed the definition of the acts allowed by non- 
profit establishments  which  can  only  be  for archiving  or conservation  purposes.  The 
exception,  publishers  must  maintain,  is  to  the  right  of  reproduction,  not  to  the 
communication  to  the  public  right.  The  original  Explanatory  Memorandum  states 
clearly: 

“This exception does not apply to the communication to the public  right. In view  of the 
economic impact at stake, a statutory exemption for such uses would not be justified. Thus, 
for instance, the making available of a work or related  subject-matter  by  a library, or an 
equivalent institution, from a server to users online should and would require a licence of 
the rightholder or hs intermediary, and would not fall within a permitted exception. Any 
other solution would severely risk conflicting with the international obligations which have 
been  reinforced by  the  two new  WIPO Treaties, i.e.  with  the  normal exploitation of 
protected  material  onhe, and  would  unreasonably  prejudice  the  legitimate  interests  of 
rightholders. For instance, the communication of copyright protected material by a library, 
or its making available via a library home-page, will in many cases be in competition with 
commercial online deliveries of material (whether library, audio-visual  or other protected 
subject-matter) .” 

(c)  Article 5.3 

Member States may provide for limitations to the exclusive right of reproduction 

provided for in Articles 2 and 3 in the following cases: 

“5.3(a). Use for the sole purpose of illustration for teaching and scientific research, as long as 
the source is indicated, and to the extent justified by  the non-commercial purpose to be 
achieved, on condition that the rightholders receive fair compensation.” 
The  FEP has  welcomed  the  introduction  by  the  Commission,  following  the 
European Parliament, of the notion of fair compensation, as it considers that the cost of 
social, educational and research policies ought to be assumed by society as a whole and 

106 

THE  

not  only by  rightholders.  In  addition,  the  FEP has  urged  the  Council  to  limit  this 
exception to short excerpts to eliminate the uncertainty over the word “illustration”. 
“5.3(b). Uses  for the benefit  of people with  a  disability, which are directly related  to the 
disability  and  of  a  non-commercial  nature, and  to  the  extent  required  by  the  specific 
disability.” 

This provision is now very widely drafted, moving from a provision for the benefit 
of the blind and partially sighted to the benefit of people with a msability. This should, 
it is  suggested, be  resisted unless a very clear justification  can be  proved  by  Member 
governments.  In  relation  to  the  partially  sighted,  it  must  also  be  remembered  that 
commercial publishers provide  a  service  of publishing  large-print  eltions, and  this 
should not be  put  at  risk.  The FEP has  entered  into  an  exchange  of views with  the 
European Blind Union. 

(d)  Avtide 5.4 

The exceptions and limitations provided for in paragraphs 2.2.3 and 3a  shall only 
be applied to certain specific cases, and shall not be interpreted in such a way as to allow 
their application to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the rightholders’ 
legitimate interests or  conflicts with  the  normal  exploitation  of their  works  or other 
subj ect-matter. 

The incorporation ofthe three-step test from the Berne Convention, which is now 
applied to all limitations and exceptions in Article 10 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty, is 
welcome.  The use  of the word  “specific” instead of the Berne wording  “special” is, 
however,  unacceptable,  and  must  be  changed  through  the  Council  of  Ministers 
Working  Group.  Further,  Article  9(2)  of  the  Berne  Convention  sets  out  three 
cumulative tests. Not only does the draft Directive get the sequence out of order, but it 
seems to replace the cumulative test with optional tests. These are not trivial drafting 
points. They go to the whole effectiveness of Article 5.4. 

Technical measures are the principal means by which rightholders will protect their 
works and license their  delivery in the digital environment.  It is  essential that the use 
and  protection  of these measures not be  questioned  by  the existence of exceptions. 
Otherwise  a wide range of circumventing  equipment could be manufactured and put 
on the market, under the excuse that it is used for an exception, but without any control 
as to by whom and for what purposes it is used in reality. This would inevitably lead to 
excess. 

The FEP has, therefore,  supported  the  amendment  of the European Parliament, 

a d l n g  to Article 5.4 the following provision: 

“These exceptions and limitations must  not prevent  the use  of technical means  to protect 
works  with  the  aim  of  safeguarding the  interests of  the  rightholders  nor  prejudice  the 
protection of these means as referred to in Article 6.” 

NET LAW 

107 

6.  PROTECTION OF TECHNOLOGICAL MEASURES  AND RIGHTS-MANAGEMENT 

INFORMATION 

Articles  6 and 7 of the draft Directive derive from Articles  11 and 12 of the WIPO 
Copyright  Treaty.  Article  11  requires  contracting  parties,  broadly,  to  provide  legal 
protection  and  legal  remedies  against  the  circumvention  of  technological  measures 
which restrict acts which are not authorised by authors or permitted by law. Article 12 
requires  contracting  parties,  again  broadly,  to  provide  legal  protection  and  legal 
remehes  against  the  removal  or  alteration  of  any  electronic  rights-management 
information without authority. 

(a)  Article  6 

as to technical measures 

T h e  Amended Proposal text of Article 6 now reads as follows: 
“Article &Obligations 
1.  Member  States shall  provide  adequate legal  protection  agamst  the  circumvention 
without  authority  of  any  effective technological measures designed to protect  any 
copyright or any rights related to copyright as provided by law or the sui generis right 
provided for in Chapter III  of European Parliament and Council Directive 96/9/EC, 
which the person concerned carries out in the knowledge, or with reasonable grounds 
to know that he or she pursues that objective. 
Member States shall provide adequate legal protection against any activities, including 
the manufacture or distribution of devices, products or components or the provision 
of services, carried out without authority, which: 
(a)  are promoted, advertised or marketed for the purpose of circumvention; or 
(b)  have only a commercially significant purpose or use other than to circumvent; or 
(c)  are  primarily  designed, produced,  adapted  or  performed  for  the  purpose  of 
enabling or facilitating the circumvention of any technologd measures designed 
to protect any copyright or any right related to copyright as provided by law or 
the  sui  gerzeris  right  provided  for  in  Chapter  III  of European  Parliament  and 
Council Directive 96/9/EC. 

2. 

2(a) 

The expression ‘effective technologcal measures’, as used in this Article, means any 
technology, device or component  that,  in  the  ordinary course  of its operation, is 
designed to prevent or inhibit the infkingement of any copyright or any rights related 
to copyright as provided by law or the suigeneris  right provided for in Chapter III of 
Directive 96/9/EC. 
Technological measures shall be deemed ‘effective’ where the  access to or use  of a 
protected work or other subject-matter is controlled through application of an access 
code or any other type of protection process which achieves the protection objective 
in an  operational and reliable manner  with  the authority  of the rightholders. Such 
measures may include decryption, de-scrambling or other transformation of the work 
or other subject-matter.” 

The Rightholders Coalition comments: 
“Article  6  of  the  origmal  proposal  was  flawed  in  two  respects.  First,  it  did  not  cover 
‘components’ of equipment, thereby allowing a wide range of ‘hacking’ equipment to be 
manufactured  and  marketed.  Second,  it  was  limited  to  measures  that  rendered  works 

108 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

accessible, thereby omitting many copy-protection measures. The European Parliament has 
adopted  amendments  (49  to  54)  correcting  these  flaws.  The  Rightholders  Coalition 
supports these amendments, and welcomes the fact that the Commission has included them 
in its amended proposal. 
However,  the Rightholders  Coalition  notes that the  Commission’s text on Article 6 also 
leaves an ambiguity on the relation between technical measures and exceptions. h c l e  6 
protects technical measures only in so far as they ‘prevent an infringement’. This could mean 
that  every  time  there  is  an  exception,  technical measures would  not  be  protected  and 
circumvention would be authorised. As  explained above, this would allow circumventing 
equipment  to  be  put  on the  market  without  any control  of its real use,  and  exceptions 
should be  accommodated in alternative ways.  We therefore support  the  wording  of the 
European  Parliament, stating that  technical measures are protected  when they  ‘protect a 
copyright or a neighboring right’. 
Finally, the Rightholders  Coalition  notes that the Commission’s text on Article 6 gives a 
definition of effective technical measures that is totally new to the Directive: according to 
the new proposal, technical measures shall be deemed ‘effective’ where the access or use of 
the protected work  , . . is controlled through application of an access code or any other type 
of protection process ‘which achieves the protection objective in an operational and reliable 
manner  with  the  authority  of  the  rightholders.’ The  term  ‘reliable’ is  widely  open  to 
criticism, since it means that technical measures that are not reliable would not be protected. 
Who will decide, how and on which  criteria, that  technical measures are  reliable? What 
about the fact that virtually anyone could demonstrate that a technical measure, even if it is 
effective, might not be ‘reliable’ and thus not protected? 
As a result, we ask for the deletion of the word ‘reliable’,’’ 
To those comments fi-om the Rightholders Coalition we might add that there is 
increasing concern over the effect of the word “effective” (if one might so put it). The 
word appears at Article 6.1 and 6.2. Similarly, “without authority” at Article 6.1 and 6.2 
has also been queried. To whose “authority” are these references made? There is fairly 
common ground on the structure of Article 6. The devil lies, as always, in the detail. 

(b)  Article 7 

The Amended Proposal text of Article 7 now reads as follows: 
“Article 7-Obligations 
1. 

concerning rights-management information 

Member  States  shall  provide  for  adequate  legal  protection  against  any  person 
performing without authority any of the following acts: 
(a)  the removal or alteration of any electronic rights-management infomiation; 
(b) the  distribution,  importation  for  distribution,  broadcasting, communication  or 
making  available  to  the  public,  of  copies  of  works  or  other  subject-matter 
protected  under  this Directive  or under Chapter  111  of Directive  96/9/EC  from 
which  electronic  rights-management information  has  been  removed  or  altered 
without authority. 
If such person knows, or has reasonable grounds to know,  that by so doing he is 
inducing,  enabling or facilitating an infringement of any copyright or any  rights 
related to copyright as provided by law, or of the sui generis right provided for in 
Chapter 111 of Directive 96/9/EC. 

The expression ‘rights-management information’, as  used  in this Article, means  any 
information  provided  by  rightholders which  identifies the  work  or  other  subject- 

2. 

NET LAW 

109 

matter referred to in this Directive or covered by the sui generis right provided for in 
Chapter III of Directive 96/9/EC, the author or any other rightholder, or infomution 
about the terms and conditions of use  of the work or other subject-matter, and any 
numbers or codes that represent such information. 
The  first  sub-paragraph  shall  apply  when  any  of  these  items  of  information  are 
associated with  a copy of, or appear in connection  with the  communication  to the 
public of, a work or other subject-matter referred to in this Directive or covered by 
the strigeneris right provided for in Chapter III of Directive 96/9/EC.” 

There  has  been  virtually  no  comment  on  the  text  of Article  7-indeed, 

the 
Explanatory Memorandum which accompanies the Amended Proposal of 21 May 1999 
makes no comment at all. The text is reproduced here, however, because Article 7 is a 
fundamental  underpinning  of  the  development  within  the  context  of  electronic 
copyright-management systems (ECMS) of the digtal object identifier (DoI) (see Section 
Four, 2, below). Publishers must, therefore, keep a close eye on any discussion in the 
Council Worlung Party. 

7.  THE U.S.  DIGITAL MILLENNIUM  COPYRIGHT ACT  (DMCA) 

The following account of highlights of the Act was  issued by the Association of 

American Publishers in October 1998: 

- 

“The main purpose of the DMCA is to implement the two WIPO Copyright Treaties adopted 
in December 1996. Passage of the implementing legislation is the critical pre-condition for 
U.S.  ratification of the Treaties. When ratified by  at least thirty nations, the Treaties will 
effectively raise the international standards of copyright protection to those provided under 
U.S. law, and establish the basis for their application in the digital environment. 
In broad terms, here are some of the ways in which the DMCA (as approved by Congress 
this  past  week)  will serve  the  interests of book  and journal  publishers in strengthening 
copyright protection in digital environments and the global market-place: 
-  Circumvention of  Technological Measures: The DMCA will make it illegal to manufacture 
or  provide  devices  or  services that  circumvent  encryption  or  other  technological 
measures used to protect the rights of copyright owners in copyrighted works; in some 
cases, the act of circumventing such measures will itself be outlawed. 
Copyright Management  Information (CMI): The DMCA will make it illegal to knowingly 
to knowingly traffic in copies of works linked with 
alter, remove or falsify CM1-r 
CMI that has been so altered, removed or falsified-with 
an intent to enable or conceal 
copyright iniiingement. 
Enforcement:  The DMCA will establish both civil and criminal penalties for violations of 
the prohibitions regarding circumvention and CMI. 
Rights  of Copyright  Owners  and  Related  Limitations:  The DMCA explicitly preserves, 
without modification, existing rights of copyright owners and the limitations on such 
rights, including fair use. 
Clariication  of Online  Service  Provider  (OSP) Liability:  The DMCA clarifies  the  rules 
concerning the liability of OSPS for copyright inhngements occurring on their systems 
and networks. Without changing existing law on what constitutes an infringement (or 
a defence to an infringement), or existing legal doctrines under which a party may be 
held responsible for infiinging conduct by another (except with respect to universities 
and their faculty), the legislation allows OSPS to avoid liability for monetary damages 
and  certain kinds  of injunctive relief while  providing incentives for OSPS to  ‘take- 

- 

- 

- 

110 

THE JOUKNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PKOPEKTY 

- 

down’ infringing material on their systems when they have knowledge, awareness or 
notice of such material. 
Concerns d Libraries  and  Educational  Institutions:  The  DMCA addresses  concerns  of 
potential adverse effects &om the anti-circumvention provisions on these entities and 
other  users  of  copyrighted works,  without  legalising  a  market  in  circumvention 
devices or creating a &r  use ‘right of access’ to copyright works. The legislation also 
‘updates’ current copyright-law  exemptions for library preservation and replacement 
of  copyrighted  works  by  permitting linuted  use  of  digital  technologies for  such 
purposes, and  provides  for  a  study  to  be  done by  the  Copyright Office  on issues 
regarding the use of copyrighted works in the provision of distance education. 

That  study  has  now  been  completed.  Given  that  distance  education  is  an 
international phenomenon  facing all publishers, attention is drawn here to the Summary 
of Testimony  on  behalf  of the  Association  of American  Publishers  presented  by  Pat 
Schroeder on 24 June 1999.” 

B.  THE DATABASE DIKECTIVE 
1, 

INTRODUCTION 

Publishers have taken a strong interest in this EU Directive since, in some ways, it 
represents a version of an independent “publisher’s right”. Publishers are neither authors 
nor  neighboring/related  rights  owners.  Yet  their  creative  role  in  nurturing  authors’ 
talents and the  vital role  of their investment  in the production  and marketing  of  the 
works  they  help  to  make  available  are  universally  acknowledged.  Publishers  in  the 
digital environment  are increasingly investing in non-material  services rather  than  in 
material products, so that copyright protection  should protect  the full creativity vested 
in the flow of information  they  make possible. The publisher  organizes the supply of 
information, and in doing so adds considerable value to it. That added value needs its 
own protection.  Indeed, the stronger the protection granted to the publisher, the greater 
the incentive  to him to design  the flow of information  so that  it can be interactively 
interrogated and used through authorised access. In brief, the sui generis right in the EU 
Database Directive is as near as publishers are ever likely to get to a publisher’s right. 

The key elements of the Directive are as follows: 
(i)  A  database  is  defined  as  a  collection  of works,  data  or  other independent 
materials arranged  in  a  systematic or methodical  way  and  capable  of being 
indvidually  accessed by electronic or other means. 
(a)  The intention of “collection” is to place the nature of a database firmly in 
the tradition of Article 2(5) of the Berne Convention as affected by Article 10 
of the Agreement  on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual  Property Rights 
(TRIPS). That is, the items  collected no longer  need  to be copyright works: 
this Berne plus approach is  clearly essential for copyright protection  of most 
databases, since they will usually consist of both copyright and non-copyright 
materials. It is suggested, however, that the criterion for originality will make 

NET LAW 

111 

copyright protection thin. 
(b)  The intention of “indvidually accessed” is  to  exclude collective works, 
such as  films. This feature suggests  that while some multimedia works w d  
have  features  that  are  individually  accessible, others,  as  sophistication of 
creative direction increases over time, will not. This draft Directive is  not a 
multimedia Directive. 

(ii)  (a)  The text  adopts the  wording of the  software Directive  on  originality. 
Article 3.1 reads, “databases which, by reason of the selection or arrangement 
of their contents, constitute the author’s own intellectual creation shall be protected 
as such by copyright.” (emphasis added). 
(b)  Article  3.1  is  to  be  read  together  with  Recital  15-“whereas 
such 
protection should cover the structure of the database.” The essential point is 
that the copyright protection offered by the text is only for the expression of 
the database, which is protectable by copyright. Some databases will pass the 
test of originality; many may not. It is very likely that the maker of a database 
will bypass the uncertainties of copyright protection and seek protection under 
the new m i  generis right  (see (iii) below) which protects the contents of the 
database which the maker has put together, regardless of whether the structure 
qualifies for copyright protection or not. 

(iii) The Directive confirms the creation of an entirely new suigeneris right, outside 
copyright itself but neighboring to a neighboring right (if one may put it that 
way). The text requires Member States, under Article 7, to: 
“ ... provide for a  right for the maker  of a database which shows that  there  has been 
qualitatively and/or quantitatively a  substantial  investment in  either  the  obtaining, 
verification  or presentation of the contents, to  prevent  acts of extraction and/or re- 
utilisation  of  the  whole  or  a  substantial  part,  evaluated  qualitatively  and/or 
quantitatively, of the contents of that database.” 

It is very important to understand the wide scope of the definition of database. It 
applies to print-on-paper,  as well as to digitized databases. Thus, a newspaper will be a 
database, since  it  is  clearly  a  collection, methodically arranged, whose materials are 
capable of being indvidually accessed. An issue of a learned journal is, equally clearly, a 
database, whether issued in paper or electronic form. All sorts of collected data are likely 
the  central  importance  of  this  new  sui  generis  right  to 
to  form  databases-hence 
publishers. 

2. 

INTERNATIONALIZATION 

OF THE SUI GENERIS  RIGHT 

Even as some EU Member States still grapple with implementation of the Database 
Directive, all Member States are also talung part, led by DG-xv  of the Commission, in 
a database at WIPO on the possible internationalization of the new sui generis right. A 
Response in June 1998 by  the International Publishers Copyright Council (IPCC) to a 

112 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Questionnaire from WIPO was well supported by other creative industries. That led to 
an  initiative by  WIPO to  IPCC to  make  presentations  of the publishers’ position  on 
internationalization to many regional meetings. IPCC finalized a Briefing Paper in June 
1999 which is reproduced here as an Annex to this article. 

The sui generis  right  will become  the  economic basis  of licensing of databases as 

services online, and sale or licensing/rental of databases offline. 

Both criminal-law and civil-law sanctions should be available against infnngement. 
The only realistic answer to the commonly asked question,  “HOW may infringements 
be  identified?” is,  as  with  copyright  infringements,  “with  difficulty”! However,  the 
work  on  unique identifiers, e.g.  the digital object  identifier  and electronic  copyright 
management  systems  currently  being  intensively  developed  may  provide  means  of 
identieing unauthorised uses  (see Section Four, 2, below). 

3.  THE COLLECTIONS OF INFORMATION  ANTI-PIRACY  ACT (HR 354) 

At  the  present  time,  it  is  not  possible  to  forecast  how  the  legislation  under 
consideration by  the  Congress of  the  United  States, i.e.  HR  354, will  end  up.  An 
excellent presentation by Mr Mitch Glaziefi to the 1999 WIPO Conference7 should be 
referred to by those publishers with a close professional interest. In general, Mr Glazier, 
had this to say: 

“. . . the bottom line is clear. The United States must enact new federal legislation to protect 
developers against piracy and unfair competition, and thus encourage continued investment 
in the production and distribution of valuable commercial collections of information. Such 
legislation will  improve the market  climate for collections of information  in the  United 
States and around the world; ensure protection for U.S. collections abroad on an equitable 
basis;  place  the  United  States  in  an  important  position  in  an emerging  international 
consensus; and provide a balanced and measured response to the new challenges of digital 
technology. This Bill seeks to advance those goals.” 

SECTION Two: Harmful  Content and Freedom of  Expression 
1. 

INTRODUCTION 

The international debate on whether, and how far, content on the Internet should 
be  regulated  is  of  great  interest  to  book  publishers, since  they  are  one  of  the  last 
unregulated media industries. Nobody tells a book publisher in advance what he can or 
cannot publish. Liability falls post-publication. 

The anarchic-mindedness of the Internet brought  this tribute from an American 
Court in the  1996 case concerning the Communications Decency Act, American  Civil 
Liberties  Union (ACLU) u. (in effect, as the Court put it) the  U S .  Government: 

6  Chief Counsel to the Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. 
House of Representatives. 
7  Supra, footnote 1. 

NET LAW 

113 

“Just as the strength of the Internet is chaos, so the strength of our liabihty depends upon the 
chaos and cacophony of the unfettered speech the First Amendment protects . . . As the most 
participatory  form  of  mass  speech  yet  developed,  the  Internet  deserves  the  highest 
protection fiom government intrusion.” 

Yet the dangers of unsuitable material being located and communicated over the 

Internet are real. As  one commentator has put it: 

“It  is  in  the  dark  corners of  the  Internet  that  paedophiles  around  the  world  are  able  to 
exchange information and disturbing pornographic photographs of children.” 

2.  THE EU COMMUNICATION AND ACTION PLAN 

In the European Community, a Communication was issued on 1 December 1997 
which  proposed  an  Action  Plan  on  promoting  safe  use  of  the  Internet.  The 
Communication  draws  attention  to  the  wide  variety  of  concerns-not 
only  child 
pornography-comprised: 

- 

national  security  (instructions  on  bomb-making,  illegal  drug  production, 
terrorist activities); 
protection of minors (abusive forms of marketing, violence, pornography); 

- 
-  protection  of  human  dignity  (incitement  to  racial  hatred  or  racial 

discrimination); 
economic security (fraud, instructions on pirating credit cards); 

- 
-  information security (malicious hacking); 
-  protection  of  privacy  (unauthorised  communication  of  personal  data, 

- 
- 

electronic harassment); 
protection of reputation (libel, unlawful comparative advertising); 
intellectual  property  (unauthorised distribution  of  copyrighted works,  e.g. 
software or music). 

The  Community’s  Action  Plan  was  adopted  as  a  Council  Decision  on  21 
December  1998. It  proposes  measures in  four  Action  Lines,  fiom  the  period  from 
1 January 1999 to 31 December 2002, with a total budget of 25 million ECU. 

The measures and Action Lines are as follows: 
“1.  Creating a safe environment  (through industry self-regulation) 

Acknowledging the important  work  that  has been  taken by the European  Internet 
industry in this respect, the Commission will build on existing hotline initiatives and 
encourage further initiatives on self-regulation and Codes of Conduct. Hotlines have 
proved  to be an efficient tool to gather information on illegal content.  Information 
gathered through  the  hotlines  will be  of vital importance  to  prevent  that  content 
considered illegal  under  current  law  shall  be  allowed  to  flourish  on international 
networks. The global nature of the Internet, however, requires these initiatives to be 
pan-European and indeed international. Action will be taken to establish networks of 
hotlines  and  improve  liaison with  law  enforcement.  Implementation  of  Codes  of 
the  24  September  1998 
Conduct  will  be  supported  along 

lines  of 

the 

114 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Recommendation  on the Protection  of Minors and Human Dignity. In connection 
with the Codes of Conduct, a system of visible quahty labels will be promoted. 

2.  Developing filtering and rating systems 

Various  means  of filtering and  rating will be  thoroughly  examined  in  a European 
context, aiming at providing users with a palette of different tools to protect themselves 
and their families against undesirable material. The Action Line will be putting its focus 
on validation of rating systems in relation to European content providers, integration 
of rating into  the  content creation process, benefits of these technical solutions and 
provision of third-party rating systems. Again, for solutions to be effective, initiatives 
wd be taken to facilitate international agreement on rating systems. 

3.  Encouraging awareness actions 

Closely linked with the other Action Lines, this Action Line will prepare the ground 
for awareness actions to be  carried out  by  the  Member  States. The actions will be 
identifying multiplier bodies and most  appropriate  channels, media  and  content  to 
reach the target audience; preparing basic material; and adapting it for linguistic and 
cultural specificities. The encouragement of full-scale  awareness actions will be made 
through a call for proposals for follow-up action by the Member States. 

4.  Support actions 

As  no  single  measure  in  itselfwd be  sufficient to improve  the  users’ possibility  to 
protect themselves and to achieve the objectives of the plan, additional action will be 
taken to evaluate the impact of Community measures, to assess legal implications and 
co-ordmate with similar international initiatives.” 

3.  THE BERTELSMANN  FOUNDATION/INCORE  INITIATIVE 

In  September  1999,  the  Bertelsmann  Foundation  sponsored,  together  with 
INCORE, a very productive conference in Munich. T h e  Foundation, recognising that n o  
State, Internet industry o r  enforcement agency can handle this complex area o n  its own, 
took a co-ordinated  approach, commissioning four reports entitled: 

T h e  Concept of Self-Regulation  and the Internet 

- 
-  Filtering the Internet 
-  T h e  Issue of Hotlines 
-  Legal Regulation, Law Enforcement and Self-Regulation 

with  an  overall  document  based  on  the  four  reports  and  dmussions  by  an  expert 
network.* That document is  entitled Self-Regulation  of Internet Content. 

In many ways, the Bertelsmann Foundation  and INCORE have set the agenda for 

the next stage of co-ordmated  policy.  As  the Foundation states i n  the document: 

“No single approach, relying on one form or one set of actors, can provide a solution in such 
a  changing and  shifting environment.  For  a  public  response  to be  effective, it  must  be 
integrated, systematic and dynamic, sensitive to public needs and national differences within 
a  framework that  encourages robust communication.  Only such a  systematic approach- 
bringng technological potential together with the  energies and capacities of government, 
industry  and  citizenry-has 
the  promise  of  success  in  meeting  what  often  seem  to  be 
competing  goals.  Given  the  global  and  borderless  architecture  of  the  Internet,  such  a 

8  The Bertelsmann Foundation’s Web site is (chttp://www.stiftuiig.bertelsmann.de>> 

NET  LAW 

115 

systematic approach requires not only co-ordination at a national and regional level, but its 
scope must be international. 
A systematic, self-regulation-based approach is especially desirable because the alternative- 
reliance on the overbroad, highly intrusive regulation, with laws differing across national 
borders-yields 
short-term,  often  crisis-driven,  mostly  ineffective  solutions.  And  these 
responses cannot meld together the complicated political and social objectives in a successful 
way. The illusion of action is no substitute for a considered and comprehensive, flexible and 
dynamic approach.” 

4.  EXAMPLES OF HARMFUL CONTENT 

It should not be assumed, from the rather abstract text offered so far, that there is 
much  rhetoric  and little  action.  The  following  news  items,  if  entirely  random,  do 
suggest  the  increasing  determination  of  different  “players”  to  pursue  illegal  and 
undesirable material. 

(a) 

International-Press 

Release 

“Internet content rating association fomed.  The Internet Content Rating Association (ICRA) has 
been formed to create an international Internet content rating system that protects children 
and  free  speech  on  the  Web.  The voluntary  self-rating system  will be  both  user-  and 
provider-friendly, and culturally non-specific and objective, based on the established RsACi 
content  rating  system.  The  founding  companies  of  ICRA  include  AOL Europe,  the 
Bertelsmann Foundation, BT, Cable & Wireless, Demon Internet (U.K.), EuroIsPA, IBM, 
Internet Watch Foundation, Microsoft, Software & Information Industry Association and 
T-Online  Germany.” 

.. 

(b)  German y - R e u  ters 

“Cyber-cops  btist  Net porn ring.  Police cracked an international online child porn ring after a 
team of Bavarian ‘cyber-cops’ found thousands of pornographic images of children as young 
as three in a chat room. Raids on private homes in Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Britain, 
Norway, the United States and Canada Wednesday led to confessions by several suspects.” 

(c)  The Netherlands-Reuters 

“Dutch court jails twofor Internet  racism. Two right-wingers  who posted racist material online 
were jailed  for a  month  by  a  court in The Hague in a ground-breaking  case.  According to 
Meldpunt Discriminatie Internet (MDI), an Internet body monitoring racism, it is the first 
case in which racial discrimination on the Internet has been punished in the Netherlands.” 
(emphasis in original). 

(d)  The United Kingdom 

“A businessman was given an eighteen-month  suspended sentence for running the U.K.’s 
largest porn operation &om servers located in America. The Judge ruled the images were 
uploaded from the United Kingdom and were therefore subject to British law. The defence 

116 

THE  

claimed the  evidence against him  was  inadmissible because it was  gathered from a  U.K. 
computer rather than from the server it originated from. Under  the  Police and Criminal 
Evidence Act, every computer involved in a crime needs to have a certificate to prove it 
was  working properly  when the  crime  was  committed.  The Judge  found  that only the 
seized computer needed a certificate.” 

T h e  Register 
“Net agency  to  track  drug  gangs  and  paedophiles.  The  government  is  setting  up  a  unit  of 
professional code-crackers to track drug runners and paedophile rings on the Internet. The 
unit  will  get  A20  million  in  government  funding,  and  will  be  staffed  by  encryption 
specialists from GCHQ, as well as  new recruits from the private sector. It is  expected to be 
called the Government Telecommunications Advisory Centre (GTAC) .” 

(e)  The United States 

“New IsPjilters pornographic, violent content (Newsbytes.com). A new, family-targeted Internet 
service  provider  (TsP)  wiU  use  artificial intelligence  and  an  extensive  database  to  keep 
pornographic, violent, and hate-oriented Web sites from reaching the eyes ofits customers.” 
“Game blocker to be installed on Windows. Microsoft plans to introduce a feature in its Windows 
operating system allowing users  to determine what  kinds of games  can be  played on the 
computer.  Such a feature could enable parents to keep  a  game with  gruesome violence, 
offensive language or nudity from being played, based on the game’s content rating.” 

5.  FINAL WORD 

T h e  final word in Section Two belongs to those w h o  battle against the overspill of 

techniques for control of unsuitable material into techniques for political control: 

Press Release 
“The twenty enemies .f the Internet. Reporters Sans FrontiPres names forty-five countries which 
restrict their citizens’ access to the Internet-usually  by forcing them to subscribe to a State- 
run Internet Service Provider. Twenty of these countries may be described as real enemies 
of the Internet because they control access totally or partially, have censored Web sites, or 
taken  action  against  users.  They  are:  the  countries  of  Central  Asia  and  the  Caucasus 
(Azerbaijan,  Kazakstan,  Kirghizia,  Tajikistan,  Turkmenistan  and  Uzbekistan),  Belarus, 
Myanmar  (Burma), China,  Cuba,  Iran,  Iraq,  Libya,  North  Korea,  Saudi Arabia,  Sierra 
Leone, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia and Vietnam.” 

SECTION THREE: The Role of  Collective Munagement 
1. 

INTRODUCTION 

Let us start with one moment of recorded history: 
“We must take care to guard against two extremes equally prejudicial; the one, that men of 
ability, who have  employed their  time  for  the  service of their  community,  may  not  be 
deprived of their just merits, and the reward of their ingenuity and labour; the other, that 
the world may not be deprived of improvements, nor the progress of the art be retarded.” 

NET LAW 

117 

Those were the words of Lord Mansfield in a case which involved the rights and 
wrongs of the copying of maps, decided over two hundred years ago, Sayre v. Moore, in 
1785. And  the  task  of reconciling the  interests of those-authors 
and their  business 
partners, publishers-who 
create copyright works with the interests of those--students, 
teachers, researchers, people in the professions and in business, the general public-who 
use copyright works, is still with us. The reproduction rights organizations (-0s) 
have 
been, ever since the pioneering work of the German RRO, WORT, a central agent in 
malung that reconciliation effective. 

Yet, what the RROS have historically delivered is, as  one American commentator 
put  it  some years  ago, a  form  of  degradation, not  reward  on  indrvidual terms,  but 
compensation on standard terms. What we are now seeing is a movement among RROS, 
their authors and their publishers, to return control to the authors and publishers-the 
rightholders-on 

terms set by them individually. 

2.  THE CLA’S  RAPID  CLEARANCE  SERVICE (CLARCS) 

CLARCS is  an  early  form  of  the  return  of  control  to  the  rightholders.  It  was 
introduced as the Copyright Licensing Agency’s (CLA) Rapid Clearance Service to meet 
some  quite  specific needs.  It  was  first established to  provide a  simple, cost-effective 
service to business, to allow business  to obtain permission to make photocopies fiom 
books, journals and periodicals, at fees specific to  the publication  determined by  the 
copyright holder. 

It soon became apparent that this simple transactional clearance system had further 
applications, not least in education, where the preparation of university study packs or 
course readers was becoming more widespread in the United Kingdom. While CLARCS 
revenue  is  still a  small  proportion  of  CLA’S overall income  (above L20 million  per 
annum), it does feature strongly in the Agency’s plans for the future, not least because 
it gives much more control back to the rightholder. 

CLARCS is  essentially a  transaction  processing  system.  It  is  based  around  two 
databases: one of works, with associated fees and conditions; and a second database  of 
registered users. Each transaction links a user with a work; the details are recorded in a 
transaction file. It is a straightforward accounting process and the transaction is a simple 
double-entry transaction: a cre&t entry to the work, and a debit entry to the user. The 
transactions can be recorded as they take place, in real time, or reported post  hoc (batch 
processing). If registered post hoc, the user can obtain in advance a relevant subset of the 
works, fees  and  conditions database. For  the  user,  in  short, CLARCS offers  the  great 
advantage of predictabhty. 

3.  LICENSING DIGITIZATION 

One  development  of  CLARCS for  the  management  of  rights  in  the  hgital,  as 

118 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

opposed to  the  traditional, print-on-paper  medium,  is  a  proposal in  1998 by  CLA to 
license digitization for higher education institutes. Four key principles have been set by 
rightholder groups. 

(a)  Transactional Only 

Because of the quite different nature of the technology, particularly in terms of its 
potential economic impact, there will be no blanket digitization licence equivalent to 
the  CLARCS photocopying  agreement  with  universities.  All  digitization  will  be 
transactionally managed and cleared via CLARCS. 

(b)  Exact Page Representation 

The licence will only permit the production of exact representations of the original 

printed page. 

(c)  RighthoIder Opt-In 

Digitization clearance will  only be  available for those works  whose  rightholders 
have given CLA a positive mandate. However, as a result of wide consultation, CLA, the 
Authors Licensing and Collecting Society (ALCS) and the Publishers Licensing Society 
(PLs) are confident that a substantial majority of the important rightholders concerned 
(authors and publishers) will opt in. 

(d)  Rightholder-Determined  Fees 

The fees in respect of the digitization and use of material wdl be determined by the 

rightholder concerned. 

As  at mid-September  1999, over seven hundred publishers have signed up to the 

new E-CLA mandate, and over one hundred HEIS. 

4.  MULTIMEDIA RIGHTS CLEARANCE  SYSTEMS  (MMRCS) 

The phrase “the one-stop shop” is now universally used to describe both  “shops” 
which  will  license rights  to  multimedia producers  and  also  those  which  will,  as  an 
information broker, give the producer information on where  to go to acquire rights, 
perhaps  a  member  representative  association  which  is  mandated  by  individual 
rightholders to license their rights; perhaps through  such an association, an  individual 
publisher/producer; and perhaps through  the publisher/producer, the original creator 
of the work in question. (There can be  considerable historical uncertainty as  to who 
owns which rights!) 

NET LAW 

119 

The collecting society in conjunction with the collective one-stop shop may deal 
in both functions, that of licensing the producer on set terms and that of informing the 
producer  where  the  relevant  licensor is  to  be  found.  The  politics  of handling  the 
synchronisation right are instructive in that respect. 

Driven by the wish to avoid imposition of statutory licence regunes, the Member 
Countries of the  European Union  and  countries beyond Europe have  shown  great 
vigour  in  recent  years  in  setting  up  one-stop  shops.  However,  there  are  many 
uncertainties. There are considerable divergences of management style, e.g. KOPIOSTO 
in  Finland reports that  any licensing structures would need to incorporate all  of  six 
options: 

(i) rightholders are contacted indwidually, and they issue licences individually; 
(ii)  rightholders issue their licences individually, but their contact information is 
registered  in  a  common  database of rightholders. Users have  access  to  the 
services of this information centre; 

(iii) rightholders  use  an 

issuing  licences,  but  decide 
individually  in  each  case  whether  a  licence  is  granted  and  the  associated 
conditions; 

intermediary  when 

(iv)  rightholders use an intermediary when issuing licences, but decide in each case 
whether a licence is granted. In an affirmative case, the licence is granted on 
standardized conditions; 

(v)  the same as  option  (iv), but the consent of rightholders is  only requested in 

cases involving political, religious, advertising and simdar contexts; 
(vi)  rightholders mandate the organization to grant licences in all cases. 
This is  in strong contrast to the intentions of SECAM in France to become a one- 

stop shop, licensing on standard terms on behalf of the following members: 

-  SDRM, mechanical rights; 
-  SACEM, essentially musical rights; 
- 
SACD, rights in dramatic works; 
- 
SCAM (auteurs multimedia); SGDL (Son'&!  des  Gens de Lettres); 
- 
SDI, photographers working in advertising via SCAM; 
- 
ADAGP, painters, sculptors and photographers. 
It must be doubted whether this level of dlversity in a cross-border environment 
can be sustained. There may be a need to harmonise the repertoire of rights in which 
the  collective one-stop  shop is  dealing.  Again,  we  are  dealing with  a  cross-border 
phenomenon, and some standardization is likely to be needed by multimedia producers 
seeking to clear rights. 

Even where there is a strong will to set terms individually, can some standardization 
of levels or bands of fees be developed? One great advantage in negotiating such bands 
in relation to  fees  for photocopying has  been predictability. That  is, the  user bodies 

120 

THE  

could work out what they would be liable to pay for various levels of use, and budget 
for those in advance (or simply abandon a project early on as financially unrealistic). 

(a)  V E ~ I  

These  uncertainties  were  noted  in  the  final  Report  of  a  Working  Group  on 
MMRCS, set up by DG-XIII of the European Community and chaired by  the present 
author. The Report led quickly to an EC-hnded project entitled Very Extensive Fbghts 
Data  Information  (VERDI) whose  aim  is  to  link  together  the  services  of  existing 
multimedia rights clearance centres in six countries: Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, 
the  Netherlands  and  Spain.  Italy  also  participates  in  the  project.  KOPIOSTO is  co- 
ordinating VERDI. 

The VERDI project has several levels: 
(i) a rights data information network between six existing systems; 
(ii)  a licensing network system model; 
(iii) a content delivery system model for a limited amount of selected content. 

The project will establish a balance between different licensing options: 

-  in cases where rightholders want to give licences individually, the service will 

- 

- 

only be contact information; 
licensing through rights clearance centres will enable rightholders to set prices 
individually, while,  at the  same  time,  a  centralized service is  offered to  the 
users; 
in collective ahnistration systems, rightholders authorise a collecting society 
to grant permissions to use their works on uniform tariffs and conditions. 

The  project  will  also  produce  an  analysis  covering  all  European  countries 
concerning different categories of works in order to clarify the current situation of rights 
and rightholders. The results of this analysis can be used as an awareness action, both in 
Europe and in other areas. The WIPO has been invited to participate in the evaluation 
of this project. 

(b)  INDECS-Interoperability  of Data in the E-Commerce Systems 

VERDI is  not  the  only EC project  in  the  area of ~ ~ M R C S .  

The Commission has 
identified  and  funded  no  less  than  ten  priority  projects.  The  projects  address  the 
networking of existing collectively managed MMRCS in six Member States (see VERDI 
above), interoperability of  digital  content  identification systems  and  rights  metadata 
within  multimedia  e-commerce  INDECS, sector-specific  MMKCS for  book  publishing 
(EFRIS), audio-visual  (TVFILES, PRISM)  and  music  (ORS) rights,  integration  of 
electronic  copyright  management  and  MMRCS (BONAFIDE), protection  of  creative 
contributions in a collaborative networked multimedia title development environment 

NET LAW 

121 

(BC), best clearance practices for educational multimedia (COMPAS) and exploitation of 
regional  public  broadcasters’  archives  supporting  minority-language  culture  and 
regional small-  and mehum-sized  enterprise (SME) development (RCTRIDW). 

Apart from VERDI, collecting societies are also active in INDECS-Interoperability 

of Data  in  the  E-Commerce  Systems-which 
is  an  international initiative of rights 
owners  creating  metadata  standards  for  e-commerce,  in  order  to  support  network 
commerce based  on intellectual property. The project is  supported by  the European 
Commission’s  INFO2000  programme  and  more  specifically in  the  area  of  MMRCS, 
whch falls  under Action Line 3.2 of the 1NF02000 programme (Triggering European 
Multimedia Potential-Trading  Multimedia Intellectual Property Rights). 

INDECS expects seven  tangible  results  from  its  work,  which  aims  to  provide  a 
coherent  framework for  co-operation  and  partnership  with  other  metadata  interest 
groups: 
- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 

a  generic  metadata  model  for  intellectual  property  trading  in  a  network 
environment, which serves as the basis for its work; 
the application of the metadata model to other major schema, provihng the 
basis of “crosswalks” between data from different sectors; 
practical solutions for “person identifiers”(human and corporate); 
a web standard for content metadata management by expressing the metadata 
model in XML and resource description framework (RDF); 
a  “metadata registry” system based  on translating metadata from one schema 
to another withn RDF; 
an F
proposals  for  formal  standardization  to  be  submitted  to  the  appropriate 
standards bodies before the end of the project in February 2000. 

 model of the generic data model; 

F

~

The following details of this very important project were gven by Tarja Koskinen- 
Olsson,  the  Chief  Executive  of  KOPIOSTO, the  co-ordmating  organization  for  the 
project,  and  Chair  of  the  International  Federation  of  Reproduction  Rights 
Organizations (IFRRO), at the 1999 WIPO Conference.9 

The  participants  in 

the  INDECS project 

include  copyright  management 
organizations representing different creation types, like KOPIOSTO (co-ordinator of the 
project), and representatives of the sound recording and publishing industries (IFPI and 
EDI~EuR). Representatives of most  creative industries are  represented  in  the  project 
through affiliation. The INDECS affdiates include the following organizations: 

ALPSP (Association of Learned & Professional Society Publishers) 

- 
-  BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) 
-  CIEPS (ISSN Centre) 
- 
- 

CISAC (International Confederation of Authors’ & Composers’ Societies) 
FEP (Federation of European Publishers) 

9  Supra, footnote 1. 

122 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

STM (International Association of Scientific, Technical & Medical Publishers) 

IFLA, UBCIM (UBC/IM of the International Federation of Library Associations) 
IFRRO (International Federation of Reproduction Rights Organizations) 

- 
-  IDF (International DOI Foundation) 
- 
- 
-  IPA (International Publishers Association) 
-  ISBN (International ISBN Agency) 
- 
-  U.S. Copynght Office. 
The tools under development include the IP commerce data hctionary, including 
a legal data  dictionary, &rectory of persons, and metadata standards for IP declarations 
and transactions. 

RIM (Recording Industry Association of America) 

During  autumn  1999,  the  final  evaluation  of  this  project  will  take  place.  A 
conference  entitled  “Metadata, Intellectual Property  and  E-Commerce-The  Way 
Ahead”  was  to  take  place  in  Washngton,  D.C.,  on  15  November  1999.  The 
Conference was supported by the Copyright Office and the U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office. 

In the future, WIPO could play an important role as a forum where initiatives like 
INDECS are evaluated, and dssemination of the results debated among governments and 
the private sector. 

(c)  ByLine 

The final  project  to  which  attention  is  drawn  here  is  a  fascinating initiative in 
electronic rights management taken by  the British Authors Licensing and  Collecting 
Society called ByLine. 

The  electronic  age,  ALCS  notes,  is  providing  new  possibdities  to  collecting 
societies, most  of which  have  developed  three  particular capabilities: they  know  the 
repertoire (who wrote, painted, filmed, or otherwise created what); they operate within 
a clearly defined, though constantly developing, legal infrastructure; and they know the 
whereabouts of the  creators. These  intrinsic  elements  of know-how  are  particularly 
relevant in electronic rights management, where they can supplement work  done by 
agents, synhcation services and publishers’ own rights departments. There are certainly 
a number of new areas of opportunity for collecting societies whch build on their core 
skills  in  offering  an  efficient  management  process  and  an  economic  return  at  a 
comparatively low cost. 

ALCS’S ByLine  service  is  one  example.  ByLine  is  an  online  news  syndication 
service, the first on the Internet to deliver copyright text material, and the licences by 
which  it can  be republished, electronically. Newspaper publishers  and journalists are 
able to upload articles electronically to ccwww.universalbyline.com)), granting ByLine 
the right to sell licences on their behalf. Regstered end-users-publishers 
are able to search and view full-text versions of articles on the database, and to purchase 

and editors- 

NET LAW 

123 

licences  tailored  to  a  wide  range  of uses.  In  addition,  ByLine  demonstrates  other 
technical and methodological innovations: 

- 

the  first  application  on  the  Internet  of  text  watermarking,  by  which  an 
undetectably watermarked file containing the article is downloaded to the user 
as proof of purchase and forms part of the audt trail of licence use; 

-  “Cheshire  cat”  technology  which  prevents  “print  screen”  and  other 
unauthorised downloading by making the text vanish at the mouse’s approach; 
-  the use of Agital object identifiers throughout  the process, putting ALcs at the 

forefront of numbering methodology. 

During its six-month  trial  as  part  of the  IMPRIMATUR project,  ByLine  began  to 
make  sales fiom its accumulated content.  Now three  hundred journalists have  posted 
nearly seven hundred articles. ALCS expects these figures to rise rapidly when the service 
is launched  commercially in late autumn  1999. 

5.  THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF COLLECTING SOCIETIES 

As  the  role  of  the  collecting  societies  changes,  as  this  author  has  put  it  “from 
keepers  of  the  last-chance  saloon  to  pioneers  of  the  wdd  cyberwest”,  so  some 
governments  may break  into  the  open their  concerns  over  the  control  of collecting 
societies which have often lain beneath the surface. Section Three ends, therefore, with 
an extract from the very interesting address by Daryl Williams, the Attorney-General  of 
Australia, on the final day of the WIPO 1999 Conference:lo 

“The international federations of collecting societies make a very important contribution to 
effective  copyright protection  and  enforcement in  developing counties.  They  have  a 
fundamental role in helping to make copyright work on the ground-not  only for owners 
but also for users who want to do justice to the owners. As copyright is traded and accessed 
more  and  more  online, the  contribution of  collective administration to  the  building of 
copyright licensing infrastructure will  become even  more important. At  the  same time, 
there  also  arise  the  issues  of  the  accountability of  collecting societies,  and  of  possible 
government intervention. Australia has found that both the number of collecting societies 
and  the  extent of their licensing activities  have  grown rapidly  in recent years.  Calls for 
greater accountability of societies have come not only 6om licensees of the materials that 
they control, but also 6om their own members. The general laws governing corporations, 
to which collecting societies are subject, and the general laws on competition to which they 
are partly subject, have been questioned as being inadequate to address these concerns. 
I predict that governments will come under pressure to achieve the right level of regulatory 
supervision  of  collecting societies,  as  they  assume  an  increasingly  important role  in  the 
distribution and accessing of copyright material online.” 

10 Supra, footnote 1. 

124 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

SECTION FOUR: Towards Global E-Commerce 
1. 

INTRODUCTION 

According to Forrester Research: 
“Large tracts of online economic terrain remain unconquered. But not for long. Business-to- 
Business  e-commerce  will  draw  90  percent  of  the  projected  US$  1.4  trillion in  total 
Internet-based  business by  2003, and business-to-business  intermediaries are blazing the 
trail.  In  dozens  of  industries,  they’re  slashing  costs,  speeding  transactions,  wringing 
efficiencies and forging new relationships.” 
Two  comments:  first,  every  forecast  of  the  growth  of  e-commerce  outbids its 
predecessor; second, this forecast, made in May 1999, emphasises that by far the majority 
of e-commerce dealings wdl be business-to-business,  rather than business-to-consumer. 
Indeed, the 90 percent forecast is steeper than a fairly recent 80 percent forecast. 

An EU Communication entitled The Need for Strengthened International Co-ordination, 

from DG-XIII in February 1998, urges the creation of an international  charter: 

“New  business  configurations are  appearing,  particularly  in  information-based  sectors. 
Companies,  including  SMES, are  establishing  world-wide  networks  linking  research, 
production,  assembly  and  distribution. Services,  in  particular  information services  (e.g. 
consultancy, banking, insurance, travel, publishing,  marketing, sales, advertising,  etc.)  can 
now be produced in one country and exported to another via electronic networks. 
The  wide  range  of activities now  technically  possible  can  only  be  fully  exploited if  an 
international enabling framework emerges.” (emphasis added). 
Publishers  share the concerns of other cultural  industries regarding the key legal 
topics  for  such  a  framework,  e.g.  security,  privacy,  uniform  commercial  codes, 
electronic payment systems, taxation and tariffs, electronic contract formation, etc., but 
they share with the music recordmg industry a special interest as deliverers of electronic 
content  in  e-commerce.  A  customer  can  be  informed  on the  Internet  about a  new 
motorcycle;  he can settle payment for the motorcycle on the Internet, but the Internet 
cannot  deliver  the motorcycle  to him.  STM publishers,  however, can  and do deliver 
learned material in all disciplines over the Internet, so that what is now called ECMS is a 
subject of paramount importance to them. 

2.  ELECTRONIC COPYRIGHT-MANAGEMENT  SYSTEMS 

A report entitled The Publisher in the Electronic World, prepared in 1994 for IPCC by 
the present author, set out the necessary ECMS scenariol’ under the heading The Answer 
to the Machine is in the Machine: 

“The questions surrounding the electronic use of copyright materials are not so  much  ‘How 
shall  we  prevent  access and  use?’ as  ‘How shall  we  monitor  access and  use?’ Generally 

11  For  a recent international  perspective on  the  whole  ECMS field,  see  the  paper  entitled  Electronic  Riyhts 
Management  Systems.  delivered to the  1999 WIPO Conference (supra, footnote 1) by  Dr Daniel Gervais, the very 
experienced and expert Vice-president, International at the Copyright Clearance Centre (CCC), U.S.A. 

NET LAW 

125 

speaking, intellectual property  is made available  to the public so that it  can be  used, and 
mechanisms which  simply  prevent  use  eventually  defeat  the  very  reason  for  which  the 
material was created at all. After all, to publish is to make something available to the public. 
The real issue is to link identifying, monitoring,  control and reward. The ideal is a system 
which can undertake several different tasks, preferably all at the same time. A system must 
be able to identify copyright materials, to track usage, to verify users, and to record usage 
and  appropriate  compensation.  In  addition,  the  system  should provide  security  for  the 
integrity  of  the  copyrighted  material  (freedom  from  tampering)  and  some  level  of 
confidentiality or  privacy  for  the  user.  It  might  also  provide  the  user  with  a  price  list 
showing various costs for different uses and individual materials along the model of a retail 
establishment.” 

The Digital  Object Zdentijier 

The essential pre-conhtion  for such a scenario is a unique identifier, an electronic 
equivalent,  to  put  the  point  very  crudely,  of  the  ISBN  or  ISSN.  The  international 
community  of  publishers  has  developed  the  DOI  system  to  provide  a  unique 
identification mechanism for content, and also a way to link users of the materials to the 
rightholders (or their agents) to facilitate automated digital commerce in the new digital 
environment. l 2  

A presentation entitled DOI: Current Status and  Outlook was made by Dr Norman 
Paskin, the  Director  of the  International  DOI Foundation,  at the  recent  1999 WIPO 
Conference.13 In it, Dr Paskin set out the basics as follows: 

a persistent identifier of intellectual property; and 
a mechanism to resolve that identifier to some useful information or service. 

“The DOI was  an  outgrowth  of a program  of the  Association of American Publishers to 
develop tools to enable management ofcopyrightable materials in an electronic environment. In 
order to protect something, it is first necessary to uniquely and  unambiguously  designate what 
that entity is. The Do1 therefore began as a practical initiative in unique persistent naming, 
as the first part of a fuller implementation to include tools to manage the persistently named 
entities themselves. 
At its simplest, the Dor system offers: 
- 
- 
The second of these two steps associates the identifier with some specific information; the 
simple way in which this was done was to route to a publisher’s Web site. The Do1 therefore 
becomes a specifier for routing to an occurrence of a piece of material on a publisher’s Web 
site, and many of the prototype  demonstrations and current practical implementations of 
DOI embody this functionality. However, the intent of the DOI is not for this to be the end- 
point, since restricting all uses of material to routing via the publisher’s Web site is neither 
possible  nor  productive.  The  Dor  is  intended  as  a  public  identifier  for  use  in  many 
applications and for local uses, and as with other information identifiers the Dot should be 
independent of specific applications-an  identifier that can be freely used in many contexts 
and by many users.’’ 

‘2  The DOI initiative has been strongly welcomed throughout the international copyright community: further 

information, which develops every week, is available at the DOI Web site <chttp://www.doi.orgn. 

l 3   Siipru, footnote 1. 

126 

THE  

3.  THE  EU DRAFT DIRECTIVE ON E-COMMERCE 

A briefing note from Bird and Bird, a major firm of solicitors in London which 
specialises in media law, conveniently summarises the main features of the original draft 
Directive (hrther condensed here). 

The Commission recognises that differences between national laws will have an 
impact on the development of the online industries in Europe. Accordingly the draft 
Directive addresses the following five issues that the Commission considers to be key 
in  providing  a  coherent  framework  for  the  Single  Market  in  the  field  of  e- 
commerce: 

-  Information Society Service Providers 
-  Commercial Communications 
-  O n h e  Conclusion of Contracts 
-  Liability of Intermediaries 
-  Implementation. 

(a)  Scope of the Directive 

The  Directive  applies  to  the  provision  of  information  services.  “Information 

services” are any service: 

at the indlvidual request of a recipient of services. 

-  normally provided for remuneration; 
-  at a distance; 
-  by electronic means; 
- 
The virtue ofthe draft Directive is its provision that Member States may not restrict 
the  freedom to  provide  information  society services  (Article 3).  The  effect  of  this 
provision is  crucial. It means that if the service is lawfully provided in a Member State 
where the provider is established, then its provision by that provider in other Member 
States is also lawful. 

The draft Directive is subject to derogations &om the principle of free movement 

- 
- 

(Article 22) and expressly does not apply to the areas of: 
taxation and data protection flows (Article 22); 
copyright and neighboring rights, e-money, collective investments in financial 
services,  direct  insurance  and  unsolicited  commercial  communications 
(Annex 11). 

The  draft  Directive  also  does  not  apply  to  contractual  obligations regardmg 
consumer contracts (Annex II),  a derogation that considerably undermines the purpose 
of the draft Directive in attempting to stimulate business investment in online services 
and provide legal certainty. Service providers will still have to understand the intricacies 
of each Member State’s national consumer protection laws. 

NET LAW 

127 

(b)  As Regards Service Providers 

A  “service provider” is  any  natural  or legal person providing such  services. A 
service provider  is  established where  it  pursues  an  economic activity using  a  fixed 
establishment for an indeterminate duration. The presence of the technical means of 
technologies required does not constitute an establishment (Article 2). 

Member States wdl have to compel information society services to render easily 
accessible, in  a  drect  and  permanent  manner  to  their  recipients  and  competent 
authorities, certain information includng: 

- 

- 
- 
- 

name, address of establishment and details for quick and drect contact (i.e. 
e-mail address); 
any registration number or trade register entry; 
the activities covered by any applicable authorisation scheme; 
as  regards regulated professions, any bohes of registration, professional title, 
rules and places where the service is regularly provided; 

-  VAT number where applicable. 
Subject  to  certain  conditions, service providers  avoid  liabihty, other  than  for 
prohibitory  injunctions, in  respect  of  certain  access,  cachng  and  hosting  services. 
(References in  the  draft Directive to  the  “recipient” of  the  service are intended to 
include both the recipient and the provider.) 

Mere  conduits  (Article 12): In  the  case  of  a  service  that  comprises transmitting 
information from  a  service  recipient  across  the  network  or  providing access  to  it 
(including  the  automatic,  intermediate  and  transient  storage  of  the  information), 
Member States must provide the service provider with an exemption fiom liability as 
regards  the  information transmitted  absent  the  provider  initiating  the  transmission, 
selecting its recipient or selecting/modifying the information contained in it. 

Caching  (Article  13):“f In  the  case  of  a  service  that  comprises  transmitting 
information from a service recipient across the network, Member States must provide 
the  service  provider  with  an  exemption  from  liability  as  regards  the  automatic, 
intermehate and transient storage of the information, performed for the sole purpose of 
malung more efficient the information’s onward transmission to other recipients of the 
service at their request, on condition that it: 
does not mo&fi the information; 
complies with  condtions  on access  to  it  and  industry standard rules  as  to 
updating it; 
does not interfere with industry standard technology used to obtain data on 
usage of the information; 
acts expedtiously to remove or bar  access to  the information on receipt of 
actual knowledge that the initial source has been removed &om the network, 

- 
- 

- 

- 

l4  See also supra, Section One, A.5.(a). 

128 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

and/or access to the information has been barred and/or such removal/barring 
has been ordered by a competent authority. 

Hosting  (Article  14):  In  the  case  of  a  service  that  comprises  the  storage  of 
information from a service recipient, Member States must provide the service provider 
with an exemption from liability as regards such storage on condition that it: 

- 

- 

does not  have  actual knowledge that  the  material is  illegal or,  for  damages 
claims, of facts or circumstances from which such illegality is apparent; and/or 
acts  expeditiously to  remove or disable  such information on obtaining such 
knowledge. 

(c)  Commercial  Communications 

A  commercial  communication  is  any  form  of  communication  designed  to 

promote, hrectly or indirectly goods, services, or the image of a company. 

Member States are to ensure that such communications comply with the following: 
- 
- 
- 

they are clearly identified as such; 
it is clear on whose behalf they are issued; 
promotional,  discount  offers,  etc.,  are  clearly  identified  as  such  and  the 
conditions attaching to  them  are  easily  accessible, presented  accurately and 
unequivocally (with similar rules in respect of games) (Article 6). 

An  unsolicited  commercial  communication  sent by  e-mail  must  be  clearly  and 

unequivocally identifiable as such as soon as it is received (Article 7). 

Electronic contracts-Formation:  With certain exceptions, Member States are obliged 
to ensure that their legislation allows contracts to be concluded electronically (Article 9). 
The following principles must  be  introduced  into  Member  State  legislation in 
respect of click-wrap type contracts, where consent is signified by technological means 
such as clicking on an icon (Article 11). The contract is concluded when the recipient 
of the service: 

has received acknowledgement of his acceptance, and 

- 
-  has confirmed such receipt, 

both  of which  are to be  effected as  quickly as possible. They are  deemed to  happen 
when the applicable party can access the acknowledgement or receipt. 

Electronic Contracts-Information:  Member States are to provide that, except where 
otherwise agreed by  professional persons, the  manner  of formation  of  a  contract by 
electronic means shall be expressed by the information society service provider clearly, 
unequivocally and prior to the conclusion of the contract (Article 10). This shall include 
the following information: 

- 

the  steps to be taken  to  conclude the  contract,  to  be  set out in  a  way that 
ensures informed consent is  given; 

NET  LAW 

129 

- 
- 
- 

whether  the contract is to be filed/accessible; 
how handling errors are to be corrected; 
except where otherwise agreed by professional parties, any applicable code of 
conduct. 

(d)  Implementation 

The draft  Directive  has  a  series  of provisions  aimed  at  implementing  its  other 

requirements. 

As  mentioned  earlier, the draft Directive was issued in late 1998, and, thanks to a 
very fast First Reading by the European Parliament in spring 1999, has reached the stage 
of an Amended  Proposal  from  the  Commission,  which  is  now before  a  Council  of 
Ministers Working Party. 

Of main interests to publishers are the provisions on the liabhty of intermeharies. 

An Executive Summary to the original draft Directive  states: 

“To facilitate the  flow  of e-commerce activities, there is  a  recognised  need  to clarifjr  the 
responsibility  of  online  service  providers  for  transmitting  and  storing  third-party 
information (i.e. when service providers act as  ‘intermediaries’). To eliminate the existing 
legal uncertainty and to bring coherence to the different approaches that  are emerging at 
Member State level, the proposal establishes a ‘mere conduit’ exemption, and limits service 
providers’ liability for other ‘intermediary’ activities. A careful balance is  sought between 
the different interests involved in order to stimulate co-operation between different parties, 
thereby reducing the risk of illegal activity online.” 

The  main  point  to  note  at  this  stage  is  that  the  Commission,  in  its  Amended 
Proposal, has made no substantive changes at all to the liability provisions at Articles 12, 
13 and  14, summarised  above. Nor has  the  Commission  changed its view,  set out at 
Article 15, that: 

“Member States shall not impose  a  general  obligation on providers, when providing the 
services covered by Articles 12 and 14, to monitor the information which they transmit or 
store nor  a  general  obligation to  actively  seek  facts  or  circumstances  indicating illegal 
activity.” 

Two final comments: 
(i)  Given that the draft E-Commerce  Directive is now at the same stage (i.e. as 
an Amended Proposal before a Council Worlung Party) as the draft Copyright 
Directive,  the Rightholders  Coalition  returns  to the  quite extraordnary (to 
many)  stand-off  between  the  liability  provisions  of  the  E-Commerce 
Directive and the Copyright Directive.15 The Coalition  comments: 
“The E-Commerce Directive is now at the same stage in the legislative process as the 
Copyright Directive.  The  ‘time-lag’  between  the  two  Directives has  been  nearly 
erased. 
Telecom operators and Internet service providers have long argued that Article 5.1 of 

l5  See also supra, Section One, A.5(a). 

130 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the Copyright Directive (providing an exemption &om the core right of reproduction 
for  temporary  copies)  was  vital  to  ensure that  they  could  not  be  held  liable  for 
copyright infiinging material in the absence of horizontal rules on liability. However, 
this is no longer a viable position, as such rules are now clearly on track for adoption. 
The  argument  for  the  European  Parliament’s  amendment  to  Article  5.1  of  the 
Copyright Directive, which establishes the general rule that temporary copying must 
be  authorised by  the rightholder, should now  prevail,  given  that all  liability  issues 
which this  may  raise  for network and  service  providers  will be  resolved  in  the E- 
Commerce Directive. Logic demands that issues of liability be  dealt with in  the E- 
Commerce Directive and not the Copyright Directive.” 

(ii)  The Rightholders Coalition has also targeted  the lack of threshold conditions 

in the Amended Proposal: 
“Threshold conditions are minimum standards, which service providers must comply 
with  in  order  to  be  eligible  for  any  limitation  on  liability.  Rightholders  have 
consistently made  it  clear  that  a  balanced  solution  needed  to  include  threshold 
conditions. It is notable that the U.S. legislation (Digital Millennium Copyright Act) 
included two important threshold conditions applicable to service providers that are 
lacking fiom the E-Commerce Directive. We find it unacceptable that rightholders 
in the United States should be better protected than those in the EU, considering the 
traditionally  strong  protection  afforded  in  Europe  to  authors  and  other 
rightholders.” 

This  version  of  NETLAW turns  now  to  a  few  topics  w h c h   are  central  to  the 
development  of e-commerce.  The major  element  in e-commerce  for publishers is, of 
course, the protection  and encouragement of intellectual  property itself at the highest 
IPA mantra “Respect Copyright, Encourage  Creativity” rings true down the 
level-the 
years. Section One of this version of NETLAW  deals in some detail with the issue. 

Through Annex II to the draft Directive on E-Commerce,  a number of derogations 
are made  to Article 3  (which sets out a country-of-origin  rule for information  society 
services in  general).  For publishers,  the most  important  derogations  are  in respect  of 
copyright, neighboring rights and database rights. The question then immediately arises 
of what regime ir to govern the very complex interaction between intellectual property 
and private international law, to which we turn now. 

4.  JURISDICTION, APPLICABLE LAW,  RECOGNITION  AND  ENFORCEMENT OF 

JUDGMENTS 

A judge, faced with a case with foreign element, will ask himself these questions: 
- 
am I legally competent, do I have jurisdiction  to hear this case? 
- 
if I do have competence, what law do I apply? 
- 
will my judgment be recognised and then enforced outside my jurisdiction? 
In Europe, the first and last questions are answered by the Brussels Convention  of 
1968 in  the  countries  of  the  EU,  and  by  the  Lugano  Convention  of  1989  in  the 
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries. 

NET LAW 

131 

(a)  Jurisdiction 

Under these Conventions, the general rule is that if the defendant is domiciled in 
one of the E U  or EFTA countries, the plaintiff must sue in the State of the defendant’s 
domicile (Article 2), but there is an exception under Article 5(3) which provides that in 
matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict,  the defendant may be sued in the courts 
of the place where the ha&l 

event occurred. 

(b)  Applicable Law 

Here we must bear in mind the particular nature of Internet activity. In a print-on- 
paper  world,  the  making  of a pirate  edition  of a work  is  likely  to take  place in  one 
geographical area, that of the manufacture of the edition. In the digital world, however, 
as the Business Software Alliance put it in 1995: 

“As we see it, there are five central stages in any transmission of a work: two that take place 
on  the  transmitting end  (creation  and  upload), two  that  take place  on  the  receiving end 
(download or access, and  use)  and  the physical act of transmission that takes place  along the 
telecommunications system itself.” (emphasis in original). 

Given this considerably more complex world, there is intensive discussion in both 
academic  and  trading  circles  on  which  country’s  laws  are  applicable  to  an  alleged 
infringement of copyright. A recent and very impressive academic analysis of t h s  issue 
has been made by Professor Jane  Ginsburg in a presentation to a group of consultants 
brought  together  by WIPO in December  1998. Her conclusion  concerning choice of 
laws for infringement cases is: 

“I recommend adoption of an approach combining certain aspects of the Satellite Directive 
with alternative points of attachment: 
1. 

The law applicable to the entirety of a defendant’s alleged Internet infringement is the 
law  of the  country in whch the  server  that hosts  the  alleged infringing  content is 
located, so  long as  this  country’s  domestic  copyright law  is  consistent with  Berne 
Convention (and WIPO Copyright Treaty) norms. 

2.  If the law of the country identified in #1 is inadequate, then the law applicable to the 
entirety of the defendant’s alleged  Internet infringement is  the law of the country in 
whch the operator of the Web site on which the allegedly infiinging content is found 
has  its  residence  or  principal place  of  business,  so  long  as  this  country’s domestic 
copyright law  is  consistent  with  Berne  Convention  (and WIPO Copyright Treaty) 
norms.” 

(c)  Recognition and Enforcement $Judgments 

We  can,  in  Europe,  turn  back  to  the  Brussels  and  Lugano  Conventions.  O n  

recoption, Article 26  of the Brussels Convention states: 

“A judgment given  in  a  contracting State shall  be  recognised  in  other  contracting States 
without any special procedure being required.” 

132 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

And on enforcement, Article 31 states: 

“A judgment  given in a contracting State and enforceable in that State shall be enforced in 
another contracting State when, on the application of any interested party, the order for its 
enforcement has been issued there.” 
The outstandmg major question is put by Professor Adrian Sterling, in a briefing 
paper  for  the  British  Copyright  Council  Worlung  Group  (intended  for  internal 
circulation) as follows: 

“Can the Brussels Convention be amended so as to become international in membership and 
effect, permitting  action in any  Convention  country  as  regards unauthorised  placing of 
protected material on a Web site in any other country? 
If that approach is not practical, should there be a new international Convention permitting 
any  rightowner  of  a  Convention  country  to  take  action  concerning  the  unauthorised 
placing of protected material on a Web site in any other Convention country?” 
Ths complex subject will be affected by two concurrent developments. First, with 
no  consultation  whatsoever,  the  EU  Commission  adopted,  in  July  1999,  a  draft 
Regulation moddjnng the Brussels  Convention. 

In July  1999, Mike  Pullen,  of Dibb Lupton  Alsop,  wrote in  these  terms  to  all 

Commissioners: 

“Iunderstand  that  the  Commission  is  due  to  adopt  the  amended  text  of  the  Brussels 
Convention as a regulation (Brussels Regulation) pursuant to new powers given by Article 
65 of the Amsterdam Treaty. I also understand that the Commission is proposing to adopt 
the Rome II  Convention  on non-contractual  liability as  a regulation (Rome Regulation) 
pursuant to the same powers. 
I have the following serious concerns on this matter: 
1.  The proposed Article 15(c) of the Brussels Regulation together with Recital  13 would 
create a situation in which the courts of a consumer’s country of habitual residence can 
take  jurisdiction  over  contractual  disputes  with  an  e-commerce  service  provider 
established in another EU State merely on the basis that its Web site can be accessed by 
consumers in the receiving State. 

Thls is  completely contrary  to  the fundamental internal market  principles of  country of 
origin and mutual recognition. It also undermines the framework for e-commerce set out 
in the  Commission’s proposed Directive  and other Directives (for example the Distance 
Selling Directive,  the  Television  Without  Frontiers  Directive  and  the  Data  Protection 
Directive) .” 
After strong protests, a Hearing was called for 5 and 6 November 1999. 
Second, a proposed “Convention on Jurisdiction and the Effects  of Judgments  in 
Civil  and Commercial  Matters”  has  emerged  from  a  Hague  Conference  on Private 
International  Law.  A  preliminary  draft was  hstributed in June  1999, and the Special 
Commission concerned was to meet to give approval to the draft in October 1999. 

5.  COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS 

There  has  been  strong  support  in  publishing  circles  in  Europe  (e.g.  from  the 

NET LAW 

133 

European Publishers Council and the International Communications Round Table) for 
the proposal to require mutual recognition of services that comply with the laws of their 
EU country of origm. It is, in practice, impossible for SMES to comply with the laws of 
all Member States. As  noted above, however, among the derogations  at Annex 11  are 
“contractual obligations concerning consumer contracts”.  Is this, one may ask, sensible, 
or indeed workable? 

(a)  Online Conclusion of  Contracts 

Article 9 of the draft Directive on E-Commerce requires Member States to “ensure 
that their legislation allows contracts to be concluded electronically”. (emphasis added). 
The requirement complements the proposal for a Directive on the validity of electronic 
signatures (see below). 

In concrete terms, the Commission states: 
“Member States will have to: 
- 
- 
- 

repeal provisions which manifestly prohibit or restrict the use of electronic media; 
not prevent the use of certain electronic systems as intelligent electronic agents; 
not give electronic contracts a weak legal effect, the result ofwhich would be to favour 
in practice the use of paper contracts; 
adapt  the formal requirements which cannot be  met by  electronic means  ... Legal 
uncertainty  as  to  the  interpretation of  formal  requirements is  the  most  frequent 
obstacle to the effective use  of electronic contracts. Examples of formal requirements 
which the Member States will have to examine and, where appropriate amend are: 

- 

Requirements  as to  the medium  lrsedfor the contractual process: that the contract be  on ‘paper’, 
that the contract be ‘written’, that a ‘letter’ (letter of confirmation, letter of intent) be sent, 
that a ‘document’ be presented, that a specific ‘form’ be used, that there be an ‘original copy’ 
of the contract, that there be a certain number of ‘original copies’ (e.g. one per person), that 
the contract be ‘printed’ or ‘published’. 
Requirements  as to  human presence: that the contract be negotiated or concluded by natural 
persons or in the presence of both parties, that the contract be negotiated or concluded in 
a specific place. 
Requirements as to the involvement ofthird parties: that the contract be prepared or authenticated 
by  a notary, that the contract be concluded in the presence of witnesses, that the contract 
be registered or lodged with a person or authority.” 
The  reference  by  the  Commission  to  a  contract  requiring  preparation  or 
authentication by a notary is curious, since Annex I  excludes the activities of notaries from 
the scope of the Directive. This itself is curious. Perhaps there is a fearsome pan-European 
trade union of notaries. Is what is needed not the reverse? That is, the creation of a new 
indeed is that far from the profession of issuing dlgital 
profession of dlgital notaries-and 
certificates, an activity much encouraged by national Chambers of Commerce? 

(b)  Digital  Signatures 

In July 1999, the Council of the European Union adopted a common position o n  

134 

THE  

the proposal for a Directive on a Common Framework for Electronic Signatures. The 
Directive aims to facilitate the use of electronic signatures as well as contributing to their 
legal recognition.  It  would  establish a legal framework for  electronic signatures and 
certain certification services, in order to ensure the proper hnctioning of the internal 
market in this area. 

Other  objectives  are  to  promote  the  interoperability  of  electronic  signature 
products, and to build trust in electronic signatures. Although digital signatures based on 
public-key  cryptography  are  currently  the  most  recognised  form  of  an  electronic 
signature, the  common  position  follows  a  “neutral”  approach  as  far  as  the  various 
technologies and services capable of authenticating data electronically are concerned. 
This approach takes into account the rapid technological development and the global 
character of the Internet. 

A common position will be  formally adopted, without debate, at a  forthcoming 

Council session. 

The role of certification services will be important. Certification Service Providers 
d provide hgital certificates to link a dgital signature to an indwidual, or to verify, 
for example, that an individual is a director of a company. 

There  has  recently been  news  of a  new  non-profit  organization called  Global 
Trust  Authority  which  has  been  created  to  work  as  a  certification authority.  It  is 
backed  by  more  than  eight  hundred  banks  and  financial  institutions  from  several 
European  countries,  includmg  B e l p m ,   France,  Italy,  Portugal,  Ireland,  Spain, 
Switzerland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, as well as Canada and Japan. 
The United  States has  not joined  the  initiative  so  far.  The authority  wlll  have  its 
headquarters in Belgium. 

(c)  Encryption Policy 

In  October  1997, the  European  Commission issued a  Communication  entitled 
Ensuring Security and  Trust in Electronic Communication:  Towards a European Framework for 
Digital  Signaturer  and  Encryption.  The  Commission’s  work  on  digital  signatures  is 
summarised above. The work on encryption has, of course, to be seen in both the EU 
and the international context. 

The importance of this subject in  the  EU can be bluntly put.  There d be no 
internal market  for  e-commerce  without  an  internal  market  for  cryptography. The 
danger  is  that  Member  States,  fearful  that  widespread  use  of  strongly  encrypted 
communication  will  reduce  their  ability  to  fight  crime  and  prevent  terrorism, will 
proceed  with  incompatible  national  regimes,  and  thus  create  obstacles  to  the 
functioning of the Internal Market. 

The international context is equally important. A recent Position Paper from the 

International Chamber of Commerce (Icc)  gave succinct conclusions: 

“In view of the hndamental need for secure communications in international commerce . . . 

NET LAW 

135 

to prevent theft and fraud, to combat industrial espionage and to protect critical trade and 
financial interactions which may require authentication or digital signature-encryption 
is 
an indispensable tool enabling business to allow the secure transmission of critical data over 
international networks. 
A practical solution must be found as soon as possible with respect to regulations concerning 
the application of encryption methods. 
The ICC therefore calls on governments to: 
1. 
- 

Remove  barriers  to  trade  and  impediments  to  the  use  of  commercially available 
encryption methods. This can be accomplished by: 
removing  unnecessary  export  and  import  controls,  usage  restrictions,  restrictive 
licensing arrangements and  the  like,  on  encryption  methods  used  in  commercial 
applications; 
enabling interoperability of networks by encouraging global standardization; 
maximising the freedom of choice of users. 
Work  together  with  industry  to  resolve  these  barriers  by  jointly  developing  a 
comprehensive national policy on encryption.  The ICC believes that  this working 
relationship would also encourage R&D and international co-operation in the field of 
advanced secure technology.” 

- 
- 
2. 

As  to  “removing  unnecessary  export  and  import  controls”,  a  very  recent 
announcement that the Clinton Administration in the United States is planning to relax 
controls on  encryption software exports is  being  met  with  guarded optimism from 
industry executives. 

6.  DOMAIN NAME  SYSTEM  (DNS) 

First, why should publishers be concerned with domain names at all? The answer 
has been cogently given by Jonathan Cohen, the interim President of the Intellectual 
Property Constituency, in written testimony to the US. Congress, as follows: 

“The copyright industries have a vital interest in the  efficient hnctioning of the Domain 
Name System (DNs). The companies in this industry operate thousands of Web sites using 
.com  and  country-code  Second  Level  Domains.  These  Web  sites  have  become 
indispensable for the promotion and marketing of every kind of copyrighted material, from 
books and other printed matter to music and sound recordings, from audio-visual  material 
to  databases,  and  of  all  kinds  of  computer  software,  including  both  business  and 
entertainment  applications.  Increasingly, these  sites  are  becoming  venues,  not  only  for 
providing information about and technical support for these products, but also for the online 
delivery of copyrighted materials in digital form. 
... 
As it becomes more and more common for copyrighted works to be distributed in digital 
form,  a  domain name  abuser  can  not  only weaken,  tarnish or  dilute  a copyright-based 
company’s marks; it can also usurp some or all of the market for the company’s product. A 
brand  name  like  Toyota,  Fiat  or  Cadillac  can  be  undermined  through  laxity  in  DNS 
administration; but  realistically  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  distribute automobiles over  the 
Internet. By contrast, pirated copies ofpopular songs or recordings, hit video games, current 
movies, and the best-selling  computer programs or books can increasingly be found on, and 
downloaded from, the sites of domain-name thieves, or even from sites whose names  do 
not directly threaten trademark interests. 

136 

THE  

Thls unique vulnerability requires companies in the copyright industry to ask not only how 
the DNS can  be used  to promote, market, transmit and distribute legitimate products, but 
also how it can be  used  to fight the accelerating trend  toward  online  digital piracy.  This 
trend is a major impediment to the development of e-commerce, and iflefi unchecked will 
threaten the viability of the World Wide Web itself as a venue for global business.” 

The second point to touch on, given the need so well expressed by Jonathan Cohen for 
some regme for the management of domain names, is, what is  happening? ICANN is 
happening-the 
Internet  Corporation  for Assigned  Names  and Numbers.  In a lively 
presentation at the 1999 WIPO Conference,16 Esther Dysol, the interim Chair of ICANN, 
opened by  describing ICANN as  “a private corporation set up to manage the Internet’s 
plumbing”! Rather more  fUy and formally, she described ICANN as a private sector 
initiative responsible for overseeing the management of the DNS, which allows Internet 
addresses  (for  example,  Web  pages  and  e-mail  accounts)  to  be  found  by  easy-to- 
remember names, instead of numbers: 

“Thanks  to  DNS, users  can  find  the  server  at  140.147.248.209  simply  by  typing 
ccwww.congress.got0) into  their  browsers.  Headquartered  in  California, ICANN is  a non-profit 
corporation structured to make decisions on the basis of Internet community consensus. As 
ICANN’S start-up phase progresses, its Board of Directors wiU be elected in part by a global 
membership of individual members of the Internet community and in part by organizations 
representing  the  business,  technical,  non-commercial  and  academic  communities.” 
(emphasis in orignal). 

Thirdly, the work of ICANN has, in some ways, been parallel  to work by  WIPO, 

which on 30 April 1999 published a Final Report. As LABNEWS stated, in June 1999: 
“The Report highlights certain questions arising out of the interface between domain names 
and trademarks protected by intellectual property rights, and recommends the adoption of 
a number of improved standard practices for registrars. 
The Report’s key recommendations include: 
-  the establishment of a minimum ‘best practices’ code for all generic top-level domain 

- 

- 

- 

name registrars; 
the  collection  of  contact  details  on  domain  name  applicants  by  regstrars  so  that 
intellectual property owners can enforce their rights; 
the creation of mandatory dispute settlement procedures to deal with cases of bad faith 
and abusive registration of domain names that violate trademark rights; and 
the creation of a system allowing owners of globally famous or well-known  marks to 
obtain an exclusion prohibiting any person other than the owner &om registering the 
mark as a domain name.” 

For the reasons stated by Jonathan Cohen, the international publishing community 

might consider some formal input to the developing work of ICANN o n  DNS. 

l6  Supra, footnote 1. 

NET LAW 

137 

ENVOI 

In a paper, Electronic Business, the U.K.  Alliance for Electronic Business has offered 

the following intriguing thought: 

“A useful analogy may  be  drawn  with maritime law  that  has,  over many years,  provided 
trading procedures  and processes that are understood internationally as  a  coherent set  of 
principles  that  guide  trade. Our  goal  must  be  to  create  something similar for  electronic 
trade.” 
We may not, however, have hundreds of years for the task. 

Annex 

International  Publishers  Copyright  Council  Briejkg  Paper,]une  1999 

NEED FOR AND JUSTIFICATION  OF A  SUI  GENERIS SYSTEM OF PROTECTION 

The potential of the Global Information Society depends on a WIPO Global Treaty 
which  wdl  provide  an  “umbrella”  for  national  Member  States’  legislation  for  the 
protection of databases. Clearly, those legislations will need to be substantially equivalent, 
and in particular, and most importantly, there needs to be substantial equivalence between 
the  EU  Sui  Generis  Right  and  the  current  formulations  in  the  United  States  of  a 
misappropriation approach  as  in the  Collections  of  Information  Anti-Piracy  Act  (HR 
354). 

The central justification  for  an  international  treaty  on the  sui  generis  system  of 
protection  for  databases  is  that  databases  are  central  to  establishing  the  Global 
Information  Society. Information  databases lie at the heart of the entry of information 
of all kinds--scientific,  technical, professional, financial, business etc.-into 
the system 
of services w h c h  is sent round the world by the Internet. 

138 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

We  approve  and  adopt  the  following  extract  from  the  intervention  of  Dr 
Reinbothe, leading the Delegation of the Commission of the European Communities 
at the WIPO Information Meeting on Databases from 17 to 19 September 1997: 

“Not only had few technologcal applications produced a revolution in the size and uses  to 
which databases could be put, but those applications were at the very source of the Internet 
itself, which  depended  in  large  part  on  the  databases which  fed  the  system, just  as  it 
depended on the software and the communications technology which operated the Internet 
and which operated related infrastructures in the information society. Therefore, databases 
played a central role. Their economic importance was steadily increasing. Third, and finally, 
just  like  any  other  electronic material,  they  were  susceptible  to  being  duplicated  and 
transmitted anywhere in the world at the touch of a button. Databases were at the essence 
and  the origin of the information society from which  all wanted to benefit. They were 
particularly vulnerable. This raised the need to secure protection world-wide.” 

We  approve  and  adopt  also  the  following extract  from  the  speech in  the  U.S. 

Senate on 19 January  1999 by Senator Hatch: 

“American  database providers  render an  invaluable  service by  collecting, organizing,  and 
disseminating billions of bits of information from myriad sources of every possible sector of 
our economy. They give us such widely used tools as phone books, directories, catalogues, 
almanacs, encyclopaedias, and  other reference guides. They provide  specialized products 
like statistical abstracts, medical and pharmaceuticals reference tools,  stock quotes, pricing 
guides,  genealogical  data  and  countless  other  sources  of  information  for  businesses, 
researchers, scientists, educators and consumers. Indeed, it is  the information they collect 
that allows us  to predict the weather, to treat disease, to preserve our national security, to 
use computers to communicate over global networks, like the Internet, to travel, to buy a 
home, and even to watch the evening news.” 

POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVES FOR A  SUI  GENERIS SYSTEM 

The most common protection has in the common-law countries lain in copyright. 
And, indeed, the dominant position of the U.K.  database industry inside the EU has 
been  due to the protection for investment provided in copyright by  the low level  of 
orignality  required  by  U.K.  case-law  known  as  “skill, judgment  or  labour”.  That 
protection has become notably  “thinner” through the adoption throughout the EU of 
the  higher-level  test  of  “the  author’s  own  intellectual  creation”,  in  the  Database 
Directive.  Both  the  uncertainty  of  this  thin  copyright  protection  and  the  virtual 
certainty that computer-assisted  and indeed computer-generated databases will not pass 
the  new  originality  test  mean  that  an  alternative  form  of  protection  for  makers  of 
databases is needed. 
The main interests which publishers have in copyright and neighboring rights are 
security  of  trading,  and  authenticity.  They  will  measure  any  initiative  against  the  first 
this initiative promote security of tradmg, so  that we can invest with 
yardstick-“will 
confidence  that  our  products  or  services  are  not  pirated  with  impunity?”  Equally, 
publishers are deeply concerned with their own professional reputations;  the American 
Medical Association  has recently  explained how much effort it puts into validating the 

NET LAW 

139 

certification and licensing of information on physicians in its &rectory so that it can be 
relied upon by  insurance companies and hospitals and other healthcare organizations. 
Database producers  invest  in  quahty products  with  careful validation and  put  their 
names on them as a level of insurance to the customer. 

Equivalent protection to that now provided in the EU wdl be required of any State 
for which export of its own industries’ databases to the EU is important. Those States 
whch claim that a tradtional copyright regime is sufficient have simply not understood 
that protection in the EU will depend, in copyright, on getting over the new hurdle of 
“the  author’s  own  intellectual  creation”  and/or,  outside  copyright,  in  having  a 
protection for the makers of databases equivalent to the EU’s suigeneris regime. 

The conclusion must be not  only that copyright is not an acceptable alternative 
system, but that its very failings in respect of compilations of data have led &rectly to 
the Sui  Generis/Misappropriation initiatives. 

The a priori  economic right which the sui generis  right represents was  developed, 
interestingly, out of a first formulation which conceived the right as  a  special rule of 
unfair  competition.  That  the  right  was,  in  years  of  intense  debate  in  Europe,  so 
developed indicates clearly that unfair competition is not a sufficient protection. In the 
words of a Member of EU DG-xv  in an article on the Common Position reached by 
the EU Council of Ministers in 1995, the stri generis  right is  an economic right which 
“has nothing  to  do  with  unfair  competition remedies because it  does not  sanction 
behaviour a posteriori  and because it provides for a term of protection.” 

Finally, the  sui generis  right is  tradable [see Directive, Article 7(3)]. Just  as  book 
publishers have  elaborated licensing systems  on  the  basis  of the  economic right  of 
copyright,  so  database  publishers  and producers  will  be  able  to  “slice  and  dice” 
information into new packets of data and then elaborate systems of sale and/or license 
of them on the basis of the economic right of sui generis protection. 

NATURE AND EXTENT OF A POSSIBLE  SUi GENERIS SYSTEM  OF PROTECTION 

Discussion of  the  sui generis  right  is bedevilled by  the  ingrained habit  of  some 
commentators of importing into the  debate concepts relevant  to  copyright. The sui 
generis right is not an intellectual property right. It is not helpful and indeed confusing to 
view  the  object  of  protection,  the  scope  of  protection  or 
the  scope  of 
limitations/exceptions through copyright spectacles. 

The IPCC would support a broad “umbrella” approach by WIPO to defining, first, 
the  object  of  protection,  second,  the  minimal  threshold  of  investment  (not  limited  to 
deployment  of  financial  resources,  in  the  EU  Directive,  but  includmg  also  the 
expenhture of time, effort and energy), third, the acts protected against (extraction and 
re-utihzation  in  the  EU  model)  and  fourth,  limitations/exceptions  (see  also  Main 
Elements below). 

140 

THE  

THE  IMPACT OF A  POSSIBLE  SUI  GENERIS SYSTEM  ON ACCESS TO DATABASES 

Given the security of trading offered to database publisherdproducers by the suigeneris 
right,  an  international treaty  will promote  very  strongly the  creation  and  licensing  of 
information  databases of all  hnds.  Providing protection will not restrict  access-n 
the 
contrary it wiU enable, through licensing systems, more dormation to become avadable. 
The importance of licensing systems has been stressed in a recent paper from the 
entitled  Contractual Licensing,  Technological 

Association  of  American  Publishers  ( h ~ )  
Measures, and  Copyright Law: 

“Through  contractual licensing, publishers are able to provide information or information 
access to specific classes of users, in ways that are carefully tailored to the specific nature of 
the product  and needs of the users. This flexibility, in many instances, can have  the effect 
of making information more widely available, or available  to  certain users  at  significantly 
lower cost. Examples are myriad. Publishers can adjust prices and other terms of availability 
to distinguish among commercial and non-profit  users. Different packages of value-added 
features and minimum needs can be  created and separately priced to accommodate larger 
and smaller users, corporations, educational institutions, and libraries. Since users pay for the 
type  and  amount  of  access  and  use  they  need,  high-quality  information  products  and 
services  can be made available to users  who could not otherwise afford them.  Thus, for 
example, as a single user paying a modest cost and agreeing to the terms of a standard form 
license agreement, an individual investor can be given access to the same information that 
is provided to a commercial investment firm under the terms of a negotiated but much more 
costly and complex license agreement.” 
T h e  example, in the last sentence quoted above, of the single user with the standard 
form licence  getting the same high-value  information  as  the  commercial investment 
firm underscores the point that providmg protection does not restrict access, but makes 
it more available to some who would not otherwise be able to afford it. 

The representatives of the International Confederation of Scientific Unions and of the 
World Meteorological Organization expressed, on the contrary, at the WIPO Information 
Meeting of September 1997, their concerns that commercial database-makers  might “lock 
up”  scientific  information  so  that  the  i?ee  exchange  of  data  in  a  co-operative  not  a 
competitive spirit, which characterises scientific advance, could, to the enormous damage 
of that advance and contrary to the public interest, be severely restricted. IPCC responds to 
these concerns in the words of D r  Reinbothe, leadmg the Delegation of the Commission 
of the European Communities in its intervention at the WIPO Information Meeting: 

“The  Delegation  stressed  [that] what  was  concerned  was  the  private  sector  activity  of  the 
development  and  commercialization of  databases  for  commercial  exploitation.  Where 
public interest requirements applied to provide for the public, and possibly free, availabhty 
of information &om whatever sources, the rules which the European Community and its 
Member States proposed would not inhibit such use. As an example, where meteorological 
information was collected by certain means and the public interest and safety of human life, 
shipping and aviation security, etc., dictated the free exchange, processing and use of such 
information,  in  such a  case,  the  proposal  of the European  Community  and  its  Member 
States would  in no way  detract from those public interest goals  and associated  freedoms. 
However, that did not prevent a private  operator from separately collecting, processing and 

NET LAW 

141 

marketing the  same  information, perhaps  with  additional information added, or  special 
processing done to produce specific results for other purposes, for example, use by insurance 
companies  for  risk-assessment  purposes,  in  addition  to  the  public  interest  tasks  already 
mentioned. It was the latter activity, for example, risk-assessment purposes and so on, which 
had  an  exclusively commercial  context, which  involved time and  effort  in its  operation and 
which could only operate in a commercial market.” (emphasis added). 
It is therefore  clear that commercial private industry investment as the basis of the 
suigeneris right is inherent in the EU Directive, and indeed quite explicit in the opening 
words of Article 1402 of the HR 354 Bd in the United States: 

“Any person  who extracts, or uses  in commerce, all or a substantial part, measured either 
quantitatively or  qualitatively,  of  a  collection  of  information  gathered,  organized, or 
maintained by  another person  through the investment of  substantial monetary or  other 
resources, so as to cause harm to the actual or potential market of that other person.. .” 

MAIN ELEMENTS OF A PROTECTION  SYSTEM 
Subject-Matter and  Criteria of Protection 

It will be neither possible nor helpful to attempt, at international treaty level, to pin 
down in statutory language the meaning of qualifjing language such as “substantial” in 
relation  to investment,  or  “insubstantial”  in relation  to  extraction.  In the long  term, 
juhcial interpretation is a safer procedure.  Thus, in the United Kingdom the Copyright 
Acts contain no definitions of either originality or substantiality, but cases decided over 
time have given considerable security of meaning to interested parties. Admittedly ‘over 
time’ can mean a considerable number of years or even decades, but the procedure is, 
on balance, preferable to what may be very damaging over-restrictive statutory language 
in a digital world we are only just entering. 

Rightholders 

The “maker of the  database” as the rightholder  can, perhaps,  only be defined by 
the criteria  for investment  which  define the making. Article 7.1  of the EU Directive 
requires a substantial investment “in either the obtaining, verification or presentation of 
the  contents”  of  the  database.  If  a  publisher/producer  cannot  demonstrate  a 
substantiality of investment  in one of  these three  activities, then  he is  not a sufficient 
“maker” for the purposes of the Directive. 

Exceptions 

To  answer  the  specijic  last  question  of the WIPO Questionnaire  of  1998 first- 

answer is  NO. 
“Should  there  be specific exceptions for  developing  countries?”-the 
One of the most exciting features of new technology  is  that it may allow developing 
countries  to by-pass  some present  analogue  channels  of communication  and  enter at 

142 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

once into the &&a1  channel. Some developing countries, e.g.  I d a ,  have very expert 
computer-related skills, and it is not dfficult to forecast for the near future investment 
by  industries in such countries in database creation and communication. It will be no 
service to  such industries to  have their  own  national  laws  riddled  by  internationally 
approved exceptions to rights. 

Ingeneral, the issue of exceptions does need revisiting. Article 9 of the EU Directive 
combines  a  narrow  view  with  some  uncertainties  of  meaning  (e.g. what  are  “the 
purposes of Illustration” in Article 9(b)?). As Professor Bernt Hugenholtz has suggested: 
“Apparently, the users’ fieedom to extract or re-utilize insubstantial parts of the database 
was considered, by the European legislation, to be sufficient.” 

It may,  indeed, be possible that  “umbrella” WIPO treaty language on exceptions 
might require the EU itself to re-visit the Directive, possibly as part of the examination 
of the suigeneris right built into the Directive at Article 16.3. 

There are, interestingly, important safeguards in HR 354, e.g. for extracting or use 
of information for non-profit  educational, scientific, or research purposes in a manner 
that does not harm the actual or potential market for the product  or service (Section 
1403(d)(i)). Government  data  is  expressly  excluded from protection  at  Section 1404. 
Further, Section 1403 also allows “any person” to make use of a database to verify the 
accuracy of information gathered, organized, or maintained by that person. 

Duration of Protection 

The EU Directive started with  the  Scandinavian “catalogue right” period of ten 
years,  and ended with  fifteen years  renewable. Under  the U.S.  initiative at HR 354, 
protection for a period of fifteen years is provided from the time of the investment. 

EXERCISE AND  INFRINGEMENT OF RIGHTS 

The sui generis right  will become  the  economic basis  of licensing of databases as 

services online, and sale or licensinglrental of databases offline. 

NET  LAW 

Table of Contents 

143 

PREFACE 

A. 

SECTION ONE: The Latest  Standardsfor Copyright 
IMPLEMENTING THE WIPO AGENDA - 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

TO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-INCLUDING  THE RIGHT  OF 

INTRODUCTION 
FROM COPYRIGHT  TO CONTRACT 
REPRODUCTION RIGHT 
COMMUNICATION 
MAKING  AVAILABLE  WORKS O R  OTHER  SUBJECT-MATTER 
EXCEPTIONS TO  THE  RESTRICTED  ACTS  OF  REPRODUCTION  AND  OF 
COMMUNICATION TO THE PUBLIC 
(a) 
(b)  Article 5.2 
(c)  Article  5.3 
(d)  Article  5.4 
PROTECTION  OF TECHNOLOGICAL MEASURES AND 
RIGHTS-MANAGEMENT  INFORMATION 
Article  6 
(a) 
(b)  Article  7 

Article 5.1-Temporary 

Acts of Reproduction 

5. 

6. 

B. 

7.  THE U.S. DIGITAL MILLENNIUM COPYRIGHT ACT  (DMCA) 
THE DATABASE DIRECTIVE 
1. 
2. 
3. 

INTRODUCTION 
INTERNATIONALIZATION OF THE SUI  GENERIS RIGHT 
THE COLLECTIONS OF INFORMATION ANTI-PIRACY  ACT  (HR 354) 

SECTION Two: Harmful  Content and Freedom of Expression 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
2.  THE EU  COMMUNICATION AND  ACTION PLAN 
3.  THE BERTELSMA"  FOUNDATION~NCORE INITIATIVE 
4.  EXAMPLES OF HARMFUL CONTENT 
International-Press  Release 

(a) 
(b)  Germany-Reuters 
(c)  The Netherlands-Reuters 
(d) 
(e)  The United States 
FINAL WORD 

The United Kingdom 

5. 

SECTION THREE: The Role of Collective Management 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
2.  THE CLA'S  RAPID CLEARANCE SERVICE  (CLARCS) 

144 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

3. 

4. 

5. 

1. 
2. 

of Data in the E-Commerce Systems 

I/ERDI 
ZNDECS-znteroperability 

LICENSING DIGITIZATION 
Transactional Only 
(a) 
(b)  Exact Page Representation 
(c)  Rightholder Opt-Zn 
(d)  Rightholder-Determined Fees 
MULTIMEDIA RIGHTS CLEARANCE SYSTEMS  (MMRCS) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c)  ByLine 
THE ACCOUNTABILITY  OF COLLECTING SOCIETIES 
Towards Global E-Commerce 
INTRODUCTION 
ELECTRONIC COPYRIGHT-MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
The Digital  Object Zdentijer 
THE EU DRAFT DIRECTIVE ON E-COMMERCE 
(a) 
(b)  As Regards Sewice Providers 
(c)  Commercial Communications 
(d)  Zmplementation 
JURISDICTION,  APPLICABLE  LAW,  RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT 
OF JUDGMENTS 
Jurisdiction 
(a) 
(b)  Applicable LAW 
(c)  Recognition and Enforcement ofJudgments 
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS 
Online Conclusion of Contracts 
(a) 
(b)  Digital Signatures 
(c)  Enctyption Policy 
DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM  (DNS) 

Scope ofthe Directive 

SECTION FOUR: 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

ENVOI 
Annex 

Copyright 0 Charles Clark 1999 


