DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12077

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Using technology transfer offices to foster
technological development: A proposal based on
a combination of articles 66.2 and 67 of the
TRIPS agreement

Nefissa Chakroun

Law School, Queen Mary, London
University, Centre for Commercial Law
Studies, London, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

Correspondence
Nefissa Chakroun, Centre for Commercial
Law Studies, Queen Mary Law School,
67-69 Lincoln’s, London, WC2A 3JB, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Email: n.chakroun@qmul.ac.uk

The paper is based on the premise that setting up technology
transfer offices (TTOs) should be envisaged as part of a more
comprehensive strategy for fostering technological develop-
ment. Its central argument is that developing countries will
not be in a position to fully benefit from technology transfer if
they suffer a lack of organisations capable of managing these
transactions. Invigorating article 66.2 mainly by shifting its
focus from incentives to enterprises to technical cooperation
as set out by article 67 is recommended. Setting up an
innovation strategy with an adequate intellectual property
policy is the foundation for the creation of a sound and viable
technological base. Structuring TTOs to play a key interme-
diary role between the producers and the receivers of the
technology is fundamental. Establishing a funding mechanism
and staffing TTOs are crucial aspects of the technical
cooperation as much of the expertise needed in relation to
technology transfer is lacking in the developing countries.

K E Y W O R D S
innovation, intellectual property, technology transfer, TRIPS

1 |

INTRODUCTION

Technology transfer is a vast subject open to discussion from several angles (WIPO, SCP/14/4 Rev). To date, debates
have mostly focused on providing flexibilities to allow developing countries to benefit from technologies generated by
the developed world (Carvalho, 2011). From an economic perspective, authors have investigated the extent to which

© 2017 The Authors. The  © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:103–118.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip | 103

104 |

CHAKROUN

the mechanism of transfer can affect the recipient of the technology. Specialists have shown that the absorptive
capacity of an economy depends on its degree of development and that the mechanism of transfer has to be rightly
adapted to this capacity (Hansen, 1980). Other works have stressed the need for a code of conduct for the transfer of
technology to facilitate these transactions (Blakeney, 1989; Guadamuz, 2000).

This paper takes the view that while international regulations are needed to promote technology transfer; they
are not necessarily sufficient to build up a sound and viable technological base as stipulated by article 66.2 of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The central argument of this work is that
developing countries will not be in a position to fully benefit from technology transfer if they suffer a lack of
organisations capable of managing these transactions.

The paper attempts to critically analyse the bargain on the basis of which developing and least developed
countries have agreed to adopt stronger intellectual property rights (IPRs) in exchange for the promise of increasing
their technological capacity.1 It advocates that an invigorated article 66.2 should be combined with article 67 of TRIPS,
which provides for technical and financial cooperation in favour of developing nations. This can be utilised for setting
up technology transfer offices (TTOs) as means of creating a sound and viable technological base for development
(Young, 2007). Hence, the primary aim of this work is to articulate proposals that bring more effectiveness to the
bargain, underpinning article 66.2. As a secondary aim, the paper attempts to show that such endeavour should be
achieved via a straight cooperation between the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO). In the exposition of the above argument, the paper proceeds in three parts. Part one
offers a critical analysis of article 66.2 by examining the reasons why the bargain underpinning the described exchange
is nothing but a ‘pipe dream’. Part two is an attempt to suggest ways of invigorating article 66.2 by combining it with
article 67 of TRIPS. Part three seeks to suggest minimum standards for a technical cooperation in relation to TTOs as
formal and essential mechanisms for operating technology transfer transactions.

2 | CREATING A SOUND AND VIABLE TECHNOLOGICAL BASIS OR A ‘PIPE
DREAM’?

This section carries out two levels of analysis. The first level analyses the wording of article 66.2. It highlights the
vagueness of its main concepts and obligations. The second level offers an assessment of its implementation. It
underscores the ineffectiveness of the incentives provided by developed countries for the enhancement of least
developed countries’ technological capacity.

2.1 | The language of article 66.2

Any discussion related to article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement requires a full understanding of the term ‘technology’ on
the one hand and ‘technology transfer’ on the other. While the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) defines the term ‘technology’ as ‘systematic knowledge for the manufacture of a product,
for the application of a process or for rendering a service’,2 WIPO describes ‘transfer of technology’ as ‘a series of
processes enabling and facilitating flows of skills, knowledge, ideas, know-how and technology among different
stakeholders such as universities and research institutions, international organizations, IGOs, NGOs, private sector
entities and individuals, as well as international technology transfer among countries’.3 From an economic point of
view, technology transfer is a mechanism through which someone intends to cede to someone else something they
have created, and teaching them how to perform it, in return for a fee. Hence, technology transfer is perceived as a
commercial transaction of purchase and sale of technological knowledge as it has the connotation of technological
trade (Blakeney, 1989; Coaracy, 1982).

As technology transfer is a cumulative process in continuous evolution, transfer of technology is supposed to be
perpetuating until the recipient of the technology acquires the technical capacity whereby he can evolve and keep up

CHAKROUN

| 105

with technological growth, independently and autonomously (Coaracy, 1982). Moreover, technology transfer can be
used as a synonym for ‘technology commercialisation’, whereby outcomes from universities are implemented to
become practical and commercial products for the market.4 In junction with this perception, TTOs based at
universities and research institutions are organisations aimed at purposefully transferring the results of fundamental
and or applied research from academia to the economy via an out-licensing of intellectual property assets.5 This paper
will analyse TTOs regardless of their location. However, in support of the central argument of this work, TTOs should
be viewed as an important vehicle through which technologies transit from the provider to the recipient. The TTO is
expected to play the role of interface between developed and developing countries. This role is meant to fill in the
existing gap in facilitating the technology transfer process. Once the transfer is accomplished, the TTO is expected to
apply the transferred technology to the local economy. It is only when this process is executed that a technological
base can be created. The process has to be consolidated so that one can refer to a sound and viable technological base
as stated in article 66.2.

Despite the fact that articles 7 and 8 of the TRIPS Agreement posit technology transfer, access and dissemination
of technical knowledge as central objectives for development, the agreement does not explain what is meant by
technology transfer. The agreement does not refer to TTOs. Article 66.2 is specifically dedicated to these kinds of
transaction but without defining them.6 The lack of clarity related to these key concepts undermines its
understanding. Article 66.2 establishes a positive and mandatory obligation on developed countries to provide
incentives to their enterprises for the purpose of promoting technology transfer to least developed countries (Correa,
2015).

The end product of such transfer should enable those countries to create their own technological base. This
means that the responsibility for the creation of a sound and viable technological base remains with the least
developed countries and not on the provider of the technology. Hence, the only obligation that lies on developed
countries is to provide incentives to their own enterprises. Referring to the 2001 WTO Doha Decision on
Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns as well as to the 2001 Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, it has been confirmed that the obligation to promote technology transfer consists only in incentivising
enterprises to facilitate the transfer of technologies.

Developed countries are not required to ensure or to monitor the process itself. A fortiori, they are not required to
ensure that the beneficiary is in the process of setting up a sound and viable technological base, which is the
prerequisite for any technological development.7 In 2003, developed countries were required to submit annual
reports on the implementation of article 66.2. The report should reflect the incentives regime, including any specific
policy or regulatory framework. The report should also provide an account of the functioning of the incentive, along
with any information related to the technology transferred and the means of transfer used.8 With this, has the bargain
been met?

2.2 | The effectiveness of article 66.2

Literature is scarce with regard to the assessment of the incentives implemented by developed countries in
application of article 66.2. Three aspects could be covered in respect to this question. The first point relates to the
adequacy of the proposed incentives in relation to the least developed countries’ needs. On this particular point,
Correa has examined reports submitted in 2006 to the TRIPS Council. He came to the conclusion that ‘developed
countries have generally failed to fulfil the obligations set out by article 66.2’ (Correa, 2007).

The second point is related to the frequency of submission of reports. This is subject to discussion as not all
developed countries have fulfilled the obligation set out by article 66.2.9 A third aspect relates to the appropriateness
of the technologies transferred to the least developed countries. Are they enhancing their capacity to innovate? Are
they really contributing in setting up a sound and viable technological base? In response to these questions, India has
voiced the fear that the technological gap between least developed countries and the rest of the world will be ‘further
widened and they would be marginalized in the global economy’.10

106 |

CHAKROUN

It has been further suggested that member states, especially least developed countries ‘have a right to know if
there is sufficient evidence to prove if the trade-off through article 66.2 was indeed effective’.11 In 2013, the Indian
delegation concluded that the incentives aimed at creating a sound and viable technological base in least developed
countries appeared to be a ‘pipe dream’.12 This paper suggests that technological development can be attained if more
specific content is added to the substance of article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement.

3 | TECHNICAL COOPERATION BASED ON FOSTERING TECHNOLOGY
TRANSFER

The implementation of article 66.2 is not leading to the foreseen objectives set out by the TRIPS Agreement. While
affirming this conclusion, it is essential to highlight that in 2016 least developed countries are being urged to
implement sections 5 and 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these sections.13
It is clear that given the current situation, meeting these commitments might pose difficulties. Addressing the situation
requires an overall review of the foundations of article 66.2. Three main issues will be analysed:

 First set of questions: what kind of actions could be implemented to promote technological advancement? Considering
that the incentives allocated to enterprises in the developed world did not produce the expected results, would it be
better to talk about technical cooperation rather than incentives? Are there any links between article 66.2 and article 67?
 Second question: to ensure effective implementation of article 66.2 is it possible to consider extending its field of

application to the developing countries?

 Third question: to increase the effectiveness of the bargain between the developed countries and the developing
nations, would it be possible to set up real mechanisms of enforcement related to any action aimed at enabling the
developing countries to create a sound and viable technological base?

3.1 | Invigorating article 66.2 through enhanced technical cooperation

Article 66.2 is meant to balance out the benefits of the TRIPS Agreement by ensuring that least developed countries receive
what they have bargained for (Gervais, 2012). Its implementation cannot be dissociated from article 67 of the same Agreement,
dealing with technical and financial cooperation in favour of developing and least developed country members (TRIPS, 1994
art. 67). This cooperation is meant to facilitate the implementation of the Agreement as a whole, including article 66.2. It should
cover assistance in the preparation of laws for the enforcement of IPRs or for the prevention of any abuse of IPRs.14

Invigorating article 66.2 can be attained through a harmonisation of the overlaps between the two articles. The
overarching aim is to establish linkage between incentives provided for in article 66.2 and the technical cooperation as
stated in article 67. The ultimate aim of this technical cooperation in favour of developing nations should be the
promotion of technology transfer and the dissemination of the technical knowledge for overall development as
expressly enunciated by articles 7, 8 and 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement. A corollary to such a proposal is that article
66.2 should reproduce the term ‘technical cooperation’ rather than ‘incentives’.

From another perspective, while article 66.2 involves developed and least developed countries, article 67
establishes technical and financial cooperation in favour of both developing and least developed countries. For more
effectiveness, article 66.2 should be extended to include developing countries. It is in this respect that scholars have
suggested that while few new initiatives have been reported, virtually all incentives or implemented programmes are
‘there are virtually no programs aimed
continued from prior policy decisions (Maskus, 2004). More critically,
specifically at the least developed countries, rather their benefits are available to all developing countries (or even
developed countries)’ (Maskus, 2004). On this basis, the trade-off between benefits and obligations underlying the
TRIPS Agreement can be better attained if article 66.2 extends its field of application to cover developing countries as
well as least developed countries.

CHAKROUN

| 107

Finally, one of the most significant deficiencies of article 66.2 is that developed nations are only required to report
on the incentives provided (Council TRIPS Decision, 2003). This means that there is no agreed mechanism, or
minimum standard by which assessment of the implementation of article 66.2 can be applied. This paper suggests that
there should be a mechanism of enforcement pursuant to which it is clarified when a developed country member is not
meeting the minimum standard agreed on by the TRIPS Council for the implementation of article 66.2. The country
member would probably be held by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body to be in violation of the TRIPS Agreement.15

3.2 | Harnessing overlaps between WTO’s technical cooperation and WIPO’s technical
assistance in relation to technology transfer

To establish minimum standards for the technical cooperation that can be provided to developing countries to create a
sound and viable technological basis, it is not sufficient to combine the provisions of article 66.2 with those of article
67 of TRIPS. Other steps are needed to bring more coherence between what is provided for in terms of technical
cooperation by WTO and what is offered by WIPO in terms of technical assistance within its development agenda.16
To this end, coordination between WTO and WIPO in terms of transfer of technology programmes should be further
enhanced. WIPO’s development agenda includes a variety of recommendations related to technology transfer. These
are in line with the aims and objectives of the TRIPS Agreement.17

Even better, the wording of recommendation 26 is in accordance with the provisions of articles 66.2 and 67. It
urges developed member states ‘to encourage their research and scientific institutions to enhance cooperation and
exchange with research and development institutions in developing countries, especially least developed ones’.18 In
so doing, WIPO duplicates the same provision, but instead of placing the burden of the incentive on the enterprise, it is
placed upon the scientific institutions. Recommendation 28 is even wider. It incentivises developed nations to explore
supportive intellectual property-related policies and measures that could be adopted to promote transfer and
dissemination of technology to developing countries.19

The same wording is also used in recommendation 31, where WIPO invites its member states to undertake
initiative contributing to transferring technologies to the developing nations.20 In sum, WTO objectives and
WIPO’s development agenda are pointing in the same direction. However, as far as outcomes are concerned,
efforts aimed at creating a sound viable technological base, in both cases, are lacking effectiveness.21 Therefore,
this paper argues that invigorating article 66.2 of TRIPS needs more consolidation of fragmented programmes.
This can be attained through closer and regular cooperation between the WTO’s TRIPS Council and the WIPO’s
Committee on Development and Intellectual Property.

More practically, a committee within the TRIPS Council could work in conjunction with WIPO’s intellectual
property and technology transfer experts to develop standards for the implementation of minimum standards that
clearly specify the substantive content of the technical cooperation and how extensive this assistance must be.
Ultimately, the proposal should be discussed and adopted by the TRIPS Council by formal decision. This can then lead
to more effectiveness in relation to the creation of a sound and viable technological base. In this respect, the paper
does not aim to propose an exhaustive list of what can be considered as technical cooperation in relation to
technology transfer. Rather, it seeks to focus on one aspect that is lacking in the vast majority of developing countries,
which is TTOs. These organisations are meant to execute the technology transfer process by playing the role of
interface between producers and receivers of the technology.

4 | TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER OFFICES AS PART OF AN INTEGRATED
POLICY TO FOSTER TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT

This section seeks to propose areas of technical cooperation that can be jointly implemented by WTO—on the basis of
articles 66.2 and 67 of the TRIPS Agreement—and by WIPO in the framework of its development agenda. Firstly, the

108 |

CHAKROUN

paper provides a justification for TTOs. Secondly, it tries to develop a detailed, but not exhaustive, list of areas of
technical cooperation for fostering technological development.

4.1 | Justification for TTOs

Whether it is a process enabling flow of skills, knowledge, ideas or know-how, technology transfer is a transaction that
goes through different channels.22 Scholars have identified four major channels for such transfer. The first channel is
related to trade in products. The second is trade in knowledge. The third is connected to direct foreign and
international investment, and the fourth relates to international movement of people (Kneller, Pantea, Upward, 2009;
Maskus, 2004). To enhance technology transfer practices, scholars have focused on policies that developed countries
can utilise to engage in technology transfer.23 Similarly, WIPO and other international organisations have analysed
policies and programmes designed to help developing countries enhance their capacity to benefit from technology
transfer transactions.24 At another level the literature has focused on how developing countries could best implement
flexibilities provided for in international agreements to better benefit from technology transfer (WIPO, CDIP, 2014).
However, analysing channels for technology transfer or providing incentives for such transactions may not suffice
(WIPO, CDIP, 2015). Still, developing countries need to set up organisations enabling them to fully benefit from
technology transfer. As discussed earlier, technology transfer is a complex process. It involves a range of skills and
competences for its accomplishment. This includes, among other skills, technical and legal qualifications in addition to
other aspects, particularly financial means.25 Deprived of these organisations, developing countries would not be able
to fully benefit from technology transfer.

It is then, in support of the central argument of this paper, that the author suggests invigorating article
66.2 through the implementation of the technical cooperation provided for by article 67. Typically, article 67
sets out the possibility of providing support for the establishment or reinforcement of domestic offices and
agencies in conjunction with matters related to the promotion of the intellectual property system. These
domestic offices may refer to the patent offices but they can also refer to organisations capable of managing
the complexity of the technology transfer transactions.26 As receiver or initiator of technology transfer
transactions, developing countries ought to possess operational TTOs capable of executing the technology
transfer process. In what follows, the paper tries to fill in the gap in the literature by proposing minimum
standards whereby WTO and WIPO could collaborate to bring more effectiveness to the disposition of article
66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement.

4.2 | Minimum standards for technical cooperation in relation to TTOs

This section proposes minimum standards for technical and financial cooperation: innovation strategies, intellectual
property policies, setting up TTOs, defining a financing model and training TTOs’ staff.

4.2.1 | Innovation strategies

Creating a sound and viable technological base where TTOs are key elements does not happen in a vacuum. It
needs an innovation strategy, which is a set of instruments and institutions aimed at upholding local
technological development.27 This may include adaptation of imported technologies to local conditions (Mani,
2004). There is no predefined framework for a perfect strategy promoting technological advancement
applicable to all countries. However, there are some common interconnected factors that can be analysed in this
context (Cohen, 2004). An innovation strategy is considered as a prerequisite, but not in itself sufficient to
generate a real dynamic based on technology transfer. Human factors engineering is one of the major elements
responsible for the effectiveness of the technology transfer process (Cohen, 2004).
Increasing financial
resources allocated to research activities is also one of those fundamental elements for an innovation strategy.

CHAKROUN

| 109

Other measures ought to be implemented such as setting fiscal incentives and promoting collaboration with the
productive sector (Roper, 2000).

Brazil, as one of the most technologically developed countries in the Latin American region, accounts for
practically one-half of the region’s total research and development expenditure.28 Its innovation strategy sets out four
main measures. Firstly, it places restrictions on the import of foreign technologies as part of a liberation strategy.
Secondly, it establishes a set of schemes through which domestic technology development is financed. Thirdly, efforts
are made to avail a set of loans and research grants, tax incentives and venture capital in favour of enterprises. Lastly,
the state intervenes to create an adequate supply of highly trained scientific manpower (Roper, 2000).

As per the French Innovation Act of 1999, it aims to ‘transform science and technology into economic growth and
job creation’.29 Incentives are established to allow creation and management of start-ups by researchers. Setting up
incubators and TTOs at universities and research centres are also encouraged (Research and Innovation, French Law,
1999). Tax reductions for investment in research and development activities are granted to companies. The
innovation policy implemented in Singapore aims to enhance local technological development through technology-
based small and medium enterprises and through the creation of a pool of techno-entrepreneurs and skilled workers.
Positive spillover from foreign companies is encouraged to operate in the country. Grants and tax incentives are
enacted. In addition, much emphasis is placed on human resource development (Mani, 2004).

Comparing the Singaporean innovation policy to the Malaysian one, many contrasts can be highlighted. Malaysia
does not have any specific instruments to engineer positive spillover despite the numerous multinational companies
that operate in its manufacturing sector. Also in terms of enrolment ratios in science and technology-related subjects,
the Malaysian ratio is very low compared to Singapore, Japan and the USA (Mani, 2004). On the other hand, the
analysis of the Indian experience shows that rigorous efforts are implemented not only to design and implement
attractive fiscal incentives but also to increase the number of research scientists and engineers (Mani, 2004).

In sum, implementing such strategies requires government commitment at the highest level. An innovation
strategy involves notably the higher education and scientific research department, the financial and fiscal bodies, the
productive sector and amongst other organisations, those dealing with intellectual property. As a prerequisite, the
success of any technology transfer needs the inclusion of a technological dimension into policies and legal frameworks
implemented by the recipient country. Moreover, creating an ecosystem fostering technology transfer with effective
TTOs needs an innovation strategy amalgamated with an intellectual property policy.

4.2.2 | Intellectual property policies

In general terms, Intellectual Property Policies (IPPs) lay down rules regulating ownership over intellectual property
assets and outcomes generated by technology transactions. The US intellectual property policy implemented by the
Bayh–Dole Act (BDA) highlights the necessity to commercialise inventions arising from research supported by federal
funds (US Patent Act, 2009). By granting the ownership of intellectual property to universities, the BDA is viewed as a
blanket permission given to universities to apply for patents and grant licences to exploit their inventions (Chakroun,
2012; Mowery, 2005; Rubin, Boozer, Helms, 2003).

Review of legislations related to intellectual property policies reveals that several countries grant the rights over
intellectual property assets to universities. Such regulation is available under Israeli law dating back to 1976, as well as
the Australian Patents Act and the French Intellectual Property Code (Harhoff & Hoisl, 2007; Meseri & Maital, 2001).
The Japanese law on technology licensing organisations regulates university patenting, marketing and licensing
activities. It promotes transfer of the outcome of academic research to industry to maintain industrial technology and
create new industries (Japanese Patent Law, 1998).

In relation to IPPs, technical cooperation can contribute to defining appropriate IPPs for developing countries
where such policies are lacking. It can improve existing regulations. This is the case for the Tunisian law that has
established the premise for an IPP since 2000 (Tunisian Law Relating to Scientific Research and Technological
Development, 1996). However, this legal framework needs revision. Most importantly, it needs adaptation to the

110 |

CHAKROUN

innovation strategy of the country. From another standpoint, an IPP should define areas where transfer of technology
is needed. Transferring technologies from the developed world to the least developed and developing countries
should be consistent with the development priorities of the recipient country. Therefore, as a threshold matter,
technical cooperation is needed to help developing countries identifying their technological needs before engaging in
any incentives provided by developed countries in application of article 66.2. Hence, the effectiveness of this article
depends on the application of article 67 in the first place.

Technical cooperation can help developing countries by specifying the best mode of facilitating the transfer of
technology. Once the technological fields are defined the IPP should specify how to retrieve and facilitate the
transfer of the needed technology. In this respect, WIPO has developed patent landscape reports (WIPO Patent
Landscape Reports, 2016). This technical assistance could be utilised to shape an effective IPP that serves the
specific needs of developing countries. More precisely, the IPP should detail which technologies are in the public
domain and which are in force. In this respect, WIPO’s patent landscape reports could be of great help. Overall,
shaping an IPP that serves the aims and objectives of the innovation strategy is a key step for any development
based on technology transfer. These are the foundations for the creation of a sound and viable technological base
and the underlying reference for the functioning of TTOs.

4.2.3 | TTOs’ structure and mission

There is no right way for setting up TTOs. These can be structured in different ways as long as they serve the
priorities and the objectives of a given national innovation strategy and its IPP (Campbell, 2007). Commonly, TTOs
are departments embedded in universities or in the institution of affiliation. Another option is to outsource the
technology transfer activity to an independent party. Such models are recommended for institutions with
considerable intellectual property portfolios. This will probably lead the independent party to pursue activities
directed towards high-value incomes rather than technology transfer for the broader public good (Campbell,
2007). By way of example, Berne and Zurich Universities have jointly set up a subsidiary non-profit TTO to
facilitate research for the public benefit, develop close ties with industry and increase income for the institutions
(Arvanitis, Kubli, Sydow, Woerter, 2005).

It is widely admitted that the main mission of a TTO is to leverage the intellectual capital of the related institution
to generate income and benefit society. A TTO may encompass various teams depending on the volume of intellectual
property assets that it is managing. Its mission is mainly related to business development and technology transfer.
Identification, management and exploitation of intellectual property assets are the key objectives of a TTO. Another
aspect of its mission is particularly devoted to monitoring and incubating new companies and spinouts from the
university.30

Specialists have shown that only few transactions generate significant incomes. Thus, government support of
TTOs’ activities is needed (Scherer & Harhoff, 2000). If traditionally, TTOs’ mission is to interface between academia
and industry, in relation to articles 66.2 and 67 of the TRIPS Agreement, TTOs are supposed to play a key intermediary
role between the producers and the receivers of the technology. Their chief mission is to manage the technology
transfer process in compliance with the innovation strategy and the IPP.

4.2.4 | TTOs’ financing models

The American BDA of 1980 has provided a legal basis for TTOs’ funding (Brown, 2011; Reisman & Cytraus, 2004). It
states that incomes generated from the commercialisation of intellectual property assets can be utilised to fund the
TTO.31 Universities are free to determine the percentage of the income that is allocated to the TTO. Commonly, it
ranges from 10 to 25%. On average, apart from its share of the commercialisation income, the university supports the
TTO by granting direct subsidies from internal sources during the first years of its operation. Subsequently, when
income generated from licensing activities becomes more significant, the subsidy required from the university is

CHAKROUN

| 111

reduced over time until it is completely eliminated. It is generally admitted that a number of years are required for a
TTO to become totally self-supporting.32

Japanese legislation was passed to create government-approved university TTOs. A TTO benefits from
government support that can reach two-thirds of its operating cost. The university provides the remaining one-third.
This is a 5-year scheme, after which the TTO is supposed to reach a certain level of financial autonomy (Lee, 2011).
Self-funded TTOs are rare and government funding is insufficient for for-profit companies, particularly for spinouts
created by TTOs. The creation of various faculty-owned spinouts associated with university TTOs has permitted an
expanded strategy to support TTOs activities. Nonetheless, new support systems such as incubators and risk capital
are still required (Collins & Wakoh, 2005; Fukugawa, 2005).

Chinese TTOs are operating as associated private companies and supported by university funds. With university
based venture funds, they are actively investing in setting up incubators and investing in spinouts. Often, TTOs
negotiate wholly or partly owned spin-out companies to become self-sufficient on the bases of their equity holdings
and the income generated from licensing and other related business development activities (Nilsson, 2006).

As far as India is concerned, though no legislation has been enacted to create formal structures for technology
transfer activities, most technical universities and research institutions have established organisations to interface
with industry (Basheer, 2010; Jhurani & Gagrani, 2010). Some of these autonomous entities are initiated with the
support of government seed funding.33 This is how the Indian Institute for Technology has established the Foundation
for Innovation and Technology Transfer. Like the Japanese and American TTOs, public funding is provided to Indian
TTOs for a limited period. Relying on royalties, shares, business consultancy and development related services; Indian
TTOs are evolving towards a self-funded status (Krishna & Chandra, 2009).

On the basis of the above, the technical and financial cooperation set out by article 67 could be utilised to assist
developing countries in shaping the most adequate financing model for setting up TTOs. This aspect is of paramount
importance as it helps define the funding mechanism for the technology transfer transaction. A review of the technical
assistance provided by WIPO reveals that not much focus has been put on this aspect. Yet, any technology transfer
process needs funding even when the transferred technology is in the public domain. The absorption process has a
cost. The adaptation process also has a cost. Other costs can be involved such as training local users to use the new
technology (Gürak, 2001).

4.2.5 | TTOs’ staffing

To be functional a TTO needs personnel skilled in technology transfer (Campbell, 2007).34 Here again, there is no right
way for staffing a TTO. Data in this respect shows interesting variations. For instance, the average number of staff in
the USA is four people, while in Canada and Australia TTOs have between eight and ten staff. Staffing levels in the UK
are six times higher than in the USA (Heher, 2007). Managing a TTO requires ability to engage with people at different
levels and across national boundaries (Campbell, 2007).

Ideally, a TTO can be perceived as a core viable unit with three staff members. Two of them should have
significant business experience, preferably in marketing, management and business development, combined with a
science or engineering background. Subsequently, they can develop expertise in commercial transactions based on
intellectual property assets.35 The third member provides administrative support.36 TTOs are expected to outsource
activities related to the filing of patent applications, negotiation of licensing agreements and enforcement of patent
rights. In-house legal advisors or patent attorneys are hired when the TTO manages a large volume of technology
transfer transactions. Given the importance of the patenting phase in the technology transfer process, it is necessary
to ensure that patent applications are drafted by a specialist. Drafting patent applications necessitates conducting
thorough prior art research, which involves the use of specialised patent databases. It also implies meeting filing
deadlines and managing the patent prosecution process in the most professional way.

Apart from that, a granted patent can be subject to an opposition procedure. In such cases, it is recommended that a
skilled patent attorney handles the legal procedure either before the patent office or the court (Young, 2007). Managing

112 |

CHAKROUN

patent portfolios is a long and complex process, which an in-house patent counsel might not be able to handle. While
developing, the TTO could diversify its activities and create individual operating divisions such as a licensing service
responsible for evaluating and marketing the inventions, coordinating industry relations and negotiating licence
agreements. Accounting services, marketing and public relations services can also be envisaged. It is also possible to think of
a division for spin-out ventures, incubators and the like (M.I.T. System of Technology Transfer, 2000).

What has been described so far are TTOs in developed countries where all the needed skills are available either in
the public or the private sector. Setting up such TTOs in developing countries is very challenging as various skills are
not available. Searching and analysing prior art, patent filing, drafting and negotiating the licensing agreement are skills
lacking in a great number of least developed and developing countries. It is in this respect that the technical
cooperation provided for by article 67 of TRIPS is greatly needed.

Training human resources to be qualified to undertake technology transfer transactions is highly recommended.
Emphasis can be put on training personnel in industry, research institutions and patent offices for the use of patent
documentation, including the ability to analyse and interpret technical knowledge (Coaracy, 1982). To this end,
complimentary programmes can be taught to engineers enabling them to play the role of brokers, negotiating licensing
agreements, advising banks and capital ventures on financing projects based on the exploitation of intellectual
property assets (Agmon & Messica, 2008). The end product of such technical cooperation is to enable the TTOs’ staff
to undertake the role of interface between providers of technologies from developed countries and receivers in the
least and developing countries.

5 | CONCLUSION

The paper is based on the premise that setting up TTOs should be envisaged as part of a more comprehensive strategy
for fostering technological development. Its central argument is that developing countries will not be in a position to
fully benefit from technology transfer if they suffer a lack of organisations capable of managing these transactions.
The paper suggests two phases in the exposition of this argument:

Invigorating article 66.2 by extending its field of application to developing countries, establishing an enforcement

mechanism and shifting its focus from incentives to enterprises to technical cooperation as set out by article 67.

Implementing technical cooperation, which covers the following areas. The first area aims at setting up an
innovation strategy with an adequate IPP as the foundation for the creation of a sound and viable technological base.
The second aspect is related to structuring TTOs and defining their mission. In this regard, the paper further argues
that while TTOs’ traditional mission is to interface between academia and industry, TTOs are also supposed to play a
key intermediary role between the producers and the receivers of the technology. Their chief mission is to manage the
technology transfer process in compliance with the innovation strategy and the IPP of the recipient country. The third
aspect is to set out a funding mechanism for the implementation of the technology transfer transaction, and the fourth
area is to staff the TTO. The paper shows that technical cooperation is crucial in this particular respect, as much of the
expertise needed in relation to technology transfer is lacking in the developing countries.

Finally, the paper stresses that implementing these two phases should lead to the creation of an ecosystem
fostering technology transfer. In this respect, it has established links between WIPO’s development agenda and
WTO’s technical cooperation. Patent landscape reports and use of patents in the public domain are examples where
cooperation between these organisations can be strengthened to enhance technological development.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Nefissa Chakroun is a researcher with a doctorate in intellectual property law. She has authored a recent monograph
on Patents for Development. Nefissa has also developed an extensive professional experience in policy making.
Practising as an international intellectual property and technology transfer consultant, she has led missions for

CHAKROUN

| 113

international organisations such us the World Intellectual Property Organisation and the United Nations Economic
and Social Commission for Western Asia. e-mail: n.chakroun@qmul.ac.uk; c.nefissa@gmail.com

ENDNOTES

This paper sought to bring a scholarly contribution to the literature related to TRIPS agreement, specifically,
provisions related to technology transfer. From another prospective, it aimed to help policy makers frame their
innovation strategies.

1 TRIPS, 1994 article 66.2 ‘Developed country Members shall provide incentives to enterprises and institutions in their
territories for the purpose of promoting and encouraging technology transfer to least-developed country Members in order
to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base’.

2 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, International Code on the Transfer of Technology (2001).
Available at <http://unctad.org/en/docs/psiteiitd28.en.pdf> [Accessed on December 2015]. See also Mark V. Shugurov,
‘TRIPS Agreement, International Technology Transfer and Least Developed Countries’ (2015) KAD International, ISBN
2410–4981. The author defines technologies as ‘global public goods of intellectual nature’ 75.

3 On the definition of the term ‘technology’, see UNCTAD 1985, Chap1, para (1) and (2). See also UNCTAD Series on
issues in international investment agreements (New York, Geneva, 2001). ‘Technology includes not only knowledge or
methods that are necessary to carry on or to improve the existing production and distribution of goods and services but
also entrepreneurial expertise and professional know-how’ MiagsamSantikarn, Technology Transfer
(Singapore,
Singapore University Press, 1981) 4. On the definition of technology transfer See WIPO, Committee on Development
and Intellectual Property, ‘Project paper for the Project on Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer: Common
Challenges-Building Solutions (Recommendations 19, 25, 26, and 28)’ Eighth Session. Geneva, November 14 to 18,
2011. CDIP/8/7.

4 WIPO, Standing Committee of the Law of Patents, Transfer of Technology in its fourteenth session. SCP/14/4/rev,
Geneva, April 13th, 2011 at 18. For further discussion on the different perceptions of technology transfer, see for
example, the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation ‘Technology transfer is a transaction or a process
through which know-how is transferred normally between businesses or agencies representing businesses. This is the
micro-level ‘business model’ of technology transfer in which the transaction or collaboration takes place because both
the parties perceives gains’ UNIDO and the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) ‘ Innovative Technology
Transfer Framework’.

5 See Lita Nelsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, presentation given on the occasion of the Innovation Day.
6 In its report on the implementation of article 66.2, New Zealand has provided a definition of technology transfer:
‘technology transfer is interpreted in this report broadly to include training, education and knowhow, along with any capital
component. Using the United Nations definition, New Zealand sees four key modes of technology transfer: (i) physical
objects or equipment; (ii) skills and human aspects of technology management and learning; (iii) designs and blueprints which
constitute the document embodied knowledge on information and technology; and (iv) production agreement linkages
within which technology is operated’. Council for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights-New Zealand-IP/C/
W/497/Add.3.3 December 2007 para 3.

7 See WTO, Implementation-related Issues and concerns, ‘Reaffirming that the provisions of Article 66.2 of the TRIPS
Agreement are mandatory, it is agreed that the TRIPS Council shall put in place a mechanism for ensuring the monitoring
and full implementation of the obligations in question. To this end, developed-country members shall submit prior to the
end of 2002 detailed reports on the functioning in practice of the incentives provided to their enterprises for the
transfer of technology in pursuance of their commitments under Article 66.2. These submissions shall be subject to a
review in the TRIPS Council and information shall be updated by Members annually’. Decision of 14 November 2001
available at <https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_implementation_e.htm> [Accessed on
December 2015].

8 WTO, Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ‘Implementation of article 66.2 of the TRIPS
Agreement’ Decision of the Council for TRIPS of 19 February 2003 (OP/C/28, 20 February 2003). Available at <file:///C:/
Users/user/Downloads/28%20(1).pdf> [Accessed on December 2015].

9 See the reminder to the notifications on the implementation of articles 66.2 and 67 (TRIPS): Technical cooperation and
Technology Transfer by the European Commission urging developed countries to comply with the obligations set out by
article 66.2 Brussels, 12 September 2007. Available at <http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2007/october/
tradoc_136431.2%20and%2067.pdf> [Accessed on December 2015].

114 |

CHAKROUN

10 WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on 10th annual review of Article 66.2, TRIPS Agreement (2012) available at

<http://keionline.org/node/1585> [Accessed on December 2015].

11 WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on 10th annual review of Article 66.2, TRIPS Agreement (2012).
12 WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on article 66.2 (2013) available on <http://keionline.org/node/1807> [Accessed
on December 2015]. On the same subject, see Andrew Michaels, ‘International Technology Transfer and TRIPS article 66.2:
Can Global Administrative Law Help Least Developed Countries get what they bargained for?’ (2009) 41 Georgetown
Journal of International Law 246–249. See also International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (UNCTAD-
ICTSD 2008), Suerie Moon, ‘Does TRIPS Art.66.2 Encourage Technology Transfer to LDCs? An Analysis of Country
Submissions to the TRIPS Council 1999–2007.

13 WTO, Declaration on TRIPS Agreement and the Public Health (Doha, Ministerial, 2001) ‘We also agree that the least-
developed country members will not be obliged, with respect to pharmaceutical products, to implement or apply Sections 5
and 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these Sections until 1 January 2016, without
prejudice to the right of least-developed country members to seek other extensions of the transition periods as provided
for in Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement. We instruct the Council for TRIPS to take the necessary action to give effect to
this pursuant to Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement’.

14 TRIPS Agreement (1994) article 67 ‘In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, developed country
Members shall provide, on request and on mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical and financial cooperation in
favour of developing and least-developed country Members. Such cooperation shall include assistance in the preparation
of laws and regulations on the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as on the prevention of
their abuse, and shall include support regarding the establishment or reinforcement of domestic offices and agencies
relevant to these matters, including the training of personnel’.

15 Understanding the WTO: Settling Disputes. Available at <https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/

disp1_e.htm> [Accessed on December 2015].

16 WIPO (General Assembly 2007) Cluster C of the Development Agenda is dedicated to Technology Transfer, Information

and Communication Technologies (ICT) and Access to Knowledge. See recommendations 25–31.

17 WIPO Development Agenda, Recommendation 25 Cluster c ‘Exploring intellectual property-related policies and initiatives
necessary to promote the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the benefit of developing countries and to take
appropriate measures to enable developing countries to fully understand and benefit from different provisions, pertaining
to flexibilities provided for in international agreements, as appropriate’.

18 WIPO Development Agenda (DA), Recommendation 26, Cluster C.
19 WIPO DA, Recommendation 28, Cluster C
20 WIPO DA, Recommendation 31, Cluster C.
21 WIPO, CDIP/16/3, Evaluation Report of the Project on Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer: Common

Challenges-Building Solutions, Sixteenth Session, Geneva, November 9 to 13, 2015.

22 UNCTAD (2001) the draft Transfer of Technology Code has listed the following five transactions ‘(a) the assignment, sale
and licensing of all forms of industrial property, except for trademarks, service marks and trade names when they are not
part of transfer of technology transactions (b) included in know-how and technical expertise are feasibility studies, plans
diagrams, models, instructions, guides, formulae, basic or detailed engineering design, specifications and equipment for
training, services involving technical advisory and managerial personnel, and personnel training (c) the provision of
technical knowledge necessary for the installation, operation and functioning of plant and equipment, and turnkey projects
(d) the provision of technological knowledge necessary to acquire, install and use machinery, equipment, intermediate
goods and/or raw materials which have been acquired by purchase, lease or other means (e) the provision of technological
contents of industrial and technical co-operation arrangements’.

23 ICTSD, Does TRIPS Art. 66.2 Encourage Technology Transfer to LDCs? An Analysis of Country Submissions to the TRIPS

Council 1999–2007, (ESCWA, 2016; Moon Suerie 2008).

24 See WIPO Expert Forum on International Technology Transfer, Geneva 16–18 February, 2015. <http://www.wipo.int/

edocs/mdocs/mdocs/en/wipo_inn_ge_15/wipo_inn_ge_15_program.pdf> [Accessed on December 2015].

25 See Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Innovation and Entrepreneurship University of Ulster Business School and
School of Social Enterprises Ireland Belfast, UK (ed by Brendan Galbraith 2014) ‘Technology Transfer encompasses a
complicated process involving the complexity of both the market as well as the complexity of interactions between the
transferor and the beneficiary originating from many different sources. It therefore, requires the use of different models
that could facilitate the effective planning and practical implementation of technologies, and help to manage and overcome
the barriers that impede the transfer process’ at 473.

CHAKROUN

| 115

26 On this subject see WIPO University Initiative Program launched in 2002 at the request of the WIPO Member States, the
aim of the WIPO University Initiative Program is to assist universities in developing their intellectual property and
technology management capacity. <http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/general/1033/wipo_pub_1033.pdf> [Ac-
cessed on December 2015]. See also WIPO, Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, WIPO’s Activity on Transfer of
Technology (SCP/18/7) Eighteenth Session Geneva May 21 to 25, 2012 at 46, Annex I page 4.

27 See Chapter 3 Innovation Policies for Development and Chapter 4 Principles for National Innovation Success in the Global
Innovation Index 2015 Effective Innovation Policies for Development (Cornel University, INSEAD, and the World Intellectual
Property Organisation 2015) Editors S. Dutta, B. Lanvin and S.W. Vincent.

28 See the Global Innovation Index (2015) available at <http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/econ_stat/en/economics/

gii/pdf/2015/gii_2015_rankings.pdf> [Accessed on December 2015].

29 See Law N°99–587 dated the 12th of July 1999 relating to the Promotion of Research and Innovation: <http://www.
legilux.public.lu/leg/a/archives/2009/0150/2009A2256A.html> [Accesses on December 2015]. See also H. Angelino, N.
Collier, ‘Comparison of Innovation Policy and Transfer of Technology from Public Institutions in Japan, France, Germany
and the United Kingdom. Part one French and Japanese case study’ (2004) National Institute of Informatics, Journal N°8 p.
62.

30 Mention has to be made to an early leader in the UK in the field of technology transfer, which is the Medical Research
Council Technology who wholly owned subsidiary of the Medical Research Council. This technology transfer company has
grew from a Team composed of four people to a company that currently employs a staff composed of more than 60 people.
See Campbell, ‘How to set up a Technology Transfer Office: Experiences from Europe’ (2007) 565.

31 The Bayh–Dole Act of 1980 enacted as PL 96–817 and codified in the US Code of Federal Regulations provides that
‘Income recorded from commercialization government-funded-research results can be utilized for only three purposes: (i)
to fund the Administration of the technology transfer function (TTO); (ii) to provide a share of income to the inventor as an
incentive to participate in technology transfer and (iii) to support education and further R&D and the institution’.

32 There are some public research organisations at the US such as Federal Laboratories that are funded directly through a set-
aside provided for example, the US department of Defence, Energy, and Commerce (See federal Laboratory Consortium for
Technology Transfer).

33 Similar experience has been witnessed in South Africa where the government has established the Innovation Fund
Commercialisation Office to provide one stop support for protecting and commercialising the outcome of public research
organisations.

34 On this issue Campbelle said that ‘the core element for successful technology transfer is people’ in ‘How to Set up a

Technology Transfer Office: Experience from Europe’ 561.

35 Specific training is needed for a team to acquire appropriate skills related to the commercialisation of intellectual property
rights. In Europe, the most prominent networking forum is the Association of European Science and technology Transfer
Professionals (ASTP). This is a professional membership organisation for technology transfer managers that hosts
conferences and allows networking activities. See also PraxisUnicao an educational not-profit organisation supporting
innovation and commercialisation of public sector and charity research for social and economic impact. <http://www.
praxisunico.org.uk>. Internships are available in various countries. For instance in the US, the Special American Buisiness
Internship Program is offered by the department of commerce.

36 A TTO that does not have access to appropriate administrative support might be inefficient. For example, it is crucial to establish
an appropriate information management system. Transferring results from academia to industry is a long process. It is important
to have adequate access to records concerning key information on the legal status of patents and related agreements. Also to
develop business, project and contact details. This information must be captured, organised and maintained for a long time.
Litigation cases require access to initial documents often several years after patent filing and licensing.

REFERENCES

Agmon, T., & Messica, A. (2008). Venture capital funds, financial foreign direct investment and the generation of local

comparative advantage in the technology sector in Israel. Contribution to Political Economy, 27, 57–72.

Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. (1994). Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World

Trade Organization, Annex 1C, 1869 U.N.T.S. 299, 33 I.L.M. 1197.

Angelino, H., & Collier, N. (2004). Comparison of innovation policy and transfer of technology from public institutions in Japan,
France, Germany and the United Kingdom. Part one French and Japanese case study. National Institute of Informatics
Journal, 8, 62.

116 |

CHAKROUN

Arvanitis, S., Kubli, U., Sydow, N., & Woerter, M. (2005). University-industry knowledge and technology transfer in

Switzerland: The university view. Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Working Paper No 119.

Basheer, S. (2010). Outsourcing Bayh–Dole to India: Lost in translation? Columbia Journal of Asian Law, 23, 269.
Blakeney, M. (1989). Legal Aspects of Technology Transfer to Developing Countries. Oxford: ESC Publishing.
Brown, G.

(2011). Academic technology licensing: Bay–Dole and beyond. <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?

abstract_id = 1780469> [Accessed March 2017].

Campbell, A. (2007). How to set up a technology transfer office: Experiences from Europe. in A. Krattiger, R. T. Mahoney, & L.
Nelson, et al. (Eds.), Intellectual management in health and agricultural innovation: A handbook of best practices. Oxford, UK:
MIHR and Davis, USA: PIPRA. Available online at: www.ipHandbook.org.

Carvalho, N. P. (2011). Article 66, least developed countries members. in The TRIPS regime of patent rights (3rd ed.)

(pp. 698–708). The Hague: Kluwer Law International.

Chakroun, N. (2012). The Bay–Dole Act: An exportable technology transfer policy. Mary Journal of Intellectual Property, 2,

79–89.

Coaracy, G. R. (1982). The role of patent information in relation to transfer of technology. World Patent Information, 4,

159–163.

Cohen, G. (2004). Technology transfer: Strategic management in developing countries. New Delhi: Sage Publication.
Collins, S., & Wakoh, H. (2005). University and technology transfer in Japan: Recent reforms in historical perspective. Journal

of Technology Transfer, 25, 213–222.

Correa, C. (2015). Can the TRIPS agreement foster technology transfer to developing countries? In K. E. Maskus, & J. H.
Reichman (Eds.), International public goods and transfer of technology under a globalized intellectual property regime.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Correa, C. (2007). Intellectual property in the LDCs: Strategies for enhancing technology transfer and dissemination.
Background Paper N 4: UNCTAD: The least developed countries report <http://unctad.org/Sections/ldc_dir/docs/
ldcr2007_Correa_en.pdf> [Accessed March 2017].

Council for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights-New Zealand-IP/C/W/497/Add.3. 3 December 2007 para 3.
Council TRIPS, Decision of the Council for TRIPS of 19 February 2003 implementation of article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement,

IP/C/28 (20 February 2003).

Cornel University, INSEAD, and the World Intellectual Property Organisation. (2015). Innovation Policies for Development.
Fukugawa, N. (2005). Characteristics of knowledge interactions between universities and small firms in Japan. International

Small Business Journal, 23, 127–150.

Gervais, D. (2012). The TRIPS agreement: Drafting history and analysis (4th ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell.
Global Innovation Index. (2015). Global Innovation Index. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/econ_stat/

en/economics/gii/pdf/2015/gii_2015_rankings.pdf>

Guadamuz, A. L. (2000). The future of technology transfer in the global village. , 3,

589–602.

Gürak, H. (2001). Hidden costs of technology transfer. <http://www.business-asia.net/UploadedFiles/ApcttDocuments/

Hidden-Costs-of-Tech-Transfer.pdf> [Accessed March 2017].

Hansen, B. (1980). Economic aspects of technology transfer to developing countries. International Review of Intellectual

Property and Completion Law, 11, 429–440.

Harhoff, D., & Hoisl, K. (2007). Institutionalised incentives for ingenuity-patent value and the German Employees Invention

Acts. Research Policy Elsevier, 36, 1143–1216.

Heher, A. D. (2007). Benchmarking of technology transfer offices and what it means for developing countries. In A. Krattiger,
R. T. Mahoney, L. Nelsen, et al. (Eds.), Intellectual property management in health and agricultural innovation: A handbook of
best practices. MIHR: Oxford, UK, and PIPRA: Davis, USA. Available online at: www.ipHandbook.org

ICTSD, Does TRIPS Art. 66.2 encourage technology transfer to LDCs? An analysis of country submissions to the TRIPS council

1999–2007, (Moon Suerie 2008).

Japanese Patent Law. (1998). Patent Act (Act No. 121 of April 13, 1959, as amended up to Act No. 36 of May 14, 2014).

Available at <http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15655>

Jhurani, R., & Gagrani, H. (2010). The Indian Bayh–Dole: A boon, or too soon? Corporate law cases.
Kneller, R., Pantea, S., & Upward, R. (2009). Which international technology transfer channels are effective in raising firm
productivity and what role for policy. Working paper <http://www.etsg.org/ETSG2009/papers/pantea.pdf> [Accessed
March 2015].

Krishna, V., & Chandra, N. (2009). Knowledge production and knowledge transfer: A study of two Indian Institutes of

Technology (IIT Madras and IIT Bombay). Asia Research Institute Working Paper No 121.

Lee, K. J. (2011). From interpersonal networks to inter-organisational alliances for University-Industry Collaborations in

Japan: The Case of the Tokyo Institute of Technology. R&D Management, 41, 190–201.

CHAKROUN

| 117

Mani, S. (2004). Government, Innovation and Technology Policy, An International Comparative Analysis. United Nations
University/Institute for New Technologies <http://www.mafhoum.com/press4/130T41.pdf> [Accessed March 2017].
Maskus, K. E. (2004). Encouraging International Technology Transfer (UNCTD-ICSD Project on Intellectual Property Rights

and Sustainable Development) Issue Paper Number 7 at 35.

Meseri, O., & Maital, S. (2001) A survey analysis of university technology transfer in Israel: Evaluation of projects and

determinants of success. Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 115–16.

Michaels, A. (2009). International technology transfer and TRIPS article 66.2: Can global administrative law help least

developed countries get what they bargained for? Georgetown Journal of International Law, 41, 246–249.

M.I.T. System of Technology Transfer. (2000). Massachusetts Institute of Technology System of Technology Transfer.
Mowery, D. C. (2005). The Bayh–Dole Act of 1980 and university-industry technology transfer: A policy model for other

governments? Journal of Technology Transfer, 30, 115–27.

Nilsson, A. S. (2006). Commercialisation of life-science research at universities in the United States, Japan and China. Ostersund,

Sweden: Swedish Institute for Growth Policy Studies.

Reisman, A., & Cytraus, A. (2004). Institutionalized technology transfer in USA: A historical review. <http://ssrn.com/

abstract=585364> [Accessed March 2017].

Roper, S. (2000). Innovation Policy in Israel, Ireland and the UK: An Evolutionary Perspective. Working Paper N°47 NIERC,

Economic Research Institute of Northern Ireland.

Rubin, H., Bukofzer, A., & Helms, S. (2003) From ivory tower to wall street-University Technology Transfer in the US, Britian,

China, Japan Germany, and Israel. International Journal of Law and IT, 11, 59–86.

Scherer, F. M., & Harhoff, D. (2000) Technology policy for a world of skew-distributed outcomes. Research Policy, 29,

559–566.

Shugurov, M. V. (2015). TRIPS agreement, international technology transfer and least developed countries. KAD International,

ISBN, 2410–4981.

Suerie, Moon. Does TRIPS Art. 66.2 encourage technology transfer to LDCs? An analysis of country submissions to the TRIPS

council 1999–2007.

Tunisian Law Relating to Scientific Research and Technological Development. (1996). Tunisian orientation law relating to

Scientific Research and Technological Development, as amended in 2000.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, International Code on the Transfer of Technology. (2001). Available at <http://

unctad.org/en/docs/psiteiitd28.en.pdf> [Accessed March 2017] UNCTAD (2001) the draft Transfer of Technology Code.

UNCTAD. (1985). UNCTAD series on issues in international investment agreements (New York, Geneva, 2001).
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia. (ESCWA, 2016). Chakroun, N ‘Legal frameworks for
Technology Transfer Offices in Tunisia, Report commissioned by ESCWA. Available at <https://www.unescwa.org/sites/
www.unescwa.org/files/page_attachments/tunisia_a_study_of_legislatives_review_and_update_roadmap.pdf>

US Patent Act. (2009). Consolidated Patent Laws - March 2017 update. Available at <https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/

pac/mpep/consolidated_laws.pdf>

Young, T. A. (2007). Establishing a technology transfer tffice. In A. Krattiger, R. T. Mahoney, L. Nelson, et al. (Eds.), Intellectual

property management in health and agricultural innovations: A handbook of best practices (p. 545). UK: Oxford.

WIPO Expert Forum on International Technology Transfer, Geneva 16–18 February 2015.
WIPO CDIP/14/INF/7. (2014).
WIPO CDIP/16/3. (2015).
WIPO Development Agenda. (2007).
WIPO Patent Landscape Reports. (2016). Patent Landscape Reports. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/publications/en/

series/index.jsp?id=137>

WIPO, Standing committee on the law of patents, ‘technology transfer’ fourteenth session, Geneva, January 25 t0 29, 2010

SCP/14/4 Rev.

WIPO, CDIP, Project paper for the Project on Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer: common challenges-building

solutions (Recommendations 19, 25, 26 and 28). Eighth Session. Geneva, November 14 to 18, 2011. CDIP/8/7.

WIPO, Transfer of technology in its fourteenth session. SCP/14/4/rev, Geneva, April, 13th, 2011.
WIPO, CDIP/14/INF/7. (2014). Economics of intellectual property and international technology transfer, fourth session,

Geneva, November 10 to 14 at Annex I.19.

WIPO (General Assembly 2007). Cluster C of the Development Agenda is dedicated to Technology Transfer, Information and

Communication Technologies (ICT) and access to knowledge.

WIPO, CDIP/16/3, Evaluation report of the project on intellectual property and technology transfer: Common challenges-

building solutions, sixteenth session, Geneva, November 9 to 13, 2015.

WIPO Landscape Reports. (2016).
WIPO University Initiative Program (2002). <http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/general/1033/wipo_pub_1033.pdf>

[Accessed March 2017].

118 |

CHAKROUN

WIPO, activity on transfer of technology (SCP/18/7) eighteenth session Geneva May 21 to 25, 2012 at 46, Annex I.
WTO,

Implementation-related issues and concerns, Decision of 14 November 2001 <https://www.wto.org/english/

thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_implementation_e.htm> [Accessed March 2017].

WTO, council for trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights ‘Implementation of article 66.2 of the TRIPS agreement’
decision of the council for TRIPS of 19 February 2003 (OP/C/28, 20 February 2003). <file:///C:/Users/user/Downloads/
28%20(1).pdf> [Accessed March 2017].

WTO trade related aspects of intellectual property rights, technical cooperation and technology transfer (2007) <http://trade.

ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2007/october/tradoc_136431.2%20and%2067.pdf> [Accessed March 2015].

WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on 10th annual review of Article 66.2, TRIPS Agreement (2012). <http://keionline.

org/node/1585> [Accessed March 2017].

WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on 10th annual review of Article 66. 2, TRIPS Agreement (2012).
WTO TRIPS Council: Intervention of India on article 66.2 (2013). Available on <http://keionline.org/node/1807> [Accessed

March 2015].

WTO, Declaration on TRIPS Agreement and the Public Health (Doha, Ministerial, 2001).
WTO Settling disputes. <https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/disp1_e.htm> [Accessed March 2017].

How to cite this article: Chakroun N. Using technology transfer offices to foster technological
development: A proposal based on a combination of articles 66.2 and 67 of the TRIPS agreement. J World
Intellect Prop. 2017;20:103–118. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12077


