The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 26–50
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2011.00432.x

International Norms for Compulsory Licensing
and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha
Cochin University of Science and Technology

In the context of the Copyright Amendment Bill, 2010 of India, this paper explores the feasibility in the inter-
national context, of compulsory licence, to ensure information dissemination while safeguarding the interests of
copyright owners and the Indian legal position in this respect. Though India pioneered the pressure group for
ensuring recognition of compulsory licence in international norms in the discussions of the Berne Convention, it
is interesting how her own laws were drafted and how the new Bill is addressing this issue. The problem of access
to the information from the developed countries in the context of The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) and the interpretation to the open-ended three-step test to
facilitate such access are the focal point of this paper.

Keywords compulsory licensing; Berne; TRIPS Agreement; India

The ultimate aim of copyright law is protection of public interest in disseminating knowledge. It is in
pursuance of this aim that the authors are rewarded so that further creativity is encouraged. Hence,
it is the duty of the copyright law to see that protection extended to the owner of copyright never
goes to the extent of nullifying the user’s interest. It is in this context that limitations and exceptions
to the exclusive rights of the copyright owner become relevant. The need for regulating industrial
practices and competition is another reason for introducing limitations to copyright.1 Limitations
are thus justiﬁed either to resolve potential conﬂicts of interests between the copyright owners and
users of copyright-protected materials or to implement a particular aspect of public policy (Guibault,
2002).

Compulsory/non-voluntary licensing is one method of assuring dissemination of information
while giving due respect to the author’s/owner’s rights by compensating him. It balances the interests
of owners and users by compelling the owner of copyright to grant licences on request, against
the payment of equitable remuneration (Guibault, 2002). Some hold the view that it simply acts
as a restriction on the right of the copyright owner to choose her contracting partner rather than
putting any restriction on the scope of her exclusive right (Guibault, 2002). It acts as a restraint
on the author when the enjoyment of the right by her runs counter to important public interests.
Unlike other forms of remuneration-free limitations and exceptions, compulsory licensing permits
bulk access.2 A perusal of its historical origin shows that it was originally intended to cover special
situations such as non-availability of copyrighted materials, over-pricing and ensuing non-access,
undersupply, etc.3 Since these are extreme situations of denial of access to copyrighted materials,
they cut at the very root of copyright justiﬁcations and thus differ widely from the justiﬁcations
for other forms of limitations. But there are other situations as well, like the compulsory licens-
ing concerning broadcasting rights and recording of musical rights, capable of taking care of the
competing industrial interests, the major justiﬁcation for which is, inter alia, prevention of abuse of
monopoly.

26

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

The International Mandate Regarding Compulsory Licensing
The “Three-Step Test” under the Berne Convention
Originally, the International Copyright Law—through the Berne Convention—left the issue of pro-
viding limitations and exceptions to the national legislation.4 It was in the Stockholm Act that the
general provision recognizing reproduction right was introduced for the ﬁrst time in the Berne Con-
vention. From that time onwards serious restrictions were put on the freedom of the countries of
the Union, in exercising their discretion on ﬁxing limitations and exceptions to the author’s exclusive
right of reproduction, by inserting the “three-step test” under article 9 (2) of the Berne Convention.5
As compulsory licensing is not expressly permitted under the three-step test, the issue of its
permissibility in the context of the three-step test has to be speciﬁcally addressed. The records that
pertain to the Stockholm Conference and the ﬁnalization of the Paris Act of the Berne Convention
reveals that the three-step test under article 9 (2) was the culmination of the attempts to reconcile
contrary opinions raised by the members of the Berne Union and the possibility to provide for
compulsory licences formed an indispensable part of this compromise.6 After the Second World
War, many colonies became independent sovereign states and the main concern of these developing
and least developed countries was their economic, social and cultural development using the tools
of education and research.7 What they wanted most for achieving this purpose was bulk access to
knowledge at affordable price. In the Stockholm Conference the developing countries, especially
India, raised the issue of bulk access through a demand for a compulsory general licensing provision.
India regarded compulsory licensing as an adequate means to overcome the growth of monopolies
and to enable dissemination of knowledge and culture. Though this demand was rejected in the
Conference, the ﬁnal article 9 (2) comprising of the three-step test was a compromise step and the
open-ended provision was stated to facilitate compulsory licence as well.8 However, India opposed
the introduction of three-step test, fearing that the provisions for compulsory licensing under the
Indian Copyright Act will be seriously curtailed by it. India, therefore, proposed an additional step
to the three-step test, exempting the reproduction not on the basis of the three criteria alone, but in
cases not covered by the three criteria also, permitting compulsory general licence for reproduction
on payment of remuneration, which shall be ﬁxed by a competent authority.9 In the Stockholm
Revision Conference, the Indian delegates expressed the view that the author’s right should give way
to the public interest and they should be contented with reasonable remuneration. The Government
of India fully supported the author’s right to remuneration but was of the view that he should not be
allowed to withhold his work from the public (Senftleben, 2004).

Though the Indian proposal enabling compulsory general licensing was rejected by the Main
Committee I, resulting in the incorporation of the three-step test, article 9 (2) of Berne Convention
permitted compulsory licence, of a much restricted scope. The concept was impliedly accepted, as
evident from the records of the Stockholm Conference and thus formed part of the Berne acquis.
Article 31 (1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties states that a treaty has to be interpreted
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their “context” and in
the light of its object and purpose. Article 31 (2) explains the meaning of “context” thus: “the context
for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including
its preamble and annexes: (a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty . . . ”. The World Trade Organization(WTO)
panel has stated that uncontested interpretation given at a conference, for example, by a Chairman
of the drafting committee, may constitute an agreement forming part of the context.10 Ulmer, the
Chairman of the Main Committee I, stated in the course of discussions that “a rather large number
of copies in industrial undertakings . . . may not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

27

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

the author, provided that, according to national legislation, an equitable remuneration is paid”.11
It could be seen that this statement was included in the Report of the Main Committee I making
it an ofﬁcial statement.12 This evinces that it was tacitly agreed upon in the Stockholm Conference
that exceptions under article 9 (2) might take the form of either absolute exceptions or compulsory
licences. Thus, though there was no express mention of compulsory licence in article 9 (2), it formed
part of the Berne acquis.

The substantial difference between the mechanism under the three-step test and the compulsory
general licence demanded by India is that as per the latter, there is no need to prove that the limitation
is not in conﬂict with the normal exploitation of the work by the owner of copyright or that it does
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder; the existence of circumstances
justifying compulsory licence alone needs to be proved, provided an equitable remuneration is paid
to the copyright owner. But as per the three-step test, the payment of remuneration only satisﬁes
the third step, and unless the ﬁrst two steps also are satisﬁed, compulsory licence will not be valid.
Moreover, if even payment of an equitable remuneration cannot obviate the unreasonable prejudice
caused to the legitimate interests of the author, the limitation is again impermissible. Thus, it is
evident that the three-step test considerably restricts the scope of compulsory licence provision. This
precisely was the reason for India’s opposition to the introduction of the three-step test.

However, India’s protest was not without any results. In the Stockholm revision, a “Protocol
Regarding Developing Countries” was established, which would have allowed developing countries
broadly to limit rights of translation and reproduction.13 But, it was successfully superseded by the
Paris Act 1971,14 which made signiﬁcant revisions to the protocol and an appendix was added to the
Berne Convention.15 It is paradoxical that the Berne Appendix, supposed to be meant for special
treatment for developing countries, became more arduous than the three-step test. Restrictions in
the form of irrational and complex procedures have driven the “special provisions” to the verge of
absurdity. The requirements for making a declaration according to article V of the Appendix16 and
for renewal in every 10 years,17 the insistence that application for compulsory licence for translation
or reproduction of the work could be made only after a certain period ranging from 1 to 7 years of
its ﬁrst publication, and the requirement for the further waiting period of 6 months for enabling the
owner of copyright to translate or reproduce the work, the provision that compulsory licence will
be terminated on publication of a translation or reproduction of the work by copyright owner at a
reasonable price etc. are commercially so deterrent that no sensible person who means business shall
venture to make any application for compulsory licence under the Berne Appendix.18 No wonder,
the provisions in the Appendix have hardly been made use of by developing countries.19 Thus, it
is clear that the compulsory licence provision available under the Berne Appendix is of no use to
developing countries whereas the compulsory licence provision available under the three-step test is
more beneﬁcial to them as there are no procedural restrictions stipulated under the three-step test,
which meant that national legislation can take care of it.

Though one may feel that the Berne Appendix has taken away the compulsory licensing option
under article 9 (2), the mere fact that both the “Protocol Regarding Developing Countries” and
the three-step test under article 9 (2) were introduced in the same Stockholm Conference, and the
revelation by the historical background of article 9 (2) that the three-step test allows compulsory li-
censing, make it clear that such a feeling is absolutely unfounded. Moreover, the compulsory licensing
option under article 9 (2) has a wider application as it is equally available to the developed countries
as well, whereas the compulsory licensing provision under the Berne Appendix is specially intro-
duced for developing countries, and is meant to be more liberal—despite the unrealistic procedural
requirements—in that they are free from the constraints of the three-step test requirements.

28

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

The TRIPS Agreement
The TRIPS Agreement incorporated all the provisions relating to conditions for access under the
Berne Convention into it by reference.20 Under the TRIPS Agreement, also there is no speciﬁc
provision allowing compulsory licensing. The provision that governs limitations and exceptions to
copyright, over and above the Berne provisions, is article 13,21 which simply lays down the three-
step test as the condition under which limitations are to be provided by member countries. Thus,
the three-step test appears twice in the TRIPS Agreement; ﬁrst, in the Berne article 9 (2), which is
incorporated into TRIPS Agreement by reference and then in article 13. However, there is difference.
When article 9 (2) of the Berne Convention applies only to exclusive reproduction right, article 13
of TRIPS Agreement extends to all copyrights (Hugenholtz and Okediji, 2008). Some are of the
view that article 13 acts as a Berne plus condition in that it could be conceived as putting additional
hurdles for limitation/exception clauses in order to be qualiﬁed as valid and thereby controlling all
copyright limitations envisaged under the TRIPS Agreement (Senftleben, 2004).

Since articles 9 (2) 1–21 of the Berne Convention and the Appendix thereto were incorporated
into the TRIPS Agreement and there is nothing to show that the Berne acquis was excluded from
such incorporation, it is evident that compulsory licence ﬁnds a place in article 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement also.22 The same logic adopted by the World Trade Organization (WTO) panel23 while
answering the question whether the minor reservations doctrine is being recognized by the TRIPS
Agreement, is applicable here also. The panel, after a detailed analysis of the drafting history of
articles 11 and 11bis of the Berne Convention, concluded that the minor exceptions doctrine formed
part of the “context” of articles 11bis and 11 of the Berne Convention (1971) as per article 31 (2) (a)
of the Vienna Convention and thus formed part of the Berne acquis. Answering the question whether
the TRIPS Agreement has recognized the minor exceptions doctrine while incorporating the Berne
provisions into the TRIPS Agreement, the panel took the view that if the incorporation of Berne
articles 1–21 was meant to cover only the text and not the entire Berne acquis relating to these articles,
article 9.1 of the TRIPS Agreement would have explicitly provided so.24 If this interpretation of the
panel is accepted, there is no problem in reaching the conclusion that the three-step test envisaged
under article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement recognizes compulsory licensing also, because as evident
from the drafting history of articles 9 (2) of the Berne Convention compulsory licensing formed part
of the Berne acquis and thus it got into the TRIPS Agreement by incorporation of Berne provisions
into the TRIPS Agreement.

Scope of Compulsory Licence under the Three-Step Test
Before the TRIPS Agreement, there was no mechanism to oversee the implementation of the three-
step test25 in the national legislation containing limitations and exceptions. With respect to TRIPS
Agreement, we could see a different situation as the WTO Agreements have changed the scenario by
launching the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism. Though the decisions of the WTO panel do not
have any precedential value, it sets a jurisprudence that no one can ignore. The only way to examine
the possible interpretations of the three-step test is through the analysis of WTO panel decisions.
Therefore, it is in the ﬁtness of things to analyse how the WTO panel has interpreted the three steps26
and how the jurists have evaluated the panel decision. While doing this, what has to be kept in mind is
the WTO panel decision that these three requirements are to be cumulatively applied for a limitation
to be valid.27

Certain Special Cases
There are different interpretations to this requirement both by the WTO panel for Dispute
Settlement28 and by several jurists. It was the WTO panel decision that brought into limelight

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

29

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

the possible interpretations of the three-step test in determining the validity of limitations under
the international copyright law. The WTO panel interpreted the ﬁrst criterion in the three-step test
restrictively. The word “certain” was interpreted by the panel to mean that “an exception or limitation
in national legislation must be clearly deﬁned” and the word “special” was interpreted to mean that
“an exception or limitation must be limited in its ﬁeld of application or exceptional in its scope”.29 In
other words, the panel’s view was that the ﬁrst condition of article 13 simply requires that “a limitation
or exception in national legislation should be clearly deﬁned and should be narrow in its scope and
reach”. This, undoubtedly, is a very narrow interpretation especially in view of the panel’s explicit
rejection of public policy purpose as a justiﬁcation for an exception.30 The public policy purposes
stated by law makers when enacting a limitation or exception was thought useful by the panel only
from a factual perspective for making inferences about the scope of a limitation or exception or the
clarity of its deﬁnition.

The refusal by the WTO panel to take into account policy objectives of national legislation
was criticized by many jurists. Martin Senftleben criticized this stand as a quantitative assessment
and was of the view that it is to be rejected in view of the drafting history of 9 (2) of the Berne
Convention as well as on the ground that the result of rejection of qualitative test is to render the
ﬁrst criteria in the three-step test simply an enquiry into the conﬂict with the normal exploitation of
the work and thus denies it of any independent meaning (Senftleben, 2004). He, therefore, holds the
view that some clear reason of public policy must underlie the adoption of copyright limitation.31
He also criticized the panel interpretation stating that it reﬂects the “civil law approach” of re-
strictively deﬁned exceptions and if this approach is accepted, “open-ended norms evolving from
the Anglo-American copyright system would automatically be rendered incapable of surmounting
the ﬁrst hurdle of the three-step test”.32 Instead, he feels that “certain special cases” have to be
equated with “some special cases” as he feels it safer to assume that the word “certain” was inserted
because the drafters of the three-step test had in mind a number of limitations which existed at
the national level at the time of Stockholm Conference, and the meaning of the French text shows
that the word “certain” was not understood to carry a further substantial prerequisite besides the
claim for specialty (Senftleben, 2004). Ricketson is of the view that “special” has to be interpreted
to mean that the purpose behind the limitation or exception “is justiﬁed by some clear reason of
public policy or some other exceptional circumstance”.33 He feels that there may be some clear po-
litical objective/justiﬁcation such as freedom of expression, public education, public information etc
(Ricketson, The Berne Convention 1886-1996, 1987). In the preparatory work for the World Intellec-
tual Property Organization (WIPO) Diplomatic Conference, with regard to the three-step test it is
stated:

When a high level protection is proposed, there is reason to balance such protection
against other important values of the society. Among these values are the interests of
education, scientiﬁc research, the need of the general public for information to be available
in libraries and the interests of persons with a handicap that prevents them from using
ordinary sources of information (WIPO Doc. CRNR/DC/4, § 12.09).34

Similarly, balancing of the rights of owners and the larger public interest is recognized in the
preamble of the WIPO Copyright Treaty. The agreed statement in relation to article 10 of the WCT
(WIPO Copyright Treaty) is understood “to permit Contracting Parties to devise new exceptions and
limitations that are appropriate in the digital network environment”.35

Certain special cases can no doubt include situations under which India wanted to permit
compulsory licensing such as withholding of copyrighted works, both Indian and foreign, from the
public, over pricing and the ensuing difﬁculty in accessing the work by the general public as these

30

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

situations envisage a compulsory licensing law far restricted than the compulsory general licensing,
which Indian delegates argued for in the Stockholm Conference. Even if the restricted interpretation
as given by the WTO panel for “certain special” is accepted these situations are covered under it.

Normal Exploitation
Though the panel admitted that equating “normal exploitation” with full use of all exclusive works
conferred by copyright and every use of a work, which in principle is covered by the scope of exclusive
rights and involves commercial gain, would render article 13 of TRIPS Agreement devoid of any
meaning (as hardly any limitation could then pass the second test under article 1336), the ﬁnal ﬁnding
of the WTO panel was to the effect that “an exception or limitation to an exclusive right in domestic
legislation rises to the level of a conﬂict with a normal exploitation of the work (i.e. the copyright
or rather the whole bundle of exclusive rights conferred by the ownership of the copyright), if uses,
that in principle are covered by that right but exempted under the exception or limitation, enter into
economic competition with the ways that right holders normally extract economic value from that
right to the work (i.e. the copyright) and thereby deprive them of signiﬁcant or tangible commercial
gains”37 (emphasis added). The ultimate result of this interpretation is that every use that poses
economic competition to the copyright owner conﬂicts with his normal exploitation. The test used
to ﬁnd out whether there is economic competition is to see if such limitation “deprives them (the
copyright owners) of signiﬁcant or tangible commercial gains”. This interpretation blocks almost
all limitations and exceptions, not to speak about compulsory licensing. In examining the reliability
of this interpretation, one must ask the pertinent question if the only aim of copyright law is to
ensure every copyright owner signiﬁcant or tangible commercial gains from her works. If the fact
that dissemination of information is an equally important objective of the copyright law, it may not
be difﬁcult to interpret “normal exploitation” in a context. Normal exploitation covers not only all
the possible modes of exploitation, but the extent of exploitation also. Therefore, in the developing
country context, what should be the normal pricing pattern also is a question to be posed in the
context of interpreting “normal exploitation”. “Normal exploitation” cannot imply exploitation
without any interference or control or restrictions whatsoever. Then it is not normal, but absolute.
It permits interference in situations of deviations from normalcy. “Normal exploitation” cannot be
equated with ensuring “signiﬁcant or tangible commercial gains”. If an equitable remuneration is
ensured in order to put a control on exorbitant pricing, or to ensure access, there cannot be any
“conﬂict with normal exploitation”. That simply is what the limitation of compulsory licensing does.
The WTO panel interpretation of the second step was criticized as “essentially economical and
consequently restrictive” by Hugenholtz and Okediji (2008). They are of the view that with the
technological advancements, the scope of normal ways of extracting economic value from a work
has been multiplied and thereby the “normal exploitation” increases and the discretion of States to
introduce or maintain limitations would be gradually whittled away.38 Ricketson is of the view that
the second step of article 9 (2) does include non-economic considerations, that is, whether a particular
kind of use is one that the copyright owner should control. He however, thinks that the second step is
open ended and uncertain and gives no guidance as to the kinds of non-economic considerations that
may be relevant. This, according to him, leaves the option for striking this balance with the national
legislation.39

Senftleben feels that putting new areas of normal exploitation emerging from the technological
development beyond the reach of the national legislator automatically, would considerably curtail
his ability to react to the new situation in tune with speciﬁc public policy concept. The real sovereign,
then, would be the market rather than the member states. He, therefore, is not ready to accept
an interpretation that encompasses each and every possibility of deriving pecuniary proﬁt from a

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

31

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

work, since such an interpretation would exceedingly limit the user’s interests (Senftleben, 2004).
Instead, relying upon the decision of the US Supreme Court in Campbell v Acuff Rose Music Inc.,40
Senftleben states that a conﬂict with the normal exploitation should only be assumed if the limitation
causes substantial market impairment (Senftleben, 2004). According to him, markets that are neither
developed nor licenced to develop will then fall beyond the scope of this deﬁnition.41 He feels
that this has to be so in a digital context where new possibilities are offered by digital technology
since a contrary view will render the second criterion in the three-step test insuperable for almost
all limitations and the provision containing three-step test would become meaningless making all
limitations impermissible (Senftleben, 2004).

In the context of the development of the internet, Heide expressed the view that if “normal
exploitation” was meant to cover all exploitations capable of being harvested by the copyright
owner, it would have been sufﬁcient to use the term “any” exploitation instead of the term “a
normal” exploitation (Heide, 1999). He feels that in an environment where practically nothing
prevents the copyright owner from contracting directly with the end user and where online contracts
and technological devices enable copyright owner to monitor the use of the copyrighted work, such
an interpretation potentially transforms three-step test into a one-step test.

Jane C. Ginsburg points to another potential problem with the overemphasis on economic
signiﬁcance. She fears that if any economically signiﬁcant exploitation that the right holder can
individually licence comes within the scope of a “normal exploitation”, there is a risk that even
traditionally privileged uses, such as scholarship or parody, could be deemed “normal exploitations”
(Ginsburg, 2001). She expresses the opinion that though the predominantly economic focus of the
panel’s analysis may be very useful in evaluating “market failure” and similarly economic motivated
exceptions, it should not be the criteria based on which an exception could be entirely outlawed. The
most desirable solution, according to her, is to leave it to review under the more conciliatory third
step of the test (Ginsburg, 2001).

It is evident from the above discussion that the major hurdle for a form of compulsory licence
to become TRIPS Agreement compliant is the second test. If the test based on the simple criterion
of “economic competition with the ways that right holders normally extract economic value from
that right to the work” no exception or limitation could surmount this test. On the other hand,
if a more sensible and realistic interpretation is adopted, compulsory licensing is compatible with
article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement as there is no substantial market impairment while allowing
compulsory licensing provided, the use of compulsory licensing ensures normalcy both in the modes of
exploitation and the extent of exploitation and ensures controlling monopolistic practices. Moreover,
compulsory licences most often cover markets that the copyright owner is reluctant to tap or markets
that are otherwise unavailable to him and it envisages payment of remuneration. Hence, there is no
question of substantial market impairment in allowing compulsory licences under both the situations
of non-access or regulation of industrial practices.

Unreasonably Prejudice Legitimate Interests
The third condition under article 13, TRIPS Agreement, also was interpreted restrictively by the
panel. In their view, “prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holders reaches an unreasonable
level if an exception or limitation causes or has potential to cause an unreasonable loss of income to
the copyright owner”.42 If the concern of the third step also is loss of income the question precisely
is what, then, is the difference between the second and third tests?

Many are of the view that the third step is the “kingpin” of the three-step test as it aims at the
exact balancing of copyright interests (Heide, 1999; Senftleben, 2004). It is the only tool capable
of dealing with the challenges against copyright’s balance, especially in times of chaos caused by

32

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

technical developments (Senftleben, 2004). Thus it is evident that the third step does not simply focus
on the loss of income, but on a larger political framework of balancing of interests. The third step
insists on some conditions that the limitation should satisfy in order to be valid under article 13; its
validity needs be questioned only if it affects the legitimate interests of the right holder; the limitation
becomes invalid only in cases where it unreasonably prejudice such legitimate interests.

Senftleben is of the view that choice of the word “interests” instead of “rights” places the owners
and users of intellectual works on equal footing (Senftleben, 2004). Only legitimate interests of the
owner need be taken into account while examining the validity of a limitation and its validity is
affected only when the prejudice caused to such interests becomes “unreasonable” as every limitation
causes some “prejudice” to the owner of copyright. The term “unreasonable” in the three-step
test acquires an independent meaning in the international level (Senftleben, 2004). In this context,
Senftleben says, the political prerogative of the legislator plays a decisive role (Senftleben, 2004).
It is up to the national legislator to shape a country’s copyright balance. Heide is of the view that
the three-step test is ﬂexible enough to provide a sufﬁcient margin of freedom to craft inevitable
exceptions in order to address important social and cultural needs.43 The three-step test has always
been understood to allow compulsory licensing in the framework of the third criterion (Senftleben,
2004). National legislation can avoid unreasonable prejudice to legitimate interests by providing for
the payment of equitable remuneration. With respect to “legitimate interests of the author”, also
Heide feels that the author’s legitimate interests need to be interpreted to include the larger public
interest in the light of the preamble to the WCT. It would permit a balancing of interests that does
not primarily focus on the economic prejudice to the author, thereby allowing social beneﬁts to be
included within the scope of the three-step test.44 Equating the three-step test with an “economic
prejudice test”, he feels, is not suited to the digital environment.

It is felt that the best approach will be to base the third test on political considerations, which
will ensure the political sovereignty of member countries in handling public interest issues. This is
the correct approach since balancing of interests is a political decision. Moreover, this alone will
differentiate the second test, which may be an economic consideration, from the third. Thus, the
third step undoubtedly allows compulsory licensing in view of the economic balancing by way of
equitable remuneration.

Compulsory Licensing under Articles 11bis (2) and 13 (1) of the Berne Convention
In the Berne Convention, apart from article 9 (2), the other provisions dealing with compul-
sory/statutory licensing are article 11bis (2) and article 13 (1). The difference between article 9
(2) and 11bis (2) is that whereas article 11bis (2) generally permits national legislations to determine
the conditions under which the broadcasting and related rights granted by article 11bis (1) may be
exercised,45 article 9 (2) allows compulsory licences based on the three-step test. Therefore, a compul-
sory licence under article 9 (2) is not at all generally permissible like in article 11bis (2) or in article 13
(1) (Senftleben, 2004). Senftleben is of the view that the ambit of operation of the three-step test was
extended to article 11bis (2) by article 13 of TRIPS Agreement and article 10 of WCT and therefore,
now, the great latitude allowed to national legislation by article 11bis (2), could be presumed to be
retained only by the agreed statement concerning article 10 (2) WCT, which hinders the three-step
test from reducing the scope of applicability of article 11bis (2).46 However, when some hold the view
that the three-step under the TRIPS Agreement 13 governs Berne 11bis (2) also (Senftleben, 2004),47
others are of the view that the TRIPS Agreement article 13 has no application to article 11bis (2) as
the scope of both the provisions are different48 and therefore it can be logically argued that 11bis (2)
of the Berne and article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement cannot be applied together.49 Moreover, if the

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

33

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

argument that article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement extends to all the rights envisaged by the copyright
law is extended further, it has to be interpreted to cover the Berne Appendix as well. This will lead to
an absurd situation, having in view the conceptual foundation of the Berne Appendix. Compulsory
licensing only controls accessibility of the works to the general public and pricing of copyrighted
works. The increased number of potential users of the copyrighted work could compensate the loss
of revenue, if any, created by the imposition of compulsory licensing.

In view of the historical origin of article 11bis (2) and article 13 (1) of Berne Convention and
the fact that these articles were incorporated into the TRIPS Agreement without any reservation, it
becomes evident that these articles were incorporated into the TRIPS Agreement without any inten-
tion of defeating the original purpose behind these articles. Unlike other limitations and exceptions,
the purpose behind article 13 (1) and 11bis (2) is restriction of monopolistic tendencies among music
publishing industries or collecting societies.50 Hence, even if it is accepted that article 11bis (2) of
Berne is subject to article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement, the historical context in which the provision
was introduced into the Berne Convention should not be undermined and the three-step test should
be so interpreted. The historical reasons behind the two articles would sufﬁce to qualify the ﬁrst step,
as they point to “certain special cases” and the payment of equitable remuneration envisaged under
these articles render them valid under the third step. The second step, which is the most problematic
of the three, should be carefully interpreted so that the purpose behind these articles is not defeated.
Since most of the licensees available under these articles would not have been available sans these
limitations, and since these limitations envisage remunerations ﬁxed by competent authorities, it
cannot be said that these limitations conﬂict with the normal exploitation of the works by copyright
owners.

Indian Legal Position vis- `a-vis TRIPS Agreement and Future Requirements
Sections 31, 31A, 32, 32A and 32B of the Copyright Act 1957 of India deal with compulsory licences.
The Copyright Act 1957, as it originally stood had only sections 3151 and 32.52 Section 31 remained
almost unchanged except for the substitution of “broadcast” for “radio diffusion” and “sound
recording” for “record”. India amended her laws in 1983 to “beneﬁt” from the Berne Appendix,
inserting sections 31A, 32 (1A), 32A and 32B and making necessary changes in the already existing
sections 31 and 32.53

While section 31 (1) (a) of the Indian Copyright Act, the genesis of which could be traced back
to the British Copyright Act 191154—the application of which was extended to India by the Indian
Copyright Act 1914—deals with the general compulsory licensing provision, section 31 (1) (b) is
governed by instances covered under article 11bis (2) of the Berne Convention. Section 32 (1) could
be traced back to the Copyright Act 1914, which limited the sole right to produce, reproduce or
perform or publish a translation of a work to 10 years from the date of ﬁrst publication of the work
in the case of a work ﬁrst published in India.55 The rest are special provisions incorporated into the
Copyright law of India “taking advantage of” India being a developing country, relying upon the
Appendix to Berne.

Section 31 (1) (a) covers situations when a published “Indian work” is withheld from the public
because of refusal to republish or allow republication, or refusal to allow performance in public.
On such situations the Copyright Board can, after giving the owner of copyright an opportunity
to be heard, grant compulsory licence to the complainant subject to such conditions and subject to
payment of such compensation as the Copyright Board deems ﬁt. It is paradoxical that India, who
argued vociferously for compulsory general licensing allowing bulk access to the rich knowledge of
the developed nations for newly independent colonies at affordable price,56 limited her own legal

34

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

provisions for compulsory licence to “Indian works” even though there was no such restriction under
the Copyright Act 1911. It was not necessary under any international conventions to restrict any
limitations or exceptions to works belonging to its own nationals. It is interesting to note that no
such restriction was there under section 32 that speaks about compulsory licensing for producing
and publishing translations in any language. Anyway, in the new Copyright Amendment Bill 2010,
it is proposed that the words “any Indian work” be substituted by “any work” and the explanation
to “Indian work” in section 31 (1) be omitted. In the context of the pending copyright Amendment
Bill, extending the scope of section 31 (1) to “any works”, irrespective of whether the work is Indian
or foreign and in view of the allegations made by different stakeholders before the Parliamentary
Standing Committee,57 it is pertinent to look into the viability of section 31 (1) (a) under article 13
TRIPS Agreement.

Undoubtedly, cases of withholding of the works from the public falls under “certain special
cases” and such a situation warrants state interference by imposing limitations on the exclusive rights
of the copyright owner as it is an undeniable fact that copyright protection presupposes dissemination
of information. When the work is withheld from the public, there is no justiﬁcation for copyright
protection. The desirable interpretation to the ﬁrst test is the one given by Senftleben that “special
case” has to be equated with “special purpose” based upon the records of the Berne Convention
(Senftleben, 2004). The situation under consideration, undoubtedly, clears the ﬁrst test as the purpose
behind the section is to unequivocally state that there is no meaning for copyright protection if the
copyrighted work is inaccessible to the general public due to its withholding (as different from the
withdrawal from public of the work by the author himself). With reference to the second test, in the
case of withholding of the work from the public there is no question of any “conﬂict” with the normal
exploitation of the work since there is no exploitation of the work at all in such a situation. The third
step also is complied with as the legitimate interest of the owner of copyright to be remunerated
for the uses of the work is satisﬁed by the requirement of payment of compensation as ﬁxed by the
Copyright Board. “Compensation” is a term capable of taking care of the “does not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate expectations of the copyright owner” requirement.

Withholding from the public is an extreme case that could, without fail, satisfy the three-step
test in the context of compulsory licence. But it is submitted that section 31 (1) (a) is also capable of
covering situations where the works are not available to the public at a reasonable price. It is to be
noted that the effect of non-availability at reasonable price is as good as “withholding the work from
public”, especially for developing countries. It has to be looked into if such a provision could pass the
three-step test. If policy considerations are valid to prove “special” case situations, over-pricing can
be a valid reason for state interference through compulsory licence. Compulsory licensing satisﬁes
the second step as well, because though it allows the Copyright Board to ﬁx the “compensation”
to be paid to the copyright owner, the term “compensation” implies that payment of a reasonable
remuneration to the copyright owner is ensured. Moreover, this will facilitate ﬁxing a reasonable price
to the work, thereby increasing the number of consumers, many of whom might not have bought it,
sans compulsory licensing. Thus, the compulsory licensing may not have an adverse economic impact
over the copyright owner. What is required under the second step is that the “normal exploitation”
of the copyright owner’s right is not affected by the limitation. To suggest that a requirement for
reasonable pricing will affect the “normal exploitation” will be equivalent to ascribing to copyright,
meanings which it is incapable of possessing. The legitimate interests of the copyright owner is not
unreasonably prejudiced as the Copyright Board is authorized to ﬁx compensation while granting
compulsory licensing, after giving the copyright owner an opportunity of being heard. This enables
the member countries to take the political decision of ensuring access to the copyrighted work on

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

35

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

appropriate situations, after securing compensation to the copyright owner and thus complying with
the third step, as then the prejudice caused, if any, is not unreasonable.

It is interesting to note that section 31 (1) (a) makes withholding from the public alone a ground
for issuing compulsory licences and not non-availability of copyrighted works at a reasonable price.
India was concerned at the high prices and frequent unavailability of works from the developed
countries (Ricketson and Ginsburg, 2006) and therefore, argued as early as in 1960, at the meetings
of the Intergovernmental Committee of the UCC (Universal Copyright Convention) and its General
Conference of 1960, that some modiﬁcation to the traditional view of copyright protection had to be
made by those nations, so as to allow for the freer circulation of their works in developing countries.58
In consequence of this demand, the Conference passed a resolution empowering the Director General
to examine these and allied problems “in order to help in the formulation of suitable programmes for
cheap production of scientiﬁc and technological books in the underdeveloped countries, on a national
and a regional basis” (Ricketson and Ginsburg, 2006). In the context of the above discussion it is
confusing why India did not include non-availability of works, whether Indian or foreign, at affordable
price as a ground for issuing compulsory licensing. It is unfortunate that there is no suggestion even
in the new Copyright Amendment Bill 2010 to extend the grounds for granting of compulsory
licensing to “non-availability at affordable price”. Even if it is possible for the judiciary to equate
non-availability at reasonable price to withholding form the public, it is always safer to clarify the
position having in view of the TRIPS Agreement compatibility phobia of developing country courts.
Section 31 (1) (b) is in line with article 11bis (2) of the Berne Convention and permits Copyright
Board to grant compulsory licence on the ground that an Indian work, which is already published
or performed in public, is being refused permission to be communicated to the public by broadcast
of such work or the work recorded in sound recording on terms that the complainant considers
reasonable. The provision is markedly different from 31 (a) as it is not conﬁned to situations where
there is withholding from the public. The focus of this provision is more on the balancing of interests of
competing industries with a view to contain monopolistic tendencies among the record manufacturers
and collecting societies, rather than on general public interest.

Though the provision for compulsory licensing was there in the Copyright Act 1957 from its
very inception, it was hardly made use of till recently, especially in relation to conventional literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic works. The increasing demand for compulsory licensing could be
attributed to the amazingly fast development in the ﬁeld of communication technology and its
repercussions in the ﬁeld of entertainment industry. The cases reveal that the need for employing
compulsory licensing provision is more felt in the entertainment industry rather than in the printing
and publishing industry. A whole range of cases on the issue of broadcasting of sound recordings
exempliﬁes this fact. In all these cases,59 the refusal by music companies to licence broadcasting of
music by different broadcasting companies is the focal point. The issues are (1) if the permission to
broadcast music was granted at least to one broadcasting company, can the provision be made use of
by others as there is no withholding from the public in such cases? In other words, is the application
of the provision limited to the cases of withholding from the public due to refusal to communicate
the work to the public by broadcasting; (2) whether a compulsory licence under the said provision
could be granted to more than one company in view of section 31 (2)? With respect to the ﬁrst issue
the Supreme Court in its recent judgement in Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. v Super Cassette
Industries Ltd. (2008)60 held:

If it is accepted that voluntary licenses have been entered into by the owners with All
India Radio and some other Radio Broadcasters, then it is sufﬁcient for closing the doors
on another person to approach the Copyright Board. One may as well say that if it is

36

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

provided to a satellite channel or a space radio, the same also would subserve the purpose
for refusing to grant an application under section 31 of the Act.61

This interpretation of the court is of some interest in view of the fact that this was reached after
considering the following passage from Copinger and Skone James on Copyright (Garnett et al. 1999):

. . . In the case of a statutory licence the rate is ﬁxed by law, in the case of a compulsory
licence the rate is left to be negotiated, but in neither case can use be refused or prevented . . .
(emphasis added).

However, after considering the “ground realities” of the number of broadcasters working
throughout the length and breadth of India, the court held with respect to the second question
that compulsory licensing could be granted to more than one broadcaster and it is “not correct to
contend that having regard to the provisions of Sub-section (2) of section 31, compulsory licence can
be granted only to one and not to more than one broadcaster”. It is disheartening that the apex court
of India failed to appreciate the legal issues and did not answer to the question of “withholding”
vis-`a-vis 31 (1) (a) and 31 (1) (b), and the relevance of 31 (2) to 31 (1) (a) and 31 (1) (b). The court
also refused to pay heed to the more reasonable ﬁnding of the Bombay High Court in Phonographic
Performance Ltd. v Music Broadcast (P) Ltd62 to the effect that the purpose of enacting Clause (b) of
subsection (1) of section 31 was to take out the ﬁeld of broadcast from Clause (a) of subsection (1) of
section 31 and to deal with that ﬁeld separately.63 The Bombay High Court’s view was that the ﬁeld
of broadcast has been given a differential treatment by the Legislature and the refusal of the holder of
copyright in the work to re-broadcast the work or allow re-broadcasting of the work need not result
in withholding the work from the public. In other words, in spite of the fact that the copyright holder
himself has made the re-broadcast of the work or has allowed others to broadcast, a complaint can be
made. The words of the provisions are clear and there is no question of importing the concept of the
refusal resulting in withholding of the work from the public into the ﬁeld of broadcast as the intention
of the Legislature in that regard is absolutely clear. The Bombay High Court also opined that in order
to make the scheme contained in section 31 workable, operation of subsection (2) of section 31 will
have to be restricted to the cases covered by Clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 31.64 Despite
these vivid statements of law, the Supreme Court went for circuitous reasoning in order to allow
compulsory licensing in the ﬁeld of broadcasting in situations where there is no withholding from
the public. However, the Amendment Bill 2010 suggests modiﬁcations to this provision, which are
capable of solving the confusions created by the existing provisions and answering the issues raised in
these judgements. In this Bill, it is proposed that instead of the words “licence to the complainant” in
section 31 (1) “such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Copyright Board, is or are qualiﬁed
to do so” is to be substituted and the subsection (2) is to be omitted so as to enable the Copyright
Board to grant compulsory licence to more than one person.65 As section 31 (1) (b) is based on article
11bis (2) of the Berne Convention its TRIPS Agreement compatibility has to be tested based on the
TRIPS Agreement compatibility of article 11bis (2), which is already done elsewhere.66

Section 31A, introduced on the basis of Berne Appendix, provides for issuing compulsory
licences for unpublished Indian works in the case of which the author is dead or unknown or
cannot be traced, or the owner of copyright cannot be found, to publish such work or translation
thereof in any language. The Copyright Amendment Bill 2010 proposes that Section 31A has to be
amended to extend its scope to foreign works as well and to any unpublished work or any work
published or communicated to the public which is withheld from the public in India, the author is
dead or unknown or cannot be traced or owner of copyright in such work cannot be found.67 The
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Copyright Amendment Bill has expressed the apprehension

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

37

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

that the extension of applicability to all foreign works (including ﬁlm, DVDs, etc.) could be violative
of Berne Convention and TRIPS Agreement and seem to fall short of the minimum obligations
imposed by such instruments.68 When the provision is extended to foreign works, it has to comply
with international mandates. In other words, if the content of the proposed section 31A is capable of
satisfying the international mandates, there is nothing wrong in extending it to foreign works.

Apart from the Berne Appendix, which India can no more resort to, there is no special provision
dealing with orphan works either in the Berne Convention or in the TRIPS Agreement. Therefore,
TRIPS Agreement/Berne compatibility has to be explored based on the three-step test alone. It is
interesting to note that though the provision relates to what is commonly called “orphan works”,69
Indian Copyright Law has never used this term. The proposed amendment to section 31A meant
to cover unpublished works, and published works withheld from the public, in both cases where
the author is dead or unknown or cannot be traced or owner of copyright in such work cannot be
found. Thus, it is evident that India does not intend to go beyond the conventional concept of orphan
works.70

In the case of unpublished works if the author is dead or unknown or cannot be traced or
owner of copyright in such work cannot be found, public interest mandates that there should be
some mechanism to make them available to the public. If the author was alive and available and he
voluntarily opted not to publish the work, there would have been no remedy as the decision whether
to publish the work or not is essentially the “legitimate interests of the author” (Ginsburg, 2009). In
the cases of unpublished works or published works that are withheld from the public, if the author
of such work is dead or untraceable, it is a “special case” as the public is being denied access to a
whole lot of valuable information. In such cases, there is “no conﬂict with the normal exploitation”
as there is no exploitation of the work by the copyright owner. Since compulsory licensing ensures
payment of royalty, there is “no unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the copyright
owner”. In the case of published works that are withheld from the public if the author cannot be
traced or dead, again, it belongs to a special case and since the work is not being exploited there is no
conﬂict with the normal exploitation. The payment of royalty takes care of the legitimate interests of
the right holder. Internationally there is concern over the accessibility to “orphan works” and in the
conventional “orphan works” situations; there is general agreement that if the availability is ensured
without violating the three-step test requirements it is a viable solution.71 Compulsory licensing,
as we have seen, is a mechanism that could effectively handle the problem in conformity with the
three-step test requirement.

Section 32 (1) of the Indian Copyright Act 1957 originally allowed any person to apply to the
copyright Board for a licence to produce and publish a translation of a literary and dramatic work
in any language if the translation of the work in that language was not published by the copyright
owner or by any person authorized by him for 7 years after the ﬁrst publication of the work, or if
published, is out of print. Before making such an application, such person should have requested and
had been denied authorization by the copyright owner to produce and publish such translation. If
the author has not withdrawn copies of the work from circulation, the Copyright Board, after being
satisﬁed of the competency and ability of the applicant to publish a correct translation of the said
work and to pay royalties to the copyright owner at such rate as determined by the Copyright Board,
and after giving the copyright owner an opportunity of being heard, wherever practicable, may grant
licence to the applicant.

Section 32 was amended in 1983, incorporating section 32 (1A) for availing of the Berne Appendix
“beneﬁts”. The new provision allows remission for the waiting period if the translation is for certain
purposes such as teaching, scholarship or research72 and if the translation is in a language not in
general use in any developed country.73 However, certain additional conditions were also incorporated

38

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

as required by the Berne Appendix such as (1) the licence shall not extend to export of copies of the
translation of the work outside India and every such translation shall contain a notice in the language
of such translation that the copy is available for distribution only in India,74 (2) the requirement that
a further period of 6 months has to be elapsed from the date of making the request to the copyright
owner for authorization for producing or publishing a translation to grant a licence to see if either the
copyright owner or any person authorized by him is publishing a translation within that time. These
additional conditions, along with section 32B introduced in 1983 in line with the Berne Appendix,
which provides for termination compulsory licence, if any time after the grant of it the copyright
owner publishes the translation of the work for which compulsory licence was granted, shoo away
any potential licensee from approaching the Copyright Board for issuing compulsory licences under
provisions based on the Berne Appendix. Though the relaxation of waiting period in section 32 (1A)
is a welcome step, the Berne Appendix conditions dissuade potential licensees. In view of the fact that
by failing to re-notify, India lost her right to make use of the Berne Appendix provisions, and that
the three-step test is a more welcome stipulation when compared to the Berne Appendix idealism, it
is more appropriate to retain the original 32 (1) with the modiﬁcation of relaxation of waiting period
rather than sticking on to Berne Appendix conditions.

It will be interesting to enquire if section 32 (1), so amended, will comply with the TRIPS
Agreement requirements without resorting to the Berne Appendix. The three-step test will not create
much of a problem as in special cases such as teaching, scholarship or research, or translation into
a language not in general use in any developed country, limitations could be permissible, provided
there is no conﬂict with the normal exploitation of the work by copyright holder and no unreasonable
prejudice to the legitimate expectations of the copyright holder. The third step is satisﬁed because, as
already seen, the requirement that royalty shall be paid at a rate ﬁxed by the Copyright Board averts
unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the copyright holder, and balances the interests
of the copyright owner and the users of the translation of the copyrighted work. The waiting period,
though diminished, and the restriction as to the situations under which such diminished waiting
period is available could take care of the second step, as they ensures that there is no substantial
market impairment to the copyright holder.

Section 32A is another provision, based on the Berne Appendix, introduced for making available
literary, scientiﬁc or artistic work to the general public or for instructional activities, at a reasonable
price, normally charged in India for such categories of works. Under section 32A, a compulsory
licence could be issued in case the copies of literary, scientiﬁc or artistic works are not made available
in India, or if such copies have not been put on sale in India at a reasonable price normally charged in
India for comparable works for a period of 6 months after the expiration of the relevant period75 to
the general public, or in connection with systematic instructional activities, by the copyright owner.
The same conditions, which are applicable to the compulsory licensing for translation of works under
section 32 (1A) including section 32B, are applicable to the compulsory licensing under section 32A
also.

Both sections 31 (1) (a) and 32A are based on the ground of withholding from the public,
or non-availability of copyrighted works to the general public. In the latter, non-availability at a
reasonable price also is a ground, but a compulsory licence could be issued only if there is non-
availability for 6 months after the expiration of the relevant period, whereas, in the case of the former,
the application could be made anytime during the term of copyright. In other words, no waiting
is prescribed under the former provision. Section 31 (1) (a) is applicable to “any Indian work”
whereas the application of section 32A is limited to “literary, scientiﬁc and artistic works” alone, but
without the qualiﬁcation “Indian”. Apart from the other conditions attached to section 31 (1) (a),
the additional conditions such as (1) grace period of 6 months after a request for authorization to

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

39

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

publish or reproduced under Clause (a) of the proviso to section 32A was made, (2) termination of
licence on reproduction or publication by the copyright owner or a person authorized by him as per
section 32B, (3) prohibition of exportation of the copies produced under compulsory licensing etc.,
as already stated, render section 32A unfeasible. Thus, a comparison between section 31 (1) (a) and
section 32A reveals that if the applicability of the former provision is extended to “any” works (Indian
or foreign), and “non-availability at a reasonable price” is included among the grounds for granting
compulsory licensing, it will render the latter provision redundant, as both serve the same purpose
and the former has a wider coverage than the latter without the conditions attached to the latter
provision.

Proposed New Provisions under the 2010 Amendment Bill
In the new Copyright Bill there is suggestion to introduce sections 31B for the beneﬁt of the disabled,
31C dealing with statutory licence for cover versions and 31D dealing with statutory licence for radio
broadcasting of literary and musical works and sound recording.

The proposed section 31B authorizes organizations working primarily for the beneﬁt of the
persons with disability, and recognized under chapter X of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act 1955 to apply for a compulsory
licence to publish any work in which copyright subsists for the beneﬁt of such persons in cases
to which section 52 (1) (zb)76 do not apply and enjoins the Copyright Board to dispose of such
applications within 2 months from the date of receipt of the application. The Copyright Board
may, after making necessary enquiry to establish the credentials of the applicant and after being
satisﬁed that the application has been made in good faith and after giving the owners of copyright
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant a compulsory
licence to publish such works. Every compulsory licence issued under this section shall specify the
means and format of publication, the period during which the compulsory licence may be exercised
(which is extendable by the Copyright Board on further application after hearing the copyright
owner) and in the case of issue of copies, the number of copies that may be issued. The Copyright
Board may specify the number of copies that may be published without payment of royalty and may
ﬁx the royalty for the remaining copies.

As per the WIPO study,77 two methods are followed by different countries to take care of the
issues of persons with disability; many countries resort to non-remunerative exceptions whereas
some countries follow compulsory licensing.78 India resorts to both the methods as is visible from
sections 52 (1) (zb) and 31B. For adaptations, reproduction, issue of copies or communication to
public in a format specially designed only for the use of persons suffering from a visual, aural or
other disability, a non-remunerative exception is envisaged under section 52 (1) (zb), whereas in
a case to which section 52 (1) (zb) is not applicable, compulsory licensing is provided for under
section 31B.79

The question, again, is whether the compulsory licensing for the persons with disability is in
conformity with the TRIPS Agreement. As already discussed, compulsory licensing provisions that
are in consistency with the three-step test are in compliance with the TRIPS Agreement. If “certain
special cases” is interpreted to take into account public policy purpose of balancing copyright
protection against other important values of the society such as the interests of education, scientiﬁc
research, the need of the general public for information to be available in libraries and the interests
of persons with a handicap that prevents them from using ordinary sources of information etc.,80 the
present amendment is in absolute compliance with the ﬁrst step. It is evident from the international
developments that a compulsory licensing option to ensure access to information to persons with

40

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

disabilities is not considered as against international norms, provided sufﬁcient steps are taken to
ensure that the works produced using compulsory licence reaches the beneﬁciaries alone by avoiding
chances of misuse. In such a situation, there will not be any conﬂict with the second criterion of
the three-step test. Evidently, the new section does not conﬂict with the third step as it does not
“unreasonably” prejudice the “legitimate” expectation of the copyright owner in that except in the
case of speciﬁed number of copies that may be published without payment of royalty, it authorizes
the Copyright Board to ﬁx royalty for the remaining copies. In the case of the speciﬁed number
of copies so published, non-payment of royalty cannot be considered to “unreasonably” prejudice
the legitimate interests of the copyright owner as these may be cases where the licence holder is
distributing the copies free of cost or without proﬁt to persons with disability. It is interesting to
note that compulsory licence provisions for facilitating access to persons with disability exist in other
countries as well.81

Section 31C deals with statutory licence that was earlier dealt with in section 52.82 This is
the correct approach as statutory licence is a form of compulsory/non-voluntary licence and its
more appropriate place is with compulsory licence rather than with permissible uses which are
non-remunerative activities. The changes brought in the Amendment Bill are (1) it requires that for
allowing statutory licensing the sound recording should be in the same medium as the last recording,
unless the medium of the last recording is no longer in current commercial use;83 (2) that the cover or
label should not contain the name or depict in any way any performer of the earlier sound recording
of the same work or any cinematograph ﬁlm in which such sound recording was incorporated, and
further, shall state on the cover that it is a cover version made under this section;84 (3) that such
sound recording shall not be made until the expiration of 5 calendar years after the end of the year
in which the ﬁrst sound recording of the work was made85 instead of the 2-year-restriction imposed
by the present copyright Act;86 (4) that one royalty in respect of such sound recording shall be paid
for a minimum of 50,000 copies of each work during each calendar year in which copies of it are
made provided that the Copyright Board may, by general order, ﬁx a lower minimum in respect of
works in a particular language or dialect having regard to the potential circulation of such works;87
(5) in the matter of making alterations in the work, a more restrictive exception is used—that is,
instead of exempting alterations that are “reasonably necessary for the adaptation of the work for
the purpose of making the sound recording”, which is the existing law, the new Bill proposes a more
limited exception of “technically necessary for the purpose of making of sound recordings” to avoid
confusion.

Section 31D deals with statutory licensing for radio broadcasting of literary and musical works
and sound recording. It authorizes any broadcasting organization desirous of communicating to the
public by way of a broadcast or by way of performance of a literary or musical work and sound
recording that has already been published to do so subject to the conditions that (1) a prior notice of
its intention to broadcast the work stating the duration and territorial coverage of the broadcast; (2)
pay to the owner of rights in each work royalties in the manner and at the rate ﬁxed by the Copyright
Board; (3) announce with the broadcast the names of the authors and the principal performers of the
work except the in case the broadcasting organization communicate the work by way of performance;
(4) not to make any fresh alterations to any literary or musical work, which is not technically necessary
for the purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening the work for the convenience of broadcast
without the consent of the owners of the rights etc.

If one ﬁnds it amusing to see licensing provisions covered under similar areas in both sections 31
(1) (b) and 31D, she should not be found fault with. Section 31 (1) speaks about compulsory licensing
of “any works published or performed in public” where as the proposed section 31D speaks about
“a literary or musical work and sound recording”. Both the sections deal with communication of the

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

41

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

work by way of broadcast except for the facts that (1) section 31D is a more speciﬁc provision enabling
the broadcasting organization to communicate by way of broadcast “a literary or musical work and
sound recording” and includes communication “by way of performance of a literary or musical work
and sound recording” whereas section 31 (1) (b) deals with communication to the public by broadcast
of “any Indian work” and (2) section 31 (1) (b) is a compulsory licensing provision whereas section
31D intends to bring in statutory licensing for broadcasting organizations.

The reason for the amendment may be to clear the confusion created by the decisions of various
courts88 on the issue of the nature of licensing to broadcasting organizations by the owners of
concerned copyrights. It is submitted that the appropriate course would be either making necessary
amendments in section 31 (1) (b)89 or scrapping it altogether converting it into a statutory licensing
provision. Allowing statutory licensing and compulsory licensing in the same areas is quite an unusual
situation. The latter option will be more appropriate in view of the easiness to obtain licence. The
standing committee report suggests that there was mixed reactions to this amendment.90 Whatever be
the option, it will be based on article 11bis (2) of the Berne Convention and there is no differentiation
as to statutory licensing or compulsory licensing under article 11bis (2).91

TRIPS Agreement compatibility issue of sections 31C and 31D are to be analysed in the
context of article 13 (1) of the Berne Convention as these provisions are based on article 13
(1) of the Berne Convention. Since article 13 (1) belongs to the same genesis as that of article
11bis (2) the discussions on TRIPS Agreement compatibility of section 31 (1) (b), which is based
on article 11bis (2) is relevant here also. Therefore, there is no need to repeat the justiﬁcations
here.

Conclusion
It is strongly felt that the open-ended nature of the three-step test and the confusion regarding the
extension of the scope of three-step test in the context of article 11bis (2) and 13 (1) needs to be
interpreted keeping in mind the need for a balancing of the interests of the owners of copyright
and the users of copyrighted works rather than pursuing an interpretation which supports the
copyright owners more, as done by the WTO panel in the copyright case. Limitations and exceptions
to copyright serve the purpose of ensuring access to information. The limits imposed on such
limitations and exceptions should be just sufﬁcient for precluding arbitrariness and not for rendering
them inconsequential.

About the Author
T. G. Agitha, Research Ofﬁcer, HRD Chair on IPR, Inter University Centre for IPR Studies, Cochin
University of Science and Technology, Cochin 682022, Kerala, India. The author has co-authored
the Book Principles of Intellectual Property published by the Eastern Book Company, India, with
Prof. N. S. Gopalakrishnan. She has published “Trademark Dilution: The Indian Approach” 50
Journal of Indian Law Institute 339 (2008). She has also published “Indian Patent System: The
Road Ahead”, along with N. S. Gopalakrishnan in Ryo Shimanami (Ed.) The Future of the Patent
System, Institute of Intellectual Property, Japan (2009 in Japanese—English version forthcoming)
and “Imperial Copyright Act and the Indian Copyright Law”, along with N. S. Gopalakrishnan in
Uma Suthersanen & Ysolde Gendreau (Ed.), 100th Anniversary of Imperial Copyright Act, Edward
Elgar (2011) (Forthcoming); e-mail: tgagitha@rediffmail.com; tgagitha@gmail.com

42

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

Notes
The author would like to thank Prof. (Dr.) K. N. Chandrasekharan Pillai, Director, National Judicial Academy,
India; Prof. (Dr.) N. S. Gopalakrishnan, Director, Inter University Centre for IPR Studies, Cochin University
of Science and Technology for their valuable suggestions.

1 Compulsory licences concerning broadcasting rights and recording of musical works are example to this.

See Lucie M. C. R. Guibault (2002, p. 56) and Martin Senftleben (2004, p. 23).

2 However, it continues to protect the owner’s rights, by providing for compensation for the use of the work

and hence it cannot be said that the owner’s interest is severely prejudiced.

3 For example, the ﬁrst compulsory licensing introduced in the United Kingdom by the Literary Copyright
Act 1842, was intended to handle situations of refusal to republish an already published work. Copinger and
Skone James on Copyright, Fourteenth Edition, Sweet & Maxwell, pp. 1545, 1546. The 1911 Act extended
it to cases where the owner was refusing to grant a license allowing a work to be performed in public.
Application of the 1911 Act was extended to India with necessary modiﬁcations for its application in India
by the Indian Copyright Act 1914.

4 The Berlin Act 1908 introduced for the ﬁrst time, the possibility of member countries to apply a compulsory

license (article 13/2). Read Stewart (1989, pp. 105, 106).
Paragraph 2 of article 13 of the Berlin Act (1908) of the Berne Convention reads:
Reservations and conditions relating to the application of this article may be determined by the domestic
legislation of each country in so far as it is concerned; but the effect of any such reservations and conditions
will be strictly limited to the country which has put them in force.
Anyhow, it is the Brussels Act 1948 that provided for equitable remuneration to be ﬁxed by competent
authority in the absence of mutually agreed terms. See article 13 (2) of the Brussels Act 1948.

5 See article 9 (2) of the Berne Convention which reads:

It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to permit the reproduction of such works
in certain special cases, provided that such reproduction does not conﬂict with a normal exploitation of
the work and does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the author.

6 Torwald Hesser (1967, p. 276). He says that the Study Group on the Stockholm Revision of the Berne
Convention has pointed out that the laws of Union countries permit many exceptions and any drastic
change in this legal situation is out of question, and the discussions ﬁnally boiled down to the question
of how a provision on exceptions should be worded. He further points out at p. 277 that a point made in
the discussions is that if the author is given the right to claim remuneration, the scope of the power to make
exceptions widens to some extent (emphasis added). Also read Sam Ricketson and Jane C. Ginsburg (2006
and Ginsburg (2001). The authors are of the view that while the text of article 9(2) does not refer explicitly
to compulsory licenses, the preparatory documents revealed that it did not preclude compulsory licenses
and the new provision could be considered capable of covering all existing exceptions under national laws.
Also read Martin Senftleben, supra n. 1, at p. 129 and Daniel Gervais (1998, pp. 89–90). While discussing
the scope of the three-step test under article 9(2), in the Report of the Main Committee I, it is stated that
only if the three criteria are complied with “would it be possible in certain special cases to introduce a
compulsory license . . . ” (paragraph 85), Records of the Intellectual Property Conference of Stockholm
(1967). Also read Sam Ricketson (2003, p. 27).

7 Sahid Alikhan (1986, p. 427). In the Stockholm Conference, the delegates from India also suggested the
need for changing the approach of the Berne Convention “treating it less as a trade matter and more as
a question of improving the educational and cultural needs of the less fortunate users and making their
existence felt in the fast-changing world”7 because India thought that the protection of the author’s right
could not be considered apart from the rights of the users. Read Martin Senftleben, op cit, at p. 79.

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

43

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

8 See Records of the Intellectual Property Conference of Stockholm (1967). At paragraph 85, it is stated:
“If it implies a rather large number of copies for use in industrial undertakings, it may not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interests of the author, provided that, according to national legislation, an equitable
remuneration is paid”. Also read Martin Senftleben, supra n. 1, at p. 80.

9 See paragraphs 71 and 80 of the Records of the Intellectual Property Conference of Stockholm (1967).
Also see Sam Ricketson and Jane C. Ginsburg (2006, Vol. I, p. 775) and Martin Senftleben, supra n. 1, at
pp. 78, 79.

10 WT/DS 160 at paragraph 6.46.
11 See the statement of Ulmer in the course of discussions of the Main Committee I, reproduced by Ricketson
and Ginsburg, op cit, p. 775. Also see that the Chairman of the Main Committee conceded that the
countries of the Union are entitled to introduce a compulsory license in some cases, as was done by the
German legislation.

12 See paragraph 85 of the Report of the Main Committee I, op cit.
13 The House Report on the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 (1988). The Report states:

In a highly charged politicized atmosphere, the Stockholm Conference Protocol Regarding Developing
Countries was adopted in a form which would have permitted deep cuts in the levels of copyright protection
that developing countries would accord to protected works. The minimum term of protection could be
reduced to life plus 25 years post mortem; exclusive rights with respect to broadcasting and retransmissions
of broadcasts could have been cut back to the level provided for in the 1928 Rome text, at least for non-
commercial broadcast undertakings; translation and reproduction compulsory licensing systems would
have been permitted; and, any use of a work (including performance, broadcasting and translation) for
“teaching, study and research” would be allowed subject only to compensation at a level accorded national
authors.
The crisis posed by the Protocol was so grave that no developed country was prepared to ratify the
Stockholm Act because of its integral protocol.

14 Ibid. The Report states that the “crisis” created by the Protocol was resolved by “complex diplomacy” in

1971 at Paris. See Nimmer on Copyright, Appendix 32-13.

15 Ibid. The Report states: “In 1970, largely under the leadership of the United States through the Universal
Copyright Convention, a compromise program was developed under which both Berne and the UCC
would be revised to include less drastic concessions to developing countries, centered largely upon limited
compulsory licensing options for translation and reprint rights in support of educational and developmental
objectives. This program succeeded and in 1971 Berne and the UCC were jointly revised at Paris”. See
Nimmer on Copyright, Appendix 32-17.
16 See article I (1) of the Berne Appendix.
17 See article I (2) of the Berne Appendix
18 Read Okediji (2005, pp. 162–8). Also read Ruth L. Okediji (2006, p. 16).
19 The statement in the House Report on the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 to the effect
that after the Paris revision of Berne there is relative stability in the Berne Convention and no compulsory
licence have been issued in those countries that opted for enjoying the privilege of Berne Appendix
reveals the fact that this was clearly the intention of those who manoeuvred to make the changes in the
Stockholm Conference Protocol Regarding the Developing Countries. Read the House Report on the
Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 (Report No. 100-609), which is reproduced in Nimmer on
Copyright, vol. IX, Appendix 32-17.

20 See article 9.1 of the TRIPS Agreement, which incorporates articles 1–21 and the Appendix thereto into

the TRIPS Agreement.

21 See article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement which reads:

44

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

Members shall conﬁne limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases which do not
conﬂict with a normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests
of the right holder.

22 See the reasoning of the WTO panel in WT/DS 160 at paragraphs 6.43 – 6.46, 6.60 – 6.66.
23 Read WT/DS 160 R paragraph 6.63 where the panel states:

Thus we conclude that in the absence of any express exclusion in article 9.1 of the TRIPS Agreement,
the incorporation of articles 11 and 11bis of the Berne Convention (1971) includes the entire acquis
of these provisions including the possibility of providing minor exceptions to the respective exclusive
rights.
The same logic can very well apply to compulsory licensing which forms part of the acquis of 9 (2) of the
Berne Convention (1971).

24 WT/DS 160 paragraph 6.62. The panel ﬁnds a further conﬁrmation for its interpretation on the fact that
the earlier drafts of the article 9.1 of the TRIPS Agreement referred merely to “the substantive provisions”
of the Berne Convention (1971), indicating that the intention was to embody the overall Berne acquis rather
than just the literal wordings of the individual articles. See f.n. 85 of the WT/DS 160.

25 The three steps are that the concerned limitation (1) must be conﬁned to “certain special cases”; (2) it must
“not conﬂict with a normal exploitation of the work” and (3) it should “not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the right holder”.

26 Only the Panel’s decision in the copyright context is attempted at since the three steps in the patent’s context

are slightly different and evidently meant to be more liberal.

27 See WT/DS 160 R, paragraph 6.97, which reads: “The three conditions apply on a cumulative basis, each
being a separate and independent requirement that must be satisﬁed. Failure to comply with any one of
the three conditions results in the article 13 exception being disallowed”.

28 WT/DS 160 R. Available at <http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/1234da.pdf>.
29 Paragraphs 6.109 and 6.111, WT/DS 160 R.
30 See paragraph 6.111 of WT/DS 160 R in which the panel has stated: It is difﬁcult to reconcile the wording
of article 13 with the proposition that an exception or limitation must be justiﬁed in terms of a legitimate
public policy purpose in order to fulﬁl the ﬁrst condition of the article.

31 Martin Senftleben, op cit, at p. 152. Jane C. Ginsburg feels that such a stand was uncalled for in view of
the fact that “no exemption, however worthy the policy underlying it, will survive scrutiny if it “conﬂicts
with the normal exploitation” or unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder” and
therefore, if there are trade distortions, there will be noncompliance with the second and third criteria and
thus article 13 can take care of it. Read Jane C. Ginsburg (2001).

32 Martin Senftleben, op cit, p. 135. Also read Haochen Sun (2007, p. 267).
33 Sam Ricketson, The Berne Convention 1886-1996 (1987, p. 482). However, in the second edition of this
book that he has jointly authored with Ginsburg, he changes this view and holds that the more “realistic”
interpretation of the expression “certain special cases” is that the exceptions should be ﬁnite and limited
in scope (paragraph 13.14, p. 767).

34 See WIPO Doc. CRNR/DC/4. Also see Senftleben, op cit, p. 147.
35 Though some hold the view that the agreed statement is without any legal implication, (Okediji, 2005,

p. 172), Ficsor is of a contrary view. Read Ficsor (2002, pp. 446–7).

36 See paragraph 6.167 and 6.182 of WT/DS 160 R.
37 WT/DS 160/R, paragraph 6.183.
38 P. Bernt Hugenholtz and Ruth L. Okediji (2008, p. 23). Available at <http://ictsd.org/downloads/
2008/08/intle_hugenholtzokediji.pdf> [Accessed 12 July 2011]. Jane C. Ginsburg also shares the view
that the “normal exploitation” of a work may change with changes in technological developments as a re-
sult of uses whose control involved excessively high transaction costs becoming more and more susceptible

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

45

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

to effective licensing and thereby entering the fold of “normal exploitation”. See Jane C. Ginsburg (2001,
p. 13)

39 Sam Ricketson (2003, pp. 25, 26).
40 510 US 569.
41 This was the US stand in WT/DS 160/R (see paragraph 6.177). The panel agreed to this to the extent
that it reﬂected the empirical or quantitative aspect of the connotation of “normal”, which is “regular,
usual, typical or ordinary”, but added that it has to give effect to the second aspect of the connotation
as well, which is “conforming to a type or standard” (paragraph 6.178). The panel, therefore, felt that in
addition to those forms of exploitation that currently generate signiﬁcant or tangible revenue, those forms
of exploitation that, with a certain degree of likelihood could acquire considerable economic or practical
importance (paragraph 6.180).

42 Paragraph 6.229, WT/DS 160/R.
43 Thomas Heide (1999). Though the open-ended three-step test was adopted at the end of the Stockholm
revision Conference instead of a list of limitations with the intention of avoiding a long list available to the
member countries, its openness also gives the national legislators the freedom to interpret enabling them
to engraft their policy considerations.

44 Thomas Heide (1999, p. 107). He feels that considering present-day technology that can render every
exploitation a “normal exploitation”, this interpretation would additionally require, at the very least, that
the determination of “normal exploitation” and “legitimate interests” appear on an equal footing. To
suggest otherwise, according to him, would set the effect of the three-step test at naught and effectively
close the gateway to the public interest opened by the preamble to the copyright treaty.

45 The same is the case with article 13 (1) of the Berne Convention.
46 Senftleben, op cit, p. 202. WT/DS 160 at paragraphs 6.87–6.89.
47 Ibid.
48 See WT/DS 160 at paragraph 6.87. According to the WTO panel, article 13 justiﬁes use free of charge
whereas article 11bis (2) of Berne does not do so. Therefore, if the view that article 13 governs article 11bis
(2) is accepted, a situation may arise where article 13 justiﬁes free use exceptions to the rights protected
under 11bis (1) and this would violate article 2(2) of the TRIPS Agreement. Read Ricketson and Ginsburg,
op cit, p. 859, paragraph 13.112.

49 WT/DS 160 R. Also read Ricketson and Ginsburg, op cit, p. 870.
50 Ricketson and Ginsburg, op cit, state at pp. 808–9, paragraphs 13.59–13.61 that with respect to the
limitations in the case of the recording of musical works (article 13 (1) of the Berne Convention), the
conﬂicting interests of the rights of authors/music publishing industry and the private interests of another
powerful group, viz., the record manufacturers weighed more than simple public interest. The concern
of the record manufacturers about the monopolistic practices existing in the music publishing industry
was one of the reasons for thinking about a mechanism to balance the interests of authors and record
manufacturers. As a result, the mechanical recording right was introduced subject to compulsory licences
in favour of record manufacturers. Similarly, with respect to article 11bis (2), the broadcasters who wished
to have unimpeded access to protected works for the purpose of their broadcasts were highly apprehensive
of the monopolistic practices or tendencies of various national collecting societies which controlled the
performing rights in most musical works, and which might be tempted to abuse these rights in relation
to the new medium of broadcasting. The authors are of the view that the precedent already set in the
case of sound recordings made it difﬁcult to resist compulsory licences in respect of broadcasting (p. 819,
paragraph 13.67).

51 Section 31 deals with compulsory license in works withheld from the public.
52 Section 32 deals with compulsory license to produce and publish translations.

46

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

53 The objects and reasons of the 1983 Amendment Act reads: “ . . . As a developing country it will be in
our interest to adhere to the [1971 Paris Act of the Berne Convention] so as to avail of the beneﬁts of the
compulsory rights”. However, India has not renewed the declaration as mandated by article I (2) of Berne
Appendix.

54 See section 4, Imperial Copyright Act 1911.
55 See section 4, The Indian Copyright Act 1914 that is based on article 5 of the Berne Convention 1886 as it
originally stood. See for a discussion on the reason for the limitation of translation right, Sam Ricketson
and Jane C. Ginsburg (2006, vol. I, paragraph 1.36, p. 35). They attribute the reason for placing signiﬁcant
restrictions on the way in which translation rights to be exercised, to lingering distrust among various
governments, of the willingness or capacity of the authors to supply translations of their works in different
languages in a reasonable period of time, the interest of their respective publics, and even to a residual
desire to continue the protection of the vested interests, which had proﬁted for a long time from the making
of unauthorized translations of foreign works.

56 Infra pp. 4, 5. Also read Ricketson and Ginsburg, op cit, vol. II, p. 887 (paragraph 14.07).
57 Read paragraph 12.2 of The Two Hundred Twenty-Seventh Report of the Department-Related Parliamen-
tary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill (2010).
A number of stakeholders such as Motion Picture Association of India, Indian Music Industry, South
Indian Music Companies Association, Indian Performing Right Society Ltd., Federation of Indian Pub-
lishers and Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation etc., alleged that such a move would make Copyright
Board non-compliant with the Berne Convention and consequently TRIPS Agreement, exposing India to
the possibility of sanctions in WTO.

58 Ricketson and Ginsburg, op cit, vol. II, p. 887 (paragraph 14.07). It was in the context of the UCC rather
than the Berne Union that the question of providing special assistance to the developing countries was
ﬁrst raised.

59 Music Broadcast Pvt. Ltd. v Phonographic Performance Ltd. (2003); Music Broadcast Pvt. Ltd., Enter-
tainment Network (India) Ltd., MANU/CP/2002; Music Choice India Private Limited v Phonographic
Performance Limited; Phonographic Performance Ltd. v Music Broadcast (P) Ltd. (2004); Entertainment
Network (India) Ltd. v Super Cassette Industries Ltd. (2008).

60 2008 (37) PTC 353 (SC).
61 2008 (37) PTC 353 (SC), at p. 387.
62 (2004) 29 PTC 282 (Bom) (DB).
63 Ibid., at p. 295. The Court feels that if clause (b) was not separately drafted, communication to the public
by broadcast would have been covered by clause (a) of section 31 (1) and thus it is clear that clause (b) is
in the nature of a proviso or exception to section 31 (1) (a).

64 Ibid., at p. 297.
65 Section 15, Copyright Amendment Bill, 2010. However, criticism is being raised against this amendment
alleging that the proposed amendment is arbitrary as there is no qualiﬁcation parameters mentioned in the
Bill and it gives sweeping powers to Copyright Board to grant persons other than the complainant and this
is dangerous to the interests of the copyright owners. Read paragraph 12.5 of The Two Hundred Twenty-
Seventh Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill (2010). It is felt that substituting “complainants”
wherever the word “complainant” occurred under the section would have been enough to categorically
state that under section 31 (1) (b) compulsory licence could be granted to more than one person. It would
have been more appropriate if the method of granting compulsory licence under sections 31 (1) (a) and 31
(1) (b) is dealt with separately so that the difference between the two is made clearer.

66 See infra pp. 14–5 and Ricketson and Ginsburg, op cit, vol. I, pp. 859, 870.
67 Section 16, Copyright Amendment Bill, 2010.

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

47

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

68 Read paragraph 12.7 of the Two Hundred Twenty-Seventh Report of the Department-Related Parlia-
mentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill
(2010).

69 Orphan works means “copyrighted works whose owners are difﬁcult or even impossible to locate” (Khong,

2010).

70 It does not mean to cover abandoned works/abandonware as explained in Dennis W. K. Khong

(2007).

71 Ibid., pp. 14–21.
72 In such situations, a 3-year waiting period is sufﬁcient.
73 One-year waiting period is sufﬁcient in such cases.
74 Section 32 (4) (ii). However, it allowed Government export of translations in a language other than English,
French or Spanish to any country if such export is for Indian citizens or for purposes of teaching scholarship
and research and not for any commercial purposes and in either case, permission from the Government of
the concerned country is obtained.
75 Explanation to section 32A states:

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, “relevant period”, in relation to any work, means a period
of—
(1) 7 years from the date of the ﬁrst publication of that work, where the application is for the reproduction
and publication of any work of, or relating to, ﬁction, poetry, drama, music or art;
(2) 3 years from the date of the ﬁrst publication of that work, where the application is for the reproduction
and publication of any work of, or relating to, natural science, physical science, mathematics or technology;
and
(3) 5 years from the date of the ﬁrst publication of that work, in any other case.

76 Section 52 (1) (zb) newly proposed to be introduced by the Copyright Amendment Bill, 2010, reads:

(zb) the adaptation, reproduction, issue of copies or communication to the public of any work in a format,
including sign language, specially designed only for the use of persons suffering from a visual, aural or
other disability that prevents their enjoyment of such works in their normal format.

77 SCCR 15/7 (Sullivan, 2007).
78 SCCR 15/7, paragraph 2.8, pp. 39–40. It is interesting to note that in the 22nd session of the Standing
Committee on Copyright and Related Rights Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, the
European Union and its Member States, Mexico, Norway, Paraguay, the Russian Federation, the United
States and Uruguay have come up with a proposal on an international instrument on limitations and excep-
tions for persons with print disabilities, which provides that member state/contracting party should/shall
provide in their national copyright law for an exception or limitation to the right of reproduction, the
right of distribution and the right of making available to the public, as deﬁned in article 8 of the WCT, for
beneﬁciary persons as deﬁned herein. Read article C.1 of SCCR/22/15 Rev. 1.

79 It is felt that the rigour of procedures should be mitigated concentrating more on prevention of abuse of
the provision as under section 31B the permissible formats in which compulsory licensing could be granted
is equally useful and accessible to persons without disabilities too.
80 See WIPO Doc. CRNR/DC/4. Also see Senfteblen, op cit, p. 147.
81 SCCR/15/7 p. 40 states that three countries, namely Austria, the Netherlands and Slovenia, appear to
provide an exception that is in effect a compulsory licence with compensation for the right holders in
respect of all the activity permitted under their exceptions for the beneﬁt of visually impaired people. In
addition, Australia, Denmark, Germany, Japan, Norway, Portugal and Sweden provide an exception that
is a compulsory licence for at least some of the permitted activities.

82 See existing section 52 (1) (j) of the Copyright Act 1957.
83 31 C (1) proviso.

48

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

T. G. Agitha

84 31 C (2) proviso.
85 31 C (3) proviso.
86 See section 52 (1) (j) (iii).
87 Read the proposed section 31 C (4) in the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the proviso

thereto.

88 See Super Cassette Industries Ltd. v Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. (2004); Phonographic Performance

Ltd. v Music Broadcast (P) Ltd. (2004) (DB) etc.

89 As the procedural requirements under section 31 (1) (b) are quite simple and refusal of the copyright owner
to allow communication “on terms which the complainant considers reasonable” is sufﬁcient to issue
compulsory licence under this provision, it could be said that the provision is almost equal to statutory
licensing. Still it is necessary to get a refusal under this provision and statutory licensing provision is much
simpler.

90 The Indian Broadcasting Organization welcomed it as a positive move as it felt that with pre-worked terms
and conditions, a broadcasting organization would have far greater certainty in terms of its operation
cost. It also felt that the number of disputes arising due to arbitrary and unreasonable demands of
copyright owners would likely to be quite low if this amendment is materialized. On the other hand,
organizations such as South India Music Companies Association, Indian Music Industry, Phonographic
Performance Ltd., Indian Performing Right Society Ltd. and RPG Enterprises—Saregama expressed
strong reservations on this amendment. Read paragraph 15.3 of the Two Hundred Twenty-Seventh Report
of the Department - Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development on
the Copyright (Amendment) Bill (2010).

91 Article 11bis (2) simply states: It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine
the conditions under which the rights mentioned in the preceding paragraph may be exercised, but these
conditions shall apply only in the countries where they have been prescribed.

References
Alikhan, S. (1986) ‘Role of the Berne Convention in the Cultural Creativity and Development: Recent Copyright

Legislation in Developing Countries’, Journal of Indian Law Institute, 28, 423–440.

Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. v Super Cassette Industries Ltd. (37) PTC 353 (SC), 2008.
Garnett, K., James, J. R. and Davies, G. (1999) Copinger and Skone James on Copyright. Sweet & Maxwell,

London.

Gervais, D. (1998) The TRIPS Agreement: Drafting History and Analysis. Sweet & Maxwell, London.
Ginsburg, J. C. (2001), ‘Toward a Supernatural Copyright Law? The WTO Panel Decision and the ‘Three-Step
Test’ for Copyright Exceptions’, Columbia Law School Working Paper No. 181, at p. 15. Available at
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=253867> [Accessed 11 July 2011].

Ginsburg, J. C. (2009) ‘Contracts, Orphan Works, and Copyright Norms: What Role for Berne and
TRIPS?’, Columbia Public Law & Legal Theory Working Papers. Available at <http://lsr.nellco.org/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1054&context=columbia_pllt> [Accessed 11 July 2011].

Guibault, L. M. C. R. (2002) Copyright Limitations and Contracts—An Analysis of the Contractual Overridability

of Limitations on Copyright. Kluwer Law International, London.

Heide, T. (1999) ‘The Berne Three-Step Test and the Proposed Copyright Directive’, 21 EIPR 105.
Hesser, T. (1967) ‘Intellectual Property Conference of Stockholm, 1967: The Ofﬁcial Programme for Revising
the Substantive Copyright Provisions of the Berne Convention’, Bulletin of Copyright Society, 14, 267–
292.

Hugenholtz, P. B. and Okediji, R. L. (2008) Conceiving an International Instrument on Limitations and
Exceptions to Copyright. Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam and University of

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1

49

T. G. Agitha

Compulsory Licensing and the Indian Copyright Law

Minnesota Law School. Available at <http://www.soros.org/initiatives/information/articles_publications/
publications/copyright_20080506/copyright_20080506.pdf>.

Khong, D. W. K.

(2007)

for Copyrighted
Goods’, International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 15, 54–89. Available at <http://ijlit.
oxfordjournals.org/content/15/1/54.full.pdf+html>.

‘Orphan Works, Abandonware and the Missing Market

Khong, D. W. K. (2010) The (Abandoned) Orphan-Works Provision of the Digital Economy Bill, E.I.P.R. 560.
Maskus, K. E. and Reichman, J. H. (eds) (2005) International Public Goods and Transfer of Technology under a

Globalized Intellectual Property Regime. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York.
Mihaly, F. (2002) The Law of Copyright and Internet. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.
Music Broadcast Pvt. Ltd. v Phonographic Performance Ltd. (26) PTC 70 (CB), 2003.
Music Broadcast Pvt. Ltd., Entertainment Network (India) Ltd., MANU/CP/0005/2002.
Nimmer, M. B. and Nimmer, D. (2002) Nimmer on Copyright, Lexis Nexis.
Okediji, R. L. ‘Sustainable Access to Digital Informational Works’, in Keith E. Maskus and Jerome H. Reichman,
(eds.), (2005) International Public Goods and Transfer of Technology under a Globalized Intellectual Property
Regime, Cambridge University Press.

Okediji, R. L. (2006) ‘International Copyright System: Limitations, Exceptions and Public Interest Considera-

tions for Developing Countries’, ICTSD—UNCTAD Project on IPRs and Sustainable Development.

Phonographic Performance Ltd. v Music Broadcast (P) Ltd. (29) PTC282 (Bom), 2004.
Records of the Intellectual Property Conference of Stockholm, June 11 to July 14, 1967 Volume II, Report on the
Work of Main Committee I (Substantive Provisions of the Berne Convention: Articles 1 to 20). Available
at <http://www.oup.com/uk/booksites/content/9780198259466/15550029>.

Ricketson, S. (2003) WIPO Study on Limitations and Exceptions of Copyright and Related Rights in the Digital

Environment, SCCR/9/7.

Ricketson, S. and Ginsburg, J. C. (2006) International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights: The Berne Convention

and Beyond. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.

Senftleben, M. (2004) Copyright, Limitations and the Three-Step Test: An Analysis of the Three-Step Test in

International and EC Copyright Law. Kluwer Law International, The Hague.

Stewart, S. M. (1989) International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights, 2nd edition. Butterworths, London.
Sullivan, J. (2007) Study on Copyright Limitations and Exceptions for the Visually Impaired, WIPO—Standing

Committee on Copyright and Related Rights—SCCR/15/7, February 20.

Sun, H. (2007) ‘Overcoming the Achilles Heel of Copyright Law’, Northwestern Journal of Technology and

Intellectual Property, 5, 265–331.

Super Cassette Industries Ltd. v Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. 29 PTC 8 (Del), 2004.
The House Report on the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 (Report No. 100-609) which is
reproduced in Nimmer on Copyright vol. IX, Appendix 32. Available at <http://www.ipmall.info/hosted_
resources/lipa/copyrights/The%20House%20Report%20on%20the%20Berne%20Convention%20
Implemenation%20Act.pdf>.

The Two Hundred Twenty-Seventh Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Available at <http://164.
100.47.5/newcommittee/reports/EnglishCommittees/Committee%20on%20HRD/227.pdf>.

WIPO Doc. CRNR/DC/4, §12.09. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/diplconf/en/crnr_dc/

crnr_dc_4.pdf>.

WT/DS 160 WTO panel decision on copyright.

50

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 1


