The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4, pp. 86–98

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12058

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing Legislation for Marine
Bioprospecting: Lessons From Australia for the Role
of Marbank in Norway

G. Kristin Rosendal
Fridtjof Nansen Institute

Anne Ingeborg Myhr
GenØk—Centre for Biosafety

Morten Walløe Tvedt
Fridtjof Nansen Institute

Marine bioprospecting offers possibilities for sustainable innovation based on marine genetic resources. How to
regulate the use of such marine genetic resources entails several challenges. The rationale for the introduction of
legislation on access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS) from the use of genetic resources is elaborated using Norway as a case.
Similarities and differences from other initiatives are presented with Australia as the comparative case. Several lessons
are transferable to the Norwegian situation, and may also be of high relevance to other countries introducing ABS
legislation. In both Norway and Australia, there is an expressed need for an ABS system that can include a model that is
based on access permissions rather than mere registration. There are difﬁculties involved in monitoring the genetic
material from access to actual commercial product, and in distinguishing between bioprospecting for scientiﬁc and
commercial use, which complicates a determination of when beneﬁt sharing should be triggered. We suggest that the
idea of beneﬁt-sharing could be supported by the principle of cost-sharing.

Keywords CBD; user-country legislation; marine bioprospecting; genetic resources

A number of countries have collections of marine organisms. Collections are found in museums, within
R&D institutions and private companies. Diverse groups of facilities have accumulated an increasing
variety of sample types, such as marine benthos, microalgae and bacteria, extending over a wide range of
biological species. As the collection and preservation initiatives have moved into inclusion of genetic
materials for both scientiﬁc and commercial purposes, the need of appropriate legislation and contracts has
become evident.

In this article, we start by clarifying the rationale behind the introduction of legislation on access and
beneﬁt sharing (ABS) from use of genetic resources, using Norway and its Marbank collection as a case.
Marbank has a central role in Norwegian marine bioprospecting. Norway is in the process of establishing a
set of ABS regulations, an administrative order, in line with its Nature Diversity Act and following
obligations resting in the ABS regime of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and its Nagoya
Protocol. We look at the state of the administrative order and ask why it has been delayed and how the lack
of ABS regulations may affect the work of Marbank. Third, we compare the role and challenges facing
Marbank with those affecting similar institutions in Australia, where domestic ABS legislation is much
further developed. Finally, we discuss remaining barriers to ABS.

Before starting on the main subject of this article, a quick backdrop on the general state of ABS
legislation in Norway is in order. The Nature Diversity Act makes it illegal to import foreign genetic
resources if access has not followed ABS regulations in the provider country. Moreover, the Norwegian

86

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Patent Act obliges Norwegian users of foreign genetic material to disclose information about the origin and
legality of access in patent applications. These obligations on Norwegian users of foreign genetic material
go further than those of most other user countries.1

Both Norway’s Nature Diversity Act (2009) and the Marine Resource Act (2008) regulate access
rights to marine biological resources, including access to marine genetic resources. Because the common
administrative order under these two acts is still pending, Norwegian ABS legislation is currently targeting
Norwegian users abroad, not external users in Norway. As regards bioprospecting at home, both acts
confer competence on the government to establish such regulations (the administrative order) requiring
permits for access to Norwegian genetic resources, rules on beneﬁt sharing and information on the use of
traditional knowledge. This administrative order is still in the pipeline and until it emerges, bioprospecting
remains largely unregulated in Norway.

Australia represents an interesting comparative case to Norway. Like Norway, Australia is a developed
country with large marine biodiversity collections. Unlike Norway, Australia has an advanced ABS legislation
system for bioprospecting within the country (Prip et al., 2014). In the following, we identify known challenges
relating to Australia’s ABS experience, in particular difﬁculties involved in distinguishing between the
scientiﬁc and the commercial intent of bioprospectors. On this basis, we identify a need for mechanisms to
ensure improved monitoring of outcomes by scientiﬁc and commercial investigations of material originating
from marine repositories in Norway. The study suggests that in order to ensure continuation of marine
bioprospecting, long-term funding is crucial and we discuss whether the principle of cost sharing can support
beneﬁt sharing to further ensure sustainable innovation from marine genetic resources.

This article is the product of a multidisciplinary collaboration between law, political science and
biology. Methodologically, we apply a primarily legal approach to this explorative and comparative
analysis, added to by discussing institutional, political and biological aspects of marine bioprospecting.
Data material is drawn from legal texts, consultation responses, academic ABS studies and reports and also
builds on an interview with Marbank ofﬁcials.

Rationale for ABS in Norway
The three objectives of the CBD are the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and the equitable
sharing of beneﬁts deriving from the use of genetic resources. The ABS regime of the CBD was set up to
promote all of these aims: fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing as well as the conservation and sustainable use
of biodiversity. Promoting equity and fairness is seen as an incentive to ensure conservation and
sustainable use. This is because the bulk of terrestrial species diversity is found in tropical parts of the
world, hence often in countries with low ability to harvest the economic and technological gains from the
use of genetic resources. In practice, there may not always be a causal link between equity and
conservation. Countries differ in their perceptions of whether conservation or equity constitutes the most
important rationale for ABS; differences largely follow the well-known South (the typical provider of
genetic resources)/North (the typical user of genetic resources) divide. With the Nagoya Protocol, the link
between fairness and equity on the one hand and conservation and sustainable use on the other has become
more explicit.2

User countries are required by the Nagoya Protocol to establish legal measures to control their actors’
use of genetic resources when bioprospecting in other countries, while providers typically wish to establish
ABS legislation to control external bioprospectors within their territories. Norway is both a user and a
provider of genetic resources. For Norway as a user country, the obligation on its users when prospecting
abroad derives from the obligations set out in the wording of the Nature Diversity Act. The regulation of
access to Norwegian genetic resources, however, has its basis in the acts, but is not made operative before
an administrative order speciﬁes the system for ABS with detailed rules.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

87

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

Norway and Australia are similar in that both represent arguably atypical cases. Both combine the role
of user and provider to a greater extent than most developed countries. They differ, however, in that
Australia has well-developed ABS legislation to control external users at home while Norway has so far
been much more concerned with regulating Norwegian bioprospectors abroad.3

Judging from national policy documents and strategies, however, it is clear that Norway, too, has

interests in regulating bioprospecting at home.

Domestic economic interest and investments in marine bioprospecting have increased rapidly over the
last couple of decades while the same resources receive signiﬁcant and increasing attention from external
pharmaceutical commercial companies (Big Pharma). In Norway, rapidly growing political interest is
accompanied by high levels of public funding and investments in marine bioprospecting as a source of new
and sustainable value creation. In 2009, Norway’s interest was highlighted in the national strategy for marine
bioprospecting (“Marine bioprospecting—a source of new and viable wealth creation” 2009–2024), in
which the Norwegian government states that it will regulate marine biological resources and make them
more accessible to researchers, industry and international participants. This initiative provided funding for a
national infrastructure and for research in the ﬁelds of natural marine products and drug discovery. At the
Norwegian Research Council (NRC), marine research and bioprospecting have been given high priority
since 2001 (NRC 2001, 2009, 2013). This national interest was recently conﬁrmed by the Norwegian
government’s initiative to develop a national strategy for bioeconomy and to draft a master plan for marine
research.

The development of Norwegian marine bioprospecting was aided by the establishment of the
Research Council’s FUGE research program4 (succeeded by BIOTEK2021), spurring widespread calls for
a repository bank for marine organisms and extracts of them (Dalmo and Jørgensen, 2004). It was
suggested that a marine repository in Norway should facilitate collection, taxonomy, creation of databases,
extraction and preservation of marine resources for research and commercial purposes.

In 2003, the national marine biobank, Marbank, was established as a project to collect biological
material from Norwegian waters. This was in close cooperation with the Norwegian Ministry of Fisheries
and it was initiated by UiT—Arctic University of Norway (formerly University of Tromsø), the
Norwegian Polar Institute and the Institute of Marine Research. Samples collected in Marbank are from the
Arctic, the Barents Sea and from the coast of Northern Norway. In 2009, Marbank was given a
coordinating role for a network of marine collections in Norway, including UiT, the Institute of Marine
Research, SINTEF/NTNU5 and UNI-Research/the University of Bergen. In 2012, Marbank was
transferred from UiT to the Institute of Marine Research—a large Norwegian center for marine research.
Turning to the conservation and sustainable use aspects of ABS, it is a common perception and
criticism—mostly among user countries—that the ABS regime has not been able signiﬁcantly to stimulate
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity (Morgera et al., 2012). This, however, is questionable
argument since the lack of progress is mainly due to ABS measures not being implemented at the national
level; not least user country measures. Moreover, the absence of tangible beneﬁts for biodiversity
conservation would hardly represent a valid argument against the equity dimension of the ABS regime,
seeing how equity and conservation are both valid aims of the ABS regime. Furthermore, ABS was never
to carry sole responsibility for biodiversity conservation (Oberth€ur and Rosendal, 2014).
meant
Interestingly, although examples of conservation and resource mobilization beneﬁts from ABS remain
scarce, we see that also developed countries such as Norway and Australia are showing a growing interest
in regulating the use of genetic resources found within their territories.

In Norway, the total number of species is estimated at 55,000; only 44,000 have been identiﬁed
(Norwegian Biodiversity Centre, 2015), and those in marine areas are relatively less explored than
terrestrial ones. Through its CBD conservation obligations, Norway is primarily responsible for its
endemic species, and therefore manages only a tiny fraction of the world’s biological diversity.

88

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Nevertheless, species and ecosystem diversity found in the country is important and in some cases unique
both in the Nordic region and globally. Other marine bioprospecting initiatives have mainly been aimed at
warmer and shallower waters and more that 60% of the marine materials that have been collected in marine
collections are from the Paciﬁc region (Leal et al., 2012). This may change as the Polar Regions are
assumed to have an equally high potential for bioprospecting of marine products. Development of culture-
independent techniques may expand interest in bioprospecting from invertebrates to microorganisms
living under extreme conditions (Akondi and Lakshmi, 2013; Pascale et al., 2012).

Norway manages some of the most productive marine areas in the northern hemisphere. The cold
conditions of several Norwegian marine biotypes make the biological resources from these ecosystems
especially interesting for research, innovation and commercial industry with their potentially unique
properties related to their adaption to extreme temperatures (Svenson, 2013). Our national policy will
affect how Norway shoulders its share of the global burdens, as required by the principle of conservation
and sustainable use of biological diversity set out in the CBD. Moreover, Norway’s highly visible
international proﬁle in advocating the CBD throughout would seem to represent a strong motive for
Norway to honor its obligations following from the CBD and its ABS regime.

An additional national motive is tied to the economic value of Norway’s marine biological material.
The economic potential to do research and product development on marine genetic resources might
become economically important in the event of successful ﬁndings and development of commercially
successful products. As the oil age comes to an end, the ﬁsheries and marine sector, including marine
bioprospecting, will become an increasingly important target for Norwegian R&D investments and source
of revenue as well as an important area in the national strategy on bioeconomy. Securing public revenue
from private companies’ oil and gas revenues has been important and was based on forward-looking legal
systems: the regulation of rights to and beneﬁts from Norwegian genetic material can have similar future
importance.

Summing up, the importance of the marine sector to Norwegian economic development is signiﬁcant
and increasing. The high level of public funding involved in infrastructure, technological developments
and education of relevance to biotechnology and marine bioprospecting implies a responsibility to ensure
that revenue from the use of genetic resources is secured for the common good of society, as the Marine
Resources Act conﬁrms: “Wild living marine resources belong to Norwegian society as a whole.”6 In
addition, Norway has a responsibility to the global community to safeguard endemic biological diversity.
It is clear from national strategy documents that Norway aims to develop ABS regulations aimed at
bioprospecting at home.

ABS in Norway: Legal Action and Inaction
In 2013, the ministries involved (Climate and the Environment, and Coastal Affairs and Fisheries)
presented a draft administrative order with the aim to secure Norwegian rights and commercial
exploitation of genetic resources, beneﬁts to society, and sustainable use of the resources. The
administrative order is, however, still awaiting political action from the current ministries involved (the
Ministry of Climate and the Environment and the reorganized Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries).
These have the competence and responsibility for drafting the administrative order and getting it approved
by the Cabinet. Why is the administrative order still pending and how does this situation affect the work of
Marbank?

There may be a number of reasons that explain the ministries’ inertia. Clearly, there is uncertainty
about means and aims.7 First—regarding uncertain means, the authorities are still apparently in the process
of trying out various models for ABS, claiming uncertainty regarding which would be best suited for the
Norwegian situation. Technological progress within biotechnology has increased the speed of genome
sequencing, and the emerging understanding of genetic elements and mechanisms has created new means

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

89

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

for genomic approaches as well as new ﬁelds, such as synthetic biology. These developments represent
new challenges and may increase uncertainties concerning how ABS could be put into practice,
compounding this ﬁrst cause of delay.

Second—regarding uncertain aims, the recent reorganization of the ministry, where the old ministry
of coastal affairs and ﬁsheries was (sub) merged with that of trade and industrial development, may have
engendered a change in priorities, with less weight on the BS in ABS and more focus on industrial and
commercial interests in access. This could prompt worries that making the private biotechnology sector
pay for access to genetic material could lead to more reluctance to invest in the ﬁeld, thereby losing more
opportunities than ABS could hopefully generate. The combined effects of these views would also be in
line with the priorities of Norway’s current blue–blue coalition government; the shift in government since
the administrative order was ﬁrst called for has clearly not made for a speedier expedition.

Third, political tardiness could also have been nurtured by the skeptical response of commercial users
to the ﬁrst draft. The consultation responses from commercial actors may have revealed stronger
opposition to ABS than expected.

The consultations on the draft directive resulted overall in widespread support for the objective of
beneﬁt sharing, with actors realizing the need for an ABS system. There also is strong support for a model
based on access permissions rather than mere registration. Still, some industry actors are critical of what
they fear may become a cumbersome and expensive access model, and at the point of time of the hearing
many recommend waiting for the EU to complete their ABS model in response to the Nagoya Protocol.
Some are dismayed by what they consider to be a far too simplistic view in the draft of the process by which
genetic resources are developed into a commercial product. Most agree that bioprospecting is by nature
commercial, but some still express concern that the ABS system could complicate non-commercial
research. Non-commercial actors responding to the draft would like to see a stronger harmonization with
patent legislation   making the patent void unless followed by the CBD ABS principles of prior informed
consent and mutually agreed terms (response from the Norwegian Biotechnology Advisory Board) or even
prohibiting the patenting of genetic material acquired in Norwegian nature outright (response from the
Development Fund). The most surprising response came from one of the two ministries involved in the
drafting of the administrative order, i.e., Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries. Ofﬁcials there point out
that the regime envisaged for reporting and control is hardly in harmony with the Government’s goals to
simplify administrative procedures.8 This strongly supports the second of our three likely explanations of
the delay in the administrative order.

In the following we look in more detail at the types of collections that are found in Marbank, the state
of the material, how much scientiﬁc work has gone into making the material ready for screening and where
the material goes when it leaves the collection. Our empirical material also includes the type of activity
associated with accessing the collection (basic/academic or applied/commercial research). This makes it
relevant to compare with the situation in Australia and discuss whether lessons are transferable to the
Norwegian situation.

The Role and Mandate of Marbank in Bioprospecting
Marbank is hosted by the Institute of Marine Research (IMR) and shares facilities with the analytical
platform Marbio and Arctic Biodiscovery Centre with the aim of creating value from Arctic biomolecules.
The repositories and laboratories are located in SIVA—Innovation Centre in Tromsø. The purpose of
Marbank is to collect, catalog, prepare and coordinate marine samples from different collections for
scientiﬁc research, commercial opportunities and exploitation. The national strategy states as its purpose to
increase the academic and commercial use of material found through marine bioprospecting by making
such resources accessible (Ministry of Fisheries et al., 2009).

90

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Marbank has the national responsibility for the collection and processing of marine organisms for
applied scientiﬁc research and aims for a wide assortment of marine species. The material archived and
stored includes whole organisms, biochemical extracts and taxonomic and genetic samples from marine
microorganisms, invertebrates and vertebrates. All samples are cataloged in a national database. With
funding from the Norwegian Research Council, Marbank worked closely with the former Ministry of
Fisheries and has since 2012 become a permanent institution and part of the Institute of Marine Research.
Under Marbank, 14,000 kg of organisms have been collected, covering 1,200 species of marine
invertebrates, 110 species of microalgae and 3,000 16S rDNA characterized bacteria strains, all from 1,100
locations along the Norwegian coast and Spitsbergen islands. One of Marbank’s tasks is to create and
participate in an active network and build a common database for the marine organisms and samples for
which access is offered. Marbank has close cooperation with the co-located platform Marbio and the
Arctic Biodiscovery Centre.

Using Marbio (the analytical platform for screening and identiﬁcation at UiT,

the Arctic
University of Norway), about 150 bioactive compounds have been characterized and 50 potential lead
candidates produced. Marbio has processed 600 biological samples from 507 species, prepared a
library of more than 3,000 extracts/fractions, and performed 316,000 screening events based on the
Marbank material.

The Arctic Biodiscovery Centre is

tasked with exploring bioactive medical products,
pharmaceutical processes and products as well as interesting biological material for industrial
purposes through the screening of Arctic organisms. As of 2015, the center is organized under the UiT
umbrella. The Arctic Biodiscovery Centre is built on the knowledge and infrastructure established
through the former MabCent-SFI project and comprises a complete pipeline from discovery of
biomolecules to their use in various biotechnological applications. MabCent-SFI was established with
funding from the Norwegian Research Council (43%), the UiT (32%) and commercial partners
(biotechnology companies) (25%). It has been the main contributor of marine organisms and extracts
for bioactive compound screening (MabCent-SFI, Summary Report, 2007–2015, p. 17; Svenson, 2013),
and has delivered 20 assays (test methods for screening) and more than 300,000 screening events in the
search for bioactive compounds (anti-cancer, etc.), and so far three patent applications have emerged
from the research. Under the new structure the Arctic Biodiscovery Centre is not tied to former funding
private partners and can collaborate with other institutions and private sector industries in both Norway
and internationally.

In order to discuss the options and challenges facing Marbank and its collaborating partners and
network in the task of providing genetic material to users, it is useful to compare the legal framework for
these activities with those of similar institutions for marine collections in Australia. The Australian case
has revealed difﬁculties involved in distinguishing between the scientiﬁc and the commercial intent of
bioprospectors and the R&D processes (Prip et al., 2014).

Comparing the Australian Institute for Marine Sciences (AIMS) and the Eskitis Institute
with Marbank
In Australia, large collections of genetic material (samples) can be found within academic institutions, of
which a great deal has already been made ready for further examination for their active compounds. Here
we describe the activities and ABS-related challenges at the Eskitis Institute at Grifﬁths University and
AIMS, comparing these with those of Marbank and its associated network and collaborating partners and
users of marine material (Marbio and the Arctic Biodiscovery Centre). We start with a brief presentation of
ABS legislation in Australia, building on Prip et al. (2014).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

91

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

ABS Legislation in Australia: Contracts and Access
Regulating ABS at the federal level in Australia is the Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999, section 301, Part 8A “Access to biological resources in Commonwealth areas.”
Those seeking access to biological resources of native species for research and development must apply for
a permit from the responsible Commonwealth Minister. The permit demands prior informed consent in
accordance with article 15.5 of the CBD.

Permits are available for potentially commercial/commercial and non-commercial purposes. All
permit applications must demonstrate that the applied access is ecologically sustainable and consistent
with the conservation of Australia’s biodiversity on the basis of the precautionary principle. If access is
sought for a commercial purpose there is permit fee of 50 AUD. Access for non-commercial purposes such
as taxonomy is free. A ﬁne may be imposed for accessing material without a permit or for breaching the
conditions stipulated in a permit. The Competent Authority for ABS has developed model contracts to
assist in the development of beneﬁt-sharing agreements. Access for non-commercial purposes does not
require such an agreement, but applicants must provide a statutory declaration stating that the applicant
will not conduct, or allow others to conduct, commercial research without agreeing to appropriate beneﬁt
sharing arrangements. As the statuary declaration system works well, and is more general in its application
than ABS, it is a good example of the use of established legal institutional structures to make ABS
functional (Prip et al., 2014).

At the state level, Queensland enacted the Biodiscovery Act in 2004. This was the ﬁrst piece of ABS
legislation in Australia. The Queensland Government wished to create legal clarity and regulate
biodiscovery activities in accordance with the CBD. The government recognized that great beneﬁts for the
state could be reaped from biodiscovery and thus wished to develop a legal framework to capture the
beneﬁts. This view built largely on past experience of bioprospecting collaboration—the extensive Natural
Product Discovery Partnership established in the late nineties between the Queensland-based Grifﬁth
University and the pharmaceutical company Astra Zeneca (Prip et al., 2014). The Biodiscovery Act differs
from the Commonwealth ABS regulations by not having two types of permits for, respectively, non-
commercial and commercial/potentially commercial biodiscovery. Interestingly, the industry acted as
advocates for the Queensland legislation, emphasizing the need for a level playing ﬁeld and legal certainty
(Prip et al., 2014).

These views and experiences certainly seem relevant to decisions pertaining to access to Norwegian
collections of genetic resources. With clear similarities to the Norwegian case, large collections of genetic
material (samples) can be found within academic institutions, much of which has already been readied for
further examination for their active compounds. The most prominent cases are Eskitis and AIMS, and in
the following we compare challenges facing them with those of Marbank and its network, Marbio and the
Arctic Biodiscovery Centre.

Eskitis: What They Provide to Users and the Ensuing Commercialization Process
The Eskitis Institute for Cell and Molecular Therapies is part of the Grifﬁth University in Brisbane. It is a
drug discovery research center searching for and developing new drug and cell-based therapies. Eskitis
research is supported by the Nature Bank, which has a library of over 200,000 optimized natural product
fractions derived from a diverse collection of over 45,000 samples of plants and marine invertebrates.
Nature Bank fractions can be accessed for screening on assay systems, with follow-up isolation chemistry
at Eskitis. The Nature Bank provides the service of processing natural products of biota or crude extracts
into fractions to create assay-ready screening sets. Samples are thus ready for analysis of whether novel
bioactive compounds could hit a particular target or bind to a speciﬁc protein. Moreover, Eskitis houses the
Queensland Compound Library (QCL). This is an automated library of nearly 400,000 pure compounds
from samples. QCL provides automated retrieval of the requested samples and supervise the formatting

92

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

into the preferred micro plate format. When screening hits are identiﬁed, contact is enabled between
chemists and biologists in Australia and abroad for potential collaboration.

Compared to Marbank, Eskitis has arguably advanced further in the actual delivery of ready assays.
However, the activities of Marbio and the Arctic Biodiversity Centre are more like those of Eskitis in this
vein and it is clearly the ambition of Marbank and cooperating partners to provide similar services to users.
Hence, so far, the parallel holds.

Samples for the Eskitis Nature Bank have been collected in Australia, Indonesia, China, and Papa
New Guinea. Samples are sent to i.a. the UK, US, Canada, China and Denmark in collaboration with
Eskitis scientists. By comparison, Marbank samples originate mostly (but not solely) from Northern-
Norwegian waters, hence making ABS less complicated.

Preceding ABS legislation, the Grifﬁth University had mixed experiences with bioprospecting
collaboration. In 1993, Grifﬁth entered into a National Product Discovery partnership with Astra
Pharmaceuticals (later AstraZeneca, AZ), one of the world’s leading pharmaceutical companies.
AstraZeneca invested more than 100 million AUD in the collaboration, but it has also received signiﬁcant
public spending. Since the end of the deal in 2007, the Queensland State and Federal Government have
ﬁnanced the building of the laboratory—the QCL—that contains and “manages” the samples, integrating
tube and plate storage with sample processing. The downside of the AZ deal was that the University could
not collaborate with other researchers, decide on research goals or get ownership to research results (Prip
et al., 2014). AZ had exclusive rights to the samples, which led to certain criticism of the partnership from
the Australian media because multinational companies were allegedly “locking up” Australia’s resources
(Laird et al., 2008). According to key actors, Grifﬁth University is very unlikely to enter into an exclusive
agreement with just one company again (Prip et al., 2014).

The parallel to Norway and the Arctic Biodiscovery Centre is striking in that it caters to a number of
PhD, postdocs and scientists. The need of scientists to get published to advance their academic prospects is
reportedly difﬁcult to do in combination with the need for patenting of their commercial partners, as
patenting usually implies long phases of secrecy prior to the patent application (MabCent-SFI Summary
report, p. 53).

The Grifﬁth University/Astra Zeneca partnership has still not led to the commercialization of any
product. However, given the often-lengthy time it takes to develop drugs from natural products,
commercial products may still be developed down the line. Scientists at Grifﬁths questioned whether Astra
Zeneca would have invested more than 100 million AUD without having obtaining any leads to new
commercially interesting products (Prip et al., 2014). This illustrates a core practical challenge of ABS: if a
particular genetic resource leads to the discovery or invention of an interesting product, what is the relevant
correlation between the genetic resource and the particular commercially viable product? Often in
bioprospecting there is no one-to-one correlation between a genetic resource and a product (Tvedt et al.,
forthcoming). This means that a speciﬁc sample does not necessarily lead to a speciﬁc product. The
distance between the biological sample and product creates problems for establishing a beneﬁt link from
the sample to the product in the market. Adding to this problem is the lack of functional user legislation
which could create incentivizing carrots or discouraging sticks, increasing willingness to comply with
ABS in the countries where multinational pharmaceutical companies are operating.

Similar challenges face Marbank in their interactions with external (foreign) users of marine material. In
most cases of access to the collection there is a combination of Norwegian and international (mostly private)
players. Due to the lack of an ABS regime for the Norwegian marine samples, it has been an explicit Marbank
objective to ensure that Norwegian researchers are involved in order to secure the value of the collection for
Norwegian society. Material from Marbank is ready for commercial utilization and Marbank would like to
see the legal issues regarding access described accordingly. When developing a functional contract for the
use of Marbank, that contract would have had more support if the administrative regulation had been in place.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

93

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

This lack is seen as a bottleneck in their work.9 In addition, Marbank sees it as highly relevant to obtain
information about and monitor how the material is being used, that is whether it has been useful, published
and/or patented. This type of information is valuable with a view both to avoiding double work and to reduce
the consumption of ﬁnite samples—the knowledge makes it possible to avoid others having to do the same
work all over again if the result from the ﬁrst round was unpromising. In Marbank’s view, it would add to the
value of the material for other users.10 Moreover, such information may be of high value for the further
reﬁnement of the product or for comparing bio-activity with products of similar characteristics derived from
other organisms.

Against this background, we could envisage a system in which ABS is not only tied to beneﬁt sharing
linked to the end product, but also involves sale/payment of valuable “leads” (ready assays). This is an
interesting notion as it points to the element of (sub-national, domestic) cost sharing in addition to the usual
argument of (international) beneﬁt sharing. Including cost sharing in the system would raise the visibility
of the high levels of public funding that go into infrastructure, collection and delivery of ready bioactive
compounds to users, all of which are necessary for users to develop commercial products. This particular
item has not been clariﬁed in the draft administrative order. A drawback of such a system might be high
transaction costs.

AIMS and the Challenges of Monitoring Genetic Material
Another major academic intermediary in biodiscovery is the AIMS. This federally funded research
institute was established in 1979 in response to environmental concerns for the health of the Great
Barrier Reef. Over the years, there have been a great number of bioprospecting expeditions in Australia
involving AIMS. Part of the funding comes from the US National Cancer Institute (NCI), as part of the
NCI’s large anti-cancer program. Industrial interest is higher for marine than for terrestrial biological
resources and AIMS is involved in a large number of activities in the sea around Australia. It has a huge
collection with taxonomically identiﬁed samples, all providing screening results of material for active
compounds and identiﬁcation of fractions as well as geographical identiﬁcation. Like the Eskitis
Institute, AIMS also sends samples with ready assays to partners. AIMS always applies for non-
commercial, scientiﬁc permits, but is prepared to apply for other types of permit if the research is
leading toward commercialization (Prip et al., 2014). This has happened only once, which is puzzling in
light of the strong Australian ABS legislation.

Australian ABS legislation has mandatory permits for all bioprospecting and mandatory beneﬁt-
sharing agreements for bioprospecting with a commercial intent. This “change of intent” was captured in
the statutory declaration in Australian Commonwealth ABS legislation. The declaration is a legal
instrument that could make the user liable under Australian criminal law, although it holds a more limited
prospect for following and tracking genetic material if it is transferred to third parties. Despite these strong
legal means, until now there has only been one case of commercial bioprospecting in Australia involving
beneﬁt sharing (Laird et al., 2008). The case involves a large study of sponges with anti-cancer compounds
and is based on collaboration between AIMS and the US National Cancer Institute. The use of the already
long-standing and existing statutory declaration in Australian Commonwealth legislation shows how they
use and apply already existing legal tools in their enforcement of ABS. This might increase the efﬁciency
of the legislation.

One possible explanation for the lack of ABS may be the difﬁculty in distinguishing between
bioprospecting for scientiﬁc and commercial use and thereby determining when beneﬁt sharing should be
triggered. Related to this, companies tend to argue that commercial results from biodiscovery are still so far
away, there are simply no grounds for expecting beneﬁt sharing anytime soon (Grajal, 1999; Morgera
et al., 2012; Prip et al., 2014). The difﬁculties involved in monitoring the genetic material from access to
actual commercial product add to this problem.

94

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Here a paradox becomes apparent, as Australian scientists usually wait for patents to be granted before
they consider publishing results from the widespread university/industry collaboration (Prip et al., 2014).
This is necessary because publishing must be postponed in order not to block the patent criterion of novelty
(the search for prior art). Patenting is, however, a strong indication of commercial interest. As both the
commercialization and the patent process are claimed to be very long and costly, this implies that there is
often a delay in the sharing of scientiﬁc results through publishing. That would be a drawback for
innovation. An alternative interpretation is that there are a lot more commercial activities and results with a
potential for beneﬁt sharing taking place at a quicker pace than the meager ABS results would indicate. The
strong link between commercial interest and patenting has given rise to a widespread view in Australia that
linking ABS and IPR legislation through disclosure of the source of biological resources in patent
applications could be an appropriate legal measure to track ABS compliance (Prip et al., 2014).

As we have already contended, similar problems related to patenting and sharing of scientiﬁc results
are reported within MabCent-SFI (MabCent-SFI, 2015). The MabCent-SFI summary report (p. 53)
concludes,

“As a consortium, all research operations were performed on behalf of the commercial
partners, and initiation of i.e. national/international collaboration outside the consortium was
not directly possible. Thus, a more open structure with less secrecy and IPR considerations
would obviously facilitate the collaboration issue in a better way.”

As the Arctic Biodiscovery Centre and the Marbank network and collaborators are not tied to speciﬁc

commercial partners at the outset, this particular problem would be less likely to arise in the future.

Challenges with Monitoring of the Genetic Material
Monitoring is a crucial issue identiﬁed by both AIMS and Eskitis as well as relating to the Norwegian draft
administrative order for ABS. In Norway, the difﬁculties related to how to correlate a particular genetic
resource to the discovery or invention of an interesting product now seem to be delaying the administrative
order on an ABS system.

A small literature survey using Science-Direct and Google Scholar found that fewer than 10% of
academic papers published between 1991 and 2013 said anything about whether the origin of their material
was a marine bank. Discussions concerning sustainability and regulation were also rarely included in the
retrieved scientiﬁc papers, underlining the urgency of implementing the ABS legislation. When it comes to
purpose, almost 33% of the papers describe the intention of the study as applied research. This illustrates
the potential difﬁculties involved in distinguishing between bioprospecting for scientiﬁc and commercial
use and determining whether beneﬁt sharing should be triggered. ABS legislation may, therefore, need to
be followed by monitoring provisions that cover the entire bioprospecting chain (Bhatia and Chugh, 2015).
On the other hand, it is widely acknowledged among scientists and industry players alike, both in Australia
and in Norway, that bioprospecting is usually of a commercial nature (Prip et al., 2014).11

While Norway lags behind Australia with a view to ABS legislation at home, the interesting thing is
that Norway has a much stronger monitoring instrument available through its revised Patent Act—at least
to the extent that patent applications are submitted at home. Norway is one of very few user countries to
have amended patent legislation in line with disclosure of origin of genetic material. The case of Marbank
is similar to the Australian case also in that within Marbank there is a broad recognition that samples
accessed from their collection will usually be of commercial value. Hence, in the Norwegian case one
would avoid uncertainties regarding the type of permit (commercial/non-commercial) on which to base
eventual contracts. This contested area of ABS governance involves balancing access to genetic resources

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

95

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

with intellectual property rights (IPR). The CBD ABS regime seeks to balance IPR in the sense that both
systems aim to tie economic conditions on legal use of the material (Pavoni, 2012; Rosendal, 2011;
Swanson, 1995).

Concluding Remarks
The Norwegian government remains hesitant with regard to the future design of ABS to regulate
bioprospecting at home. For Marbank, in performing its tasks, this legal vacuum represents a prominent
challenge. The skepticism of politicians toward ABS basically concerns whether industry can and should
be expected to pay for access to genetic material. If the government concludes that no such payment can or
should be expected, the logical consequence is that Marbank and its associated network cannot be expected
to work economically independently from further public funding to secure the costly and necessary
infrastructure for bioprospecting. Protocols used in bioprospecting are both time and cost intensive and
require in Norwegian conditions technology adapted for polar and deep-sea searches, as well as advanced
laboratory platforms. Public funding is also essential to ensure initiation of the early phases of research into
the marine material. This exposes Marbank to an insecure funding situation in the future. Since collections
like Marbank’s are an expensive venture, long-term funding is a core need.

A second conclusion to be drawn from the deliberations in this study is that the idea of beneﬁt sharing
could be supported by, and expanded with, the principle of cost sharing. This could involve selling ready
assays or leads to industrial partners. We have seen that industry is not foreign to the idea of ABS
legislation that secures a level playing ﬁeld and legal certainty. Legal certainty would also support the
political aim of creating incentives for further innovation and R&D based on marine bioprospecting in
Norway. If the revenue is to be channeled back into Norwegian R&D, the multinational pharmaceutical
companies need to be somehow included as contributors. The alternative is a situation in which the large
multinational players remain free riders in a system that provides ready assays for biotechnological
development and where genetic material can be sent out of the country free of charge. Although some
beneﬁt sharing is currently taking place, such as research collaborations, the cost of the infrastructure
remains a public responsibility. The result is that public funding is required through all the phases of the
value creation chain of, for instance, medicinal products, from education, collection, infrastructure and
providing ready assays—and then in addition to paying royalties to the large pharmaceutical corporations
for acquiring vaccines and medicines. This remains a strong argument in favor of cost sharing even if
beneﬁt sharing is still a tough political issue to tackle.12

About the Authors
G. Kristin Rosendal is Research Director and Professor at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Norway. She
holds a PhD in political science and has published extensively in on issues relating to international regimes
on environment and trade, with a focus on access and beneﬁt sharing and intellectual property rights to
genetic resources (see www.fni.no for complete list of publications). With Sebastian Oberth€ur she is the
editor of Global Governance of Genetic Resources: Access and Beneﬁt Sharing after the Nagoya Protocol,
London/New York, Routledge, 2014; e-mail: kristin-rosendal@fni.no.

Anne Ingeborg Myhr is Director at GenØk—Centre for Biosafety, Norway. She holds a PhD from the
Institute of Medical Biology at the University of Tromsø. Her main experience is within risk assessment
and risk management of GMOs as well as on ethical, social and legal aspects (ELSA) related to genetic
engineering. During the past years new research has been extended to include environmental, health and
social impacts by emerging biotechnologies including synthetic biology and nanobiotechnology.

96

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Morten Walløe Tvedt is senior researcher at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute. Tvedt has published
extensively in the area of biological resources law and intellectual property (see www.fni.no for a complete
list of publications). Most important is a monograph co-authored with Tomme R. Young: Beyond Access:
Exploring Implementation of the Fair and Equitable Sharing Commitment
in the CBD, IUCN
Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 67/1.

Notes

1. Despite this, there are still challenges involved in making these obligations fully functional (see Tvedt and

Fauchald, 2011).

2. Nagoya Protocol Article 1: Objective. The objective of this Protocol is the fair and equitable sharing of the beneﬁts
arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by
appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to
technologies, and by appropriate funding, thereby contributing to the conservation of biological diversity and the
sustainable use of its components.

3. An increasing number of provider (developing) countries are enacting access legislation. However, since
compatible legislation in user countries to support compliance with access regulations is still largely lacking, there
is some way to go before the regime can work effectively (Tvedt, 2014; Tvedt and Young, 2007). ABS legislation
in developing countries is often criticized for being cumbersome with a view to access and futile with a view to
beneﬁt sharing (Grajal, 1999; Morgera et al., 2012). Australia’s ABS legislation, in contrast, has not been subject
to either objection; it seems to be regarded as successful in terms of handling access issues, although verdicts are
varied regarding its provision of beneﬁts to Australia from utilization of genetic resources (Burton, 2013).

4. FUGE alone contributed 1.6 billion NOK from 2002 to 2012 (Kunnskapsdepartementet, 2011).
5. The Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
6. Lov 2008-06-06 nr 37: available in English https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2008-06-06-37/KAPITTEL_

5#§27.

7. Kjersti Lie Gabrielsen, Director at Marbank, emphasized the two ﬁrst reasons in interview 22 June 2015.
8. This is based on the author’s reading of all the consultation responses, including from the 11 industrial actors, to

the draft administrative order (March 2013).

9. Interview with Kjersti Lie Gabrielsen, Director Marbank, 22 June 2015.
10. These views are also spelled out in the consultation response from Marbank and the Institute of Marine Research

to the draft administrative order, letter of 5 April 2013.

11. Based also on the author’ reading through the hearing notes from the 11 industrial actors responding to the

Norwegian draft administrative order (March 2013).

12. The research behind this article is funded by the Norwegian Research Council under the ELSA Program and forms
part of the 3 year project “Exploring Legal Conditions and Framework for Marine-based Bioprospecting and
Innovation”, project number 208543/O30.

References

Akondi, K.B. and Lakshmi, V.V. (2013) ‘Emerging Trends in Genomic Approaches for Microbial Bioprospecting’,

OMICS A Journal of Integrative Biology 17(2), 61–70.

Bhatia, P. and Chugh, A. (2015) ‘Role of Marine Bioprospecting Contracts in Developing Access and Beneﬁt Sharing
Mechanisms for Marine Traditional Knowledge Holders in the Pharmaceutical Industry’, Global Ecology and
Conservation 3, 176–187.

Burton, G. (2013) ‘The JUSCANZ Group in Nagoya Negotiations; The Unlikely Lot’, in E. Morgera, M. Buck, and E.
Tsioumani (eds.), The 2010 Nagoya Protocol on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing in Perspective. Implications for
international law and implementation challenges. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Leiden, pp. 295–330.

Dalmo, R. and Jørgensen, T. (2004) White Paper on Norwegian Marine Repository. University of Tromsø, Norway.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

97

G. Kristin Rosendal, Anne Ingeborg Myhr and Morten Walløe Tvedt

Access and Benefit Sharing, Marin Bioprospecting

Grajal, A. (1999) ‘Biodiversity and the Nation State: Regulating Access to Genetic Resources Limits Biodiversity

Research in Developing Countries’, Conservation Biology 13(1), 6–10.

Kunnskapsdepartementet. (2011) Nasjonal strategi for bioteknologi 2011–2020. F-471B.
Laird, S., Monagle, C., Johnston, S., and Queensland Biodiscovery Collaboration. (2008) ‘The Grifﬁth University
AstraZenaca Partnership for Natural Product Discovery. An Access and beneﬁt Sharing Case Study’. Report by
the United Nations University   Institute of Advanced Studies, UNU-IAS.

Leal, M., Puga, J., Ser^odio, J., Gomes, N.C.M. and Calado, R. (2012) ‘Trend in the Discovery of New Marine Natural
Products from Invertebrates over the Last Two Decades—Where and What Are We Bioprospecting?’ PLoS ONE
7(1), e30580.

MabCent-SFI. (2015) Summary Report 2007–2015. UiT—The Arctic University of Norway.
Ministry of Fisheries, Ministry of Education and Research, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2009) Marin bioprospektering—
en kilde til ny og bærekraftig verdiskapning (only available in Norwegian). Available at <https://www.regjeringen.
no/no/aktuelt/marin-bioprospektering–en-kilde-til-ny-/id576341/> [Accessed on 23 July 2015].

Morgera, E., Buck, M., and Tsioumani, E. (eds) (2012) The 2010 Nagoya Protocol on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing
in Perspective. Implications for International Law and Implementation Challenges. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
Leiden.

Norwegian Biodiversity Center (2015) Hva vet vi? (Only available in Norwegian). Available at <http://www.

artsdatabanken.no/artsprosjektet/hvavetviidag> [Accessed on 23 July 2015].

NRC (Norwegian Research Council) (2001) Store satsinger, budsjettforslag 2003 (only in Norwegian). Available at
<http://www.forskningsradet.no/no/Publikasjoner/1220788264903> [Accessed on 23 July 2015] Norges
forskningsråd, Oslo, Norway.

NRC (Norwegian Research Council) (2009) A

rsrapport 2008 (only available in Norwegian). Available at <http://
www.forskningsradet.no/no/Publikasjoner/1220788264903> [Accessed on 23 July 2015] FUGE, Norges
forskningsråd, Oslo, Norway.

NRC (Norwegian Research Council) (2013) BIOTEK2021 Work programme. Available at <http://www.forskningsradet.

no/no/Publikasjoner/1220788264903> [Accessed on 23 July 2015] Norges forskningsråd, Oslo, Norway.

Oberth€ur, S. and Rosendal, G.K. (eds.) (2014) Global Governance of Genetic Resources. Access and Beneﬁt Sharing

After the Nagoya Protocol. Routledge, London, New York.

Pascale, D., Santi, C., Fu, J. and Landfald, D. (2012) ‘The Microbial Diversity of Polar Environments Is a Fertile

Ground for Bioprospecting’, Marine Genomics 8(1), 15–22.

Pavoni, R. (2012) ‘The Nagoya Protocol and WTO Law’, in M. Elisa, B. Matthias and T. Elsa (eds.), The 2010 Nagoya

Protocol on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing in Perspective. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Leiden, pp. 185–213.

Prip, C., G. Kristin, R., Steinar, A. and Morten, W.T. (2014) The Australian ABS Framework: A Model Case for

Bioprospecting? FNI Report 1/2014, Lysaker, FNI.

Rosendal, G.K. (2011) ‘Biodiversity Protection in International Negotiations: Cooperation and Conﬂict’, in S. Dinar
(ed.), Beyond Resource Wars: Scarcity, Environmental Degradation, and International Cooperation. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, USA, pp. 59–86.

Svenson, J. (2013) ‘MabCent: Arctic Marine Bioprospecting in Norway’, Phytochemistry Reviews 12, 567–578.
Swanson, T. (ed.) (1995) Intellectual Property Rights and Biodiversity Conservation. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge.

Tvedt, M.W. (2014) ‘Beyond Nagoya: Towards a Legally Functional System of Access and Beneﬁt Sharing’, in S.
Oberth€ur and G.K. Rosendal (eds.), Global Governance of Genetic Resources. Access and Beneﬁt Sharing After
the Nagoya Protocol. Routledge, London, New York.

Tvedt, M.W. and Young., T. (2007) Beyond Access: Exploring Implementation of the Fair and Equitable Sharing

Commitment in the CBD. IUCN, Gland (Switzerland).

Tvedt, M.W. and Fauchald, O.K. (2011) ‘Implementing the Nagoya Protocol on ABS: A Hypothetical Case Study on

Enforcing Beneﬁt Sharing in Norway’, The  14(5), 383–402.

98

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 3–4

̊

