The  (2011) Vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 133–154

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2010.00412.x

Is the Devil in the Data? A Literature Review of
Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi
University of the Witwatersrand

This article examines the scholarly literature pertaining to music, ﬁlm and software piracy around the world,
with special attention to data sources, research scope and general ﬁndings. The article ﬁnds that the
conspicuous absence of methodologies utilizing critical theory in this broad literature has constricted the
world view of piracy, resulting in monolithic explanations of the causes and correlates of piracy. It further
identiﬁes systematic biases relating to the unjustiﬁed use of data published by the industry watchdog Business
Software Alliance (BSA).

Keywords copyright; piracy; information goods; intellectual property rights

Deﬁnition and Conceptual Landscape

Although broad extant literature exists on piracy and its many elements, the ﬁeld lacks a
universally acceptable deﬁnition. For many like van Wijk (2002), piracy involves the unauthorized
replication of copyrighted intellectual assets. Others are more general
in deﬁning piracy as
in general and software. Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006a,
violations of copyrighted material
p. 450) argues that books, software, music and video ﬁles are the main targets of internet piracy.
Much extant literature agrees that piracy gains currency from its role in information goods. As
Andr ´es (2006, p. 101) points out, information goods have large ﬁxed costs and small variable costs
of reproduction. He adds that technological advancements have greatly reduced the costs of
copying and also increased the availability of technologies to pirate these products. For example,
according to Mishra et al. (2005, p. 224), software piracy occurs because software is the
quintessential knowledge good having high development (ﬁxed) cost and minimal variable cost.
Furthermore, as Coombe and Herman (2004, p. 561) note, the production of value increasingly
‘‘takes the form of intangible, symbolic, or informational capital that is protected as intellectual
property’’. Wang (2004) suggests that intellectual property (IP) is a kind of intangible asset owned
by the creators, but it is a property in a legal sense that can be owned and dealt with.

Economic theorists argue that the development of the knowledge economy requires consis-
tency with the legal system, to protect the advanced productive forces involved in new knowledge
and the new economy.1 Towse (2005) further points out that information goods––intangible
products embodying IP––cannot be protected by contract alone as they are public goods and thus
open to ‘‘third party’’ free rider use (see also Novos and Waldman, 1984, p. 237).2 Scholarly
thinking around the ‘‘free rider’’ notion is informed by Arrow’s (1962) seminal paper that posited
that the ‘‘indivisible’’ nature of knowledge means that whatever its production costs, subsequent
reproductions cost nothing or next to nothing. In any case, as argued by Shy and Thisse (1999, p.
164), the value of using an information good increases with the number of people who legally and
illegally use the same good. Some scholars have coined the term ‘‘intellectual capitalism’’ to
describe an emerging conﬂuence of a capitalist economy and a knowledge or information economy
in which intellectual capital in some sense is dominant (Granstrand, 2000, p. 1061).3

r 133

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

This reasoning underpins the common deﬁnition of piracy as the unauthorized use or
reproduction of another’s work (see for instance Yang et al., 2004).4 Rahim et al. (1999, p. 302)
deﬁne ‘‘software piracy’’ as ‘‘the practice of making unauthorised copies of software that is neither
site-licensed nor in the public domain’’. Many researchers (e.g. Cheng et al., 1997; Gopal and
Sanders, 1997; 1998; Gopal et al., 2004; Hinduja, 2008; Lau, 2003; 2007; Peitz and Waelbroeck,
2006) have holistically adopted the deﬁnition advanced by the Business Software Alliance (BSA)
that software piracy is ‘‘the unauthorized use of computer software or the unauthorized distribu-
tion of copies of software without permission being given by the owner’’. Kini et al. (2003, p. 63)
introduce a minor variation in their deﬁnition of software piracy as ‘‘the making of unauthorized
copies of software by individuals or businesses for resale or for use in workplace, school, or home’’.
Verhoogt and Schriks (2007, p. 84) also see piracy as part and parcel of the notion of IP.5 They
argue that past media revolutions, like the introduction of the printing press, phonographs,
television and computer, offered new means of production, distribution and consumption of
information. The introduction of such new media constantly resulted in new legal questions—or
maybe the recurring of the same legal questions—of IP (Verhoogt and Schriks, 2007, p. 83). Their
argument resonates with de Castro et al’s (2008, p. 77) deﬁnition of product piracy as ‘‘the
misappropriation of IP by a party other than the rightful owner, resulting in the making of
unauthorized copies of a product’’.

Interestingly, not all piracy is negative and detrimental to the economic gain of the IP holder.
A growing research corpus—including Givon et al. (1995), Gayer and Shy (2003), Gopal et al.
(2006), Liebowitz (2006) and Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006b)—has demonstrated that increases in
piracy could boost the demand for legal information good.6 Bakker (2005) calls for a critical costs
and beneﬁt analysis of ﬁle-sharing networks because of their inherent beneﬁts. It is also noteworthy
that not all information goods are victims of piracy. For example, Cosovanu (2006) argues that
piracy principally affects off-the-shelf software packaged for such general applications as text
processing, spreadsheets and basic graphics packages. This is because these products have large
market sizes and customer bases, high anonymity and mobility.

Figure 1 summarizes the conceptual framework of extant research into the broad ﬁeld of
piracy. The three types—music, video (ﬁlm) and software piracy—dominate, although there is a
limited (and dwindling) amount of research into book piracy.7 The conceptual frames are self-
explanatory: it appears that much theorizing of piracy falls into either end-user piracy, network
externalities or commercial piracy. It is quite conceivable that future research might explore the
interactions between these seemingly disparate frames. New research might also identify new
conceptual frames altogether.

Contextualizing Piracy

As the premier advocates of digital property rights, BSA has dictated global understanding of a
variety of policy priorities,
including protection of IP rights (copyrights, patents and tech
mandates), software innovation and choice. However, it is within these policy priorities that one
can then critically engage with the discourses around music, video and software piracy. Several
studies, informed by the ‘‘alarming’’ statistics, have highlighted the ‘‘negative’’ impacts of piracy in
the software industry. However, most of the empirical studies on piracy have largely used the
BSA’s piracy rates (Andr ´es, 2003; 2006; Depken and Simmons, 2004; Holm, 2003; Husted, 2000;
Marron and Steel, 2000; Mishra et al., 2005; Shadlen et al., 2005; van Kranenburg and Hogenbirk,
2005), among others. According to Andr ´es (2006), annual national software piracy rates are
compiled by the International Planning and Research Corporation (IPRC, 2003) for the BSA and

134

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

Piracy 

Types

Music piracy

Video (film) piracy
Software piracy   

Conceptual frames 
End-user piracy 
(cid:129) Non-commercial but unauthorised copying of information goods 

for personal use 

(cid:129) Analog formats e.g. dubbing video and audio cassettes 
(cid:129) Digital formats e.g. copying computer software, DVDs or MP3s 
(cid:129)

Some use of shareware and freeware 

Free distribution of information goods, especially via Internet  

Network externalities 
(cid:129)
(cid:129) MP3 format downloading 
(cid:129)
Peer-to-Peer file sharing 
(cid:129)
Loading software in pre-sold computers 
(cid:129) Downloading and sharing of “demo” files and “sample” music 
(cid:129) Online provision of CD-key code crackers 

Commercial piracy (bootlegging) 
(cid:129)

(cid:129)

Illegal copies of information goods are sold in markets parallel to 
original producers 
Counterfeiting: Large-scale production of illegal information 
goods 

(cid:129) Unlawful branding of inferior in formation goods as original goods 

Figure 1: Conceptual landscape of piracy

the Software Information Industry Association (SIIA). BSA strongly argues that making or
downloading unauthorized copies is to break the law, committing a copyright infringement. BSA,
among other digital property rights activists, maintains that ‘‘digital piracy costs billions of dollars
in revenues, wages, jobs and taxes for the USA alone’’.

It is little wonder then that scholarly discussions of piracy are biased considerably in favour of
BSA and its member organizations. Inevitably, this bias limits a critical understanding of a
phenomenon that has assumed global proportions.8 However, it is noteworthy that some scholars
and critics do not accept BSA’s piracy statistics. For example, Yar (2008) calls for a considerable
critical scrutiny of the BSA ﬁgures because they emerge from partial and interested parties. He
terms the statistics as ‘‘guesstimates, which can only approximately track levels of piracy; at worst,

r 135

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

they may be seen as the product of methodologically questionable forms of statistical inference and
accounting’’ (Yar, 2008, p. 608). After all, he argues, most of the available data come mostly from
the US sources, reﬂecting ‘‘the country’s eminent position in the global media for media and
software goods’’. He further argues that these statistics should be viewed as discursive strategies
that only attempt to construct a political and public consensus about the ‘‘immorality’’ of piracy.
Gayer and Shy (2000) also believe that common statements made by publishers and their
lawyers regarding their ‘‘losses’’ from piracy are grossly exaggerated and that the ‘‘reported losses’’
do not usually exist. In trying to underscore the differential aspects of the piracy rates, Andr ´es
(2006) argues that by whichever model used to calculate the rates, there is a correlation to the
cultural, economic and socioeconomic factors like income, education and judicial efﬁcacy in the
different regions and countries. Gopal et al. (2004, p. 90) go further to identify technological and
ethical considerations, in addition to economic factors, as explanatory variables to why digital
piracy is on the increase. They argue that the growing pervasiveness of the internet and the rapid
adoption of broadband technology has led to cross-border and transcontinental music piracy.

While reviewing piracy in Eastern Europe, Cosovanu (2006) identiﬁes an obstacle that is
unrelated to the protection of IP rights that prevents most software ﬁrms in developing countries
from moving into the more lucrative business of developing their own packed products on a
sufﬁciently large scale. Cosovanu contends that the software industry is mainly dominated by the
West in such a way that consumers in the developing countries are more conversant with their
products. A new industry in the developing world will fail at the entry stage or even on the domestic
market if they succeed in launching their packaged products because the local consumers are more
comfortable with what they already know. These are products from the software industries in the
West. This is what he refers to as the ‘‘network effect’’. Hand in hand with this is the ‘‘lock-in’’
effect, where consumers are loath to learning new programs (as opposed to what they already know
from the established software industries) that might come with packaged products from their own
countries.

Other factors include the high costs of developing a high-quality software package and
launching it successfully. ‘‘Domestic capital is scarce and foreign capital has consistently preferred
the less risky outsourcing model’’ (Cosovanu, 2006, p. 6). Telecommunications infrastructure as
well as the size of the local market in Eastern and Central Europe is also an obstacle. While
proffering an economic solution to piracy, Cosovanu (2006, p. 8) suggests that selling software
products at a lower price that reﬂects the marginal costs and the local purchasing power could
displace even the most resilient pirates without hurting diffusion, as the new discount clients would
be encouraged to abandon the blackout market for the legal one. Hill (2007, p. 10) attributes the
high piracy rates in Asia to the lack of long established IP rights regimes. Secondly, he argues that
weak enforcement of the laws that do exist is another problem. Walls and Harvey (2006) observe
the same in Hong Kong, as they discuss the institutional and operations of the pirate software
market. While examining the current situation of IP in China, Wang (2004) argues that there is lack
of sufﬁcient, effective, intensive and extensive enforcement of IP. Priest (2006, p. 801) also
attributes the proliferation of piracy in China to a lack of will on the central government’s part
to confront and eliminate piracy. However, he rightly argues that the government has more
pressing problems to deal with, including the AIDS epidemic, pollution, unemployment and public
health problems, among many others.

The spread of piracy is also attributed to the rapid growth of technology. As Andr ´es (2006,
p. 101) notes, the advancements in technology have reduced the costs of copying and also increased
the availability of technologies to produce software applications, sound recordings and movies.
This is a view shared by Bezmen and Depken (2006, p. 356) and Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006a),

136

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

who contend that technological advancements related to the production of information-based
products have increased the availability of these goods on world markets, especially computer
software, music and videos. These same advancements, however, have also reduced the costs and
increased the availability throughout the world of the technology used to copy or ‘‘pirate’’ these
products.

The rise of piracy, according to Zamoon and Curley (2008), due to the pace of economic,
technological and economic change, has obviously outpaced the development of laws and norms
that regulate their acquisition and use. Yar (2005) agrees that these changes are ‘‘radically
reconﬁguring the global political coordinates within which the consumption of media goods takes
place’’. To Yar, the upsurge of piracy is also a product of the shifting legal regimes, lobbying
activities, rhetorical manoeuvres, criminal justice agendas and ‘‘interested’’ or ‘‘partial’’ processes
of statistical inference. Commenting on music piracy, Chiang and Assane (2007, p. 188) observe
that with the rapid growth in technology, internet music piracy is increasingly becoming a problem
especially with peer-to-peer (P2P) ﬁle-sharing services, personal websites and blogs.

Methodologies Used in Piracy Studies

Extant systematic studies of piracy around the world identify numerous methodological ap-
proaches. This section outlines the major methodologies identiﬁed in the extant literature relating
to software, music and video piracy. Although only the major methodologies are listed here, it is
worth noting that a number of studies utilize multiple methodologies. Other studies adopt
normative perspectives, thereby building their principal arguments through systematic literature
reviews and philosophical excursions. While both quantitative and qualitative approaches are
common among piracy scholars, this ﬁeld of study appears to have attracted more interest from the
economics ﬁeld, especially the sub-ﬁeld of formal modelling using utility function theory. As such,
there was a higher observance of formal modelling studies of piracy than any other research
methodology.

Country- and regional-level studies are probably the most frequently used case-study
perspectives. At the country level, numerous studies exist on developed and developing countries.
China is one of the most studied countries in this regard (see Greguras, 2007; Guifeng et al., 2005;
Jiang, 2007; Kshetri, 2009; Liu, 2005; Priest, 2006; Wang, 2004; Yang and Clarke, 2005).
Anchordoguy (2000) offers a detailed case study of Japan’s software industry and the challenge
of software piracy. Gan and Koh (2006) investigate perceptions of software piracy among
university students in Singapore. Other case studies exist for Brunei (Rahim et al., 1999), Eastern
Europe (Cosovanu, 2006), the European Union (Saxby, 2004), Finland (Siponen and Vartiainen,
2005), Hong Kong (Lau, 2003; Moores and Dhillon, 2000), Iran (Sarkissian, 2008), Nigeria
(Oyebisi and Agboola, 2003), Singapore (Moores and Dhaliwal, 2004), Thailand (Kini et al., 2003)
and Turkey (Mishra et al., 2006). Some extant research embarks on comparative analysis using
case studies. For example, Chen and Maxwell (2007) examine bilateral IP negotiations between
Taiwan and the United States. Rawlinson and Lupton (2007) investigate cross-national attitudes
and perceptions of piracy between the United States and China. At a global level, Ginarte and
Park’s (1997) cross-national study creates an index of patent rights across 110 countries, while
Husted (2000) studies the impact of national cultures on software piracy across 39 countries. Shore
et al. (2001) use questionnaires to study piracy attitudes in the United States, New Zealand, Hong
Kong and Pakistan. Other cross-national studies of piracy include van Kranenburg and Hogenbirk
(2005) and Landy (2008).

r 137

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

A special case-study type is the one used by Bakker (2005) investigating the efﬁcacy of legal
networks and illegal ﬁle-sharing schemes in delivery digital products. Bakker examines secondary
data—media reports and industry announcements—using multiple analysis methods, and con-
cludes that paid (legal) download services are more enduring than P2P ﬁle-sharing services. Similar
studies have been carried out by King and Lampe (2003) as well as Domon and Yamazaki (2004).
Liebowitz (2003; 2005; 2006) are seminal studies of the ﬁle-sharing networks, focusing on research
methodologies used to estimate the impact of P2P sharing on the global music industry. The
Liebowitz research examines the magnitude of MP3 downloads and ﬁle-sharing and estimates their
adverse effects on the durability of the global music industry. Zentner (2008) uses a sophisticated
survival analytic probit regression model that investigates the impact of broadband internet use
and ﬁle sharing on the existence of physical retail music stores.

Another common research method is economic modelling. Here, studies have proceeded from
microeconomic theory with an emphasis on utility function models and competition forms. Conner
and Rumelt (1991) is seminal both in its methodology and its ﬁndings. Conner and Rumelt
modelled piracy as a function of price, protection technology, demand for the pirated copy and an
undeﬁned matrix representing the behaviour patterns of hard-core pirates. They use normative
theory and utility functions to establish the proﬁt-maximizing level of protection, and ﬁnd that
protection increases both price and proﬁt.

Some studies have used marginal cost theories for monopolistically competitive markets
(e.g. Yoon, 2002). Sundararajan (2004) uses utility function theory to model pricing strategies
under different piracy scenarios. Sundararajan reports that the use of utility models offers
useful insights into the design of effective pricing policies in the presence of digital piracy, as
well as how to simultaneously use price discrimination and technology-based protection to deter
piracy. Similar studies investigating optimal pricing under piracy conditions include Khouja
and Smith (2007) and Khouja and Park (2007). Bae and Choi’s (2006) paper entitled A Model
of Piracy also uses utility function theory to study the short- and long-term effects of piracy. They
argue that piracy is a major factor in a monopolistic software producer’s decision matrix of
efﬁciency and quality in the short and long run. Chang et al. (2008) research ender-user piracy in a
monopolized software industry setting in which consumers have a heterogeneous income and
limited liability. Other important studies using utility functions include Johnson (1985), Novos and
Waldman (1984), Shy and Thisse (1999), Gayer and Shy (2003), Gayer and Shy (2000), Qiu (2006)
and Kiema (2008).

Banerjee (2003) uses utility theory to model the impact of government policies on the decision
calculus of consumers, producers and pirates. He ﬁnds that a producer’s decision to ﬁght piracy
through monitoring (and use of government policy) could signiﬁcantly reduce the spread and reach
of pirated products. The role of the government and its policies in this case is primarily in the
promotion of network effects, Banerjee adds. In another equally interesting study using the same
methodology, Banerjee (2006) highlights the challenges posed by governments that see non-action
on their part as a socially optimal outcome on the decision of whether to ﬁght piracy. In this case,
Banerjee suggests that commercial pirates (organizations that take pirated software and install it
across their operations) will be content with paying a penalty to the government, which in turn
redistributes such beneﬁts to the broader society. In a watershed study, Belleﬂamme and Picard
(2007) take studies using the utility function theories to a higher level when they model the
behaviour of duopolists in the presence of piracy. They model multiproduct monopoly as a
function of the duopolists’ action as well as those of the externalities introduced by piracy. By
modelling the behaviour of multiple producers in reaction to piracy, Belleﬂame and Picard reveal
deeper insights regarding how piracy affects markets of perfectly differentiated products. Chellapa

138

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

and Shivendu (2005) use utility functions to model piracy in vertically integrated markets as a two-
stage decision phenomenon. Hill (2007) also uses analytical models in a study of strategic responses
to piracy. Hui et al. (2008) use utility functions to model the economics of shareware software,
while Mishra et al. (2005) use them to estimate the cost of software piracy detection and
prevention. Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006b) uses utility function models to demonstrate the
advantage of free music downloads.

Under the classical economic theory ambit, a rich corpus of research methodologies has
emerged. These range from simple descriptive studies to advanced statistical analysis. For example,
Cheng et al. (1997) offer one of the earliest statistical analyses of the decision calculus whether or
not to pirate software. Their study, which was dogged by numerous methodological challenges,
was critical in providing a template of ﬁndings on why individuals pirate. Givon et al. (1995) also
offer an interesting estimation of lost sales using diffusion models.9 Depken and Simmons (2004)
conduct a cross-national study of variation in piracy propensity using multivariate regression
analysis techniques. Their study models the propensity to pirate software against economic
development, international trade links, cost of living, literacy and individualism as explanatory
variables. Their study supports other general ﬁndings indicating that at a macro level, piracy is
linked to some aspects of a country’s gross domestic product (GDP), trade, research and
development (R&D), employment, labour force and foreign direct investment (FDI) (Javorcik,
2004; Yang, 2007). Javorcik (2004) uses an econometric speciﬁcation model to estimate the impact
of intellectual copyright protection on FDI. Yang (2007) uses similar multivariate regression
techniques to analyse more recent data and ﬁnds that a country’s macro environments do impact
on the degree of piracy in that country. He argues that ‘‘when [software] ﬁrms go to a country for
business activities, they must conduct a macro analysis of the country’s environments and their
inﬂuence on piracy’’ (Yang, 2007, p. 139).

Bezmen and Depken (2006) use robust pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) models to study
socioeconomic inﬂuences on software piracy in the Unites States. They report a negative relation-
ship between software piracy and income, tax burdens and economic freedom. Djekic and
Loebbecke (2007) use descriptive statistics and binary logistic regression models analyses to
empirically investigate the extent to which technical copy protections avoid illegal copying among
international software users. A number of studies by leading piracy scholar Ram Gopal also use
multiple methodologies, for example economic modelling and survey research (Gopal et al., 2006),
survey research and structural models (Gopal and Sanders, 1998; Gopal et al., 2004), and meta-
analysis and survey research (Gopal and Sanders, 1997). Sinha and Mandel (2008) use modiﬁed
versions of the contingent valuation method to estimate piracy and the consumers’ tendency to
avoid paying for the product in 3-year panel data. In another interesting research perspective,
Nizovtseva and Thursby (2007) develop a game-theoretic model to show that full public disclosure
can be an equilibrium strategy in a game played by rational loss-minimizing agents.

Most studies using classical economic theory proceed on the assumption that globalization,
development trends and innovation in information technology help to establish the conditions for
expanded production and consumption of ‘‘pirate’’ audio-visual goods (Yar, 2005). Other studies
under this popular research genre use psychological approaches that emphasize belief, attitude,
intention and behaviour (see e.g. Christensen and Eining, 1991). Christensen and Eining’s theory
that attitude and social norms inﬂuence piracy has been widely supported and used as a foundation
for further research into the causes and correlates of piracy around the world. The most popular of
these are public opinion surveys of university students in a variety of social, economic and
situational contexts, and their perceptions and behaviour towards piracy. For example, Swinyard
et al. (1990) and Chiang and Assane (2007) use questionnaires to investigate the cognition,

r 139

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

attitudes and intentions of university students from Singapore and United States towards software
piracy. Chiang and Assane (2008) conduct advanced quantitative investigations on the gender
factor in decisions by university students to pirate music. Woolley and Eining (2006) polled
university students studying accounting; Wang (2004) administered a closed questionnaire on
students attending four Taiwanese universities; and d’Astous et al. (2005) used a self-administered
questionnaire on students at a major Canadian business school. Coyle et al. (2009) use the same
instrument to study the consumer considerations that lead to the decision to engage in music piracy
among university students in Midwestern United States. Green (2007) conducts a three-wave panel
data survey with university students in Illinois, United States. Siponen and Vartiainen (2005) use a
questionnaire instrument to investigate the attitudes and factors affecting software piracy among
university students in Finland. Lysonski and Durvasula (2008) investigate past and future
predispositions to music piracy using a closed questionnaire.

Other psychologically oriented studies are premised upon Fishbein and Ajzen’s (1975) theory
of reasoned action10 and Ajzen’s (1985) more expanded theory of planned behaviour. Cronan and
Al-Refee (2008) offer a useful discussion of TRA and TPB and then proceed to use the theories as
the basis of a questionnaire-based study of piracy among students at a university in Midwestern
United States. Limayen et al. (2005) use a combination of focus groups and questionnaire to
investigate long-term factors inﬂuencing software piracy. Mishra et al. (2006) use a questionnaire
to study software piracy among IT professionals in Turkey.

Two cases highlighting advanced used of questionnaire instruments are noted. The ﬁrst is Nair
and Stafford’s (1998) utilization of an open-ended expert panel questionnaire on executives whose
companies have business interests in China. The second is Hinduja’s (2008) survey research that
investigates de-individuation strategies (anonymity and pseudonymity) among university students
who were also internet users. Yang et al. (2004) utilized a self-administered questionnaire on senior
IP managers working with British and American manufacturing activities in China. The choice of
method was critical to Yang’s wide-ranging ﬁndings and conclusions.

While qualitative research methodologies appear to be relatively unpopular, their results have
been critically useful in providing breadth to the global perspective of piracy research. Studies
using ethnographic methodologies (e.g. Levy, 2007; Siponen and Vartiainen, 2004; Walls and
Harvey, 2006) offer a unique window into understanding the decision calculus of participants in
the piracy trade. Walls and Harvey use investigative ethnographic techniques to elicit ﬁrst-hand
knowledge of buyers and sellers of pirated products in Hong Kong. Lau (2006) uses an open-ended
questionnaire to study piracy attitudes on a major Chinese newsgroup, combined with a content
analysis of posted messages. Lau (2007) also uses an open-ended questionnaire to computer
enthusiasts visiting a major computer expo in Hong Kong. Bian and Moutinho (2009) used the
focus group methodology to study attitudes towards counterfeit products. In a similar study, Byers
et al. (2004) attempt to determine the source of unauthorized copies by studying the availability
and characteristics of recent popular movies in ﬁle-sharing networks. Their ﬁndings, while not
unequivocal, suggest that industry insiders are a major conduit in movie piracy.

A small but persuasive number of extant studies use critical text analytic methodologies that
draw their strength from the broad school of qualitative research. These methodologies include
discourse analysis, for example rhetorical performance (Yar, 2008). Studies such as Yar (2008)
presuppose that the ongoing global piracy debate is premised upon legitimating a socially shared
notion of value, hence the use of ‘‘repertoires of justiﬁcation’’ to undergird most anti-piracy
campaigns. Yar (2005) uses both the traditional classical economics explanation and the social
constructionist perspective, and upholds the latter as a more persuasive methodology, stating ‘‘[its]
critical edge derives from its ability to draw attention to the impact of dominant economic and

140

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

political interests upon the ways in which cultural goods can be legitimately enjoyed’’ (Yar, 2005,
p. 691). He concludes:

The expansion of proprietary copyrights, and the criminalization of their violation, is
part of a larger ‘‘game’’ in which struggles to dominate the uses of information are
being played out within the new ‘‘knowledge economy’’. Rather than taking industry or
government claims about ﬁlm ‘‘piracy’’ (its scope, scale, location, perpetrators, costs or
impact) at face value, we would do well to subject them to a critical scrutiny that asks in
whose interests such claims ultimately work (Yar, 2005, p. 691).

Outside of the above broad research genres are normative studies. A few initiatives were
identiﬁed in the literature that utilized normative approaches to shed light on the broad question of
piracy. Bockstedt et al. (2006) use normative approaches to examine how changes in the structure
of the digital music market have affected the music industry’s strategy and management. Brennan
(2002) offers a normative discussion of copyright of media content and the notion of equitable
remuneration of retransmission pertaining to pay television. Runge and Defrancesco (2006) offer
an engaging historical analysis of the Commons and IP rights.

Normative studies, such as Granstrand (2000), Jacobs et al. (2001), Coriat and Orsi (2002),
Depoorter and Parisi (2002) and Cook and Wang (2004), contain rich bibliographies of extant
research in their respective sub-ﬁelds. From a normative legal perspective are such studies as Hayes
and Fenwick (2001), Randle (2002), Ecob et al. (2003), Menell (2007), Epstein (2008) and Introna
(2007). James et al. (2004), Towse (2005), Hanel (2006) and Forero-Pineda (2006) are normative
studies of IP rights. Others conduct case-study research into IP rights, for example China (Liu,
2005) and Iran (Sarkissian, 2008). Priest (2006) conducts an extensive study of the legal landscape
governing ﬁlm and music in China. Pierce II (2006) provides an interesting discussion of
maintaining market dominance after the expiry of software and other IT patents. Sharp’s (2007)
case study of early music copyrights in the Unites States argues that over-extension of such
copyrights poses threats to cultural development.

An isolated amount of research explores the existence of positive aspects of piracy. Choi and
Perez (2007) use normative theory and secondary data analysis to examine the impact of online
piracy on innovation and the creation of new, legitimate businesses. Using similar normative
perspectives, Jaisingh (2009) also ﬁnds that in monopoly markets, an increase in the policy variable
(in the form of legal action against pirating users or educating users about the harms of piracy)
could act as a disincentive for innovation. Cremer and Pestieau (2009) also use utility function
modelling to demonstrate that piracy may be welfare enhancing because it enables a good to be
provided to individuals with a low willingness to pay without undermining the producing ﬁrm’s
ability to ﬁnance the development cost via the pricing scheme applied to high valuation consumers.
In a similar undertaking, de Castro et al. (2008) use normative theory in information economics to
explain why and when imitation can increase the value of an IP resource.

A few studies also use critical cultural studies research techniques. Decherney (2007) uses
media historicism in his engaging examination of the aetiology of copyright and piracy laws in the
United States in the late, nineteenth century and early, twentieth century. DeVoss and Porter
(2006) offer sophisticated cultural studies investigating P2P ﬁle sharing and its implications on
somewhat disparate ﬁelds such as language teaching and writing. Their argument hinges on the
need to deconstruct plagiarism and fair use in the era of blurred copyright issues. DeVoss and
Webb (2008) extend the debate of copyright and fair use to multimedia compositions. Towse (2005)
offers an interesting study of copyright issues from a cultural economics perspective. Here, Towse
combines cultural studies research techniques and the historicism perspective to argue that

r 141

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

copyright favours the industry side of the creative industries rather than the creators and
performers whose work they exploit.

Findings from Extant Research

Many studies on piracy implicate young people, especially students, as the most active demo-
graphic group that practices piracy. Woolley and Eining (2006) quote a 1991 survey in United
States that found out that a large number of accounting students pirate software. Yar (2008)
quotes a 2004 US poll that found that ‘‘more than half of all eight- to 18-year-olds have
downloaded music, one-third have downloaded games, and nearly a quarter have downloaded
software illegally from the internet’’. Yar further quotes a 2004 Canadian survey, which found that
47% of 12- to 21-year-olds intended to download music, video or software from the internet over
the next 6 months. The Canadian study further found that 70% of respondents deemed it
acceptable to download music, video or software from the internet. From these polls, Yar
(2008,p. 609) argues that the high levels of softlifting—described by Mishra et al. (2005, p. 226)
as downloading copyrighted software from the internet for personal use—among college students
had little weight attached to the legal and moral objections.

Chiang and Assane (2007) conducted a survey on university students in the United States to
study attitudes towards copyright law along with economic and demographic factors affecting the
extent of music copyright violations. Their choice of students was based on the notion that
university students constitute ‘‘a market segment that is technologically savvy and exhibits high
demand for music’’ (2007, p. 188). It is in this view that Mason (2008) argues that modern youth
culture and piracy are explicitly linked. Cheng et al. (1997, p. 51) argue that software piracy is more
prevalent in academia than in business and that colleges and universities are ‘‘breeding grounds for
software piracy’’. In an empirical study of business students in a university, they came to a
conclusion that affordability and price constitute the main reasons for pirating software, whereas
the need for supporting material to use the software is the primary reason for purchasing the
software among students.

Lysonski and Durvasula (2008, p. 169) argue that Generation Y (mostly students and other
young consumers) are more permissive of piracy for the expressed reason that they felt that there
were doing no harm to others and they were ‘‘victims of inﬂated music prices kept artiﬁcially high
by the music industry’’. In an exploratory research of moral intensity regarding software piracy
conducted in a university in Thailand, Kini et al. (2003) came to a conclusion that the most active
age group in software piracy is students under the age of 30 years. Females’ moral intensity
towards piracy was also found to be lower than that of males. The same was found out about
undergraduates as opposed to graduate students. However, Chiang and Assane’s (2008) study on
university students in three US universities found out that male students exhibit relatively higher
music ﬁle-sharing rates than females. The study further showed that male students in computer and
other scientiﬁc ﬁelds tend to engage in ﬁle sharing more than their female counterparts in similar
ﬁelds.

Green (2007) indicates that female students have more respect for copyright laws than their
male counterparts, who are more involved in downloading songs illegally from the internet.
Bhattacharjee et al. (2003) concur with the above when they argue that females and older
individuals, as opposed to younger college students, pirate less, just as individuals with an ethical
disposition. They contend that young people form a signiﬁcant portion of the music fan base, and
online music copying and sharing is rampant among students. In a study conducted in Singapore,
Gan and Koh (2006) arrive at the conclusion that piracy is rampant among university students.

142

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

The only plausible causes of software piracy at the universities in Singapore, they argue, have been
the absence of a clear software policy and a lack of understanding of copyright law by students, as
well as a lack of vigorous law enforcement by academic ofﬁcials.

While discussing software piracy among university students in Brunei, Rahim et al. (1999) are
of the opinion that most academic institutions can hardly keep up with the pace and frequency with
which new software appears in the market. This explains why students seek alternative means to
gain access to the new software, usually through piracy (see e.g. Kini et al., 2003; Rawlinson and
Lupton, 2007).

Probably, to return to Cosovanu’s (2006) argument above about software being priced beyond
the reach of most local users, Rawlinson and Lupton (2007) are of the opinion that most university
students do not have much discretionary income to purchase software. A similar observation is
made by Moores and Dhaliwal (2004) in a study on software piracy in Singapore among students.
They conclude that software piracy among students was not an ‘‘ethically charged issue of right
and wrong, but a calculated response aimed at acquiring software that would otherwise be out of
their reach’’. In their study of piracy among IT professionals in Turkey, Mishra et al. (2006) found
that younger professionals have a higher propensity to using pirated software than their older
counterparts.

From the above, therefore, it is clear that age, gender, income levels and experience are
determining factors when considering reasons as to why people, especially students, engage in
piracy. Lack of clear policies regarding software use and an absence of copyright laws especially in
academic institutions is another factor. The fast pace at which new technologies come to being
means that institutions have to keep up with this speed.

China is prominent in piracy studies (see, for instance, Chow, 2003; Fisman and Wei, 2009;
Greguras, 2007; Guifeng et al., 2005; Kshetri, 2009; Liu, 2005; Nair and Stafford, 1998; Priest, 2006;
Rawlinson and Lupton, 2007; Wang, 2004; Yang and Clarke, 2005) for a number of reasons. As
highlighted above, there is reported laxity in implementing IPR statutes. However, several other
factors can account for this problem. China boasts the second-highest number of internet users in the
world. Although China has the highest population in the world, the country, according to Priest
(2006, p. 798), accounted for only 0.6% of the world market for music sold on a physical format
(CDs, cassettes, etc.) in 2003, while the United States and England together accounted for nearly 50%
of the global sales.

However, as noted above, there is some moral ambiguity when discussing the issue of piracy,
given the level of globalization of IT, within the backdrop of social, cultural, economic,
technological inequalities, which are mostly fashioned in favour of the developed Western World
and the United States predominantly. The emergence of China as an economic force might provide
impetus to organizations like BSA to improve their ‘‘guesstimates’’ (Yar, 2008) of piracy rates.

Besides a whole discipline of IP rights and piracy literature reviewed above, there is a glaring
absence of similar studies in the developing world, except for a few mentions in the Asia-Paciﬁc
region (Chen and Maxwell, 2007; Gan and Koh, 2006; Kini et al., 2003; Moores and Dhaliwal,
2004; Shin, 2007; Walls and Harvey, 2006) and Eastern and Central Europe (Cosovanu, 2006).
Mentions of Africa, Caribbean, Latin America and Middle East (Rahim et al., 1999; Sarkissian,
2008) are almost non-existent. This is quite interesting, given that BSA names these regions as
recording the highest levels of piracy rates, as indicated above. Second, most of the empirical
studies have involved participants in America; hence, the ﬁndings might differ signiﬁcantly from
the diverse regions of the world. It is this light that we argue that discourses around and about
piracy must be cognizant of the above observations, lest we end up conditioned by the ‘‘victim’’
mindset instead of looking at the bigger picture.

r 143

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Rethinking Research in Piracy

As already discussed, piracy is often perceived as a threat to the development and creation of
information goods because it undermines the suppliers’ intents to recoup their development costs
(see e.g. Andr ´es, 2006). The underlying assumption here is that piracy has a negative effect on a
producer’s proﬁts. However, what proponents of the anti-piracy policies fail to acknowledge is that
irrespective of the reasons presented to explain the proliferation of piracy, there is a redeeming side
of the entire phenomenon. Economic, cultural and technological studies about and around piracy
have brought to the fore ways into which those into the music, video and software industry can tap
into the rich reservoir that has resulted from piracy.

Decherney’s (2007, p. 109) argument is that instead of vilifying pirates and their trade, we
should learn that today’s pirates are tomorrow’s moguls who are simply pushing the limits of new
technologies in directions that have yet to be assimilated or condemned by law or society. The
argument propounded here is that pirates simply take advantage of the temporary law frontiers
that accompany the diffusion of new media. Decherney is content with the fact that ‘‘piracy is an
integral part of the new media’’. He further argues that the new forms of copying and distribution
only appear as piracy before they are assimilated and often modiﬁed by the law.

In no less terms, Choi and Perez’s (2007) argument is congruent with the above. They respect
the fact that pirate technologies and communities have spawned a proliferation and source of
strategic innovations as well as a creation of both pirate and legitimate business models. While
Napster (the online music sharing service that was closed down on allegations of massive copyright
violations) was pilloried by the anti-piracy crusaders, Choi and Perez in fact argue that on the
positive side, it contributed to a new market creation of music lovers who consumed music in a
different way, thus giving rise to a new generation of business models:

Catapulted by the original success of P2P (peer-to-peer ﬁle distribution systems)
models, the music industry realized that it had to adapt to the changes by creating
new business models like PressPlay.com, a joint venture between Sony Music
Entertainment and Universal Music Group, and MusicNet, a partnership between
AOL Time Warner, EMI, Bertelsmann, and technology from Real Networks—both
launched in December 2001 (Choi and Perez, 2007, p. 172).

The story of Napster, according to Choi and Perez, shows how online piracy advances
technology, offers customer insight, builds a customer base and creates innovative and legitimate
businesses. Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006b, p. 908) contend that ﬁle sharing should not be restricted
as the music industry itself could beneﬁt from the ﬁle-sharing networks. They argue that down-
loaders use ‘‘the downloaded ﬁles for sampling in order to make more informed purchasing
decisions’’. As such, Choi and Perez conclude that even incumbents in legit businesses are turning
to pirate and communities and they are no longer reluctant to work with them. This is because it
offers them an opportunity to experiment, in creating new offerings and services. They give another
example of Time Warner, who entered into a deal with BiTorrent, the entity that helped ignite the
video market by pirate transfers. However, other incumbents are unwilling to work with the pirate
communities, but they have accepted them as a fact of life; thus, they have had to devise new
technologies (2007, p. 176).

Tu and Lu (2006) concur that there are numerous opportunities and innovations for electronic
markets and the new economy, given the rapid growth of the internet and other emerging
information technologies. For example, Priest (2006) found that the Chinese record industry has
developed more ﬂexible business models and it is less reliant on retail sales revenues, primarily

144

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

because of piracy. He argues that the industry is ‘‘naturally positioned at the cutting edge of an
internet-driven shift from the old, product-oriented music business model to a service-oriented
business model’’ (Priest, 2006, p. 835). From an economic perspective, Cosovanu (2006, p. 3) views
piracy as a ‘‘necessary evil for the diffusion of software that is legally priced beyond the reach of
most local users’’. The statement epitomizes the economic complexities that arise from media
piracy.

Cremer and Pestiau (2009) discount the generalizations that piracy negatively affects the
producers’ proﬁts. They argue that within a monopolist setting that produces an information good
that is sold in different versions to two groups of consumers whose valuation of the good differs,
then copying or piracy might be welfare enhancing because ‘‘it is a way of providing the ‘‘good’’ to
some individuals (those with a low willingness to pay) without undermining the ﬁrm’s ability to
ﬁnance the development cost via the pricing scheme applied to high valuation customers’’ (2008,
p. 2). According to them:

The reason is that the consumers with a low willingness to pay can copy the information
good at some cost and some quality loss. The consumers with a high willingness to pay
cannot engage in fully-ﬂedged piracy, but they can consume the version designed for the
other customer group (Cremer and Pestiau, 2008, p. 2).

When copying is introduced, they add, a new equilibrium emerges with high-valuation
consumers buying the original and low-valuation consumers buying the copy. In this way, a
higher proﬁt may be yielded than in the absence of piracy. This is corroborated by de Castro et al.
(2008, p. 78), who argue that piracy, at its extreme, may actually create wealth for an
entrepreneurial ﬁrm ‘‘provided that any net increase in demand for the legal versions of the
product is not outweighed by lobbying and enforcement costs’’. From a slightly different
perspective, Givon et al. (1995), applying the innovation diffusion model on software piracy,
argue that pirates play an important role in converting potential users into users of the software,
many of whom legally purchase the software. The implication here is that piracy plays a dominant
role in the generation of buyers over the life cycle of the software.

Clearly, piracy is underpinned by complex economic structures, agencies and arrangements. It
needs to be understood as such. Rather than a blanket condemnation of the practice, it is only apt
that the other side be considered. It might be true that some of the economic incentives to pirate
include the high cost of purchasing legitimate information goods. Gopal et al. (2004) report that in
software policy, increasing software prices are generally correlated with increased piracy beha-
viour. Secondly, as Jaisingh (2009) argues, stricter piracy policies that increase the perceived costs
to using pirated software for end users may in some cases lead to an increase in piracy (demand in
pirated products) and a decrease in product quality. Mason (2008) offers a powerful parting shot,
arguing that piracy is more than the one-dimensional ‘‘threat’’ that most media and software
practitioners see it as. Piracy, Mason argues, is—and always has been—an important catalyst for
innovation. In acknowledging the role that piracy has played in the becoming of our modern
society, he asserts that today’s occurrences of piracy are a sign of a change in the way we interact
with information and cultural goods.

Conclusion

This study has examined the extant literature pertaining to piracy around the world and across a
variety of ﬁelds. It has utilized conceptual frameworks, methodologies and ﬁndings as the main
tenets for the systematic literature review. One discernible challenge of this strategy is its imputed

r 145

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

ability (and necessity) to organize seemingly disparate studies into some semblance of order. To be
sure, the fact that these studies were on some aspect of music, video or software piracy does not
necessarily imply that they have a common (but possibly latent) thread of relevance running
through. To say that the broad patterns documented above suggest a robust ﬁeld is fallacious,
especially given the broad breadth of theoretical perspectives and research assumptions. Indeed,
the popular social science accusation of systematic literature review as a ‘‘mile wide but an inch
deep’’ could well apply here, considering this study’s hesitation to delve substantively into a
number of research elements. This critique notwithstanding, it is submitted here that the patterns
reported above are intended to provide opportunities for general systemic analysis. Indeed, the
utility of this review exercise is principally in isolated these general systemic patterns and the
speciﬁc literature undergirding such observations.

Two general observations are made regarding the conceptual foundations of research into
piracy. First, extant research thus far suggests that the conceptual frames—end-user, network
externalities and bootlegging—are linear and mutually exclusive. While such assumptions may be
useful for the purposes of research designs,
like many other
contemporary phenomena, occurs in more complex scenarios. Such suppositions include the
likelihood of interactive relationships. Second, the dominance of tertiary education samples is
appreciated against the backdrop of advanced update of communications technologies among such
communities. However, a nascent cultural studies school identiﬁes shopping malls as new oases for
learning, socialization and the shaping of attitudes and perceptions. It may be important to
examine the extent to which shopping malls and communications technology have interacted to
construct and deconstruct attitudes and behaviour in contemporary societies.

it is quite likely that piracy,

Third, the overbearing nature of the BSA is disconcerting. BSA ideology overtly undergirds a
large proportion of the research projects reviewed; its assumptions, data, argumentation and
outlook colour many studies. To suggest that BSA data and activities lack veracity is unfair, but in
the same vein, to rely exclusively on this organization’s viewpoint is tantamount to a research
atrocity. Given BSA’s vested interests and well-articulated position in the anti-piracy campaigns,
why would so many scholars from such diverse backgrounds coalesce around a blatantly
unbalanced viewpoint? A plausible explanation is the dearth of alternative data, especially on
BSA’s widely quoted economic costs of piracy around the world. Some studies utilized data from
the International Federation of Phonogram and Videogram Producers (IFPVP), International
Federation of Phonographic Industry (IFPI) and the British Phonographic Industry (BPI). Such
data offered refreshing angles that must be encouraged in piracy research. As a bare minimum,
piracy researchers must be wary of the fundamental ﬂaw of over-reliance on under-reliable data.11
Fourth, the conspicuous absence of substantive inquiries into media and piracy is telling about
the general fullness of this ﬁeld of research. Through their unmatched abilities to educate, inform,
entertain and inﬂuence, mass media provide vital links between societies and the processes that
constitute everyday life. It is difﬁcult to conceive twenty-ﬁrst century life and culture as anything
but mediated lives and mediated cultures. That media are pervasive in all aspects of social life and
social relations is now a foregone conclusion. In this regard, any endeavours to understand
contemporary social perceptions and behaviour must have a media component. This applies to the
piracy phenomenon more than most others. Among the missing media-related links are such
perspectives as the social construction of piracy in media coverage; representations of piracy
actors; and media discourses on this enduring social practice. Spitz and Hunter’s (2005) study on
the social construction of Napster, and Yar’s (2005) construction of global movie piracy, are
welcome exceptions to this general omission, but two examples that stand as reminders of the work
still outstanding in our endeavour to understand piracy.

146

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

In addition, studying overtures to shift or change people’s perceptions of piracy is of critical
importance. For nearly two decades, BSA has been actively lobbying governments and other
public institutions in their ﬁght against piracy. Their persuasion methods and strategies, and any
noted successes or failures, should themselves be subjects of rigorous research. The abrasive media
campaigns—veiled as public education—have in the past included broadcast and advertising, while
their advocacy efforts have included partnerships with stakeholder groups such as customs
departments and chambers of commerce. But how efﬁcacious are these overtures, and to what
extent can they be credited with any positive shifts in public attitude and behaviour towards piracy?
In all, this review of extant literature has opened a useful window to piracy studies. The review
has heightened our understanding of the piracy concept and ways in which researchers are
exploring this public behaviour. Through this study, new research will be appropriately positioned
conceptually and methodologically. New research also stands to gain from the broad knowledge
patterns outlined here as well as the rich bibliography that that supports these patterns. This study
also identiﬁes critical opportunities for further research, a useful starting point for anyone reading
this review with an interest in research. The missing links in our systematic understanding of this
social notion are also clearer to discern, if not easier to tackle.

About the Author

Nixon K Kariithi, Senior Research Associate, Department of Media Studies, University of
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, Private Bag 3, Wits 2050, South Africa; e-mail: nixonkk@
yahoo.com

Notes

This research was part of the multicountry research project,
undertaken by the Association for Progressive Communications (ACP) and supported by the Social
Science Research Council (SSRC), New York. I am grateful to Natasha Primo for assistance with project
administration and the anonymous referees for their useful comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript.
Neither the ACP nor SSRC is responsible for the data analyses and interpretations of the data presented here.

‘‘Towards a D ´etente in Media Piracy’’,

1 Wang (2004, p. 254) argues that

the key to development of the knowledge economy resides in innovation of knowledge,
while the intellectual property system,
in terms of property, gives the owner of an
innovation exclusive rights for a certain period, so that they might recover the high
amount of
to drive economic development. The
establishment of a legal system of IP . . . gives full play into the value of IP and
maximizes the interests of the owner, thereby mobilizing in full the people’s enthusiasm
to innovate. Protecting IP rights is essential to fair competition, research and innovation.

input and gains of

innovation,

2 A pure public good is one that is non-rival and non-excludable, the signiﬁcance of these characteristics

being that consumers would not pay for such a good and a private proﬁt-oriented producer lacks the
incentive to supply it (Towse, 2005, pp. 12–3).

3 Granstrand (2000, p. 1061) deﬁnes intellectual capital as comprising all non-material or intangible
resources that could be considered as capitalizable assets of an economic agent. He further decomposes
capital into material (tangible) and non-material (intangible) capital.

4 Yang et al. (2004, p. 459) argue that this deﬁnition has a much broader meaning than counterfeiting,
which means ‘‘to imitate exactly something valuable or important’’, such as counterfeited money, with
the intent to defraud or deceive.

r 147

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

5 To Verhoogt and Schriks (2007), IP is a fascinating mixture of concepts of individuality, property rights
and technological innovation. They argue that IP provides the author the exclusive right to reproduce
and to publicize his work. Such right suggests a special bond between the author and her or his ideas that
may require special legal protection. For example, copyright is founded on the concept of the unique
individual who creates something original and is entitled to reap a proﬁt from those labours (Verhoogt
and Schriks, 2007, p. 84).

6 This argument has been advanced by the ‘‘proﬁtable piracy’’ debate.
7 A few studies, primarily from the 1980s, examined photocopying as a form of piracy. Another small array
of studies, evident from 2004, focuses on the advent of e-books and the possible emergence of new forms
of book piracy.

8 In 2007, BSA released piracy rates around the world: North America 21%, Western Europe 33%, Asia

Paciﬁc 59%, Middle East/Africa 60%, Central/Eastern Europe 68%, Latin America 65%, European
Union 35% and Worldwide 38%. Clearly, piracy is on the rise despite global efforts to control it. The
differences in magnitude between regions are also noteworthy. Some scholars have used data published
by the International Planning Research Corporation (IPRC). For example, Andr ´es (2006, p. 101) quotes
IPRC estimates of world piracy rate for business software applications (39% in 2002). Andr ´es says,
according to the IPRC, worldwide losses from pirated PC business applications increased to US$13
billion in 2002 from about US$11 billion in 2001. Interestingly, Bae and Choi (2006, p. 304) use BSA data
that place global piracy in 2004 at 33% and translate the losses to software publishers alone at US$33
billion.

9 Diffusion models are premised on the notion that an innovation is ﬁrst adopted by a select group of
buyers, called innovators, who then inﬂuence others by word of mouth to adopt the innovation. With
software piracy, there exists both the legal diffusion and the illegal shadow diffusion.

10 The theory of reasoned action postulates that human behaviour is rational and makes use of the limited
information available to individuals. The theory suggests that two determinants affect human behaviour:
attitude, which is personal in nature, and subjective norms, which represent social inﬂuences.

11 Yar (2005) deserves special mention for carefully steering clear of BSA rehash and instead sourcing his

data from less contentious sources such as the International IP Alliance (IIPA), Alliance Against
Counterfeiting and Piracy (AACP), Anti-Counterfeiting Group (ACG), British Phonographic Industry
(BPI), Federation Against Copyright Theft (FACT) and the Motion Picture Association of America
(MPAA). Of course, it is quite plausible that these organizations share research and other industry data,
but it is deﬁnitely a step in the right direction.

References

Ajzen, I. (1985) ‘From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behaviour’, in J. Kuhi and J. Beckmann

(eds), Action—Control: From Cognition to Behaviour. Springer, Heidelberg, pp. 11–39.

Anchordoguy, M. (2000) ‘Japan’s Software Industry: A Failure of Institutions?’, Research Policy, 29(3),

391–408.

Andr ´es, A. R. (2003) ‘The Relationship between Software Protection and Piracy: Evidence from Europe’,

European Journal of Law and Economics, 21(1), 29–51.

Andr ´es, A. R. (2006) ‘Software Piracy and Income Inequality’, Applied Economics Letters, 13(2), 101–5.
Arrow, K. (1962) ‘Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention’, in R. Nelson (ed.), The

Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609–26.

Bae, S. H. and Choi, J. P. (2006) ‘A Model of Piracy’, Information Economics and Policy, 18(3), 303–20.
Bakker, P. (2005) ‘File-Sharing—Fight, Ignore or Compete. Paid Download Services vs. P2P-Networks’,

Telematics and Informatics, 22(1–2), 41–55.

148

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

Banerjee, D. (2003) ‘Software Piracy: A Strategic Analysis and Policy Instruments’, International Journal of

Industrial Organization, 21(1), 97–127.

Banerjee, D. (2006) ‘Lobbying and Commercial Software Piracy’, European Journal of Political Economy,

22(1), 139–55.

Belleﬂamme, P. and Picard, P. M. (2007) ‘Piracy and Competition’, Journal of Economics and Management

Strategy, 16(2), 351–83.

Bezmen, T. L. and Depken, C. A. II (2006) ‘Inﬂuences on Software Piracy: Evidence from the Various United

States’, Economics Letters, 90(3), 356–61.

Bhattacharjee, S., Gopal, R. D. and Sanders, L. G. (2003) ‘Digital Music and Online Sharing: Software Piracy
2.0? Considering the Similarities and Unique Characteristics of Online File Sharing and Software Piracy’,
Communications of the ACM, 46(7), 107–11.

Bian, X. and Moutinho, L. (2009) ‘An Investigation of Determinants of Counterfeit Purchase Consideration’,

Journal of Business Research, 62(3), 368–7.

Bockstedt, J. C., Kauffman, R. J. and Frederick, J. R. (2006) ‘The Move to Artist-Led On-Line Music

Distribution: A Theory-Based Assessment and Prospects for Structural Changes in the Digital Music
Market’, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 10(3), 7–38.

Brennan, D. J. (2002) ‘Fair Price and Public Goods: A Theory of Value Applied to Retransmission’,

International Review of Law and Economics, 22(3), 347–75.

Byers, S., Cranor, L. F., Cronin, E., Korman, D. and McDaniel, P. (2004) ‘An Analysis of Security

Vulnerabilities in the Movie Production and Distribution Process’, Telecommunications Policy, 28(7–8),
619–44.

Chang, M. C., Lin, C. F. and Wu, D. (2008) ‘Piracy and Limited Liability’, Journal of Economics, 95(1), 25–53.
Chellapa, R. K. and Shivendu, S. (2005) ‘Managing Piracy: Pricing and Sampling Strategies for Digital
Experience Goods in Vertically Segmented Markets’, Information Systems Research, 16(4), 400–17.

Chen, C. and Maxwell, T. A. (2007) ‘The Dynamics of Bilateral Intellectual Property Negotiations: Taiwan

and the United States’, Government Information Quarterly, 24(3), 666–87.

Cheng, H., Sims, R. and Teegen, H. (1997) ‘To Purchase or to Pirate Software: An Empirical Study’, Journal

of Management Information Systems, 13(4), 49–60.

Chiang, E. P. and Assane, D. (2007) ‘Determinants of Music Copyright Violations on the University

Campus’, Journal of Cultural Economics, 31(3), 187–204.

Chiang, E. P. and Assane, D. (2008) ‘Music Piracy Among Students on the University Campus: Do Males and

Females React Differently?’, The Journal of Socio-Economics, 37(4), 1371–80.

Choi, D. Y. and Perez, A. (2007) ‘Online Piracy, Innovation, and Legitimate Business Models’, Technovation,

27(4), 168–7.

Chow, D. C. K. (2003) ‘Organized Crime, Local Protectionism, and the Trade in Counterfeit Goods in China’,

China Economic Review, 14(4), 473–84.

Christensen, A. L. and Eining, M. M. (1991) ‘Factors Inﬂuencing Software Piracy: Implications for

Accountants’, Journal of Information Systems, 5(1), 67–80.

Conner, K. R. and Rumelt, R. P. (1991) ‘Software Piracy: An Analysis of Protection Strategies’, Management

Science, 37(2), 125–39.

Cook, D. A. and Wang, W. (2004) ‘Neutralizing the Piracy of Motion Pictures: Reengineering the Industry’s

Supply Chain’, Technology in Society, 26(4), 567–83.

Coombe, R. and Herman, A. (2004) ‘Rhetorical Virtues: Property, Speech, and the Commons on the World-

Wide Web’, Anthropological Quarterly, 77(3), 559–74.

Coriat, B. and Orsi, F. (2002) ‘Establishing a New Intellectual Property Rights Regime in the United States.

Origins, Content and Problems’, Research Policy, 31(8–9), 1491–507.

r 149

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Cosovanu, C. (2006) ‘Open Source Software in Eastern Europe and other Emerging Markets: The Moral

Alternative to Piracy?’, Journal of Internet Law, 9(1), 3–14.

Coyle, J. R., Gould, S. J., Gupta, P. and Gupta, R. (2009) ‘To Buy or to Pirate: The Matrix of Music

Consumers’ Acquisition-Mode Decision-Making’, Journal of Business Research, 62(10), 1031–7.

Cremer, H. and Pestieau, P. (2009) ‘Piracy Prevention and the Pricing of Information Goods’, Information

Economics and Policy, 21(1), 34–42.

Cronan, T. P. and Al-Refee, S. (2008) ‘Factors that Inﬂuence the Intention to Pirate Software and Media’,

Journal of Business Ethics, 78(4), 527–45.

d’Astous, A., Colbert, F. and Montpetit, D. (2005) ‘Music Piracy on the Web–How Effective are Anti-Piracy
Arguments? Evidence From the Theory of Planned Behaviour’, Journal of Consumer Policy, 28, 289–310.
De Castro, J. O., Balkin, D. B. and Shepherd, D. A. (2008) ‘Can Entrepreneurial Firms Beneﬁt from Product

Piracy?’, Journal of Business Venturing, 23(1), 75–90.

Decherney, P. (2007) ‘Copyright Dupes: Piracy and New Media in Edison v. Lubin (1903)’, Film History,

19(2), 109–24.

Depken, C. A. II and Simmons, L. C. (2004) ‘Social Construct and the Propensity for Software Piracy’,

Applied Economics Letters, 11(2), 97–100.

Depoorter, B. and Parisi, F. (2002) ‘Fair Use and Copyright Protection: A Price Theory Explanation’,

International Review of Law and Economics, 21(4), 453–7.

DeVoss, D. N. and Porter, J. E. (2006) ‘Why Napster Matters to Writing: Filesharing as a New Ethic of

Digital Delivery’, Computers and Composition, 23(2), 178–210.

DeVoss, D. N. and Webb, S. (2008) ‘Media Convergence: Grand Theft Audio: Negotiating Copyright as

Composers’, Computers and Composition, 25(1), 79–103.

Djekic, P. and Loebbecke, C. (2007) ‘Preventing Application Software Piracy: An Empirical Investigation of

Technical Copy Protections’, Strategic Information Systems, 16(2), 173–86.

Domon, K. and Yamazaki, N. (2004) ‘Unauthorized File-Sharing and the Pricing of Digital Content’,

Economics Letters, 85(2), 179–84.

Ecob, C., Cootes, D. and Tout, A. (2003) ‘An Overview of the Australian Import Regime for Copyright

Material’, Computer Law and Security Report, 19(4), 304–6.

Epstein, R. (2008) ‘The Property Rights Movement and Intellectual Property: A Response to Peter Menell’,

Regulation, 30(4), 58–63.

Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975) Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and

Research. Addison, Wesley, Reading, MA.

Fisman, R. and Wei, S. (2009) ‘The Smuggling of Art, and the Art of Smuggling: Uncovering the Illicit Trade

in Cultural Property and Antiques’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3), 82–96.

Forero-Pineda, C. (2006) ‘The Impact of Stronger Intellectual Property Rights on Science and Technology in

Developing Countries’, Research Policy, 35(6), 808–24.

Gan, L. L. and Koh, H. C. (2006) ‘An Empirical Study of Software Piracy Among Tertiary Institutions in

Singapore’, Information and Management, 43(5), 640–9.

Gayer, A. and Shy, O. (2000) ‘Copyright Enforcement in the Digital Era’, CESifo Economic Studies, 51(2–3),

477–89.

Gayer, A. and Shy, O. (2003) ‘Copyright Protection and Hardware Taxation’, Information Economics and

Policy, 15(4), 467–83.

Ginarte, J. C. and Park, W. G. (1997) ‘Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study’, Research

Policy, 26(3), 238–301.

Givon, M., Mahajan, V. and Muller, E. (1995) ‘Software Piracy: Estimation of Lost Sales and the Impact on

Software Diffusion’, Journal of Marketing, 59(1), 29–37.

150

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

Gopal, R. D. and Sanders, G. L. (1997) ‘Preventive and Deterrent Controls for Software Piracy’, Journal of

Management Information Systems, 13(4), 29–47.

Gopal, R. D. and Sanders, G. L. (1998) ‘International Software Piracy: Analysis of Key Issues and Impacts’,

Information Systems Research, 9(4), 380–97.

Gopal, R. D., Bhattacharjee, S., Sanders, G. L., Agrawal, M. and Wagner, S. C. (2004) ‘A Behavioural

Model of Digital Music Piracy’, Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 14(2),
89–105.

Gopal, R. D., Bhattacharjee, S. and Sanders, G. L. (2006) ‘Do Artist Beneﬁt from Online Music Sharing?’,

Journal of Business, 79(3), 1503–33.

Granstrand, O. (2000) ‘The Shift Towards Intellectual Capitalism—The Role of Infocom Technologies’,

Research Policy, 29(9), 1061–80.

Green, H. (2007) ‘Digital Music Pirating by College Students: An Exploratory Empirical Study’, Journal of

American Academy of Business, Cambridge, 11(2), 197–204.

Greguras, F. (2007) ‘Intellectual Property Strategy and Best Practices for R&D Services in China’, Computer

Law and Security Report, 23(5), 449–52.

Guifeng, S., Lingnan, O. and Qingsheng, Z. (2005) ‘Policies of Software Protection: The Practice of China’,

Computer Law and Security Report, 21(4), 338–43.

Hanel, P. (2006) ‘Intellectual Property Rights Business Management Practices: A Survey of the Literature’,

Technovation, 26(8), 895–931.

Hayes, D. L. and Fenwick, W. (2001) ‘Internet Copyright—Advanced Copyright Issues on the Internet—Part

III’, Computer Law and Security Report, 17(2), 75–91.

Hill, C. W. L. (2007) ‘Digital Piracy: Causes, Consequences, and Strategic Responses’, Asia Paciﬁc Journal of

Management, 24(1), 9–25.

Hinduja, S. (2008) ‘Deindividuation and Internet Software Piracy’, Cyber Psychology and Behavior, 11(4),

391–8.

Holm, H. (2003) ‘Can Economic Theory Explain Piracy Behaviour?’, Economic Analysis and Policy [online],

3(1). Available at hhttp://www.bepress.com/bejeapi [Accessed December 2010].

Hui, W., Yoo, B. and Tam, K. Y. (2008) ‘Economics of Shareware: How do Uncertainty and Piracy Affect

Shareware Quality and Brand Premium?’, Decision Support Systems, 44(3), 580–94.

Husted, B. W. (2000) ‘The Impact of National Culture on Software Piracy’, Journal of Business Ethics, 26(3),

197–211.

International Planning and Research Corporation (IPRC) (2003) ‘Eighth Annual BSA Global Software

Piracy Study’, Trends in Software Piracy 1994–2002.

Introna, L. D. (2007) ‘Singular Justice and Software Piracy’, Business Ethics: A European Review, 16(3),

264–77.

Jacobs, L., Samli, A. C. and Jedlik, T. (2001) ‘The Nightmare of International Product Piracy’, Industrial

Marketing Management, 30(6), 499–509.

Jaisingh, J. (2009) ‘Impact of Piracy on Innovation of Software Firms and Implications for Piracy Policy’,

Decision Support Systems, 46(4), 763–7.

James, W., Smith, J. and Smith, H. (2004) ‘The IP Enforcement Directive: Is Further Legislation Really

Necessary to Level the Playing Filed? A UK Perspective’, Computer Law and Security, 20(5), 356–63.

Javorcik, B. S. (2004) ‘The Composition of Foreign Direct Investment and Protection of Intellectual Property

Rights: Evidence from Transition Economies’, European Economic Review, 48(1), 39–62.

Jiang, W. (2007) ‘Evaluating China’s Copyright Protection Situation’, The Journal of China Universities of

Posts and Telecommunications, 14(1), 1–3.

Johnson, W. R. (1985) ‘The Economics of Copying’, Journal of Political Economy, 93(1), 158–74.

r 151

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Khouja, M. and Park, S. (2007) ‘Optimal Pricing of Digital Experience Goods Under Piracy’, Journal of

Management Information Systems, 24(3), 109–41.

Khouja, M. and Smith, M. A. (2007) ‘Optimal Pricing for Information Goods with Piracy and Saturation

Effect’, European Journal of Operational Research, 176(1), 482–97.

Kiema, I. (2008) ‘Commercial Piracy and Intellectual Property Policy’, Journal of Economic Behavior and

Organization, 68(1), 304–18.

King, S. P. and Lampe, R. (2003) ‘Network Externalities, Price Discrimination and Proﬁtable Piracy’,

Information Economics and Policy, 15(3), 271–90.

Kini, R. B., Ramakrishna, H. V. and Vijayaraman, B. S. (2003) ‘An Exploratory Study of Moral Intensity

Regarding Software Piracy of Students in Thailand’, Behaviour and Information Technology, 22(1),
63–70.

Kshetri, N. (2009) ‘Institutionalization of Intellectual Property Rights in China’, European Management

Journal, 27(3), 155–64.

Landy, G. K. (2008) The IT/Digital Legal Companion: A Comprehensive Business Guide. Syngress, Burlington,

Princeton, MA.

Lau, E. K. W. (2003) ‘An Empirical Study of Software Piracy’, Business Ethics: A European Review, 12(3),

233–45.

Lau, E. K. W. (2006) ‘Factors Motivating People toward Pirated Software’, Qualitative Market Research: An

International Journal, 9(4), 104–419.

Lau, E. K. W. (2007) ‘Interaction Effects in Software Piracy’, Business Ethics: A European Review, 16(1),

34–47.

Levy, D. (2007) ‘Price Adjustment under the Table: Evidence on Efﬁciency-Enhancing Corruption’, European

Journal of Political Economy, 23, 423–47.

Liebowitz, S. J. (2003) ‘Will MP3 downloads Annihilate the Record Industry? The Evidence so Far’, Social

Science Research Network [online]. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=414162 or DOI:10.2139/
ssrn.414162i.

Liebowitz, S. J. (2005) ‘Pitfalls in Measuring the Impact of File-Sharing on the Sound Recording Market’,

CESifo Economic Studies, 51(2–3), 435–73.

Liebowitz, S. J. (2006) ‘File-Sharing: Creative Destruction of just Plain Destruction?’ Center for the Analysis
of Property Rights Working Paper No. 04-03 [online]. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=646943 or
DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.646943i.

Limayem, M., Khalifa, M. and Chin, W. W. (2005) ‘Factors Motivating Software Piracy: A Longitudinal

Study’, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 51(4), 414–25.

Liu, W. (2005) ‘Intellectual Property Protection Related to Technology in China’, Technological Forecasting

and Social Change, 72(3), 339–48.

Lysonski, S. and Durvasula, S. (2008) ‘Digital Piracy of MP3s: Consumer and Ethical Predispositions’,

Journal of Consumer Marketing, 25(3), 167–78.

Marron, D. and Steel, D. (2000) ‘Which Countries Protect Intellectual Property? The Case of Software

Piracy’, Economic Inquiry, 38(2), 159–74.

Mason, M. (2008) The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Re-Invented Capitalism. Free Press, New York.
Menell, P. S. (2007) ‘Intellectual Property and the Property Rights Movement’, Regulation, 30(3), 36–42.
Mishra, A., Akman, I. and Yaziei, A. (2006) ‘Software Piracy Among IT Professionals in Organizations’,

International Journal of Information Management, 26(5), 401–13.

Mishra, B. K., Raghu, T. S. and Prasad, A. (2005) ‘Strategic Analysis of Corporate Software Piracy

Prevention and Detection’, Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 15(2),
223–52.

152

r Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Nixon K. Kariithi

Moores, T. T. and Dhaliwal, J. (2004) ‘A Reversed Context Analysis of Software Piracy Issues in Singapore’,

Information and Management, 41(8), 1037–42.

Moores, T. T. and Dhillon, G. (2000) ‘Software Piracy: A View from Hong Kong’, Communications of the

ACM, 43(12), 88–93.

Nair, A. S. and Stafford, E. R. (1998) ‘Strategic Alliances in China: Negotiating the Barriers’, Long Range

Planning, 31(1), 139–46.

Nizovtseva, D. and Thursby, M. (2007) ‘To Disclose or Not? An Analysis of Software User Behaviour’,

Information Economics and Policy, 19(1), 43–64.

Novos, I. E. and Waldman, M. (1984) ‘The Effects of Increased Copyright Protection: An Analytic

Approach’, Journal of Political Economy, 92(2), 236–46.

Oyebisi, T. O. and Agboola, A. A. (2003) ‘The Impact of the Environment on the Growth of the Nigerian IT

Industry’, International Journal of Information Management, 23(4), 313–21.

Pearce II, J. A. (2006) ‘How Companies can Preserve Market Dominance after Patents Expire’, Long Range

Planning, 39(1), 71–87.

Peitz, M. and Waelbroeck, P. (2006a) ‘Piracy of Digital Products: A Critical Review of the Theoretical

Literature’, Information Economics and Policy, 18(4), 449–76.

Peitz, M. and Waelbroeck, P. (2006b) ‘Why the Music Industry may Gain from Free Downloading—The Role

of Sampling’, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(5), 907–13.

Priest, E. (2006) ‘The Future of Music and Film Piracy in China’, Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 21(2),

795–871.

Qiu, L. D. (2006) ‘A General Equilibrium Analysis of Software Development: Implications of Copyright

Protection and Contact Enforcement’, European Economic Review, 50(7), 1661–82.

Rahim, M. M., Seyal, A. H. and Rahman, M. N. A. (1999) ‘Software Piracy among Computing Students: A

Bruneian Scenario’, Computers and Education, 32(4), 301–21.

Randle, P. (2002) ‘Rights Management—When the Chips are Down: Law and Technology can Potentially

Prevent the Circumvention of Copy Protection’, Computer Law and Security Report, 18(5), 314–7.

Rawlinson, D. R. and Lupton, R. A. (2007) ‘Cross-National Attitudes and Perceptions Concerning Software
Piracy: A Comparative Study of Students from the United States and China’, Journal of Education for
Business, 83(2), 87–94.

Runge, C. F. and Defrancesco, E. (2006) ‘Exclusion, Inclusion, and Enclosure: Historical Commons and

Modern Intellectual Property’, World Development, 34(10), 1713–27.

Sarkissian, A. (2008) ‘Intellectual Property Rights for Developing Countries: Lessons from Iran’,

Technovation, 28(11), 786–98.

Saxby, S. (2004) ‘EU Gets Tough on Intellectual Property Rights’, Computer Law and Security Report, 20(3), 163.
Shadlen, C., Schrank, A. and Kurtz, M. (2005) ‘The Political Economy of Intellectual Property Protection:

The Case of Software’, International Studies Quarterly, 49(1), 45–71.

Sharp, H. M. (2007) ‘The Day the Music Died: How Overly Extended Copyright Terms Threaten the Very

Existence of Our Nation’s Earliest Musical Works’, Emory Law Journal, 57(1), 279–310.

Shin, D. H. (2007) ‘A Critique of Korean National Information Strategy: Case of National Information

Infrastructures’, Government Information Quarterly, 24(3), 624–45.

Shore, B., Venkatachalam, A. R., Solorzano, E., Burn, J. M., Hassan, S. Z. and Janczewski, L. J. (2001)

‘Softlifting and Piracy: Behavior Across Cultures’, Technology in Society, 23(4), 563–81.

Shy, O. and Thisse, J. F. (1999) ‘A Strategic Approach to Software Protection’, Journal of Economics and

Management Strategy, 8(2), 163–90.

Sinha, R. K. and Mandel, N. (2008) ‘Preventing Digital Music Piracy: The Carrot or the Stick?’, Journal of

Marketing, 72(1), 1–15.

r 153

Nixon K. Kariithi

Literature Review of Piracy Around the World

Siponen, M. and Vartiainen, T. (2004) ‘Unauthorized Copying of Software and Levels of Moral

Development: A Literature Analysis and Its Implications for Research and Practice’, Info Systems
Journal, 14(4), 387–407.

Siponen, M. and Vartiainen, T. (2005) ‘Attitudes to and Factors Affecting Unauthorized Copying of

Computer Software in Finland’, Behaviour and Information Technology, 24(4), 249–57.

Spitz, D. and Hunter, S. D. (2005) ‘Contested Codes: The Social Construction of Napster’, The Information

Society, 21(3), 169–80.

Sundararajan, A. (2004) ‘Managing Digital Piracy: Pricing and Protection’, Information Systems Research,

15(3), 287–308.

Swinyard, W. R., Rinne, H. and Kau, A. K. (1990) ‘The Morality of Software Piracy: A Cross-Cultural

Analysis’, Journal of Business Ethics, 9(8), 655–64.

Towse, R. (2005) ‘Economics and Copyright Reform: Aspects of EC Directive’, Telematics and Informatics,

22(1), 11–24.

Tu, Y. and Lu, M. (2006) ‘An Experimental and Analytical Study of On-Line Digital Music Sampling

Strategies’, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 10(3), 39–70.

van Kranenburg, H. and Hogenbirk, A. (2005) ‘Multimedia, Entertainment, and Business Software Copyright

Piracy: A Cross-National Study’, Journal of Media Economics, 18(2), 109–29.

van Wijk, J. (2002) ‘Dealing with Piracy: Intellectual Asset Management in Music and Software’, European

Management Journal, 20(6), 689–98.

Verhoogt, R. and Schriks, C. (2007) ‘Reﬂecting Media: A Cultural History of Copyright and the Media’, in K.

de Leeuw and J. Bergstra (eds), The History of Information Security: A Comprehensive Handbook.
Elsevier B.V., New York, pp. 83–119.

Walls, W. D. and Harvey, P. J. (2006) ‘Digital Pirates in Practice: Analysis of Market Transactions in Hong

Kong’s Pirate Software Arcades’, International Journal of Management, 23(2), 207–14.

Wang, L. (2004) ‘Intellectual Property Protection in China’, The International Information and Library Review,

36(3), 253–61.

Woolley, D. J. and Eining, M. M. (2006) ‘Software Piracy Among Accounting Students: A Longitudinal

Comparison of Changes and Sensitivity’, Journal of Information Systems, 20(1), 49–63.

Yang, D. (2007) ‘The Impact of Business Environments on Software Piracy’, Technology in Society, 29(1),

121–41.

Yang, D. and Clarke, P. (2005) ‘Globalisation and Intellectual Property in China’, Technovation, 25(5),

545–55.

Yang, D., Sonmez, M. and Bosworth, D. (2004) ‘Intellectual Property Abuses: How should Multinationals

Respond?’, Long Range, 37(5), 459–75.

Yar, M. (2005) ‘The Global Epidemic of Movie Piracy: Crime-Wave or Social Construction?’, Media, Culture

and Society, 27(5), 677–96.

Yar, M. (2008) ‘The Rhetorics and Myths of Anti-Piracy Campaigns: Criminalization, Moral Pedagogy and

Capitalist Property Relations in the Classroom’, New Media and Society, 10(4), 605–23.

Yoon, K. (2002) ‘The Optimal Level of Copyright Protection’, Information Economics and Policy, 14(3),

327–48.

Zamoon, S. and Curley, S. P. (2008) ‘Ripped from the Headlines: What can the Popular Press Teach us about

Software Piracy?’, Journal of Business Ethics, 83(3), 515–33.

Zentner, A. (2008) ‘Online Sales, Internet Use, File Sharing, and the Decline of Retail Music Specialty Stores’,

Information Economics and Policy, 20(3), 288–300.

154

r 
