Human Rghts and Intellectual Property 

Conzict OY Convergence? 

Jakob CORNIDES* 

I.  BACKGROUND 

Ten years after the  conclusion of the  Agreement  on Trade-Related  Aspects of 
Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TRIPS) has  triggered  a  globalisation  of  intellectual 
property rights (IPRs), the relationship between intellectual property and human rights 
is the subject of public debate in the media as well as in various academic and political 
as  the  inherent 
fora.  Originally,  the  discussion  focused  on  specific  issues-such 
tension  between  pharmaceutical  patents  and  the  right  of  access  to  health;  the 
misappropriation  of  “traditional  knowledge”;  the  protection  of  “biodiversity”; the 
right of “fair-use” of copyrighted matter, etc.-but 
these side-themes are increasingly 
generating a more fundamental debate. 

A first important discussion on these issues was  hosted by the World Intellectual 
Property  Organization  (WIPO) and  the  Office  of  the  UN  High  Commissioner for 
Human  Rights  in  1998.’  The  U N   Sub-Commission  on  Human  Rights  adopted 
resolutions on this subject at its session both in 2000 and 2001.2  Following a  request 
from the Sub-Commission, the High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a report 
on the human rights impacts of the TRIPS Agreement and more general issues related to 
human rights and intellectual property.3 The U N  Committee on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights held  a day  of general discussion of the  subject in  November  2000.4 
It then proceeded with  drafting a  statement on a  normative framework for a  human 
rights  approach  to  intellectual  property,  which  it  adopted  in  November  2001.5 

* Administrator in Directorate General for Trade, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium. 
The views set out in this  article are attributable  only to the  author, and  do not  engage in  any  way  the 

institution for which he is working. He may be contacted at: njakob.comides@cec.eu.intB. 

1  The entire documentation of this Panel  Discussion, held  in  Geneva on  9 November 1998 to  mark  the 
50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, has  been published by  the World Intellectual 
Property Organization and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Intellectual 
Property and Human Rights, WIPO, Geneva, Publication No. 7620,1999. It was also made available on the Website 
of WIPO, nwww.wipo.orgs 

Sub-Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Resolutions 2000/7 and 2001/21. 
3  The Impact ofthe Agreement  on  Trade-Related Aspects oflntellectual  Property Rights on Human Rights, Report of 

the High Commissioner, UNHCR, Geneva, E/CN. 4/Sub.2/2001/13,27  June 2001. 

4  The  discussion paper prepared by  Dr Audrey  Chapman  (E/C.12/2000/12)  and background  documents 
submitted by Speciahzed Agencies, UN Programmes and individual experts (E/C.12/2000/13,  14,15, 16.17, 18 
and 19) have been published in all working languages of the Committee. 
26 November 2001, E/C.12/2001/15. 

5  Human Rights and  Intellectual Property  Issues: Statement by  the  Committee on Economic Social and  Cultural Rights. 

136 

THE  

Moreover, the Committee decided, as a follow-up to the discussion held, to commence 
the drafting of a “General Comment” on Article 15(1) (c) of the International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). 

The  outcome  of  the  work  undertaken  in  the  UN  institutions  can  be  biiefly 

resumed in the statement that: 

“Since  the  TRIPS Agreement  does  not  adequately  reflect  the  fundamental  nature  and 
indivisibility of all human  rights  ... there  are  apparent  conflicts betwccn  thc  intellectual 
property  rights  regime  embodled  in  the  TRIPS Agreement,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
international human rights law, on the other.”6 
Many  academic  authors  have  shared  this  criticism  and  further  accentuated  it. 

Peter Prove and Miloon Kothari speak of the TRIPS Agreement: 

“_.. threatening  key  human rights,  including  the  right  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of scientific 
progress, the right to health, the right to food and the right to self-determination.”7 
Other authors do not go as far as condemning TRIPS as a whole, but they do express 

concern with regard to what they describe as the unbalanced implementation of TRIPS* 
or the tendency of certain governments to stipulate “TRIPS-plus” obligations in external 
trade   agreement^.^  Keith  Aolu  speaks  of  an  “unprecedented  grab”  by  intellectual 
property  owners  of what  should  be  common  resources, and  of a  “vicious circle  of 
increasingly strong  (and virtually  automatic)  intellectual property  protection  coming 
with  some serious  costs at  both  the  local and  the  global levels.”*(~ Peter  Drahos has 
warned against what be calls “Information Feudahsm””  and suggested that “intellectual 
property rights should serve the  interests and needs that  citizens identie, through the 
language of human rights, as hndamental.”Q 

O n  the other hand, the TRIPS Agreement  could not have been  concluded had its 
partisans not also been able to use  human rights as an argument  speaking in favour of 
stronger  (and  worldwide)  intellectual  property  protection.  For  them,  intellectual 
property is property, and IPR infringement is theft.13 

Sustainable Development (ICTSD), Vol. 4, No. 6, July-August  2000. 

6  Cf. Sub-Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Resolution 2000/7. 
7  P. Prove and M. Kothari, Human Rights Bodies Gear Up on  TRIPS. BRIDGES, International Centre for Trade and 
fi  G. Dutfield, IPR Rules and Human Rights: Is  there a  Contict? SciDev Net Policy Brief, October 2001. 
Y  Cf. Hunian Rights Watch, me  FTAA, Access to HIV/AIDS Treatment, and Human Righfs, 29 October 2002. 
10  K.  Aoki  Neocolonialism,  Anticommom  Property,  and  Eiopiracy  in  the  (Not-So-Bruve)  New  World  Order  4 
11  Peter Drahos, Intomation Feudalism  in the Infoomation Society, The Information Society (Trs), Vol. 11, 1995, 
pp.  209-222;  Peter  Drahos  and John  Braithwaite,  Information  Feudalism:  Who  Owns  the  Knowledge  Economy? 
Earthscan Publications, London, 2002. 

International Intellectual Propetty  Protection, Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 59-1  15. 

12  Peter Drahos, The Universality $Intellectual  Property Rights: Origin and Development, in Intellectual Property and 

Human Rights, swpra, footnote 1. 

‘3  Cf. Jack Valenti, President and Chief Executive Offker of the Motion Picture Association of‘ America, in 
an intervention  before the Sub-committee on Courts, the Internet, and Intellectual Property  of the US. House 
of  Representatives,  13  March  2003:  “America’s crown  jewels-its 
being  looted. 
Organized, violent, international criminal groups are getting rich from the high-gain/low-risk  business of stealing 
America’s copyrighted works ... Only when governments around the world effectively bring to bear the full powers 
of the State against these criminals can we expect to make progress.  Only when industry and governments join 
forces to fight these organized groups will we succeed in protecting one of the jewels in America’s trade crown. A 
singular truth exists in the movie industry: ‘If you can’t protect what you own, you don’t own anything.’.” 

intellectual  property-are 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

137 

Contrary to this, some have argued that not all kmds  of property rights qualify as 
fundamental human rights, given that both private international and public international 
law recognize the right of sovereign States to regulate property rights, i.e. to adjust them 
to economic and social circum~tances.~4 

It seems, thus, that the relationship between intellectual property and human rights 
is  an  ambiguous  one:  on  the  one  hand,  it  can  be  argued  that  human  rights  oblige 
legislators to  foresee  and  enforce  intellectual property  rights  (but, to  what  extent?). 
On the other hand, it has also been contended that human rights set limits to intellectual 
property rights (but if so, what are these limits?). 

The present article has the ambition of shedding some light on this relationship. 
However,  contrary to  the  approach  chosen by  other  authors,l5 the  argument is  not 
about the correct interpretation of the one or the other human rights document, but 
tries to reach beyond. The question, put in very simple terms, is: what is the purpose of 
property,  and  what  is  the  raison  d’8tre  of  what  we  call  “intellectual  property”? 
The purpose of these rights should, supposedly, allow us to determine their scope. 

The reason for this approach is that human rights codifications inevitably convey a 
somewhat incomplete, or even biased, image ofwhat human rights really are. All of them 
have been drafted and enacted under specific political and economic circumstances, and 
therefore reflect the mindsets and specific concerns of their drafters and the time they 
lived in. They are often the h i t  of political compromise-a 
constraint to which moral 
truth is not exposed. 

Yet it is commonly understood that there is something that sets off human rights 
against other, less “fundamental” rights: they derive not from any legislative act adopted 
by some kind of supreme authority, but are founded in the inalienable dignity of human 
nature as such.16 

Protecting Human Rights:  The European Dimension,  Carl Heymanns, Cologne, pp. 565-580. 

l 4  H.G. Schemers,  The International  Protection  ofthe Right of Property, in F. Matscher and  H. Petzold  (eds.), 
l5 Cf. the aforementioned  discussion  paper  prepared by Dr Audrey  Chapman,  supra,  footnote 4,  which is 

focused on the interpretation ofArticle 15(l)(c) of the ICESCR. 

‘6 This was explicitly acknowledged when, in the late 18th century, the fint attempts were made to codify the 
fundamental rights of man. For example, the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, adopted by the 
French  National Assembly on 26 August 1789, states in its first Article: “Les hommes  naissent  et  demeurent  Zibres et 
gaux en droits.”  (Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be founded only upon 
the  general good.); and  in  its Article 2:  “Le but  de  toute  association politique  est  la  conservation des  droits  naturels  et 
imprescriptibles de l’homme.”  (The aim of all political association is the preservation of the natural and imprescriptible 
rights of man. These rights are liberty, property, security, and resistance to oppression.) Likewise, the “Declaration 
of Rights”, adopted on 12 June  1776 by the Virginia  Convention of Delegates, states in its first Article: “That all 
men are by nature equally free and independent, and have certain inherent rights, of which, when they enter into 
a  state  of  society,  they  cannot, by  any  contract,  deprive  or  divest their  posterity.”  The  U S .  Declaration  of 
Independence  states:  “That  all  men  are  created  equal;  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with  certain 
unalienable rights.” These affirmations must be understood  as the reaffirmation of unalienable natural rights that 
were considered to have been violated and oppressed by  the  “unnatural”  and abusive exercise of power by  the 
absolutist ann’ens rigimes that had just been overturned. In the 20th century, again, new documents on human rights 
were adopted in an effort to react to the atrocities of Nazi and Soviet totalitarianism. The Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights states, in the first two recitals of its preamble, that “recognition  of the inherent dignity and of the 
equal and inahenable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in 
the world” and that “disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged 
the conscience of mankind.” 

138 

THE  

Thus, it is common sense that human rights can neither be granted nor repealed by 
any legislator. Instead, they should be recognized by all. Consequently, the discourse on 
human  rights must  be  about understanding them,  not  about  malung them.  Existing 
human  rights  documents  thus  must  be  seen  as  a  testimony  of  common  moral 
convictions, but they should not in any way prevent the debate 6om proceeding further 
or from coming to new conclusions or deeper insights. 

Beside  this, it  must  also  be  taken  into  account  that  the  adoption  of documents 
concerning human  rights has  much  increased over  the  last  decades and,  in  a  certain 
sense, become  inflationary. A  prominent  example  for  this  development  is  the  new 
“Charter of Fundamental Rights of The European Union”, solemnly proclaimed at the 
European Council Summit at Nice in December 2000, which foresees, inter ulia: 

-  a “right to education and to have access to vocational and continuing training” 

including “free compulsory education” (Article 14); 
a “right to cultural diversity” (Article 22); 
a  “workers’ right  to  information and  consultation within  the  undertakmg” 
(Article 27); 
a “right of access to a free placement service” (Article 29); 
a “right to access to preventive health care” (Article 34); 
a right to “a high level of consumer protection” (Article 38); and, last but not least 
a “right to good administration” (Article 41). 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

The Charter is certainly not alone in this all-embracing approach, but it reflects 
a general tendency in public debate to vest everything that is considered valuable and 
desirable into a right, which then may further be promoted to become a fundamental 
right.  However,  the  epithet  “fundamental”  is  there  to  single  out  and  distinguish 
certain  important  principles from  other,  less  important  principles,  i.e.  to  create  a 
hierarchy of values.  If everything that seems a  desirable policy objective is awarded 
the status of a fundamental right, then this hierarchy is levelled down and the concept 
loses its value. Indeed,  one is  tempted  to wonder whether  the  “right of access to a 
free  placement  service”  stands really  on the  same  level  as  the  right  to life  or  the 
freedom of opinion. 

The recognition and proclamation of so great a variety of fundamental rights thus 
introduces  an  element  of  uncertainty  into  the  matter  this  article  is  dedicated  to 
address. Each of the divergent views on the complex relationship between intellectual 
property  and  human  rights  may  claim  to  be  founded  on  fundamental  rights 
(for example, some may point at the right to property, whereas others quote the right 
to health or the right to development), so that we now stand to determine which of 
the fundamental rights is more fundamental than others. Indeed, it seems that much 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

139 

of what  nowadays is understood  as  fundamental rights  are, in reality, high-ranking 
policy objectives rather than individual entitlements. However, it must also be kept 
in mind  that  individual rights  are  not  necessarily  ends in themselves, but  that  they 
serve  these  high-ranking  societal  purposes,  which,  so  recently,  have  acquired  the 
status of fixndamental rights, 

It is for these reasons that, while committing due attention to what is spelt out in 
the major human rights documents, we must ultimately aim to discover the inherent 
nature of the rights at  question, their purposes and their weight. The argument must, 
therefore, necessarily be a philosophical rather than a legal one, oriented on social ethics 
more than on positive legislation. 

11.  THE CONCEPT OF PROPERTY  APPLIED TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

A.  RIGHT TO PROPERTY 

“Intellectual property”  is  a  concept  that-be 

it  in  respect  of  its  nature  or  for 
closely  associated  to  the  general  concept  of  property. 
argumentative  purposes-is 
Intellectual property, it is argued by many, is essentially the same as property in tangible 
assets and must therefore be secured by the same legal guarantees. 

1.  The Right  to Property  in the Major Human Rights Documents 

Consequently,  provisions  made  by  human  rights  documents  with  regard  to 
property cover intellectual property as well, which is thereby elevated to the ranks of 
“fundamental rights”: the State is obliged to grant and to protect intellectual property. 
Some documents specifically mention intellectual property as a matter of protection. 
For example, the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights”  (UDHR) recognizes, in its 
Article 1 7 (1) : 

“Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.” 
In its Article 27(2), the UDHR makes specific reference to intellectual property: 
“Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from 
any scientific, literary or artistic production  of which he is the author.” 
The “International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights” contains 
a specific clause on intellectual property with nearly identical wordmg. Article 15(1) of 
the Covenant stipulates: 

“The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone: 

(c) to  benefit from the protection  of the  moral and material interests resulting from any 

scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.” 

140 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Finally, the “Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union” stipulates in 

its Article 17 (Right to Property): 

“1. Everyone has the right to own, use, dispose of and bequeath his or her lawfully acquired 
possessions.  No  one  may  be  deprived  of  his  or  her  possessions,  except in  the  public 
interest and in the  cases and under  the  conditions provided for by  law, subject to  fair 
compensation  being  paid  in  good  time  for  their  loss.  The  use  of  property  may  be 
regulated by law in so far as is  necessary for the general interest. 

2. Intellectual property shall be protected.”” 
In  contrast  to  the above-cited  documents,  the  “First  Protocol  to  the  European 
Convention o n  Human Rights”  does not make any  specific  reference  to intellectual 
property. It states in its first Article: 

“Every  natural  or legal person  is  entitled  to  thc  peaceful  enjoyment  of his  possessions. 
No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public  interest and subject to 
the conditions provided  for by law and by the general principles of international law. 
The preceding provisions  shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to 
enforce  such laws  as  it  deems necessary to  control the  use  of property in  accordance 
with  the  general  interest  or  to  secure  the  payment  of  taxes  or  other  contributions 
or penalties.” 
Contrary  to  the UDHR and the  Charter,  the  European  Convention  on  Human 
Rights  is  of  legally  binding  character  and  can  be  invoked  in  court.  T h e  judgments 
rendered by the European  Human Rights Court of Strasbourg play  an important role 
in determining the scope and meaning of the Convention’s provisions. 

Unfortunately,  there so far appears to be hardly  any case-law  explicitly  dealing 
with  IPRS.’~ However,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  scope  of  Article  1 of  the  First 
Protocol has been given a wide interpretation by the Court, according to which the 
notion “possessions”: 

“... has  an  autonomous  meaning which  is  certainly not  limited to  ownership  of physical 
goods: certain other rights and interests constituting assets can also be regarded as  ‘property 
rights’, and thus as ‘possessions’, for the purposes of this provision;”l9 

The drafting committee (Praesidlum) responsible for the drafting of the Charter commented this as follows: 
“Protection of intellectual property,  one aspect  of  the right  of property, is explicitly mentioned in paragraph  2 
because  of its  growing importance  and  Community  secondary legislation. Intellectual property  covers not only 
literary and artistic property but also patent and trademark rights and associated rights. The guarantees laid down in 
paragraph 1 shall apply as appropriate to intellectual property.” 

I*  In the  case  British  American  Tobacco Ltd. v .  The Netherlands,  Application  19589/92,  the European  Human 
Righ6  Court  refused  to  examine  whether  or  not  the  patent  application  lodged  by  the  applicant  company 
constituted  a “possession”  coming within the scope of the  protection afforded by Article  1 of Protocol No.  1. 
However,  the  European  Commission  of  Human  Kights  had  concluded  that,  while  a  valid  patent  could  bc 
considered a “possession”, a mere patent application could not. In another case that was not dealt with by the Court 
(SmithKline and  French  Laboratories  Ltd. v .  The Netherlands,  Application  12633/87),  the European  Commission of 
Human  Rights stated that  the  grant  under Dutch law  of a compulsory licence  in  a patented  drug was  not  an 
interference in the patent  holder’s rights  under  Article 1 of Protocol 1 of the  European  Convention of Human 
Rights. The  “compulsory  licence  was  lawful and  pursued  a legitimate  aim  of encouraging  technological  and 
economic development.” 

‘ 9   Gasus Dmier-und  Fb‘rdertechnik GmbH v .  The Netherlands, Application 15375/89. 

HUMAN  RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

141 

In another interpretation, possessions: 
“ ... can be  ‘existing possessions’ or assets, including claims, in respect of which the applicant 
can argue that he has at least a ‘legitimate expectation’ of obtaining effective enjoyment of 
a property right.”20 
It clearly follows that the right to property is by no means limited to tangible assets. 
It covers “claims” and “legitimate expectations to obtain a property right”, including 
the  expectation  to  receive  payments  from  a  pension  fund  or  insurance.  In  these 
circumstances, it  is  hard  to  see  why  IPKS should  be  exempted  from  the  scope  of 
Article 1 of the First Protocol. 

Be that as  it may, it appears to be  generally recognized that intellectual property 
should receive protection as  a fundamental right. This implies not  only that the  State 
should not arbitrarily deprive right holders of their property, but also that there should 
be efficient remedies for right holders to defend their IPRS against third parties. 

Nevertheless, it  must  be  noted  that  the  concepts  of  “property”  or  “intellectual 
property” as such are not defined in any of the above-cited documents. The protection 
they provide extends, therefore, only to  “property” as defined by  the legal system of 
each signatory State. It  follows that  any national legislator may  freely determine the 
scope of property rights (including IPRS, and the modahties under which they must be 
exercised, provided that the essentials of these rights are respected. 

2. 

The Right  to Property required by Human Nature 

What are the essential and inalienable characteristics of property rights? As has been 
shown above, the writers of the major documents on human rights were unanimous in 
believing that the institution of private property is required by  nature. This view is,  in 
spite of certain authors affirming the contrary,21 firmly corroborated by a long and solid 
tradition of occidental thought.22 

According  to  that  doctrine,  the  nature  of  the  human  person  requires  private 

property, because: 

- 

- 

man has a natural desire for property;23 
man has a natural desire to provide help to his friends as well as to strangers, 
which he can only do if he disposes of property; 

20  Liechtenstein v .  Gemany, Application 42527/98. 
21  For example, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Qu’est  ce  que la proprittt?  1840: “Property is theft because it allows 
income without labour. The abolition of private properly was indeed the guiding principle of all socialist theory, 
which for this very reason was inevitably destined to turn totalitarian in thought as well as deed.” 

22  For those readers  who may wish to find more detailed information  on this matter, see Johannes Messner, 
Das  Natrmecht,  6th  edxion,  Tyrolia,  Innsbruck,  1966, which  indeed  must  be  regarded  as  the  most  ingenious 
compendium of natural law doctrine. The reflections on private property in the present article are mainly based on 
Chapter 171 of that book. 

23  Thomas Aq., De regimine principiurn, 1.7: inest animis horninurn, ut proprium bonurn quaerant. 

142 

THE  

- 

-  only in acting on his own responsibility can man be what nature destines him 
to  be;  given  that  this  own  responsibility must  be  exercised in  a  world  of 
material goods, it is necessary that he have power over these goods; 
the  impulse  to  make  provision  for  his  future  (and  thereby  to  acquire 
independence from chance and from the goodwill of other persons) is inherent 
to  human  nature;  such  provision  is  possible  only  on  the  basis  of  private 
property; 
for the  same reason, family life and the possibility for parents to secure the 
future of their offspring is dependent on the availability of property. 

- 

The nature  and  the  purpose  of human  society  also  require  the  recognition  of 

property, for the following reasons: 

-  the basic function of property is to determine what belongs to whom. In doing 

- 

- 

- 

- 

so, it secures peace and reduces the scope for dispute; 
private property allows it to  make better  use  of the  goods avadable in  any 
given society, and this is in the general interest; 
property is  a prerequisite for commercial exchange and for the specialization 
in task  of each member of society; it thus  contributes to  technical progress 
and  enhances  the  knitting  of  a  network  of  social  relationships  between 
indvidual persons; 
without private property people would not be interdependent, but all would 
depend on a central authority; 
property is, therefore, a prerequisite for the freedom of individual persons as 
well as for society as a whole. 

These  latter  reasons  underline  the  important  function  private  property  has  for 

society, and the social responsibility it confers. 

In  that  context,  it  should  be  noted  that,  in  view  of  this  social  function,  the 
institution of private property indeed must be contained in any legal order that aims to 
do justice to human nature; however, the concrete forms that this right may  take in a 
given civil-law  order depends, to a large extent, to the degree of social and economic 
development of the society in question, and has varied accordmgly. Certain forms of 
property (eg. the property in slaves) are inherently unjust, others (e.g. feudal rights) are 
inappropriate for a modern society, and others are only to be thought of in a society that 
has attained a certain level of technical or social development (e.g. property in stocks).24 

24  Even between  societies having reached a comparable status of economic and  social development, the 
scope of property rights and the modalities may vary considerably. These differences concern, for example, the 
question  of  what  can  be  owned,  the  length  of prescription periods,  the  legal  relation between  owners  of 
neighboring grounds, etc. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

143 

The most important conclusion to be drawn, however, is that property is not an end 
in itseK Obviously, it must be used in a way that contributes to the realisation ofthe higher 
objectives of human society: the protection of freedom, human life and human dignity. 

B. THE EMERGING OF  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Whereas  the  institution  of  private  property  has  originally  been  conceived and 
applied only  to  tangible goods  (land, livestock,  etc.),  “intellectual”  or  “immaterial” 
property rights have emerged only in more recent times. 

Copyright, for example, was unknown to the otherwise highly developed civil- 
law system of Roman Antiquity. Authors wrote in order to make their ideas known 
or  to  win  public  appraisal;  economically,  they  were  dependent  on  the  financial 
support  they  received  from  their   benefactor^.^^  In  the  Middle  Ages,  the  situation 
essentially remained the same; most authors were learned monks, who lived not from 
selling books, but were sustained by the work  of their lay brethren. It was  only the 
invention of the printing press, allowing copying on an industrial scale, which raised 
the issue of piracy. The exclusive privileges granted to printers must be seen as  the 
precursor of modern copyright.26 The purpose at that time was to protect the printer’s 
investment, and to encourage him to print new works of which the success was not 
always easy to foretell. 

Only at a later stage was  copyright transformed from a right of publishers into a 
right of authors. This change of mindset is best illustrated by the famous words of Jean 
Le Chapelier in the French National Assembly of 1791: 

“La plus sacrbe, la plus peeonnelle de toutes les propriCtCs est l’ouvrage, fruit de la pensee de 
l’Ccrivain.”27 
It is from this time onward that, in certain countries, the moral rights of the author 
(i.e. the rights allowing him to maintain control over the exploitation of his work) have 
gained a certain prevalence in copyright, whereas other countries persist in emphasizing 
the economic interests to be protected. At the same time, the  development of moral 
rights followed the  rapid  pace  of technical progress: each new method  of exploiting 
intellectual creations triggers a  demand for new legislation securing the  control  over 
such exploitation to the author or the holder of a derived right. 

Patent law developed under a different reasoning; here, the main objective seems 
to have been to create an incentive for inventors to make their invention accessible to the 

25  A famous example is the Roman poet Q. Horatius Flaccus, who depended on money he received from his 
benefactor Maecenas. In return, Horatius praised Maecenas’ generosity in his poetry in a manner ensuring that, even 
to the present day, his benefactor’s name has remained synonymous for all benefactors of the fine arts. 
26 “... the bookseller acquires by an act a manuscript; the ministry, by a permission, authorises the publication 
ofthis manuscript, and guarantees to the purchaser the peace of his possession. What is there that could be contrary 
to the general interest?”, Denis Diderot, Lethe sur le  Commerce de la Zibrairie,  1763. 

27 “The most sacred, the most personal, of all property is the work  itself, the h i t  of the writer’s thought.” 

144 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

public28 instead of keeping it secret. The unlimited, but precarious, exclusivity procured 
by keeping a new technique secret29 could be exchanged against  the limited-in-time, 
but  secure, monopoly  granted by  a  patent.  This  created legal certainty for  both  the 
inventor and his licensee, and it was also understood that the pace of technical progress 
could be accelerated with inventions not being kept secret, because this enabled persons 
other than the original inventor to further develop them. 

It  is,  nevertheless, worth  noting  that  patent  protection  is  granted  routinely for 
inventions that,  once  being placed  on  the  market,  could not  have  been  kept  secret 
anyway. The scope of what is considered patentable was  extended as time went by; it 
now  comprises not  only  technical  inventions, but  also  substances, plant  breeds  and 
genes. In certain  countries there  is  vivid discussion on the  patentability of computer 
programs and business methods. 

Trademarks are used to prevent manufacturers from trying to pass  off their goods 
as  someone  else’s.30  In  this  way,  the  grant  of  a  right  to  a  certain  mark  involved 
recognition of the need to protect the goodwill which a manufacturer may  develop in 
his  customers. Correspondingly, trademarks enable the customer to rely on the source 
and the high quality of the good in question. 

In recent times, the trademark usage has evolved considerably, and it may even be 
said  that  there  has  been  a  certain  estrangement  from  the  original  purpose;  many 
trademark owners now put  their marks onto  goods that have  not  been  produced by 
themselves, but by licensees according to specifications defined and controlled by  the 
trademark  owner.  Accordingly,  counterfeiting  today  often  takes  the  guise  of 
unauthorized production of adchtional stock by the same licensee who also produces the 

28  It actually appears that patents were originally not linked to new technologies. In medieval times, the grant of 
exclusive rights by the sovereign was a convenient way to raise money without the need to resort to taxation. Such 
grants were common in many European countries. Some of these, for example in mining regions or in respect of 
production of certain textiles, seem to have had  a relation to innovations. The first law providing for the grant of 
exclusive rights for limited periods to the makers  of inventions in  general as  a deliberate act  of economic policy 
appears to have been enacted in Venice in 1474. It does not seem coincidental that this was at a time when Venice 
lost  most  of its  trading empire  in  the Eastern Mediterranean  and  consequently had  to  re-focus  its  economy  on 
manufacture rather than trade. Indeed, as Venice’s domination of trade with the East weakened, it adopted a number 
of measures to  establish and  maintain a pre-eminence  in  manufacture, including laws prohibiting  emigration of 
skilled artisans and the  export of certain materials, while at the same time  encouraging the immigration of skilled 
workers &om other countries, for example by a tax holiday for two years after their arrival in Venice. 

The development  in  other  European  States  was  similar: the  right  of sovereigns to  grant  monopolies  was 
gradually restricted, unless they were for the introduction of a new industry to the country. In 1624, as part of the 
skirmishing between Parliament and the Crown that finally led to the English Civil War, the English Parliament 
passed the Statute ofMonopolies. This had the effect oflimiting the power ofthe Crown to the grant ofmonopolies 
duration of two training periods 
to making such grants only to inventions for limited periods (fourteen years-the 
for  craft apprentices) and  only  for  “manners  of new  manufacture”  that  were introduced into the  realm by  the 
recipient of the monopoly. 

29  For example, the art of producing  porcelain,  discovered by J.F.  von Bottger  in  1707, was kept  as  a  State 
secret by  the Prince Elector of Saxony for many decades. Only through spying could other princes gradually avail 
themselves of the art and found their  own porcelain manufactures. To this day, companies continue to preserve 
industrial secrets wherever they believe it possible, which in many cases remains an  alternative to the protection 
granted by patents. 

3”  The  protection  of  trademarks indeed  looks  back  on  to  a  long  tradition.  Two  breweries  of  Bavaria, 
Weihenstephan (circa  1040) and  Weltenburg (circa 1050), claim to possess the oldest continuously used business marks. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

145 

“~riginal” good. In addition, trademark protection is now often claimed with regard to 
categories of goods and services that are alien to the goods and services produced by the 
trademark owner.31 

The consequence is that the primary function of trademarks today no longer is to 
prevent the misleadmg of customers (with all the negative impacts this may have for the 
producer  of  the  original good); rather,  they  protect  an  artificially created  image  or 
lifestyle concept that is linked to the trademark itself and not so much to any good or 
service. In the creation of the image of a trademark, public relations campaigns now play 
a role that sometimes eclipses the inherent  quality of the goods or services Concerned. 
Trademarks are recognized to be valuable assets in themselves that can be disposed of 
independently.32 Accordingly, the  protection  of a  customer’s interest  to  rely  on the 
origin and  quality of the  good in  question is  no  longer the focus; rather, trademark 
legislation recognizes and protects the investment made by the trademark owner. 

The protection  of geographical indications dates back to the  19th century, when 
French producers of wines and spirits sought to protect themselves against the use  of 
denominations like “Champagne” and “Cognac” for wines and spirits not  originating 
from these regions. The concept was  then extended to other foodstuffs, such as cheese 
(e.g.  Roquefort)  and  ham  (e.g. prosciutto  di  Purrnu).  It  is  recognized  by  Section  3 
(Articles 22-24)  of the TRIPS Agreement, which defines them as: 

“... indications which identify a good as origmating in [a] territory ... where a given quality, 
reputation  or other characteristic of the good is  essentially attributable to its geographical 
o n g h ” 3 3  
The recognition of geographical indications adds value to the goods concerned and 
enables agricultural producers to specialize in high-quality products. Thereby, they may 
provide an important contribution to the economic development of rural regions. 

C.  Is “INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY’’  THE SAME  THING AS PROPERTY IN TANGIBLE  ASSETS? 

The protection of IPRs is based on moral as well as economic rationales. 
The moral argument postulates a “natural right” of the innovator to claim property 
in his idea or, at least, to receive compensation and reward. However, it is a remarkable 
fact that the term “intellectual property” has penetrated legal thought and language only 
quite recently, but with  increasing density.34 This shift  in terminology is not without 

31 The protection  of “well-known”  trademarks, even with regard to goods and services other than those for 

which they are registered, has been introduced by Article 16(3) of the TRIPS Agreement. 

32  The result is  that trademarks can be completely separated &om the production know-how  and facilities to 
whch they owe their reputation.  A prominent example is the acquisition of the Rolls-Royce trademark rights by 
BMW, whereas the enterprise itself was taken over by Volkswagen. 

33 Article 22 of the TRIPS Agreement. 
34  For more details on this, see Lawrence Lessig, The Future $Ideas,  Vintage Books, New York, 2001, p. 294 
(Footnote 26  to  Chapter 6). It indeed  seems  that  well into  the  20th  century  it was  not  common to associate 
copyrights and patents with the term “property”. 

146 

THE  

implications; if the owner of tangible assets has nearly hll  control over his property, the 
term “intellectual property” seems to mean that creators and inventors should, too, have 
hll control over their works and inventions. The use of the term “intellectual property” 
thus favours the ambitions of those who wish to secure for right holders a complete or 
nearly complete control over the exploitation of ideas or knowledge.35 The above-cited 
words of Jean Le  Chapelier have certainly influenced the subsequent development of 
copyright law in continental European jurisdictions in that regard. 

Yet copyright and patent law have, in contrast to property in tangible assets, always 
been designed to grant an incomplete, porous control over the subject-matter: they are 
limited in  time  (whereas property in  tangible assets  has  no  temporal limitation) and 
scope  (for  example, there  are  fair-use  provisions  in  copyright, whereas  there  is,  in 
principle, no right to make fair-use of someone else’s car). 

In that situation, it is  certainly not inappropriate to examine whether intellectual 
a plenary and unlimited 

property corresponds to the classic concept of property-i.e. 
right to possess, use, exploit or destroy something, or to grant or deny access to it-r 
whether it is a strigeneris right hlfihng a different purpose. This leads to other questions: 
do the moral arguments speaking in favour of the recognition and protection of tangible 
assets apply in an equal and unreserved manner to intellectual property? Are tangible and 
immaterial property really the same thing? 

Certain arguments speak in favour of such an approach. Man’s natural desire for 
property without  doubt  extends to  all possible kinds  of assets, including intangible 
ones.  Moreover,  these  assets  may  help  him  to  provide  help  to  his  friends and  to 
strangers, to secure his own future and that of his family, etc. Like property in general, 
intellectual property is to some extent a prerequisite for commercial exchange and for 
the specialization in task of each member of society; for example, without copyright 
it would be difficult for authors and performers to specialize in the creation of works 
of art and for producers to finance the production  of artistic works or performances. 
Consequently, there would  be  less  creativity. Moreover, intellectual property, like 
property in general, contributes to social progress; for example, patents may create an 
incentive for  research and  innovation, and  trademarks may  create an  incentive to 
improve the quality of goods or services. 

This  reasoning, however,  meets  a  strong objection: there  are  great  differences 
between  the  subject-matter  of property in  tangible assets  and  the  subject-matter  of 

35  Fritz  Machlup and Edith Penrose,  The Patent Controversy  in  the  Nineteenth  Century, Journal  of Economic 
History, x(I), 1950, May, 1-29,  argued that  the  term  “intellectual property right” (as opposed  to  “intellectual 
monopoly privilege”) was a very deliberate choice on the part of politicians working for the  adoption of a patent 
law in the 19th century. This period was for liberty and equality and against privileges and monopolies of any sort. 
Patent law on inventions based upon a “monopoly privilege” would be rejected, but as a “natural property right”, 
the patent law would be justified or accepted. Thus, it becomes once more apparent how the name of something 
influences our idea of what it is. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

147 

intellectual  property.  These differences concern, on the one hand,  the rivalrous/non- 
rivalrous character of the assets concerned and, on the other hand, the effects produced 
by “exclusive” control over them. 

1,  Rivalrous and  Non-Rivalrous Resources 

Most tangible assets (land, livestock, etc.) are scarce resources, and their availability 
is limited; economic  theory speaks of “rivalrous resources”.  If such rivalrous resources 
are not the property of someone, they risk to be over-exploited  and under-maintained. 
Everybody  will  tend  to feed  as  many  of his  sheep  as  possible  on a  common pasture 
ground, whereas nobody wdl make any sacrifices in order to let the pasture regenerate; 
an  orchard  in  common possession  wdl  be  harvested  by  all,  but  tended  by  nobody; 
nobody would care to maintain a bicycle that is in common property, but all would wish 
to use it. The result is that, in the absence of a property right linked to it, the rivalrous 
resource will degenerate or be depleted.36 Consequently  (and paradoxically), the valuc 
of rivalrous resources for society is, with  few  exceptions,  highest  when  they  stand in 
private property, given that this is  the best way to ensure that they are well maintained 
and  exploited  in  the  most  efficient  way.  Private  property  in  tangible  assets  is  thus 
beneficial for society.37 

Contrary to this,  copyrights and patents  concern  knowledge,  and knowledge  is 
not a limited  resource;  it  is  non-rivalrous.  The nature  of non-rivalrous  resources is 
such that  they  cannot  be  over-exploited;  on  the contrary,  they  may  become more 
valuable  for  society  as  a whole  (and, at  times,  even for  the  individual  members  of 
society), if they  are used  to the largest possible  extent. If A passes on his knowledge 
to B, both will possess it. If A teaches a language to B, both will be able to speak this 
language  and,  given  that  the number  of persons  speaking and  understanding  it has 
increased, the language has itself become more useful (which is also in the interests of 
A). Thus, if tangible assets are best exploited in the interest of society when individual 
persons  possess  them,  this  is  not necessarily  the  same with  knowledge.  Indeed,  the 
more  persons  dispose  of knowledge,  the  better  for  the  development  prospects  of 
society as a whole. 

J6 This is what is generally described as the “Tragedy ofthe Commons”. Cf. the seminal article published under 

that title by  Garett Hardin, Science, Vol. 162, 1968, pp. 1243-1248. 

37  This concerns goods for consumption as well as means of production. The Marxist approach of bringing all 
means of production  under State control has broken the power of the capitalists who had previously owned them. 
Instead, a much stronger power was now exerted by  those who, purporting to act “in  the name of the people”, 
exerted  a monopoly  over all means of production, which  was no more challenged by  the mechanisms of a free 
market.  In that sense, the practical result of applied Marxist theory  inevitably led to a new kind of feudal system, 
with high-ranking party membedgovemment officials acting as the new feud holders. 

As some are more skilled and/or more productive than others, it is inevitable that there are wealthier and less 
wealthier members of society. This is acceptable and can even be considered as beneficial to society (in view of the 
incentive it sets) if the difference in wealth  does not become extreme.  Cf.  Messner, supra, footnote 22, p.  1080, 
who argues that the societal function of private property is best fulfilled if there is a maximum amount of private 
property of average size. 

148 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

2.  Exclusivity 

Property in a tangible asset confers to the owner the right to exert control over that 
particular asset which is, as such, limited in its value and extent. As  we have seen, the 
distribution of property between all members of society helps to ensure freedom for the 
indwidual person: what A cannot obtain from B (because B refuses to sell) he may be 
able  to  obtain from C or D. Thus, A  is not  dependent  on the caprice of B when he 
wishes to avail himself of a given good. 

This holds true for most goods of everyday use  (e.g. food and clothes). In view of 
the type of goods, the interest of A to obtain them may  receive additional protection 
through legal provisions obligmg his counterpart to contract with him. For example, the 
owner of the only grocery in a village would be obliged to contract with A-even 
if he 
has  taken  a  strong  personal  dislike  to  him-if 
his  refusal  to  do  so  would  inflict  a 
particularly bad hardship onto him. However, if A has taken a fancy to buying a unique 
good  (a particular  house  owned  by  B,  for  example), his  interest in  concluding the 
contract receives no specific protection; if he fails to persuade B  to sell the property, 
there will be no deal. 

Thus,  the  monopoly  created  by  property  is  strongest  where  there  is  a  strong 

demand for the asset concerned, and no possibility to adequately substitute it. 

Where  patents  and  copyrights are  concerned,  the  situation is  comparable; they 
assign control over an immaterial resource to rightholders, who are allowed to control 
the  access  of  others  to  these  resources,  inasmuch  as  no  fair-use  exemption  can  be 
invoked.  Of course,  such  exclusive  control  can  be  of  extreme value  for  the  happy 
owner, if the demand for access is  high and  the possibility to substitute is  inexistent. 
This high value for the holder can, however, be more than outweighed by the damage 
caused, not only to competitors, but to society as a whole: less competition leading to 
higher prices and to slower cycles of innovation-this  means, eventually, that society 
pays more money for less value. 

Should, then, anyone be allowed to exert such control over ideas? 
With regard to intangible assets, exclusive control has always been more restricted 
than with regard to tangible assets. Perhaps, the reason for this is that an exclusive right 
to exploit a specific creation or invention could be more damagmg for economic liberty 
than exclusive control of a tangible asset; a patent, for example, can enable its holder to 
exclude all competitors from access to key technology. However,  current intellectual 
property  legislation  makes  hardly  any  difference  between  creationshnventions  the 
accessibility of which is of vital importance for society, and other intellectual-property- 
related matter which, being of lesser importance, could be left under the full control of 
rightholders.38 In any case, it is clear that the free flow ofinformation is, in general, more 

38  For  example,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  there  should  be  easier  access  to  important pharmaceutical 
know-how, especially for the populations of poor countries unable to afford medicines sold at the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation  and Development (OECD) price level. It is far less easy to conceive why anyone should be 
given free access to the songs of Michael Jackson. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND 1NTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

149 

beneficial to society than  a flow of information  that is in any way restricted.  It  seems 
therefore logical not to grant exclusive rights over ideas, except where there are strong 
reasons to do so. 

D.  THE “ECONOMIC  INCENTIVE”  RATIONALE FOR  PROTECTING INTELLECTUAL 

PROPERTY 

The  rationale  for  the  recognition  of  intellectual  property  by  a  legal  system  is 
therefore hndamentally  different from the rationale  to recognize  and protect  property 
in tangible assets. 

This  rationale  is,  with  impressive clarity,  spelled out by  the  Constitution  of the 

United States of America, which, in its Section 8, Clause 8, foresees: 

“The Congress shall have Power ... to promote the Progress ofscience and usefl Arts, by securing 
for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings 
and Discoveries.” (emphasis added). 

It  is  indeed  noteworthy  that  the  U.S.  Constitution,  which  was  the  first 
constitutional law in the modern sense, already recognized  the necessity of what today 
is called “intellectual property”.  However,  rather than on the concept of property,  the 
focus  is  set  on  “promoting  the  progress  of  science  and  usefkl  arts”  and  on setting 
appropriate  incentives.  The incentives  are  thus  no  more  than  a  means  to  reahse  an 
objective  and,  as  a  matter  of  consequence,  they  are  subordinated  to  this  objective. 
Moreover, the “promotion of the progress of science and usefd arts”  must be seen as a 
public policy objective, and the granting of exclusive rights nothing but an instrument 
to pursue this objective. 

The m u r e  to  use  the  term  “intellectual  property”  was  by  no  means  accidental. 
Quite to the contrary,  the authors  of this Constitution were adamant on the principle 
that ideas as such could not be owned. That is the conclusion to which Thomas Jefferson, 
himselfthe first U.S. Patent Commissioner, comes to in hs famous letter to Isaac McPherson 
of 13 August 1813: 

“... It has been pretended by some ... that inventors have a natural and exclusive right to their 
inventions, and not merely for their own lives, but inheritable to their heirs. But while it is 
a moot question whether the origin of any kind of property is derived from nature at all, it 
would be singular to admit a natural and even an hereditary right to inventors. 

If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusive property, it is 
the action of the thinking power called an idea, which an individual may exclusively possess 
as  long as  he  keeps  it to  himself; but the moment it is  divulged, it forces itself into the 
possession  of  everyone,  and  the  receiver  cannot  dispossess  himself  of  it.  Its  peculiar 
character, too, is that no one possesses the less, because every other possesses the whole of 
it. He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; 
as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. 

150 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

That  ideas should freely spread from  one to another  over the  globe,  for the  moral and 
mutual  instruction  of  man,  and  improvement  of  his  condition,  seems  to  have  been 
peculiarly  and  benevolently  designed  by  nature,  when  she  made  them,  like  fire, 
expansible over all space, without lessening their density in any point, and like the air in 
which  we  breathe,  move,  and  have  our  physical  being,  incapable  of  confinement  or 
exclusive appropriation. 
Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject of property.” 
The very convincing argument made here is that inventions cannot be a subject of 
property,  because  they  are  a non-rivalrous  resource.  A  rivalrous  resource  would  not 
permit the consumption by A without lessening the consumption by B; yet information 
is non-rivalrous  and thus could be the freest of all resources. However, it must be noted 
that Jefferson, in his function as U.S. Patent Commissioner, did not argue against patent 
protection  as  such-he 
only  pointed  out  that  such  protection  was  not  in  any  way 
comparable to property rights in tangible a~sets.3~ 

Both property  in tangible assets and in intellectual property  have in common that 
they  are  not  ends  in  themselves,  but  exist  to  the  benefit  of  society.  In  the  case  of 
intellectual property, the objective is not to prevent the over-using  and depletion of the 
resource concerned, but to enhance its creation, given that the very nature of good ideas 
implies that the more they are used, the better it is for society. The objective is rather 
to set an  incentive  for innovators  to  create, research  and  develop,  and  to  make  their 
innovation publicly available. 

E.  THE RIGHT BALANCE IN IPRS 

if the purpose  of granting IPRS is to incite innovation and creativity, it is evident 
that  the  reward  offered  to  innovators  should be  appropriate;  it  must  be  neither  too 
modest,  nor must  it be  excessive. Either  deviation  from  the  right  balance  of interest 
would not only frustrate the purpose, but it would also be inherently unjust. Granting 
too small a reward for creativity would  mean  to unfairly exploit the creator, whereas 
rewarding him excessively would mean to privilege his particular interest at the expense 
of the interests of society.  It is  at this point  that  IPRS can come into conflict with the 
rights of third parties. 

It is  relatively easy to imagine  what would  happen  if the  rewards for innovation 
were too modest: there would probably be less innovation.  However, even if the State 
granted  no  IPKS at  all,  this  would  not  result  in  no  innovation  at  all.  Very  useful 
inventions  (such  as  the  wheel  or  the  plough)  have  been  made  without  any  patents 

39  It is, however, necessary in this context to make an important differentiation; even if an idea or invention 
cannot as such be subject to property rights, it is obvious that the rights granted to authors or inventors (i.e. patents 
and copyrights) are property. They can constitute a considerable economic value, and their holders should without 
doubt be appropriately protected  against expropriation by the State and infringement of his rights by third parties. 
It is in this sense that IPRs constitute “possessions” in the sense ofArticle I ofthe Protocol to the European Human 
Rights Convention. However, what reward should be given to inventors or creators (or whether any reward should 
br givcii to them) is quite a different question. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

151 

steady progress is made by small inventive steps-is 

having  been  taken  out  for  them,  and  the  eternal  masterpieces  of  art,  music  and 
literature  have  been  created  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  copyright.  Incremental 
innovation-where 
not dependent 
on the existence of patent or copyright law. Contrary to that, no private entrepreneur 
could realise  capital-intensive research activities (or certain copyright-related  activities 
such as the publication of scientific reviews, or high-budget  film productions) without 
them. These activities could then only be realised  on the basis of public fundmg-and, 
consequently, the freedom of individuals to undertake them would defucto be restricted.40 
The damage that could be caused by excessive rewards (e.g. overly long Copyright 
terms, or the granting of patents for trifling inventions, or of overly broad patents) are 
perhaps  less  evident-but 
they  are  certainly  worth  in-depth  consideration.  The 
fundamental problem is that innovation and creativity do not take place in a vacuum. 
Instead, each innovative step is based  on pre-existing ideas,41 and if these pre-existent 
ideas are “owned” by someone, the “owner” may use his exclusive right to prevent the 
derivative innovation from takmg place. In such a situation, IPRS can have the perverse 
effect of stifling innovation instead of promoting it. 

This innovation-stifling  side-effect of IPRS is  far from being  a  merely theoretical 
it  creates  important  practical  obstacles  for  innovation  and  has 
issue-instead, 
engendered a heated academic debate. Although remaining neutral in this discussion,42 
it would seem useful to mention some of the most contentious points of debate in order 
to illustrate the problem. 

In the area of copyright, the debate focuses on the following issues: 
-  The  duration  of  copyright  terms:  According  to  the  1971  Revised  Berne 
Convention,  the  minimal  copyright  duration  is  until  50 years  post  mortem 
auctoris. In the European Union  the minimum  term  is  70 years post  modem 
auctoris.43  The  United  States  has  only  recently  aligned  to  that  standard. 
The gradual extension of the copyright term (most recently by the Copyright 
Term  Extension  Act  (CTEA) of  1998)  has  stirred  up  much  criticism  in 
the United States. The critics claimed that copyright now was excessive and, 
deefacto, unhmited in time, whereas the U.S.  Constitution demands that there 

40  The fieedom to research can thus be factually restricted by the unavailability of funds, just as the freedom of 

the press is, in some countries, restricted by the government’s control over printing paper. 

4’  This  fundamental  insight  on  how  progress  takes  place  has  never  been  better  expressed  than  by 
Sir Isaac Newton in a letter to Robert Hooke in 1676: “If I have seen further it is by  standing on the shoulders of 
giants.” But even long before that, St. Paul wrote: “What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did 
receive it, why do you boast as ifyou had not received it?” 1 Corinthians, 4, 7. 

42  For those wishing to obtain more ample information,  especially with regard to the impact of IPRS  on the 
Fate ofthe Commons in a Connected  World by Lawrence Lessig, Vintage 
information society, The Future ofIdeus-?he 
Books, New York, 2001, may be useful reading. The effects of high IPR standards on developing countries have 
been the subject ofa study by the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights (CIPR), commissioned by the U.K. 
Department for International Development, which was published in 2002. The integral text ofthis study as well as 
an executive summary can be downloaded from the CIPR Website: <‘http://www.iprcommksion.org>. 
43  Council Directive 93/98/E~C of 29 October 1993 harmonizing the term  of protection of copyright and 

certain related rights. 

152 

THE  

should be  a  time-limit.  Moreover,  the  retroactive prolongation of the term 
had  no  inciting effect in  view  of the  works  already created-yet 
the  U.S. 
Constitution empowers Congress to grant copyrights only as an incentive “to 
promote the progress of art and the useful sciences”. A petition to declare the 
CTEA unconstitutional was dismissed by the U.S Supreme Court in 2002.44 
The legal protection qf databases: Databases enjoy a sui generis protection in the 
European  Union  under  Directive  96/9/EC.45  This  Directive  confers  to 
database creators the right to prevent extraction of the whole or a substantial 
part  of the  database for a period  of fifteen years. This term  of protection is 
renewable  whenever  a  substantial  change  is  introduced  (for  example,  by 
adding new  data). Sirmlar proposals have been  before  the  U.S.  Congress.46 
Critics say that this regime protects investments rather than original creative 
expression-an 
approach  they  consider  alien  to  the  purpose  of copyright. 
It  has  also  been  said  that  this  regime  unduly  restricts  access  to  scientific 
databases, thereby stifling research.47 
Digital  rights  management  and  specijic  legislation  to  prevent  its  circumvention: 
The  U.S.  Digital  Millennium  Copyright  Act  (DMCA) of  1998  contains 
provisions aiming to  substantially reinforce  the  control  of rightholders over 
copyrighted works. According to these provisions it is unlawful to circumvent 
“technical devices” by which producers of copyrighted matter try to protect a 
work against copying. This applies irrespective of whether the act of copying 
is  itself  unlawful  or  is  covered  by  a  fair-use  exemption.  In  the  European 
Union,  EC  Directive  2001 /29/EC48  contains  a  similar  provision. 
The  proposal  for  a  Directive  on  measures  and  procedures  to  ensure  the 
enforcement of I P R s ~ ~  aims to further extend this principle to other fields of 
intellectual property law, for example patents and trademarks. 
The  advocates  of  such  legislation  contend  that  recent  technological 
developments have made unlawful copying so easy that it is necessary to adopt 
the strictest possible legislation. Critics, on the other hand, point out that the 
undifferentiated  prohibition  to  circumvent  “technical  devices”  make  it 
possible  for  rightholders  not  only  to  reinforce  the  protection,  but  also  to 
extend the scope of their rights. For example, a technical device preventing 
the copying of a CD prevents not only illegal copying, but also interferes with 

of databases. 

<~http://www.eldred.cc/eldrevashcroft.htmln. 

44  U.S.  Supreme  Court  No.  01-618,  15 January  2003,  Eldrrd  v.  Ashcroft.  For  a  full  account,  see: 
45 Directive 96/9/EC ofthe European Parliament and ofthe Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection 

46 For example, the draft Database Investment and InteHectual Property Anti-Piracy Act of 1996. 
4’  Cf. Chapman, supra, footnote 4. 
4R  Directive  2001/29/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  22  May  2001  on  the 

harmonization of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society. 

49 COM (2003) 46(01). Article 21  of the proposal obliges Member States to  “provide for appropriate legal 

protection against the manufacture, import, distribution and use of illegal technical devices.” 

HUMAN  RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

153 

the fair-use  expectations of consumers. Copy-protected  discs will disappoint 
consumers who have purchased MP3 players, despite the fact that making an 
MP3 copy of a CD for personal use is a fair-use.  Mahng “mix CDs” or copies 
of CDs for the office or car are other examples of fair-use  that are impaired by 
copy-protection  technologies.  Companies that  distribute  tools  to  “repair” 
these dysfunctional CDs, restoring to consumers their fair-use  privileges, run 
the risk of lawsuits. 

Meanwhile, anti-circumvention legislation is  being used  outside the  classic 
scope of copyright. For example, the printer company Lexmark is suing Static 
Control  Components,  a  company  that  re-manufactures  toner  cartridges to 
make them  compatible with  Lexmark printers.  The lawsuit is  based  on the 
claim that Static Control reverse-engineered a chip on laser toner  cartridges 
meant for Lexmark printers, in violation of the DMCA. Thus, adding a chip to 
any kind  of product  would  make it  fall under  the  DMcA-and 
prevent  an 
otherwise l a h l  competition.50 

Concerning patents, the major bones of contention are: 
-  Patentability standards: The requirements for inventions to be patentable vary 
from country to country. Some countries apply a standard of absolute novelty 
(prior art  includes disclosure through  use  anywhere in  the world), whereas 
others  consider  it  sufficient  that  the  invention  be  novel  in  their  own 
jurisdiction. Recent European jurisdxtion  considers it an invention if a new 
use is found for a product or process already known. 
At present an invention is considered to be inventive if it is not obvious to a 
person skdled in the art. Recent decisions of the European Patent Office (EPo) 
and  the  US. Patent  and  Trademark  Office  (USPTO) have  triggered  some 
criticism according to which the standards applied are too low, resulting in a 
proliferation of trivial inventions instead of enhancing real innovation. 
The granting ofpatentsfor trivial inventions, or of too-broad patent  claims: In their 
own interests, patent depositors define the scope of their inventions as broadly 
as  possible, so  as to secure the largest possible scope for their patent. It also 
occurs that  patents are  granted  in view  of inventions that  represent  only  a 
moderate inventive step. If a patent system foresees no efficient control, the 
“contract” between  society and the inventor risks  losing its balance; i.e. the 
value of the reward would exceed the value of the innovation. Consequently, 
the patent system would  incite the  artfil filing of patent claims  rather than 
useful research. 

- 

50  For  hrther  information  on  this  case  as  well  as  on  further  problems  caused  by  the  DMCA, see 
Robin  D.  Gross,  Circumvention Prohibitions  Reconsidered:  W h y  America’s Mistake  Is  Europe’s Future,  available  at: 
ehttp://www.ipjustice.org/eucdOl2903.shtml~. 

154 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

- 

- 

- 

T h s  can have particularly adverse effects where such patents put the holder in 
a position to prevent or monopolize downstream research. 
The patentability  of  genes and  of 
living organisms, especially such  as  can  be found 
in nature: The scope of innovations considered patentable has broadened in 
the past decade. For  example, one requirement  for a patent to be granted 
used to be that a technical invention  (and not a discovery) had been made. 
It thus was the technical process (“if you do X and then Y, you achieve Z ” )  
that could be patented, not a substance or an organism that could be found 
in nature. 
Recently,  a  change  of  approach  has  considerably broadened  the  scope  of 
patentable “inventions”; they now comprise, amongst other things, genes and 
living organisms. Arguably, if  considerable funds are invested in research on 
genes or plants, the new knowledge stemming from such research should be 
adequately rewarded. On the  other hand, many people are uneasy  with  the 
idea that “life” can be patented. Their concern is that biological diversity is put 
into question by such patents, and/or  that such patents could set an incentive 
for immoral activities, such as the cloning of human beings, the manipulation 
of the human genome, or “therapeutic” activities involving the destruction of 
human embryos. 
The patentability  of certain  innovations,  suck  as  computer programs  or  business 
methods: According to a new interpretation of the law recently adopted by the 
USPTO, computer  programs and business methods  can  be patented  in  the 
United States. 

The European  Union  has  so  far  not  followed this  approach.  Instead, it  is 
currently  discussing  the  adoption  of  a  Directive  on  the  patentability  of 
“computer-related  inventions”.sl The  authors  of  the  proposal  say  that  the 
concept  of  “computer-related  inventions”  is  significantly  different  from 
“computer programs”. 
So far, the European Union has taken no steps to introduce the patenting of 
business methods. 
In the United States, patent litigation concerning both computer software and 
business methods has triggered a heated debate.52 
“Strategicpatenting” by some economic operators in order to prevent others gaining access 
to areas ofresearck: The fundamental dilemma here is that what may be the result 
of one research process  is often a possible  input to one or more downstream 

52  Cf.  Patenting  Business Methods-A  White  Paper uf the American Intellectual  Property Law Association, adopted 

27 November 2000. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

155 

- 

research processes. The holder of the upstream patent can prevent others from 
researching downstream, and thus put off hrther innovation. This brings the 
progress of science in the area concerned under the control of a patent owner.53 
Given the high cost of patent filing and patent litigation, big rather than small 
businesses  can  benefit  more  easily  from  patent  protection.  Allegedly,  it 
happens that patents are claimed abusively (i.e. to put the onus of proving the 
patent’s invalidity on the  shoulders of the  competitor  and  thus hinder  him 
from entering the market). 
The patenting  of traditional  knowledge:  This  problem  is  closely  linked  to  the 
criterion of novelty. Some jurishctions consider it an innovation meriting patent 
protection  if traditional knowledge from an  &en  cultural circle is  found and 
transferred. Others  consider  this  a  misappropriation and  contend that  where 
inventions are based  on  traditional knowledge, the benefit  should be  shared 
between the inventor and the holders of the traditional knowledge at question.54 
issue:  Some  developing  countries  possess  a  sigruficant 
diversity of plants, animals and micro-organisms. These resources increasingly 
form the basic material of modem biotechnology and are used in areas such as 
plant  breeding, pharmacology  or  cosmetics. The question here  is  whether 
innovators wishing to obtain a patent on such inventions should be obliged to 
disclose the origin of resources used and whether a part of the benefit obtained 
should go to the country of origin. 

-  The  “biodiversity” 

It becomes evident from these debated issues that the overly generous awardmg of 
exclusive rights for inventors and creators can have very damaging effects not  only for 
other  societal interests (such as  development,  or  biodiversity), but  even  on progress 
itself, thus compromising the very objective pursued by  the  awarding of IPRS. In the 
extreme  case,  a given  innovation  is  simply not  allowed to  take  place,  because  it  is 
blocked by the owner of a patent or copyright. 

In view of such situations, it is clear that the overly generous awarding of IPRS is 

possibly more nefarious than not awarding any reward for innovation at all. 

The challenge faced by  patent  and  copyright legislation is  thus to find  a  delicate 
balance;  the  main  objective must  be  to  enhance  progress.  Patents  and  copyright are 
subordinated to this  objective; they are a tool to achieve it. While meant to encourage 
innovation and creativity, they must be tailored in a  way  that the innovation becomes 

53 Cf. Michael Heller  and  Rebecca Eisenbcrg, Can Patents  Deter  Innovatiom!  The AntKommom in  Biomedical 

Research,  Science, Vol. 280, May 1998, pp. 69&701. 

54  The  aforementioned  study  by  the  CIPR (see  the  full  text  on:  shttp://www.iprcommission.orgr), 

commissioned by the U.K. Department for International Development, dedicates a separate chapter to the problem 
of traditional knowledge. An update on the state of play was published by WIPO in May 2003 to prepare for the 
5th session of the WIPO Intergovcmmental  Committee on Intellectual Property  and Genetic Resources,  and is 
available at: ~~http://www.wipo.org/documents/en/meetin~/2003/igc/p~/~f~ic~S~l0.pdfi. 

156 

THE JOURNAL OF WOFUD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

BALANCE BETWEEN CREATIVITY AND CONTROL 

Figure  1 

Note: 

Level of intellectual property protection  (x) 

a  reward for his  creativity-to 

In  this  diagram,  the  vertical  vector  (y)  indicates  the  level  of  creativity  and 
innovation in a society. The horizontal vector (x)  indicates the amount of control 
the  author or 
over the  innovation,  granted-as 
inventor by a copyright or a patent. 
If no exclusive right (or other reward) is awarded, innovation will be at a lower 
level than  it might  be, but  there  will  at least  be  some innovation.  The curve 
illustrating the level of creativity therefore does not begin at point zero, but at A. 
If the  reward  for  creativity is  only  modest  (between A  and  B),  its  impact in 
enhancing  creativity will  be  modest,  too;  few  will  be  motivated  to  make  an 
additional effort to  innovate,  and  the  overall  creativity will  therefore  increase 
only slightly. As  from point B, the  reward reaches a  level sufficiently high to 
create a  real incentive  to  invest  in  research and  creativity: the  curve soars up 
steeply. It begins to flatten as  from  C  (where the  first  adverse effects become 
visible) and reaches its culmination point at D. From now on, the level of creativity 
sinks  down  again-in 
spite  of  increasing  intellectual  property  protection. 
Initially, the descent is slow, but from E onwards it becomes increasingly steep. 
Ultimately, it is even possible that the level of creativity f d s  beneath where it was 
when there were no IPRS at all; i.e. innovation is nearly brought  to a standstill. 
In  this  diagram,  the  shading  shows  where  the  level  of  intellectual property 
protection should be situated. Ideally, it would lie somewhere between C and D; 
in  that  case,  society  would  get  a  maximum  (or  nearly)  of  innovation  for  a 
reasonable price. In any case, the “price” is a fair one in this section of the curve; 
more IPRS lead to more innovation. If the level of protection is between D and E, 
the same amount of innovation would  take place-but 
the price to be paid by 
society would be higher. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

157 

available to the publicand, most notably, to other innovators-as 
soon as possible and 
at the lowest possible cost. A maximum of innovation should be talung place, and it should 
fill into the public domain as quickly as feasible in order to generate hrther innovation. 
This need for balance is visualised in Figure  1. 

It is  not  the  aim here to identify the ideal duration and scope of copyrights and 
patents.  However,  they  may  vary  according  to  the  subject-matter,  as  well  as  the 
particular  situation of a  country’s economic and  social  development. What  Figure  1 
illustrates-in  very abstract terms-is  only that the overly generous granting of exclusive 
rights on inventions and ideas can have effects that would be better avoided. 

On the practical side, the damage would consist in the stifling of innovation, which 
is contrary to the very purpose of IPRS. But there is also a moral side to the issue: the 
granting of over-generous incentives can create social injustice. To those profiting from 
it, it awards undeserved and disproportionately high profits at the expense of society in 
the form of higher prices for less innovative products. At the same time, other potential 
innovators may  be blocked or discouraged from innovating, which  turns  them  into 
victims in a more specific sense. 

F. 

IPRS AND THE PROTECTION  OF INVESTMENTS 

1.  Patents  and  Copyrights 

If the primary function of patents and copyrights is to set incentives for creativity, 
it must nevertheless be remarked that many authors or inventors would be creative even 
in the absence of IPRS. For example, most scientists would be keen to publish, even if 
they received no royalties in return. Rather than in the royalties they earn when copies 
of their publications are  sold, their  reward lies  in  the  increased public  attention  and 
recognition they receive if they manage to publish in a well-reputed scientific journal. 
Ultimately, this increased recognition may  pay  off in the form of a professorship in a 
well-respected university, or other rewards. Yet no scientific journal could exist if the 
publisher could not rely on his copyright. 

A  comparable  situation  exists  wherever  the  generation  of  new  works  and 
inventions relies not only on creative inspiration, but also on investment. Investors must 
be able to gain revenue from their investment-otherwise 
they wdl abstain from it. This 
concerns the film industry as well as pharmaceutical laboratories or the music industry. 
Patents  and  copyrights  exist,  therefore,  not  only  in  the  interests  of  artists  and 
inventors,  but  also  in  the  interests  of  investors.  Their  activity  merits  protection, 
provided that it is in the interest of society. 

However, the role of investors must be seen as an ancdlary one. While innovation 
and creativity strictly cannot  take place without  authors and inventors, this  does not 

158 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

mean  that  the  systems of  economic  exploitation  prevailing today  must  remain  the 
same  tomorrow.  For  example,  if  new  technologies  make  a  direct  communication 
between  an  author  and  his  public  possible, the  role  of the  publisher  (who, in  the 
technical sense, basically acts  as an intermediary) needs to be redefined. Patents and 
copyrights are there to enhance creativity, but not to protect  the existence of specific 
business models that may be outdated. 

Thus,  patents  and  copyrights  protect  the  interests  of  investors,  who  are  not 
creative  themselves but  who  finance  creativity.  However,  as  it  has  been  pointed 
out,  these  interests  are  not  absolute  but  subordinated  to  the  societal purpose  of 
enhancing creativity. 

2.  Trademarks and  Geographical Indications 

It  has  been  stated above that  a  difference must  be made between  rivalrous and 
non-rivalrous  resources.  This  distinction,  however,  does  not  coincide  with  the 
distinction made between  tangible and intangible assets. Indeed,  there  are intangible 
assets, which are nevertheless rivalrous. Such is notably the case with trademarks (and, 
equally, with “geographical indications”). A trademark that can be used by everybody 
would quickly have lost its significance. 

Trademark rights are, therefore, significantly different from patents and copyright. 
They are not granted as a reward or incentive for innovation, but to protect the name 
and mark of the owner against misuse  and depletion. In practical terms, they make it 
possible  for  an  economic  operator  to  invest  in  his  good  reputation.  Ideally,  this 
investment  would  consist  in  optimising  the  quality  of  the  products  and  services 
concerned, rather  than in  mere  spending on public  relations. But  in  both  cases,  the 
availability of  trademark  rights  is  to  the  benefit  of  society-it 
allows  consumers to 
identifjr  the  products  and  services  they  favour  over  others,  and,  by  attaching  an 
“identity” to goods and services, it enhances competition. 

Due  to  their  rivalrous  nature,  trademarks  and  geographical  indications  merit 

protection comparable to that accorded to property in tangble assets. 

111.  DO IPRS CONFLICT WITH HUMAN RIGHTS? 

There has been criticism in recent years  according to which certain IPRS stand in 
conflict with certain human rights. This concerns notably the right to health  (allegedly 
compromised by patents on medicines), the right to food and the right to development. 
As  has  been  shown above,  the most  important  yardstick for  the  balance  sought 
between, on the one side, the interests of authors and inventors and, on the other, certain 
societal objectives, is  to be found in the purpose of IPRS themselves. Notably, patents 
and copyrights serve the purpose of promoting progress and development. 

HUMAN RIGHTS  AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

159 

Therefore,  it  may  be  assumed  that,  if  legislation  on  intellectual  property 
corresponds  to  this  purpose,  there  can  be  no  true  conflict  between  intellectual 
property  and policy objectives such as development, public health, or the fight against 
hunger. IPRS are subordnated to these objectives and must be shaped in order to servc 
them  as  much  as  possible. The hierarchy of values requires the respect  of this  order; 
institutions like property or IPRS are not an end in themselves, but tools to realise high- 
ranhng  societal objectives (such as  access  to  food,  health,  development,  education). 
The tool cannot rank above the objective it has been designed to realise. 

However,  it must be recognized that  objectives such as  development  and public 
health  strongly depend  on cost-intensive  research, which  will only take place if it  is 
economically viable. This economic viability is guaranteed through IPRS. In the absence 
of  any  better  incentive,  abolishing IPRS in  the  name  of  human  rights would  be  a 
short-sighted and counter-productive  policy. Even if there were benefits in the short 
term  (e.g.  that  the  price for  new  medicines would  fall  sharply), there  would  be  less 
innovation  in  the  medium  and  long  term;  hardly  any  new  treatment  would  be 
developed  by  privately owned  companies, and  the  development  of new  treatments 
would then depend upon public funding. 

A. 

IPRS AND  THE RIGHT TO DEVELOPMENT 

The strong link between human rights and development has figured prominently 
in  United  Nations  deliberations for  more  than  half  a  century.  In  1986, the  right  to 
development  was  made  explicit in  the  Declaration  on  the  Right  to  Development, 
which states that: 

“The right to development is  an inalienable human right by  virtue  of which  every human 
person  and  all peoples  are  entitled to participate in, contribute  to, and  enjoy  economic, 
social,  cultural  and  political  development, in  which  all  human  rights  and  fundamental 
freedoms can be fully realised.” 
However,  before the benefits of development can be  shared, it is  necessary that 
development  takes place.  IPRS are  intended  to  play  an  important  role  in  enhancing 
development. It seems, thus, inappropriate to blame IPRS as constituting an obstacle for 
development-provided 
that  they  are adequately shaped. However,  as  demonstrated 
above, both too-strong and too-weak IPRS can have a negative impact on development. 
The right to  development  thus puts an obligation on all States to  foresee intellectual 
property protection at a level that best fits the purpose. 

Yet  this ideal level of protection  may depend on the status of development  of a 
country’s national economy. It is  therefore  necessary that  each country reflect  on its 
specific situation and shape its intellectual property legislation accordingly. 

The World  Trade  Organization  (WTO) TRIPS Agreement  is  often  criticized for 
being “too unflexible” or “containing a one-size-fits-all  approach”. According to some 

160 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

critics,  the  minimum  standards of  intellectual property  protection  set  by  the  TRIPS 
Agreement are too high for most developing countries, thereby putting them under an 
obligation to adopt legislation that is not adapted to their specific needs. 

These  concerns  must  be  taken  seriously. Indeed,  the  WTO has  appropriately 
reacted to this criticism by  adopting a more flexible approach, which is reflected in 
the  Doha  Development  Agenda.  Besides  that,  however,  it  must  be  recognized 
that  the  authors  of  the  TRIPS Agreement  clearly  considered  development  and 
progress  for  all  countries  as  the  primary  objective  to  be  pursued  through  that 
instrument.  The  TRIPS Agreement  was  thus  designed  to  become  a  very  flexible 
instrument,55 and it is indeed regrettable that many developing countries fail to make 
use  of the flexibility TRIPS offers to them.56 

It remains to be seen whether the standards for intellectual property protection set 
by  TRIPS will  have  the  expected  beneficial  effects for  developing countries.  For  a 
country  struggling  to  avail  itself  of  existing  technology,  legislation  inciting  the 
development of new technology is  not  necessarily the  appropriate answer.  In other 
words,  even  the  adoption  of  strong  patent  legislation  will  not  help  to  transform 
Mozambique, within a foreseeable future, into a world leader of biotechnical research. 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) and transfer of technology appear to depend on a 
great  variety  of  factors,  of  which  intellectual  property  protection  is  only  one.57 
Historically, the development strategy of successful national economies seems to have 
been based  on low intellectual property standards and reverse engmeering rather than 
on the incentives set by strict intellectual property standards.58 

55  Article 7 of the TRIPS Agreement  explicitly states that:  “The protection and enforcement  of intellectual 
property  rights  should  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  technological  innovation  and  to  the  transfer  and 
dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a 
manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.” In its Article 66(2), 
TRIPS contains an obligation for developed countries to:  “ ... provide  incentives to enterprises and institutions in 
their  territories for  the  purpose  of promoting and  encouraging  technology  transfer  to  least-developed country 
Members in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base.” 

56  The above-cited CIPR Report,  Integrating Intellectual Property  Rights and  Developing Policy, contains valuable 

hints at how the flexibility of TRIPS can be made use of. Cf. Chapters 6 and 7 of that Report. 

57  Keith Maskus, Intellectual Property  Rights  and  Foreign  Direct  Investment, Policy Discussion  Paper, Centre for 
International Economic Studies (CES), School of Economics of the University of Adelaide, No. 22,2000, points 
out that, while there are indications that strengthening IPRS  can be an effective incentive for inward FDI, it is only 
a component of a broader  set  of factors. Strong IPRS alone are  not  sufficient incentives for firms to invest in a 
country.  If they were, recent FDI flows to developing economies would have gone mainly to sub-Saharan  Africa 
and Eastern Europe. In contrast, China, Brazil, and other high-growth,  large-market developing economies with 
weak protection  would not have attracted nearly as  much FDI. From a policy perspective, it is the existence of a 
pro-competitive  business  environment that  matters overall for FDI. Investment  and technology  transfer  do not 
necessarily expand with stronger IPRS, but there is emerging evidence in favour of that view. 
58  This is  true for all developed economies, not least the United States of America. Between  1790 and 1836, 
as  a  net  importer  of  technology,  the  United  States  awarded  patents  only  to  its  own  citizens  and  residents. 
When, in 1836, access to patent protection was opened to foreign inventors, patents fees for foreigners were futed 
at ten times the rate fixed  for U.S.  citizens. Copyright protection was restricted to U.S. citizens until  1891; after 
1891, the protection granted to non-U.S.  citizens depended  on strict formal requirements  (for example, printing 
had to be on U.S. typesets) which led to many creators forfeiting their rights. The present US. attachment to high 
standards  of intellectual property  protection  stem from a time  when  the  United  States had  turned  into  a  net 
exporter of knowledge and technology. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

161 

B. 

IPRS AND THE RIGHT  TO HEALTH 

1. The Right to Health in International  Conventions 

It has often been asked whether it serves any good purpose to speak of a “right to 
health”.  After  all,  the  purpose  of  a  “right”  usually  is  to  defend  the  holder  against 
unlawful interference from either the State or some third person. To be in good health, 
however,  is  a  lucky  situation that  cannot  be  guaranteed  to  anyone,  not  even  the 
wealthiest and most well-connected person. In what sense, therefore, can a legal system 
guarantee a right to health? 

Quite obviously, the right to health does not guarantee anyone good health and 
well-being. It does, however, gwe the individual rights against the State as well as third 
parties, which, by nature, are judcable.  On the defensive side, it is forbidden-to 
the 
State as  well as to private persons: 

-  to  commit  actions  that  put  at  danger  public  health  or  the  health  of 

- 

individual persons; 
to deprive individuals or groups of persons from having access to health care, 
in particular by discriminating according to their race, sex, age, or other criteria. 

On the positive side, each State is, according to its possibilities, also obliged: 
-  to pursue public health as a high-ranking policy objective, i.e. to build public 

health schemes; 

-  to combat infectious diseases; 
-  to  ensure that  all members of society have  access  to  food,  drinking water, 

clothing and housing, etc. 

Even if it does not belong to the “classic”  catalogue of human rights, the right to 
health  is  now  explicitly  mentioned  and  recognized  by  numerous  international 
conventions. It attributes to all men and women a right to the highest attainable standard 
of physical and mental health, without discrimination of any kind. 

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 25, runs as follows: 
“Everyone has  the  right  to  a  standard  of living adequate for ... health  and  well-being  of 
himself  and his family, including food,  Clothing, housing, medical  care and the  right  to 
security in the event of ... sickness, disability .... Motherhood and childhood are entitled to 
special care and assistance ...” 
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Articles 7, 

11 and 12, foresees: 

“The States Parties ... recognise the right of everyone to ... j ust and favourable conditions of 
work which ensure ... safe and healthy working conditions ... the right to ... an adequate 

162 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

standard of living ... the enjoyment of the highcst attainable standard of physical and mental 
health. The steps to be taken ... to achieve the full reahsation ofthis right shall include those 
necessary for: ... the reduction of ... infant mortality and for the healthy development of the 
child;  the  improvement  of  all  aspects  of  environmental  and  industrial  hygene;  the 
prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic, occupational and other diseases; 
the creation of conditions which would assure to all, medical service and medical attention 
in the event of sickness.” 
The  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  AU  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against 
Women, Articles 10, 12 and 14, contains specific obligations with regard to the health 
of women: 

“States Parties shall ... ensure to [women] ... access to specific educational information to help 
to ensurc the health and well-being  of families, including information and advice on family 
planning  ...  States  Parties  shall  ...  eliminate  discrimination  against  women  in  ... health 
care  ... to ensure, on a basis  of equality of men and women, access to health  care services, 
including those  related to family planning ... ensure ... appropriate services in connection 
with  pregnancy  ... States  Parties  shall  ...  ensure  ...  that  [women  in  rural  areas]  ._. have 
access to  adequate health  care facilities, including information counselling  and  services in 
family planning ...” 
The Convention on the Elimination ofAU Forms of Racial Discrimination, Article 
5, reiterates the same rights, this time with the emphasis on equal access to health care 
without racial discrimination: 

“States Parties undertake to ... eliminate racial discrimination  ... and to guarantee the right of 
everyone, without  distinction  as  to race,  colour,  or national  or ethnic origin, to  equality 
before  the  law  ... the  right  to  public  health,  medical  care.  social  security  and social 
services ...” 
And  finally, the Convention on the Rights  of the Child, Article  24, repeats  the 

same formula, this time with regard to children: 

“States Parties  recognise  the right  of the  child  to  the  enjoyment of  the highest  attainable 
standard of health and to facilities for the treatment of illness and rehabilitation  ofhealth ...” 

2. 

The Role of 

IPRS in promoting Public Health 

As  has  been  seen,  it  is  widely  recognized  that  each  State  must  consider  the 

safeguarding of public health as  a primary policy objective, and act accordingly. 

This objective demands a wide variety  of actions, among which  the provision  of 
efficient health insurance  and health  care systems seem to be the most important ones. 
The health  care systems should be of the highest attainable technical  standard. Yet the 
issue of IPRs gets involved only where the question of making available the most recent 
results  of  medical  research  to  a  greater  public,  or  the  funding  of  new  research,  is 
involved. 

Consequently,  intellectual  property-i.e. 

medicines  or medical  equipment-is 

the  availability  of  patent  protected 
not  always the crucial issue.  In  least-developed 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

163 

countries, the problem often is not the unavailability of the newest (and, for this reason, 
most  expensive) medicines, but rather the absence of even the most basic  equipment, 
treatments, or human resources. The failure to attain a reasonable medical standard has 
nothing to do with excessive patent protection. 

Yet, if a specific problem is not the biggest (or most frequent) of all problems, that 
does not mean that it is not  there. Indeed, in the context of the relationship between 
IPRS and public health, the following problems must be singled out: 

-  There  are  circumstances  where  new  and  rapidly  spreadmg  diseases 
(for  example  AIDS) demand  the  availability  of  new  medical  treatments. 
Given that such new  treatments must be newly developed, they are usually 
patented, and therefore ofien very expensive. As  a consequence, they can be 
afforded by patients in high-income countries, but not in poor countries. 

- 

- 

- 

In  other  cases,  even  the  availability of patent  protection  fails  to  act  as  an 
incentive  for  the  development  of  new  treatments.  This  is  the  case  with 
so-called “neglected diseases”, some of which (such as malaria or tuberculosis), 
affecting mainly poor countries, kill millions every year. The problem is that 
the  patients  suffering  from  these  diseases,  due  to  their  poverty,  do  not 
represent  a sufficiently large  market  potential that  would  turn  research  on 
these dseases into an economically viable investment. 
At  the  same time,  important research  funds are  diverted into  areas  such  as 
slimming treatments, treatments against impotence (such as Viagra, the most 
“valuable” of all existing medical patents), or medical surgery. 

Moreover, if the costs  of public  health systems have  exploded and, even in 
high-income  countries, put the health budgets into a precarious situation, this 
is  to  a  large  extent  due  to  a  galloping increase in  spending on  (patented) 
medcal  treatments.  The relationship between  IPRS and public  health  is,  it 
seems, not only a problem for developing countries. 

If these problems are undeniable, they do not mean that the granting of patents for 
new medicines is, as such, a flawed concept. However, they show that this concept of 
enhancing innovation has innate limits. 

Regardmg  AIDS, existing  cures  would  not  have  been  developed  without  the 
incentive  set by  IPRS.  It  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  inventors of their  fair  reward. 
Yet  this  incentive  only  functioned-and  continues  to  function-because 
there  is 
sufficient demand for AIDS treatments in high-price  markets such as the United  States 
and  Europe.  However,  AIDS is  not  limited  to  the  United  States and  Europe.  The 
treatments against AIDS must be made avdable to all, including the poorest. The patent 
holders clearly have a responsibihty here, as has the international community. With the 
recent compromise on compulsory licences under TRIPS, WTO Members have tried to 

164 

THE  

face  up  to  this  responsibility. Nevertheless,  the  solution for  the  AIDS crisis  does not 
depend solely on IPRS. Accompanying measures are needed, such as the Global Fund to 
fight  AIDS, tuberculosis  and  malaria,  and  various  initiatives  to  encourage  the 
pharmaceutical industry to sell medicines at strongly reduced (but sustainable) prices to 
poor countries (“tiered pricing”). This pre-supposes that efficient measures are taken to 
prevent the trade diversion of mehcines sold at a tiered price to high-price countries.59 
On the other hand, the problem of “neglected diseases” shows that IPRS are not a 
solution to  every problem.  Where  the  market  cannot  re-finance  research  spending, 
patents  do  not  function  as  incentives  for  research.  The  solution  is  to  set  different 
incentives for private research, or to conduct research in public institutions. 

Thus IPRS are a necessary, but not the only, tool to serve the objective ofpublic health. 

c.  IPRS AN11 THE RIGHT TO FOOD 

The reflections made in the precedmg section with  regard to the right  to health 
apply mutatis  mutandis  to another fundamental right of equal rank: the “right to food”. 

The World Food Summit in November  1996 reaffirmed: 
“[The right of everyone] to have access to safe and nutritious food, consistent with the right 
to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, and gave 
a specific mandate to the High Commissioner for Human Rights to better define the rights 
related to food and propose ways to implement and realise them.” 
Furthermore, the right to food is recognized by the same international conventions 
(and indeed the same Articles of these) quoted above in respect of the right to health. 
The  contribution  of  IPRS to  ensure  access  to  nutrition  is  (and  has  been)  an 
important one. The past  decades have witnessed an unprecedented rise of productivity 
in agriculture.60 Without this, it would have been hardly possible to sustain the world’s 
growing population. Much of this increased productivity is  due to new plant varieties, 
or  new  agricultural techniques. Without  IPRS, many  of these innovations might not 
have taken place. 

It is in recognition of these circumstances that Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement 
covers, in principle, patents for biotechnological inventions. However, recognizing that 
different countries may require hfferent policy approaches, these rules are very flexible. 
Article 27.3(b) of TRIPS stipulates that WTO Members may  exclude from patentability: 
“(b) plants and animals other than  micro-organisms,  and  essentially biological processes 
for the production  of plants or animals other than non-biological  and microbiological 
processes.  However,  Members  shall  provide  for  the  protection  of  plant  varieties 

59  In the European Union, Council Regulation 953/2003 to avoid trade diversion into the European  Union 

of certain key medicines has been adopted to address this specific issue. 

6o  Vernon  W. Ruttan,  Productivity  Growth in  World Agriculture:  Sources  and  Constraints, Journal of Economic 

Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 4, Fall 2002, pp.  161-184. 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

165 

either by patents or by 
The provisions  of  this 
entry into force of the 

an effective  mi generis  system or by any combination thereof. 
subparagraph shall  be  reviewed  four years  after  the date  of 
WTO Agreement.” 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  TRIPS Agreement  does not define  by  any  means the 
term  “effective sui generis  system”. The context of the provision  merely leads to the 
conclusion that, if new varieties are used, there  must be  a  reward for the producer. 
The timely  duration  of this  “protection”  should  not  be  significantly less  than  the 
minimal duration of a patent term. 

Irrespective ofwhether a country uses patents or a suigenevis system to protect new 
plant varieties, it may incorporate a “breeder’s exemption” and a ‘’farmer’s privilege”. 
The latter ensures that farmers can re-sow protected varieties on their own land without 
having to purchase new seed. 

D.  THE IMPACT OF IPRS ON ECONOMIC FREEDOM 

As  shown  above,  the  institution  of property  in tangible  assets  is  an  important 
pre-condition  for  the  economic  freedom  of  individuals. Without  property,  people 
would not be able to buy and sell for their own account, but  depend on a centralized 
power mstributing tasks and assets to the individual members of society. The person or 
group of persons, in exerting this centralized power, would be in total control of society. 
To a  certain  extent,  IPRS contribute  in  the same way  to  economic  freedom; 
many  individuals  live  on  the  economic  basis  provided  by  IPRS.  Yet  patents  and 
copyrights feature an inherent problem-they 
create monopolies, which can restrict 
economic liberty. 

“Economic  liberty”  is  considered  by  many  theorists  as  a  pre-condition  for 

economic growth and wealth. They define it as: 

“ ... the absence of government  coercion  or constraint  on the production, distribution, or 
consumption of goods and services beyond the extent necessary for citizens to protect and 
maintain liberty itseK”61 

Even if they adrmt that some minimal coercion is necessary in order for the citizens 
of a community or nation to defend themselves, promote the evolution of civil society, 
and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  labour,  they  believe  that,  when  governments  employ 
coercion beyond that minimalist standard, or interfere in the market to effect ends other 
than the protection of person and property, they undermine economic freedom. 

Other theorists have  some  reservations against  this  concept  of  freedom.  They 
believe that, while the freedom of individuals is a high value, this individual freedom 

61  Cf.  The  2003  Index  of  Economic  Freedom  (a  publication  by  the  Heritage  Foundation  and  the  Wall 
Street Journal), Chapter  5, Explaining  the  Factors  of  the  Index  of  Economic  Freedom,  by  William  W. Beach  and 
Gerald P. O’Driscoll, Jr. 

166 

THE  

implies responsibility towards society. The purpose of a State, to them, is therefore not 
only to protect  the person  and its property, but also to achieve societal ends such as 
social equity, the protection of health and environment and the promotion of progress 
and development. 

The human rights conventions that have been quoted in this article with respect to 
the right to health, the right to food and the right to development-and  which, besides 
these issues, recognize a great variety  of other societal objectives, such as  the combat 
against any form of discrimination, the protection of the environment or of indigenous 
show that the rights of the individual, however much  importance is 
cultures-clearly 
attached to them, must be embedded in a societal context. 

Yet the economic freedom of the individual is also recognized in various human 
rights  conventions.  It  is  not  possible here  to provide  a full quotation  of all  relevant 
provisions; however some of those provisions stand in a context with IPKS. For example, 
the Universal Declaration on Human Rights recognizes, in its Article 23, paragraph 1: 
“Everyone  has  the  right  to  work, to  Gee  choice  of  employment,  to just  and  favourable 
conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.” 
And in its Article 26, paragraph 1: 
“Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and 
fundamental stages.” 
And in its Article 27: 
“Everyone has  the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy 
the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.” 
The International  Covenant  on Economic,  Social and  Cultural  Rights  contains 

further, more detailed obligations for signatory States with respect to these rights. 

In the IPR context, the problem  is  that  the monopolies  created  by patents and 
copyrights potentially impinge upon these economic freedoms. For example, certain 
economic activities (for example, producing spare parts for a car, or creating software 
solutions designed to run on a given operating  system, or researching on a gene or a 
cell isolated by an upstream researcher) are dependent on the grant of a licence by a 
rightholder.  Education  becomes  less  accessible  to  many  (especially  in  developing 
countries) where copyright laws contain no fair-use clauses or where fair-use is made 
impossible by  technical  devices.  The  right  to  participate  in  cultural  life  is  put  at 
danger where copyright is used to prevent the publication of derivative works or of 
persiflage or criticism. 

Where  access  to  knowledge  becomes  unavailable  or  unnecessarily  scarce,  this 
generally may be seen as  a severe restriction, if not a violation, of economic freedom. 
This can not only have a negative impact on the economic development  of a society, 
but  also  on the  economic  and  social perspective  of many  individuals. Children  are 

HUMAN RIGHTS AND  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

167 

deprived of access to education, entrepreneurs of their right to start up new enterprises 
and create jobs, artists of their right to create new works of art on the basis  of existing 
works, researchers of their  right  to  research  freely.  This  is  not  merely a  question of 
eaciency, but also of the social rights of individuals. 

IPRS, therefore, should be  tailored in a way  that  procures,  on the  one hand, an 
appropriate reward for creators and innovators, whilst  on the other  hand avoiding to 
limit economic freedom more than absolutely necessary. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

The debate on human rights is, and will continue being, a debate on putting widely 
recognized values  into the  right order  and into  the  right  balance.  Although, clearly, 
some values  have to take precedence over others, there are few, if any, that could be 
considered to enjoy absolute prevalence. At  the same time, the rights of the individual 
have to be  carefully balanced against  societal interest; there  are  situations where  the 
individual has to accept limitations of its rights to the benefit of society, and there are 
other situations where the opposite is the case. 

With regard to intellectual property, it seems that the best balance is achieved when 
it is remembered that IPRS were originally created in order to secure societal purposes, 
and that, in t h s  context, the usage of the term “property” has emerged much later. 

The overall conclusion is, therefore, that the type and level of protection afforded 
by any IPR regime must, to the greatest possible extent, facilitate scientific progress. 
Yet scientific progress also is of no absolute value if it benefits only a few members of 
society, while a majority remains excluded from these benefits. The international IPR 
system  must  therefore  strike  a  balance  between  rewarding  innovators  and  making 
innovation available to all, on both an individual and an international level. It results 
that balance is  the highest  virtue  of a legal system: itrs  est  urs  boni  et  uequi.62 This, at 
least, holds true for intellectual property  as much as for any other legal matter. 

Law is the art of the good and the just. 


