Asian Perspectives on Post-TRIPS Issues in 

Intellectual Property 

Assafa ENDESHAW* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Just like non-industrial countries (non-ICs)’ in other parts of the world, Asian non- 
ICs have slavishly imitated the intellectual property (IP) system entrenched in, or newly 
introduced by, the major industrial nations. Their continuous transplantation of IP laws, 
often modelled on those of the European Union or the United States, picked up speed 
in the 1980s and 1990s as they sought to attract foreign technology and investment,2 on 
the  one  hand,  and  to  placate  criticisms directed  at  their  foreign  trade  or  domestic 
policies? on the other. 

The  most  dramatic  development  in  the  transplantation process  followed  the 
long-standing  calls,  particularly  by  the  United  States,  for  the  creation  of  uniform 
substantive rules cutting across differing cultural and  economic  conditions4 and  the 
conclusion  of  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual  Property 
Rights  (TRIPS) at the  Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations conducted 
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994 at the same time 
as  the  founding  of the World Trade Organization  (WTO). Consequently,  the forms 
and scope of IP  that  non-ICs  were  forced  to  embrace increased. In particular, the 
conscious linkage of IP issues with trade issues and the administration of TRIPS by the 
*  Ph.D., LL.M., LL.B., History  and  Governance Research Institute  (HAGRI), Information  Law  Research 
The author wishes  to  express his gratitude to the  Centre for Asia-Pacific  Social Transformation Studies 
of Wollongong University, New South Wales, Australia, where he undertook most of the research 

Group (School of Legal Studies), University of Wolverhampton, United Kingdom. 

(CAPSTRANS) 
for this article as a Senior Visiting Fellow in December 2003-January  2004. 

The author may be contacted at: cA.Endeshaw@wlv.ac.uk). 

1  The author takes  “non-industrial  countries” to mean countries that have yet to achieve industrialization 
fully or, at any rate, as a dominant sector of their economies. The economic base of such countries is agriculture or 
mining (such as  minerals and oil), and they thus  engage in the production of raw or primary materials;  they are 
usually unable to process those materials themselves because they lack the technology and capital to do so. 

2  Alan Gutterman and Robert Brown, Intellectual Property Laws ofEast Asia, Sweet & Maxwell, Hong Kong, 

1997, at p.  18. 

3  Innes and Turpin thus write  of Australia,  China, Indonesia, South Korea, the  Philippines and Thailand 
that “the state of IPR legislation has been driven by international forces and demands for regulatory change”. See 
Jane  Innes and Tim Turpin, Intellectual  Property  Legislation  and  Innovation  in Asia-Pmic  Economies:  Case Studies  of 
Intellectual Property Law in Australia, China, Indonesia, Korea,  the Philippines and  Thailand, Hybrid, Ormond, Victoria, 
Australia,  1999, at p. 8. 

4  The pursuit ofuniversal laws in IP has been noted in many stukes. See, for instance, David Samoff, A World 
Patent  System,  Kettenng  Award  Address  to  the  Tenth Annual  Public  Conferenre,  10 IDEA 143, 1966; Report  of the 
President’s Commission on the Patent  System, “To Promote  the Progress of.. .  Useful Arts”: In an Age Of Exploding 
Technology, Washington, D.C.,  1966; Gerald J. Mossinghoff and Vivian  S. Kuo,  World Patent  System  Circa ZOXX, 
A.D., Intellectual Property Law Review 1999, pp.  3 4 2 .  

212 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

WTO, instead of by  the World Intellectual Property Organization  (WIPO), as well as 
the fear of persistent threats of trade sanctions (chiefly by the United States) compelled 
the non-ICs  not  only to adopt the further expansion of IP laws but  also to strive to 
enforce the same. 

By  2000,  practically  all  nations  on  the  globe  with  a  sizable  industrial  and 
commercial sector in their economies had made adjustments to their IP laws to bring 
them  into  line  with  TRIPS. Meanwhile,  the  scope  and  type  of  IP  rights  have 
continued  to  expand  in  all  directions.  Terms  of  copyright  protection  were 
lengthened  both  in  Europe  and  the  United  States; patents  have  been  extended  to 
management  methods  and  ~oftware;~ the  electronic  media  and  digitization  have 
spawned a new form of IP-domain 
the same time as  they have helped 
proprietors lock in previously accepted margins of free use  as  private domains.6 All 
in  all,  IP  has  been  expanding  by  leaps  and  bounds  and  encroaching on  areas and 
activities (such as free speech,’  human  rights and innovation) previously considered 
sacrosanct or, at any rate, legitimate. 

names-at 

A principal consequence of this  development is  that certain sectors of the major 
industrial countries have started to question whether  the unrelenting expansion of IP 
might not be throttling innovation and competition.8 Furthermore, a rising demand for 
cheaper melcines to combat epidemics has  expressed itself  through  grief and public 
outcry across the world against the big pharmaceutical companies and TRIPS, altogether 
exerting huge pressure towards loosening the stranglehold on all non-ICs.  Resurgent 
demands for protection of traditional or indigenous knowledge as well as  solutions to 
environmental problems also  reflect deep-seated needs for change in the international 
IP system in favour of such countries. 

The lot of Asian non-ICs has been to continue to imitate and copy foreign IP laws 
and practices regardless  of whether  the latter have had  adverse ramifications for their 
economies or cultures. Asian  non-ICs are still grappling with how to accommodate or 
assindate the latest addtions to rules and mechanisms of IP in the European Union and 

5  The United  States Patent  and  Trademark  Office  has  liberally issued patents for new  methods  of doing 
business  on  the  Internet  by  treating  them  essentially  as  “processes”.  The  US.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the 
Federal Circuit endorsed the practice in State  Street Bank G. Trust Co. v .  Signature Financial  Group, Znc., 149 F3d 1368 
(Fed. Cir., 1998). 

6  The protection,  under the sui generis mechanism, of databases, regardless of the (non-)copyrightable merit 
of the material they hold and against the legitimate interests of others who might seek to use the material freely, in 
effect hands to the proprietors a blank cheque.  In particular, the protection of material that would have remained 
in the public domain had it not been  for its inclusion in a database opens an unearned  revenue  stream for such 
proprietors of databases. 

7  The  U.S.  Digital  Millennium  Copyright  Act  of  1998 has  been  cited  by  U.S. Federal  authorities  as 
supporting  their  action  against  the  release,  by  individual  researchers, of  software  codes  (such  as  encryption) 
protecting  digital  devices,  such  as  Dws, while  those  who  released  them  sought  protection  under  the  First 
Amendment of the U S .  Constitution. 

8  See, amongst othen, Peter Drahos, with John Braithwaite, Infomation Feudalism:  Who Owns the  Knowledge 
Economy?  Earthscan, London, 2002; Lawrence Lessig,  The Future  of 
Ideas:  The Fate  ofthe Commons in  a Connected 
World, Random House, New York, 2001; Christopher May, A Global Political Economy oflntellectual Property Rights: 
The New Enclosures? Routledge, New York, 2000; and Debora J. Halbert, Intellectual  Property in the Infoomation Age: 
The Politics cfExpanding Ownership Rights, Quorum, Westport, Connecticut, 1999. 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES  O N  IP ISSUES 

213 

the  United  States.9  The  constant  fear  of  sanctions,  possible  loss  of  investment  or 
technology  flows  into  their  economies,  as  well  as  a  lack  of  understandmg  of  the 
international processes at work and the implication of introducing more IP laws, leave 
them  prone  to such  a  path  of perennial acquiescence to  developments in  the  major 
industrial  nations.  Yet,  sooner  or  later, Asian  non-ICs  will  have  to  respond  to  the 
potentially  harmful  trend  of  overarching IP, just  as  some  sectors  in  the  developed 
countries have begun, or proposed, to do. 

This  article wdl  examine current attitudes of Asian  non-ICs  towards  the  diverse 
issues  that  have  sprung up  since  TRIPS came  into  force  with  a  view  to  establishing 
whether there might be any discernible signs of an Asian response to further extension of 
IP. To that  end, it  starts  off with  a summary, in  Section  11,  of  the  contributions, or 
otherwise,  of  Asian  non-ICs  during  the  preparation  for  the  Doha  WTO Ministerial 
Conference. Section 111 then reviews the participation of Asian non-ICs in the post-Doha 
debate on IP issues, especially on whether they could reshape TRIPS to suit their current 
requirements.  Section IV  briefly looks at  the  stance of Asian  nations on the  potential 
role of IP at the fded Cancun Ministerial Conference. The article concludes that Asian 
non-ICs are bogged down in a collfkontation with the developed countries on a number 
of fronts in current international trade negotiations and that their stakes in IP appear to 
have been smothered under the weight of the multiplicity of issues. 

11.  ASIAN CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE POST-TRIPS DEBATE PRECEDING DOHA 

The implementation of TRIPS by all Members of the WTO is subject to the review 
of the Council for TRIPS’O every two years.11 Moreover, the Council has been entrusted 
with  handling  the  unresolved  issues  in  the  Agreement-the 
so-called  “built-in 
agenda”12-and  mahng proposals for “modification or amendment” of the same.13 To 
that  effect, it has  reviewed  the performance  of Member  States, including those from 
Asia. It has also examined some of the TRIPS provisions that have become contentious, 
the  “built-in  agenda”  in  respect  of  geographical  indications,  and  “non-violation” 
disputes.  Stdl,  it  has  not  yet  proposed  any  “modifications” or  “amendment”,  as  is 
arguably allowed under TRIPS Article 71. 

For a review of attitudes towards the so-called WIPo treaties, see Assafa Endeshaw, The Asian Approach  in 
Responding  to  Developments  in  Intellectual  Property,  in  Anura  Goonasekera  and  Lee  Chun  Wah  (eds.), Asian 
Communications  Handbook  2001,  Asian  Mema  Information  and  Communication  Centre  and  School  of 
Communication Stuhes, Nanyang Technological Univenity, Singapore, 2001, at pp. 269-277. 

l o   See TRIPS Article 68. 
*l TRIPS Article 71. 
‘2  Such as is found in TRIPS Article 24.1 (entering into negotiations for increasing the protection of individual 
geographical indications); Article 24.2  (on reviews of the  application of  the  TRIPS provisions for  geographical 
indications); Article 23.4  (on undertaking  negotiations for  establishing a  multilateral system  of notification  and 
registration of geographical indications for wines); Article 27.3(b)  (the review, after four years from entry into force 
of the TRIPS Agreement, of Members’ measures to protect plant varieties and any exclusion &om patentability they 
might make); Article 64.3 (establishing modalities for  non-IP  complaints five years from entry into force of the 
WTO Agreement); and Article 71.1 (review of the implementation  of the TRIPS Agreement by developing nations 
post-2000). 

TRIPS Article 71(1). 

214 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Just  as  countries from  other  continents have  done,  Asian  nations  made various 
representations to the Council for TRIPS to influence the outcome of negotiations and 
planned Ministerial Conferences. India thus  sought to  “initiate discussions on issues” 
relating  to  transfer  of  technology,  the  relationship  between  the  United  Nations 
Convention  on  Biological  Diversity  (CBD) and  TRIPS and  the  protection  of 
geographical  indications  other  than  wines  and  spirits.14  It  proposed  that  a  vaguely 
defined form of intervention to ensure that the objectives of TRIPS to promote transfer 
of technology  could be  realized.  It  also  recommended inserting a  provision into  the 
Agreement (requiring “a clear mention of the biological source material and the country 
of origin”) to make it purportedly compatible with the CBD.l5 As regards the protection 
of goods other than wines and spirits, it suggested extending such to “products of export 
interest like basmati rice, Darjeeling tea, alphonso mangoes, Kohlapuri slippers in the 
case of India”, as well as to other nations’ goods.16 

Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan and three other non-ICs outside of Asia iterated their 
views  with  respect to the  application of the  non-violation  remedy as  specified under 
Article  XXIII  of  the  GATT 1994.l7 They  asserted that  the  introduction  of “the  non- 
violation remedy in intellectual property may constrain Members’ abilities” to devise or 
implement  measures  appropriate  for  their  development.18 They  therefore  proposed 
further extension of the five-year  suspension of that remedy “until the  complexity of 
the implications of such a remedy in the area of intellectual property is better understood 
and the possible  scope and modalities are adequately addressed”.19 

India submitted, on 2 July 1999, a separate document20 that restated its standpoint 
on the protection of geographic indications of goods other than wines and spirits. That 
same  document  was  circulated  later  without  any  change.21  India  also  declared  its 
position on the revision of TRIPS Article 27.3(b).22 It maintained that the review should 
cover  the  scope  and  forms  of  exclusions  from  patentability  of  life  forms,  the 
effectiveness  of  the  protection  for  micro-organisms  and  non-biological  and 
microbiological processes, as  well as the  appropriateness of sui genevic systems for the 
protection of plant varieties. 

15  Ibid. 
16  Ibid. 

l4  WTO, General Council, Preparationsfor the  1999 Ministerial, Proposals  on IPR Issues, Communication from 
India, WTO Doc. WT/GC/W/147,  18 February  1999. This document was later circulated as WTO, Council for 
TRIPS, Communication from India, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/195,  12 July 2000. 

WTO, Council  for  TRIPS, Non- Violation Nullijcation  or  Impairment  under  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related 
Aspects  of Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TFZPS), Proposal  from  Cuba, the  Dominican  Republic, Egypt, Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Pakistan, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/141,29  April  1999. 

Ibid. 
*”  WTO, Gcneral Council, Preparationsfor  the  1999 Ministerial, Froposals regarding the  TRIPS Agreement  in Terms 
19  Ibid. 
of Paragraph  9(a)(i)  .f the  Geneva Ministen’al  Declaration,  Communication from India, WTO Doc,WT/GC/W/225, 
2 July 1999. 

21  WTO, Council for TRIPS, Communication from India, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/196,  12 July 2000. 
22  WTO,  Council  for  TRIPS, Review  of the  Provirions  o f h t i c l e  2 7 . 3 0 ,  Communication  from India, WTO 

Doc. IP/C/W/161,3  November  1999. 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES ON IP  ISSUES 

215 

India characterized the concept of rights in IP as being confined to “formal systems 
of knowledge only”. As far as it was concerned, failure to recognize  “informal systems” 
embedded in tradition  “can have  severe adverse consequences  on mankmd, some say 
even leading to our extinction”.23 It therefore proposed to exclude patents as a whole; 
but if such was unreahzable, to deny them for traditional knowledge, or at least to make 
any grant  subject to hsclosure  of source and prior consent of communities  as  well  as 
proof of a benefit-sharing  arrangement being in place. 

Concerning  micro-organisms,  India  affirmed  that  the  distinction  between 
discovery  and  invention  be  maintained  and  that  only  inventions  satisfying the  usual 
criteria become patented.  As  regards the patentablity  of micro-organisms,  it proposed 
that man-made,  genetically engineered varieties meeting the criteria should be granted 
patents.  It reasoned that  “unless there is human intervention  involved and unless they 
fall  in  the  category  of  micro-organisms’’  biological  material  cannot  qualify  as  an 
invention  and,  in any  case,  “it  should  be  left  to  national  policy  to  decide  what  are 
patentable  micro-organisms”.*4 

India judged that the exclusion from protection under TRIPS Article 27.2 could be 
used in national laws as a basis to allay “many of the fears arising out of possible adverse 
consequences  of patenting  of micro-organisms”.25  It  believed  that  the  requirements 
under  Article  27.3(b)  for  instituting  protection  for  plant  varieties  provided  a  “wide 
latitude” to Member States to work out a system appropriate to their objectives. Citing 
the  existence  of  various  models-such 
as  the  International  Convention  for  the 
Protection of New Varieties of Plants and the biologcal diversity laws- 
India asserted 
that countries could develop systems acceptable to themselves. It further contended that 
the  CBD and  farmers rights  do not  constitute  a dilution  of TRIPS. Inha affirmed,  in 
conclusion, that: 

“. . . developing countries like India cannot accept any further strengthening of the protection 
provided  to  lifeforms  at  present.  Developing  country  laws  in  this  area  are  still  being 
developed. It may take some more time for developing countries to acquire experience on 
the level ofprotection necessary and desirable as well as the exceptions and balances necessary 
for ethical, social and economic needs of their peoples. Perhaps it may be beneficial to wait 
till  such  experience  is  acquired  before  debating the  extent  of  protection  of  intellectual 
property rights in this area. In fact, it may be ideal to exclude patent protection for lifeforms 
from all national laws until such time. Until then, it may also not be advisable for the WTO 
community to assess the implementation of obligations in this area.”26 
Meanwhile,  the  Phdippines  presented  a  Proposal for  a  Declaration  on  Developing 
Countries to the General Council  of the WTO on 24 November 1999.27 The Proposal 
essentially called for an assessment of the impact of WTo-linked  obligations on non-ICs 

23  Ibid. 
24  Ibid. 
25  Ibid. 
26  Ibid. 
27  WTO, General Council, Preparationsfor the  1999 Minirtenal, Proposalfor a Declaration on Developing Countries, 

Communication &om the Philippines, WTO Doc. WT/GC/W/393,  25 November 1999. 

216 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

to  establish  whether  they  had  benefited  from  them  and  from  the  institution  of 
preferential  treatment  in  their  favour  (longer  transition  periods,  flexibility  in 
implementation or even exemption from obligations). 

India then presented its proposals for resolving IP issues in traditional knowledge 
and biodiversity.28 It referred to the difficulty of challenging, in foreign countries, patent 
applications on an invention based on biological material. It asserted that: 

“. . . the time, effort, and money involved in getting individual patents examined and revoked 
in foreign patent  offices is prohibitive. Hence, an internationally accepted solution to such 
bio-piracy is necessary.”29 
It further pointed out that only an international mechanism that harmonizes TRIPS 

with  the  CBD, recognizes the  rights  of  indigenous communities to  their  traditional 
knowledge, and introduces a mode of sharing of benefits from its exploitation would 
resolve the problem of “bio-piracy”. It argued that established forms of IP, essentially 
directed at indwidual property rights, do not protect indigenous knowledge, which is 
collective in  nature, accumulates over time and may  be in existence among different 
communities  simultaneously.  India  added  its  voice  to  the  need  for  documenting 
traditional knowledge, maintaining a digital library and the like-at 
least for defensive 
purposes-as  well as  extending help to traditional communities to realize the value of 
their resources.30 

Again,  India, Pakistan and  Sri Lanka, together with  other  non-ICs  outside Asia, 
submitted  a  paper31  pertaining  to  the  possible  extension  of  protection,  in  view  of 
negotiations under TRIPS Article 24.1, for geographical indications for products other 
than wines and spirits. They argued that there is  “no systematic or logical explanation 
for the distinction” in  Section 3, Part II  of TRIPS between  the  general protection for 
geographical indications as a whole (in Article 22) and the special protection extended 
to  wines  and  spirits  (in Article  23). They  asserted that  the  “distinction ignores that 
geographical indications for categories of goods other than wines and spirits are equally 
important for trade7’.32 Consequently, they contended that the issue of extension is “an 
integral part of the built-in  agenda” of T~1ps.33 

Subsequently, that same  group of nations, as well as new ones who joined them, 
sought to reinforce their proposal for extending protection for geographical indications 
to products  other than wines and spirits.34  They amplified their arguments about the 

28  WTO, Council  for  TRIPS, Profection  .f Biodiversity  and  Traditional  Knowledge--The 

Indian  Experience, 

Submission by India, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/198,  14 July 2000. 

29  Ibid. 
30  Ibid. 
31  WTO, Council for  TRIPS, Communication  from Bulgaria, The  Czech Republic, Egypt, Iceland, India, 
Kenya, Liechtenstein,  Pakistan, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland and Turkey, WTO Doc.  IP/C/W/204/Rev.  1, 
2 October 2000. 

32  Ibid. 
33  Ibid. 
34  WTD, Council for  TRIPS, Proposal  from Bulgaria,  Cuba, The  Czech  Republic, Egypt,  Iceland,  India, 
Jamaica,  Kenya,  Liechtenstein,  Mauritius,  Nigeria,  Pakistan,  Slovenia,  Sri  Lanka,  Switzerland,  Turkey  and 
Venezuela, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/247/Rev.l,  17 May 2001. 

ASIAN  PERSPECTIVES  O N  IP ISSUES 

217 

insufficiency of the level of protection provided by TRIPS Article 22 and demonstrated 
the unjustified nature of providing two different levels of protection and the necessity 
of creating one uniform level of protection.35 

Along with  the same mix of nations and new members who joined  them,  India, 
Pakistan and Sri Lanka again reiterated their views,36 this time in response to a reaction 
to their proposals by a group of other nations.37 The latter had raised the implications of 
such an  extension in  terms  of potential  costs  to  WTO Members  and  the  effects  on 
consumers  and  on  trade.  The  group  of  countries  consisting of  India,  Pakistan  and 
Sri  Lanka,  among  others,  maintained  that  the  extension  would  not  necessitate 
establishing “any new mechanism or scheme of protection”,38 as the protection already 
available for wines and spirits could also serve the additional products. They argued that 
extending protection to other products under Article 23 has the advantage of removing 
the  need  to  prove  any  misleading  of  the  public  or  unfair  competition  as  currently 
required under  Article 22.  The benefit of this  would  be  to  expedite  the  process  of 
enforcement, as  “the authorities would simply have to  examine whether  the product 
actually origmates from the place indicated by  the geographical indication” instead of 
having  “to  establish  time-consuming  and  costly  legal  proof”  under  Article  22.39 
According to them, this would do away with the “uncertainty and lack of transparency” 
in  applying the  evidentiary  requirements  of Article  22.40  They  concluded  that  the 
extension would bring about “a reduction of the workload ofjudicial and administrative 
authorities” and ‘‘more than offset any costs that might be incurred by extension” .41 

With reference to the issue of costs to consumers because of the presumable “need 
to re-name  and re-label products as well as by  the disappearance of terms customarily 
used  to  identi%  products”,  they  argued  that  the  prohibition  of  the  false  use  of 
geographical indications only helps consumers to ascertain the true origin as well as the 
qualities  and  reputation  of  a  product.42  They  pointed  out  that  those  indications 
exempted in  Article 24  of TRIPS would  not  have to  be  re-labelled, and  the  market 
would remain open to them. Indeed, they equated the prohibition of the use of untrue 
geographical indications to the avoidance of free-riding on the reputation of others and 
the  preservation  of  the  true  geographical  indications  from  becoming  generic.43 
Furthermore, they insisted that the supposed negative implications on trade that such a 
change might bring about could just as well be ascribed to other forms of IP. 

New Zealand, Paraguay and the United States, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/289,  29 June 2001. 

35  Ibid. 
36  WTO, TRIPS Council, Communication from Bulgaria, Cuba, The Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, 
Iceland,  India,  Kenya,  The Kyrgyz  Republic,  Liechtenstein,  Moldova,  Nigeria,  Pakistan, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, 
Switzerland and Turkey, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/308,  17 September 2001. 
37  WTO,  Council  for  TRIPS, Communication  horn Argentina,  Australia,  Canada,  Chile,  Guatemala, 
38  WTO Doc. IP/C/W/308,  supra, footnote 36. 
39  Ibid. 
4”  Ibid. 
41  Ibid. 
42  Ibid. 
43  Ibid. 

218 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

In  the  area  of the  impact  of TRIPS on public  health,  medicines  and  the  like,  a 
representation  was  made  by  the  African  Group  and  certain  countries  from  South 
America, as well as India, Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Thailand.44 
They called for: 

“. . . a common understanding that  confirms  the right of governments to  ensure access  to 
medications  at  affordable  prices  and  to  make  use  of  the  provisions  in  the  Agreement 
whenever the scope or exercise of IPRs result in barriers to access to iiiedicines.”45 
They read Article 7 as clearly establishing that “the protection  and enforcement of 
intellectual  property  rights  do not  exist in  a  vacuum.  They are  supposed  to  benefit 
society as a  whole and do not aim at the mere protection  of private rights.”46 In their 
view,  TRIPS cannot  stand  in  the  way  of  implementing  health  policies  through 
technological innovation and transfer, among other things.47 

They also asserted the rights of Members  (pursuant to TRIPS Article 8.2) “to take 
measures  to prevent  the abuse  of intellectual  property  rights  by  right  holders  or the 
resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international 
transfer of technology”.48 They cited the examples of charging “excessively high prices” 
for drugs or not offering them in sufficient quantities, thus preventing  “adequate access 
to  medications  by  the  general  public”.49 They  also  referred  to  the  Members’  right, 
pursuant  to  TRIPS, to  deploy  exhaustion principles  as  well as  compulsory  licences to 
increase access to med1cines.50 

As  part  of  a  group  of  non-ICs,  Bangladesh,  India,  Indonesia,  Pakistan,  the 
Philippines,  Sri Lanka and Thailand submitted  a Draft  Declaration to the Council for 
TRIPS regarding the recognition of certain principles in the implementation of TRIPS in 
the  area  of  public  health  and  nutrition.  These  were  the  exhaustion  of  IP  rights, 
compulsory licensing, the right  to market  generic medicines  and similar products  and 
disclosure of patent information for such purpose.51 

Japan, on the other hand, explained its position52 more in support of upholding the 
status quo that the other industrial powers also seek to maintain  than  in revising it, as 
the Asian non-ICs  were calling for. Japan  thus maintained that the issue of permissible 
limits of patentability  as linked with  development  is  “only a small fraction” of several 

44  WTO, TRIPS Council, Submission by the African Group, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, the Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, India,  Indonesia, Jamaica,  Pakistan,  Paraguay, the  Philippines,  Peru,  S n  Lanka, 
Thailand and Venezuela, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/296,29  June 2001. 

45  Ibid. 
46  Ibid. 
47  Ibid. 
48  Ibid. 
49  Ibid. 
50  Ibid. 
51  WTO, General Council, Proposal by the African Group, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, the 
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Haiti, Honduras, India,  Indonesia, Jamaica, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, 
Peru, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Venezuela, WTO Doc. WT/GC/W/450,4  October 2001. 
52  WTO, Council for TRIPS, Review  .f the  Provisions  of Article  2 7 . 3 ( b ~ ] a p a n ’ z  View, Communication &om 

Japan, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/236,  11 December 2000. 

220 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

sake  of balanced benefits of holders of biologcal  resources and inventors/patentees”, 
payment issues should be resolved by the concerned parties alone.58 

Japan’s view of the call for protection of tracttional knowledge and farmers rights 
is not yet firm. Japan sought to leave it open for further ctscussion as to whether a new, 
sui generis system would be necessary to protect tradttional knowledge. It asserted that 
“~d]iscussion on tracttional knowledge should not preempt the establishment of new 
intellectual property  systems  for  the  protection  of  traditional  knowledge”.59 Japan 
nevertheless agreed  that  documentation of tradttional knowledge could serve patent 
examiners and avoid grants on prior art. 

Prior to the Doha Ministerial Conference, there were also discernible divergences 
in the views of those Members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations60 which 
are also Members of the WTO. At the various meetings of the Council for TRIPS, the 
Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand appeared to espouse the same positions as regards 
the nature and scope of the review O ~ T R I P S  Article 27(3), while Singapore was closer 
to the positions of the European Union  and the  United  States.61 The former group, 
though not often acting in unison, sought to extend the review to broader policy issues 
instead  of  confining  it  to  implementation,  as  Singapore  and  the  major  powers 
preferred. Thailand and Malaysia indeed sought to extend it to an explicit recognition 
of  the  right  of  States  to  control  or  use  genetic  resources,  farmers rights  and  the 
protection of plant varieties.62 

The  demand for  extension  of  rights  in  the  manner suggested by  Thailand  and 
Malaysia,  and  agreed  to  by  the  Philippines.  as  well  as  the  search  for  broader 
interpretation  of  TRIPS Article  27(3) in  light of its  impact  on  economic  and  social 
welfare, ctd not win the sympathy of Singapore, which warned against a lowering of IP 
standards. Instead, it proposed continuation of the status quo as a minimum. 

Overall, on the eve of the Doha  Ministerial Conference, Asian  nations had  put 
forward &verging views  and  proposals  relating to  the  implications of reviewing the 
scope  of  patents  under  TRIPS Article  27(3) and  the  extension  of  protection  to 
geographic indications other than those for wines and spirits. The range of views and 
the elements of disparity in their respective positions suggest that Asian nations were still 
divided at the fundamental level over whether they desired a revamp of the international 
IP system as a whole. India emerged during that period as the leader of the whole pack 
of Asian, if not all, non-ICs by pushing for a reform of the international IP system across 
a spectrum of issues.  Its views were more articulate and comprehensive in the area of 

58  Ibid. 
59  Ibid. 
6o  The  Association  of Southeast Asian  Nations  comprises  Brunei,  Carnbodaa, Indonesia,  Laos,  Malaysia, 

Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam. 

61  For a review of the contrasting positions, see Christoph Antons, Michael Blakeney and Christopher Heath 
(eds.), Intellecfual Property  Harmonisation  Within ASEAN and AfEc, Kluwer  Law  International, The Hague, 2004, 
pp. 139-158. 
62  Ibid. 

ASIAN  PERSPECTIVES O N  IP  ISSUES 

221 

biodvesity and protection  of traditional knowledge. It is  noticeable  that East  Asian 
nations  (China,  Taiwan,  South  Korea  and  Hong Kong)  were  remarkably silent  as 
regards the same issues. Singapore began to emerge as a champion of the status quo, very 
much in tune with Japan (and the United States), which expressed views diametrically 
opposed to those of Asian non-ICs. 

Nonetheless,  Asian  non-ICs  contributed  to  the  major  outcomes  of  the  Doha 
Ministerial Conference, namely the Declaration  on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, 
as well as the instruction given to the Council for TRIPS to examine "the relationship 
between  TRIPS and  the  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity,  the  protection  of 
traditional knowledge and  folklore, and  other  relevant new  developments raised by 
members pursuant to Article 7 1.1 ".63 

111.  ASIAN VIEWS  ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  ISSUES DURING THE POST-DOHA 

PERIOD 

trade 

At  the  conclusion of the  WTO Ministerial Conference  held  in Doha,  Qatar  in 
November 2001, the WTO was mandated to negotiate accords among the Members on 
further 
liberalization  (in  agriculture,  services  and  market  access)  and 
implementation  of previous agreements by  1 January 2005.  One of the  agreements 
pending implementation is  that establishing a  multilateral system of notification and 
registration of  geographical indications for  wines  and  spirits, vigorously pursued by 
European  nations  but  opposed  by  the  United  States  and  the  Cairns  Group 
(representing  agriculture-exporting  nations,  including  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  the 
Philippines and  Thailand  from  Asia).  The  Members  of  MERCOSUR (the  Southern 
Common  Market)-Argentina,  Brazil,  Paraguay  and  Uruguay-also 
threatened  to 
block any progress in the post-Doha negotiations if trade liberalization in agriculture 
was stalled by the European Union and other nations.64 The EU has indeed frozen any 
reforms in its Common Agricultural Policy until 2007.'j5 

In regard to TRIPS, the Doha Development Agenda66 did not single out any specific 
directions  for  change.  That  was  surprising, particularly in  view  of Asian  and  other 
non-ICs'  continued interest in some form of equitable intervention on their behalf. Still, 
Asian  non-ICs  did not  refrain  from legislating to  meet  their  outstanding obligations. 
Thus,  on  14 May 2002, India passed  an amendment to its  1970 Patent Law  allowing 
extension of the duration of process patents from seven years to twenty. In June 2002, 
the Philippines introduced a new plant varieties protection law. On 15 September 2002, 
China  introduced  new  regulations for  trademarks and  copyright which  significantly 
increased fines for infringement and allowed local government authorities to impose 

63  The Doha Ministerial Declaration, adopted on 20 November 2001, WTO Doc. WT/MIN(OI)/DEC/~, para. 19. 
64  Gustavo  Capdevila,  Trade: MERCOSUR Threatem  to  Block  W T O  Liberalisation  Talks, Inter  Press  Service, 

Geneva, 1 November 2002. 

65  Ibid. 
66  This is another name for the Ministerial Declaration of 20 November 2001, supra, footnote 63. 

222 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

them. The Philippines joined the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances 
and Phonograms Treaty on 4 October 2002; it also issued an administrative order for 
Customs by way of implementing the Intellectual Property Code. On 1 January 2003, 
Taiwan established an  “integrated enforcement task  force”. South Korea joined  the 
Trade Mark  Law  Treaty on 25  February 2003.  On 10 July  2003, Thailand put  into 
effect a trade secret law that incorporated data protection provisions. 

In contrast to the general and silent acquiescence of most Asian non-ICs to treaty 
obligations in  IP,  the  Indian stance highlighted the  kmd  of issues  that  underlie the 
continuing debate. Owing to  domestic opposition, the Indian government remained 
hesitant to introduce product patents for drugs pursuant to its obligations under TRIPS. 
Yet  the  Government expressed readiness to  table a  bill to  amend the Patent Law  in 
2002.67  The  Confederation of In&an Industry welcomed the  passage  of  the  Patents 
(Second Amendment) Bill 1999, hailing its capacity to “safeguard national security and 
protect varied interests of the nation inclulng public health”,68 though it pointed out 
that “the government may still need to clarify provisions in terms of compulsory licence 
norms and exclusive marketing rights”.@ 

Nonetheless, multinational pharmaceutical companies directed criticism against the 
Amendment. The Indian Drug Manufacturers Association, which openly opposed the 
demand for data exclusivity of multinational pharmaceuticals, retorted: “. . . to say that 
Indian law is weak or not TRIPS compliant is an insult of the Parliament which has gone 
through  it  very  carefully before  passing it.”7O  It  asserted  that  the  demand  was  “in 
violation of the spirit of Doha declaration, which reaffirmed the right of WTO Members 
to  use  all flexibility  to  meet  health  emergencies and  urgencies”.71 The  Association 
defended the Amendment as fully TRIPS-compliant and declared that to push for further 
changes was to go beyond the existing requirements and to inject TRIPS-P~US 
demands. 
It contended: “The phrase ‘data exclusivity’ does not figure in TRIPS, this is  a phrase 
which appears in US Food and Drug Administration regulations.”72 

During the Meeting of the Non-Ahgned Movement (NAM) in Kuala Lumpur, the 
Indian  Minister  for  Investment,  Information  Technology  and  Communications 
expressed strongly the need to have the non-ICs rally around their own interests. At the 
NAM Business Forum, he argued that Members “must pool their resources to remedy the 
imbalances in  the WTO, particularly in  ensuring their  developed counterparts do not 
&lute their commitments made at the WTO Doha Ministerial Conference in November 
2001”.73 He noted the lack of advances since the Doha Ministerial Conference in  the 

Indian  Chamber Hails Passing qflnsurance Amendment Bill, Asia Pulse, New Delhi, 16 May 2002. 

67  Indian  Cabinet Okays Amendment Bill on Product Patents, Asia Pulse, New Delhi, 28 February  2002 
69  Ibid. 
7”  Indian  Drug Manufncturers Criticize Multinationals,  Asia Pulse, New Delhi, 16 January 2003. 
7‘  Ibid. 
72  Ibid. 
73  Help Remedy Imbalances at  WTO, NAM Business Forum  Told, Malaysia General News, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia, 

23 February 2003. 

ASIAN  PERSPECTIVES ON 1P  ISSUES 

223 

implementation of the commitments of WTO Members. He cited the example of the 
protection erected by the major industrial nations for their pharmaceutical sector so as to 
block out competition from non-ICs.  He advised that “NAM should seriously consider 
establishng a research group to counter such inadequacies, which in the process  could 
insulate developing societies &om fly-by-night  advisers from the west, especially in the 
area of Intellectual Property Rights” and the international capital market.74 

I ‘ . .  

He called upon NAM countries to: 
. present  a unified and common stand especially in the WTO negotiations as  well as  in 
global economic issues to ensure a sense of fair play for all, especially developing countries 
which  have  all this  while been  subjected to unfair  trade and investment policies pushed 
through by developed countries”.75 

In the meantime, the Indian government came up with fresh views by proposing 
a  “development coalition” of bio-diversity-rich  countries to evolve an “internationally 
agreed instrument to recognize national-level  systems for the protection of tradtional 
knowledge” .76 

In contrast, China has become non-committal in its positions. This is dscemible in 
the language used by its officials. It refrains &om openly expressing anything of substance; 
it merely states generalities and platitudes about meeting the  “reasonable demands” of 
non-ICs and “new international rules” for all. For instance, a Vice-Minister  of Foreign 
Trade and Economic Co-operation and former Chma WTO chief negotiator suggested 
that  “the WTO should provide technical assistance to developing countries, help them 
understand the  procedures and  content  of rule-malung and enhance their capacity to 
participate in  the  new  round  of negotiations”.77 The call  for  technical assistance  and 
increased  awareness  is  a  far  cry  fkom  what  the  non-ICs  themselves  have  been 
demanding-i.e. 

a fundamental transformation of the status quo. 

As regards China’s role, the Vice-Minister iterated that: 
“China should work to make the World Trade Organization (WTO) a truly fair and efficient 
trade body  at  the  Doha  Round  of trade  negotiations ... The WTO should balance  the 
interests of developed countries and  those  of  developing countries in  laying down  new 
international trade policies.”78 
At  the  same  time,  he  reportedly  asserted  that  “the  Uruguay  Round  of  WTO 
negotiations,  presided  over  by  developed  countries,  passed  many  rules  that  are 
detrimental to  the  economic  development of developing countries”.79  The Chinese 
Minister of  Foreign  Trade  and  Economic  Co-operation,  Shi  Guangsheng,  similarly 
stated, after a meeting with his EU counterpart that the “talks agenda set at the Doha 

74  Ibid. 
75  Ibid. 
76  India Proposes Coalitionfor  Profection OfKnowledge, Asia Pulse, New Delhi, 5 April 2002 
77  Meng Yan, Callfor  WTO to Change, Business Daily Update, 24 May 2002. 
78  Ibid. 
79  Ibid. 

224 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

meeting should not  be  changed or weakened”,  adding that  the  “reasonable requests 
from developing countries needed to be considered”.s” It  is  not  clear what  China is 
proposing to do-to 
overthrow the status quo and replace it, or to continue to work on 
improving it  bit by  bit.  It seem that  the  Chinese  Ministers had  the  latter in mind. 
Moreover, while prophesying about a rosy future, they ignored the cumulative manner 
in which the laws have been introduced and reinforced to date and their inherent bias 
against non-Western countries in general and non-ICs in particular. 

The position of the United States did not change in any significant way after Doha. 
Except for the muted approach it assumed during the confrontations with the non-ICs 
aaicted with the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the persistent plea to make an exception for 
the  sufferers  and  roll  back  the  powers  of  patentees,  the  United  States  remained 
unapologetic. In the 2001 Annual Report and 2002 Trade Agenda of the U.S. Trade 
Representative, USTR Robert Zoellick stated that “America’s trade agenda needs to be 
aligned securely with  the  values  of our  society”.81 While  maintaining the  view  that 
TRIPS “contains flexibilities for developing nations to obtain access to critical medicines 
to help address public health emergencies, such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria”, 
he  asserted  that  the  use  of  such  flexibdities  “must  be  compatible with  the  crucial 
protection of intellectual property0.8* In other words, “back to square one”. Yet  the 
mounting pressure exerted on the United States and the European Union to allow non- 
ICs, regardless of whether  or not they have drugs manufacturing facilities, to produce 
or import drugs by  overriding the relevant patents without fear of sanctions or other 
measures achieved the expected outcome. 

A.  THE ISSUE OF BYPASSING PATENTS I N  NATIONAL EMERGENCY OR FOR PUBLIC 

HEALTH REASONS 

It  is  to  be  recalled  that  the  Doha  Ministerial had  agreed that  countries  could 
resort  to  compulsory  licences  for  domestic  use  of  patented  drugs.83  The  question 
remained whether  countries,  such as  India, which  exported  generic drugs or those 
without domestic manufacturing capacity could do the same. Moreover, non-ICs and 
non-governmental  organizations such as Oxfam, MCdecins Sans Fronti6res and Third 
World  Network  have  continued  their  campaign to  treat  trade  in  medicines under 
human  rights and values  rather  than  that  of the  market.  They  have  extended  their 
critique of the limitations of TRIPS to the negative impacts of other Agreements, such 

China, E U  to Boost Coordination in New Round ofTrade Talks, Xinhua News Agency, Beijing, 17 October 2002. 
S1  Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc., U.S. State Department, Zoellick  Reiterates Trade Negotialiny 

Authority  Push;  Cites Multilaferal, Regional,  Bilateral  Goals in 2002, 19 March 2002. 

82  Ibid. 
83  The Doha Ministerial Declaration, supra,  footnote 63, para  6., reads in part:  “We recognizc that  under 
WTO rules no country should be prevented from taking measures for the protection of human, animal or plant life 
or health, or of the environment at the levels it considers appropriate, subject to the requirement that they are not 
applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between  countries 
where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, and are otherwise in accordance 
with the provisions of the WTO Agreements.” 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES ON IP ISSUES 

225 

as  those  on Technical  Barriers to  Trade,  Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures,  and 
Trade  in  Services. They  feared  that  liberalization  of  services  trade  could  lead  to 
market-based provision of education, health and water, with devastating implications 
for most  of these. The European  Union,  the  United  States, the African  Group and 
other  non-ICs  had  presented  their  proposals to  the  Council for  TRIPS, which  was 
grappling with a formula to please all before the  end of 2002 as  it was  mandated to 
find by the Doha Declaration. 

Among the  non-ICs  that  presented  their  proposals for possible solutions to  the 
implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and 
Public Health84 were China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand. These 
countries  exhorted  the  Council  for  TRIPS to  “refrain  from  considering  narrow, 
burdensome, or ineffective solutions that would ultimately defeat the very purpose of 
the solution under Paragraph 6”.85  They cited cases where manufacturing facilities may 
not exist, the patent law does not protect drugs, or economies of scale may not be found 
as possible factors that the Council will have to ignore to arrive at a judicious solution. 
The persistent fear of the developed industrial nations  (such as  the United  States 
and Switzerland) with  multinational pharmaceutical companies was  that  cheap drugs 
dispatched to or produced in non-ICs  might eventually find their way back to other 
markets, including those in Europe and North America. Additional issues were the type 
of  medicines  that  would  be  placed  under  compulsory licence  and  whether  parallel 
imports could be allowed. The United  States had sought to limit the list to medicines 
for about fifteen diseases. 

Among the  Asian  non-ICs,  India  was,  as  usual, most  alert  about  the  issues.  Its 
pharmaceutical  companies  “expressed  apprehensions that  the  Government  of  India 
would  not  be  able  to  withstand  the  pressure  from  the  US  and  other  developed 
countries” to define the mode of implementation of the Doha Declaration on TRIPS and 
Public  Health.*6 The Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance  (IPA) pressed  the  Government 
“not to  accede to the US’ view”  of requiring a  licence from both  the importer  and 
exporter because it saw such a process “would be both time-consuming and costly, with 
both the exporter and the importer having to pay  royalty to the patentee”.87  The IPA 
also argued against the importer’s responsibility for trade diversion, while expressing the 
suspicion that  the leading pharmaceutical companies were undercutting its  members’ 
opportunities  to  export  medicines  to  non-IC  countries ravaged  by  AIDS and  other 
diseases by creating alliances with some of the latter.88 

84  Paragraph  6 of the Ministen’al  Declaration  on  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  Public  Health, Communications to  the 
Council for TRIPS from the  Permanent  Mission  of Brazil on  behalf of Bolivia,  Cuba, China, the  Dormnican 
Republic, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Peru, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Venezuela, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/355, 
24 June 2002. 

85  Ibid.,  at para.  14. 
86  “Government Must  not Bow to  US View on TRIPS”, WTO to R e v i w  Phama Policy for  Poor Nations (Say Major 

Phamaceutical  Companies of India), India Business Insight, 24 September 2002. 

87  Ibid. 
88  Ibid. 

226 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The Philippines took  centre stage  when it opposed EU proposals to tighten the 
procedures for compulsory licences under discussion even after the deadline to finalize 
such  proposals  by  the  end  of  2002  had  passed.  The  EU  proposal  required  the 
involvement of the World  Health Organization (WHO), as well as  making importing 
countries  take  measures  to  prevent  trade  diversion.89  The  European  Union  had 
proposed  a  list  of  twenty-two  diseases  for  which  non-ICs  could  issue  compulsory 
licences.  It also  proposed  that  poor  countries be  able  to  address  other  public  health 
problems they  face  as  long as  the  WHO determines whether  the  problem  is  serious 
enough to warrant such.90 The Philippines Trade and Industry Secretary objected to the 
EU proposal on the basis that it: 

“ ... detracts  from  the  flexibility granted by  the  TRIPS Declaration  allowing countries  to 
determine  on  their  own  what  constitute  public  health  problems,  without  need  of 
confirmation or advice by  any other country or international organization.”91 
O x f m  International declared support  for  the  position  taken  by  the  Trade  and 
Industry  Secretary  of  the  Philippines  “despite  the  pressure  you  are  undoubtedly 
under”.92 In return, the Secretary asked Oxfam to “help mitigate the pressure made to 
bear upon us by urging other developing countries to follow our lead in remaining firm 
on the foregoing ~ S S U ~ S ” . ~ ~  
He also  criticized the U.S. suggestion as seeking to restrict 
the “broad and comprehensive scope enunciated in paragraph 1 [ofthe Doha Ministerial 
Declaration] under the guise of a classificatory definition”.94 

Eventually, the United States declared a moratorium on its use  of WTO measures 
against  nations  that  might  resort  to  compulsory  licensing for  drugs.  The  European 
Union followed the United States in declaring to the same effect, “as a purely stop-gap, 
temporary  measure”.95  In  return,  other  nations  had  to  accept  the  notification 
requirements. 

The  zigzags  in  submissions  of  proposals,  the  contentious  views  among  the 
protagonists and the failure to meet the deadline for reaching agreement on medicines 
and patents bred anxiety among WTO officials.  Carlos Perez del Castillo, Chairman of 
the WTO General Council, thus stated that the problem had developed into “a  banner 
issue[,]  due to its humanitarian characteristics”, among non-ICs  and said that, if there 
were no progress, “I  doubt that the countries of Africa  and the rest of the developing 
world are going to accept compromises on other matters.”96 

21 January  2003.- 

Presse , 9 January 2003. 

8y  WTo-EU-Medicines-Expert; WHO Expert  Rejects  Listing  Diseases  in  W T O  Medicines  Talks, Agence  France- 
90  Developin2  Countries  Should  Have  Greater  Access  to  Drufs:  Philippines,  Agence  France-Presse,  Manila, 
91  Philippines Disagrees  With EU’s  WTO Drug Agreement  Proposal, Asia Pulse, Manila, 21 January 2003. 
92  Philippines Gets Supportfrom  Oxfam on Parallel Drug Imports, Asia Pulse, Manila, 6 February  2003. 
93  Ibid. 
94  Ibid. 
95  Ibid. 
96  Gustavo Capdevila,  Trade: Health  Problems  AfFict WTO or1  W a y  to  Cancnn,  Inter Press  Service,  Geneva, 

.. 

Switzerland, 11 July 2003. 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES O N  IP  ISSUES 

227 

The actions of the United States (in deference to its pharmaceuticals companies, 
who feared that allowing import of generic drugs by non-ICs  would lead India and 
Brazil to flood the market with their own cheap drugs) to block the commonly agreed 
16 December  2002  text  was  later  overcome  by  the  multinational  pharmaceutical 
companies’ own  fears  that  the  lack  of  agreement  might  open  them  up  to  further 
attacks  at  the  Cancun  Ministerial Conference.  The  drugs  industry  had  apparently 
informed  the  WTO of  “its  willingness to  resolve  the  matter  prior  to  the  Cancun 
Mini~terial”.~~ The  SARS (Severe Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome)  scare  in  Asia  also 
contributed to the view that limiting the compulsory licence right to certain type of 
diseases would be unworkable.98 

The deal struck on 30 August 2003 (known as  the “Perez Motta text”, after the 
former Chairman of the Council for TRIPS) was a compromise between the European 
Union and the United States, on the one hand, who agreed not to assert their IP rights 
against  generic drug manufacturing and import by  non-ICs  and other WTO Members 
and, on the other hand, those same non-ICs  and other WTO Members, who pledged 
not  to abuse the facility by  importing generic medicines for commercial or industrial 
purposes  or  to  divert  such  back  to  the  industrial  nations’  markets.  Twenty-three 
industrial countries99 also pledged not to resort to such a measure, while another group 
of developing countries100 declared that they would desist from such a measure except 
in a national emergency. 

The waiver introduced  in  favour of non-ICs  was  expected to become,  by July 
2004, an  amendment to TRIPS Article 31 (f), which otherwise restricts products made 
under  compulsory licence to  remain  “predominantly for  the  supply of the  domestic 
market”. Still, the waiver is not absolute. It has a number of preconditions and intricate 
procedures with which the eligible importing Member should comply. Moreover, the 
measure  can  be  deployed  ‘‘only  in  the  case  of  a  national  emergency  or  other 
circumstances  of  extreme  urgency  or  in  cases  of  public  non-commercial  use”.l01 
Clearly, the needs of a country to provide adequate health services and medicines do 
not form part of the grant. 

Neither  are  the  requirements and procedures any easier for  the  exporters. The 
issue  of  the  compulsory  licence  by  an  exporting  Member  is  subject  to  certain 
conditions:  volume  and  specific labelling  or  marking  of  the  licensed products  and 

97  Ibid. 
9* Ibid. 
99 These are Australia,  Austria,  Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, 
Ireland, Italy,Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
the United Kingdom and the United States of America. 

loo  Turkey, Slovenia, Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia,  Hungary, Slovakia, The  Czech Republic, Poland,  Malta, 
Cyprus, Israel, South Korea, Singapore, Hong Kong China, Mexico, Chinese Taipei, Kuwait, Macao China, Qatar 
and the United Arab Emirates. 
Io1  Implementation ofParagraph  6 ofthe  Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, Decision of the 
WTO  General Council of 30 August 2003, WTO  Doc. WT/L/540,  1 September 2003, para. 1. 

228 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

posting of information on the Internet before shipment. The exporting Member must 
also notifj the Council for TRIPS of the grant of the licence and provide information 
about  the  licensee.  Neither  is  the  grant  of  a  compulsory licence  free.  “Adequate 
remuneration” must be paid in the exporting Member. The waiver extends to regional 
blocs to which the eligible importing Member belongs, if the blocs “share the health 
problem in question”.”J2 

Clear winners in the saga were Indian drugs manufacturers. It was apparent that the 
tug-of-war  between  the  European Union  and  the  United  States, on  the  one  hand, 
which sought to block imports of cheap drugs by the non-ICs, allowing manufacturing 
only, and  the  rest  of  the  non-ICs,  who  had  no  manufacturing  capacity  and  would 
therefore  need  to  import  them  from  elsewhere,  on  the  other  hand,  would  end  in 
benefiting India and similar countries. Thus, “India’s pharma industry breathed a sigh of 
relief””J3 when  the  U.S.  proposals  were  rejected  during  the  final  hours  of  the 
negotiations  on  the  compulsory  licence  issue.  A  member  of  the  Organisation  of 
Pharmaceutical Producers of India declared 

“If the deal had  gone through, it would have imposed subtle, but very tricky conditions on 
poor generic drug manufacturing countries effectively tying us up in knots. Wc are relieved 
that some two dozen WTO members rejected the proposal.”104 
India saw  the benefit  of the  moratorium  on patents for  health  emergencies as  a 
windfall.105  Indian  manufacturers  of  generic  drugs  were  hoping  to  cash  in  on  the 
allowances extended to non-ICs to import cheap drugs not only for HIV/AIDS but also 
other diseases such as tuberculosis and malaria. 

B. 

ISSUES OF S A F E G U A R D I N G  A N D  EXPLOITING 
KNOWLEDGE 

INDIGENOUS OR TRADITIONAL 

Many nations had presented their views at various times to address the problem of 
safeguardmg and exploiting indigenous or traditional knowledge as well as the creation 
of consistency between TRIPS and the CBD. Essentially, the submissions called for the 
amendment of TRIPS to allow WTO Members to demand from an applicant for a patent 
on biological materials or traditional knowledge the disclosure of the source and country 
of origin of the same and the provision of evidence of prior informed consent as well as 
of  fair  and  equitable  benefit-sharing  (as  required  under  the  CBD). The  attempt 
culminated in the recognition given by the Doha Ministerial Declaration106 to the need 
to conduct negotiations to resolve the matter. 

Ibid., para. 6. 

’“2 

available at: www.factiva.com. 

lo3  India’s Phama Industry Breathes Sigh ofReliefas WTO Drug5 Pact Collapses, Agence France-Presse, 29 August 2003; 
‘04  O x f m  Urges Africa  to  Unite Ahead  of  WTO Meeting, Agence France-Presse, Nairobi, 29 August 2003. 
105  U S  Windfall Awaits  Indian  Pharma  Companies  (Expected  to  Benefitfrom  Speciic  Steps  to  be  Taken by  US to 

Liberalire  Sales 4 Generic Drugs), India Business Insight, 31 August 2003. 

Adopted on 14 November 2001. 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES  ON IP ISSUES 

229 

A group including China,  India, Palustan, and Thailand from Asia  thus made  a 
submission to the Council for TRIPS in June 2002.107 It argued that TRIPS needed to be 
modified to make it consistent with the objectives of the CBD. In particular, it sought 
to  include  provisions  in  TRIPS outlawing  biopiracy  and  requiring  prior  informed 
consent from the  owners of the biological resources as  preconditions for grants of IP 
rights, as well as mechanisms of enforcing claims for fair and equitable sharing ofbenefits 
by source countries. 

The  group  of  nations  contended  that  the  establishment  of  “an  internationally 
accepted solution” would constitute a saving of valuable resources by avoiding expensive 
patent revocation proceedings in diverse jurisdictions. The group viewed that approach 
to be more beneficial to non-ICs because they “do not have the resources to follow each 
and every patent issued outside their territories on the use of their resources”.10* It also 
called upon  going beyond the  “defensive protection for tradltional communities h-om 
misappropriation  of  their  knowledge”  to  instituting  “an  international  framework” 
capable of achieving those objectives “at the national and regional levels”.109 

Another group, comprising Latin American nations along with India and Thadand, 
submitted  its  proposals  to  the  Council  for  TRIPS, which  circulated the  same  at  its 
meeting of 4-5  June 2003.110  The submission sought to  achieve similar objectives of 
consistency between TRIPS and the CBD by amending the former. Moreover, the group 
contended that the disclosure of the source and the country of origin as well as provision 
of evidence of consent and benefit would help prevent “biopiracy and misappropriation 
and . . . the issue of ‘bad patents’.”l” It noted that, in the absence of such an amendment, 
legal recourse on an international level would remain: 

“. . . complicated and  expensive, and may  not be  economically feasible for many aggrieved 
countries . . . Placing the onus on a patent applicant to disclose the basis of its claims is a step 
that  can  pre-empt  any  misuse  of  patent  laws  and  thereby  prevent  misappropriation  of 
knowledge and resources.”112 
The  submission  then  addressed  arguments  that  such  requirements  amount  to 
violation of the principle of non-discrimination between fields of technology or impose 
unnecessary burden on applicants.1*3 It contended that the use  of different procedures 
dependent  on  the  “field  of  technology”  is  the  norm  and,  hence,  the  argument  is 
unsupportable. Secondly, it countered that provision of information or evidence by the 

WTO,  Council for TRIPS, The Relationship  between  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  the  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity  and  the  Protection  of  Traditional  Knowledge,  Communication  &om Brazil,  on  behalf  of  China,  Cuba, 
the  Dominican  Republic,  Ecuador,  India,  Pakistan,  Peru,  Thailand,  Venezuela,  Zambia  and  Zimbabwe, 
WTO Doc. IP/C/W/356,24  June 2002. 

WTO, Council for TRIPS, The Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convmtiun on Biological Diversify 
and  the  Protection of Traditional Knowledge, Submission by  India  on behalf of Bolivia,  Brazil, Cuba,  the Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, India, Peru, Thailand and Venezuela, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/403,24 June 2003. 

108  Ibid. 
10’)  Ibid. 

111  Ibid. 
112  Ibid. 

WTO, Council for TRIPS, Communication from the United States, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/257,13 June 2001. 

230 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

patent  applicant  makes  sense  because  such information is  readily  available with  that 
applicant.  It  then  pointed  to  the  limitation  of  using  only  available  databases  for 
determination of rights, as not  all information would  possibly  be  deposited in them. 
Finally, it rejected the contractual route or the resort to purely national measures, which 
were suggested by  some (rapan, amongst others) to be sufficient to protect resources, 
although it admitted that some have already used both, but more as additional means. It 
therefore pointed to the only solution being to amend TRIPS so that it can be applied in 
a harmonious way with CBD and both complement each other. 
c.  GEOGRAPHICAL INDiCATfONS 

The negotiation, as envisaged in Paragraph 18 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, 
for extension of the protection available through TRIPS to wines and spirits (and largely 
confined to a few European and other nations) to other countries and products has not 
been  easy.  For  one  thing,  a  group  of  countries including  the  United  States114  has 
opposed the proposal by the European Union and other countriesl15 to recognize other 
geographic indications such as Darjeeling tea, Indian saris, Turkish carpets and jasmine 
rice. The argument against  extension has focused on costs to WTO Members if such a 
change  were  effected.  Interestingly,  Asian  countries  have  not  adopted  a  uniform 
position.  Thus,  the  Philippines  and  Taiwan  have joined  the  United  States,  while 
Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand supported the EW proposals. 

Iv.  ASIAN NATIONS. AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AT THE C A N C O N  MINISTERIAL 

CONFERENCE 

In the run up  to the Canchn Ministerial 10-14  September 2003, many non-ICs 
expressed their positions chiefly in terms of the removal of subsidies for agriculture and 
other  barriers  to  trade.  Only  a  minority  among  them  seemed  to  think  that  TRIPS 
deserved to continue to be scrutinized or that the negotiations at Canc6n should include 
this. Thus, Indonesia welcomed the agreement on compulsory licensing for health but 
sought to go beyond issues of market access and agriculture. It urged that: 

I ‘ .  . . a higher level of protection should also be given to other products which are now only 
given to wine  and spirits under  geographical indication. We wish that  this protection be 
extended to traditional knowledge such as batik Solo, jarnu, Toraja coffee, basmati rice, and 
many others.”l*6 

114 Sce communication from Australia, Canada, Guatemala, New Zealand, Paraguay, the Philippines and the 
United States (WTO Doc. IP/C/W/360),  a subsequent communication from Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile, 
Chinese Taipei, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, New Zealand,  Paraguay, the Philippines and 
the  United  States  (WTO Doc.  IP/C/W/386)  and  another  &om Argentina,  Australia, Canada, Chile,  Chinese 
Taipei, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, New Zealand, Panama 
and the United States (WTO Doc. IP/C/W/395). 

115  See the communication &om Bulgaria, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the European Communities 
and  their  Member States, Georgia,  Hungary,  Iceland,  India, Kenya, Liechtenstein,  Malta,  Mauritius,  Pakistan, 
Romania, Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand and Turkey (WTO Doc. IP/C/W/353). 
1’6  Ministerial, Fifth  Session, Cancdn, Mexico,  10-14  September 2003,  Siatemenf  by  H.E. Mrs  Rini  M.S. 

Soewandi, Minister oflndustry and  Trade ofIndonesia, WTO Doc. WT/MIN(O~)/ST/~, 10 September 2003. 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES O N  IP  ISSUES 

23 1 

The Philippines was unconcerned whether the “new round of talks at the World 
Trade Organization” convened or not.117 The Philippines Trade and Industry Secretary, 
Manuel A. Roxas II, stated plainly, “We will not be unhappy if there was no new WTO 
round  at  all”, apparently in  line  with  “President Gloria  Macapagal Arroyo’s policy 
change  to  go  slow  on  trade  commitments”.118 The  Philippines Trade and  Industry 
Secretary remained steadfast in his position of ensuring the country’s sovereign right to 
determine its public health needs. He stated “Our country should be allowed to avail 
of  the  agreement’s foreseen benefits, including our  objective of lowering prices  of 
essential medicines for  the  p00r.”119  This view was  echoed by  various  civil society 
groups such as the “Stop the New Round! Coahtion”, which brought together many 
smaller organizations that “warned that further liberalizing trade without any safety nets 
would only leave local industries in peril”. 120 

In contrast, the Thai Prime Minister manifested the common illusion that the WTO 
was meant to benefit both developed and developing countries equally. He stated this 
optimism in his visit to the Philippines by expressing his hope that the meeting “be more 
balanced between developed and developing countries”.l’l  He said the “ultimate goal” 
of the Canc6n talks should be  “how the developing world can develop under W T O ” .  
He also called on developed countries to open their markets hrther to poorer countries, 
saying this would help both sides.122 

Surprisingly, Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee declared at an India-AsEAN 
trade meeting that  “the  contentious issue  of TRIPS ... and public health”  had  been 
resolved.123 Malaysia  saw  the  objective of the  Fifth  WTO Ministerial Conference at 
C a n c h  in terms of ensuring “greater market access for its products and for an equitable 
multilateral trading system to  evolve”.124 Accorhng  to  Rafidah Aziz, the  Malaysian 
Minister of International Trade and Industry, the push for liberalization of the services 
sector by the European Union and the United States, among others, must be tempered 
by  “due regard for the domestic needs, situation and environment” of non-ICs  as  the 
latter “do not have the capacity to open up while others do not even have a services 
sector to speak 0f”.125 

In the speeches that the Asian countries’ representatives made at the opening of the 
Canc6n Ministerial Conference, they iterated &verse positions. Thus, a Thai Minister 

Iris  Cecilia  C. Gonzales, R P  Says  no  New  WTO Round  not  a  Cause  of  Great  Concern,  Business World 

~ 

(Philippines), 9 April 2003. 

Countries in  Wro, Global News Wire, 9 September 2003. 

IlR  Ibid. 
119  Cheaper Dnrgs  Get WTO Nod, Manila Standard, 8 October 2003. 
‘20  Ibid. 
lZ1  Iris Cecilia C. Gonzales and Karen L. Lema, Philippines: Thai PM Sees  “Little” Hope of Concessionsfor Poor 
122  Ibid. 
123  Biman Mukheji,  Zndian  PM  Fires  Potshot  at  Rich  Natiom ahead  of W T O  Summit,  Agence  France-Presse, 
124  M s i a  to  Seek  Mom  Market  Access at  Cancun  WTO Meefing Next  Week, Malaysia Economic News, Kuala 
125  Hardev Kaur, Ensuring Fair Play at Cancun, New Straits Times-Management Times, 8 September 2003. 

New Delhi, 4 September 2003. 

Lurnpur, 5 September 2003. 

232 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

pointed to the disparity among the WTO Members, the huge reliance of non-ICs  on 
agriculture and, therefore, the need to involve everyone in the negotiations rather than 
allowing “only some members” to dictate them  “while others are left on the sideline 
and forced to accept the outcome”.126 

The Singaporean position  was  to  try  to  speed  up  negotiations  lest  “those  who 
oppose liberalization and prefer protection”  in the  domestic politics of every country 
benefited  from  the  failure.127  The  Singaporean  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry 
projected a future where danger lurked for everyone if progress towards further trade 
liberalization was not achieved. In particular, he contended that nations might otherwise 
work on “alternative arrangements”, such as economic blocs that parcel out the world 
trading system.128 

As regards the topical agenda of the Conference, namely elimination of subsidies in 
agriculture, the Philippines argued for the provision of special and differential treatment 
for  non-ICs  in view  of their  requirement  of  “pursuing rural development and food 
secunty”.l29 The delegation of Papua New Guinea stated identical views on removal of 
subsidies in agri~ulture.~30 Myanmar added that: 

“. . . harmful practices such as economic coercive measures, trade sanctions, linkage to trade 
preferences,  development  aids  or  debt  relief  initiatives  are  being  used  by  some  major 
developed countries are contrary to  the  multilateral trade  rules that negatively affect  the 
socio-economic  lives  of  the  people  and  also  slow  down the  development  process.  We 
strongly believe that developing countries have the right to choose the path of development 
in accordance with their national priorities and objectives.”*3* 
India provided an extended argument: 
“Given  the  differences in  levels  of  development  and  the  ability  of  countries  to  assume 
obligations, it is imperative to ensure that equal rules do not apply to unequal players. With 
very few exceptions, today’s developed countries in the past  practised and benefited from 
the same protection they now seek to deny to developing countries. Anyone can dismantle 
all protection after growing wealthier and powerful. The multilateral trading system has  to 
acknowledge  that  developing  countries  cannot  afford  to  travel  at  the  same  speed  as 
developed  countries  to  achieve  gains.  Therefore,  obligations to  be  undertaken  by  the 
developing countries should not  arise out of coercion. Rather, they should have  a feeling 
that  these  obligations are  in  their  interest and  that  they  are  in  a  position  to  accept and 
implement them.”’3* 

Bodharamik, Minister of  Commerce [of  Thailand], WTO Doc. W T / M I N ( ~ ~ ) / S T / ~ ~ ,  

l z h   Ministerial,  Fifth  Session,  Canchn,  Mexico,  1G14  September  2003,  Statement  by  H.E.  Dr  Adisai 
Iz7  Ministerial, Fifth  Session, Canchn, Mexico,  10-14 September  2003, Statemenf  by  H.E. Mr  George Yeo, 

10 September 2003. 

Ministerfor Trade and  Industry of Singapore, WTO Doc. WT/MrN(03)/ST/1, 10 September 2003. 

128  Ibid. 
Iz9  Ministerial, Fifth Session, Canchn, Mexico,  1G14 September 2003, Statement by  the  Honourable Manuel 

’3”  Ministerial,  Fifth  Session,  Canchn,  Mexico,  1G14  September  2003,  Statement  by 

Roxas, Secretary of Trade and  Industry /ofthe Philippines], WTO Doc. WT/M”(03)/ST/63,  10 September 2003. 
the  Honourable 
Allan  Savenat  Mesak  Marat,  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister for  Trade  and  Industry  [of  Papua  New Guinea], 
WTO Doc. wT/M1~(03)/ST/72/Rev.l, 14 September 2003. 
13’  Ministerial, Fifth  Session, Canchn, Mexico,  1G14 September 2003, Statement by  H.E. Brigadier General 

Pyi Sone, Ministerfor Commerce ofMyanmar, WTO Doc. WT/MIN(03)/ST/105,  12 September 2003. 

‘3*  Ministerial, Fifth  Session,  Canchn, Mexico,  1G14 September  2003,  Statement by  H.E. Mr Awn Jaitley, 
10 September 2003. 

Minister $Commerce  and Industry and Law andJustice [ofIndia], WTO Doc. WT/MIN(O~)/ST/~~, 

ASIAN PERSPECTIVES  O N  IP ISSUES 

233 

The G-20 group of n ~ n - I C s , l ~ ~  which started apparently informally in Geneva in 
the course of preparations for the Canc6n Ministerial Conference, has started to make 
its mark. It tabled a framework proposal highlighting the group’s concerns and making 
agriculture the central issue for the WTO Canc6n Ministerial Conference. Its emergence 
or activities have not, however, elicited favourable response from the European Union 
and the United States. 

According to one commentator: 
‘‘Brazil  and  other  G-22  countries  could  transform  the  WTO from  a  vehicle  aimed  at 
negotiating trade disputes into  a  forum in which  a politically energised South would  be 
launching attacks against the North, and especially on the United StateP.134 
Predictably, the  United  States has  started  “to  co-opt  some  of the  developing 
economies in Latin America, Asia  and Africa, by  offering them separate trade deals 
with the US”.135 In the meantime, the G-20  Group has been attempting to work out 
a post-Canc6n  agenda. 

In  the  aftermath  of  the  failure  of  the  Canc6n  Ministerial,  Rafidah  Aziz,  the 
Malaysian  Minister of  International Trade  and  Industry,  commented  that  while  the 
industrial  powers  were  “reluctant  to  undertake  reforms  in  agriculture”,  they  are 
“seehng to turn WTO into an all-purpose  supranational organisation by  introducing 
global  rules  on  new  issues  like  investment,  competition  policy,  government 
procurement and trade facilitation”.136 She argued that such moves would trample on: 
“. . . the sovereign rights of governments to determine domestic policies to achieve particular 
development  goals.  No  responsible  government  can  be  expected  to  undertake  such 
commitments that can deny its people the legitimate rights to exercise policy options in the 
pursuit of development, particularly when these same policy options had been exercised by 
the proponents of the  ‘new issues’ at the earlier stages of their development. The rush to 
negotiate  multilateral  rules  and  disciplines in  these  areas,  without  clear  and  thorough 
understanding of the  ramifications and manifestations, can  impinge upon  and undermine 
those sovereign rights.”*37 
One must note, nevertheless, that the Minister did not view the concessions already 
given under TRIPS as forming part of the same problems the non-ICs continue to face. 
In any event, it is surprising that almost all of the Asian  nations were prepared to 
shelve IP issues altogether. Even when some acerbic arguments were made against  the 
international trade regime and the domineering positions of the major industrial powers, 
they were confined to the liberalization of the services sector and agricultural subsidy 

‘33  It comprises of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, C u e ,  China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, India, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, the  Philippines, South Atiica, Thdand and Venezuela. 
Note that the numbers have not been constant. 

Leon Hadar, World Trade-Back 

to the North v5 South Split? The Business Times (Singapore), 5 November 2003. 
135  Ibid. 
136  Datuk  Sen  Rafidah  Aziz,  Cancun  Conference:  The  Malaysian  Perspective,  Business  Times  (Malaysia), 
197  Ibid. 

3 November 2003, at 2. 

234 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

issues and not  extended to the international trading system as a whole or to TRIPS in 
particular. The fact that calls for special preferences have been made in the context of 
agriculture without  any  references to  other  industries  or  fields  of activities, such  as 
innovative work, research and development, and the like, suggests either morbid fear of 
retaliatory measures or utter ignorance of the links that subsist among all of them. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Up until 1995, the only enthusiastic champions of IP in Asia were Japan and British 
Hong Kong. By 2000, almost all Asian non-ICs had updated their IP laws to make them 
TRIPS-compliant  as expected under that Agreement. No sooner had they done so than 
the  so-called  WIPO treaties  were  pushed  through  by  the  major  industrial  nations. 
Predictably, Asian non-ICs had to imitate and transplant the contents of those treaties.138 
As  the  discussion  in  this  article  has  shown,  Asian  non-ICs  take  positions  on 
developments  in  IP  in  a  largely  reactive  manner.  Thus,  before  the  Doha  WTO 
Ministerial Conference  recognized the  urgency of the  need  of non-ICs  for cheaper 
drugs  and  affirmed  their  right  to  resort  to  extraordinary  measures,  none  of  them 
embarked on such a measure. (Thailand had asserted its right at some stage, in response 
to  popular  demands,  but  caved  in  to  U.S.  criticism  and  latent  fear  of  retaliation.) 
Neither  during  the  course of the  debate before  Doha  nor  afterwards did  they  ever 
identify what needs to be changed in the patent system. Clearly, after the advances that 
the industrial powers achieved through TRIPS in 1994, none of them would accept any 
retreats, and Asian non-ICs  could not muster the arguments, leave alone the strength, 
to achieve that. 

Indeed, during the period under consideration, Asian non-ICs  seem to have been 
taken in by the perception that the more pressing need for cheaper medicines had been 
addressed  fully through  the Doha  Declaration. Although anecdotal evidence suggests 
that all non-ICs  ignore or shelve IP laws that are on the statute books if they do not 
serve their purposes, more empirical study is required to account for the lack of serious 
arguments  for  the  revision  of  TRIPS, as  these  countries  seem  to  desire  in  their 
pronouncements vis-2-vis various issues. 

It is  not  coincidental, therefore, that  the  attitudes and policies of Asian  non-ICs 
towards the further expansion of IP across the world is  still incipient. Any  attempt to 
assess  future  prospects  in  that  direction  and  the  likelihood,  or  otherwise,  of  the 
emergence of a common position among them is a moot point.  If Asian  non-ICs  have 
managed at all to throw up issues and standpoints, these have remained limited to such 
disjointed aspects as biodversity,  compulsory licensing and extension of protection for 
geographic indications to cultural or other  artefacts in Asia.  Even then,  one notes the 

138  The  manner  in  which  they  reacted  to  them  and  their  habitual  acquiescence  has  been  reviewed  m 

Endeshaw, supra, footnote 9. 

ASIAN  PERSPECTIVES ON IP  ISSUES 

235 

tendency  towards inward-loolung  measures,  such  as  asserting indgenous  cultural  or 
other values, as opposed to, for instance, high technology products that they continue 
to acquire from abroad. 

The  obvious  lack  of  a  unified  perspective  across  Asian  States  prevents  the 
emergence  of articulate positions  on  major  IP  issues  that  could  command  broader 
appeal among governments, civil society, professional groups and consumers. One has 
only to see the virtual walkover of the U.S. Trade Representative in negotiations with 
Asian  (and other) non-ICs  on free trade agreements (FTAS) to understand the paucity 
of a policy-based  grasp  of the  implications of overarching IP  to Asian  non-ICs  and 
beyond. That the latter are being dragged into such FTAS one by one-regardless  of the 
common  knowledge  that  they  cannot  possibly  be  ready  for  TRIPS-P~US 
provisions 
while their IP laws largely remain just  on the statute books and, hence, not yet fully 
enforced-underlines  both the futility of the exercise on the part of the United States 
and the state of despondency among the target nations. 


