On Parallel Importation, TRIPS and European 

Court of Justice Decisions 

Domenico SINDICO* 

I.  THE ISSUES 

Although  it  is  not  easy  to  say  somethmg new  about  the  problem  of  parallel 
importation  within  the  European  Union  (EU)-or  rather,  within  the  European 
Economic Area (EM)-the 
renewed interest in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) negotiations and the launchmg of the Doha Round 
as well  as  a  recent  decision  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  (EcJ)  deserve  some 
comments, since they appear to indicate some of the difficulties-both 
conceptual and 
political-involved 
in  maintaining  the  current  interpretation of  the  principle  of  the 
exhaustion of rights, as applied by European courts with reference to intellectual property 
rights (IPRS). 

In order to fully appreciate these problems it is important to briefly summarize the 
application of the principle of the exhaustion of rights within the EU, emphasizing both 
the continuity and the evolution of the interpretation and the relatively recent change 
in the original position of the ECJ concerning the freedom of Member countries to 
decide about the territorial extension of the application of this principle. 

The  key  decisions on  “exhaustion of  rights”  and  on  “common origin”,  which 

determine the fieedom of circulation of goods protected by IPRs within the EU-namely, 
HAG r,i  HAG 112 and  Sired-did  not  directly deal with the problem of whether the 
exhaustion of rights applied only to the territory of the EU (intra-Union or regional 
exhaustion) or was to be considered worldwide (international exhaustion). However, since 
the mid-l96Os, the ECJ has considered intra-Union, or regional, exhaustion as a minimum 
standard which the Member States were obliged to apply, although this principle did not 
necessarily imply that national courts, which were &ee to decide according to national 
doctrine, could not apply a more liberal approach recognising international exhaustion. 

If we  consider the  ontological reasons on which these principles (exhaustion of 
rights and common origins) are founded, we must adtmt that international exhaustion 

* Rossotto & Associates, Turin, Italy. 
The author may be contacted at: c(d.sindico@rossono.ib~. 
ECJ, Case  192/73,  Van  Z u y h ~  Fdm v. HAG, 1974, ECR 731. 
ECJ, CaSe  10/89, CNL-sUCal V. HAG,  1990, ECR 1-3711. 
ECJ, Case 40/70,  Sirem v. EDA, 1971, ECR 69. 

506 

THE  

is  very  convincing, while  national  or  regonal  exhaustion appears  to  have  a  more 
commercial or political goal behind it. In fact, once a good which includes any IPR is 
legitimately sold anywhere in the world, the IPR owner obtains its reward for the use of 
its IPR, and there is no reason why the good should not circulate fieely everywhere. This 
has  recently  also  been  reaffirmed within  other  integration processes,  namely  in  the 
Andean Community, where Decision No. 486/2000 reads as follows: 

“A trade-mark  registration shall not confer the right to prevent  a third party &om carrying 
out acts of  commerce with respect to a product protected by  such registration, after the 
product has been introduced into commerce in any country by the proprietor or by another 
person, under  the  consent of the proprietor or economically related to him, in particular 
when the products and the containers or crates that were in direct contact with them would 
have suffered no modification, alteration or deterioration.”4 
There  are,  of  course,  other  reasons  for  limiting  the  fiee  circulation of  goods; 
however, they are not  strictly legal but  mostly commercial and/or  political, and they 
pertain to the different price structure of the different countries where the  goods are 
sold  and/or  to  the  commercial  policy  of  local  governments and  to  their  decision 
concerning whether or not to protect local industries and local markets. 

The contradictions between a fiee-trade  approach to IPR protection  (which, we 
should recall, is  itself dificult  to make  compatible with  free trade, since it  creates a 
monopoly, whch is temporary in the case of patents, or potentially perpetual in the case 
of trade marks5) and the reahty of developing countries were made extremely clear in 
the  World  Trade  Organization meeting  in  Doha  which  launched  the  new  General 
Agreement  on  Tarif&  and  Trade  (GATT)-TRIPS negotiation  Round.  These 
contradictions were  fuelled by  the  issue  of availability and  prices,  in  less-developed 
countries, of essential medicines for major diseases, such as  AIDS or malaria, and the 
claim (of the pharmaceutical industry) that low prices or f?ee  medicines could result in 
the unavailability of funds for research and, consequently, in the mid-  and long-term, 
the unavailability of new and more efficient drugs. 

This  problem  was,  of  course,  enhanced  by 

the  recent  decision  of  the 
pharmaceutical industry to  withdraw  a  court  case  in  South  Africa,  where  the  local 
government had disregarded IPRS in order to make the drugs that were necessary for the 
treatment of AIDS available to a large part of the population. 

The issue of the territorial extension of the exhaustion of IPRS following the first 
sale is strictly related to the same kind  of problems, since it is  easy  to understand the 
potential consequences of international exhaustion in the case of goods sold at symbolic, 

Quoted &om Natalia Tob&n, Parallel importation or Exhaustion of  Trademark Rights in the Andean Community, 

Les Nouvelles, Vol. XXXVII,  No. 1, March 2002, page 42. 
5  This Merence is justified by  the fact that  patent protection creates a monopoly on a spec&  commodq 
while  a  trade  mark creates  a monopoly only  on the  name  under which the  commodity is sold, thus  the  same 
commodity may be fieely sold under different trade marks. 

PARALLEL  IMPORTS,  TRIPS AND ECJ DECISIONS 

507 

or very low, prices in some countries, if they could then freely circulate in the rest  of 
the world. 

These principles were  clearly  expressed in the EU  official  position paper  at the 

WTO meeting in Doha6 in the following passage: 

“. . . The EU believes that a global, tiered pricing system to which the world’s pharmaceutical 
industry is committed, is the most effective way to ensure a sustainable supply of affordable 
medicines to the  poorest.  Tiered pricing  allows  a new  product  to  gain  its  normal  high 
introductory price in some markets while providing marginal, more affordable prices to the 
less wealthy. This flexibility allows the pricing system to adapt to the heterogeneity within 
LDCS peast-developed  countries] and change in parallel to these countries’ development 
providing  a  flexibility superior to  the  suggested alternative of abolishing all  royalties on 
medicines paid by LDCS. The scheme has the potential of providing global affordability to 
needed  medicines without  damaging the  underlying benefits  of a  patent  system, as  the 
royalties needed to finance research and development are largely  collected in markets of 
developed  countries.  What  makes  tiered  prices  feasible  for  pharmaceuticals  are  the 
economies of scale that can be exploited fiom global provision enabling production at lower 
costs than s d e r  suppliers. Differential pricing has already been achieved for commodities 
such  as vaccines,  contraceptives and  condoms  through  a  combination  of  high-volume 
purchasing,  reliable  and  adequate financing,  corporate  responsibility and  market  forces 
giving hope to the challenge of expanding this to life-saving medicine. Critical to the success 
of tiered pricing  would  be  methods of preventing  lower priced  drugs from jinding  their way into  rich 
countries . . .” (emphasis added). 
T h e   relevance  of  the  question  of  patents  in  the  pharmaceutical  field  and  the 
position  of  the  less-developed  countries  has  become  so  important  that  it  has  been 
expressly addressed by the W T O ~  
in terms that are unusual for this Organization, as can 
be understood from the following quotes: 

“We agree that the TRIPS Agreement does not and should not prevent Members fiom taking 
measures to protect public health. Accordingly, while reiterating our commitment to the 
TRIPS Agreement, we affirm that the Agreement can and should be interpreted in a manner 
supportive of WT0 Members’ right to protect public health and, in particular, to promote 
access to medicines for all.”8 
And, more to the point: 
“. . . We also agree that the least-developed country Members will not be obliged, with respect 
to pharmaceutical products, to implement or apply Sections 5 and 7 of Part 11 of the TRIPS 
Agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these Sections until 1 January 2016 . . .”9 
It is this fimdamental point of view that gives us insight into the position held on 

this matter within the EU. 

~ 

Group D Globalization, pages 3-4. 

Position ofthe European Union on Controversial Topicsfor the World Trade Organization Meeting in Doha, Qatat- 
’ World Trade Organization, Doha Declaration, Declaration on the  TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, adopted 
8  Ibid., paragraph 4. 
9  Ibid., paragraph 7. 

on 14 November 2001, %“I?/MIN(OI)/DEC/2,20 November 2001. WTO, Geneva. 

508 

THE JOURNAL OF  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

11.  KEY ECJ DECISIONS 

The main decision on the common-origin  principle, the ECJ BAG r, when read 
rr and Sirena, constitutes the basis of this principle in the EU. The 
together with I t 4 ~  
decisions  also help  us  to  trace  the  underlying  continuity and  the  evolution of  the 
doctrine of exhaustion of rights within the EU, beginning with the definition of the 
basic principle and moving on to the narrowing and/or  widening of its interpretation 
following the more general evolution of EU policy. 

These decisions have all been widely commented on, as have the other decisions 
that will be mentioned later on. This analysis will, therefore, be limited to pointing out 
very briefly the essential issues underlying them which are relevant for understanding 
the continuity and evolution of the ECJ doctrine on parallel importation in an attempt 
to focus the connection between the ECJ interpretation, the TRIPS Agreement and WTO 
Rules. 

The Sirena decision originated from an attempt by the Italian company Sirena to 
stop importation from Germany to Italy of a cosmetic product sold under a trade mark 
(PREP) owned  in  Italy  by  Sirena. The trade  mark was  originally owned  by  a  U.S. 
company which sold it, at different times, to dfferent companies in Italy and Germany. 
The  ECJ, basing  its  decision  on  Article  85  of  the  Treaty  of  Rome,  decided  that, 
considering the common origin of the Italian and German trade marks, the Italian right- 
owner  could not  stop  the  free  circulation  in  the  EU  (then  EEC) of  the  products 
legitimately sold in  Germany by  the  local right-owner  because both  the  Italian and 
German rights had  the  same  origin, and the purchase of the title did not  cancel the 
obligations originally attached to it (which included non-interference with the rights of 
the  German  title-owner).  In  this  decision  the  ECJ  referred  to  intra-Community 
exhaustion of rights, widening its interpretation to include also the common origin of 
the trade marks, therefore making the “personal” history of the single trade mark largely 
irrelevant because its rights and obligation were evaluated according to its origin and not 
according to the particular situation of its ownership at a given moment. 

The HAG I  and ItAc rr decisions made the relevance of the common origin and its 
connection  with  the  principle  of  exhaustion  of  rights  even  more  evident: BAG I 
confirmed the common origin as the essential element of this principle, whde I ~ A G  II 
put  the emphasis on the  “consent” of the right-owner as  a  necessary complement in 
order to enforce the principle. 

The cases stemmed from the fact that HAG A.G., a German company, lost its trade 
mark HAG in Belgium and Luxembourg (registered by a controlled company) following 
the expropriation of German properties as war damages. During the 1970s, HAG A.G. 
began to sell HAG coffee in Belgium, and the Belgian company which had bought the 
Belgian trade mark tried to oppose this. The ECJ decision rehsed to protect the Belgian 
interests  by  simply  arguing  that  both  trade  marks  had  the  same  origin  (and  the 

PhRALLEL IMPORTS, TRIPS AND ECJ DECISIONS 

509 

expropriating Belgan company had to accept the limitation implied in the rights). This 
decision was widely criticized but was  somewhat modified by a subsequent decision, 
HAG U, taken by the ECJ following the marketing decision of the Belgan company to 
sell its coffee in Germany, on the basis of the decision which had allowed the German 
company to sell its coffee in Belgium. The ECJ, in deciding on the claim of the German 
company seeking protection for its market, decided to protect the German trade mark 
and based its decision on the fact that the parent (German) company’s loss of the trade- 
mark‘s right in Belgium (which led to the Belgian company’s acquisition of the trade 
mark)  had  not  been voluntary. Therefore, since there had  been  no  consent by  the 
origmal owner to the sale of the Belgian company’s coffee in Germany, the German 
company had not lost its right to protect its market. 

There is  no contradiction between the  two I t a ~  decisions, and they may well 
coexist since in the hrst case the Belgian company acquired its rights knowing and being 
hlly aware that they had the same origin as the German trade mark (and therefore they 
accepted the coexistence). The second decision pointed out that the German rights in 
Belgium had been expropriated and, therefore, there was  no consent by the original 
German title-owner  and, lacking the essential element of consent, the German rights 
could not be overridden by the common origin of the trade marks. 

The “consent” of the original right-owner, its definition and interpretation by the 
national courts and the ECJ, became, following this decision, the essential elements in 
EU doctrine about intra-Community exhaustion of IPRS. 

In another case,  Centrafam BV v.  Winthrop BV,lO  the ECJ  confirmed the central 
relevance of the consensus of the right-owner in deciding about exhaustion of rights and 
common origin. C e n t r a h  BV bought a large quantity of a drug named “Negram”, 
sold by Sterling Drug in Great Britain and by Winthrop BV, a company controlled by 
Sterling Drug, in the Netherlands. Because of the sigtllficant price difference in the two 
countries, Centrafarm was  able to  buy  the  drug in  Great Britain and  sell  it  in  the 
Netherlands at a price lower than Winthrop’s and still make a good profit. 

Winthrop  sued  Centrafirm,  claiming  exclusive  rights  over  the  trade  mark 
“Negram” in the Netherlands, but the decision of the Dutch Court (confirmed by the 
ECJ) ruled that i f a  company did not want to expose its products to the risk of parallel 
importation then, under the principle of exhaustion of rights, it should not sell them in 
countries, such as Great Britain, where there was a price control on drugs. Once the 
decision to sell in Great Britain was taken (a fiee decision depending only on the will 
of the trade-mark owner), then it was not possible to oppose the fi-ee circulation of the 
goods in other EEC countries. 

10  ECJ. Case 16/74,  Centrafam v. Winfhrop, 1974. ECR 1183. 

510 

THE  

111.  THE  CHANGE IN THE ECJ APPROACH 

The ECJ developed rather early-in 

doctrine of “intra-Union 
exhaustion”,l* considering the EEC a single territory and making it clear that only a first 
sale  within  the  Union  had  to  be  construed,  by  the  dfferent  national  courts,  as 
exhaustion of rights. 

the mid-1 960s-the 

However, single States were free to consider international exhaustion of rights if 
they so wanted based on Article 36 of the Treaty of Rome, which allows Member States 
to  protect  national  IPRS, and  consequently the  ECJ did  not  consider  a  more  liberal 
approach by single States as being a violation of any EEC law.12 From a practical point 
of view this meant that international exhaustion of rights was the rule in most counties. 
What  radically changed  the  situation was  the  introduction  of the  Trade Marks 
Directive 89/104, Article 7 of which expressly limits the application of the principle of 
exhaustion  of  rights  for  all  EU  countries  to  intra-Union  exhaustion and  makes  it 
dependent on the “consent” of the right-owner to the first sale of the goods in the EU. 
This changed the  ECJ approach to the  problem in line with  its  role, which has 
always been to provide uniform interpretation for all EU countries, thus assuming an 
essential role in the development of the regional integration process. It may well be said 
that in the absence of a  regional government, the ECJ has  been  the  central motor  of 
integration, acting as a regulatory body whose decisions national courts have to comply 
with.  This  role  makes  its  experience a  “unique”  reference  point  for  other  existing 
integration  processes  (e.g.  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA), 
MEXCOSUR (Common Market of the Southern Cone) and the Andean Pact).13 

Article 7 of the Trade Marks Directive 89/104, which reads: 
“1. The trade mark  shall not entitle the proprietor  to prohibit  its use  in relation to goods 
which have been  put  on the  market in the  Community under  the  trade  mark by the 
proprietor or with his consent. 

2. Paragraph  1. Shall not apply where there  exist legitimate reasons for the  proprietor to 
oppose further  commercialisation of the  goods,  especially where the  condition of the 
goods is changed or impaired after they have been put on the market.”, 

was  meant to  harmonise  the  different existing national laws  and it was  construed as 
being  incompatible with  non-uniform  decisions  by  national  courts.  The  reasoning 
behind it is  very simple and convincing: if each nation  could decide whether  or not 
international exhaustion applies, some countries in the EU could consider unauthorized 
importation &om outside the area legtimate, which would therefore create differences 
or barriers within the EU market. 

11  ECJ, Case 56, 58/64,  Constern and  Grundig v. Commission, 1966, ECR 299. 
13  Francesco  Sindico,  7 k e   Solution  .f kgal  Conticts  in  the  MERCOSUR, unpublished  dissertation,  Facolth 

ECJ, Case 270/80, Polydor v. Harlequin Record  Shops, ECR 329, 9 February 1982. 

Giurisprudenza, University of Turin, 2001. 

PARALLEL IMPORTS,  TRIPS AND ECJ  DECISIONS 

51 1 

The ECJ took a very articulate and clear position on this matter with its Silhouette 
decision,14 which dealt with re-importation  of glasses fiames within the EEA after they 
were sold by the proprietor in Bulgaria with the understandmg that they could not be 
re-imported into the EEA. At the time, 1996, the country involved, Austria, was not yet 
a Member of the EU but belonged to the EEA. However, by the time of the decision, 
Austria was an EU country. 

The  importance  of  this  decision  lies  first  of  all  in  the  interpretation  given  to 
Article 7(1) of the Trade Marks Directive.  The question debated before the ECJ was 
whether  or  not  single countries  could  have  a  broader  interpretation  of Article 7(1), 
maintaining that it only provided the minimum standard and that each country could 
have a more liberal approach, permitting international exhaustion of rights. Actually t h s  
position was defended only by Sweden, whde the EU Commission and Austria, France, 
Germany,  Italy  and the  United  Kingdom  were  against  any  broad  interpretation, 
considering that the literal wording of Article 7 defined exhaustion as the result of a first 
sale within the EU with the consent of the proprietor, and that the letter and the spirit 
of the Trade Marks Directive was against any hfferent interpretation. 

The Swedish argument was based on the fact that the Directive was not intended 
to lead to full-scale  harmonisation of all Member States’ trade-mark laws, but only to 
harmonise the essential aspects thereof. There was still space, according to the Swedish 
interpretation,  to permit  Member  States to have more liberal rules on exhaustion of 
rights. 

As a matter of fact, however, the Directive does mention that existing differences 
between  national trade-mark  laws impede  fiee movement  of goods and services and 
should be eliminated so as to make sure that registered trade marks have the same level 
of protection in all EU counties. 
The ECJ decision stated that: 
I‘. . . the Directive cannot be interpreted as leaving it open to the Member States to provide 
in their domestic law for exhaustion of the rights conferred by  a trade mark in respect of 
products put on the market in non-Member countries. 
This, moreover, is the only interpretation which is M y  capable of ensuring that the purpose 
of the Directive is achieved, namely to safeguard the functioning of the internal market. A 
situation in which some Member States could provide for international exhaustion while 
others provided for Community exhaustion only, would inevitably give rise to barriers to 
the fkee movement of goods and the fkeedom to provide services.”15 
The reasoning of the ECJ is sound and there has been no challenge to it. The ECJ 
doctrine following this decision is, thus, anchored on two principles: intra-Community 

~ 

2 C.M.L.R. 953,16 July 1998. 

‘4  ECJ,  Case  C-355/96,  Silhouette  International  Schmied  GmbH  G  Co. v.  Hartlauer Handelgeselkchaft  mbH, 
15  Id. 

512 

THE  

exhaustion of IPRS and the need for the “consent” of the original owner of the IPR to 
the first sale on the EU market of the relevant goods. 

It is, however, important to consider that the real issue, not yet addressed by the 
ECJ, would eventually be whether or not national or regional exhaustion of rights is 
compatible with TRIPS and/or WTO standards, or more generally, with free trade and 
the globalization of the world economy rather than with the EU Trade Marks Directive. 
As mentioned above, the central issue in the decisions that have been discussed so 
fir is the idea of the “consensus of the proprietor” to the first sale in the EU; EIAG II and 
Silhouette are landmark decisions on this matter. Now, a recent decision has enlarged the 
interpretation to  be  given  to  this  “consent”, widening its  extent  and  taking a  step 
towards a more liberal approach to parallel importation within the EU. 

The ECJ, in the Davidofcase,i6  focuses again on this problem, namely, taking into 
account the forms of the right-owner’s  consensus which, according to  this decision, 
does not need to be “expressed” but can be implied and inferred fiom the “behaviour” 
of the IPR proprietor. 

Ths is an interesting aspect which widens considerably the possible applications of 

the exhaustion-of-rights principle. 

The ECJ, after making the  point  that  the  interpretation of the  “consent of  the 
proprietor” must be  the same by all Member States within the EU so  as  to make it 
possible for the same protection to be offered by the national courts according to the 
9th Recital of the Trade Marks Directive, states that the consent of the proprietor need 
not  necessarily be  expressed but  it  may  also  be  only implied. Such consent may be 
inferred by  elements and situations prior, contemporaneous or subsequent to the first 
sale outside the EU, if from these elements it is possible to infer with certainty that the 
proprietor has renounced his right to oppose the circulation of the goods within the EU. 
The word “certainty” is the key word in the decision; it avoids a break with the 
previous  decisions and  implies  that  the  national judges  must  evaluate the  evidence 
provided carefully so that the implied consensus is sufficiently proved. 

This same reasoning underlines two other ECJ decisions, Levi Struuss C-415/99 and 
C-416/99, issued together with the previously mentioned Duvido$ruling,17  where it is 
stated that the mere silence of the right-owner is not sufficient to prove h s  consent and 
that the importer who puts the goods in commerce in the EU is not justified  by  his 
ignorance of the lack of the right-owner’s consent. 

Objections  by  the  defendants  Tesco  and  Costco  (C-415/99  and  C-416/99, 
respectively), who  claimed that if a proprietor wanted to limit the  circulation of its 

‘6  ECJ, Case 414/99, Zino Davidoff S . A .  v. AGG Importationation Ltd. 

ECJ, Case 415199, Lmi Strauss G Co. and Another v. Tesco Stores Ltd. and Another, Case 416/99, Lmi Strauss 

G. Co. and Another v.  Cosrco  Wholesale UK Ltd.; decision of 20  November 2001. 

PARALLEL IMPORTS,  TRIPS AND ECJ DECISIONS 

513 

goods in the EU, it should indicate this on the products (Tesco), and that a legitimate 
buyer  in  a  third  country, unaware  of  the  limitations set  by  the  proprietor  on the 
circulation of its goods, could not be stopped from re-selling the same goods within the 
E U  (Costco), were  dsmissed on  the  grounds that  Article  7(1)  of the  Trade Marks 
Directive clearly defines the conditions that have to be met in order to overcome intra- 
Community exhaustion (the first sale of the goods within the EU must be made with 
the consent of the proprietor or of its licensee). Accordingly, the required consent may 
be implied but it can never be presumed. 

The  decisions  go  into  details  and  considerations  which  are  specific  to  the 
particular cases and which are not particularly relevant for the present dscussion. What 
should be  pointed  out,  however, is  the fact that, following the  definition of intra- 
Community exhaustion as the only principle to be applied within the EU, these recent 
decisions offer a broader interpretation of the necessary consensus of the IPR owner and 
may lead to a  more liberal approach in  the interpretation of this aspect by  national 
courts. 

The decisions, without modifjlng the previous interpretation given by the ECJ on 
these  matters, are  nevertheless important because  they  appear  to  offer  a  somewhat 
enlarged possibility to  defend parallel importation fkom  third countries by  making it 
clear that significant behaviour by the IPR proprietor, either prior, contemporaneous or 
subsequent to the first sale in a third country, may be sufficient to imply its consensus 
to importation of the goods within the EU, and that the evaluation of this behaviour 
should be made by  the national courts, according to the principles stated by  the ECJ 
(which requires the “certainty”of the implied consensus). 

They are, thus, a step towards a more liberal approach to the problem, although 

they are not yet a challenge to the prior doctrine. 

Iv.  COMPATIBILITY OF ECJ DECISIONS, WTO RULES AND THE TRIPS AGREEMENT 

A certain number of questions should be asked when considering the evolution of 
ECJ decisions on parallel importation and their relation to general WTO policy and the 
TRIPS Agreement. 

First of all, are they consistent with EU Directives and with any other law, rule and 
regulation  which  may  apply  to  EU Member  countries? Is  regional  exhaustion  (or 
national exhaustion, for non-EEA  Member States) consistent with free trade  and  the 
theory of globalization, mostly as applied towards less-developed countries? 

Prior  to  the  Trade  Marks  Directive  89/104, the  ECJ  had  ruled  that  intra- 
Community exhaustion of rights was  a minimum standard for all E U  Member States, 
but left each State fkee to eventually adopt more liberal provisions-which 
is to say they 
were left fiee to adopt international exhaustion. 

514 

THE  

This  situation  could no  longer be  tolerated  after  the  issue of the  Trade  Marks 

Directive, since all countries were required to enact the provisions of Article 7. 

There was, therefore, no longer the possibility of different behaviour, even if more 
liberal, by the Member States since they were required to enact the Directive in order 
to avoid any possibility that trade marks might enjoy different rights in the single States 
of the Union. 

ECJ  decisions have always considered intra-Union  exhaustion of rights to be the 
rule; following the Trade Marks Directive, and the Silhouette decision, the doctrine was 
fbrther defined by  simply denying the right  of single countries to adopt international 
exhaustion, a position justified by the need to harmonise the rights enjoyed by the trade- 
mark’s owner in the different States. 

The question  concerning the  consistency of intra-Community  exhaustion with 
TRIPS provisions and WTO recommendations has  been  addressed often and has been 
dealt  with  by  many  people,  in  particular  during  the  Conference  on  Exhaustion  of 
Intellectual Property Fbghts and Parallel Importation in World Trade, held in Geneva, 
Switzerland, on 6 and 7 November 1998. 

Exhaustion of rights is dealt with only by Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement, which 

reads: 

“For the purpose of dispute settlement under this Agreement, subject to the provisions of 
Articles 3 and 4 nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address the issue of exhaustion 
of intellectual property rights.” 
According to two ofthe major commentators, Frederick M. Abbott,l* and Thomas 
Cottier,*9 TRIPS’ negotiators were not able to reach any kind of agreement on the issue 
of IPR exhaustion and decided to formalize their lack  of agreement by leaving every 
country free to do whatever it wanted regarding this matter. For Thomas Cottier this 
was an  “agreement to &sagree”.20 

Whatever one’s opinion about the relevance of TRIPS for this issue may be-and 

bearing in mind that the purpose of TRIPS is not to create a unified market but only to 
set minimum standards of protection for IPRs-we 
can  be  construed to  work  against  intra-Community  exhaustion and,  therefore,  ECJ 
decisions are not at odds with TRIPS provisions. It should also be remembered that, since 

can safely say that nothing in TRIPS 

18  Frederick  M. Abbott was  the  Rapporteur  for  the  Committee  on  International Trade  Law  at  the  1998 
Geneva Conference on Exhaustion  of Intellectual Propeq FLights  and Parallel Importation in World Trade; his 
paper is included in  Frederick M. Abbott, Thomas Cottier and Francis GUT,  The International Intellectual Property 
System:  Commentary  and  Materials,  Kluwer  Law  International,  The  Hague,  London,  Boston,  1999, at  pages 
17%-1796. 

l 9   Thomas Cottier,  rite WTO System and Exhawtion OfRights, in ibid.,  at pages 17961804. 
20  [bid., at page 1797. A totally different interpretation is discussed (and refuted) by Marco C.E. Bronkers, The 
Exhaustion  ofpatent  Rights  under  W ~ O  Law, in Abbott et  d., supra, footnote  18, at page  1815: “In  other words, 
according to this view Article 6 [of TRIPS] does not represent an agreement to disagree. It is not possible either to 
read  any  legal  obligation on  the  exhaustion of intellectual property  rights.  It  could  even be  envisaged  that  a 
disgruntled WTO Member might impose trade restrictions against the other Member to express its displeasure.” 

PARALLEL IMPORTS, TRIPS AND ECJ DECISIONS 

515 

TRIPS merely sets minimum standards for the protection of IPRS, only a clear provision 
specifically requiring the enforcement of international exhaustion would have interfered 
with EU policy and ECJ decisions. 

The WTO Agreement poses major questions. Mr Abbott points out that the official 
statement for the adoption of the TRIPS Agreement by WTO Members made it clear that 
the central strategy was to enhance the development of international trade: 

“Desiring to reduce the distortions and impediments to international trade, and  taking into 
account the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights, 
and to ensure that measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not 
themselves become bamers to legitimate trades;” (emphasis added).21 
It appears that, at least  conceptually, protection  of IPRS is secondary to the more 
general goal of enhancing trade. However, if this statement is read in the general context 
of  other  provisions  applying to  IPRS, namely,  Article xx  of  GATT 1994  (Uruguay 
Round), it must be pointed out that customs measures are considered a legitimate way 
of enforcing the  protection  of patents, trade  marks  and  copyright. It  followssince 
WTO rules on IPRS are included in TRIPS and TRIPS leaves each country fiee to choose 
between national or regional and international exhaustion of rights-that 
nothing in the 
general WTO system may be construed against regional exhaustion and, therefore, that 
ECJ decisions cannot be criticized on that basis.  It also follows that if a change should be 
made  concerning exhaustion  of IPRS, it  should be made  under  the  TRIPS provisions 
which are specifically dedicated to  IPRS, since nothing else in the general WTO rules 
would support a right to interfere with regional exhaustion of rights. 

But a final and general consideration must be made. 
Recent years have been years of globalization. This approach to trade has become 
a  “faith” supported by the most advanced economies which have preached, mostly to 
the  developing countries, that  only  the  dismantling of any barrier  to  trade  and the 
creation of a worldwide, free market would help development and increase the standard 
of living of the populations of developing countries. 

It  is  not  this  author’s intention  to  criticize or challenge this  view  (with which, 
however, he does not  agree) but, keeping to the topic of this work, it must be asked 
whether or not national or regional exhaustion of IPRs is consistent with the theory, and 
practice, of globalization. 

It must  also  be  asked whether  it is  coherent  to  ask  a  less-developed  country  to 
dsmantle its national industry, as s m a l l  or modem as it may be, on the grounds that the 
same goods can be produced better and cheaper elsewhere-and 
therefore be put  on 
the local market at a lower price thus  “favouring” local consumers-but 
at the  same 
time forbidding goods produced or marketed in that same country fiom  being sold on 

21  Abbott, supra, footnote 18, at page  1785. 

516 

THE  

the  EU  market  because  of  extra-Community  origins and,  therefore, impeding EU 
consumers &om buying cheaper goods and depriving the less-developed country of an 
important market for its production. 

The  result  is  that  the  less-developed  country’s  industry  is  dismantled,  local 
consumen  can  buy  very  little  because  the  dismantling of  local  industry  increases 
widespread poverty, and very few people can enjoy the better quality and lower prices 
of  imported  goods.  In  addition, even  the  few  commodities  that  are  produced  or 
marketed locally by  national or  multinational companies cannot be  sold on  the EU 
market, thus limiting the possibility of the local economy to create wealth by selling its 
lower-priced production, or by re-exporting goods put on sale in the national market 
to the world market. 

Oniy international exhaustion would cure this inconsistency. 
The same conclusions are supported by Mr Abbott, Rapporteur of the Committee 
on  International  Trade  Law  at  the  1998  Geneva  Conference,=  and  by  Thomas 
Cottier.23 

Taking these  considerations into  account, it  may  be  reasonable to  expect that, 
continuing the evolution which began with the Duvidofldecision, the ECJ may, in the 
future, widen the interpretation of the necessary “consent”, thus making it easier to 
defend parallel imports from third countries. 

The main  question, the  territorial extension of the exhaustion of rights, should, 
however, now be addressed by  TRIPS, and the Doha Round was an opportunity not to 
be missed, since if international exhaustion is to become a world standard, TRIPS is the 
right,  and  only,  instrument that  can  be  used  for  h s  purpose, since  its  minimum 
standards must be enforced by all WTO Members, including the EU. 

To fail to enforce TRIPS’ standards would continue to privilege the interests of a 
few countries and give support to the claim of the developing world that rules are always 
bent according to the interests of richer and stronger countries. Globalization may then 
reasonably be seen by the Third World as their Trojan horse (Time0 Danaos domferentes) 
used to dismantle their economic structures to the benefit of foreign interests. 

22  [bid., at pages 1795-96:  “This Rapporteur remains persuaded that the intexess of the developing countries 
are better served by a general rule of international exhaustion which will permit p d e l  importation. The reasons 
for this  conclusion are  stated in the  First Report. Restrictions on parallel importation are likely to constrain the 
export opportunities of producers  established  in  the  developing countries, and to  limit  capital  formation and 
economic growth in those countries.” 
23  Cottier, supra, footnote  19, at page  1804 “The doctrine of national or regional exhaustion is an outdated 
concept which no longer can be legitimately sustained while other areas of competition law are fully operating 
under different concepts of territoriality.” 


