Developments on Business Method Patents 

Georgios I. ZEKOS* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

A valid patent, such as a business method patent (BMP), must cover proper subject- 

matter,  and  be  useful,  novel  and  non-obvious.  Moreover,  patent  protection-and 
consequently  protection  to  BMPs-does 
not  extend  to  the  laws  of  nature,  physical 
phenomena or abstract ideas.1 The principal legal requirements for patentability of BMPs 
are that the invention: 

-  is new; 
- 
- 

involves an inventive step; and 
has an industrial or other usefd capabihty. 

Are BMPS merely abstract ideas? A patent-and 

as such a B M P - w ~ ~ ~  not issue if the 
differences between  the  invention  seeking the  patent  and  other  known,  previously 
established inventions (called “prior art”) “are such that the subject-matter as  a whole 
would  have  been  obvious  at  the  time  the  invention  was  made  to  a  person  having 
ordinary skill in  the art to which  said subject-matter  pertains  ...”2  The patent system 
aims to protect inventors and those who fund their work by promoting the disclosure 
of  inventions,  as  against  secrecy,  through  the  publication  of  patent  applications, 
stimulating others to “invent around” patents. 

An invention is novel if it is, until that time, unknown or undisclosed to the public; 
and an invention is obvious if prior art or knowledge would lead a practitioner skilled in 
the art in which the invention was made to conceive of the invention. Were an invention 
deemed obvious, by  definition there would be  nothing to disclose.  One conhtion for 
granting a patent is that the inventor must disclose the invention in a written description 
(the patent speclfication) which gives a skilled person the necessary instructions for putting 
the invention to practical  use.  Inventions may  be viewed as new solutions to techcal 
problems. A patent is a property right granted by a State authority excluding others from 
the use or benefit of the patented invention without the consent of the patent holder. An 
invention has a well-established  u&ty  if a person of ordinary skill in the art would instantly 

The author may be contacted at: cgzekos@hotmail.com,. 

*  B.Sc. (Econ.), J.D., LL.M., Ph.D., Attorney-at-Law and Economist, Komotini, Greece. 
1  Diamond v .  Ckakrabarfy, 447 U.S. 303, 307 (1980). A business method can be defined as “a method of ... 
adrmnistering, managing, or otherwise operating an enterprise or organization, including a technique used in doing 
or conducting business.”, H.R. 5364,106th Cong. § 2 (2000). available at: (http://fhvebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/ 
getdoc.cgi?dbname=l06~congbills&docid=E h5364ih.txt.pdf). 

2  35 U.S.C.  § 101, 5  103(a) (1994). 

694 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

value why the invention is useful based on the characteristics of the invention. The utility 
of an invention, in concert with its novelty  and non-obviousness,  merits the reward of 
patent protection.3 Whether a claimed invention lacks utility presents a question of fact.4 
What is the nature of the inventive step involved? A new creation (business method), 
in order to be patentable, must contain an invention, which means not only an abstract idea 
but also its incorporation  into a technical mechanism that allows its implementation and 
applicabhty into producing somethng new into the real or virtual world. A digitized idea 
can be patentable if it is transformed into a new mgital product, mechanism, or both and its 
implementation brings something new that contains an invention (combination of idea and 
mechanism-not  merely  a  mathematic  calculation)  applicable  to  e-commerce  or 
cyberspace in general and not merely a common/normal idea or common business practice. 
U d k e  novelty, where the claimed invention is compared with a single prior art reference,5 
non-obviousness compares the claimed invention with the relevant prior art as a whole.6 
What constitutes novelty? An invention  is not novel if the invention is  not merely 
non-obvious given the prior art, but is actually already found in the prior art, which means 
that the non-obviousness7 facts are central to the novelty determination.8 If the inventive- 
step requirement is too easily satisfied, patents are granted for inventions that have Iittle or 
no inventive merit.9 The concept of “business methods” is doubtless undefinable and the 
vast complexity of defining an area of technology for the purpose of treating it differently 
at the patent system entry point is not limited to business methods, because all patents on 
any kind of method or process are presumably acquired for use in a business endeavour.10 

3  Brenner u. Manson, 383 US. 519,534 (1966): “The basic quidpro quo contemplated by the Constitution and 
the Congress for granting a patent monopoly is the benefit derived by the public from an invention with substantial 
utility.”; Cross v.  lizuka, 753 F.2d 1040, 1044 (Fed. Cir. 1985). 

4  Raytheon  Co. u. Roper C o p ,  724 F.2d  951, 956 (Fed. Cir. 1983); Rey-Bellet v,  Engelhardt, 493 F.2d 1380, 
1385 (C.C.P.A. 1974), stating that:  “conception of [an] ... invention is  not  complete  absent a conception  of its 
utility.” 

5  See Advanced Display  Sys., Inc. v. Kent State  Uniu., 212 F.3d 1272, 1282 (Fed. Cir. 2000) which states that: 
“Invalidity by  anticipation requires that the four corners of a single, prior art document describe every element of 
the claimed invention, either expressly or inherently, such that a person of ordinary skill in the art could practice 
the invention without undue experimentation.” 

conclude that the claimed invention was obvious. 

See  Graham v.]ohn  Deere  Co.,  383 U.S.  1, 34-37  (1966): combining elements from  prior art patents  to 
7 35 U.S.C. 5 103 reads in part: “A  patent  may not be obtained  ... if the differences between  the subject- 
matter to be patented and the prior art are such that the subject-matter as a whole would have been obvious at the 
hmc the invention  was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which  said subject-matter pertains.”: 
35 U.S.C.  5 103(a) (2000). 
*  An  invention:  “ ... must  be  of practical  use;  it  must  show  an  element  of  novelty,  that  is,  some  new 
characteristic which  is  not known in the body  of existing knowledge  in its technical ficld. This body of existing 
knowledge is  called  “prior art”. The invention  must show an  inventive  step, which  could not  be  deduced by  a 
person with average knowledge of the technical field ... scientific theories, mathematical methodr, plant or animal 
varieties, discoveries of natural substances, commercial methods,  or methods for medical treatment  (as opposed to 
medical products) are generally not patentable.” 

John H. Barton, Intellectual Property Rights: Reforming the Patent System, 287 Science 1933, 2000. 
Examples of BMPS are the well-known  one-click patents assigned to Amazon.com) and the Dutch auction 
patent  of (Priceline.com). In  re  Schrader  22  F.3d  290, 298  (Fed. Cir.  1994), Judge Newman  stated: “The Board 
also relied on the  ‘method of doing business’ ground for finding Schrader’s subject-matter  non-statutory  under 
Section 101. In so doing the Board remarked that the ‘method of doing business’ is a ‘fuzzy’ concept, observed the 
inconclusiveness of precedent,  and  sought  guidance from this  Court.  Indeed  it  is  fuzzy; and  since  it  is  also an 
unwarranted encumbrance to the definition of statutory subject-matter in Section 101 ... my guidance is that it be 
discarded as error-prone, redundant, and obsolete. It merits retirement  from the glossary of Section 101.” 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

695 

Many BMPS are, in fact, patents  on  the  transfer  of a known  business method  to  a 
sofiware and/or  Web-based  implementation. Hence, many BMPS are patents on methods 
of doing business in cyberspace.11 BMPS are a subset of software patents. It should be taken 
into account that the existence ofpatents on standards must be transparent and the licensing 
of such patents subject to appropriate controls so as  to ensure widespread industry access. 
Do BMPS give exclusive rights to pure ideas? One or more hardware or s o h a r e  standards 
govern virtually every aspect of using a computer or connecting to the Internet.** Product 
interoperability, public health and safety, and global competitiveness are driving the rise of 
standards-setting in  order  to  acheve  product  interoperabihty  in  cyberspace.13  De fucto 
standards are not promulgated by a speclfic body, but arise instinctively due to market-place 
success existing in markets characterized by network effects. Network effects markets d 
be attractive targets for companies which can place their own proprietary technology  as 
the technical standard in that market.14 De jtwe standards, which are rules for implementing 
a  technology,  are set by  some official body,  be  it a government, an  industry working 
group, or an academic consortium. The content of industry standards will not be available 
as  prior  art  to  defeat patents  on  the  technology  involved  in  those  standards. Industry 
standards fi-equently include  proprietary  technology,  together  with  technology  already 
patented or the subject of pendmg patent applications.15 Internet BMPS have been plainly 
criticized by most observers as being singularly inferior to most other patents. The U.S. 
Court  of Appeals for  the  Federal  Circuit  has  recently  extended  patent  protection  to 
business  methods  and  in  the  world  of  e-commerce,  the  B M P S ~ ~  
present  tremendous 
opportunities for inventive entreprene~rs.’~ The aim of this analysis is the investigation of 
the patentabihty of business methods. 

According  to  Bronwyn  H.  Hall,  Business  Method  Patents,  Innovation  and  Policy,  Working  Paper  No. 
CPC 03-39,4 May 2003, p.  16: “When innovations are incremental and when many different innovations must be 
combined to make a useful product, it is less obvious that benefits of the patent system outweigh the costs. Business 
methods are more likely to fall into the second class than the first.” 
Internet  World,  15  April  2001,  at  50,  available  at:  ~www.intemetworld.com/magazine.php?inc=041501/ 
04.15.0lintemettechl .html). 

12  Larry  Seltzer,  The Standards  Industry:  Corporate  Consortia  Are  Supplanting  Traditional Rule-Making  Bodies, 

Keith  Lutsch  et  al.:  Standards  Activities  itz  the  Computer  Industry,  Compaq  Computer  Corp.,  Intellectual 
Property Law Institute, San Antonio, Texas, 20-21  March  1998, at N-2:  “the essence of a technology standard is 
the definition of a core product and a complementary product, for example, a compact disc player and a compact 
disc. The definition allows any number of manufacturers to produce  cross-compatible core and complementary 
products.” 
‘4  Mark A. Lemley and David McGowan, Legal Implications ofNetwork Economic Eflects, 86 C&f.  L. Rev. 479, 
481,  1998; Robert Pitofsky, Antitrust  and  Intellectual  Property:  Unresolved  Issues  at  the  Heart of the  New Economy, 
16 Berkeley Tech. L.J.  535,  550, 2001; David Friedman,  Standards  as Intellectual Property: A n  Economic Approach, 
19 U. Dayton L. Rev. 1109, 1122,1994; John Gladstone Mills, III, et al.,  Patent Law Fundamentals, § 1:2, 1-5, second 
edition,  2002:  “The  reason  for  a patent  system  is  to  encourage  innovation and  ... to  bring  new  designs  and 
technologies into the public domain through disclosure.” 
15  American National  Standards Institute,  Guidelinesfor Implementation of the ANSI Patent  Policy, available at: 
(http://web.ansi.org/public/library/gides/-ppguide.html); Timothy J. Muris,  Competition and  Intellectual Property 
Policy:  The Way Ahead, presented to The American Bar Association’s Antitrust Section Fall Forum,  Washington, 
D.C.,  15 November 2001, at 5, available at: cwww.itc.gov/speeches/-muris/intellectual.htm>. 

’6  Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss, Are Business Method Patents Badfor Business? 16 Santa Clara Computer & High 
Tech. L.J.  263,  265,  2000; Leo J. Raskind,  The State  Street Bank  Decision: The Bad  Business .f Unlimited  Patent 
ProrotectionfrMethods ofDoing Business, 10 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J.  61, 70-71,  1999. 

17  Larry J. Guffey, Business Method  Patertts:  W h a t  They Are-Wy  Clients  and  Service  Providers  Should  Care, 

33 Md. Bus. J. 25, 26,2000. 

696 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

11.  BMPS AND  CYBERSPACE 

The  business-method  exception  as  a  manner  of  doing  business  was  an 
unpatentable  subject-matter  and  the  mathematical-algorithm  exception  generally 
prevented computer programs that consisted of a mathematical algorithm from being 
patented. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals decided, in Hotel  Security  Checking Co. 
v .  Lorraine  Co.,lB to  strike  o f f  a  patent  grant  for  a  system  of  financial  accounting 
designed  to  stop  fraud  by  restaurant  waiters  and  cashiers.  The  Court  stated  that  a 
“system  of  transacting  business  disconnected from  the  means  for  carrying  out  the 
system is  not, within  the most liberal interpretation  of the  term,  an art”  and that as 
such, transacting business was not  an art based  on the grounds of novelty rather than 
the business-method exception. 

In  hew’s Drive-In  Theatres,  Inc.  v .  Park-In  Theatres,  Inc.,19  the  Court  noted that a 
system  of  transacting  business  was  patentable  not  on  its  own,  but  rather  only  in 
conjunction with  the  means  of making  the  system  useful  in practice.  Three  Supreme 
Court  cases  established  the  mathematical-algorithm  exception,2O  i.e.  that  the  usell 
application of the algorithm had to work to physically transform or reduce an article to a 
different state or thing. In order to invahdate a patent under the mathematical-algorithm 
exception,  one  had  to  demonstrate  that  the  algorithms  were  “merely  abstract  ideas 
constituting disembodied  concepts or  truths  that  are  not  ‘useW .”21  Several principal 
events  were  set  in  motion  by  the  courts’  aflinnation  that  mathematical  algorithms 
performed by computers and that provided ‘‘usell, concrete, and tangible” results were, 
indeed, patentable subject-matter. 

Were  patents on business  methods possessed  of  inferior quality and  would  they 
eventuate in more harm than good for the software industry and the broader economy? 
It is  argued that  the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office  (USPTO) issued far  too  many 

‘8  160 F. 467 (2d Cir. 1908), at 472. “It is unnecessary to multiply authorities as we are convinced that there 
is  no patentable novelty either in the physical means employed or in the method described and claimed ...” : Fowler 
v. City OfNew York, 121 F. 747, 748 (2d Cir.  1903). 
19  174 F.2d 547 (1st Cir. 1949), at 552: “There is nothing inventive in adapting the old arcuate arrangement 
of seats in a theatre to automobiles in a parking lot as the means to achieve horizontal pointing.” 
20  State St. Bank  G Trust Co. v .  Signature Fin. Group, Inc., 927 F. Supp. 502, 508 (D. Mass. 1996): stating that 
Gottrchalk v. Bensun, 409 U.S. 63 (1972), Parker v. Hook, 437 U.S.  584 (1978), and Diamond v .  Diehr, 450 US. 175 
(1981) discussed the scope ofpatent protection  that ought to be afforded computer software; rev’d, 149 F.3d  1368 
(Fed. Cir. 1998). In  re  Alappnt, 33 F.3d  1526, 1544 (Fed. Cir. 1994), upheld the patent  claim for a machine that 
employed an  algorithm  to  transform an  electric input  signal into  a smooth waveforni  displayed  on a  monitor 
because the mathematical formula in the invention met the transformation requirement transforming electric data 
into  a visual waveform  display.  In  re  Schrader (supra, footnote  10, 290, 291,  294)  held  that  a patented  method 
claiming an algorithm that transformed bid prices into new groupings of bid prices failed the test because number 
conversion did not represent a physical transformation. Arrhythmia Research Tech., Inc. v .  Corazonix Cup., 958 F.2d 
1053, 1060-61 (Fed. Cir. 1992), held that a device that  converted  electrocardiograph signals using mathematical 
calculations into output information about heart activity was a useful and, hence, patentable application. 
21  Stak 9. Bank G Twt Co. v. Signam Fin. Group, Im, 149 F.M 1368,1374 (Fed Cir, 1998), quoting In s Purdu, 684 
F.2d 912, 915 (C.C.P.A, 1982), at 1373; Joseph H. Sommer, Against Cyberluw, 15 Berkeley Tech. LJ.  1145, 2000, 
states in passing that business methods have  nothing to do with technology,  and that  the patent  system is going 
beyond  technological innovation  to protect social innovation. Julie E. Cohen and Mark A. Lemley, Patent  Scope 
and Innovation  in the SOftware Industry, 89 Cal. L. Rev. I,n.99,2001: “The floodgates for non-technological patents 
were  opened by  State Street  ... which  allowed the patenting  of pure business methods. A number of patents had 
already issued for such non-technological  concepts as methods of holding a golf putter, however.” 

DEVELOPMENTS  O N  BMPS 

697 

low-quality  patents  on methods  of doing busines.Z2 Criticism  of BMPS themselves has 
focused profoundly on novelty  and obviousness, as well as  on one other non-statutory 
patent’s scope.  Do  BMPsZ3 possess  an  excessively wide  scope? The main 
aspect-the 
concern  refers to  the breadth  the patent’s claims24 and broad patents might,  in effect, 
have  monopolized  whole  lines of business activity,  not just  the method  or system of 
performing  particular  business processes.  Have  BMPS been  used  merely  to instantiate 
already well-known  and broadly used business practices and processes? There is need to 
distinguish novel business concepts from the “mere automation”  of previously-known, 
manually-performed processes.25 Are Internet and e-commerce patents only novelty the 
fact that they “merely place” a fomerly26 well-known  process in cyberspace? It is argued 
that BMPS would  r a d d l y  reduce  incentives  for innovation,  unjustifiably and unfairly 
limit competition, predominantly in cyberspace, and significantly increase the costs and 
frequency of patent litigation.27 

The business-method  exception  worked  to  block  process patents  that  claimed  a 
general  process  or method  of  conducting  business while  the  mathematical-algorithm 
exception  worked  to  deny  protection  to  computer  programs.  Mathematical  subject- 
matter is not treated in a different way to any other subject-matter in patent law and, thus, 
software is  patentable  subject-matter  despite  the  fact  that  it  consists  of  mathematical 
algorithms.28 Algorithms are only unpatentable in the abstract, but are patentable subject- 
matter if they achieve a ‘‘usefd, concrete, and tangble result”. The dstinction between 
abstract  and  useful  implicates  the  utility  requirement  of  patent  law  rather  than  the 
patentable subject-matter  requirement. 

Methodological  Tools, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers, No. 8498, 1-53,  2001. 

**  Bronwyn H. Hall, A.B. Jaffe and M. Tratjenberg,  The NBER Patent  Citation Data File: Lessons,  Insights  arid 
*3  K. Frieswick, Are  Business  Method  Patetills a License to Steal? CFO.com.,  2001. 
24  P.  OConnell,  Every  Patent  is  a  Double-Edged  Sword,  Businessweek Online, 2001;  W.  Orlikowski  and 
S .  Barley,  Technology G Institutions:  What Can Research  on Irfoormation  Technology and Research on  Organizations b a n i  
)om  Each  Other! MIS Quarterly 25(2), 145-165,  2001. 
25  United  States,  European  and Japanese Patent  Offices,  Trilateral  Commission  Report  on  Comparative  Study 
camed Our Under Trilateral Project B3b “ ... while a technical aspect is necessary for a computer-implemented business 
method to be eligible for patenting ... to merely automate a known human  transaction process using well-known 
automation techniques is not patentable.”, 2000; United States Patent and Trademark Office, USPTO Whlte Paper, 
Automated  Financial or Management Data Processing Methods (Business Methods), 2001. 

26  A.  Pressman,  Patent  Refom  Pending, The Industry  Standard, 2001;  L.  Lessig,  Online Patents:  Leave  them 
Pending,  Wall  Street Journal, New Yolk, 2001,  22:  “Awarding patents of that  type  [business method  patents] 
siphons off resources &om technologists to lawyen-&om  people  making real  products  to people  applying for 
regulatory privilege and protection.  An  increasingly  significant cost  of Net start-ups  involves both defensive and 
offensive lawyering-making 
sure you don’t ‘steal’ someone else’s ‘idea’ and quickly claiming as yours every ‘idea’ 
you can  describe in a patent  application.”; “Under the proposed standard, a business method invention  will  be 
presumed obvious when prior art references disclose a business method that  differs &om what is  claimed  only in 
that  the  claim  requires a  computer technology  to  implement  the practice  of  the  business method  invention.”: 
House Resolution, 1332, 3 Apd 2001. 
27  R .  Merges, The Uninvited  Guest: Pafents on  Wall Street, SSRN Working Paper Series, 2003; R .  Posner,  The 
Law  and  Economics  of  Intellectual  Property,  Daedalus, loumal of the American Academy of Arts  and Sciences 5(1), 
5-12,  Spring 2002:s“Something is*fukhmentally G o n g  with a system that  allows individuals to get  patents for 
doing the seemingly obvious ... We’re introducing this legislation in an effort to repair the system before the PTO 
awards more monopoly power to people doing the patently obvious.” Congressional Record, E1651-52, 2000. 
28  In  re  Alappat, supra, footnote 20; John R .  Thomas,  The Patenting ofthe Liberal Profiions, 40 B.C.  L. Rev. 
1139, 1185, 1999: the patentability of business processes opens the door for patenting new developments in all of 
human experience, and that patents should remain grounded in science and engineering; Alan L.  Durham,  “Usefl 
Arts” in the Information Age, B.Y.U.L. Rev. 1419, 1525-28, 1999: business method patents should not be patentable 
subject-matter. 

-. 

698 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

In 1998, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, in State  Street Bank  G 
Trust  Co. v. Signature  Finance  Group,  112c.,29  formally dissolved  the  business-method 
exception.  State  Street involved  a computerized business method that  pooled  mutual 
fund assets  into  an  investment  portfolio  that  was  organized  as  a partnership  for  tax 
benefits. The case firmly held that a financial business method that transforms data to 
produce  a  “useful,  concrete  and  tangible  result”  is  eligible  for  patent  protection. 
Moreover,  the  Federal Circuit,  in ATGT  Coy. v. Excel  Communications,  I ~ c . , ~ O  held 
that  any  computer-implemented  invention,  apparatus,  or  method  that  is  new  and 
useful  is  patentable  subject-matter.  So,  the  barriers  to  patenting  computer-based 
business  models  had  fallen,  as  the  cases  explicitly  struck  down  the  long-standing 
“busines-method”  exception and restricted the mathematical-algorithm  exception in 
U.S. patent law. 

By and large, the business-method exception held that a method of doing business 
was  an  unpatentable  subject-matter.3l  Methods  of  doing  business  have  quickly 
combined with emerging computer technology to fuel the resulting e-commerce,  and 
Internet companies have sparked persistent controversy for the skillful exploitation of 
their patents.32 Business methods must meet the novelty and non-obvious requirements 
for patentability.33 Patents of poor quality will issue because the standards of novelty and 
inventiveness are not absolute but are field-dependent. 

Are BMPS anti-competitive  and anti-innovative?  Will BMPS in  e-commerce  fuel 
the explosive growth and innovation witnessed in the Internet or will they dampen the 
incentive  to  innovate  by  thwarting  innovators?  Will  BMPS lead  to  economic 
inefficiency by  trapping  businesses  in  wasteful  methods  of  employing  manpower, 
because those companies lack the patent rights entitling them to more rational means 
of  deploying  their  resources? Today’s  computer-based  technology  companies  and 
Internet-based  businesses can  seek even stronger  intellectual property protection  for 
their  computer-based  innovations.  Accordingly, it could  be  argued that  BMPS breed 
inefficiency, which  adversely affects innovation  and  the  economy.  The barriers  to 
innovation posed by BMPS de@ judicial correction because the patents do not need to 
be operative for long to be detrimental to competition, innovation and the economy. 
Patents have already been issued for processes such as Internet search methods, delivery 
of postage, Internet server-access control and monitoring systems, electronic shopping 

29  149 F.3d 1368, 1374 (Fed. Cir. 1998). 
3(’  172 F.3d 1352 (Fed. Cir, 1999). 
3’  Hotel  Security Checking Co.. 160 F. 467, at 469. “No mere abstraction, no idea, however brilliant, can be the 
subject of a patent irrespective of the means designed to give it effect.”: Fowler v .  City $New  Yo&, 121 F. 747, 748; 
hew’s Drive-In  Theatres, Inc. v ,  Par&-In Theatres, Inc.,  174 F.2d 547. 

Keys to Cyberspace, 589 Prac. L. Inst. 31, 48, 2000. 

32  Stcven L. Friednian et a]., Stare Street  Ban& and  Tmst Company v. Siptuture Finaerial  Group, Inc.: Seeking the 
33  Amazon.rom,  Inc.  u.  BarnesandNoble.com. Inc.,  73  F.  Supp.  2d  1228,  1249  (W.D. Wash.  1999).  See 
Jeffrey  A.  Berkowitz,  Business  Method  Patents:  Everybody  Wants  to  Be  a  Millionaire, 609  Prac.  L.  Inst.  7,  36, 
2000.  Amazon.com.  Inc.  v .   BarnesundNoble.com. Inc.,  239  F.3d  1343,  1360-62  (Fed.  Cir.  2001):  holding 
<BarnesandNoble.com, mounted  serious  challenge,  based  on  obviousness  in light of prior  art, to  validity  of 
patent  claiming  single  action  method  and  system for placing  purchase  order  over  the  Internet,  precluding 
preliminary  injunction. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

699 

carts, Internet auctions and Internet keyword search services.34 Professor Greg S. Fine35 
observes that, for Internet companies, the BMP is the best system because they simply 
provide  consumers  easy  access  to  products  or  services  of  other  firms  and  if  these 
companies could not patent their business methods, innovation would be stifled in that 
entrepreneurs would never get off the ground. 

If emulation and not innovation leads to more competent business methods, then 
the grant of monopoly power serves no socially beneficial purpose.  Sensitivity to this 
feature of business methods leads to a failure to strike the proper balance between the 
incentivdreward attributes of a patent and its potential for a monopoly. BMPS threaten 
the  economic  viability  of  those  businesses  finding  that  many  vital  methods  for 
improvement  are  only  available to  them at  great  cost-the 
price  of buying  licences 
from the owners of BMPS or of defending patent infringement litigation. Furthermore, 
BMPS defy the anti-free-rider  and pro-disclosure justifications  that are the foundations 
of patent law in general; business methods are difficult to free-ride  on because they are 
largely  firm-specific,  and  there  is  no  need  to  encourage  disclosure  since  they  are 
practiced  in public.  Patented  products  result  in  higher  costs, lower  quality  and  less 
quantity. Thus, the patenting  of business methods  does not result in the same positive 
social characteristics of other types of patents,  but they  embody all of the same costs. 
Merges asserts that “it is virtually impossible to determine-at  least at this time-if  truly 
valid business concept patents are a net drag on the economy, a net plus, or neutra1.”36 
Ail patents  grant monopolies,  with all of the associated efficiency problems,  and 
therefore BMPS of appropriate scope, novelty, usefulness, and non-obviousness  should 
not cause different reactions in the market place.37  Because of the Internet’s power as 
a  consumer-business  interface,  many  e-commerce  companies  are  merely  providing 
consumers  easy  access  to  products  or services  of  other  companies.  Thus,  for  these 
online businesses, it is the business technique that implements the interface that defines 
the company. So, the business technique is the only facet of the enterprise deemed by 
the  company  to be  valuable  enough  to compel protection.  Consequently,  the single 
most important asset of many of these Internet companies is their patents.38 Currently, 
many  European  countries  explicitly  deny  patent  protection  to  business  methods  or 

Intell. Prop. L. Rev. 17, 27-29,  2000. 

34  William D. Wiese, Death of a Myth: The Patenting oflaternet Business Models After State Street Bank, 4 Mary. 
35  Greg S. Fine, To Issue or Not to Issue: Analysis ofthe Business Method Patent Controversy on the Internet, 42 B.C. 

L. Rev. 1195, 121G11,2001. 
36  Robert  P.  Merges, A s  Many as  Six  Patents  BefDre  Breakfast: Properfy Rights for Business  Concepts and  Patent 
System  Reform,  14 Berkeley Tech.  L.1.  577, 588, 1999; Thomas,  supra, footnote 28, at  1141: business methods 
should n6r be  characterized as technblogical in nature and therefore should not only  receive patent  protection; 
Fransisc  Marius  Keeley-Domokos,  State  Street  Bank  G.  Trust  Co.  v. Signature  Financial  Group, Inc.,  14 Berkeley 
Tech. L.J.  153,  167-69,  1999: a traditional  cost-benefit  analysis used  to justify  the limited  monopoly  granted 
under the patent system does not support the granting ofpatents to methods of doing business; In re Schrader, supra, 
footnote 10, Newman, J., dissenting: arguing that the business method concept was  fuzzy and an “unwarranted 
encumbrance to the definition of statutory subject matter”. 
Prac. L. Inst. 31, 77, 86-87, 2000. 

37  Roberta J. Moms, Business Method Patents: Good or Bad,  Old or New (and  Other Miscellaneons Thoughts), 589 
38  BarnesandNoble.com  Wins  Patent  Ruling,  at:  ~www.digitalmass.com/news/daily/02/021S01/ 

oneclickgatent.html). 

700 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

business  models.3’  American  inventors  encounter  problems  in  finding  patent 
protection for the overall business methods embodied in their computer programs. 

The European Patent Office ( E P o ) ~ ~  has clarified its position that business methods 
are not of a technical nature and so cannot receive patent protection  as  a process under 
the EPO system. It has offered one possible definition by stating that a business method 
is any subject-matter  that is more concerned with financial, interpersonal,  and societal 
relationships  than  with  engineering.  European  systems  require  that  mathematical 
algorithms embedded in software provide a technical solution to a technical problem in 
implementing  a  process.41  Furthermore,  the  EPO has  drawn  a  distinction  between 
computer  software  per  se  and  its  application  towards  the  resolution  of  technical 
problems,  excluding from patentability  only the former class of inventions. In the EU, 
it  is  possible  to  patent  a  business  method  provided  that  the  application  is  not  for  a 
method  of doing business “as  such”42 but the subject-matter  of a patent  must have a 
technical character  and be industrially applicable. In the United  States, software could 
be patented if it produced a “useful, concrete and tangible result” and so the restrictions 
on  the  patenting  of business  methods,  apart  from  the  requirements  of novelty  and 
inventive step, are negligible.43 

The United States offers as much protection as possible to its inventors in the existing 
legislation and case-law,  interpreting them  as  broadly as  possible.44  The patentabhty  of 
software is well established and computer programs can be patented. While Europe insists 
that its technicity requirement45 bars inventions without at least some physical effect from 

~~~ 

39  Michal Likhovski, Michael Spence and Michael Molineaw, The First Mover Monopoly: ,4  Study on Patenting 
Business  Methods  in  Europe,  Olswang  and  Oxford  Intellectual  Property  Research  Centre,  2000,  available  at: 
cwww.oiprc.ox.ac.uk/EJWP0500.pdf,. 

40  The EPO, with its headquarters in Munich,  Germany,  officially came into existence in  1977 when ten 
European  States banded  together  to form  the  Office.  It is  regulated by a treaty known as  the European  Patent 
Convention (EPc). 

41  The EPO clarified its stance on computer-implemented  business methods: computer programs that provide 
technical solutions for technical problems in the operation of a business may be patented, but programs that are of a 
non-technical nature may not. See Press Release, European Patent Office, Statement by Dr. Roland Crossenbacher, 
Chairman of the Administrative Council of the European Patent  Organization, 29 November 2000, avaiiablc at: 
cwww.european-patent-o~ce.org/news/pressrcl/2000~11~29~e. html). 

42  K. Henderson and H. Kane, Internet Patents: Will They Hinder the Development ofE-Commerce!  (1) The Journal 
(JILT)  2001,  available  at:  <http://elj.wamvick.ac.uk/jilt/OO-l/ 
Information,  Law  and  Technology 
of 
henderson.htmb; Ann Bartow, Separating Marketing lnnovatiorzfrom Actual  Invention: A  Proposal f o r  a New, Improved, 
Lighter, and Better-Tasting Form ofPatent Protection, 4 J. Small & Emerging Bus. L.  1,2000: advocating the creation of 
an “origination patent” for low-tech innovations; Jeffrey Bezos, A n  Open Letter FromJeJBezos  on the Subject $Patents, 
available at: cwww.amazon.com/patents>, suggesting a different patent regime for Internet business model patcnts; 
Mark D. Janis, Second  Tier Patent  Protection, 40 Ham. Int’l. L.J.  151, 1999: arguing against U.S. implcmentation of a 
second-tier patent  system such as  is  available in Europe and Japan. Under Article 52(2) of the Erc, programs for 
computers “as such” are defined as not being inventions and so are excluded fiom patentability. In fact, the exclusion 
has  been interpreted  by  the Boards  of Appeal  of the  EPO as  relating to those computer-implemented  inventions 
which have no technical character. 

43  The difference between the United States and Europe and between  the United States and Japan is that in 
Europe there has to be a technical contribution provided by the invention. In Japan the invention has to be a highly 
advanced creation of technical ideas by which a law of nature is utilized. In the United States the invention must 
purely be within the technological arts and no technological contribution is needed. 

A. Lash, Patent o$ice  Wrestles With E-Commerce, The Industry Standard, available at: www.chestandard.corn), 

45  European  Parent  Convention,  1998, originally enacted  5  October  1973, available at: cwww.european- 

patent-office.org/legal/epc/index.html), R. 29(1). 

1988. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

701 

patentabhty, the United States has abandoned the notion that patentable inventions must 
somehow  exist  in  the  physical  world.  This  is  noticeably  reflected in  unambiguously 
including  business  methods  within  patentable  subject-matter.46  European  Judge 
Steinbrener, who wrote that “it is legitimate to have a mix of technical and ‘non-technical’ 
features appearing in a claim, even if the non-techmcal features should form a dominating 
part’’’47  and  his  American  colleague Judge  Clevenger,  stating that  “today  ... virtually 
anything is patentable”,4* appear to have the same opinion. 

It is worth mentioning that patents can be obtained by a purely national route without 
the involvement of the EPO, and in Mewill Lynch, Inc. ’r 
the Court came to an 
unquestionably different result to that  of the  State  Street  Court,  ruling that  a computer 
program that causes a computer to calculate numbers to provide pricing information &d 
not involve a technical step and was  therefore unpatentable. There is  a clear distinction 
between  technical  solutions  and  non-technical  methods.  The  Agreement  on  Trade- 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) provides that Member States: 

“ ... may  exclude from patentability  inventions, the prevention within their territory of the 
commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality ... provided 
that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by their law.”50 
The Treaty, however, plainly does not accept or reject business methods as patentable 
processes. Does the specific lack of a business-method exclusion suggest that TRIPS includes 
protection for business models? The American “usefidness” standard, whch was used by 
the State Street Court to validate protection for business-method software, is much broader 
in scope when  compared to the industrial application standard as applied by Europe.  It 
could be argued that TRIPS may not require countries to grant patents to data processing 
systems  consisting of  computer  hardware  if  that  system  is  only  capable  of  a  business 
application and not of a technical or industrial application. In fact, the TRIPS Agreement 
expressly allows for Member  States to exclude broad ranges of patentable subject-matter 
from their domestic patent laws, including me&cal procedures, plant Me  and animal Me. 
The economic life of patents may be increasingly shortened due to the pace of innovation. 
Thus, a patent’s economic life may be shorter than  its legal life if the patent is rendered 
obsolete by other technological advances prior to the expiration of its legal lde.51 

4h  State St. Bank  G. Trust Co . u. Signature  Fin. Group, supra, footnote 21. 
47  DeTeMobil Deutsche  Telekom MobilNet  GmbH et al. v. Comvik GsMAB, no. T 0641/00, slip op. at 5-6,  Tech. 
Bd. App., 26 September 2002, available at: chttp://legdi.european-patent-o~ce.org/dg3~iblio/tOOO641exl .htm). 
48  Hughes Aircrdt Co. u. United States, 148 F.3d  1384, 1385 (Fed. Cir, 1998), Clevenger, J., dissenting. 
49  [1988]  R.P.C.  1 ,   @d,  [1989] R.P.C.  561.  German jurisprudence  did  not  exclude the  likelihood that 
business methods having a technical aspect could be patentable  even if the only contribution that the invention 
makes is non-technical. See Ralph Nack, Sind jetzt computenmplementierte  Geschiijsmethoden patenfdhig!-Analyse 
der 
Bundesgenchtshof-Entsc~eidung “Sprachanalyseeinnc~tung”, [2000]  Gewerblicher  Rechtschutz  und  Urbeberrecht 
(GRUR) Int. 853; Automatic Sales  Control,  [1999] GRUR 1078; Speech Analysis Apparatus,  [2000] GRUR 930. See 
Proposal  for  a  Directive of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the  patentability  of  computer- 
implemented inventions, COM (2002) 92 final. 

50  TRIPS Agreement, Article 27.2. 
5’  See Cohen and Lemley, supra, footnote 21, at 56; United States Patent and Trademark Ofice, Patent Pools: 
the  Problem  of  Access 
A  Solution 
in  Biotechnology  Patents!  USPTO, 19  January  2001,  available  at: 
(www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/dapp/opla/pa~oolcover.h~); Mohammad  S.  Rahman,  Patent  Valuation: 
Impacts on Damages, 6 U. Balt. Intell. Prop. L.J.  145, 147, 1998. 

to 

702 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Has the recent explosion of BMPs reflected a commensurate increase in innovation? 
Broad  patents  are  essential  to  encourage  high-risk  research  in  entirely  new  fields.52 
Batze153  considered 
that  the  patent  system  survived  because  reformers  pushed 
“pragmatic administrative reforms” that strengthened the standing of the patent system. 
American courts are reluctant to apply patent laws in an extraterritorial manner. So, the 
use of a patented product overseas is not a violation of U.S. patent l a ~ s . 5 ~  However, the 
use  of  a  patented  process  abroad  is  not  an  infringement  of  the  patent  laws  either. 
Furthermore, any attempt to localize the infringing activity is complicated greatly by the 
presence  of the  Internet  because  the  moment  any  company  goes  onltne,  it  becomes 
present in every country. Any special treatment  for Internet  sites should not extend so 
far as to permit devious entrepreneurs to evade, without difficulty, intellectual property 
laws through the creation of an Internet site abroad.55 As the use of cyberspace increases, 
the  ease  with  which  data  flows between  nations,  the  old  rules  concerning patented 
processes may prove  too  outmoded  to  provide  clear rules  that  domestic  and  foreign 
parties  can  interpret,  and  around  which  they  can  plan.  International  companies, 
considering whether  to utilize particular computer-implemented  business methods  on 
cyberspace, may be wary of potentially infringing a patent and may take defensive steps 
to  avoid  possible  infringement  by  re-designing 
their  corporate  structure,  their 
distribution  channels, or their marketing schemes. This may prove  to be incompetent 
and costly. It should be taken into account that a head-start advantage may be even more 
important in the online world than in the traditional  market place because the barriers 
to entry are significantly lower for e-business.56 

Does  the  current  system  simply  attempt  to  embrace  any  new  property  to  be 
protected  in  one  of  the  established  rules  of the  old  system? It  could  be  said  that 
business-method  sofiware  does not fall into the traditional paradigm  because its very 

52  Michael A.  Heller and Rebecca S. Eisenberg, Can Patents Deter Innovation!  The Anticommons in Biomedical 
Research, 280 Science 698,  1998. According to Carl Shapiro, the PTO has  “allowed a number of patents on ideas 
that would not appear ofihand to meet the usual standards for novelty and non-obviousness, such as the patent held 
by 6ightsound.com) which  reputedly covers ‘the sale of audio or video recordings in download fashion over the 
Internet’.”: Carl Shapiro, Navigating the Patent  Thicket: Cross Liceus, Patrnt Pools, and Standard-Settirg,  in Adam B. 
Jaffe et al. (eds.), 2001, Innovation Policy  and  the Economy  Volume r, available at: chttp://haas.berkeley.edu/-shapiro/ 
thicket.pdf,, citing the “flood of patents currently being issued by  the PTO”. 

53  Victor M. Batzel, Legal  Monopoly  in  Liberal England:  T h e  Patent  Controversy in  the Mid-Ninetecwth  Century, 

22 Bus. Hist. 189, 190, 1980. 
54  Timothy F. Myers, Note: Foreign  Infingement  ofBuriness Method  Patents, 7  Willamette J.  Int’l L.  & Disp. 
Resol. 101, 2000. In gzer Inc. v. Aceto  Corp., 853 F. Supp. 104, 105-06  (S.D.N.Y. 1994), the Court held that a 
foreign business that sold the product of a patented process to another foreign company, that in turn imported the 
product into the United States, was not a direct importer ofproducts and so not subject to the Patent Act provision<. 
See alco Raskind, supra, footnote 16, at 64: business method patents have the ability to hamper conipctition in the 
Gce  market and thus should receive stronger scrutiny than  other patentable innovations;  at  64: “The economic 
analysis of patent protection does not support the extension of patent protcction to methods of doing business. Both 
economic  theory  and  empirical  studies  of  patent-intensive  industries  cast  doubt  on  the  premise  that  patent 
protection  of business methods is required either as an incentive for innovation or as an ingredient of the eficient 
diffusion of business methods in the economy.” 
55  Playboy  Enterprises. Inc.  u.  Chuckleberry  Publishing,  Inc.,  939  F.  Supp.  1032 (S.D.N.Y.  1996). Jared  Earl 
Grusd, Internet Business Methods:  What Role  Does and  Should  Patent  Law Play!  4 Va. J.L.  & Tech. 9, S 47,  1999, 
available  at:  ~www.vjolt.net/vol4/~4i2a9-grusd.htd~; Michael  Perelman,  Software  Patents  and  the  Infomratiott 
Economy, 2 Mich. Telecomm. Tech. L. Rev. 93, 1996. 
56  J.H. Reichman, Charting the Collapse ofthe Patent-Copyright Dichotomy: Premisesfor a Restructured International 

Intellectual  Property  System, 13 Cardozo Arts 81 Ent. L.J. 475, 500-02,  1995. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

703 

make-up is fundamentally a combination of undividable forms of intellectual property, 
each protected under various types of intellectual property doctrines. Professor Barton57 
argued  that  “broad basic  patents  on fundamental research  processes” might  prevent 
consequential research,  and  could  be  subjected to  a  compulsory  licensing  regime. 
Overly  broad protection  could inhibit  competition  in  software by  malung it  much 
more  difficult  to  invent  around  existing  patents  and  by  increasing  the  costs  of 
subsequent innovation.58 

Since software  is  not  a  law  of nature  itself, in  so  far  as  it utilizes the  physical 
resources of computer hardware it should unquestionably be patent-eligible subject- 
matter. That being said, inclusion of a mathematical formula should not influence the 
patentability  of  a  claim  as  long  as  the  claim  was  directed  to  the  application  of  a 
mathematical formula. It could be argued that once competitive arts are incorporated 
as patent-eligible subject-matter, the duty to provide patent protection  on them will 
inevitably be  imposed on all World  Trade Organization  (WTO) Member countries. 
For instance, European  countries have suffered from the  uncertainty introduced by 
US. case-law.  The influence of US. case-law  on the  Convention  on the  Grant  of 
European Patents (EPc) is clear.59 Additionally, Professor Lunney60 proposes setting a 
marginal,  creative-investment  fraction  to  give  rise  to  a  presumption  of  non- 
obviousness.  Internet  patents  seem  to  demand  more  creativity  investment  than 
traditional innovations such as chemical or pharmaceutical inventions, which require 
substantial investment for testing and implementation. Therefore, such a solution may 
encourage  ineffective  investment  in  creativity.  E-commerce  combines  computer- 
software  development  and business development,  and  for  Internet  business-model 
patents, the  focus of the  claims tends to be  mainly  on a  method  of doing business 
conducted in the environment of cyberspace. 

~ 

57  Barton, supra, footnote 9,  at 1934. 
58  Merges, supra, footnote 36:  arguing that the growing volume of patents and the emergence of new types 
of patents such as  BMPS reinforce a gcneral need for new procedures, such as a European-style patent  opposition 
system, and  a reform  of patent  examiners’ training and incentives,  to  minimize  the  granting of invalid patents; 
Lawrence  Lessig,  The Problem  with  Patents,  23  April  1999,  available at:  www.thestandard.com/article/display/ 
0,1151,4296,OO.html):  attributing the growing problem of “bad patents”, especidly bad BMPS, as “thc space debris 
of cyberspace, to workloads and incentives for PTO Examiners that limit scrutiny, and to the high cost of litigating 
against  invalid  patents”;  Mark  A.  Lemley,  Rational  Igmrance  at  the  Patatent  Ofie, Working  Paper,  available  at: 
~www.law.bcrkeley.edu/institutes/law~econ/workin~apers/PDFpapers/olinwp200~-16.pdf~: 
arguing that reforms 
should focus on litigation rather  than  the  PTO, including  an  abolition  of the presumption  of validity in  patent 
litigation; Mark A. Lemley et al., Sofrw.re and Internet Law, 333-34,2000:  discussing specific weaknesses in the PTO’S 
scrutiny  of  software  patents  in  the  1990s; Jeff  Bezos,  A n   Open  Letter  on  the  Subject  .f Paten$,  available  at: 
~www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/subst/misc/patents.h~/105-1090555-5463134~: arguing that business method 
and  software patents should be limited to three  to five years  duration  and subjected to public  comment before 
issuance. See also  National  Research  Council, Computer  Science and  Telecommunications  Board,  The Digital 
Dilemma:  Intellectual  Property  in  the  Infoomation  Age,  228,  2000:  “The  past  decade has  seen a substantial defacto 
broadening  of  items  for  which  patents  can  be  obtained,  including  information  inventions  such  as  computer 
programming,  information design, and business methods.  The long-term  effects of this trend  are as yet unclear, 
although the near-term  consequences are worrisome.” 
59  Convention on the Grant ofEuropean Patents, 5 October 1973, 13 I.L.M. 268 (as amended 21 December 
1978). Thomas, supra, footnote 28, at 1161. EPC Examination Guidelines, C-W, 9,  available  at: cwww.european- 
patent-office.org;  Amazon.com. Inc. v .  BarnesandNoble.com. Inc., 73 F. Supp. 2d 1228 (W.D. Wash. 1999), vacated 
by  239 F.3d  1343 (Fed. Cir. 2001). 

6”  M. Lunney, E-obviousness, 2001 Mich. Tcl. Tech. L.R. 363. 

704 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

The Internet environment is merely that software is instrumental in performing the 
method  as opposed to “hardware”. The innovation in an Internet  BMP lies not in the 
computer  programming  associated with  implementing  the  model,  but  instead in  the 
“idea” of allowing a customer to order an item by a single action, or haggling over the 
price of an item.61 According to Bagley,62 courts must consider the  “real” deficiencies 
attendant in the prosecution of many Internet BMPS when deciding whether application 
of the doctrine of equivalents is warranted for “pseudo” pioneer innovations. Moreover, 
the EPC 2000 provides, in Article 52(2), a list of subject-matter that shall be regarded as 
inventions.63 The list excludes programs for computers and presentations of information. 
The Guidelines of Substantive Examination, however,  presented rules for assessing the 
patentability of computer-related inventions. Using the Guidelines and the provisions of 
the EPC, the EPO has  rejected all  claims related to  text-processing  computer  software, 
while  accepting  claims  relating  to  a  computer-controlled  X-ray  apparatus  and  an 
apparatus  for  mgitally  processing  a  two-dimensional  data  array  that  reduced  noise 
content. In the list mentioned  above, it appears that computer programs are excluded 
only to the extent that the application or patent claim relates to the computer program 
as  such. Thus,  despite the  exclusion  of computer  programs, it  seems that  the  idea  of 
patenting software-related inventions has not been completely discarded in Europe. An 
invention must also have a “technical character” in order to be patentable under the EPC. 
As mentioned  above, the EPO mentions that methods of doing business per se are 
excluded from  patentability pursuant  to  Article  52(2)(c) and  (3) EPC, and  claims of 
European  patent  applications  that  convey  such  methods,  or  simply  indicate 
commonplace features relating to the technological implementation  of such methods, 
will  not  be  searched  if  the  search  examiner  cannot  establish  any  technical problem 
which might potentially have required an inventive step for it to be overcome64. The 

61  Judge Rader, in Overhead Door Coy. v .  Chamberlain  Group, Inc., said that a “well-understood  tenet of the 
computing art  [that] ... ‘any software process can be transformed  into an equivalent hardware process, and any 
hardware process can be transformed into an equivalent software process’.”, 194 F.3d  1261, 1269 (Fed. Cir. 1999); 
see also Pamela  Samuelson et al., A  Manqesto  Concerning  the  Legal  Protection  o j  Computer Programs,  94 Colum. L. 
Rev. 2308, 2319, 1994: “Computer science has long observed that software and hardware are inter-changeable.’’ 
Steven  I.  Wallach,  How  Could  They  Patent  That?  Corporate  Intelligence,  28  July  2000,  available  at: 
~www.corporateintelligence.com/issues.cfm?Story~28&Author~Wallach~, 
expressing the desire for the USPTO or 
the courts to announce  a new rule addressing “whether well-known  bricks-and-mortar  business methods that are 
adapted to the Internet are obvious or not.” 

62  Margo A. Bagley, Internet  Business Model  I-’atentx: Obvious By Analogy,  7 Mich.  Telecomm. Tech. L. Rev. 
253,2001. Douglas Gary Lichtman, The Economics $Innovation:  Protecting Unpatentable Goods, 81 Minn. L. Rev. 693, 
1997. Lichtman says that state laws forbidding the copying of unpatentable inventions do not conflict with federal 
patent law, as long as the cost of inventing a non-infringing substitute is  satisfactorily low in comparison with the 
research and development (R&D)  costs of the original invention. So, the inventor of the non-patentable invention 
would be expected to license the invention to competitors and to earn a reward that does not exceed his R&D costs. 
63  According to  Article 52(2) of the  EPC 2000:  “(2) The following in particular shall not be  regarded as 
inventions within  the meaning of paragraph 1: (a)  discoveries, scientific theories and mathematical methods;  (b) 
aesthetic creations; (c) schemes, rules and methods for performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and 
programs  for  computen;  (d)  presentations  of  information.  (3)  The  provisions  of  paragraph  2  shall  exclude 
patentability of the subject-matter or activities referred to in that provision only to the extent to which a European 
patent application or European patent relates to such subject-matter or activities as such. (4) Methods for treatment 
of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal body 
shall not be regarded as inventions which are susceptible ofindustrial application within the meaning ofparagraph 1. 
This provision shall not apply to products, in particular substances or compositions, for use in any of these methods.” 
64  O.J. 2002, p. 248. Decision ofTechnica1 Board ofAppeal3.5.1 dated 26 September 2002, T 641/00-3  5.1, 

O.J. 2003, p.  319. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

705 

EPO Board of Appeal has generally held that computer programs and business methods 
become patentable subject-matter if they satisfy the “technical character” requirement. 
In 1992, the examining &vision of the E P O  refused SOHEIG5 a patent for a generd 
purpose computer management system and the basis for refusal was that in accordance 
with  Article  52(2) and  (3) EPC, the  subject-matter  of  the  independent  method  and 
system claimed could not  be  regarded as  an invention within  the meaning of Article 
52(1) EPC. However, the Board ofAppeal considered that the system of Claim 1 and the 
method of Claim 2 to involve technical consideration, resulting in technical contribution 
to the art, such that the system and method should not be excluded from patentability. 
Moreover,  a  method  of  controlling  a  pension-benefits  program66  involving  only 
economic concepts and practices of doing business cannot be invention; but inventive 
step was the programming of a computer system to carry out the invention and it could 
be said that producing a special technical effect means a technical Contribution to the art 
and thus be inventive. Regardless of the plain exclusion of BMPs under the EPC, some 
business methods are, in fact, patentable in limited circumstances under the theory that 
they  constitute  more  than just  business  methods  “as  such”.67  There  is  a  distinction 
between  business  methods  per  se  and  business  processes  implemented  through  an 
“apparatus” holding that only the latter is patentable subject-matter. The invention has 
to  solve a technical problem,  thereby  satisft-ing the  inventive step requirement,  even 
though the technical problem has nothing to do with the object of the invention68. In 

65  EPO Board of Appeal Decision, T 92/0769 SOHEI. See R. Soetendorp, Patenting Insurance-Related  Business 
Methods: Predictability and Risk, 2003 (I), JILT,  available at: ~http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/03-l/soetendorp.html~. 
66  EPO Board of Appeal Decision, T 0931/95-3.2.1,  Pension-Benefit Systems Partnership. 
67  President of the European  Patent  Office, Appendix 6, Examination  of “Business Method” Applications 
(EPo),  19  May  2000,  available  at:  ~www.uspto.gov/web/tws/appendix6.pdfi. The  President  of  the  EPO 
distinguished between (1) business methods  “in abstract, i.e. not specifymg any apparatus used in carrying out the 
method”;  (2)  business  methods  that  are  implemented  through  a  computer; and  (3) business  methods that  are 
implemented  through some “other apparatus”. Second, he explained that the first category of business methods, 
“abstract” business methods, are business methods  “as such” and therefore excluded from patentability. Third, he 
explained that the remaining two categories of business methods should be examined “using the same scheme for 
examination as  for computer {-implemented inventions].” The EPO President states that computer-implemented 
inventions are “presumed, pnmafacie, not to be excluded &om patentability” and that  “the subject-matter  of the 
claim is  therefore  to  be  examined for novelty  and inventive  step.”  He  then  explains  that  some  aspects of the 
invention must solve an “objective technical problem”. If it does not, it will be  “rejected on the ground that its 
subject-matter lacks an inventive step”. 

68  The Board  of Appeal  made  a  similar distinction  between the  object  of an invention  and  the  technical 
problem solved by an invention in the PetterssodQueuing System79 decision. Case T 1002/92, [I9961 E.P.O.R.  1 
(EPO Technical Bd. App. 1994), reprinted in 6 Chartered Institute of Patent Agents, European Patents Handbook, 

s 103 second edition,  1998, available at:  ~http://legal.european-patent-o~ce.org/dg3/pdf/t921002ex1 .pdf,. The 
invention at issue in Pettersson  was  a “system for determining the queue sequence for serving customers.”: “The 
claimed apparatus is clearly technical in nature  ... The fact that  one such practical application of such apparatus 
concerns the service of customers of ‘a business equipment’ does not mean that the claimed subject-matter must be 
equated with a method of doing business, as such .__ The program-determined  output signal ofthe hardware is used 
for  an  automatic  control of the  operation of another system  component  (information  unit)  and  thus  solves a 
problem which  is completely of a technical nature.” English courts have declined to follow the EPO’s decision to 
treat business methods that are implemented through an apparatus asperse patentable subject-matter, and they limit 
their inquiry of inventive step to the invention’s overall purpose which means that a component of a computer- 
implemented business method which makes a technical contribution will not make the invention patentable if the 
end result of the invention is  a method of doing business. MerriN  Lynch  Inc.’s Application,  [1988] R.P.C. I, 9-14 
(Patent Ct.  1989): applying a strict interpretation  of Article 52(2)’s business-method exception to invalidate claim 
for a computer-implemented  method for buying and selling stocks; Michal Likhovski, Fighting  the Patent  Wars, 23 
Eur. Intell. Prop. Rev. 267, 272, 2001. 

706 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

other words, the specification of at least one component of the invention that required 
the  solution  of  a  technical  problem  was  enough  to  show  an  inventive  step. 
Consequently, if a claim is directed to an apparatus (or a process utilizing an apparatus) 
used  to  carry  out  a  business  method,  it  w d  be  examined  under  the  same  three 
requirements as any other invention: industrial application, novelty and inventive step. 
Nevertheless,  the  EPO appears  to  be  more  restrictive  than  the  USPTO in  allowing 
computer-related  inventions.  Overall,  the  term  “technology”  is  construed  more 
narrowly in  Europe  than in  the  United  States.69  Finally, an  invention  has  not  to be 
merely a computerized version of a mental act but a technical problem has to be solved 
in order for the claimed invention to be patentable, 

Is software patentable and copyrightable? Is software a “writing” or a “machine”? 
Since the early 1970s software was predominantly protected by copyright because courts 
considered algorithms too  similar to  mathematical formulas to  be  patentable.70  The 
simple  existence  of  an  algorithm  does  not  comprise  a  workable  criterion  for 
distinguishing patentable  from non-patentable  subject-matter.71 Later  on, software is 
protected under both patent and copyright. There is a distinction based on the medmm 
of  expression, with  copyright  protecting  writings  and  patent  protecting  machines. 
Emerging technologies such as software and BMPS have revealed underlying conceptual 
contradictions in the  distinction between machines protected by patent, and writings 
protected by  copyright.72  It should be taken into consideration that a single computer 
can behave in an infinite number of ways through the use of different software, and the 
computer  combines  the  utllitarian  functionality  of  a  machine  with  the  continual 

Commission of the European Communities, Proposalfor a Council Directive on the Legal Protection ofDatabases, 
COM (92) 24 Final, May 1992; David R. Syrowik, International  Software Protection, 70 Mich. B.J, 656,657-58,  1991; 
Imf, Decision ofthe Technical Board ofApped 3.5.1, 14 February 1989, T38/86, O.J. EPO, No. 10; Koch GSterzel 
GmbH u. Siemens AC, Decision of the Technical Board of Appeal 3.4.1, 21 May 1987, T26/86,  1988, O.J. EPO, 
Nos.  1-2;  Vicom Systems Inc., Decision of the Technical Board  of Appeal  3.5.1,  15 July  1986, T208/84,  1987, 
O.J. EPO, No. 1; Marshall A. Leaffer, Protecting United States Intellectual Property Abroad: Toward a New Multilateralism, 
76 Iowa L. Rev. 273, 287, 1991. 

’0  Cottschalk u. Bewon, 409 U.S. 63 (1972): ruling against the patentability ofsoftware for converting decimals 
into binary numbers because of the similarity to a mathematical formula; Pamela Samuelson, Creating a New Kind 
of Intellectual Property: Applying the  L~SSOJZS 
ofthe Chip Law to  Computer Programs, 70 Minn, L.  Rev. 471, 502-03, 
1985: arguing for replacing the  distinction between writings and machines with a distinction between  original 
works of authorship  and non-obvious  implementations  of ideas; Robert Plotkin, Computer  Progmmming  and  the 
Automation oflnuention: A Casefor Software Patent Reform, 2003 UCLA J.L. & Tech. 7; S .  Davies, The Proposed Sofhare 
Directive: A  User’s Comments, 2003 (l), JILT, available at: chttp://elj.wanuick.ac.uk/jilt/03-l/davies.html~; C. Koboldt, 
Much Painfor Little  Gain: A Critical  View of Soffwre Patents, 2003 (l), JILT, available at: chttp://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/ 
03-l/koboldt.html);  S. Perchaud, Software Pafents and Innovation, 2003 (1). JILT, available at: chttp://elj.wanvick.ac.uk/ 
jilt/03-l/perchaud.html); Paul J. Berman and  Sinan Utku,  Trends:  E C  Soffware Proposal’s  Impact,  Pat.  Strategy  & 
Mgmt., at 1, April 2002: “In the United Kingdom, a computer-program-related  invention that is merely a method 
for doing business may not be patentable, even if a technical contribution is made. In Germany, on the other hand, 
a  computer-implemented  business  method  that  has  a  technical  aspect  may  be  patented,  even  though  the 
contribution the invention makes is non-technical.” 

7’  An  abstract algorithm defined in terms of pure logic in the absence of any physical reference points. 

’* Dan L. Burk, Patenting Speech, 79 Tex. L. Rev. 99, 2000; Andrew Chin, Computational Complexity and  the 
Scope  of Software  Patents,  39  Urimetrics J.  17,  1998; Donald  S.  Chisum,  The Future  oft Softmare  Protection:  The 
Patentability afrllgonthms, 47 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 959, 1986; Joseph Robert Brown, Jr..  Note, Software Patent Dyynamicr: 
Sofiware As Patentable  Subject Matter Afier Slate Street  Bank G Trust Co., 25 Okla. City U. L. Rev. 639, 2000; see also 
State  St. Bank G Trust Co. u. Signature Fin. Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 119 S. Ct. 851 
(1999): extending patent protection  to software. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

707 

flexibility of written expressions. According to Pamela Samuelson: 

“By executing different sets of stored instructions, a general purpose digital computer could 
‘become’  different  machines  ...  Machines  could  become  writings,  and  writings  could 
become machines.”73 
Adopting mi generis  intellectual property legislation, such  as  the  Semiconductor 
Chip  Protection  Act74 tailored  to  special  hybrids  such  as  computer  software,  is  a 
solution.75 Machines are offered patent protection not just because they are machines, 
but  also  because  they  apply  scientific ideas  and  pose  greater  dangers  of  closing-off 
avenues of innovation. It could be argued that BMPS include software allowing them to 
work  online  and  consequently  incorporate  the  characteristics for  a  valid  traditional 
patent and a software patent. 

Are not patents, granted without proper consideration of the prior art, as likely to 
meet  the statutory requirements of novelty and non-obviousness? It should be taken 
into account  that fundamental programming knowledge was  developed long before 
software  was  recognized  as  a  candidate  for  patenting  and  that,  as  a  result,  this 
knowledge was  kept as a trade secret and is not  available to those searching for prior 
art.76 According  to  Rochelle  Cooper  Dreyfuss,77  patents  are  unnecessary  to  create 
incentives to innovate in business methods and thus there is no social benefit to offset 
the social cost of exclusive rights. Additionally, Richard Posner78 considers that BMPS 
achieve vast monopoly power and produce a reward really in excess of the cost of the 
invention. The American Business Method Patent Improvement Act of 200079 raises 
the patentability bar for BMPS, increasing the  difficulty of satisfying the  requirement 
that  an  invention  must  be  non-obvious,  and  calls  for  post-grant  opposition 

~ 

~ 

~ 

 

I

_

D

... 

-  ~ . ~ .  

Program-Related  Inventions, 39 Emory L.J.  1025, 1 12&29,01990. 

73  Pamela  Samuelson. Benson  Revisited:  The C u e  Aminst Patent  Protection  for Almrithms and  Other Comouter 
74  17 u.s.c RR 901-914.2000. 
75  J.H. Reichman, Toward  Third Intellectual Droperfy Paradigm:  Legal Hybrids Between  the Patent  and  Copyright 
Paradigm,  94 Colum. L.  Rev. 2432,  1994; Irwin R. Gross, A  New  Frameworkfor  Software Protection: Distinguishing 
Behueen InteraIive and Non-InleruIive Ape& ofcomputer Program, 20 Rutgers Computer & Tech. L.J. 107,17746,1994, 
76  Amazon.com  v .  Bamesandnoble.com,  239  F.3d  1343 (Fed.  Cir. 2001). There were  sutficient obviousness- 
based doubts about the patent’s validity to preclude  a finding of substantial likelihood of success on the merits; 
Eugene R. Quinn, Jr.,  The Drolijeration ofElectronic Commerce Patents:  Don’t  Blame  the  PJO, 28 Rutgers Comp. & 
Tech. L.J.  121, 122 and N.5, 2002 

7’  Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss, supra, footnote 16, at 274-77;  Merges, supra, footnote 36: “the relatively short 
duration  of Internet business cycles prevents the market from having enough time to correct the anticompetitive 
consequences of ill-considered business method patents even if they are later deemed to be invalid.”; Malla Pollack, 
The  Multiple  Unconstitutionality  L$  Business  Method  Patents:  Common  Sense,  Congressional  Consideration  and 
Constitutional  History,  28  Rutgen  Comp.  & Tech.  L.J.  61,  2002:  attacking BMPS as  unconstitutional  because: 
(1) common sense shows that they do not promote progress; (2) Congress has not said that BMPS promote progress; 
(3) the term “useful arts” as used in the Constitution’s intellectual property clause does not contemplate BMPS; and 
(4) the  generation  that  ratified the  Constitution would  have considered BMPS to  be  “an abuse  of the rights of 
Englishmen”. 
78  Posner, supra,  foomote 27, at 5: criticizing recent  expansions of copyright law and attacking the granting 
of  “very  questionable”  BMPS. Declan  McCullagh,  Lefr  Gets  Nod  From  Right  on  Copyright  Law,  CNET News, 
20 November 2002, avdable at: ~http://news.com.com/2100-1023-966595.html~. 
79  H.R. 5364, 106th Cong., 2nd Sess. (2000), (introduced 3 October 2000); H.R. 1332, The Business Method 
Patent  Improvement  Act  of2001, 3  April  2001; Peter  R. Lando,  Brrsiness  Method  Patents:  Update Post  State  Street, 
9 Tex. Intell. Prop. L.J. 403,2001; Dan L. Burk and Mark A. Lemley, Is Patent Law Technology-Spenfic! 17 Berkeley 
Tech. L.J.  1155, 2002: exploring the idea that use  of the ordinarily skilled person standard necessarily results in 
differences in the application of some of the basic patentability rules. 

708 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

proceedings. Patent quahty consists of the likelihood that a patented invention meets the 
requirements of novelty and non-obviousness, and consequently will be found valid if 
challenged in litigation. BMPS all lie in a very narrow technical field, while the average 
patent frequently will involve multiple areas of technology. Allison & Tillerso found that 
Internet BMPS were no worse than patents in general in the late 1990s. The significance 
of  patents  as  a  means  for  appropriating  returns  from  research  and  development 
investments varies among industries and that patents are among the least favourite means 
in almost all of them, regardless that patenting activity has increased considerably.*’ 

S o h a r e  development and  computer-implemented  inventions make  a substantial 
contribution  to  the  gross  domestic product  (GDP) and  employment  in  the  EU.  The 
Proposal  of 20  February 2002 for a  Directive of the European Parliament and  of the 
Council  on the  patentability of computer-implemented  inventions82  covers inventions 
either of a product  (a programmed computer) or of a procedure which involves the use 
of a computer and the use of a computer network or any other programmable device. To 
be considered patentable, a computer-implemented invention has to be new and make a 
technical contribution,  which  is  defined as  a  contribution  to  the  state of the  art in  a 
technical field which is not obvious to a person skdled in the art. It should be taken into 
account that computer programs as such cannot be patented and wdl be excluded from 
the scope of patentabdity in the Proposal because they are only protected by copyright as 
laid down in Directive 91/250/EEC on the legal protection of computer programs. The 
Proposal does not make any substantive changes to the law concerning patentabihty under 
the EPC but its primary scope is to cochfj the requirement that computer-implemented 
inventions make a technical contribution, which is currently only an implicit requirement 
that  has  been  imputed  into  the  EPC by  the  EPO Board  of Appeal.  Additionally, the 
Proposal  does  not  permit  claims  for  “computer  program  products”,  which  can  be 
dstinguished from the apparatus used to execute the program. Ths differs from the EPO’s 
current approach which permits the patenting of computer-program products, without a 
chrect connection to the computer used to execute it, as long as they can bring about “a 
technical  effect  which  goes  beyond  the  ‘normal’ physical  interactions between  the 
program (software) and the computer (hardware) on which it is run.”X3 If the Proposal is 

80  Allison & Tiller, Business Method  Patent  Myth, Draft, July 2003, available at: (u?Nw.ssrn.com), at 16; at 82: 
“Internet  business  method  patents  spent  significantly more  time  in  the  PTO than  did  patents  in  three  areas: 
automotive-related, electronics, and mechanics. Internet business method patents spent significantly less time in the 
PTO than those in three areas: biotechnology,  chemistry, and phannaceuticals.” (emphasis in original); Quinn, Jr., 
supra, footnote 76, at 122: “This patent ... apparently gives cPriceIine.com, the exclusive right to what is known as 
a Dutch auction, something that is hardly new or non-obvious.”; Raskind, supra, footnote 16, at 64: “The economic 
analysis of patent protection  does not support the extension of patent protection to methods of doing business.”; 
at 78: “In the absence of data showing a need to spur innovation in business methods, it is equally plausible that the 
spur of competition and the long tradition of competition by emulation have been suficient to provide an adequate 
level of innovation in methods of doing business.” 
8‘  Wesley  M.  Cohen  et  al.,  Protecting  Their  Intellectual  Assets:  Appropriability  Conditions  and  Why  U.S. 
Manufncturing Firms Patent (Or Not), Nat’l Bureau ofEcon. Res. Working Paper No. 7552,2000; Richard C. Levin 
et al.,  Appropriating the Returnfrom Industrial Research  and Development, Brookings Paper on Econ. Activity 783, 796, 
3 987. 

82  COM  (2002) 92 final; O.J. C 151 E, 25 June 2002. 
83  leM/Computer Programs,  Case T  1173/97, [2000] E.P.O.R. 219, 234, EPO Technical  Bd.  App.  1998, 

available at: chttp://legal.european-patent-office.org/dg3/pdf/t97 1 173ex1 .pd6. 

DEVELOPMENTS ON BMPS 

709 

encompasses BMPs-into 

adopted,  its key effect wdl be  to strengthen  the technical-contribution  requirement for 
computer-implemented  inventions-which 
European  patent 
law.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  lack  of  clarification  as  to  what  is  considered 
“technical” for the purposes of malung a technical contribution to an art well might cause 
problems, talung into account hfferences  of approach.  In  the  IBil.i/Metkod for Interactive 
Rotation  of  Displayed  Graphic  Objects  decision?4  patent  was  granted  for  a  computer- 
implemented  invention  that  displays  graphical  objects  on  a  computer  monitor  in  an 
interactive format. The invention made a technical contribution because it allowed users 
to rotate the graphcal objects in a more precise manner than prior systems. However, in 
Siemens/Character  Form,85  a  computer-implemented 
invention  used  to  immediately 
convert characters to Arabic and &splay them on a computer monitor was not satisfactonly 
technical to satisfji the inventive step requirement, even though  the program converted 
characters more quickly and displayed them in a more readable format than prior systems. 
In fact, the true  inventiveness of each program lay in the fact that users could perform 
certain tasks more effectively and so each invention achieved its result through  creative 
computer programming. It could be argued that business methods should contribute not 
only to the field of economy, a field which, accordmg to the EPO Board of Appeal, is not 
sufficiently “technical”~6 but also should include a technically inventive step, which means 
that the true invention in any BMP d lie in the method itself. 

111.  CONCLUSION 

Will BMPS destroy the Internet, turning it into a big business-controlled institution? 
Patent  floods were  triggered  by  technological  breakthroughs  not  present  in  business 
methods.  Software  programming 
is  technology,  and  business  methods  involve 
programming and technology. Business methods are patentable since they comply with 
the conditions applying to a valid trahtional patent and would  not destroy cyberspace 
and e-commerce.  Of course, the business method should incorporate an invention and 
not  merely  an  abstract idea  or  a  simple mathematic  calculation.  Moreover,  business 
methods implementing mere abstract ideas or overall and general conceptions lack the 
characteristics for a valid patent and therefore are not patentable. 

84  Case T 0059/93,  5. EPO Technical Bd. App.  1994, available at: (http://legal.europcan-patent-office.org/ 
dg3/pdf/t930059eul .pd5. 
85  Case  T  158/88, [1992]  E.P.O.R.  69,  72-73,  Ero  Technical  Bd.  App.  1989,  available  at: 
~http://legal.european-patcnt-office.org/dg3/biblio/+880158epl.htm~: the claimed invention “merely showed the 
skilled person  how to construct  and program  a computer”  so  that  characters can be  converted and displayed  in 
Arabic in the manner described. 

86  Pension BeneJits, Case T 0931/95,  [2002] E.P.O.R. 52 at 532, EYO Technical Bd. App. 2000, available at: 

chttp://~ega~.europedn-patcnt-office.org/dg~/p~/~~~~~~ 

1 eu 1 .pdf,. 


