DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12101

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Bioinformatics innovations and patent eligibility

Ramesh B. Karky

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Centre for Economic Law and Governance, Elsene, Brussels, Belgium

Correspondence
Ramesh B. Karky, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Centre for Economic Law and Governance,
Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Elsene, Brussels, Belgium.
Email: rkarky@vub.ac.be

Bioinformatics technology (combination of biology and
information technology) is worthy of special consider-
ation in terms of intellectual property. Bioinformatics
inventions have brought up many uncertainties over the
issue of patent eligibility. There is neither any specific
bioinformatics law nor any court has adjudicated any
disputes related to bioinformatics. This paper critically
examines bioinformatics-related patent laws and practi-
ces and analyzes whether patent laws protect bioinfor-
matics innovations particularly software which analyze
DNA sequences.

K E Y W O R D S
bioinformatics-software, patent eligibility

1 |

INTRODUCTION

Bioinformatics is a rapidly developing area in the field of technology, with the potential for new inventions beyond our
imagination. Today, genetic information is freely available online from the databases developed and maintained by
various research institutions and bio-ventures. The availability of vast amount of information about the human
genome has increased the potential of bioinformatics inventions. The identification of the function of a gene, through
DNA analysis using sophisticated laboratory techniques and complex computer algorithms, will allow for the
development of useful products such as pharmaceuticals and therapeutic drugs, among other advancements. There is
no specific bioinformatics law as such, and no court has adjudicated any disputes related to bioinformatics. Except for
a few advanced countries, many countries have no bioinformatics technology. Due to its special nature (combination
of biology and information technology), bioinformatics is worthy of special consideration in terms of intellectual
property.

Bioinformatics inventions have brought up many uncertainties over the issue of patent eligibility. Some
bioinformatics inventions can utilize a composition of matter or article of manufacture claims, whereas most

© 2018 The Authors. The  © 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

140 | wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip

J World Intellect Prop. 2018;21:140–156.

KARKY

| 141

bioinformatics inventions are software processes. Bioinformatics software patents are among the most difficult
protections to obtain. This paper surveys and critically examines bioinformatics-related patent laws and
practices in the US, Canada, the EU, Australia, and Japan and analyzes whether bioinformatics innovations are
protected by patent laws. This paper addresses the issues relating to the patent eligibility of bioinformatics
innovations.

This paper has been organized into four parts. The first part (general introduction to bioinformatics) presents
the definition of bioinformatics,
its possible areas of application or use, and the role of gene and genetic
information in bioinformatics inventions. The second part (bioinformatics and databases) discusses relevant
databases and situations when such databases can be patent-eligible. The third part (bioinformatics invention and
patent eligibility) examines whether computer-implemented bioinformatics inventions are patent-eligible and
protected by patent laws in the US, Canada, the EU, Japan, and Australia and further examines each countries'
testing methods for granting patent to bioinformatics inventions. This part covers bioinformatics software, the
impact of the Alice decision on bioinformatics innovations, and open source. The fourth part presents the
discussion and conclusion of this paper.

The relevant patent laws and practices of the US, Canada, EU, Australia and Japan have been chosen for
discussion in this paper as these countries have bioinformatics technology. Most developing countries and least-
developed countries have no bioinformatics technology; thus, it is not possible to survey every country's relevant laws
in this paper.

2 | GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO BIOINFORMATICS

2.1 | Definition

There is no single and well-accepted definition of the term “bioinformatics.” The scope of this term's use is still being
debated within the biological and computer science communities. To some, bioinformatics and computational biology
are one and the same, and both are defined as any use of computers to process any biology-derived information and
characterize the molecular components of living things (Bioinformatic.org, 2017). To others, bioinformatics relates to
computer science, that is, information science or technology, where the information contained within biological data is
emphasized (Bioinformatic.org, 2017). In practice, a combination of the two concepts appears to have gained wide
acceptance among scientific communities.

Paulien Hogeweg had used the term “bioinformatics” for the first time (Cuticchia, 2013, 1). She writes, “In the
beginning of the 1970s, Ben Hesper and I started to use the term ‘bioinformatics’ for the research we wanted to do,
defining it as ‘the study of informatics processes in biotic systems’” (Hogeweg, 2011).

Biologists use computers to analyze, store, retrieve and predict the composition or structure of
biomolecules, which include genetic material (nucleic acids) and the products of genes (proteins) (Bioinformatic.
org, 2017). Fredj Tekaia defines bioinformatics as “the mathematical, statistical and computing methods that
aim to solve biological problems using DNA and amino acid sequences and related information” (Bioinformatic.
org, 2017).

On 17 July 2000, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) issued a working definition of Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology. It states that the two disciplines are rooted in life, computer and information
sciences and technologies and draw from mathematics, physics, engineering, biology and behavioral sciences
(BISTIC Definition Committee, 2000). The NIH defines bioinformatics as “research, development, or application
of computational tools and approaches for expanding the use of biological, medical, behavioral or health data,
including those to acquire, store, organize, archive, analyze, or visualize such data” (BISTIC Definition
Committee, 2000). Another definition, suggested by Gaff, Loren, and Dickson (2013) states that bioinformatics
is “the use of information technology in the analysis and organization of data relating to biology” (15). In other

142 |

KARKY

words, bioinformatics applies the principles of information science and technology to make life science data
more understandable and useful.

The NIH further defines computational biology as “the development and application of data analytical and
theoretical methods, mathematical modeling and computational simulation techniques to the study of biological,
behavioral, and social systems” (BISTIC Definition Committee, 2000). In other words,
it is a field that uses
mathematical and computational approaches to answer questions in theoretical and experimental biology. Although
bioinformatics and computational biology are distinct disciplines, a considerable overlap exists between them (BISTIC
Definition Committee, 2000).

There is no specific law that defines bioinformatics. Until now, there has been no record of adjudication on
bioinformatics other than the US Tax Court (Cuticchia, 2013, 13). The United States Tax Court, in Jin Xiong
Petitioner v. Commissioner of
Internal Revenue, has attempted to define bioinformatics and states that
bioinformatics is “the analysis of information relating to biological structures with the aid of computers” (T. C.
sum. Op. 2007–96, 2007).

2.2 | Applications

In general, bioinformatics focuses on examining when and to what degree genes are expressed (Cuticchia,
2013, 3). Bioinformatics can be used in various fields such as molecular medicine, personalized medicine,
preventive medicine, gene therapy, drug development, crop improvement,
insect resistance studies,
nutritional quality improvement and many others (Lapidus, 2017, 4). Identification of the function of a gene
will allow the development of useful products such as pharmaceuticals and therapeutic drugs. To identify the
function of a gene, DNA must be analyzed using sophisticated laboratory techniques and complex computer
algorithms (Watanabe et al, 2007, 208). Hence, genome research in general focuses on areas such as the
structure/function analysis of proteins encoded by specific DNA sequences, single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) analyze and the identification of the mutations of genes associated with diseases (Watanabe et al,
2007, 208). Many inventions related to DNA are employed in the treatment of human diseases (Watanabe et
al, 2007, 14).

Bioinformatics has been used in various ways. A. James Cuticchia gives one example of such types of

bioinformatics use:

An example of bioinformatics in action is the development of a treatment
for a fungal
infection . . . After isolating the fungus, a researcher might examine its DNA. This could be done
by sequencing the DNA or isolating the mRNA and sequencing that. The advantage of sequencing
the mRNA is that it is known that the gene is being expressed. Once there is a list of sequences, the
human genome sequence is queried. The goal is to find genes that are not in the human genome.
Once a list is created, a test is performed by “knocking out” genes on the list and noting fungal
death. The results show which gene(s) to target for therapy. A screening test, where the gene is
extracted and inserted into a molecular tool,
if not hundreds of
thousands, of molecules are tested in this manner. Those that have the desired effect are studied
more closely to understand the sequence and possibly even the structure of the molecule. The
molecule(s) that look most promising as a treatment are sent off to the medicinal chemistry
department. It is there where chemists work to modify the molecule to increase cellular uptake and
lethality to the target. Once a molecule has been modified, the “drug” can then be tested (Cuticchia,
2013, 5).

is created. . . . Thousands,

A few words on genes will be helpful to introduce the subject matter related to the bioinformatics innovation and

its patent eligibility.

KARKY

2.3 | Genes

| 143

Genes are made up of stretches of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that are found in the cell nucleus. The building
blocks of DNA are called nucleotides. There are four types of nucleotides: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine(C) and
guanine (G). The arrangement of these four nucleotides in a certain order is called a nucleotide (or DNA) sequence,
which contains the genetic information coding for proteins. In a cell, proteins composed of amino acids are
synthesized based on a design given by this nucleotide sequence in the DNA. To make the protein, the DNA must
be first copied into an intermediary molecule, messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA),
in a process called
“transcription.” mRNA is chemically very similar to DNA except that it has one atom of oxygen in the ribose sugar
component of each nucleotide. This subtle difference allows the DNA to form a double-stranded helix, whereas
RNA almost always exists as single strand (Tamura, 2006).

A gene often contains a portion of a nucleotide sequence that may not be translated into protein. “cDNA
(complementary DNA) is a gene excluding this portion of the nucleotide sequence. It may be called a full-length cDNA
so that it can be distinguished from ESTs (expressed sequence tags), which cannot alone produce any specific protein”
(Tamura, 2006).

Genes and genetic information are valuable input into most bioinformatics programs. In the bioinformatics fields,
gene-related patents have become important. The patent eligibility of genes and the uses of genes may be the basis for
many bioinformatics products (Carter-Johnson, 2013, 62).

For a long time, the patent eligibility of genes has been a contentious issue. Regarding the patent eligibility of
genes, in 1980, for the first time, in the Diamond v Chakrabarty case, the US Supreme court allowed the patentability of
life forms by granting a patent for a recombinant bacterium (447 U. S. 303, U. S. Sup. Ct., 1980). Since then, the United
States Patent and Trademarks Office (USPTO) had been granting patents for isolated DNA, but in 2013, the US
Supreme Court, in the Myriad case, ruled that, “[a] naturally occurring DNA segment is a product of nature and not
patent eligible merely because it has been isolated, . . .” (569 U. S. at Pp. 10–18, 2013). Currently, the US does not allow
the patenting of isolated DNA, whereas the EU, Canada and Japan allow this. On 7 October 2015, the High Court of
Australia, in the Darcy v. Myriad Genetics Inc. & Anor case, held that an isolated nucleic acid, coding for a BRCA1
protein, was not a “patentable invention” within the meaning of section 18(1)(a) of the Australian Patents Act ([2015]
HCA 35). In Europe, the patentability of isolated genes is expressly accepted in European law after the implementation
of the Directive on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions in 1998 (Directive 98/44/EC, 1998). Many
developing countries have not outlined any rules or policies on this issue. The issue of patent eligibility of genes or
DNA is different from the issue of patent eligibility of bioinformatics innovations. This paper focuses on only issues
relating to the patent eligibility of bioinformatics innovations.

In the next chapter, bioinformatics databases are discussed. Databases are one of the major components of

bioinformatics.

3 | BIOINFORMATICS DATABASES

Generally, the data in a bioinformatics database are not within the scope of patent protection (McBride, 2002, 1342).
The US Federal Circuit and the USPTO have ruled that a database is not patentable subject matter because it is merely
a “data structure” or “non-functional descriptive materials” (33 F.3d 1354; 32 F.2d 1579 (Fed. Cir., 1994). However,
the manner of creating and managing the database may be patent-eligible subject matter (patentable process) (see,
e. g., U.S. Patent No. 6,023,659). Furthermore, “Patent protection is more readily available for inventions derived from
the data” (Garon, 2013, 142; see USPTO.GOV, 2013).

The subject matter of bioinformatics involves “the acquisition, organization, storage, analysis and visualization of
information contained within biological molecules” (McBride, 2002, 1331, 1334). “Here we will define a
“bioinformatics database” to be one constructed for the storage, dissemination, and analysis of biological data”

144 |

KARKY

(Garon, 2013, 137). In general, a bioinformatics database involves “persistent sets of data that are maintained in a
consistent state over essentially indefinite periods of time” (Robbins, 1996, n.2).

Sequence databases are one area of bioinformatics. Bioinformatics databases in general are sequence databases
containing DNA, RNA and protein sequences. In addition to the sequence database, there are databases on gene
mapping, protein structure and literature citations (Chang and Zhu, 2010, 448). In February 2001, the Human Genome
Project and the Celera Genomics Group published a working draft of the human genome sequences in the journals
Science and Nature (Venter et al., 2001). In April 2003, final sequencing of the human genome was completed (National
Institute of Health, 2004). The vast amount of information released during the project will help further research and
innovation (Australian Law Reform Commission, 2004; see Collins, Green, Guttmacher, & Guyer). The availability of
the vast amount of information about human genome sequences has increased the potential of bioinformatics
inventions. Currently, genetic information is freely available online from the databases developed and maintained by
various research institutions and bio-ventures (Watanabe et al, 2007, 207).

Since the completion of the human genome sequencing project, bioinformatics has made it increasingly possible
to search for genes that are directly associated with different diseases and to understand how these diseases develop
at the molecular level, enabling scientists to develop better diagnostics, treatments and preventative measures
(Lapidus, 2017, 4). Bioinformatics has also facilitated the evolution of “gene therapy,” where genes themselves or
altered gene expression may be used to treat or even prevent certain diseases (Lapidus, 2017, 4). Since the recent
deciphering of complete genome sequences of several microorganisms, bioinformatics has been applied to exploit the
vast data generated, which will undoubtedly have far-reaching implications for health, energy and industrial
applications (Lapidus, 2017, 4).

There is no sui-generis law on database protection in the US, Canada, Japan or Australia, but the EU has the
Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases (Directive 96/9/EC, 1996). The database law (sui generis system) protects
bioinformatics data or the contents of the database. To qualify for database law protection, the contents must meet
the requirements of qualitative or quantitative investment of a substantive nature while obtaining the data or
verifying the data or presentation of the contents of the database. This European database protection is available only
to EU citizens (Chang and Zhu, 2010, 448).

Both the United States and Canada are watching the development and effectiveness of the database laws
of European countries. The United States attempted to enact a database rights law but was unsuccessful.
Several proposals for database protection legislation have been brought before the US House of
Representatives.1 In May 1996, prior to the December 1996 WIPO Diplomatic Conference, Congressman
Moorhead introduced a bill in Congress to protect databases (Bill H.R. 3531 (104th Congress), May 23, 1996
(Moorhead)). However, this bill, entitled “The Database Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy Act,”
was not enacted. Following several international meetings of experts and after the December 1996 Diplomatic
Conference, Congressman Coble introduced another bill (Bill H.R. 2652 (105th Congress), 9 October 1997
[Coble)]) (Howell, 1998, 84), that attempted to create a database treaty at the World Intellectual Property
Organization forum in May 1996.

On the issue of protecting the investment of a database compiler in Australia, Prof. Brian Fitzgerald says, “we need
to develop a sui generis regime similar to the European Directive on the Legal Protection of Databases (Howell, 1998, 42)
or to engage in a flexible development of common law principles such as unjust enrichment law” (Fitzgerald, 2003,
187; see Matarese v MooreMcCormack Lines Inc. 158F. 2d 631 (2nd Cir. 1946); Bristol v Equitable Life Insurance of US
132 N. Y. 264, 30 N.E. 506 (N. Y. C. A.)). In Japan, there is no specific database law as such; data in terms of compilation
have been covered by copyright law. The Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry made an agenda to
create a sui generis law for the protection of databases in Japan 20 years ago, but no progress was made and the law did
not materialize. Initially, the Japanese Patent Office had rejected a patent application for an English dictionary
arranged by phonics. Later, the Intellectual Property High Court granted a patent to the dictionary and ruled that “The
claim, including human behavior, can be patentable if that human act (non-native English speakers can discern
consonants more than vowels) can be patentable” (Intellectual Property High Court 2008. 8. 26). This case protected a

KARKY

| 145

database by means of a patent, but it was the only case in the history of Japan, and no court followed that line of action
again.

Copyright law cannot provide direct protection to bioinformatics database, but the compilation of such data or
the arrangement of information can be subject to copyright protection (Howard & Ramsey, 2002, 46). The functional
aspects of bioinformatics databases or information can be subject to patent protection, but not copyright protection.
In Canada, the Copyright Act (The Copyright Act [R. S., 1985, c. C-42]) provides copyright protection to compilations
of data (Section 2 of the Copyright Act [R. S., 1985, c. C-42]). The Copyright Act also provides a definition of
“compilation”: “(a) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works or
of parts thereof, or (b) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of data” (Section 2 of the Copyright Act
[R. S., 1985, c. C-42]). Similarly, the US Copyright Act of 1976 provides copyright protection to the compilation of data
(17 U. S. C. s 103). Japan and Australia have also similar provisions.

Section 101 of the US Copyright Act, 1976, defines data as a compilation of work and requires originality in the
selection, coordination or arrangement of data for copyright protection.2 The US Supreme Court held in Feist Pubs.
Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co (499 U. S. 340 (1991)) that only “creative selections and arrangements of information” are
considered “compilations” for the purpose of copyright protection. Copyright protection for biological databases
would extend only to original selections or arrangements. Copyright protection for databases remains limited: “In
the U.S., a set of facts cannot be protected merely due to the amount of resources that have been invested in the
database” (D'Souza, 2004, 4). The Supreme Court of Canada, in the TeleDirect Publications Inc. v American Business
Information Inc (43 (1997) 3D 296 (F. C. A.)), has adopted the same point of view. The Federal Court of Australia, in
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Limited ([2002] F. C. A. F. C. 112 (cited in Aus. L. Rev. as [2002]
192 A. L. R. 433.)), followed the English court decision and ruled that in the case of compilation, “sweat of the brow”
was sufficient for copyright protection, and it was not necessary for there to be originality such as intellectual
creativity ([2001] FCA 612. See Fitzgerald, 2003, 187). Overall, copyright protection is not effective because the
contents of the database can be copied and rearranged electronically, and a database of identical content can be
reproduced. The database (sui generis) protection law addresses this weakness in the copyright law (McCubbin, 2003,
250). As bioinformatics databases are freely available online, the effectiveness of the European database law is very
weak.

In addition to databases, software is a broad area of bioinformatics. Biologists use computers to store, retrieve,
analyze or predict the composition or the structure of biomolecules. In general, the field of bioinformatics includes
analyses of materials including biological sequences that are stored in special databases, and sophisticated software is
used to analyze these sequences. In the next chapter, this paper examines whether computer-implemented
bioinformatics inventions are protected by patent laws.

4 | BIOINFORMATICS INVENTION AND PATENT ELIGIBILITY

The legal landscape of bioinformatics patents is constantly evolving. Kirsch and Brown (2013) define bioinformatics as
“The science of using information to understand biology through the use of computational tools and database” (53).
They further state that “Bioinformatics inventions are typically directed to computer-implemented methods for
collecting, storing, processing or analyzing biological data. As such, laws that affect software patents will affect
bioinformatics patents” (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53).

Most bioinformatics inventions are software processes that rely on methods, systems, or computer-readable
medium claims (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53). However, in some cases, when the value of the invention resides in a
therapeutic product, such bioinformatics inventions can rely on the composition of matter or article of manufacture
claims (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53). When a patentable therapeutic product is invented using bioinformatics tools, a
separate patent application may also be filed on such a product using the so-called product-by-process claims, and a
patent may be granted to products created using the bioinformatics tools (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53).

146 |

KARKY

Kirsch and Brown, provide specific examples of bioinformatics inventions:

1. protein modeling systems;
2. sequence alignment methods;
3. combinatorial library systems;
4. computer-aided sequence visualization and analysis systems;
5. compositions of matter on microchips; and
6. methods of comparing patients' conditions.

Other examples include the following:

1. tools for the automation of laboratory experimentation and data generation;
2. the design, implementation, management and integration of databases;
3. the design of communications standards between databases from multiple sources; and
4. data-mining tools for retrieving, processing, analyzing and simulating biological data to determine a gene location
within a chromosome, find similar genes or proteins from other species, and determine 3D structure and function
of different proteins (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53).

Most bioinformatics patents will have method claims. Patentable subject matter is the most challenging
issue of method claim patent applications (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 55). For example, in Ex parte Kelkar (App.
No. 2009xps1004635 (B.P.A.I., September 24, 2010)),
the USPTO's Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences (BPAI) ruled that a method of determining similarity between two genetic profiles and a
computer program stored on a medium to perform the method did not satisfy the machine-or-transformed
test because it failed to require any particular machinery and failed to transform an article into a different
state or thing. The BPAI held that the claim was improperly directed to an abstract algorithm (unpatentable
mathematical algorithm) and that the computer-readable medium claims were not directed to patent-eligible
subject matter.

4.1 | Bioinformatics software

As noted above, software is the other broad area of bioinformatics. In bioinformatics, software turns data into
knowledge (Cuticchia, 2013, 10). The use of software in the biological and medical sciences is no exception
(Herman, Eckels, Montague, & Bowler, 2013, 23). Although the text of software source code is protectable under
copyright law, software can also be protected by patents, for example, programmable apparatuses, processes, or
methods (Herman et al., 2013, 28). “Bioinformatics software handles a torrent of data: both as input, which can
include large and complex databases representing genetic information, and as output, which can include
sophisticated computer graphics” (Meeker, 2013, 39). In general, the fields within bioinformatics analyze materials
including biological sequences that are stored in special databases, and sophisticated software is used to analyze
these sequences.

Biologists use computers to store, retrieve, analyze or predict the composition or the structure of
biomolecules. Biomolecules include genetic material
(nucleic acids) and the products of genes (proteins)
(Bioinformatic.org, 2017). It is important to identify the function of a gene to develop useful products such as
pharmaceutical products. To identify the function of a gene, the DNA is analyzed using bioinformatics (Watanabe
et al, 2007, 208). Hence, the patent protection of software is important for the further advancement of
bioinformatics.

Initially, computer software was protected by copyright law. Copyright protection was available only to software
code, not the functionality of computer software. Prior to the early 1980s, a software-implemented invention was not

KARKY

| 147

considered patentable subject matter. The US Supreme Court in Gottschalk v Benson (409 U. S. 63 (1972)) and Parker v
Flook (437 U. S. 584 (1978)) had ruled that software-implemented inventions were not patentable. In 1981, for the
first time, in the Diamond v. Diehr (450 U. S. 175 (1981)) case, the US Supreme Court held that a process using such
software (actually algorithms) was not unpatentable when the novelty lay in the use of the algorithms. Then the
USPTO began to issue patent to computer software innovations (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 50). After the Diamond v.
Diehr (450 U. S. 175 (1981)) case, other jurisdictions followed suit regarding the patent eligibility of software
innovations.

In 1999, considering the importance of the field of bioinformatics, the USPTO established a unit to examine
bioinformatics patent applications (Steinberg, 2000). This unit resides in the USPTO Technology Center 1600 (the
technology center that examines inventions in biotechnology and organic chemistry) (Steinberg, 2000) and was
designated AU 1631 (Vishnubhakat & Rai, 2015, 5). The USPTO had the opportunity to consider software and data
processing patent cases from the late 1990s (AT&T Corp. v Excel Communications Inc. 172 F.3d 1352 (Fed. Cir. 1999;
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v Signature Financial Group Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998)), which were closely
related to patents on computing tools for analyzing biological systems (Vishnubhakat & Rai, 2015, 5). The USPTO
classified bioinformatics inventions examined in AU 1631 into subsets of US patent class 703 pertaining to data
processing (USPTO, 2010), and traditional software informatics inventions examined in AU 2123 are classified
similarly (USPTO, 2015, Art Units 1764–2691). However, Vishnubhakat and Rai (2015) state that applications in AU
1632 were significantly different and “better” applications than the more traditional software-oriented data
processing art unit, AU 2123 (6).

We have shown that patent applications in bioinformatics generally received more stringent examiner
scrutiny and more rejections, particularly on notice-related grounds, than did applications in conventional
software informatics. Bioinformatics examiners paid significant attention to notice not only in the biological
aspects of the inventions that they examined but also in the inventions' strictly informational aspects. . . . At
the stage of incoming application, we found significant evidence that bioinformatics applications were
“better” than conventional informatics applications (Vishnubhakat & Rai, 2015, 51).

Although they may have different test methods, the US, Canada, Japan, EU and Australia have been
granting patents to bioinformatics software. Usefulness, novelty (newness), and non-obviousness are the basic
tests of the patentability of an invention. If these requirements are met, then an inventor is entitled to patent
protection. A patent entitles the patent owner the right to exclude others which is to prevent others from
making, using, selling or even offering to sell the patented invention (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 45). Full disclosure
of a patent is an inventor's obligation. Society will benefit from such full disclosure, and this is the main reason
why governments grant patents and protect such inventions. “Non-obviousness requires that a given invention
represent a sufficiently large inventive leap from the current state of knowledge, whereas enablement requires
that the applicant's disclosure sufficiently bridges that inventive leap so that others may follow” (Vishnubhakat
& Rai, 2015, 45).

In the US, a patentable invention is defined as follows: “Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process,
machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent
therefore, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title” (35 USC s. 101 (1952)). Novelty, utility and non-
obviousness are the statutory requirements for patentability (35 USC s. 101, 103, (1952)). Under US patent law, there
is no express provision of exclusion from patentability. However, inventions or discoveries, such as naturally occurring
organisms, laws of nature, natural or physical phenomena, abstract ideas, and any application of those things that does
not also reflect a different “inventive concept” than merely applying or isolating those things for particular purposes
are excluded from patentability by the court (Diamond v Diehr, 450 U. S. 175 at 185 (1981); Diamond v. Chakrabarty,
447 U. S. 303, 309 (1980); Bilski v. Kappos, 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 5, 14); Mayo Collaborative Services v.
Prometheus Laboratories, Inc., No. 10–1150, Slip Op. at 16.).

148 |

KARKY

Unlike in the EU, a computer program as such is not excluded from patentable subject matter by US law.
Computer software is patentable if it meets the statutory requirements for all patentable inventions (Vorndran &
Florence, 2002, 108). Previously, the test for the patentability of computer software was its ability to produce
useful, concrete and tangible results. In 1998, the US Federal Circuit Court of Appeals, in its decision in the State
Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group Inc. (149 F. 3rd 1368, 47 U. S. P. Q. 2d 1596 (U. S. Fed. Cir,
1998)) case, ruled that mathematical algorithms are patentable if they produce a “useful, concrete and tangible
result” (Vorndran & Florence, 2002, 113). In 2008, the US Federal Court of Appeals changed its previous test of a
“useful, concrete and tangible result” and decided in the In re Bilski (545 F. 3d at 961–2 (Fed. Cir. 2008)) case that in
order to be eligible as patent subject matter, the claims must either tie a business method to a machine or
represent a transformation (machine-or-transformation test). In 2010, the US Supreme Court in Bilski v. Kappos
case (US, No. 08–964 (6/28/10)), held that the machine-or-transformation test is a valuable clue to the question of
process patent eligibility, but this is not an exclusive test for process or method patents (Huys, Overwalle, &
Matthijs, 2011, 1106). “In the US, the Supreme Court's 2010 decision in Bilski v. Kappos didn't recast software such
as bioinformatics as subject matter that's un-patentable. Indeed, the Supreme Court broadened the test for what's
patentable subject matter by stepping back from the so-called machine-or-transformation test, which could have
limited the patentability of bioinformatics in the US. The Supreme Court stressed that additional criteria would be
used to test for patentability and, at this point, those criteria have not presented any significant roadblocks to
patenting bioinformatics” (Gaff et al., 2013, 17). Although the Bilski case is related to business methods, the test
has been applied in several biotechnology cases (Huys et al., 2011, 1105). Statutory requirements in addition to
the machine-or-transformation test have not been considered as an exclusive test for the patentability of
computer software.

In the Cybersource case (654 F. 3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2011)), the federal circuit found the method claim for detecting
fraud in credit card transactions over the Internet by comparing IP address to be patent ineligible. The Federal Circuit
applied the machine-or-transformation test and stated that “collection and organization of data regarding credit card
numbers and Internet addresses is insufficient to meet the transformation prong of the test” (654 F. 3d 1366, 1370
(Fed. Cir. 2011)).

In the Mayo Collaborative Services v. Prometheus Laboratories, Inc. case (132 S. Ct. 1289 (2012)), the US Supreme
Court unanimously held that even a newly discovered law of nature is not proper subject matter for patent eligibility.
The issue was whether a method claim of adjusting a drug dosage to a patient by measuring metabolites of that drug in
the patient's blood was patent-eligible subject matter. The US Supreme Court said, “Because methods for making such
determinations were well known in the art, this step simply tells doctors to engage in well-understood, routine,
conventional activity previously engaged in by scientists in the field. Such activity is normally not sufficient to
transform an unpatentable law of nature into a patent-eligible application of such a law” (Mayo Collaborative Services v.
Prometheus Laboratories, Inc., No. 10–1150, Slip Op. at 16.).

On June 19, 2014, the U. S. Supreme court, in the Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International case (573 US_, 134 S. Ct.
2347 (2014)), delivered a judgment on whether computer-implemented patent claims for facilitatating the
exchange of financial obligations between parties using a computer system as a third party-intermediary is eligible
for patent protection. The court determined whether the claims at issue were a patent-ineligible concept and
whether the claim's elements transformed the nature of the claim into a patent-eligible application. The court held
that intermediated settlement is an “abstract idea” because “the concept of intermediated settlement is ‘a
fundamental economic practice long prevalent in our system of commerce,”’ and the use of a third-party
intermediary (or “clearing house”) is a building block of the modern economy” (573 US_, 134 S. Ct. 2347 (2014) pp.
7–10). The court further held that “the method claims, which merely require generic computer implementation, fail
to transform that abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention” (573 US_, 134 S. Ct. 2347 (2014) pp 10–16).
Accordingly, the US Supreme Court held that the claims at issue lean toward a patent-ineligible abstract idea and
are not patent-eligible. In other words, the US Supreme Court in the Alice Corp. v CLS Bank International case (573
US_, 134 S. Ct. 234 (2014)), stated that it would be protected as an invention if the computer-implemented

KARKY

| 149

method claim transformed the nature of the claim, including any abstract ideas, into a patent-eligible invention.
The Alice decision treated the method and the product claims identically, and both are relevant to the question of
eligibility.

In the Alice case, the claim did not solve a technological problem or improve the functioning of the computer
itself or any other “technology or technical field.” The claims did not do more than implement an abstract idea
using a general-purpose computer. Hence, the claims did not contain an “inventive concept” that was sufficient to
transform the claimed abstract idea into a patent-eligible application (Biernacki, Castanias, Maiorana, & Johnson,
2014). “The claims at issue amount to “nothing significantly more” than an instruction to apply the abstract idea of
intermediated settlement using some unspecified, generic computer. According to the Court, “that is not ‘enough’
to transform an abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention”” (Biernacki et al, 2014). “Despite the presence of
hardware and computerized functions, the Court concluded that, in essence, the system and computer-readable
medium claims merely recite generic and conventional computer components for implementing the same abstract
idea as the representative claim. Accordingly, the Court found that these claims, too, lacked an “inventive concept”
sufficient for patent eligibility” (Biernacki et al, 2014).

The Alice decision (2014) is important because the US Supreme Court, for the first time in 30 years, ruled on
what types of computer-implemented patent claims can meet the patent eligibility requirements prescribed by
Section 101. “According to the Court, it is not sufficient to combine an abstract idea with a computer and simply
‘apply it’” (Biernacki et al, 2014, 5). In this case, the Supreme Court prescribed a possible measuring stick
“technological arts test” under Section 101 “under which patents supposedly should not be issued for claimed
inventions falling outside the “technological arts” (Biernacki et al, 2014). In this case, the court did not provide a
definition of what constitutes an “abstract idea” in the context of a computerized or business method patent
(Biernacki et al, 2014, 3). The Alice decision (2014) raises the question of the type of impact it will have on
bioinformatics invention. One of the dissenting judges from the federal circuit had predicted that it would be
the death of hundreds of thousands of patents (Biernacki et al, 2014, 4). In the Alice case (2014), “The Supreme
Court made a point to note “that many computer-implemented claims are formally addressed to patent-eligible
subject matter.” Thus, the court recognized that software claims that do improve the functioning of a computer
or improve other technology or a technical field, as well as potentially other categories of software innovations,
may be eligible for patent protection” (Biernacki et al, 2014). As all bioinformatics inventions are computer
implemented, this decision plays an important role as a guide to the patent eligibility of bioinformatics
inventions.

The Canadian patent system is very similar to that of the US system. The Canadian Patent Act (R. S. C., 1984, c.
P-4) defines “invention” as “any new and useful art, process, machine, manufacture or composition of matter, or
any new and useful improvement in any art, process, machine, manufacture or composition of matter” (R. S. C.,
1985, c. P-4). Novelty, non-obviousness and utility are the requirements for patentability (R. S. C., 1985, c. P-4, s.
28(3)). Mere scientific principles or abstract theorems are not patentable (Perry, 2004, 70). Like the US Patent Act,
the Canadian Patent Act has no provision of exclusion and public order or public morals as such.

Computer software is patentable in Canada. A software patent needs to meet the statutory requirements of
patentability, that is, novelty, utility and non-obviousness, and the software must be stored on a physical memory unit
to obtain patent protection. The computer software needs to provide a “technological solution to a technological
problem” to be considered patentable. Unlike Europe, a computer program “as such” is not excluded from patentable
subject matter by law in Canada. The Patent Appeal Board decided to allow patents for a computing apparatus
programmed in a novel manner (No. 096,284,52 C.P.R. (2d) at 100). The Canadian Patent Office has granted patents
related to computer software that are similar to those granted under the recent US policy (Gratton, 2003, 226; see
Vaver, 2011, 129).

Art. 52(1) of the European Patent Convention (EPC) defines patentable inventions as “Any inventions that are
susceptible to industrial application, that are new and that involve an inventive step” (1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c. 1 s. 52
(1)). However, “Methods for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy and diagnostic methods

150 |

KARKY

practiced on the human or animal body” are excluded from the patentable subject matter (1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c.
1 s. 52(4)). Furthermore, Art. 52(2) of the EPC provides that the following subject matters are not regarded as
invention:

1. discoveries, scientific theories and mathematical methods;
2. aesthetic creations;
3. schemes, rules and methods for performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for

computers; and

4. presentations of information (1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c. 1 s. 52(2)).

The European approach to the patenting of software innovations is different from that in the US. The European
Patent Office defines a computer-implemented invention as “one that involves the use of a computer, computer
network or other programmable apparatus, where one or more features are realized wholly or partly by means of a
computer program” (EPO, 2017). A computer program “as such” is not patentable in Europe, but copyright laws
protect program listings. A patentable computer-implemented invention should solve a technical problem in a novel
and non-obvious manner (EPO, 2017, 3). This pragmatic problem solution approach was set by European Patent
Office in The T 641/00 (Comvik) and T 258/03 (Hitachi) cases (EPO, 2017, 15). Here, the inventor needs to have a
claim beyond that of a program for a computer, and the invention needs to be tied to hardware (Gaff et al., 2013,16). A
particularly efficient method of identifying patterns in a sequence may be patentable in Europe, but the mere use of a
computer to perform a mental calculation is clearly not” (Gaff et al., 2013, 17). In Europe, patents are not granted
merely for program listings. Hence, a computer program “as such” is not patentable (1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c. 1 s. 52(2)(c)
and (3)).

The Japanese Patent Act (PA) (Patent Act, Act No. 121 of 1959, latest revision Act No. 109 of 2006) is the
governing law of patents in Japan. The Japanese Patent Act defines invention as a “highly advanced creation of
technical ideas utilizing the laws of nature” (Patent Act, Act No. 121 of 1959, latest revision Act No. 109 of 2006, art. 2
(1)). The “technical idea” must have a certain degree of concreteness, operatives or repetitiveness and may not simply
be a discovery of a “law of nature” (Kitagawa, 2006, 16–18). Novelty, existence of an inventive step and industrial
applicability are the basic requirements of patentability (Patent Act, Act No. 121 of 1959, latest revision Act No. 109
of 2006, art. 29). The following inventions are not patentable in Japan because they are not industrially applicable
(Watanabe et al, 2007, 208; see Tokyo District Court, 2002.4.11, Hanrei Jiho 1828, p 99; see Patent Act, Act No. 121
of 1959, latest revision Act No. 109 of 2006, the first sentence of Art. 29(1)):

1. Methods of treating the human body by surgery, therapy or diagnostic methods practiced on the human body.
2. An invention that is commercially inapplicable.
3. A practically inapplicable invention.

However, a computer program is patentable in Japan, where copyright protection is also available for the source
code of the computer software program. For methods of processing, patent protection is available for new
innovations if they meet patent requirements. To qualify as an invention for patentability, there must be a creation of
technical ideas utilizing a law of nature. There is no special rule for bioinformatics software innovations. The Japanese
Patent Office (JPO) applies Examination Standards (Examination Guidelines for Patent and Utility Model) for all types of
patenting (JPO, 2005). Part VII of the Examination Guidelines for Patent and Utility Model is entitled “Examination
Guidelines for Inventions in Specific Fields,” and Chapter 1 of Part VII includes a chapter devoted to computer
software-related inventions. For patent protection to be granted, a software program is required to be a creation of
technical ideas “utilizing a law of nature.” According to the Standard for Software, this requirement is typically met by
“concretely realizing the information processing performed by the software.” Bioinformatics generally involves
information processing using hardware resources.

KARKY

| 151

In Australia, the Patents Act 1990 provides the legislative framework for patents. To be eligible for patent
protection, an invention must be novel, involve an inventive step, and have a useful application (Patents Act 1990
(Cth) s 18). The Patents Act defines “invention” as “any manner of new manufacture the subject of letters patent and
grant of privilege within section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies, and includes an alleged invention” (Patents Acts 1990
(Cth), sch 1). The Australian Patents Act Section 18 prescribes the requirements for a patentable invention.
Accordingly, a patentable invention is one that

is a manner of manufacture within the meaning of Section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies 1623;
is novel compared to the prior art;
involves an inventive step compared to the prior art;
is useful; and

1.
2.
3.
4.
5. has not been secretly used in Australia before the priority date by or with the authority of the patent holder

(Australian Law Reform Commission, 2004).

The Patent Act clearly excludes “human beings, and the biological processes for their generation” from
patentability (Patents Act 1990 (Cth) s 18(2)). IP Australia's Manual of Practice and Procedure (the Manual) states that
“human genes, tissues and cell lines' are outside the scope of s 18(2) and will be patentable, if the other requirements
set out in the Patents Act are satisfied” (Australian Law Reform Commission, 2004; see IP Australia, 2002; see Nicol,
1996). Pure or abstract methods of doing business are not considered patentable but become patentable if the
method is implemented using a computer.

IMPACT OF THE ALICE DECISION ON BIOINFORMATICS

5 |
INNOVATIONS

Bioinformatics software patents are among the most difficult protections to obtain (Gaff et al., 2013, 16). Bioinformatics is an
inter-disciplinary science. Some bioinformatics inventions can utilize a composition of matter or article of manufacture claims,
whereas most bioinformatics inventions are software processes (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 53). The database itself (“data
structure” or “non-functional descriptive materials”) does not constitute patentable subject matter (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 56),
but “the manner of creating and managing the database may constitute a patentable process” (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 56). “We
found considerable evidence that bioinformatics applications were ‘better’ than conventional informatics application”
(Vishnubhakat & Rai, 2015, 51). One of the biggest challenges for patenting bioinformatics innovations is to find patent
examiners who are trained in both computer science and biology (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 54; see Vishnubhakat & Rai, 2015,
82). “For example, a bioinformatics patent application recently examined by the USPTO contained claims directed to methods
for managing a biological database . . .. Throughout examination, the examiner at the USPTO demonstrated his lack of
proficiency with respect to the biological arts . . .. Furthermore, as the examiner was unfamiliar with genes and amino acids, the
examiner did not understand the term expression data” (Kirsch & Brown, 2013, 54).

In 2014, after the decision of the Alice case, “the Federal Circuit in the Ultramercial, Inc. v Hulu, LLC (LLC, 772 F.3d 709
(Fed. Cir., 2014)) case invalidated a software patent on grounds that the claims were directed toward ineligible subject
matter . . .. The court decided that no inventive concepts was present, and that the claims were patent ineligible under
section 101. In finding that there was no inventive concept, the court did not cite prior art, but rather summarily
concluded that the claims were “routine, conventional activities” (Vyas, 2015, 15–16). In the DDR Holding v Hotels. Com
(L.P., 773 F.3d 1245 (Fed. Cir., 2014)) case, “the claims were directed to a scheme to allow a website host to keep a visitor
on the host's site even when the visitor clicked a link displaying third-party merchant's information . . . allows a visitor to
make purchases from the third-party merchant. The majority determined that the claims recited patent-eligible subject
matter, as the claims were not directed towards an abstract idea” (Vyas, 2015, 16). Summerfield states, “I have analyzed
US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) data covering millions of patents over the past decade, which shows that

152 |

KARKY

patents covering computer-implemented inventions, outside the particular fields of ecommerce, business and finance,
not only are not in any form of decline, but have never, at any time over the past decade, shown any significant difference
in grant rate from the bulk of patents issued by the USPTO across all fields of technology” (Summerfield, 2017).
However, “the US Supreme Court decision in Alice looks to have eliminated above 75% of new business method patents”
(Summerfield, 2017). Summerfield further states, “The data presented above demonstrate that in established fields of
software technology, covered by associated Art Unites in USPTO Technology Center 2100, neither US court decisions
nor changes in management have resulted in any identifiable deviation in US patent grant rates, despite the consistent
gleeful claims of opponents that ‘software patents are dead’” (Summerfield, 2017).

In the US, there are many inconsistent decisions that make the question of what can be patented uncertain and
the validity of any issued patents potentially dependent on which panel of Federal Circuit judges may ultimately hear
the case. Difficulties in obtaining patents for bioinformatics inventions and their impact on the development of new
bioinformatics technologies is an area requiring further empirical study.

It would not be out of context to mention here that there are some similar provisions among the patent laws of the
US, Canada, EU, Japan and Australia, but there are also contradictory provisions. The EU and Japan have provision of
public order and morals, where any bioinformatics inventions contrary to public order and morals are considered as
non-patentable. The European Patent Convention states that European patents shall not be granted to “Inventions,
the commercial exploitation of which would be contrary to public order or morality; such exploitation shall not be
deemed to be so contrary merely because it is prohibited by law or regulation in some or all of the Contracting States”
(1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c. 1 s. 53(a)). Australian patent law also has a provision where a new invention, the “use of which
would be contrary to law,” is non-patentable (Patents Act 1990 (Cth) ss 18(2), 50(1)(a), 101B((2)(c), (d)). In contrast, US
and Canadian patent laws have no such provision regarding public order or morals.

5.1 | Open source

Bioinformatics invention is heavily dependent on the availability of vast collections of data that can be downloaded
and analyzed by researchers anywhere in the world (Contreras, 2013, 147). The science of bioinformatics has been
growing in more directions than any other field of knowledge. Openness is the main operating principle in the field of
bioinformatics. Most genomic data are currently freely available online. The scientists who are working in this field
often have a strong urge to facilitate their invention freely for others to use. Richard Stallman epitomized the free
software movement as a vision of making software development a culturally enriching experience (Fitzgerald, 2003,
188). In the free software movement, software source code is distributed in an open and free manner to enable the
software to be further modified and improved (Fitzgerald, 2003, 188). “In this process copyright law is used to create a
‘copyleft’ effect as opposed to a ‘copyright’ effect by mandating that code should be open and free for all to use in
innovation and development of software” (Fitzgerald, 2003, 188). “In doing so, copyright law is used to structure the
practices of software developers into a community of effort while in a broader sense ensuring diversity and social
innovation of the digital environment and thereby social existence. In short, free software and open code projects
have the potential to use intellectual property (copyright) law to enrich and better structure cultural existence”
(Fitzgerald, 2003, 188). “It can be argued that copyright law exists in this model for the purpose of augmenting a better
social framework and not necessarily to secure economic gain. Similar arguments have surfaced in the areas of genetic
data and bioinformatics” (European Commission, 2001; Fitzgerald, 2003, 188; see McBride, 2002, 1331).

Dr. Yoshiyuki Tamura of Hokkaido University in Japan believes that there is “Creative Commons” movement in Japan that
is similar to the “Open Source” movement in the US and Europe (Tamura, 2014). Furthermore, according to Dr. Shugo
Nakamura of the University of Tokyo, Japan, the bioinformatics field is still new in Japan. He has been working in this field for
the past 23 years where his aim has not been profit but to share his findings or research with others to contribute to the field. He
further states that “We get almost all data freely online, and much is from the US. I also believe in ‘Open Source.’ According to
Dr. Nakamura, he has not patented any findings and has no plans to do so. He believes that patents may not be the optimal
solution for this type of invention because they are costly and may hinder further research (Nakamura, 2014).

KARKY

6 | CONCLUSION

| 153

Bioinformatics has brought revolutionary changes to the fields of medicine, agriculture, botany and others.
Scientists who are working in this field have fewer profit motives and have greater motives to contribute to society
by offering their works or inventions freely. The spirit of the scientists has impacted this field differently from
other fields.

A system of strong protection of bioinformatics software will play a role in further innovations and
investments in this field. Bioinformatics software can be protected by different types of intellectual property
rights, but they do not provide equal types of protection. Copyright law protects original expression, but it does
not protect ideas or the functionality of software programs. Copyright may protect the source code of a computer
software program, but if such code has been rewritten and is no longer similar to the original code, copyright
protection will not be available. Bioinformatics inventions can be protected using patents. Among the available
protections, patent protection is the broadest protection. However, bioinformatics software patents are some of
the most difficult protections to obtain.

Statutory requirements plus the machine-or-transformation test have not been considered exclusive
requirements for the patentability of computer software. In the Alice case (2014), the US Supreme Court, for the
first time in 30 years, ruled on what types of computer-implemented patent claims can meet the patent eligibility
requirements prescribed by Section 101. This decision can be an important guideline with respect to the patent
eligibility of bioinformatics inventions. In the Alice case, the US Supreme Court has propounded a possible measuring
stick “technological arts test” as one of the requirements of patent eligibility. In the Alice case, the claim did not solve a
technological problem or improve the functioning of the computer itself or any other “technology or technical field.”
The claims did not do more than implement abstract ideas using a general-purpose computer. Hence, for patent
eligibility, the claim needs to include an “inventive concept” that is sufficient to transform the claimed abstract idea
into a patent-eligible application (Biernacki et al, 2014, 3).

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Ramesh Bikram Karky, SJD, LLM, is a Fellow of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court
of Nepal, and International Consultant (Intellectual Property and International Trade) based in Canada. His research
interests include law, science and technology, intellectual property rights law, biotechnology law, and international
trade law.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Author would like to thank Dr. Larry Morgan (Senior International Consultant), Professor Mark Perry and
Professor Kim Van der Borght for their continued support and encouragement, and Dr. Sameer Sakallah for his helpful
advice on various scientific technical issues examined in this paper.

ENDNOTES

1 These include US, Bill H. R. 3531, Database Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy Act of 1996, 104th Cong., 1996
(Moorhead) and US, Bill H. R. 2652, 105th Cong., Collections of Information Antipiracy Act, 1997 (Coble). See Suneeta
D'Souza, “Gene Meets Machine: Intellectual Property Issues in Bioinformatics,” (2004) 12 Health L. Rev. No. 2, p. 4
[D'Souza].

2 Section 101 of Copyright Act, 1976, (17 U. S. C.) states, “A ‘compilation’ is a work formed by the collection and assembling of
preexisting materials or of data that are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the resulting work as a whole
constitutes an original work of authorship. The term ‘compilation’ includes collective works.”

154 |

ORCID

Ramesh B. Karky

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6099-384X

KARKY

REFERENCES

Australian Law Reform Commission. (2004). Genes and Ingenuity: Gene patenting and human health, ALRC 99. Available

online at: http://www.alrc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pdfs/publications/ALRC99.pdf. [Accessed April 2017].

Biernacki, J. V., Castanias, G. A., Maiorana, D. M., & Johnson, M. W. (2014). Commentary: Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank: Did the
Supreme Court Sign the Warrant for the “Death of Hundreds of Thousands of Patents?” JONES DAY Publications,
June 2014 [online]. Available online at: http://www.jonesday.com/files/Publication/a0e82e3b-1fa5-4164-a90e-
98d1bf635bbe/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/230bb63a-b8b2-4bca-894e- c7c39b1effdb/Alice%20Corp%20v
%20CLS%20Bank.pdf. [Accessed January 2016].

Bioinformatic.org.

(2017). Bioinformatics [online]. Wiki. Available online at: http://www.bioinformatics.org/wiki/

Bioinformatics. [Accessed April 2017].

BISTIC Definition Committee. (2000). NIH Working Definition of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. Available online
[Accessed

https://www.kennedykrieger.org/sites/default/files/research_related_files/bioinformatics-def.pdf.

at:
April 2017].

Carter-Johnson, J. (2013). A gene patent primer. In Jorge L. Contreras, & A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal

issues for computational biology in the post-genome era (pp 61–75). Chicago: ABA Publishing.

Chang, J., & Zhu, X. (2010). Bioinformatics databases: Intellectual property protection strategy. Journal of Intellectual Property

Rights, 15, 447–454.

Collins, F. S., Green, E. D., Guttmacher, A. E., & Guyer, M. S. (2003). A vision for the future of genomics research: A blueprint for
the genomic era. Nature, 422, 835–847. Available online at: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v422/n6934/full/
nature01626.html. [April 2017].

Contreras, J. L. (2013). Data release and access. In Jorge L. Contreras & A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal
issues for computational biology in the post-genome era. Chicago: ABA Section of Science and Technology (ABA Publishing).
Cuticchia, A. J. (2013). Bioinformatics overview. In Jorge L. Contreras & A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal

issues for computational biology in the post-genome era (pp 1–14). Chicago: ABA Publishing.

D'Souza, S. (2004). Gene meets machine: Intellectual property issues in bioinformatics. Health Law Review, 12(2), 34–43.
EPO. (2017). Patents for software? European law and practice [online], pp 1–18. Available online at: http://documents.epo.
org/projects/babylon/eponet.nsf/0/a0be115260b5ff71c125746d004c51a5/$FILE/patents_for_software_en.pdf. [Ac-
cessed April 2017].

European Commission. (2001). Managing IPR in a Knowledge-based economy—Bioinformatics and the influence of public

policy, proceedings of a workshop held in Brussels, November.

Fitzgerald, B. (2003). Theoretical underpinning of intellectual property: “I am a pragmatist but theory is my rhetoric." The

Canadian Journal of Law & Jurisprudence, 16(2), 179–189.

Gaff, B. M., Loren, R. A., & Dickson, G. (2013). Protecting bioinformatics as intellectual property. Computer, 46(1), 15–17.

https://doi.org/10.1109/MC. 2013.27

Garon, J. M. (2013). Database protection. In Jorge L. Contreras, & A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal issues for

computational biology in the post-Ggenome era (pp 137–146). Chicago: ABA Publishing.

Gratton, E. (2003). Should patent protection be considered for computer software-related innovations?. Computer Law Review

and Technology, 7(winter), 223–253.

Herman, M. K., Eckels, J., Montague, J., & Bowler, J. J. (2013). Open source software and bioinformatics. In Jorge L. Contreras,
& A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal issues for computational biology in the post-Genome era (pp 23–36).
Chicago: ABA Publishing.

Hogeweg, P. (2011). The roots of bioinformatics in theoretical biology. PLoS Computational Biology, 7(3): e1002021. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002021. Available online at: http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1002021. [Accessed April 2017].

Howard, E., & Ramsey, G. (2002). Bioinformatics databases: Questions of copyright. BioPharm International, 15(11), 46–48.
Howell, R. G. (1998). Database Protection and Canadians Laws, prepared for Industry Canada and Canadian Heritage, October

1998 (ISBN 0-662-27289-7, Cat. No. C2-370/1998E).

Huys, I., Overwalle, G. V., & Matthijs, G. (2011). Gene and genetic diagnostic method patent claims: A comparison under
current European and US patent law. European Journal of Human Genetics, [online], 19(10):1104–1107. Available online at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3190248/. [Accessed April 2017].

KARKY

| 155

IP Australia. (2002). Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure, National, Vol. 2 [8.5.1]. (Japanese) Intellectual Property High

Court 2008. 8. 26.

JPO (2005), Examination Guidelines for Patent and Utility Model, Part VII: Examination Guidelines for Inventions in Specific
Fields, Chapter 1 Computer Software Related Inventions, Chapter 2 Biological Inventions, Chapter 3 Medicinal Inventions,
December 28, 2000, Latest Revision November 2005. Available online at: https://www.jpo.go.jp/tetuzuki_e/t_tokkyo_e/
1312-002_e_0930.htm. [Accessed April 2017].

Kirsch, G. J., & Brown, C. F. (2013). Software patents. In Jorge L. Contreras & A. James Cuticchia (eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal

issues for computational biology in the post-genome era (pp 45–60). Chicago: ABA Publishing.

Kitagawa, Z. (ed.). (2006), Doing business in Japan Chapter 16 intellectual property. Matthew Bender, New York. Vol. 1.
Lapidus, A. L.

(2017). Bioinformatics and its applications St. Petersburg, pp 1–35. Available online at: http://

bioinformaticsinstitute.ru/sites/default/files/lapidus_1_0.pdf. [Accessed April 2017].

McBride, M. S.
1331–1364.

(2002). Bioinformatics and intellectual property protection. Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 17(4),

McCubbin, C. (2003). Legal issues in bioinformatics. Journal of Commercial Biotechnology, 9(3), 249–265.
Meeker, H. J. (2013). Software development. In Jorge L. Contreras & A. James Cuticchia (Eds.), Bioinformatics law: Legal issues

for computational biology in the post-Genome era (pp 37–44). Chicago: ABA Publishing.

Nakamura, S. (2014). Interviewed at interfaculty initiative in information studies, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life

Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan on January 16.

National Institute of Health. (2004) National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI): Important Events in NHGRI history,
at: https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/national-human-genome-research-

Available online
institute-nhgri. [Accessed April 2017].

Nicol, D. (1996). Should human genes be patentable inventions under australian patent law? Journal of Law and Medicine, 3(3),

231–248. (ISSN: 1320–159X).

Perry, M. (2004). From Pasteur to Monsanto: Approaches to patenting life in Canada. Journal of International Biotechnology

Law, 1(1), 70.

Robbins, R. J. (1996). Bioinformatics: Essential infrastructure for global biology. Journal of Computational Biology, 3(3),

465–478.

R. S. C. (1985). Patent Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. P-4). Available online at: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-4/page-1.html
The Canadian Patent Act, R. S. C. (1984), c. P-4.
Steinberg, D.

(2000). New USPTO unit examines bioinformatics applications. The Scientist, [online]. Nov. 27, 2000.
Available online at: http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/13144/title/New-PTO-Unit-Examines-
Bioinformatics-Applications/. [Accessed April 2017].

Summerfield, M. (2017). How the fate of software and business method patents has turned on USPTO directors and the
[online]. Available online at: http://blog.patentology.com.au/2017/01/how-fate-of-

courts. The Patentology Blog,
software-and-business.html. [Accessed April 2017].

Tamura, Y. (2006). Patent protection of biotechnology in the information age (1). Intellectual Property Law and Policy Journal,

10, 49–66.

Tamura, Y. (2014). Interviewed on Bioinformatics innovations at Research Institute for Information Law & Policy, School of

Law, Hokkaido University, Japan on January 25.

USPTO. (2010). Classes Arranged by Art Unit: Art Units 1611–1763. Available online at: https://www.uspto.gov/patents-

application-process/classes-arranged-art-unit-art-units-1611-1763. [Accessed April 2017].

USPTO. (2015). Classes Arranged by Art Unit: Art Units 1764–2691. Available online at: https://www.uspto.gov/patents-

application-process/classes-arranged-art-unit-art-units-1764-2691. [Accessed April 2017].

USPTO. Gov. (2013). Guidelines for Examination for Applications for Compliance with the Utility Requirement, 66 Fed. Reg.

Available online at: https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2107.html#sect2107. [Accessed April 2017].

Vaver, D. (2011). Intellectual property law copyright, patents, Trade-marks. Toronto: Irwin Law.
Venter, J. C., Adams, M. D., Myers, E. W., Li, P. W., Mural, R. J., Sutton, G. G., . . . Zhu, X. (2001). The sequence of the human
genome. Science, 291(5507), 1304–1351. Available online at: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/291/5507/
1304.full.pdf. [Accessed April 2017].

Vishnubhakat, S. & Rai, A. K. (2015) When biopharma meets software: Bioinformatics at the patent office. Harvard Journal of

Law and Technology, 29, Submission Draft at page 5. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2610431

Vorndran, C., & Florence, R. L. (2002). Bioinformatics: Patenting the bridge between information technology and the life

sciences. IDEA—The Journal of Law and Technology, 42(1), 93–131.

Vyas, A. D. (2015). Alice in wonderland v. CLS bank: The supreme court's fantastic adventure into section 101 abstract idea
jurisprudence. Akron Intellectual Property Journal, 9(1) 1–28. Available online at: http://ideaexchange.uakron.edu/
akronintellectualproperty/vol9/iss1/1. [Accessed April 2017].

Watanabe, M., & IP Study Group of Tsukuni & Associates. (2007). How to Read and Write Japanese Patent Specifications in

Chemistry and Biotechnology. Maruzen Planet Co., Ltd., Tokyo.

156 |

KARKY

Convention on the Grant of European Patents, Oct. 5, 1973, 1065 U.N.T.S. 199, c. 1 s. 52(1) [The European Patent

Convention, 1973].

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases,
1996 O.J. (L 77) 20. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX:31996L0009 [Accessed
April 2017].

Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological
Inventions, 1998 O.J. (L 213) 13, 21 & art. 17. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX
%.[Accessed April 2017].

Alice Corp. v CLS Bank International, 573 US __, 134 S. Ct. 2347 (2014).
App. No. 2009-004635 (B.P.A.I., September 24, 2010).
AT&T Corp. v Excel Communications Inc., 172 F.3d 1352 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
Ass’n for Molecular Pathology v Myriad Genetics, Inc., 569 U. S. at Pp. 10-18 (2013).
Bilski v. Kappos, US, No. 08-964 (6/28/10).
Bristol v Equitable Life Insurance Society of US 132 N.Y. 264, 30 N.E. 506. (N.Y.C.A.).
Cybersource Corp. v Retail Decisions, Inc., 654 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2011).
Cybersource Corp. v Retail Decisions, Inc., 654 F.3d 1366, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2011).
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Limited, [2002] F.C.A. F.C. 112. [Cited in Aus. L. Rev. as [2002] 192 A.L.

R. 433].

[2001] FCA 612.
Diamond v Chakrabarty, 447 U. S. 303 (U. S. Sup. Ct., 1980).
Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U. S. 175 (1981).
Darcy v Myriad Genetics Inc. & Anor, [2015] HCA 35.
DDR Holdings v. Hotels.com, L.P., 773 F.3d 1245 (Fed. Cir. 2014).
Feist Pubs. Inc. v Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U. S. 340 (1991).
Gottschalk v Benson, 409 U. S. 63 (1972).
In re Bilski. 545 F.3d at 961-2 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
In re Lowry, 32 F.2d 1579 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
In re Warmerdam, 33 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
Matarese v MooreMcCormack Lines Inc. 158 F. 2d 631 (2nd Cir. 1946).
Mayo Collaborative Services v. Prometheus Laboratories, Inc., 132 S. Ct. 1289 (2012).
No. 096,284, 52 C.P.R.(2d) at 100. [The Patent Appeal Board of Canada].
Parker v. Flook, 437 U. S. 584 (1978).
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group Inc., 149 F. 3d 1368, 47 U. S. P. Q. 2d 1596 (U. S. Fed. Cir. 1998).
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v Signature Financial Group Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
TeleDirect Publications Inc. v. American Business Information Inc., 43 (1997) 3D 296 (F.C.A.) [official cite: [1998] 2 F.C. 22

(F.C.A.)].

Tokyo District Court, 2002.4.11, Hanrei Jiho 1828.
The Copyright Act (R. S., 1985, c. C-42).
Government of Japan (1959), Patent Act, Act No. 121 of 1959, latest revision Act No. 109 of 2006.
Patents Act 1990 (Cth) s 18. [Australia].
Ultramercial, Inc. v Hulu, LLC, 772 F.3d 709 (Fed. Cir. 2014).
U.S. Patent No. 6,023,659.
17 U. S. C. s 103.
35 USC s. 101 (1952).

How to cite this article: Karky RB. Bioinformatics innovations and patent eligibility. J World Intellect Prop.
2018;21:140–156. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12101


