Trade-Mark Protection and Counterfeiting 

The Kappa  Gvoup Experience 

Domenico SINDICO* 

The Kappa  Group  (KG) is a group of companies whch is becoming increasingly 
important in the production and distribution of sportswear and leisure wear. Its strategy 
for trade-mark protection and anti-counterfeiting activities is strongly influenced by its 
structure,  namely  by  its  size,  by  the  particular  nature  of  its  licensees,  and  by  the 
organization of its production. 

KG is quite small if compared with other major sportswear and leisure wear apparel 
companies, e.g. Nike, Adidas or Reebok, although its distribution capacity is sufficient 
to qualifir it as world-wide, being present in over sixty countries and distributed in all 
five  continents. The  reduced  dimensions have  made  it  necessary  for  KG  to  think 
differently and to structure its network of licensees and its world-wide activity in a non- 
traditional way, using its ingenuity to make up for its limited availability of capital and 
manpower. It  has,  in  addtion, been  necessary  to  give particular importance to  new 
markets, such as those of East Asia and Latin America as well as those of the transition 
economies in Eastern Europe, where it is possible to acquire market-shares not already 
firmly held by larger competitors. 

KG  consists  of a  core of companies, each having a  specific vocation-the 

trade- 
mark  owner,  the  licensing structure,  the  service provider for  the  licensees, product 
research and development, international marketing, communication, sourcing centres 
etc.  These  companies are  mostly  located  in  Italy,  in  the  city  of  Turin,  where  the 
managerial and strategic centre of the Group is concentrated; there are, however, also 
companies abroad such as the Asian sourcing centre, which is based in Hong Kong. 

Licences have been granted, with very few exceptions, to independent companies 
which  are  formed  by  local  entrepreneurs,  local  employees  and  local  capital.  This 
structure, which may be considered a particular form of “fianchising”, is innovative in 
is the case of the best- 
so far as it is not organized at the final mstribution level-which 
known  examples of franchising, from McDonalds to Benetton-but 
at the wholesale 
level,  where  the  local  licensees  have  the  possibility  either  to  produce  the  articles 
independently, according to the standards set forth by KG, or to acquire them from the 
sourcing centres organized by  the licensor and  then  to  independently organize their 
own distribution network in their territory. 

The core structure provides most services to the licensees, including the above- 
*  Rossotto e Associati, Turin, Italy 

408 

THE JOURNAL. OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

mentioned possibility of concentrating the production of the articles required through 
sourcing centres strategically located world-wide. The possibility to pool the orders and 
source the production for all, or at least for a large number of licensees greatly reduces 
costs and makes it possible to obtain, world-wide, a uniform product, strictly controlled 
by the licensor. 

The licensees are therefore drectly involved in the KG system and are aware of the 
characteristics of the  goods produced.  They have  a  contractual duty to  supervise the 
market and to signal any counterfeiting activities they detect to the corporate bo&es in 
charge of trade-mark protection; they have the necessary  information and knowledge 
to cany out t h s  duty efficiently. 

Of course,  decisions about  prosecution,  or any  other  kind  of intervention,  are 
reserved to the corporate structure, and no &rect judicial involvement of the licensees 
is allowed, unless so decided by the corporate &rectors in charge. 

The  KG  structure  has,  therefore,  a  direct  bearing  on  the  anti-counterfeiting 
strategy  and  on  licensees’  participation  in  this  activity.  The  licensees  are  &rectly 
concerned  with  the  activity  of  counterfeiters  since  they  interfere  with  their  own 
business in their territory and they have sufficient knowledge of the articles produced 
so as to be able to directly recognize and speciG the details which make it possible  to 
recognize goods as counterfeited. The collaboration with KG’s corporate bodes implies 
that, in  ad&tion to  monitoring  their  markets, local licensees are  often nominated as 
experts in helping the police to recognize the counterfeited goods. 

The corporate strategy for licensing the trade marks also has an impact in the host 
economies: since the group does not use  local distributors or license the trade marks 
for large territories, licences have been  granted to local entrepreneurs who use  their 
own capital, their  own organization and local employees. This implies an important 
transfer of know-how,  not only as far as the productive process is concerned, but also 
at the organizational and commercial level, and this transfer is important in countries 
such  as  those  of the  transition  economies  of Eastern  Europe  or  of Latin  America, 
where  the  acquisition  of  know-how  by  the  local  entrepreneurs  is  an  essential 
conktion for economic growth. It is true that this policy also makes it more difficult 
for KG,  at this stage, to find suitable partners  and to  achieve rapid  growth  in those 
countries. However,  KG  considers that,  in  the  long  run,  this  strategy will  pay  off, 
establishing very stable relationships, well-rooted  in the countries where the licensees 
operate. 

In addtion, this policy has a positive long-term impact on the countries where it 
is applied, since it makes it possible to promote local growth at the same time as it makes 
it possible  to achieve corporate policy. Through the &rect participation of local capital 
and local labour in the process of growth of KG, it creates autonomous local managerial 
capacity and entrepreneurship, which then belongs to the country and is independent 
of  the  relationship  with  KG.  In  other  words,  the  SMS and  expertise  which  are 
developed become  a patrimony of the local entrepreneurs and may  be  used  in  other 

TRADE-MARK  PROTECTION AND COUNTERFEITING 

409 

activities or  transferred to  other local  entrepreneurs who  benefit indirectly from this 
experience. 

As far as counterfeiting is concerned, the experience matured during the last four 
years (KG was formed in 1994, following the bankruptcy of the previous owner and the 
acquisition of the trade marks by  the present ownership) shows that the phenomenon 
vanes greatly according to the geo-cultural and economic characteristics of the countries 
concerned. 

In the  transition  economies in Eastern Europe,  counterfeits are  often produced 
abroad, mostly in Turkey and Greece, are of lower quality, and are sold through street 
markets. A partial exception to this trend has been observed in Yugoslavia  and Croatia 
where counterfeits, mostly coming fiom Greece, have been found in small stores.’ 

It is interesting to analyse the way the production  and distribution of counterfeit 
goods for export is organized in Turkey. There is a large number of small, even f d y -  
run shops which receive the material to be used and manufacture the articles for export. 
Each of the small shops has a very limited quantity of goods so that, if they are raided, 
there is  no sipficant loss for the central organization. At  a  given date the goods are 
collected by  the  person  or persons  in  charge  of transport  and  immediately shipped 
through Bulgaria.2 

Evidently  it  is  extremely  dfficult  to  crack  such  an organization  because  the 
parcelled production guarantees that a certain quantity of goods is always available to the 
smugglers, and the reduced economy in which the small shops work is a guarantee that 
they d not escape fiom the network which provides them with the raw materials and 
guarantees their sales. The similarity with the pre-industrial-revolution  organization of 
work in Western Europe is strikmg. 

It is also interesting to note that the Turlush judicial system has proven reliable in 
prosecuting and condemning the counterfeiters. KG organized an investigation in the 
city of Istanbul and in the region of Izmir during the year  19973 and, after obtaining 
evidence,  filed  judcial  complaints  against  the  culprits  requesting  their  criminal 
prosecution. In a period of one to two years, seven counterfeiters have been brought to 
trial, nine have been condemned to pay heavy fines or serve prison t e r n ,  or both, and 
businesses  were  closed.4  A  few  of  them-two 
asked  to  settle  their 
position directly with KG in exchange for the withdrawal of the complaint, signing an 
affidavit and reimbursing expenses (about US$  1,000 each).5 

to  date-have 

Turkish  counterfeits  are  smuggled  through  Bulgaria  and  arrive  mostly  on  the 
Hungarian market, although we have found articles bought  in Estonia and Lithuania, 

1  The situation in the former Yugoslavia worsened during the civil war in Bosnia and Croatia, making it more 
difficult to intervene in those years. Today, with the end of the war, KG is again controlling the use of the trade 
marks in the territory. 

2  Report  of November  1996  to  KG’s local  correspondent,  Mr  Aydn  Dens,  from  Istanbul  International 

Investigation and Information Service-Foreign  Trade Co. Ltd. 

and Information Service-Foreign  Trade Co. Ltd. 

3  Report ofJuly 1997 to KG’s local correspondent, Mr Aydn Dens, from Istanbul International Investigation 
4  Istanbul Criminal Court: K G  v. Musfda Sahin and &$k  Kuya; K G  v. Ayhan Erden; KG v. Butik K~ksul. 
5  K G  v. Abdiilkadir Nas and  Yahya Yiice; K G  v. Hiiseyin Has. 

410 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

arriving probably through Russia.6 Most Greek counterfeits are sold in Yugoslavia and 
routed through Macedonia and Serbia.7 

The quality of the products, and consequently their price, is very low. The goods 
are immediately recognizable and the counterfeiters do not  even attempt to copy the 
design and style of the  original products, attaching the trade marks to generic articles 
(mostly track suits). This is important because it shows that it is the trade mark in itself 
which is appealing to the counterfeiters and not the style or the design; it implies a high 
degree of popularity  of the  trade mark  and a  low level of sophistication of the  final 
consumer. 

Recently, however, a very different and interesting case has been successfully dealt 
with. A shipment of windbreaker jackets bearing the Kappa trade mark was stopped at 
Helsinh airport, originating fiom Vietnam and with final destination in Estonia. A KG 
local licensee certified the articles to be counterfeits and the certification was confirmed 
by KG corporate quahty control. The final destination of the shpment was Tallin, and 
the buyer opposed the seizure on the grounds that the goods had been regularly bought 
in a factory producing for KG.  The seizure has  been  confirmed and the  case  is  now 
pending before the Helsinlu Court.8 It is interesting to note that this case points out the 
capacity of some local Estonian entrepreneurs to buy large stocks of counterfeit articles 
in a far-away  country to be resold in Estonia. Evidently, there is capital available for such 
an  activity which confirms the pattern used for Asian counterfeit products, a situation 
which w d  be better explained hrther on in this article. 

The same pattern had been  used  in  a  previous  case  of counterfeits produced in 
China  and  shipped  to  Lithuania  through  Finland.  The  shipment was  seized  at  the 
Helsinlu  airport  and  the  case  brought  before  the  District  Court  of  Helsinh  which 
conftrmed the seizure.9 

Local Kappa licensees in Eastern Europe have shown an interest in trying to deal 
with  the  problem  created by  the  counterfeits in  their  own  countries in an  informal 
manner, being rather reluctant to  proceed ju&cially. Their  attitude is  mostly  due to 
&strust of the efficacy of legal reme&es and to their opinion that large scale counterfeits 
are  controlled by  organized crime and it is  very dangerous to  act against  them.  This 
situation appears to be very real, and in one case a local lawyer frankly refused to act 
when  requested to  organize a  seizure of a  truckload of counterfeit goods which had 
been identified. 

On the  other  hand,  there  have  been  two  cases  where  the  Hungarian Customs 
authorities, under the provisions of Act XI of 1997 on the Custody of Trade Marks and 
Geographical  Goods  Labels,  seized  counterfeited  Kappa  goods  at  their  borders.10 

’ Information provided by KG’s Serbian licensee. 
6  Information provided by KG’s Finnish licensee. 
8  Three hundred jackets seized on September 1998; seizure confirmed by the District  Court of Helsinki. 
Two hundred track suits seized on September 1997. The goods were destroyed following a decision of the 

District Court of Helsinki of 14 January 1999. 

I0  Information received from Hungarian Customs on 4 June 1998 about the  seizure  of goods coming fiom 

Turkey, and about a seizure made on 13 October 1998. 

TRADE-MARK  PROTECTION AND  COUNTERFEITING 

41 1 

Unfortunately, such an act requires that  the licensor initiate a lawsuit  and  notifjr  the 
competent customs authorities within ten days of serving notice of the seizure and, in 
our  case,  that  time-limit  proved  too  short  (although  the  notice  was  written  in 
Hungarian and sent to the address of the trade-mark owner in Luxemburg) and made it 
impossible to block the imports. However, these episodes show that things are moving 
in the right drection at the administrative and legislative level. 

In  addition, the  KG  Hungarian licensee  has  recently joined  the  Association  of 
Trade-Mark  Protection,  which  is  an organization  collaborating effectively with  the 
Hungarian  police  for  the  seizure  of  counterfeit  goods  and  the  prosecution  of 
counterfeiters.  Although  up  until  today  we  have  not  yet  had  any  information 
concerning  seizures  of  goods  bearing  the  Kappa  trade  mark,  the  creation  of  this 
association is certainly a very strong signal of the maturity of the local entrepreneurs. 

modelled  upon 

It appears that only institutional measures, such as the above-mentioned Hungarian 
act for the protection of trade marks, may improve the present situation in the transition 
economies in Eastern Europe. Enabling institutional bodies, such as the customs offices, 
to intervene drectly, and creating or improving some kmd of police or administrative 
organization-possibly 
the  United 
Kingdom-would  be a clear signal to local and foreign investors of the interest of local 
government to protect industrial property and at least to enforce the existing legislation 
on this matter. Existing legislation could be improved, or new laws could be approved, 
mostly  in  order  to  permit  quick  enforcement  and  to  provide  sufficient  time  and 
opportunities for trade-mark  owners to intervene judicially and to effectively recover 
their  costs.  As  a  result,  foreign  companies  would  certainly  be  more  interested in 
investing in the transition economies of Eastern Europe. 

the  Trading  Standards  in 

A  few  problems  related  to  the  area  described  above  have  arisen  also  in  some 
in Finland, Sweden and 
countries bordering with Eastern European countries-mostly 
to the imports of counterfeit goods from Estonia and Poland. Goods 
Denmark-due 
have been bought in street markets in those countries by small shop-owners in Denmark 
and Finland and resold in their own countries. The problem has proved to be minor, 
with  the  sole  exception  of  the  Mustumuki  market  in  Tallin,  which  is  practically  a 
counterfeit department store, where counterfeits of very important sport trade marks, 
including Kappa, can be found. Up until now KG has dealt with resellers in Denmark, 
Sweden and Finland. The goods have been seized and the shop-owners have paid legal 
expenses and signed an affidavit never to sell counterfeits in the future."  It is interesting 
that in the case of a few Juventusjerseys, coming fiom Poland and sold in Denmark, the 
quality appeared to be better than average, and KG  could not be sure about the origin 
of the goods.12 

The situation is very different in the Western European markets. As a matter of fact, 
Kappa  counterfeits  are  also  widely  found  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Italy, Spain  and 

1'  In Sweden in 1997, the local shop-owner  agreed to pay legal fees and destroy the counterfeits. 
12  Seizure by the Danish customs on January 1997; settled by an agreement of 11 July  1997. 

412 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Portugal, but they are either good quality articles which copy the style and design of the 
original products, or related to the sponsoring of major football teams (namely Juventus, 
Barcelona-until 
last season, Athletic Bilbao, Porto, Monaco, Manchester City, etc.). 
Rarely are very low quahty goods sold in the street markets. 

However, the large Western markets attract large amounts of counterfeits and of 
disruptive parallel imports. In the United Kingdom, good quality counterfeits produced 
in  the  Far  East  and  low  quality Turlush  ones  have  been  found,  as  well  as  original 
products from previous seasons imported from other European Union countries. 

The United Kingdom is surely a good example, as far as the fight against counterfeit 
goods is  concerned, but this is well known and needs no addtional comments. It may 
be interesting, however, to evaluate the organization of the anti-counterfeiting activities 
of a  KG local licensee which  has  personnel dehcated  to  act  as liaison with  Trading 
Standards Officers  and  has  retained  a  law  firm  to  maintain  control  over  the  more 
complicated situations, such as the sale of counterfeits in large department stores or the 
use  by  unauthorized manufacturers of counterfeit ornamental stripes reproducing the 
Kappa  trade mark.13 Both  the local licensee and  the  trade-mark  proprietor company 
participate in the ACG (Anti-Counterfeiting Group), and every semester the situation is 
assessed at a meeting with the KG corporate official in charge of anti-counterfeiting and 
trade-mark  control. The situation is therefore always monitored both at the local and at 
the corporate decision level.  The importance of the structure is justified both  by  the 
economic relevance of the U.K. market for KG and by the results obtained. 

Quite different is the situation in Spain, where most counterfeit goods arrive from 
Portugal and are of relatively high quality. The region of Porto and all the border zone 
is f d  of labour-intensive small shops which produce a large quantity of track suits, sweat 
shirts and jerseys-mostly  with the trade marks and emblems of football teams sponsored 
by KG-and 
sell them on both sides of the border.14 In this situation, it was particularly 
important to control the border, and to use customs controls in order to detect and seize 
the counterfeit goods but, since both countries are part of the Shengen Agreement, this 
possibility, which in the past had proven to be positive, is no longer available. Another 
option,  which  has  given  good  results,  is  to  maintain  good  relations with  the  most 
important transport companies, who can inform KG should their vehicles be used for 
the shipment of counterfeits. 

In  Italy  there  is  a  very  serious  problem  related  to  the  sale  and  distribution of 
counterfeit jerseys reproducing the colours and trade marks of football teams sponsored 
by KG. The counterfeits are widely sold, mostly outside the stadiums where the matches 
are played. Only seldom have there been raids to stop this dlegal activity.15 

Counterfeiters have tried to avoid penalties by not reproducing the trade mark of 
the technical sponsor (Kappa, Adldas, Nike, etc.) but they usually use the colours, trade 

l 3   In both cases, an out-of-court  settlement was reached. 
l 4   In July 1995, a seizure of one thousand-three  hundred counterfeit articles was made in Miranda do Douro. 

The seizure was judicially confirmed, and the court action is  s

 pending. 

d

A large seizure was  made before the JuventusAnter match in Turin on 25 October 1998, when over two 

thousand counterfeit jerseys were seized on the stands outside the stadium. 

TRADE-MARK  PROTECTION  AND COUNTERFEITING 

413 

marks, crest and/or  name of the team on their products, and often the trade mark or 
name of the commercial sponsor appears as well. While the Italian courts have no doubt 
about considering as counterfeits the articles which bear the registered trade marks of 
the  technical sponsor and/or  of the  teams,  there  have been  decisions which  do not 
consider it dlegal to use  the name and colours of the teams and/or  the name or trade 
mark  of  the  commercial  sponsors.l6  While  some  of  these  decisions  are  absolutely 
correct, because it is impossible to defend simply a banal use of colours (e.g. black and 
white stripes), since it is not  a “dminctive element”, it is not  correct, in this author’s 
opinion,  to  deny protection  when  the  articles are  clearly identified  as  related to  the 
teams sponsored, as can be seen by the use of the name of the team, of the players and/or 
of the  commercial sponsor, even without  the  use  of the  trade mark  of the  technical 
sponsor. In this case, the exclusive right of the technical sponsor to sell the garments of 
the sponsored team are certainly and consciously violated. 

Counterfeiting of leisure wear with the Kappa trade marks has also been a problem 
in Italy, although it is mostly tied to minor  sales in the street markets or by  peddlers, 
mostly in the major cities. Street vendors who have a few items on sale, together with 
a large number of other articles of many different kinds and sources, are rather common, 
but represent a minor commercial problem, although they have a disruptive effect on 
the  appreciation  of  the  trade  mark  by  the  public.  While  KG  has  been  actively 
prosecuting these infringements, it has been decided not to proceed in all cases, but to 
maintain sufficient pressure  on the  counterfeiters by  prosecuting every  time  there  is 
evidence that leads to the actual producers, as well as in a reasonable percentage of the 
other cases. 

The  experience  concerning  counterfeit  products  origmating in  Asia  is  quite 
different. They are less  common  on the local markets, although some activities have 
been detected, for example in Singapore, where a large stock of goods were put on the 
market through a local outlet store.”  In other markets, however, very large stocks of 
articles coming fiom Asian  factories have been detected and are often identical to the 
originals--so  much so that it is almost certain that they are produced on the basis of the 
original design and materials. It is most likely that the same companies which produce 
for the trade mark’s owner also have a parallel production of counterfeit goods, or that 
they provide the  design and material  to the  counterfeiters. Particularly sigtllficant has 
been the experience on the Canadian market where a chain of small sports stores selhng 
“custom-made  counterfeit jerseys” of all the major European soccer teams was  found 
and investigated. The owner declared to a detective that he could obtain a large amount 
of shirts with the origrnal trade marks, produced in Indonesia by the same suppliers of 
the  original  trade-mark  owners,  for  delivery  within  one  month  fiom  the  order.’* 

16  In a case concerning the use of the crest and the colours of the Lazio football team, the District Court of 
Turin ruled that the use  of the emblem could not he monopolized by  the team and  that the consumer did not 
associate the crest with articles licensed by the team. 

17  The case was closed with an out-of-court settlement following a letter of cease and desist by a local lawyer. 
18  The local detective presented himself as  a  potential buyer and videotaped the entire encounter with the 

owner of the store. 

414 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

A complaint against the owner and the distributor was filed with the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, and the case is s d l  pendng. 

Very little experience has been accrued on the Latin American markets, where KG 
has faced a problem of trade-mark piracy due to the attempt by various parties to regster 
the trade mark Kappa in their name, rather than a problem of counterfeits goods being 
sold on the market. The only experience has been the counterfeiting of the jerseys of 
football teams sponsored by KG, sold by street peddlers in Brazil. 

To  summarize, it  is  possible to  conclude that  KG world-wide  corporate policy 
concerning  anti-counterfeiting  is  to  invest  a  reasonable  amount  of  money,  giving 
priority to prosecuting the producers and the large-scale  distributors. It is, however, also 
very important to maintain a reasonable amount of pressure on the small dstributors and 
on street peddlers; in order to achieve this goal a certain number of actions are planned 
against  them, trying to pool them together in areas where, with a single action, more 
may be caught, (for example in bazaars and street markets). 

In  conclusion,  KG  policy  has  obtained  satisfactory  results  where  the  local 
condtions have made it possible to do so, and that the corporate policy has dedcated 
considerable resources to  anti-piracy policy, maintaining pressure  everywhere in  the 
countries where counterfeits have been detected. The improvement of the institutional 
condtions  in  some  countries  would  certainly  make  it  possible  to  provide  better 
protection, which would result in a larger involvement and in an intensification of the 
corporate anti-counterfeiting activities in those countries. 

If the KG experience may be considered representative of the general trend, it may 
be said that it is in the best interest of the host countries, in particular of those where 
international  investments  are  important  to  promote  local  growth,  to  implement 
improved legislation and to enforce existing laws through the judiciary system and the 
police and customs apparatus. 

Adequate  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  plays  an  important  role  in 
deciding  corporate  foreign  strategy  and  it  is  likely  that  large-  and  medum-sized 
corporations, mostly those which are wding to play an innovative role in new markets, 
will  evaluate very  carefully the  level  of protection  and  the  capacity of enforcement 
which they can expect in each country where they decide to be involved before talung 
a final decision. 

It is, however, evident that better legislation and a more efficient judiciary system 
are  a  positive asset  in  any  country; it  is  also  important  to consider that  most  of the 
countries where  there  are problems with  these aspects  are also  countries which  have 
problems in  many  other  areas.  Our  conclusions are  therefore  meaningful  only  if  a 
country  which  also  has  many  other  items  on  its  priority list  is  able  to  consider the 
protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights as one of them. 

It  is  our  assumption that  foreign  investments  may  generally  help  to  promote 
internal growth, although we do not think that this is always and necessarily  the  case. 
However, the experience of KG demonstrates that when foreign involvement is able to 

TRADE-MARK  PROTECTION AND COUNTERFEITING 

415 

promote  local  entrepreneurship, the  growth  of local  skilled labour,  and  managerial 
experience, it has a positive effect which goes far beyond the growth of the company 
itself. 

Creating a positive climate for these lunds of foreign investments can therefore be 
in the best interest of the host country and can, by promoting local economic growth, 
also help increase resources avdable for other projects. 


