The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 441–466
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2011.00428.x

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for Intellectual Property
Piracy in Islamic Countries?

Nora El-Bialy
University of Hamburg

Moamen Gouda
University of Marburg

This study examines the stance of Islamic legal traditions (Shari’a) towards intellectual property (IP) piracy.
Although Muslims may differ on what Shari’a dictates, most of them view Shari’a as God’s law and as a main
ingredient of Islamic belief system. Since piracy rates in Islamic countries are considerably high in light of
existing formal IPR laws, it becomes essential to test if Shari’a has any relation with such phenomenon. Our
hypothesis is that, although Muslim countries have formal institutions or laws that protect intellectual property
rights (IPR), little attention is given to informal institutions, or human morals, regarding IPR piracy, which
negatively affects the enforcement level of IPR laws in these countries. Muslims may not be convinced that IPR
violations, although illegal, are unethical or forbidden by Islamic Shari’a. In order to test the level of adherence
of Muslims to Shari’a to support our hypothesis, we develop a “religious loyalty” index (RLI). Comparing
adherence of followers of different religions with those of Islam, Muslim countries have the highest religiosity
level, positively affecting obedience level to Shari’a. Consequently, an investigation of how Shari’a views IPR
piracy is conducted. As Islam generally prohibits IPR piracy, the study concludes by offering a set of policy
recommendations that can effectively help in minimizing IPR piracy in Muslim countries.

Keywords intellectual property rights (IPR); informal institutions; religion; enforcement

The literal meaning of Shari’a in Arabic is “the path to the source of water”, the connotation of which
is that it is the source of life for Muslims. Shari’a has come to mean the “divinely mandated path”,
the clear and truthful path that a Muslim must follow in life so as to be submitting to the will of God
(Esposito, 1991). As such, the Shari’a must be central to any Islamic society. Khadduri (1984) views
Shari’a as what Thomas Aquinas would term “Eternal Law”, since it derives mainly from revelation,
and is in fact the quintessence of God’s will and justice. It is respected by Muslims worldwide due
to its two textual sources: the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam that contains God’s word revealed to
the prophet Muhammad over a period of 23 years, and the Sunna—the practices and sayings of the
prophet Muhammad—which became the source of Islamic ethics and norm for Muslim behaviour.
Islamic jurisprudence (Fiqh) extends the appliance of Shari’a to questions not directly addressed by
the primary sources through including secondary sources. These secondary sources usually include
the consensus of the religious scholars embodied (Ijma), and analogy from the Qur’an and Sunna
(Qiyas). As Shari’a is revered by Muslims and is viewed as God’s law, it becomes crucial to study how
it affects Muslims’ attitude towards recently imposed legal codes that are issued by Muslim countries
as being part of the international community, for example the intellectual property rights (IPR) law.
Accordingly, this study mainly examines the stance of Islamic legal traditions1 (Shari’a, hereafter)
with regards to IPR piracy.

In 2008, pirated PC software represented 41% of total PC software existing worldwide. In the
same year, global losses due to IPR piracy reached US$ 53 billion, compared to a value of US$ 48

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

441

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

billion in the previous year. In other words, for every US$ 100 of legitimate software sold, another
US$ 69 was pirated. Average piracy rate in the ﬁeld of software within the Middle East, Asia Paciﬁc,
Latin America and Central and Eastern Europe reached 63% in 2008. Accordingly, more than
half of the software users in these regions use pirated software (BSA, 2009).2 Although most of
the member nations of World Trade Organization (WTO) have already come up with legislations
to tackle and prevent infringement of IPR, the cases of such infringements continue to grow, due
to a considerable lack of effective tools for the enforcement of these laws and regulations. Several
formal mechanisms for observing more effective enforcement of IPR laws are being sought for by
international organizations and local governments. Nevertheless, no real concern is given to the
informal moral and ethical institutions existing in these countries.

While IPR piracy is considered illegal under formal legislations, it can be considered as ethically
acceptable in infringing countries depending on the informal institutions, represented by values
and morals endorsed by the prevailing ideology in their respective societies. Consequently, this
will negatively affect the enforceability of IPR laws as the law enforcers in societies that ethically
accept IPR piracy may themselves not be motivated enough to enforce IPR laws and prevent piracy.
Moreover, a pirate’s feelings of guilt and fear of shame and embarrassment will be held at a minimum
as he or she conforms to the society’s ideology that does not condemn such an act. However, this
can only be observed, when societies enjoy a relatively high level of adherence of members of this
society to such ideology. If members of society tend to adhere to a certain ideology that conforms
to IPR laws then the level of enforcement will be higher since the law enforcers as well as pirates
will be keener to apply what they believe regarding IPR. Nonetheless, if the same pro-IPR ideology
or informal institution exists in another society that does not have a high-adherence level to it,
the impact on enforcement level will be minimal. From the perspective of the new institutional
economics (NIE), religion is considered an informal institution as it shapes the morals and behaviour
of its followers, depending on the level of religiosity or adherence that they have towards its rules and
commandments. Therefore, a religion that views IPR piracy as a malevolent act is able to support
the formal enforcement process of IPR laws in a certain society, in the presence of high adherence
by the majority of this society. Accordingly, a deeper analysis of the perception of religion regarding
IPR piracy is worth only in societies with relatively high common religious adherence.

This paper explores the failure of existing formal IPR laws, as a possible outcome of diverging
formal and informal institutions in a country, describes how religious loyalty can be used to narrow
this gap and ﬁnally offers a comprehensive analysis regarding the standing of IPR piracy in Islamic
Shari’a to be able to draw policy recommendations. It comprises six sections, where section one
reviews the economic literature on IPR, mainly exploring the link between informal institutions and
IPR piracy. Section two illustrates the role of informal institutions in effectively changing human
behaviour, in light of the existing formal laws. We present a model analysing the interplay between
formal rule, religion and human behaviour and describe how this relation can be affected by diverg-
ing formal and informal institutions to explain the failure of the IPR transplantation process. In
section three, we calculate a “religious loyalty” index and use descriptive statistics to be able to draw
conclusions about religious loyalty among different religious sects. The main ﬁnding is that Muslim
societies are still the keenest to follow the restrictions of their religion. The results interpreted from
this measurement are then used to analyse the role of religion as a possible informal institution in
shaping human behaviour towards understanding the ethics of IPR protection. Section four sheds
light on the mechanism of formulating Islamic legal judgements. This will be of importance to see
exactly where IPR ﬁt under such Islamic legal framework. However, this can only be realized if the
IPR products themselves do not violate the Islamic pricing mechanism. In other words, they should
be sold in a fair manner. Therefore, section ﬁve mainly deals with informal enforcement of IPR

442

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

laws in Islamic countries by investigating the interaction between prices of IPR products and the
aforementioned kind of enforcement which is based on the society’s participation in condemning and
stopping acts of piracy. Section six concludes by highlighting the main ﬁndings of the study.

IPR in Economic Literature
Most of the available literature dealing with IPR usually focuses on two research points. The ﬁrst
mainly investigates the effect of IPR on innovation, while the second analyzes the relation between
IPR enforcement and economic growth. Different levels of analysis were used in these researches,
whether it is national, regional or global. Regarding the former, several studies show that IPR broadly
fosters innovation, which positively affects future growth and prosperity (e.g. Alfranca and Huffman,
2003; Chin and Grossman, 1988; Diwan and Rodrik, 1991; Helpman, 1993; Hu and Mathews, 2005;
Kanwar and Evenson, 2003; Lai and Qiu, 2003; L´eger, 2007; McCalman, 2000; Schneider, 2005;
Yang and Maskus, 2001). Similarly for the latter, another body of economic literature supports the
hypothesis that IPR positively affects the economic development (e.g. Falvey et al., 2006; Gould and
Gruben, 1996; Ginarte and Park, 1997; Markusen, 1998; Primo Braga and Fink, 1998; Schneider,
2005; Thompson and Rushing, 1999). Nevertheless, a considerable number of studies support the
opposite idea on both accounts and argue that IPR laws inhibit innovation and hinders the economic
growth, especially in developing countries (e.g. Boldrin and Levine, 2008; Kinsella, 2001; Mason,
2009; Penrose, 1951; Plant, 1974; Stiglitz, 2006; Verzola, 2004).

Although the literature on the effect of IPR on economic development is still controversial, most
countries already signed the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) and have already issued their IPR law according to the international standards. Moreover,
some countries have even established a special police unit to combat IPR piracy, as in the case of
Bulgaria, Colombia, Egypt, France and Turkey among others (WIPO, 2010). Accordingly, the focus
point of recent literature on IPR became identifying the determinants of IPR piracy within a country,
to be able to explain why IPR laws are not efﬁciently implemented although they exist in infringing
countries, especially developing ones, which continue to have a high recorded levels of piracy rate.
A common conclusion of most IPR studies—whether for or against IPR in the ﬁrst place—is that
IPR piracy is mainly related to levels of per capita income or economic development of each country.
In other words, rich nations (western countries) are more likely to convey with formal IPR laws,
rather than poor ones. This ﬁnding is supported by Maskus and Penubarti (1995), Ginarte and Park
(1997), Maskus (2000), Marron and Steel (2000) and Husted (2000). Recently, other studies started
analyzing the effects of a range of domestic economic, political and social variables, such as the size of
the economy, research and development expenditures, education levels, economic openness, political
pressure, political freedom, market freedom, sanctions and culture on IPR piracy (see Bezman and
Depken, 2004; Depken and Simmons, 2004; Fischer and Andr´es, 2005; Grossman and Lai, 2004;
Shadlen et al., 2004; van Kranenburg and Hogenbirk, 2005). Almost all of these studies support
the claim that economic, political and formal legal factors signiﬁcantly affect piracy rates. However,
none of them clearly identiﬁes the informal institutional or cultural factors and their possible impact
on the implementation of the IPR law.

As can be deduced from the above-mentioned literature, there exists a negative relation between
the level of economic development and IPR piracy. However, another important relation is also in-
voked through literature between economic development and religiosity. Such relation is investigated
through two main hypothesis; secularization hypothesis and religion-market model hypothesis. The
secularization hypothesis examine the effect of religiosity related to different religions on economic
development (Barro and McCleary, 2003; Blum and Dudley, 2001; Cavalcanti et al., 2007; Chaves,

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

443

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Figure 1: Demonstrating the international pattern of religiosity (Gallup, 2009)

Source: Crabtree and Pelham, What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common, Gallup website, 9 February 2009.

1994; Grier, 1997; Noland, 2005; North and Gwin, 2004) on the one hand. On the other hand,
literature adopting religion-market model hypothesis looks on the impact of economic development
on religiosity as a dependent variable (Gill, 1999; Iannaccone, 1991; Iannaccone and Stark, 1994;
Lopez and Santos, 2008; McCleary and Barro, 2006; Smith et al., 1998; Smith and Sawkins, 2003). A
debate is still raging among scholars with regards to the direction of causality between religion and
economic development. Nevertheless, a pattern seems to emerge among the aforementioned studies,
most importantly in McCleary and Barro (2006), as well as through the world values survey (WVS)
and Gallup international surveys that investigate religion along with global demographics. This pat-
tern relates a country’s progress in its level of economic development with a negative relation of the
spirituality and religiosity of its population. In other words, as countries develop economically, there
is less emphasis on dominant religious traditions and values and more emphasis placed on secular
institutions. Figure 1 is developed by Gallup to demonstrate this relation. From Figure 1, it can be
deduced that developing countries have a high level of religiosity.

Although religion plays an important role in formulating culture (Lewis-Fernandez and Diaz,
2002), studies that tackled the link between IPR and cultural factors have not taken religion into
account so far. Kovacic (2007) afﬁrms that Hofstede’s cultural model (Hofstede, 1981, 2004) is the
most frequently used cultural model in software piracy research (see e.g. Depken and Simmons, 2004;
Husted, 2000; Ki et al., 2006; Kyper et al., 2004; Moores, 2003; Ronkainen and Guerrero-Cusumano,
2001; Shin et al., 2004). Moreover, as noted by Shore et al. (2001), cross-cultural research that explored
the relation between IPR piracy and ethical or moral behaviour remains limited. Swinyard et al. (1990)
analyze the attitudes towards software copyright laws and the behavioural intentions towards these
laws in the United States and Singapore and found that both attitudes and behavioural intentions

444

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

of Americans are more harmonious with copyright laws than those of Singaporeans. Moreover, the
authors ﬁnd that “not only does the Asian culture provide less support for copyright legislation;
it provides more support for the human beneﬁts which might come from the piracy”. Al-Jabri and
Abdul-Gader (1997) derive a model to explore the effects of individual and peer beliefs on software
copyright infringements in Saudi Arabia through conducting a survey. The results of this study show
that beliefs, whether for individuals or for peers, have signiﬁcant effects on ethical intention to respect
or infringe protected software. El Sheikh et al. (2006) offer a similar study for Jordan and discover
that the majority of the survey respondents (63%) believe that the act of piracy is unethical and
wrong. The authors argue then that raising the awareness of the negative ethical consequences of
piracy could be useful. Most recently, Haigh (2008) examines the interaction of technology, software
users, and regulatory regimes related to piracy in Ukraine. The author concludes that “because each
nation has its own history, the traditional understandings and social norms on which Internet users
draw will be quite different in each country”.

The Interplay between Rules and Human Behaviour
Primo Braga and Fink (1998) argue that it would be inefﬁcient for developing countries to simply copy
IPR institutions and regulations that were developed by industrial countries over several decades, as
these two groups of countries enjoy a different structure of demand for IPR protection, in addition
to different government resources. Hence, the probability of successfully enforcing copied western
institutions through a politically set strategy by the national government is very weak. So, what
should be done in order to ensure the effectiveness of national laws that resulted as a consequence
of international agreements, like IPR laws? The key to answer this question is being able to identify
the complementary role of formal and informal IPR institutions in the interplay between rule and
behaviour. A possible positive step towards reforming IPR regimes in developing countries is through
establishing national consensus within each country. This step can be considered the ground for
formulating new tailored IPR institutions that are easier to enforce within a speciﬁc society. As a
consequence, incentives for respecting IPR are created; in addition adversely affected groups of the
economy can be identiﬁed and appropriate compensation mechanisms can then be designed to ensure
that they are compensated for their damages (Primo Braga and Fink, 1998, p. 552). People usually
respond to incentives and act according to certain rules imposed by the society or the government.
As long as incentives to follow a certain rule are missing, people will not convey to the rule.

Talking about effectiveness of rules, some would argue that a deterrent sanction is sufﬁcient
for determining the effectiveness of any formal institution. However, we should keep in mind that
punishment should ﬁt the crime and consequently each country has to determine IPR piracy sanctions
based on personal value judgments. Moreover, the existence of a deterrent sanction as stated by the
law does not necessary imply practicing the sanction in reality. According to Ghada Khalifa, formal
anti-piracy manager at Microsoft Egypt, comparing the software piracy rates provided by the global
software piracy study of the Business Software Alliance (BSA) with the actual number of cases that
were factually sanctioned due to IPR violations within the same country, large discrepancies can be
noticed (Personal Communication, 6 April 2005).

Lax enforcement implies that infringement cases might be brought to court by prosecutors but
not be sanctioned by judges or they might not be caught by the police in the ﬁrst place. Thus,
the IPR law becomes not deterrent and might lose its power after some time. This fact becomes
even more evident when informal institutions and social or cultural norms do not support these
formal laws. The NIE presents a clear explanation about the possible failures of laws as a type
of formal institutions when not supported by society’s norms, culture, beliefs and religion, the

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

445

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Figure 2: The interplay between rules and human behaviour

so-called informal institutions. Formal and informal institutions in general could have a neutral,
complementary, substitutive or conﬂicting relation (Kiwit and Voigt, 1995). Being complementary
can lead to optimal results; however being conﬂicting, will never lead to satisfying results. Hence,
one could think of religion as being an effective tool to guide people towards separating what is right
from what is wrong. Moreover, it can be considered a main source of identifying morals and ethics
in a certain society. This tool might achieve signiﬁcant results, especially in countries with strong
adherence to religion.

Figure 2 is a model representing the interplay between the imposition of a new formal rule and
human behaviour. In other words, it explains how the society responds to imposed formal institutions
(e.g. IPR law). Mansﬁeld (1994) determines three areas of concern in assessing the strength of property
rights enforcement in a country. These are the laws, the legal infrastructure and the willingness of
governments to actively enforce property rights.3 Thus, on one hand, the government should not only
approve a law but must also believe in its importance and be willing to practically enforce it in order
to achieve strong efﬁcient IPR enforcement. On the other hand, public support must be present. The
society should be motivated or carefully guided to the moral reasons behind respecting a certain law.
Such moral reasons can be affected, whether directly or indirectly, through adherence to a speciﬁc
religion. The divergence between citizens’ actual and expected behaviour after the issuance of the law
can be attributed to their moral and ethical stipulation. In other words, ceteris paribus, it is expected
that a newly issued law can be enforced more effectively in a society that adhere to a certain moral

446

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

and ethical code that is in line with or supports this particular law than in a society where its moral
stance opposes it.

The above ﬁgure is designed by the authors especially to illustrate such an observation as it shows
that a pirate has to choose between either to conform with or to disobey IPR laws and regulations in
her country. The law is said to be implemented efﬁciently in case the pirate conform to it. However,
if the pirate chooses not to do so, then the beneﬁt of her piracy must be greater than the cost, which
includes her feelings of guilt and as well as the probability of getting caught multiplied by the ﬁne and
consequential social embarrassment she will suffer from if he or she got caught. Here, the moral and
ethical background of the society is an important factor that controls the pirate’s expected action.
This is because ﬁrst, the pirate’s guilt feelings are directly affected by the pirate’s morality in the ﬁrst
place. Second, the social embarrassment is related to the society’s moral code as well, and ﬁnally, the
motivation of law enforcers to apply this law is also affected by their own moral and ethical standards.
In a highly religious society, the law enforcers, as well as the society as a whole, could view any formal
law as a null if it contradicts with the teachings of the dominant religion. Accordingly, this model
will continue to iterate as long as the beneﬁts of breaking the formal institutions outweigh their
costs. The existence of discrepancies between de jure and de facto legal enforcement, as a result of the
absence of public support (informal or internal institutions working against or are neutral to formal
or external institutions) can be considered an important determinant of the ineffectiveness of formal
laws. Figure 2 can be used as a basis to provide a political-economic explanation for the interplay
between the designed schemes of any formal institution in general and the pattern of individual
behaviour. This might offer a better insight into the possible causes of IPR institutions in developing
countries. Comparing a shoplifter with a pirate, it can be said that the latter is relatively more aware
of the penal consequences of her action. If a shoplifter is caught, the police will sanction him or her,
and this action is totally supported by a general acceptance in the society to punish a thief.

The case of IPR piracy in general and copyright products piracy in speciﬁc in developing
countries is, however, different: It is unlikely that they will get caught, and if the pirate is caught, it
rarely happens that he or she is even given a proper sanction. Moreover, the society will not disgrace
him or her for their actions, and it is not expected that any other member of the society would
report piracy actions to the police to catch him in the ﬁrst place. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd an
efﬁcient solution entirely within the legal system. However, religion can play an important role in
this case. In highly religious societies, most individuals usually give little attention to any formal law
if it contradicts the teachings of the dominant religion. Data obtained by the Gallup Polls including
143 countries show that among countries where average annual incomes are US$ 2,000 or less, 92%
of residents surveyed state that religion is an important part of their daily lives. Conversely, among
the richest countries surveyed—those where average annual incomes are US$ 25,000 or more—the
ﬁgure drops to 44% only (Crabtree and Pelham, 2009a). This shows that poor countries are more
religious. Moreover, as mentioned before and according to the BSA report on piracy (2009), piracy is
mostly high in developing countries (see Figure 1). This indicates that as IPR piracy problem is more
severe in the case of developing countries and as these countries tend to be more religious, one can
think of religion as being a more effective tool to signal the unethical behaviour of IPR infringement
to these societies. To sum up, it can be said that the effectiveness of formal institutions in general
and IPR laws in speciﬁc will mainly depend on achieving legitimacy through national actors, which
imply that the enforcement of the new rule should be approved by the society itself. They must realize
the importance of the rule, expect to reap certain beneﬁts from conveying to it and understand the
ethical values behind respecting it. In other words, the law or the formal institution must be localized.
Issuing new rules or institutions should be accompanied by local awareness about the essentiality
of the institution and moreover certain linkages to informal or cultural factors of the country in

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

447

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

question. Religious motives can create such an informal protection mechanism, which increases the
cost of piracy actions, given that people are religious, or in other words, given that these people are
keen to follow their religion.

Relating Global Religious Loyalty to IPR Piracy
As illustrated in the previous section, informal institutions may entail a certain informal protection
mechanism that can deter IPR piracy. However, due to the informality of this protection mechanism, it
is therefore, totally dependent on the loyalty and adherence of individuals towards a speciﬁc informal
institution in the ﬁrst place. As the informal institution focused upon in this study is religion, it
is essential to examine how much do different societies adhere to religious teachings and to check
whether these religious teachings can help in reducing the level of IPR piracy through its respective
societies. Hence, we analyse the degree of religiosity within different countries to measure the loyalty
to the institutions stemming from religion.

Various measurements of religiosity are already developed. Gallup’s religiosity index (Crabtree
and Pelham, 2009b) is one of the fundamental measurements of religiosity across countries. Gallup
asks respondents in 143 countries and territories whether religion is an important part of their daily
lives. However, since the index is only based on this speciﬁc question, it is limited as it does not tackle
how much respondents apply their religion in their daily life actions. Barro and McCleary (2006)
use Herﬁndahl index4 to test for the degree of religion pluralism in a certain country. Nevertheless,
their proposed “Pluralism Index” remains inadequate for our purpose since it only uses one wave
of WVS (year 2000). Therefore, a limited number of countries were analysed, mostly western ones.
Accordingly, this study develops a new measure; the so-called “religious loyalty” index (RLI) to
better capture the adherence of countries to religion. The main premise of RLI is based on ﬁgures
provided by the WVS. From the period lasting from 1981 to 2008, The WVS, in collaboration with
European Values Study (EVS) carried out ﬁve waves of representative national surveys in 97 societies
containing almost 90% of the world’s population. WVS mainly deals with what people in different
societies want out of life and what they believe in (WVS, 2009a). We have chosen a set of questions
that indicate the degree of religiosity across different societies, these questions are:

r “Indicate how important it is in your life. Would you say it is: Religion?” (Question V9). The
respondents are asked to provide their answer on a scale of the following four degrees: “Very
important”,“Rather important“,“Not very important” and “not at all important”.

r “Could you tell me how much conﬁdence you have in these speciﬁc organizations: the Churches5?”
(Question V131). The respondents are asked to provide their answer on a scale of four degrees: “A
great deal”, “Rather important”, “Not very important” and “not at all important”.

r “Apart from weddings, funerals and christenings, about how often do you attend religious services
these days?” (Question V186). The respondents are asked to provide their answer on a scale of
seven degrees: “More than once a week”, “Once a week”, “Once a month”, “Only on special holy
days/Christmas/Easter days”, “Once a year”, “Less often” and “Never practically never”.

r “Independently of whether you go to church or not, would you say you are a religious person?”
(Question V187). The respondents are asked to provide their answer on a scale of four degrees: “A
religious person”, “Not a religious person”, “A convinced atheist” and “Other answer”.

r “Generally speaking, do you think that the churches in your country are giving adequate answers
to the moral problems and needs of the individual?” (Question V188). The respondents are asked
to provide their answer with only “Yes” or “No”.

448

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Our country sample includes mainly all the 85 countries that their citizens were surveyed about
their religious preferences and denomination through the fourth and ﬁfth WVS survey waves, which
was conducted between 1999 and 2008. We divide the sample countries according to their domi-
nant religious denomination. For this cause, we use the data supplied by adherents.com (2005), a
specialized website that has a collection of over 43,870 statistics related to religion adherence and
religious geography citations. Adherents.com describes itself as the “2nd most frequently visited
general religion site on the Internet, with an average of 13,500 unique visitors per day”. Although
this source provides the needed data on religion of most of the countries in our sample, the speciﬁc
religious sect followed by the majority in some countries are not given. Consequently, another source
(CIA World Factbook, 2010) is used to double check the ﬁndings from the previous source as well
as to determine the missing religious denomination for the remaining countries (for a full list, see
Table A1 in Appendix I).

Our next step involves assembling the survey results of the questions chosen for each country.
The intention here is to assimilate the percentage of religious persons in each country sample through
collecting the number of respondents that believe and act according to a certain religion. For our
ﬁrst question (Religion Importance in Life: Question V9), the percentage of the respondents who
chose the ﬁrst two answer choices (“Very Important” and “Rather important”) was summed. This is
also done regarding the second question (Conﬁdence in Churches: Question V131) as we have also
summed the respondents percentages that choose one of the ﬁrst two answers (“A great deal” and
“Rather important”). As for the third question (Attending Religious Services: Question V186), we
have summed the respondents percentage that gave one of those two answers (“More than once a
week” and “Once a week”). As for the fourth question (Religious Person: V187), we have indicated
the respondents percentage that answered “Yes”. The same was done regarding the ﬁfth and last
question (Churches Give Answers to Moral Problems: Question V188). It is perceived that these
percentages collected so far represent the percentage of society that is inclined towards religion in
each country sampled.

In order to construct a unique scale of religious loyalty by the type of religion, a principal
component analysis is necessary to enable inferring different weights representing the importance
of each of the ﬁve questions to calculate a new index (for more details, see Tables A2 to A4 in
Appendix II). Accordingly, the RLI is a weighted average of the ﬁve WVS questions.7 Since Hinduism
and Shinto are represented through our sample by only one country each, they are discarded from
our analysis. The resulting values are normalized so that the index range is [0, 1], where 0 indicates
non- or low level of religiosity and 1 indicates a high level of religiosity. An average RLI of each
religious denomination is then calculated for comparison. (For the complete list of RLI by country
and religion type, see Table A6 in Appendix 2.) The results, as shown in Table 1, indicate that Islamic
countries are highly adherent to Islam, since the group RLI average reached 0.73, indicating a high
level of religious loyalty. This becomes more apparent when it is compared by the group averages of

Count

Mean

Table 1: RLI by Religion
Standard Deviation

Median

Buddhism
Catholic
Islam
Orthodox
Protestant

3
35
18
13
14

0.34
0.47
0.73
0.49
0.36

0.23
0.49
0.77
0.44
0.26

0.20
0.23
0.15
0.16
0.27

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Range

Minimum

Maximum

0.36
0.87
0.50
0.52
0.76

0.21
0.02
0.42
0.26
0.11

0.57
0.89
0.92
0.78
0.87

449

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Source: Business Software Alliance (BSA), Annual BSA and IDC Global Software Piracy Study, Various Issues.

Figure 3: Piracy rate by religion (2003–9)

other religions, where their group RLI averages range between 0.34 (Buddhism) and 0.49 (Orthodox
Christianity).

As for the IPR, we investigated the average piracy rate for our sample countries using software
piracy data provided by the annual reports of BSA. The data supplied is between the years 2003 and
2009 and had some limitations in its coverage. Therefore, few countries were missing through our
dataset. Figure 3 provides a graphical presentation of the average piracy rates of countries under
investigation between the years 2003 and 2009.

Table 2 provides statistics on IPR piracy by religious group. It can be seen that Orthodox
Christianity and Islam have the highest rate of piracy through their respective countries (Table 2). It
is noteworthy to mention that although Buddhist countries are recording high piracy rates as well,
our sample consists of three countries only. Therefore, an accurate deduction about piracy rates in
Buddhist societies is hard to validate.

Linking these two results together, Figure 4 illustrates the relation between our two variables. It
can be deduced that Islamic countries have a high level of both IPR piracy and religiosity. Somewhat
this result is not surprising since all the Islamic countries in our sample are considered to be developing
ones, therefore have this aforementioned trend of low level of economic development and high levels
of piracy and religiosity. This can even explain the position of protestant countries that are mostly
composed of countries with a high level of economic development. Moreover, these countries have low

Buddhism
Catholicism
Islam
Orthodox
Protestant

Count

3
31
13
12
13

Table 2: Average Piracy Rate by Religion, 2003–9
Range

Standard Deviation

Median

Mean

Minimum

Maximum

70.3
49.7
74.4
76.6
38.3

78.3
45.9
76.7
77.5
28.9

22.8
16.7
12.2
13.0
19.5

43.6
61.3
39.8
43.6
69.7

44.6
21.0
52.0
51.4
20.7

88.1
82.3
91.8
95.0
90.4

Source: Business Software Alliance (BSA), Annual BSA and IDC Global Software Piracy Study, Various Issues.

450

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Figure 4: Linking IPR piracy to religiosity

piracy, as well as religiosity levels. Islamic countries proved to be relatively more religious compared
to their nearest religious group (Orthodox countries) that, also, is mostly composed of developing
ones.

Source: It is clear from this result that Islamic societies are more adherent to religion than other
religions. As Islam provides the value system for its adherents, basically reﬂected in their societies at
a macro-level, it can be used as an informal institution to inﬂuence the behaviour of these societies
towards respecting newly introduced formal rules. The majority of Muslim societies are still keen to
follow the rules of their religion and search for answers using sentences of the Qur’an. Accordingly, it
becomes necessary to ask whether Islam as a religion followed favourably by its adherents can be used
as an informal enforcement mechanism to support the IPR enforcement process in Islamic countries.
In other words, is this type of religious jurisprudence able to formulate a belief among Muslims that
IPR piracy is unethical and prohibited by Islam, thus, creating a sort of informal sanction mechanism
that can increase the marginal cost of IPR pirates and positively affect combating piracy in these
countries? For this reason, an investigation of how Islam views IPR piracy is necessary.

How Does Shari’a View IPR Piracy?
Islam and IPR Protection8
As mentioned above, Islam demands its followers to adhere to a large system of rules, regulations,
values and normative framework covering all aspects of life for Muslims. Gibb (1950) states that
Muslim scholars do not observe law as an independent discipline. They rather consider law as the
practical aspect of the religious and social doctrine preached by the prophet Mohammed, since little
or no distinction between ‘legal’ and ‘religious’ existed in the minds of the early Muslims. Even in
the Qur’an the two aspects are found side by side, or rather interwoven one with the other, and so
likewise in the Hadith (Prophet Mohammed’s sayings). The study and interpretation of the Qur’an
involved sometimes the one (legal) and sometimes the other (religious) (Gibb, 1950).

The primary sources of Shari’a are Qur’an, Sunna (words, actions and practices of the prophet
Mohammad) as well as the human articulation and comprehension of the aforementioned primary

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

451

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

sources (Ali, 2009, p. 117). The human deduction is stressed upon in our analysis since, as Kamali
(1991) points out, “The Qur’an and Sunna themselves contain very little by way of methodology, but
rather provide the indications from which the rules of Shari’a can be deduced”. As Jamar (1992) notes
that in order to establish a certain legal proposition to be followed by Muslims, one should be able to
point to a certain verse of the Qur’an, or the Sunna of the prophet Mohammad that directly tackles
this legal proposition, giving clear rules and regulations regarding it. If this proved to be unfruitful,
then if a certain point in history can be found when all Muslim legal scholars agreed upon a particular
interpretation of a certain Islamic text, then in this case, their consensus may be relied upon as a
valid source of Islamic legal traditions. This is referred to as Ijma.9 Use of analogical reasoning,
or Qiyas, is very limited in Islamic legal traditions (Jamar, 1992, p. 2). Qiyas is the extension of a
certain legal tradition in Islam from an original case to a new one, because the latter has the same
effective underpinning as the former. The original case is regulated by a given text, and Qiyas tries to
expand the same textual ruling to the new case (Kamali, 1991, p. 180). Qiyas, however, seems to be
most suitable in legislative situations, which due to the advances of culture and knowledge were not
envisaged in the time of prophet Mohammed, 1,500 years ago, Berger (2006) elaborates.

Jamar (1992) divides Shari’a to three areas; ﬁrst, areas that have clear and precise rules and
regulations, such as spiritual duties and inheritance. Second, areas that were given some general
principles, but with some indeﬁniteness, as in contract law, and ﬁnally, areas that were out of Islamic
legal boundaries as in the ﬁeld of IP. Consequently, Muslim judges are obliged to formulate Islamic
verdict that relate to IPR, taking into consideration that these rules do not “run afoul of Shari’a
prohibitions and are consistent with Shari’a principles” (Jamar, 1992, p. 3). The main methodology
for derivation of Islamic legislation towards IPR is Qiyas (analogical reasoning). Islamic deﬁnition
of property rights generically concedes with that of North (1990) and Sened (1997) where the former
deﬁnes it as being the rights individuals appropriate or practice over their own labour and the goods
and services they possess. According to North (1990), IP could take the form of industrial property
(protected by patents or trade secrets or utility models) on the one hand, or the form of an artistic
work or software program (protected by copyrights), on the other hand. Sened (1997) relates the
concept of IPR to law and describes IPR as being the ﬁeld of law that deals with property rights in
intangible property, and it refers to the creation of human mind and intellect. Thus, when dealing
with IP, we are faced with the problem of providing public goods. Therefore, it can be argued that
Islam recognizes the two forms of IP, whether as a public or private good. A considerable amount of
Qur’anic and Sunna literature strongly tackled stealing and cheating of public and private property.
Consequently, Muslim judges use Qiyas in dealing with IPR piracy, where the same Qur’anic and
Sunna literature are expanded through interpretation to include IPR as well (see Alghamdy, 2005, p.
39; Jamar, 1992, pp. 3–4) . Moreover, many fatwas exhaustively tackled IPR piracy. An Islamic website
(islamweb.net website, 2009) lists 194 fatwas that covers IPR from every aspect.10 Furthermore, The
International Islamic Fiqh Academy, which consists of the highest Islamic religious authorities in
all Islamic countries, tackled the topic of IPR in its ﬁfth round held in Kuwait in 1988 and issued
a fatwa.11 The basic consensus in all these fatwas as well as a considerable body of research that
investigate how Islam views IPR piracy concludes that such type of piracy is prohibited by Islam (see
Abou elkhir, 2002; Alghamdy, 2005; Alnaggar, 2002; Amanullah, 2006; Khalil, 2003 among others).
A list of Qur’anic verses has been used as evidence for the prohibition of IPR piracy in Islam, among
them:

r “And do not eat up your property among yourselves for vanities, nor use it as bait for the judges,
with intent that ye may eat up wrongfully and knowingly a little of (other) people’s property”
(Qur’an, chapter 2: Verse 188).

452

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

r “O ye who believe! Eat not up your property among yourselves in vanities: But let there be amongst
you Trafﬁc and trade by mutual good-will: Nor kill (or destroy) yourselves: for verily Allah hath
been to you Most Merciful!” (Qur’an, chapter 4: Verse 29).

r “Allah doth command you to render back your Trusts to those to whom they are due; And when

ye judge between man and man, that ye judge with justice” (Qur’an, chapter 4: Verse 58).

r “Help ye one another in righteousness and piety, but help ye not one another in sin and rancour:

fear Allah, for Allah is strict in punishment” (Qur’an, chapter 5: Verse 2).

r “Give just measure and weight, nor withhold from the people the things that are their due; and do
no mischief on the earth after it has been set in order: that will be best for you, if ye have Faith”
(Qur’an, chapter 7: Verse 85).

r “O ye that believe! Betray not the trust of Allah and the Messenger, nor misappropriate knowingly

things entrusted to you” (Qur’an, chapter 8: Verse 27).

Hadith are also used in presenting the case against IPR piracy in Islam, among Hadith used are:

r “Muslims must abide by their agreements, except an agreement that make Haram (unlawful) what

is Halal (lawful) or make Halal what was Haram”. (Al-Tirmidhi, Hadith no. 1272).

r “Whoever precedes others in gaining a Halal (lawful) thing, will be more entitled to own it (than

others)”. (AlQaari, 1985, no. 492)

r “He who cheats is not of us (Muslims). Deceitfulness and fraud are things that lead one to Hell”.

(Ibn Hanbal, no. 4968)

r “Honesty and clarity are blessed for both parties to a sale, while concealment and deceit destroy

the blessings of their sale”. (Al-Bukhari, no. 1937)

r “Don’t betray he who have betrayed you and (Keep and) pay back the trusts of those who entrust

you”. (Al-Sanaani, no. 1483)

Islamic legal traditions divide the acts of a Muslim into ﬁve main categories: Wajib (obliga-
tory), Mustahabb/Sunna (recommended), Mubah (permitted, neither obligatory nor recommended),
Makruh (recommended against, abominable) and Haram (prohibited, banned). Throughout the
Islamic literature and fatwas, IPR piracy is judged to be Haram—the highest degree of prohibi-
tion. This clearly shows that Islam basically backs up laws and regulations—whether nationally or
internationally—that prohibits any kind of IPR piracy.

Although the Islamic legal tradition towards IPR piracy generically prohibits this act, there are
still many signiﬁcant factors that Muslim legal scholars take into consideration when they issue any
fatwa relating to IPR issue. Fatwa generally change through time and place, therefore it is of key
importance for Muslim legal scholars to build a real and exact image of the situation in hand so
that fatwas can be as close to reality as possible. Ibn Qayyim (d. 1349) mentions that “fatwa can
experience change due to differences in period, place, situation, customs and intention”. Fatwas
depend on several factors that play a crucial role in determining the degree of prohibition of IPR
piracy as seen by Muslim legal scholars, and they include the type of infringed IP in question (whether
it is for an educational or entertainment purpose;12 Islamweb, 2009), the availability of the item under
IP protection for purchasing13 (Islamweb, 2009), whether the act of piracy is done for personal use
or for public broadcasting14 (Islamweb, 2009), and, most importantly, if the price of item under IP
protection is too high for the needy consumer to purchase15 (Abou elkhir, 2002; Islamweb, 2009;
Khalil, 2003).

Pricing Strategies under Islamic Rules
According to Bashar (1997), Islamic Shari’a has categorized prices as valid or invalid. A valid price
refers to the price given in a market with accordance to Shari’a. This means that such price must

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

453

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

be free from any deliberate attempt to cheat, deceive, conceal, lie or withhold relevant information
of a certain good or service. Valid price is a one that satisﬁes all possible Shari’a legal requirements
in the process of formation. Muslim legal scholars allow these valid prices to reign in the market
and disallow them when they conﬂict with fairness and justice and/or societal interests. An invalid
price, on the contrary, is that price which does not follow the Islamic legal requirements. It is
likely that such a price will be higher than normal price. Invalidity of price may occur if a ﬁrm
manipulated supply by creating artiﬁcial scarcity. Therefore, prices that will emerge in the market if
monopolists or producers form cartels exert inﬂuence on output or prohibit others from competing
in the market are considered invalid and not lawful under Islamic jurisprudence (Bashar, 1997,
pp. 41–2).

As for the case of IPR, Fellmeth (1998) points out in his study on copyright misuse and the
limits of IP monopoly that copyright owners are given an exclusive right to make, use, copy, sell or
import the respective subject of the patent or copyright for a limited time, allowing them to act as
“temporary, limited monopolists” therefore, controlling the nature of their protected goods through
using methods that might otherwise breach the anti-trust laws. Stiglitz (2008) supports ﬁndings of
Fellmeth and notes that “Intellectual Property Rights generate monopoly power that can be used
to leverage further monopoly power. The most obvious example is Microsoft, which has leveraged
its monopoly power in operating systems to obtain a dominant position in applications like word
processing (Microsoft Ofﬁce) and Internet browsers (Internet Explorer)”.

Khalil (2003) deduces that Islam prohibits monopolistic acts by copyright holders based on
the Hadith: “He who monopolizes is a wrong-doer” (Muslim, no. 3012). In this case, Muslim legal
scholars give permission to Muslim public to illegally copy software but only for personal purposes
and not for the intention of selling it afterwards (Islamweb, 2009).13 Muslim Legal scholars view
such case as a “necessity” and allow it only in a limited account. Qur’anic verses give legitimacy to
this necessity:

r “But if one is forced by necessity, without wilful disobedience, nor transgressing due limits, – then

is he guiltless. For Allah is Oft-forgiving Most Merciful”. (Qur’an, chapter 2: Verse 173)

r “ . . . Except under compulsion of necessity”. (Qur’an, chapter 6: Verse 119)

To sum up, it can be said that Islamic prohibition of IPR is not as direct as it was assumed
from other studies dealing with this issue (i.e. Alghamdy, 2005; Amanullah, 2006; Jamar, 1992).
We have demonstrated that Muslim legal scholars base their opinion in IPR-related fatwa on the
inquirer’s social and economic status as well as the kind of intellectually protected item under
investigation. Most Muslim societies suffer from low levels of economic development, which is
also reﬂected on the low income of a large proportion in Muslims in their respective societies.
Moreover, prices of intellectually protected items coming from developed countries remain relatively
expensive for the Muslim layman. Consequently, Muslim legal scholars might issue adverse fatwas
that permit Muslims to pirate IPR products due to their high prices. In other words, IPR-related
fatwa generally prohibits piracy actions, but given the extreme high prices of the original products that
are imposed by international monopolistic ﬁrms, without any consideration of the necessity of the
product to the poor, fatwas might become more lenient leading to a controversial effect to the extent
of supporting piracy. This fact can explain why there are numerous fatwas prohibiting IPR piracy
and at the same time, Islamic countries have such a high level of piracy. In the next section, we will
propose a mechanism of how informal enforcement of IPR laws plays a more effective role in Islamic
countries.

454

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Conclusion and Policy Recommendation
This study makes four contributions to the broader literature of institutional economics. Opper
(2008) states that NIE certainly focuses on important issues relevant to developing countries, though
it provides broad suggestions and fails to provide clear cut policy advice to escape from institutional
deﬁciencies in such countries. Accordingly, this paper ﬁrst applies a new theoretical approach to the
concept of embeddedness of institutions, an area that has been neglected so far by most institutional
economic literature. This type of research is usually left to other social sciences, in particular to
sociologists. We argue that politically monitored formal institutions might achieve minor satisfactory
results, if any, without the support of prevailing informal institutions in a country. Research and
theorizing on the mechanics of informal norms were left to other social sciences, in particular to
sociologists”. Second, linking IPR piracy to NIE is considered genuine in both hypothesis and
analysis. Consequently, this affected the tools used by such studies in analysing the subtle reasons
behind increasing piracy rates in different societies, especially in developing countries. Third, an
analysis of religious loyalty is carried out through this study as an attempt to assess religion as
an informal institutional structure governing different societies. A generic misconception in social
sciences literature is to postulate that a certain society have chosen a certain public action due to
its religion inclination, however, it is logically understandable that different societies vary in their
adherence to religion due to a vast amount of factors that are out of the scope of this study.
By relying on this measurement, the link between rules and behaviour of societies are clearer since
religion dimension, with all its consequences on informal institutions, is added to the analysis. Finally,
an analysis of the link between IPR piracy and Islam as an informal institution is conducted.

We believe that by analysing and understanding the informal structure governing IPR piracy in
Islamic countries, we can develop a more effective method to combat this illegal behaviour, without
having to bear the additional cost of enforcement. Using descriptive statistics, we try to give more
support to our hypothesis that IPR piracy in Islamic countries can be tackled in a more effective
way if religious dimensions are integrated in the campaign against this illegal act. This can be done
through increasing awareness of Muslim legal scholars on the severity of IPR piracy problem and
its economic consequence. It was already mentioned that the International Islamic Fiqh Academy
issued a fatwa in 1988 prohibiting IPR infringement. This academy is composed of the highest
religious authorities in Muslim countries (grand muftis in Sunni countries and ayatollah in Shiite
ones), which are highly inﬂuential in Muslim societies as they issue the ofﬁcial legal opinions and
fatwas on interpretations of Shari’a, inducing Islamic texts towards practical application by followers
on a national level. Our survey results shows that Islamic countries’ population is highly conﬁdent
in these religious leaders, since an average of 83% of the sample collected from these countries had
either “a great deal of conﬁdence” or “quite a lot of conﬁdence” towards those religious authorities.
Ofﬁcial fatwas issued by those leaders are also highly inﬂuential in formulating the legal opinion
given by sheikhs in mosques, since these sheikhs are employed by the government. An important
dimension that should be however considered by right holders is their pricing strategy in developing
countries, especially Islamic ones. Although Islam initially prohibits acts of IPR piracy, high prices
of important and essential IPR inversely affect the degree of prohibition set by Islam. Hence, a price-
discriminatory strategy is required not only for a developing country but also within the different
consumer groups of the same country, for example students, government ofﬁces and private sector.
Finally, a more focused campaign run by Muslim scholars against acts of IPR piracy in Muslim
countries shall be conducted. Integrating religion in the campaign against IPR piracy needs to be
covered by more research on this issue. Therefore, this can be a call for more studies to be conducted
on the link between adherence to other religions and IPR piracy.

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

455

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Appendix I

Buddhism

1. South Korea
2. Thailand
3. Vietnam

Catholic Christianity

1. Andorra
2. Argentina
3. Austria
4. Belgium
5. Brazil
6. Canada
7. Chile
8. Colombia
9. Croatia
10. Czech Republic
11. France
12. Guatemala
13. Hungary
14. Ireland
15. Italy
16. Lithuania
17. Luxembourg
18. Malta
19. Mexico
20. The Netherlands
21. Northern Ireland
22. Peru
23. Philippines
24. Poland
25. Portugal
26. Puerto Rico

Table A1: List of Countries by Predominant Religion

27. Rwanda
28. Slovakia
29. Slovenia
30. Spain
31. Switzerland
32. Trinidad and Tobago
33. Uganda
34. Uruguay
35. Zambia

Hinduism

1. India

Islam

1. Albania
2. Algeria
3. Bangladesh
4. Bosnia and Herzegovina
5. Burkina Faso
6. Egypt
7. Indonesia
8. Iran
9. Iraq
10. Jordan
11. Kyrgyzstan
12. Mali
13. Morocco
14. Nigeria
15. Pakistan
16. Saudi Arabia
17. Tanzania
18. Turkey

Orthodox Christianity

1. Belarus
2. Bulgaria
3. Cyprus
4. Ethiopia
5. Georgia
6. Greece
7. Macedonia
8. Moldova
9. Montenegro
10. Romania
11. Russian Federation
12. Serbia
13. Ukraine

Protestant Christianity

1. Australia
2. Denmark
3. Estonia
4. Finland
5. Germany
6. Ghana
7. Iceland
8. Latvia
9. Norway
10. South Africa
11. Sweden
12. United Kingdom
13. United States
14. Zimbabwe

Shinto

1. Japan

Source: Aherents.com website, Predominant Religion (2005) [Accessed November 2010] and CIA World Factbook, Field Listing
Religion (2010) [Accessed November 2010].

Appendix II
Calculating RLI
The following tables offer a comprehensive summary of the methodology used for developing a
measurement for religiosity. The main aim of observing this index is to be able to develop simple
correlations between different religious groups and their degree of religiosity and then linking our
ﬁndings to the prevailing levels of piracy. We calculated a so-called “religious loyalty” index (RLI)
using principal component analysis of the ﬁve variables chosen from World Values Survey (WVS) data
to represent a proxy for the state of religiosity across different societies. These variables are observed

456

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Table A2: Principal Component Analysis

Original Eigen Values

Component

Eigenvalue

Proportion

Cumulative

Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Factor 4
Factor 5
Factor analysis/correlation; Method : principal-component factors; Rotation: (unrotated); Number of observations = 85;
Retained factors = 1; Number of parameters = 5
LR test: independent vs. saturated: chi2(10) = 329.84 Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

3.75873
0.52916
0.40556
0.18055
0.12600

75.17
85.76
93.87
97.48
100.00

75.17
10.58
8.11
3.61
2.52

Table A3: Factor loadings (pattern matrix) and unique variances

Variable

rel_imp
conf_chrch
att_chrch
rel_prsn
morl_prblm

F 1

0.9479
0.9155
0.8297
0.8041
0.8289

Uniqueness

0.1015
0.1618
0.3116
0.3535
0.3129

Table A4: Correlation Matrix

rel_imp

conf_chrch

att_chrch

rel_prsn

morl_prblm

F1

rel_imp
conf_chrch
att_chrch
rel_prsn
morl_prblm
F1

1.0000
0.8434
0.7755
0.7526
0.7435
0.9479

1.0000
0.6616
0.6760
0.7896
0.9155

1.0000
0.5861
0.5365
0.8297

1.0000
0.5280
0.8041

1.0000
0.8289

1.0000

through calculating the number of respondents that respond positively to different questions in
an attempt to measure their adherence to their respective religion/ideology. In general, it can be
said that factor analytic techniques are considered variable reduction procedures, which are used
to solve measurement problems that might occur when including redundant variables. Redundancy
usually occurs when some of the variables are correlated with one another, possibly because they are
measuring the same construct (in our case religiosity). Accordingly and in order to avoid this problem,
we use the principal component analysis to reduce the observed ﬁve variables into one or maybe two
unobserved principal components (maybe one factor for beliefs and another for behaviour). The new
unobserved variable or variables generated by factor analysis will account for most of the variance in
the observed variables. Table A2 contains the eigenvalues and Table A3 the factor loadings. Table A4
presents the correlations between the ﬁve variables, in addition to their respective correlation with
the chosen factor and Table A5 reports the assigned weights based on the observed factor loading
of each variable to be able to calculate our RLI. The observed weights indicate that all ﬁve variables
contribute with an almost equal share to our index, indicating that a simple average method would

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

457

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Table A5: Scoring coefﬁcients (weights developed on the basis of factor loadings using STATA)

Variable

rel_imp
conf_chrch
att_chrch
rel_prsn
morl_prblm

F1

0.25219
0.24357
0.22074
0.21392
0.22053

also be proper to use, as similar values for RLI can be obtained. Finally Table A6 presents the
normalized values of the ﬁnal values of our religiosity index.

The second column (eigenvalue) represents the variance of the new factors extracted from dif-
ferent combinations of our original ﬁve variables. The ﬁrst factor accounts for the most variance, the

Table A6: Religious Loyalty Index (RLI) by Country and Religious Group

Average by Religious Group

0.3381

0.4714

Religion
Buddhism

Catholic Christianity

Country (Year of WVS Survey)

South Korea (2005)
Thailand (2007)
Vietnam (2006)
Andorra (2005)
Argentina (2006)
Austria (1999)
Belgium (1999)
Brazil (2006)
Canada (2006)
Chile (2006)
Colombia (2005)
Croatia (1999)
Czech Republic (1999)
France (2006)
Guatemala (2004)
Hungary (1999)
Ireland (1999)
Italy (2005)
Lithuania (1999)
Luxembourg (1999)
Malta (1999)
Mexico (2005)
The Netherlands (2006)
Northern Ireland (1999)
Peru (2006)
Philippines (2001)
Poland (2005)
Portugal (1999)

RLI

0.2330
0.5692
0.2123
0.0223
0.4067
0.3174
0.2395
0.6783
0.3891
0.4680
0.6761
0.5591
0.0293
0.1776
0.7816
0.2555
0.4494
0.6044
0.5663
0.2598
0.7370
0.5860
0.1397
0.4446
0.5207
0.7398
0.7067
0.6065

458

Continued

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Average by Religious Group

0.7263

0.4912

Religion

Islam

Orthodox Christianity

Table A6: Continued

Country (Year of WVS Survey)

Puerto Rico (2001)
Rwanda (2007)
Slovakia (1999)
Slovenia (2005)
Spain (2007)
Switzerland (2007)
Trinidad and Tobago (2006)
Uganda (2001)
Uruguay (2006)
Zambia (2007)
Albania (2002)
Algeria (2002)
Bangladesh (2002)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (2001)
Burkina Faso (2007)
Egypt (2008)
Indonesia (2006)
Iran (2005)
Iraq (2006)
Jordan (2007)
Kyrgyzstan (2003)
Mali (2007)
Morocco (2007)
Nigeria (2000)
Pakistan (2001)
Saudi Arabia (2003)
Tanzania (2001)
Turkey (2007)
Belarus (2000)
Bulgaria (2006)
Cyprus (2006)
Ethiopia (2007)
Georgia (2008)
Greece (1999)
Macedonia (2001)
Moldova (2006)
Montenegro (2001)
Romania (2005)
Russian Federation (2006)
Serbia (2006)
Ukraine (2006)

RLI

0.7178
0.7247
0.5522
0.2644
0.1416
0.2885
0.4943
0.8891
0.2832
0.7841
0.4571
0.7338
0.8047
0.4203
0.7616
0.7711
0.8267
0.6481
0.6271
0.8793
0.4944
0.8721
0.8257
0.9191
0.7841
0.7227
0.8849
0.6419
0.2609
0.2963
0.4265
0.7284
0.7785
0.4005
0.4402
0.5565
0.3636
0.7314
0.4340
0.4805
0.4891

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Continued

459

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Average by Religious Group

0.3609

Religion
Protestant Christianity

Table A6: Continued

Country (Year of WVS Survey)

Australia (2005)
Denmark (1999)
Estonia (1999)
Finland (2005)
Germany (2006)
Ghana (2007)
Iceland (1999)
Latvia (1999)
Norway (2007)
South Africa (2007)
Sweden (2006)
United Kingdom (2006)
United States (2006)
Zimbabwe (2001)

RLI

0.1771
0.2082
0.1270
0.3122
0.1423
0.8662
0.3496
0.3721
0.1245
0.7321
0.1110
0.1904
0.5079
0.8328

second will account for the next highest amount of variance, and so on. The third column (propor-
tion) expresses the eigenvalues (variance of each factor) as a percent age of the total variance. The
fourth column (cumulative) contains the cumulative proportion of variance accounted for by this
factor plus all of the previous ones. On the basis of Table A2, it can be deduced that factor 1 (F1)
accounts for 75.17% of the variance, factor 2 for 10.58% and so on and hence within factors, we can
count solely on F1 to represent all of our ﬁve variables. The relationship between our ﬁve variables
and F1 is represented by so-called factor loadings. It represents both how the variables are weighted
for a certain factor or factors and also the correlation between the variables and the factor.

Looking at the factor loadings of all ﬁve variables, it can be said that they all well captured in F1,
with rel-imp being the variable with the highest factor loading (correlation with F1) and rel_persn
being the lowest correlated variable. The third column of Table A3 presents the proportion of the
common variance of the variable not associated with F1. To get an overview of how the individual
variables are related to each other, one must look at the correlation matrix of all ﬁve variables.

It becomes obvious that all ﬁve variables are either correlated or highly correlated with each
other, supporting our argument of presenting them all by one single factor. Accordingly and based
on the factor loadings observed, it is possible using STATA to derive different weighted averages for
each variable and summing all weighted variables up, we would end up with our religiosity index for
each country. Tables A4 and A5 present the scoring coefﬁcients of each variable used to calculate the
religiosity index and the values of the normalized index for each country respectively.

About the Authors
Nora El-Bialy is an economist specializing in the area of law and economics with special emphasis on
IPR enforcement and judicial efﬁciency in least developed countries. She is currently a Yousef Jameel
scholar and a research associate at the Institute of Law and Economics, University of Hamburg,
Germany; e-mail: nora.elbialy@ile-hamburg.de

460

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Moamen Gouda is an economist specializing in the areas of informal institutions, economics of
religion, and Islamic economics. He obtained his MBA from Edinburgh Business School, Heriot-
Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom. He is presently a Yousef Jameel scholar
and a research fellow at Philipps-Universit¨at Marburg, Germany; e-mail: moamen27@yahoo.com

Notes
The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees of JWIP, Prof. Bernd Hayo, Prof. Helmut Leipold, Sang
Min Park, Shimaa Hanafy for their helpful comments on the earlier draft of this paper. Our greatest gratitude
goes to Prof. Stefan Voigt for his continuous motivation and support.

1 We use Ali (2009) deﬁnition of Shari’a as “Islamic legal tradition” rather than “Islamic law” for the same
reason he derived; “to avoid creating a restrictive fence around an evolving tradition” (Ali, 2009:117–18).
2 Piracy rate is deﬁned as the total number of units of pirated software put into use in a year divided by
the total units of software sold (BSA, 2008). It should be taken into consideration that BSA is a direct
representative of the interests of US software ﬁrms. Hence, the absolute piracy rates reported by this
organization to reﬂect the absolute enforcement level in a country should be treated carefully and with
slight critique, as the BSA might have interest to manipulate the data to exert further pressure on pirating
countries in case of reduced enforcement progress (The Economist, 2005; ZDNet UK, 2005). However,
their reported piracy measures can be considered a proxy for showing enforcement trends within each
country and region.

3 According to Oxford online dictionary (2010), fatwa is a ruling on a point of Islamic law given by a

recognized authority. For a thorough look on the range on deﬁnitions of fatwa, see Ali (2009, p. 121).

4 For more details, see Lanjouw and Lerner (1997, p. 22).
5 Although Herﬁndahl index was originally developed to measure trade concentration in a certain country
(Hirschman, 1964), Barro and McCleary (2006) used the same concept on religious denominations in the
sampled countries.

6 WVS 2005 codebook indicates that the word “Churches” in the WVS questions is substituted by the phrase

“religious leaders” in surveys done in non-Christian countries (WVS, 2009b).

7 Using a simple average method instead of calculating weights based on corresponding factor loadings to
measure RLI yield similar results, indicating that all ﬁve variables are almost equally important to reﬂect
religiosity.

8 This section uses unpublished primary sources in Arabic language collected by the authors themselves.
9 Kamali (1991) deﬁnes Ijma as “as the unanimous agreement of the mujtahidun, of the Muslim community
10 See these fatwas on IPR at (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/FatwaCategory.php?lang=A&CatId=
11 For the fatwa issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy on IPR, see (cid:3)http://www.
12 Fatwa on IPR no. 123712 (in Arabic). (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/ShowFatwa.php?lang=
13 Fatwa on IPR no. 13170 (in Arabic). (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/ShowFatwa.php?Option=
14 Fatwas on IPR nos. 125038, 28439 and 117615 (in Arabic). (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/
(cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/
(cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/
and

of any period following the demise of the Prophet Mohammad on any matter” (Kamali, 1991, p. 156).
2180 (in Arabic)(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
ﬁqhacademy.org.sa/(cid:4) [Accessed June 2011].
A&Id=123712&Option=FatwaId(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
FatwaId&lang=A&Id=13170(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
ShowFatwa.php?lang=A&Id=125038&Option=FatwaId(cid:4),
ShowFatwa.php?Option=FatwaId&lang=A&Id=28439(cid:4)
Fatwa/ShowFatwa.php?lang=A&Id=117615&Option=FatwaId(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

461

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

15 Fatwa on IPR no. 121287 (in Arabic). (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/Fatwa/ShowFatwa.php?lang

=A&Id=121287&Option=FatwaId(cid:4)[Accessed November 2009].

References
Abou Elkhir, A. (2002) ‘Perspectives on the Position of Islamic Jurisprudence of the Financial Right of the
Author’, Paper presented at the symposium on the legal protection of intellectual property, S.A. Kamel
Centre for Islamic Economics, Al-Azhar University, Cairo.
Aherents.com website (2005). Predominant Religion [online]. Adherents.com. Available at (cid:3)http://www.
adherents.com/adh_predom.html(cid:4) [Accessed November 2010].
(cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/hadith/index.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].

Al-bukhari, M. (d. 870) (2011) Sahih al-bukhari [online]. Islamweb Hadith Encyclopaedia. Available at

Alfranca, O. and Huffman, W. (2003) ‘Aggregate Private R&D Investments in Agriculture: The Role of Incen-

tives, Public Policies, and Institutions’, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 52(1), 1–22.

Alghamdy, N. (2005) ‘Protection of Intellectual Property in Islamic Jurisprudence and Its Economic Con-
sequences’. Paper presented at the third international conference for Islamic Economics, Umm al-Qura
university, Mecca.
Ali, S. (2009) ‘Resurrecting Siyar through Fatwas? (Re)Constructing ‘Islamic International Law’ In a Post–(Iraq)
Invasion World’, Warwick School of Law Research Paper. Available at (cid:3)http://ssrn.com/abstract=1496337(cid:4)
[Accessed October 2010].

Al-jabri, I. and Abdul-Gader, A. (1997) ‘Software Copyright Infringements: An Exploratory Study of the Effects

of Individual and Peer Beliefs’, International Journal of Management Science, 25(3), 335–44.

Alqaari, A. (1985) Ala’srar almrfoua’ah ﬁ ala’khbar almoudhoua’ah [online]. Islamweb Hadith Encyclopaedia.

Alnaggar, A. (2002) ‘Introduction for Protection of Intellectual Property’. Paper presented at the symposium on
the legal protection of intellectual property, S.A. Kamel Centre for Islamic Economics, Al-Azhar University,
Cairo.
Available at (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/hadith/index.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
able at (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/hadith/index.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
(cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/hadith/index.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].

Al-sanaani, A. (1989) Tafser alQur’an (Qur’an interpretation) [online]. Islamweb Hadith Encyclopaedia. Avail-

Islamweb Hadith Encyclopaedia. Available

Al-tirmidhi, M.

892) Al-jami’

[online].

(d.

at

Amanullah, M. (2006) ‘Author’s Copyright: An Islamic Perspective’, The Journal of World Intellectual Property,

9(3), 301–15.

Barro, R. J. and McCleary, R. (2003) ‘Religion and Economic Growth across Countries’, American Sociological

Review, 68(5), 760–81.

Barro, R. J. and McCleary, R. M. (2006) ‘Religion and Political Economy in an International Panel’, Journal

for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion, 45(2), 149–75.

Bashar, M. (1997) ‘Price Control in an Islamic Economy’, JKAU: Islamic economics, 9, 29–52.
Bezman, T. L., and Depken, C. A. (2004) ‘Inﬂuences on Software Piracy: Evidence from the Various United
States’, The University of Texas at Arlington, Department of Economics, Working Paper 04–010 [online].
Available at (cid:3)http://www.uta.edu/depken/P/statepiracy.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed January 2005].

Blum, U. and Dudley, L. (2001) ‘Religion and Economic Growth: Was Weber Right?’, Journal of Evolutionary

Economics, 11(2), 207–30.

Boldrin, M. and Levine, D. (2008) Against Intellectual Monopoly, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Business Software Alliance (BSA) (2008). Fifth Annual BSA and IDC Global Software Piracy Studies [online]. The
Business Software Alliance. Available at (cid:3)http://global.bsa.org/globalpiracy2007/index.html(cid:4) [Accessed
May 2010].

462

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Business Software Alliance (BSA) (2009). Sixth Annual BSA and IDC Global Software Piracy Studies [on-
line]. The Business Software Alliance. Available at (cid:3)http://global.bsa.org/globalpiracy2008/index.html(cid:4)
[Accessed May 2010].

Cavalcanti, T. V., Parente, S. L. and Zhao, R. (2007) ‘Religion in Macroeconomics: A Quantitative Analysis of

Weber’s Thesis’, Economic Theory, 32(1), 105–23.

CIA World

Chaves, M. (1994) ‘Secularization as Declining Religious Authority’, Social Forces 72(3), 749–74.
Chin, J. and Grossman, G. (1988) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and North–South Trade’, NBER Working Paper
(cid:3)https://www.

Series, 2769, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, November.
cia.gov/library/publications/the-world- factbook/ﬁelds/2122.html(cid:4) [Accessed November 2010].
Crabtree, S. and Pelham, B. (2009a) Religion Provides Emotional Boost to World’s Poor [online]. Gallup. Available
at (cid:3)http://www.gallup.com/poll/116449/religion-provides-emotional-boost-world-poor.aspx(cid:4) [Accessed
November 2009].

Religions.

Factbook

Available

Listing:

(2010)

Field

at

Crabtree, S. and Pelham, B.

Perspective on Americans’ Religiosity Offers a Few Surprises
(cid:3)http://www.gallup.com/poll/114211/Alabamians-Iranians-Common.aspx(cid:4) [Accessed July 2010].

(2009b) What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common: A Global
[online]. Gallup. Available at

Depken, C. and Simmons, L. (2004) ‘Social Construct and the Propensity for Software Piracy’, Applied Eco-

nomics Letters, 11(2), 97–100.

Diwan, I. and Rodrik, D. (1991) ‘Patents, Appropriate Technology, and North-South Trade’, Journal of Inter-

Economist, the (2005-05-19) ‘BSA or just BS? Software Theft is Bad; So is Misstating the Evidence’. Available

national Economics, 30(1–2), 27–48.
at (cid:3)http://www.economist.com/node/3993427?story_id=3993427(cid:4) [Accessed July 2011].

El Sheikh, A., Rashed, A., Qudah, B. A. and Peace, A. G. (2006) ‘An Exploratory Study of Software Piracy in

Jordan’, The Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries [online], 23(4), 1–8.

Esposito, J. L. (1991) Islam: The Straight Path, New York: Oxford University Press.
Falvey, R., Foster, N. and Greenaway, D. (2006) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Growth’, Review
Fatwa. (2010). Oxford Online Dictionaries. Available at (cid:3)http://oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/fatwa(cid:4) [Ac-

of Development Economics, 10(4), 700–19.

cessed March 2011].

Fellmeth, A. (1998) ‘Copyright Misuse and the Limits of the Intellectual Property Monopoly’, Journal of

Intellectual Property Law, 6(1), 1–40.

Fischer, J. and Andr´es, A. (2005) ‘Is Software Piracy A Middle Class Crime? Investigating The Inequality-
Piracy Channel’, University of St. Gallen, Department Of Economics, Working Paper Series 2005, 2005–18,
Department of Economics, University of St. Gallen.
Gallup Website (2009) What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common [online]. Gallup. Available at
(cid:3)http://www.gallup.com/poll/114211/alabamians-iranians-common.aspx(cid:4) [Accessed September 2010].
Gibb, H. A. R. (1950) Mohammedanism, an Historical Survey, Oxford University Press, London, pp. 72–84.
Gill, A. (1999) ‘Government Regulation, Social Anomie and Protestant Growth in Latin America: A Cross-

National Analysis’, Rationality and Society 11(3), 287–316.

Ginarte, J., and Park, W. (1997) ‘Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study’, Research Policy,

26(3), 283–301.

Gould, D. M. and Gruben, W. (1996) ‘The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Economic Growth2’, Journal

of Development Economics, 48(2), 323–50.

Grier, R. (1997) ‘The Effect of Religion on Economic Development: A Cross National Study of 63 Former

Colonies’, Kyklos, 50(1), 47–62.

Grossman, G. and Lai, E. (2004) ‘International Protection of Intellectual Property’, American Economic Review,

94(5), 1635–53.

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

463

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Haigh, M. (2008) ‘The “Goodbye Petrovka” Plan: Moral Economy of File Sharing in Post Soviet Ukraine’,

Quelle, Working paper series of the research network 1989, Berlin.

Helpman, E.
1247–80.

(1993)

‘Innovation,

Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights’, Econometrica 61(6),

Hirschman, A. (1964) ‘The Paternity of an Index’, American Economic Review, 54(5), 76.
Hofstede, G. (1981) ‘Culture and Organizations’, International Studies of Management and Organization, 10(4),
Hofstede, G. (2004) Geert Hofstede Cultural Dimensions [online]. Available at (cid:3)http://www.geert-hofstede.

15–41.
com/hofstede_dimensions.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].

Hu, M. C., and Mathews, J. (2005) ‘National Innovative Capacity in East Asia’, Research Policy, 34(9),

1322–49.

Husted, B. (2000) ‘The Impact of National Culture on Software Piracy’, Journal of Business Ethics, 26(3),

197–211.

Iannaccone, L. R. (1991) ‘The Consequences of Religious Market Structures: Adam Smith and the Economics

of Religion’, Rationality and Society, 3(2), 156–77.

Iannaccone, L. R. and Stark, R. (1994) ‘A Supply-Side Reinterpretation of the “Secularization” of Europe’,

(d. 855)

Ibn Hanbal, A.

Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion 33(3), 76–88.
(2011) Al-musnad [online].
(cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/hadith/index.php(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].
‘aalameen [online], vol. 3, 1. Is-
lamweb. Fatwas on Intellectual Property (in Arabic). Available at (cid:3)http://www.islamweb.net/ver2/
fatwa/fatwacategory.php?lang=a&catid=2180(cid:4) [Accessed November 2009].

Islamweb hadith encyclopaedia. Available at

Ibn Qayyim, M. (d. 1349) (2011) I’laam ul muwaqqi’een ‘an rabb il

Islamweb.net website (2009). Fatwas on IPR [Accessed November 2009].
Jamar, S. D. (1992) ‘The Protection of Intellectual Property under Islamic Law’, Capital University Law Review

[online], 21, 1–26. Available at (cid:3)http://ssrn.com/abstract=1148735(cid:4) [Accessed May 2010].

Kanwar, S. and Evenson, R. (2003) ‘Does Intellectual Property Protection Spurt Technological Change?’, Oxford

Economic Papers, 55(2), 235–64.

Kamali, M. (1991) Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence, Islamic Texts Society, Cambridge.
Khadduri, M. (1984) The Islamic Conception of Justice, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Lanham,

Khalil, O. (2003) Intellectual Property in the Islamic Jurisprudence [online]. Almeshkat Islamic website. Available

MD.
at (cid:3)http://www.almeshkat.net/books/open.php?cat=32&book=1621(cid:4) [Accessed March 2010].

Ki, E.-J., Chang, E.-H. and Khang, H. (2006) ‘Exploring Inﬂuential Factors on Music Piracy across Countries’,

Journal of Communication, 56(2), 406–26.

Kinsella, S. (2001) ‘Against Intellectual Property’, Journal of Libertarian Studies, 15(2), 1–53. Auburn, AL:

Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Kiwit, D. and Voigt, S. (1995) ‘ ¨Uberlegungen zum institutionellen Wandel unter Ber¨ucksichtigung des
Verh¨altnisses interner und externer Institutionen (Considerations on Institutional Change Taking into
Account the Relationship between External and Internal Institutions)’, ORDO, 46, 117–48.
ing Science + Information Technology Education Joint Conference, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Kovacic, Z. (2007) ‘Determinants of Worldwide Software Piracy’. Paper presented in proceedings of the Inform-

Kyper, E., Lievano, R. J., Mangiameli, P. and Shin, S. K. (2004) ‘Software Piracy: A Time-Series Analysis’.
Proceedings of the 10th Americas Conference on Information Systems, New York [online]. Available
at (cid:3)http://aisel.isworld.org/pdf.asp?Vpath=AMCIS/2004&PDFpath=RINTNL01–1363.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed
February 2005].

Lai, E. and Qui, L. D. (2003) ‘The North’s Intellectual Property Rights Standard for the South?’, Journal of

International Economics, Elsevier, 59(1), 183–209.

464

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Lanjouw, J. and Lerner, J. (1997) ‘The Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights: A Survey of the Empir-
ical Literature’, NBER working paper [online], W6296. Available at (cid:3)http://ssrn.com/abstract=226053(cid:4)
[Accessed March 2010].

L´eger, A.

(2007)

‘Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation around the World: Evidence from
Panel Data’, German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin), Discussion Paper no. 696
(June).

Lewis-Fernandez, R. and Diaz, N. (2002) ‘The Cultural Formulation: A Method for Assessing Cultural Factors

Affecting the Clinical Encounter’, Psychiatric Quarterly, 73(4), 271–295.

Lopez, J. A. P. and Santos, J. M. S. (2008) ‘Effects of Competition on Religious Markets: Some Empirical

Evidence’, Applied Economics Letters, 15, 371–74.

Mansﬁeld, E. (1994) ‘Intellectual Property Protection, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology Transfer’,

International Finance Corporation, Discussion Paper 19, the World Bank, Washington, DC.

Markusen, J. R. (1998) ‘Contracts, Intellectual Property Rights, and Multinational Investment in Developing

Countries’, NBER Working Paper, W6448 (March).

Marron, D. and Steel, D. (2000) ‘Which Countries Protect Intellectual Property? The Case of Software Piracy’.

Economic inquiry, 38(2), 159–74.

Maskus, K. (2000) ‘Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy’, Institute for International Economics,

Washington, DC.

Maskus, K. E., and Penubarti, M. (1995) ‘How Trade Related Are Intellectual Property Rights?’ Journal of

International Economics, 39(3–4), 227–48.

Mason, M. (2009) The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism, Free Press,

New York.

McCleary R. M. and Barro R. J. (2006) ‘Religion and Political Economy in an International Panel’, Journal for

the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion, 45(2), 149–75.

McCalman, P. (2000) ‘Reaping What You Saw: An Empirical Analysis of International Patent Harmonization’,

Mimeo, University of California-Santa Cruz, September.

Moores, T. (2003) ‘The Effect of National Culture and Economic Wealth on Global Software Piracy Rates’,

Communication of the ACM, 46(9), 207–15.
Muslim, A. (d. 875) (2011) Sahih Muslim [online]. Ministry of Islamic Affairs, Endowments, Da‘Wah
and Guidance. Available at (cid:3)http://hadith.al-islam.com/display/display.asp?doc=1&rec=3840(cid:4) [Accessed
May 2010].

Noland, M. (2005) ‘Religion and Economic Performance’, World Development, 33(8), 1215–32.
North, D. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge.

North, C. and Gwin, C. (2004) ‘Religious Freedom and the Unintended Consequences of State Religion’,

Southern Economic Journal, 71(1), 103–17.

Opper, S. (2008) ‘New Institutional Economics and Its Application on Transition and Developing Economies’,
in E. Brousseau and J. Glachant (eds), New Institutional Economics—A Guidebook, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Penrose, E. (1951) The Economics of the International Patent System, Johns Hopkins University Press, Lanham,

MD, Baltimore, pp. 116–17.

Plant, A. (1974) ‘The Economic Theory Concerning Patents for Inventions’, in Selected Economic Essays and
Addresses, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 35–56 (originally published in Economica, New Series, 1(1),
February 1934, 30–51).

Primo Braga, C. A. and Fink, C. (1998) ‘Reforming Intellectual Property Rights Regimes: Challenges
for Developing Countries’, Journal of International Economic Law [online], 1(4), 537–54. Available at
(cid:3)http://jiel.oxfordjournals.org/content/1/4/537.full.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed July 2011].

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6

465

Nora El-Bialy and Moamen Gouda

Can Shari’a be a Deterrent for IPR Piracy?

Qur’an, the holy (all verbatim quotations are from the translation of the Qur’an by Abdullah Yusufali,
“the meanings of the holy Qur’an”, published in 2006.) Available at (cid:3)http://www.thegodisone.com/
koran.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

Ronkainen, I. and Guerrero-Cusumano, J. (2001) ‘Correlates of Intellectual Property Violation’, Multinational

Business Review, 9(1), 59–65.

Schneider, P. H. (2005) ‘International Trade, Economic Growth and Intellectual Property Rights: A Panel
Data Study of Developed and Developing Countries’, Journal of Development Economics, 78(2),
529–47.

Sened, I. (1997) The Political Institution of Private Property, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Shadlen, K., Schrank, A. and Kurtz, M. (2004) ‘The Political Economy of Intellectual Property Protection: The

Case of Software’, International Studies Quarterly, 49(1), 45–71.

Shin, S., Gopal, R., Sanders, G. and Whinston, A. (2004) ‘Global Software Piracy Revisited: Beyond Eco-

nomics2’, Communications Of The ACM, 47(1), 103–07.

Shore, B., Venkatachalam, A. R., Solorzano, E., Burn, J. M., Hassan, S. Z. and Janczewski, L. J. (2001)

‘Softlifting and Piracy: Behaviour across Cultures’, Technology in Society, 23(4), 563–81.

Smith, I. and Sawkins, J. W. (2003) ‘The Economics of Regional Variation in Religious Attendance’, Applied

Economics, 35(14), 1577–88.

Smith, I., Sawkins, J. W. and Seaman, P. T. (1998) ‘The Economics of Religious Participation: A Cross-Country

Stiglitz, J.

Study’, Kyklos, 51(1), 25–43.
(cid:3)http://www.bcs.rochester.edu/people/eorhan/2006_New_Scientist.pdf(cid:4).

(2006)

‘Give Prizes Not Patents’, 16 September, The New Scientist, 21. Available at

Stiglitz, J. (2008) ‘Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property Rights’, Duke Law Journal, 57(6), 101–132.
Swinyard, W. R., Rinne, H. and Keng Kau, A. (1990) ‘The Morality of Software Piracy: A Cross-Cultural

Analysis’, Journal of Business Ethics, 9, 655–64.

Thompson, M. A. and Rushing, F. W. (1999) ‘An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Patent Protection on

Economic Growth: An Extension’, Journal of Economic Development, 24(1), 67–76.

Van Kranenburg, H. and Hogenirk, A. (2005) ‘Multimedia, Entertainment, and Business Software Copyright

Piracy: A Cross-National Study’, Journal of Media Economics, 18(2), 109—29.

Verzola, R. (2004) ‘Towards a Political Economy of Information’, Foundation for Nationalist Studies (FNS),

Quezon City, Philippines.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (2010) Collection of Laws for Electronic Access (CLEA)

World values survey (2009a) Values change the world [online]. The Word Value Survey. Available at

database. [Accessed July 2010].
(cid:3)http://www.worldvaluessurvey.com/(cid:4) [Accessed May 2010].
Available at (cid:3)http://www.worldvaluessurvey.com/(cid:4) [Accessed May 2010].

World values survey (2009b) WVS 2005 Codebook (version 20090415) [online]. The World Value Survey.

Yang, G. and Maskus, K. E. (2001) ‘Intellectual Property Rights, Licensing, and Innovation in an Endogenous

ZDNet, UK (2005–06-24) Lies,

Product-Cycle Model’, Journal of International Economics, 53(1), 169–87.
(cid:3)http://www.zdnet.co.uk/news/it-at-work/2005/06/24/lies-damn-lies-and-statistics-39205464/(cid:4)
cessed June 2011].

(online). ZDNet. Available

statistics

damn

and

lies

at
[Ac-

466

C(cid:2) 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 6


