The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 297–316

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00362.x

Patenting Pharmaceutical Inventions on
Second Medical Uses in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa
Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property, Competition and Tax Law and Munich Intellectual Property
Law Center

The current Brazilian industrial property law (Law 9279 of 14 May 1996) allows patents for
pharmaceuticals, along with the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights provisions. Since 1999, after an amendment in the legislation, two govern-
mental authorities—the Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (INPI) and the Ageˆ ncia
Nacional de Vigilaˆ ncia Sanita´ ria (ANVISA)—have been concomitantly acting in the patent-
granting procedures for pharmaceuticals. The INPI is the ofﬁce usually responsible for the
examination and granting of patents, and the ANVISA is the agency primarily responsible
for the granting of marketing approval of drugs. In a peculiar situation, the two institutions
have been responsible for the granting or denial of applications and have very often been
divergent in their positions. The patentability of pharmaceutical inventions claiming second
medical use is an example. The purpose of this work is to analyze the current situation of the
Brazilian patent-granting system in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld, with a special focus on the
patentability of inventions claiming second medical use. It debates the two governmental
positions and questions whether the existing conﬂicts are harmful to the system.

Keywords pharmaceuticals; patentability; second medical use; Brazil

Developing new uses of pharmaceuticals has led to advances in technology. Aspirin
and Viagra are often cited as examples showing that the development of further
applications of an already existing substance is technically and commercially
valuable (Aspirin Foundation, 2008; Fox et al., 2003, p. 2207).1 The numbers of
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)—according to which only 33.5%
out of 1,284 drugs approved from 1990 to 2004 contained a new molecular entity—
also illustrate the signiﬁcance of research in this area (US FDA, 2005).

Patents are seen as a tool to foster investments in research and development
(R&D) of a new drug (with a new active ingredient or not), as well as to ﬁnance the
clinical trials needed for its marketing. In the case of a further application of a
pharmaceutical product, use claims are devised to describe the invention for which
protection is sought (Paterson, 1996, p. 179). What entitles inventors to the patent
privilege is teaching the use of a substance for a speciﬁc and new therapeutic
purpose (Straus, 2004, p. 101).

The term ﬁrst medical use refers to a new medicinal use of a known substance
that has not yet been used for such medicinal purposes. It is used to contrast it with
second medical use, which describes second medical indications of known substances
already used for medicinal purposes (Straus, 2004, p. 101). In this article, second

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

297

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

medical use refers not only to second but also to third and further medicinal uses of
a known substance.

The current Brazilian industrial property law (law 9279 of 14 May 1996—
hereinafter simply referred as law 9276/96) was enacted to equate the national
legislation to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS). The law does not prohibit patents in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld.
However, patents in this ﬁeld are regarded suspiciously and often argued to be
detrimental to the access to medicines by the population (Basso, 2006, p. 54).
Speciﬁcally, pharmaceutical patents on second medical uses are accused of lacking
novelty and of unduly extending the term of already existing patents (frequently
covering a brand innovative drug), under the so-called ‘‘evergreening’’ practice
(Correa, 2006, p. 4).

In this context, attention should be paid to the conﬂicting opinions between the
Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (National Institute of Industrial
Property—INPI), as the governmental institution primarily responsible for the
examination and granting of patents, and the Ageˆ ncia Nacional de Vigilaˆ ncia
Sanita´ ria (National Agency of Sanitary Surveillance—ANVISA), as the authority
responsible for the marketing approval of drugs. According to an amendment of the
industrial property law of 1999, the ANVISA was granted authority to intervene in
the patent-granting procedure of applications in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld, which
require this authority’s ‘‘prior approval’’.2 The INPI has been allowing patent
applications claiming second medical use, while the ANVISA has adopted a policy
to deny all the patent applications on this subject matter (ANVISA, 2004b).3

The present article ﬁrst describes the current situation of the Brazilian patent-
granting system in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld in general. It discusses the competence
of the ANVISA in the patent-granting procedure for applications for pharma-
ceutical products and processes, after the amendment introduced in the industrial
property law. Following these discussions, this work analyzes how claims on second
medical use inventions are handled by the INPI and the ANVISA. It focuses on the
divergent understandings from each of the two authorities. It ﬁnally debates
whether the conﬂicting governmental positions can confer uncertainty to the system
in general and whether the choice not to allow patents on second medical use could
be harmful for the country’s economic and technological development.

Understanding the Brazilian System for Pharmaceutical Patents

In Brazil, protection of inventions is a constitutional guarantee. Article 5, XXIX of
the Federal Constitution 1988 establishes that the law shall ensure temporary
privileges for the use of industrial inventions by their authors, as well as the
protection of industrial creations, keeping in mind the social interest and the
technological and economic development of the country. There are authors who
interpret the constitutional clause as ﬁnalistic, meaning that the clause has a speciﬁc
goal. In this case, the granting of each patent would be subject to the condition that

298

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

the granted patents should conform to ‘‘the social interest and the technological and
economic development of the country’’ (Barbosa, 2006b, p. 13). In contrast, this
clause has also been seen as justifying the existence of the patent system, reﬂecting
the compromise between the inventor and society. The conditions for the granting
of patents would be regulated in the infra-constitutional legislation,4 which would
then guide the activities of the public administration (Oswald and Leonardos, 2007,
p. 8).

Law 9279/96 entered into force on 15 May 1996 to regulate industrial property
rights. The new law implements the inventor’s constitutional rights and aims at
observing the obligations assumed by the Brazilian government when signing
TRIPS.

The inventions are patentable, provided they meet the novelty, inventive step,
industrial application and disclosure requirements, set forth in articles 8, 24 and 25
of law 9279/96.5 Furthermore, the generic classiﬁcation is adopted and the eligible
categories of inventions are not enumerated. Subject matters entitled to patent
protection are deﬁned by exclusion in the law, meaning that they should not belong
to the statutory bars of articles 10 (subject matter not eligible for lack of a
patentability requirement) and 18 (subject matter expressly excluded, despite
fulﬁlling the patentability requirements).6 The current industrial property law,
unlike the previous statute (law 5772 of 21 December 1971), does not prohibit
product patents in the chemical and pharmaceutical ﬁelds. However, article 10, VIII
of law 9279/96 does not recognize operating or surgical techniques and therapeutic
or diagnostic methods for use on the human or animal body as inventions.

The INPI is the Brazilian institution competent for examining and granting
patents. It was created in 1970 to implement the legislation concerning industrial
property.7 Since 1999, the system has been facing a peculiar situation. Besides the
INPI, another governmental
institution called ANVISA (the regulatory ofﬁce
competent for approving the marketing of drugs)8 must intervene in the process
of granting a patent. A provisional measure was enacted by the President on 15
December 1999,9 determining that patent applications in the pharmaceutical area
must be submitted to ‘‘prior approval’’ by the ANVISA before their issuance.10 The
‘‘prior approval’’ requisite was ultimately inserted as article 229-C of law 9279/96 by
the amending law 10196/2001 of 14 February 2001.

Accordingly, the ANVISA published Ordinance 593 of 25 August 2000, which
changed its internal regulations. Within the competences of the agency, and, in
addition to regulating the marketing of drugs, it enumerates the consent (‘‘prior
approval’’) on the granting of patents for pharmaceutical products and processes.
The agency, however, introduced in its structure an Intellectual Property Division,
responsible for the ‘‘prior approval’’ only on 21 May 2001, when Ordinance 239 of
17 May 2001 (which once again changed ANVISA’s internal regulations) entered
into force.

Because article 229-C was introduced into the legislation by a Provisional
Measure enacted by the President, there are no records of hearings at the Congress

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

299

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

discussing the purposes of the creation of the ANVISA’s ‘‘prior approval’’ requisite.
It has its origins in a recommendation to the President made by the Ministries
of Health, External Relations, Industry and Management (EM Interministerial
92 of 14 December 1999). As a justiﬁcation, they simply pointed out the need to
assure better technical standards in deciding the grant of pharmaceutical patents,
similar to procedures existing in the patent and sanitary surveillance systems of
developed countries.11 Without any legal criteria for the ‘‘prior approval’’, or any
regulation implementing article 229-C, the role of the ANVISA was not clearly
deﬁned.

The INPI understood at ﬁrst that the ANVISA would be responsible for
determining the industrial application requirement. This was expressed in a legal
opinion rendered by the Solicitor’s Ofﬁce, which also stated that only regular
applications would be submitted to the ANVISA (INPI, PROC 003/00). ‘‘Pipeline’’
patent applications would not be subject to the ‘‘prior approval’’ requisite, because
they are exempted from examination of the patentability requirements set forth in
article 8 of the statute (novelty, inventive step and industrial application).

‘‘Pipeline’’ patents or patents of revalidation consist of a validation in Brazil of
a patent issued abroad, ratifying the examination conducted by the foreign patent
ofﬁce, provided that the product covered by the patent application was not made
commercially available (novelty, inventive step and industrial application are not
examined by the INPI). They are foreseen by the statute in articles 230 and 231, as a
transitory mechanism to allow pharmaceutical patent applications to be ﬁled
between 1996 and 1997, irrespective of the novelty requirement being accomplished
and bearing in mind that the previous legislation did not allow patents on
pharmaceutical products (Licks and Leonardos, 2002).

Without deﬁning ‘‘prior approval’’, the INPI ﬁnally decided that the applica-
tions would be sent to the ANVISA following the end of the examination by the
patent ofﬁce, which concluded the granting of the patent (INPI, Comunicado INPI/
DIRPA 02/2001). This procedure has been applied to all patent applications,
regular or ‘‘pipeline’’.12

At its own judgment, the ANVISA then opted to re-examine completely the
patent applications. All the requirements such as novelty,
inventive step and
industrial applications—which have already been analyzed by the INPI—are once
more checked by the ANVISA (ANVISA, 2004a). Moreover, the grant of ‘‘prior
approval’’ would also be subject to a policy evaluation, an analysis of public health
aspects, that is the access to medicines and the technical evaluation of compounds.
According to their policies for drug regulation, the granting of patents demands a
rigorous analysis, because it is a privilege with a direct impact on the ﬁnal cost of the
drug.

On 24 June 2008, the ANVISA adopted Resolution-RDC 45 of 23 June 2008,
which regulated the procedure of the patent applications submitted to the agency for
‘‘prior approval’’. It establishes that the ANVISA will examine the patentability
requirements established in the legislation and may request the applicant through

300

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

an ofﬁce action to submit documents, clariﬁcations and amendments.13 With almost
10 years of delay since the introduction of the ‘‘prior approval’’ requirement, the
agency decided to regulate it, evidencing its lack of capability to deal with the
matter, despite the crucial decisions already taken, that is to grant patents on
pharmaceuticals based on policy evaluations.14 It is important to notice that the
Resolution states clearly that the ANVISA’s activities should stick to the law, with
no margin for other considerations. Therefore, when implementing its policies, the
agency should raise arguments on lack of novelty, inventive step, disclosure or
enablement, which reﬂect criteria in examining applications different from the ones
adopted by INPI. This is the case of the inventions on second medical uses, which
will be discussed further in this article.

For the Associac¸ a˜ o Brasileira da Propriedade Intelectual (Brazilian Intellectual
Property Association—ABPI), the ‘‘prior approval’’ should only be applicable to
the ‘‘pipeline’’ applications, because both are inserted among the transitory provi-
sions of the statute (ABPI, 2004).15 Furthermore, the ANVISA is the competent
authority for approving the marketing of the drugs, and the non-commercialization
is one of the requirements for granting ‘‘pipeline’’ patents (ABPI, 2004).

The intervention by the ANVISA in the patent-granting procedure can be
regarded as a measure of the Brazilian Executive Government to implement a policy
of ‘‘blockage’’ of patents covering pharmaceutical-related inventions (Souza, 2008,
p. 53). In implementing the minimum standards required by TRIPS, the Brazilian
industrial property law created legal grounds for the development of a sound patent
system. Despite facing some difﬁculties, such as the constant need for more
examiners, the INPI has been heading towards a patent-friendly approach when
applying the statute. Therefore, the Brazilian government saw it as necessary to
control politically the granting of pharmaceutical patents in the country: this would
be performed by the ANVISA.

This control would be justiﬁed based on the government’s discretionary power
to act in defense of human rights (the access to medicines), which would be
represented in the right to health in article 196 of the Federal Constitution (Basso,
2006, p. 60). The public administration would then be entitled by article 197 of the
Constitution to act in order to guarantee it (Basso, 2006, p. 60). The supremacy of
welfare over individual rights would be established in the Constitution, articles 5,
XXIII and 170, III, which require that the property observes its social function
(Basso, 2006, p. 60). Accordingly, the ‘‘prior approval’’ would be a means to assure
social justice (Basso, 2006, p. 60), and the right of access to medicine would serve as
a limitation to intellectual property rights, speciﬁcally patent rights (Rodrigues and
Murphy, 2006, p. 437).

Under the argument that public interests should prevail over private interests, it
is often forgotten that article 5, XXIX of the Federal Constitution also relates to the
public interest. The inventor obtains the property rights, but society beneﬁts from
the contents of the patent directly (when having access to the new product) or
indirectly (when enjoying the new economic activities related to the new product in

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

301

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

the market), and the state would proﬁt from the activities fostering its technological
development, through the transfer of technology (Oswald and Leonardos, 2007, p.
11). Without the investments in R&D propitiated by the patent system, the
development of new drugs would be at stake.

Furthermore, the ANVISA’s policy control would be unconstitutional because
patents are a fundamental guarantee and must be granted upon fulﬁllment of the
patentability requirements set forth in the statute (Barbosa, 2006a, p. 733). The
activities of the public administration are subject to the principle of legality and
there should be no space for the discretionary power of the ANVISA or any other
entity of the public administration.16 The constitutional clause would represent a
justiﬁcation given by the legislators to enact the patent statute. This is the legal
instrument to which the public administrator (in this case represented by the
ANVISA and the INPI) is attached. Therefore, once veriﬁed that the invention is
new, inventive, industrially applicable, supported by the description and not a
prohibited subject matter (articles 10 and 18), the patent must be granted upon
payment of the applicable fees. Otherwise, the public administration would act
contra legem, as per the opinion of the public attorneys from the INPI (INPI, 2008a,
p. 14).

Another interesting argument of the public attorneys from the INPI relates to
the social function of the patent. They argue that a patent should be granted,
provided the legal requisites are observed, but as property rights they should respect
the principle of social function of property of article 5, XXII and 170, II of the
Federal Constitution (INPI, 2008a, p. 16). The limitations to the use of the patent
rights should be determined in favor of society in order not to restrict unduly the
competition, and act as a guarantee of article 170, IV of the Constitution (INPI,
2008a, p. 16). Accordingly, the policy evaluations involved should be used to avoid
an abusive exercise of patent rights.

The Federal Constitution provides, therefore, that patents are a guarantee and
the law enacted by Congress should implement this guarantee, because it is
beneﬁcial to society and the country’s development. But because this guarantee is
not unlimited, a balance exercise should be carried out in light of other constitu-
tional principles, such as the social function of property mentioned above. When
this balance exercise occurs at the stage of enforcement of patent rights, the
constitutional rights of the inventor are not harmed and due respect to prevailing
circumstances in favor of society is paid. Thus, policy considerations should not be
part of the patent-granting procedure, which is strictly linked to the law. Matters of
a government’s policy should be considered at the stage of enforcement of patent
rights, as the example of the granting of compulsory licenses, which are within the
so-called TRIPS ﬂexibilities. In fact, the Brazilian government has already granted a
compulsory license to the drug Efavirenz (for the treatment of AIDS) of Merck,
because it considered it of public interest (Decree 6108 of 4 May 2007).

On 3 November 2004, the trial judge of the 37th Federal District Court of Rio
de Janeiro rendered a judgment overruling ANVISA’s decision denying ‘‘prior

302

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

approval’’ to patent application PI 9503468-4 (covering the drug Valcyte for the
treatment of AIDS) of F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG.17 Differing from the INPI’s
examination, which concluded for the patentability, the ANVISA considered that
the invention was already part of the state of the art and argued that the granting of
‘‘bad patents’’ is harmful to the public health.18 The trial court decided on the
unconstitutionality of ANVISA’s interpretation of article 229-C, meaning that the
ANVISA lacks statutory authority to examine the requirements of an inventive
step, novelty and industrial application of pharmaceutical patent applications, and
any act of the ANVISA should be free from any policy ground. It then invalidated
the ANVISA’s decision, rejecting the ‘‘prior approval’’ of the PI 9503468 patent
application. This district court decision was nulliﬁed by the decision of the Court of
Appeals rendered on 11 December 2007, for non-accomplishment of procedural
requirements in the lawsuit.19 It was found that the trial court erred in denying
ANVISA’s request for a technical expert to assist the courts to assess whether the
invention was part of the state of the art. The issues concerning the ANVISA’s
competence for intervening in the patent-granting procedure and the scope of the
‘‘prior approval’’ were, however, not handled.

In another case, the Court of Appeals dealt with the competence of the
ANVISA when examining patent applications submitted to ‘‘prior approval’’.
The trial judge of the 38th Federal District Court of Rio de Janeiro sustained
the ANVISA’s denial of ‘‘prior approval’’ to patent application PI 9508789-3
(covering the drug Taxotere for the treatment of cancer) of Aventis Pharma S.A.20
ANVISA understood that the amendments in the claims exceeded the matter
disclosed in the original application, in violation article 32 of law 9279/96.21 On
31 July 2008, the appellate court afﬁrmed the decision rendered by the trial
court, which considered that after the introduction of article 229-C into the
legislation, the patent-granting procedure in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld should be
deemed a complex act, requiring the activities of two administrative bodies: the
INPI and the ANVISA. The appellate court judgment stated that article 229-C of
law 9279/96 gives a different treatment to pharmaceutical patent applications, and
both the INPI and the ANVISA should coordinately examine the patentability
requirements of article 8 of law 9279/96. It further asserts that patent applications in
this ﬁeld should be subjected to a more stringent examination in order to avoid
undue patent protection to medicines that are of high importance to the public
health.

One can observe that the above-mentioned case law tends to conﬁrm the
ANVISA’s practice in re-examining the patentability requirements of applications
submitted to ‘‘prior approval’’. Under the argument that patents in the pharma-
ceutical ﬁeld can harm public health,
the ANVISA has been convincing
courts to support its policies. However, it is still to be made clear whether such
policies can or cannot consist of discretionarily granting or denying the ‘‘prior
approval’’, like the absolute rejection of pharmaceutical inventions claiming second
medical uses.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

303

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

A further development in the role of the ANVISA within the patent-granting
procedure has also been established at the political level. On 9 July 2008, the Bill of
Law 3709/2008 was presented at the House of Representatives to modify article
229-C. According to the proposal, the ANVISA’s ‘‘prior approval’’ would be
restricted to ‘‘pipeline’’ patent applications. The justiﬁcation of the Bill states that
‘‘pipeline’’ patents consist of the revalidation of patents granted abroad, which
should thus be subject to a more stringent analysis of whether the object of the
patent was made available in the international market. Because ‘‘pipeline’’ applica-
tions would be allowed only for 1 year after the enactment of the patent statute,
article 229-C would then be a transitory provision attached to the transitory nature
of the existence of ‘‘pipeline’’ patents in the Brazilian system. The restrictions in the
ANVISA’s activities proposed in the Bill have already prompted protests from the
agency, which is resistant to losing its powers to intervene in the patent-granting
proceedings. The agency argues that the INPI is too lenient in the examination and
favors the industry too much (Formenti, 2008). The INPI, on the other hand,
argues that the concomitant work of the two governmental institutions extends the
patent examination term and opens doors to conﬂicting understandings—such as
the case of the patentability of second medical uses—and, thus, to legal uncertainty
(Formenti, 2008).

Meanwhile, without further clariﬁcations or changes in the law about the
participation of the ANVISA in the patent-granting procedure, it is important to
emphasize that the examination by both the INPI and the ANVISA should always
respect the principle of legality.

The Second Medical Use Inventions

Patents on second use inventions in the pharmaceutical or other ﬁelds are allowed
by the INPI, once novelty and inventive step are ascertained in such second use. The
INPI’s Examination Guidelines in the Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Field
currently in force deﬁne second medical use inventions as a new use as a medication
of a product known outside the medical ﬁeld (referring to ﬁrst medical use) or a new
medical use of a product already applied in the medical ﬁeld (referring to second
medical use) (INPI, 2002).22

According to the Examination Guidelines, claims drafted as ‘‘use of product X
characterized in that it is for the preparation of a medication to treat illness Y’’ or
‘‘use of product X characterized in that it is for the preparation of a medication to
treat illness Y, which treatment consists of such and such’’ may be allowed (INPI,
2002).23 These claims are described in the so-called Swiss-type form, which are
required to avoid the prohibition against patenting methods of medical treatment in
article 10, VIII of law 9279/96 (INPI, 2002).24 In contrast, claims such as ‘‘product
X characterized in that it is for the treatment of disease Y’’ would lack novelty and
claims such as ‘‘use of product X characterized in that it is for the treatment of

304

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

disease Y’’ or ‘‘process to treat disease Y, characterized by the administration of
product X’’ are considered therapeutic methods (INPI, 2002).25

Despite the considerations on claim drafting, as per the current Examination
Guidelines, the ofﬁcial understanding of the INPI is that second medical use
inventions are patentable. Nevertheless, the ANVISA has an opposite opinion in
this regard.

On 25 August 2004, the ANVISA’s website made available some information
about the agency’s procedures concerning patent applications on pharmaceutical-
related inventions (ANVISA, 2004b). As the main issue, it publishes the decision of
the ANVISA’s Collegiate Board of 23 November 2003, according to which the
agency will not grant ‘‘prior approval’’ to patent applications on second medical
uses. It states that these patents are harmful to public health, to the country’s
scientiﬁc and technological development, and that they may hinder access to
medication by the population (ANVISA, 2004b).

The ANVISA’s denial of ‘‘prior approval’’ to applications claiming second
medical uses may violate TRIPS, representing a discrimination of a ﬁeld of
technology, prohibited by article 27.1 of TRIPS (ABPI, 2004; Souza, 2008,
pp. 62–3). Applicants in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld are subjected to a second
examination round, while inventors in other ﬁelds are not. In addition, article
27.2 could not be used to justify the denial of such patents, because the goal of this
provision is to prevent proprietary rights only to inventions contrary to the society’s
interest (Rodrigues and Murphy, 2006, p. 451). Only if the commercial exploitation
of these inventions is not allowed, could they be excluded from patent protection.
In the other line of argument, the legitimacy of the ANVISA’s denial to grant
patents on second medical uses would be supported by articles 7 and 8 of TRIPS, as
well as by the Doha Declaration (Basso, 2006, p. 63). These provisions would entitle
World Trade Organization (WTO) member states to adopt any measure considered
necessary to promote social welfare and protect public health. Speciﬁcally, article 8.1
of TRIPS would expressly allow the countries to exclude from patentable subject
matter the inventions, like second medical uses, needed to protect the public health
(Arruda and Cerdeira, 2007, p. 124). Such patents would not contribute to techno-
logical innovation (being the result of empirical observation rather than of investments
in R&D), or to the dissemination of technology for artiﬁcially extending the exclusive
rights of the patent holder (Basso, 2006, p. 63). Moreover, article 27 of TRIPS is silent
about second medical use inventions when dealing with patentable subject matter and,
therefore, member states would be free to allow or not patents on them (Correa, 2007,
p. 1; Rodrigues and Murphy, 2006, p. 430). The ANVISA’s intervention would be an
important tool to ensure the implementation of public health policies by adopting
more stringent criteria of patentability (Correa, 2006, p. 17).

The conﬂicts between the two governmental authorities (INPI and ANVISA)
prompted the recent debates reviewing the INPI’s Examination Guidelines. The INPI
has organized meetings opened to representatives of the two governmental institu-
tions, associations from the industry (innovative and generic) and practitioners

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

305

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

(INPI, 2007d). In those discussions, the divergent opinions from the ANVISA and
the INPI are notorious.

The Head of the Chemical Patent Division of the INPI believes that a second
medical application for a known substance consists of an invention and the scope of
the new guidelines is to deﬁne the criteria for the granting of a patent (INPI, 2007a).
In contrast, the ANVISA’s representatives contended that the inventions consist
mostly of methods of treatment by therapy (INPI, 2007a). Additionally, a Swiss-
type claim is not enabled in the speciﬁcation. Because it is not possible to
manufacture a medicine for the treatment of a certain disease from what is disclosed
in the application, the written description requirements are, therefore, not fulﬁlled
(INPI, 2007a). These arguments are the same as those used decades ago against the
patentability of second medical use inventions, as if there were no advance in the
discussions. They just evidence the policy positioning behind the ‘‘technical’’
reasons to deny patents on such matters.

The debates at the INPI concluded towards the permissibility of patents on
second medical use inventions, reiterating the institute’s position under the current
Examination Guidelines. The ﬁrst draft for the new Examination Guidelines
recognizes that an invention of second medical use is based on the report of a
new therapeutic activity of a known chemical compound for the production of a
medicine with a different purpose from the one already part of the state of the art
(INPI, 2007c). The invention would be deemed new when the already known
pharmaceutical product is used to treat a different disease (INPI, 2007c). The
inventive step would be veriﬁed when the new medical use is not obvious to a person
skilled in the art, taking into account the mechanisms of action of the chemical
compound, the relationship between therapeutic activity and chemical structure and
the etiology of the targeted diseases (INPI, 2007c). The draft, however, does not yet
suggest any parameter for the disclosure requirement and the admissible claim
wording. Since the last meeting held on 9 October 2007, the INPI has been working
on a ﬁnal proposal for the new Examination Guidelines. Meanwhile, the ones
discussed previously are still in force.

Within the Brazilian pharmaceutical industry context, one should take into
account the remarks of the representative of the Associac¸ a˜ o dos Laborat ´orios
Farmaceˆ uticos Nacionais (Association of the National Pharmaceutical Labora-
tories—ALANAC) during the meetings for the revision of the Examination Guide-
lines (INPI, 2007b). The little research conducted nationally consists mostly of
already known substances and any developments therefrom are new medical uses.
The innovation performed by Brazilian companies is an incremental innovation
(INPI, 2007b). The national industry does not have the means to ﬁnance and
perform the R&D activities and the clinical trials needed for new drugs containing
new chemical compounds. In contrast, the expenses needed for development of a
drug based on new uses of known chemical compounds are comparatively much
lower, since the initial tests for proving the safety of the substance have already been
performed. Brazilian inventors and industry would be harmed by the ANVISA’s

306

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

policy in blocking second medical use patents. Examples of Brazilian inventors who
could be affected by such policy have also been identiﬁed (Souza, 2008, p. 67).26

The conﬂict between the ANVISA and the INPI was also remarkable in
Congress, during the analysis of the Bill of Law 2511/2007 (proposed on 29
November 2007), aiming at amending law 9279/96 in order to include a prohibition
in article 18 against the patentability of second medical indications of pharmaceu-
ticals. The Bill of Law 2511/2007 justiﬁes such prohibition, stating that the lack of
deﬁnition of a therapeutic method in the law led to the granting of patents on new
medical
indications, which consist of mere discoveries and do not fulﬁll the
patentability requirements. It concludes by stating that the unjustiﬁed extension
of protection hinders the access by the population to generic drugs. One should note
that the justiﬁcations are unclear about the relationship between second medical
uses being mere discoveries and the lack of deﬁnition of therapeutic methods.

In the discussions at the House of Representatives, each institution adopted
opposite opinions towards the patentability of such inventions. ANVISA reiterated
that patenting second medical use inventions is contrary to the public health
policies, because it hinders the production of generics and increases the costs of
purchase of medicines (Ageˆ ncia Caˆ mara, 2008). In the opposite direction, the INPI
afﬁrms their patentability upon fulﬁllment of the requirements, based on the
absence of such prohibition in the current statute (Ageˆ ncia Caˆ mara, 2008).

Attached to the Bill of Law 2511/2007, the new Bill of Law 3995/2008 proposed
on 3 September 2008 has led to further discussions at the House of Representatives.
The Bill of Law 3995/2008 intends to modify article 10 of law 9279/96 and exclude
from patentability new crystalline forms of substances already in the state of the art,
as well as new uses of products or therapeutic substances already subject to patent
protection. As reasons, it is stated that these kinds of patents would interest foreign
pharmaceutical companies, because they are an extension of the term of protection
of already existing patents, serving as barriers to other companies to enter in the
market. Second medical use consists in the discovery of side effects, and the research
is only related to adapting the already existing drug to the new pathology to be
treated, which, on the other hand, would be a therapeutic method—excluded from
patentability by article 10, VIII of law 9279/96.

During the debates with the politicians, the INPI’s Commissioner afﬁrmed once
again the institute’s position in favor of the patentability of second medical use
inventions, because they may foster national research in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld,
and quotes a manifestation of Brazilian scientists in this regard (INPI, 2008c). He
states that the INPI criteria in examining such patent applications would avoid
undue extension of already existing patents, by delimiting clearly the scope of
protection (INPI, 2008c). He recognizes that such patents may serve as a tool to the
country’s technological development, in line with the concerns of the representative
of the Ministry of Industry—which the INPI is part of in the governmental
structure (INPI, 2008c). On the other hand, the representative of the Ministry of
Health—to which the ANVISA is afﬁliated—advocated for the absolute ban of

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

307

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

patents on second medical uses (INPI, 2008c). These discussions made clear that the
conﬂicts between the ANVISA and the INPI reﬂect divergent positions between two
different sectors of the executive government: the Ministry of Industry and the
Ministry of Health.

The INPI’s position was legally grounded in an opinion of its public attorneys
that considered that, absent a restriction in the statute against the patentability of
second medical uses, patents on such subject matter must be granted, provided that
the requirements of novelty, inventive step and industrial application are met (INPI,
2008a, p. 14). Not doing so, the INPI would be acting against the law, because
policy evaluations should be reserved to the enforcement stage (INPI, 2008a, p. 16).
For the technical aspects to justify the criteria used by the institute, an opinion
prepared by its examiners was presented (INPI, 2008b), conﬁrming the under-
standings already revealed in the ﬁrst draft for the new Examination Guidelines.
The new use of a known pharmaceutical product may be protected under the Swiss-
type claim (‘‘Use of compound X characterized in that it is for the preparation of a
medication to treat illness Y’’), because the protection would not be directed to the
already known product, but to the use of the known product to manufacture a
medicine for a new therapeutic use (INPI, 2008b, p. 22). This way, there would be
no barriers to third parties using either the product or the process to produce it, in
case they are already in the public domain and are not used for the new indication
(INPI, 2008b, p. 22). In addition, therapeutic methods comprise the steps necessary
for the cure or prevention of a disease, or for alleviating pain and suffering, aiming
at the re-establishment of normal conditions of health. Swiss-type claims would not
cover such steps (INPI, 2008b, p. 22). Novelty would be veriﬁed when the second
use is different from the one already part of the state of the art, meaning the
treatment or prevention of a different disease (INPI, 2008b, p. 22). When analyzing
the prior art, side effects duly documented may be novelty destroying (INPI, 2008b,
p. 23). The inventive step requirement would be fulﬁlled when a person skilled in
the art would not understand the new application as obvious, taking into
consideration that the invention has a mechanism of action different from the
one described for the ﬁrst use, the etiology of new disease to be treated is also not
the same and the new therapeutic effect is not evidently derived from a molecular
structure analogous to compounds presenting similar activities (INPI, 2008b,
pp. 23–4). With regard to disclosure and enablement, in vivo tests are required,
and the disease to be treated should be speciﬁcally mentioned in the description, a
reference to the conditions to be treated not being enough (the mechanism of
action) (INPI, 2008b, pp. 24–5).

It is important to remember that, notwithstanding the INPI’s tendency to favor
the patentability of second medical use inventions, the review of ANVISA’s policy
of peremptorily denying ‘‘prior approval’’
is also needed. Otherwise, patent
applications in such ﬁelds would lack a granting requirement.

Recently, the issue of second medical use inventions was dealt with for the ﬁrst
time by a Brazilian court. On 3 December 2007, the trial judge of the Federal

308

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

District Court of Rio de Janeiro rendered a decision in a leading case, related to
patent application PI 9606903-1, covering the drug Strattera (whose active principle
is tomoxetine) of Eli Lilly and Company.27 Strattera is indicated for the treatment
of attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity disorder, and tomoxetine, although known for
decades, had not been medically used for this purpose. The trial court judge
afﬁrmed that the new application of a product is patentable when the already
known object is inventively used towards obtaining a new result and the novelty
consists in the relationship between the means and the result. He stated that there is
no speciﬁc provision in the Brazilian patent statute prohibiting the patentability of
second uses in pharmaceutical arts (second medical uses are not prohibited by
articles 10 and 18 of law 9279/96) and they should be patentable, provided that the
new use is not part of the state of the art, and inventive step and industrial
application are shown. Furthermore, he clariﬁes that new uses of pharmaceutical
products are not therapeutic methods, not being prohibited by article 10, VIII of
law 9279/96. Finally, he considers that Swiss-type claims used to describe second
medical use inventions should not be seen as process claims. He understands that
the nature of a Swiss-type claim relates to a product and its purpose. An appeal
against this decision is now pending.28

From this decision, one can ascertain some development of national courts
towards the comprehension of patent law issues, regardless of the early stage of
maturity of the Brazilian system, where very few lawsuits can be found. Never-
theless, it is important to note that this case has not dealt with the ANVISA’s
peremptory prohibition on patents of second medical use. The INPI considered that
the patent application lacked novelty, whereas in the court proceedings it was
deemed to be new. There is still a long way to go before the Brazilian courts until the
ANVISA’s ‘‘prior approval’’ plays a role in this case.

Conclusion

Patents, especially in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld, are of great signiﬁcance for the
industry to retrieve investments in the R&D of a drug and in the clinical trials. In
addition, very few new drugs approved by the regulatory authorities contain a new
active ingredient (US FDA, 2005). In this respect, patents covering second medical
use inventions are a key issue.

Nevertheless, the patentability of these inventions is heartily debated in
developing countries. Pharmaceutical patents in general are seen as a barrier to
consumers’ access to medicines, by increasing prices. Speciﬁcally, patent protection
to second medical uses would mean extending the term of exclusivity on existing
product patents. This would be undeserved privileges, because those patents would
not protect an invention, but rather simple discoveries (Correa, 2006, p. 16).
Another argument criticizing such patents is that they would cover therapeutic
methods, which are excluded patent subject matter in some systems, such as Europe
and Brazil.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

309

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

As discussed in this article, the Brazilian patent system has been facing an
unusual situation, where two governmental authorities, the INPI and the ANVISA,
are examining applications for pharmaceutical products and processes. These two
institutions adopt different criteria in their analysis, which has been leading to
conﬂicting decisions on the patentability of some inventions. Speciﬁcally, for
inventions claiming second medical uses, the ANVISA has adopted a policy of
absolute denial for patents covering such subject matter. The ANVISA’s position
may be legally questionable, keeping in mind the constitutional principle of legality,
which forbids the public administrator to act discretionarily.

Whether the ANVISA’s ‘‘prior approval’’ system is illegal under WTO law is an
issue to be evaluated under a procedure before the organization’s Dispute Settle-
ment Body. The installment of such procedure would involve many other con-
siderations by the member state pleading against Brazil and, therefore, it is likely
that it will never occur (Rodrigues and Murphy, 2006, p. 454). Despite this, one
should consider that the right to protect public health is not totally unlimited.
Patent rights are recognized in TRIPS and in the Doha Declaration to be important
to encourage the development of new life-saving medicines (Rodrigues and Mur-
phy, 2006, p. 448). Excluding second medical use inventions from patentability,
even if not contrary to article 27.1, may lead to severe consequences in the advance
of technologies related to new medicines. Public health policies, even if supported
by articles 7 and 8 of TRIPS and the Doha Declaration, should also consider this.
There should always be a balance exercise between the two social interests, public
health and technological development, in addition to the assessment of the private
and public interests involved.

For the Brazilian pharmaceutical industry, which struggles to establish itself in
the national market, the prohibition against patents on second medical uses may be
damaging. Most of the costs involved in the development of a drug are in the pre-
clinical trial stages, when the molecules are still being studied before tests on human
beings. The second medical uses, on the other hand, relate to already known
molecules, where the costs are relatively lower. It is in this area that the national
industry may have the chance to generate new technology.

The risks related to undue extension of already existing patents would
be minimized by the criteria adopted in the examination of the applications.
Only when they do present novelty, inventiveness, industrial applicability and
are supported by the description (within the parameters presented by the
INPI), would the exclusivity rights be granted. Furthermore, any errors are subject
to a reassessment within the INPI structure under the opposition or appeal
proceedings, in addition to any judicial review. The ANVISA’s re-examination of
patent applications for the grant of ‘‘prior approval’’ may represent a further delay
to the already extensive backlog of patent applications pending examination in
Brazil.

It is crucial for the Brazilian government to re-evaluate its policies when dealing
with patents in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld at the risk of jeopardizing the national

310

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

industry and the country’s economical progress. The argument that the country’s
public health and technological development are hindered by patents on second
medical uses may be too simplistic.

About the Author

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa is research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for
Intellectual Property, Competition and Tax Law, Munich, Ph.D. candidate at the
Ludwig-Maximilllians-Universit ¨at, Munich, LL.M. in Intellectual Property Law at
the Munich Intellectual Property Law Center—MIPLC, and attorney-at-law in
Brazil; e-mail: viviyumy@gmail.com

Notes

This article includes some results of the research assigned by the Japanese Patent Ofﬁce and
conducted at the Institute of Intellectual Property, Tokyo, from October to December 2007.
The author would like to thank Prof. Dr Dres.h.c. Joseph Straus for his constant support and
guidance, Dr Luciana Jansen de Oliveira Figueiredo, Ms Maria Cec ´ılia de Arau´ jo Oswald
and Ms Renata Curzel for their valuable assistance.

1 Aspirin was originally prescribed as a pain killer and has been used for other indications,
such as for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes (Aspirin Foundation,
2008). The active principle of Viagra, sildenaﬁl citrate, nowadays highly prescribed for
the treatment of erectile dysfunction, was originally used against cardiovascular diseases
(Fox et al., 2003, p. 2207).

2 ‘‘Article 229-C. The granting of patents in connection with pharmaceutical products or
processes shall be dependent on ‘‘prior approval’’ from the ANVISA’’ (The documents
in Portuguese language were translated into English by the author for the ease of the
reader.)

3 IV—Regarding the applications which bear as claim the ‘‘new use’’ of substances—The

Collegiate Board, at a meeting held on 23 November 2003 stated as thus:

The Collegiate Board considers that the institute is harmful to public health,
to the country’s scientiﬁc and technological development, and that it may
hinder access to medication by the population. In this respect,
it has
decided for not granting ‘‘prior approval’’ to cases of second use patent
applications.

4 In Brazilian law, the Federal Constitution enjoys supremacy in the hierarchy of laws.
Laws and statutes enacted by the Congress would follow the hierarchical scale, together
with the Provisional Measures enacted by the President (according to article 62
of the Federal Constitution). Presidential Decrees regulating the law enacted by the
Congress would come after. Ordinances and Resolutions from the governmental
institutions would be the last. All the legislation, which in the hierarchical scale is
subordinated to the Federal Constitution, is referred to as infra-constitutional
legislation.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

311

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

5 Article 8. To be patentable an invention must meet the requirements of novelty,

inventive activity and industrial application.

Article 24. The speciﬁcation must describe the subject matter clearly and
sufﬁciently so as to enable a person skilled in the art to carry it out and to
indicate, when applicable, the best mode of execution. Sole Paragraph—In
the case of biological material essential for the practical execution of the
subject matter of the application, which cannot be described in the form of
this Article and which has not been accessible to the public,
the
speciﬁcation will be supplemented by a deposit of the material in an
institution authorized by INPI or indicated in an international agreement.

Article 25. The claims must be based on the speciﬁcation, characterizing
the particularities of the application and deﬁning clearly and precisely the
subject matter to be protected.

6 Article 10. The following are not considered to be inventions or utility models: I—
discoveries, scientiﬁc theories and mathematical methods; II—purely abstract concepts;
III—schemes, plans, principles or methods of a commercial, accounting, ﬁnancial,
educational, publishing, lottery or ﬁscal nature; IV—literary, architectural, artistic and
scientiﬁc works or any aesthetic creation; V—computer programs per se; VI—the
presentation of information; VII—rules of games; VIII—operating or surgical
techniques and therapeutic or diagnostic methods, for use on the human or animal
body; and IX—natural living beings, in whole or in part, and biological material,
including the genome or germ-plasm of any natural living being, when found in nature
or isolated therefrom, and natural biological processes.

Article 18. The following are not patentable: I—that which is contrary to
morals, good customs and public security, order and health; II—
substances, matter, mixtures, elements or products of any kind, as well as
the modiﬁcation of their physical-chemical properties and the respective
processes of obtaining or modifying them, when they result from the
transformation of the atomic nucleus; and III—living beings, in whole or
in part, except transgenic micro-organisms meeting the three patentability
requirements—novelty,
inventive activity and industrial application—
provided for in Article 8 and which are not mere discoveries. Sole
Paragraph—For the purposes of this law, transgenic micro-organisms are
organisms, except the whole or part of plants or animals, which exhibit, due
to direct human intervention in their genetic composition, a characteristic
that cannot normally be attained by the species under natural conditions.

7 Article 2 of law 5648 of 11 December 1970.
8 Article 6 of law 9782 of 26 January 1999.
9 Article 62 of the Brazilian Federal Constitution empowers the President to legislate in

case of relevance and urgency.

10 Provisional Measure 2006 of 14 December 1999, succeeded by Provisional Measure 2014
of 30 December 1999 (and its several re-editions) and Provisional Measure 2105-14 of 27
December 2000.

312

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

11 It must be observed that the author is not aware of another country with a similar

requisite as the ‘‘prior approval’’, conditioning the granting of a patent in the
pharmaceutical ﬁeld, by an authority equivalent to the ANVISA.

12 The corresponding decision is published in the Ofﬁcial Gazette under the codes 9.1, for

regular applications, and 23.17, for ‘‘pipeline’’ applications, meaning that the
examination was concluded and the application meets the patentability requirements,
applicable to each kind, regular or ‘‘pipeline’’.

13 Until

the enactment of Resolution-RDC 45/2008, the communications with the

applicant were carried out through the INPI.

14 Article 1, Paragraph 1 of Resolution-RDC 45/2008 establishes that the provisions of the

resolution are applicable retroactively to all patent applications for pharmaceutical
products and processes that were pending on 15 December 1999 or ﬁled afterwards,
regardless of whether already granted in the meantime. This provision creates acquired
rights problems that have not yet been dealt with by the Brazilian courts.

15 The ABPI is the Brazilian group of the Association Internationale pour la Protection de

la Propri ´et ´e Intellectuelle.

16 The principle of legality established in the Federal Constitution in article 37 orders the
public administrator to act strictly in accordance with the law, that is the statutory act
originating from Congress. The public administration is only allowed to act when the
law so establishes. Any ordinance or resolution enacted by the public administrator must
be in accordance with the law originated from Congress. In this case, both the INPI’s
and ANVISA’s activities, when granting or denying applications or regulating this, must
not contravene the patent statute.

17 F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG v ANVISA and INPI. J.F.R.J., 37th District Court of Rio de

Janeiro, Process No. 2004.51.01.506840-0, judge Monique Calmon Biolchini, 22
November 2004, D.O.E. 89.

18 A patente imerecida reduz o campo de desenvolvimento da indu´ stria farmaceˆ utica

nacional, incluindo a pesquisa cient ´ıﬁca e a fabricac¸ a˜ o. A patente irregular estanca o
desenvolvimento cient ´ıﬁco nacional, impedindo uma maior eﬁca´ cia social da pol ´ıtica
pu´ blica de medicamentos gen ´ericos e restringindo o acesso da populac¸ a˜ o a rem ´edios
mais baratos (F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG v ANVISA and INPI).

(The undue patent reduces the development of the national pharmaceutical
industry, including the scientiﬁc research and manufacturing. The irregular
patent stays the national scientiﬁc development, hindering a larger social
efﬁcacy of the public policy of generic medicines, restricting the access by
the population to cheaper medicines.)

19 F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG v ANVISA and

INPI. TRF-2, Appeal No.

2004.51.01.506840-0, judge Guilherme Calmon Nogueira da Gama, 30 January 2008,
D.J.U.

20 Aventis Pharma SA v ANVISA and INPI. TRF-2, Appeal No. 2004.51.01.513854-1,

judge Marcia Helena Nunes, 31 July 2008, D.J.U.

21 Article 32. In order to better clarify or deﬁne a patent application, the applicant may
effect alterations up to the request for examination, provided that they are limited to the
subject matter initially disclosed in the application.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

313

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

22 2.39 Second use invention 2.39.1 Inventions of this nature can be of two types: (i) a new
use, as medication, of a known product with use outside the medical ﬁeld (ﬁrst medical
use); (ii) a new medical use of a product already known as medication (second medical
use).

23 2.39.2 Typical claims of this type of invention would be: 2.39.2.1 Claim type: a. Product
X characterized by the fact that it is used as a medication. b. Product X characterized by
the fact that it is used for the treatment of illness Y shall not be granted on account of the
fact that its purpose does not present newness, as, per deﬁnition (i) above, it comprises a
known product which, obviously, is not new in the sense of Article 11. . . . 2.39.2.2
Claims of the type: a. Pharmaceutical preparation characterized for containing product
X (occasionally with other components). b. Preparation for the treatment of illness Y
characterized for containing product X (occasionally with other components). c.
Preparation in the form of (tablet, gel, injected solution, etc.), characterized for
containing product X (occasionally with other components) for use in the treatment of
illness Y, may be granted as long as the preparations encompassed be new and display
inventive activity. . . . 2.39.2.4. Claims of type: a. Use of product X characterized in that
it is for the preparation of a medication to treat illness Y. b. Use of product X
characterized in that it is for the preparation of a medication to treat illness Y, which
treatment consisting of such and such, known as ‘‘Swiss formulas’’, being almost always
used in second medical use inventions. They are entitled to privilege, in view of the
considerations contained in item 2.23 above . . . .

24 A Swiss-type claim consists of applying a wording formula for claiming inventions on

second medical uses. The form of a usual Swiss-type claim is ‘‘use of a substance or
composition X for the manufacture of a medicine for therapeutic application Z’’. This
wording aims at avoiding that a use claim for a pharmaceutical product is considered a
therapeutic method, falling under the statutory prohibition against patenting such subject
matter, foreseen in several national legislations, such as Brazil. It was ﬁrst adopted by the
Swiss Patent Ofﬁce, followed by the practices of the European Patent Ofﬁce.

25 2.39.2.3 Claim of type: a. Use of product X characterized in that it is for the treatment of
illness Y. b. Process for treating illness Y characterized by administering of product X
(or preparation containing product X), are not granted on account of the fact that they
comprise a therapeutic method . . .

26 See patent applications PI9908664-6, ﬁled by Henrique Chvaler; PI9806330-5-8, ﬁled by

Edson Claro do Nascimento; PI9805654-9, ﬁled by Edson Claro do Nascimento;
PI9902178-1, ﬁled by Edson Claro do Nascimento (BR/SP); PI9806331-6, ﬁled by Edson
Claro do Nascimento; PI0202647-3, ﬁled by Jos ´e Carlos Barbosa Vosgerau; PI0202539-
6, ﬁled by Marcus Keche Weber; PI0102184-2, ﬁled by Laborat ´orio Catarinense S/A;
PI0102186-9, ﬁled by Laborat ´orio Catarinense S/A; PI0102185-0, ﬁled by Laborat ´orio
Catarinense S/A; PI0004106-8, ﬁled by Laborat ´orio Sintofarma S/A; PI0004105-0, ﬁled
by Laborat ´orio Sintofarma S/A; PI9702841-0, ﬁled by Laborat ´orio Sintofarma S/A; and
PI9802893-6, ﬁled by Eurofarma Laborat ´orios Ltda (Souza, 2008, p. 67).

27 Eli Lilly and Company v INPI. J.F.R.J., 35th District Court of Rio de Janeiro, Process

No. 2005.51.01.507811-1, judge Guilherme Bollorini Pereira, 29 November 2007,
D.O.E.

28 Ibid. TRF-2, Appeal No. 2005.51.01.507811-1, for the current status see the website

available online at hhttp://www.trf2.gov.br/cgi-bin/pingresi [Accessed August 2008].

314

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

References

Ageˆ ncia Caˆ mara (2008) Governo Diverge sobre Concessa˜o de Patente de Segundo Uso [online].

Caˆ mara dos Deputados. Available at hhttp://www2.camara.gov.br/internet/
homeagencia/materias.html?pk=124505i [Accessed August 2008].

Ageˆ ncia Nacional de Vigil aˆ ncia Sanit a´ ria (2004a) Pol ´ıtica Vigente para a Regulac¸ a˜o de
Medicamentos no Brasil [online]. ANVISA. Available at hhttp://www.anvisa.gov.br/
institucional/conselho/temas/politica_medicamentos.htmi [Accessed April 2008].

Ageˆ ncia Nacional de Vigilaˆ ncia Sanita´ ria (2004b) Esclarecimentos sobre Pedidos de Patentes

dos Produtos e Processos Farmaceˆuticos [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.anvisa.gov.br/divulga/alertas/2004/250804.htmi [Accessed September 2004]. This
report is no longer available at ANVISA’s website [on ﬁle with author].

Arruda, G. F. and Cerdeira, P. C. (2007) ‘Patentes de Medicamento e Sau´ de Pu´ blica’, in E. B.
Rodrigues Jr. and F. Polido (eds), Propriedade Intelectual. Elsevier, Rio de Janeiro, pp.
117–32.

Aspirin Foundation (2008) Uses of Aspirin [online]. Aspirin Foundation. Available at hhttp://

www.aspirin-foundation.com/uses/index.htmli [Accessed January 2008].

Associac¸ a˜ o Brasileira da Propriedade Intelectual (2004) Alerta T ´ecnico da ANVISA:

Resoluc¸ a˜o da ABPI No. 63, of October 21, 2004 [online]. ABPI. Available at hhttp://
www.abpi.org.br/bibliotecas.asp?idiomas=Portugu%C3%AAs&secao=Resolu%
C3%A7%C3%B5es%20da%20ABPI&codigo=3&resolucao=6i [Accessed October
2008].

Barbosa, D. B. (2006a) ‘A Proibic¸ a˜ o, pela ANVISA, de Reivindicac¸ o˜ es de Uso Farmaceˆ utico
(2004)’, in D. B. Barbosa (ed.), Usucapia˜o de Patentes e Outros Estudos de Propriedade
Intelectual. Lumen Juris, Rio de Janeiro, pp. 715–47.

Barbosa, D. B. (2006b) ‘Inconstitucionalidade das Patentes Pipeline’, Revista da ABPI, 83,

3–39.

Basso, M. (2006) ‘Intervention of Health Authorities in Patent Examination: The Brazilian

Practice of the Prior Consent’, International Journal of Intellectual Property
Management, 1(1/2), 54–74.

Correa, C. M. (2006) ‘Pharmaceutical Inventions: When is the Granting of a Patent
Justiﬁed?’, International Journal Intellectual Property Management, 1(1/2), 4–21.

Correa, C. (2007) Guidelines for the Examination of Pharmaceutical Patents: Developing a

Public Health Perspective, a Working Paper [online]. ICTSD. Available at hhttp://
www.iprsonline.org/resources/docs/Correa_Patentability%20Guidelines.pdfi [Accessed
November 2008].

Formenti, L. (2008) ‘Anvisa Resiste a` Perda de Poder de Ana´ lise de Patente’, O Estado de SP,
[online] 5 November 2008. Available at hhttp://www.jornaldaciencia.org.br/Detalhe.jsp?
id=59736i [Accessed November 2008].

Fox, K. M., Thadani, U., Ma, P. T. S., Nash, S. D., Keating, Z., Czomiak, M. A., Gillies, H.
and Keltai, M. (2003) ‘Sildenaﬁl Citrate Does Not Reduce Exercise Tolerance in Men
with Erectile Dysfunction and Chronic Stable Angina’, European Heart Journal, 24(24),
2206–12.

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2002) Diretrizes para o Exame de Pedidos de
Patente nas A´reas de Biotecnologia e Farmaceˆutica depositados ap ´os 31/12/1994 [online].
INPI. Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/menu-esquerdo/patente/pasta_manuali
[Accessed March 2008].

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4

315

Viviane Yumy Mitsuuchi Kunisawa

Second Medical Use Patents in Brazil

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2007a) Ata completa da 1a Reunia˜o do Grupo de
Estudos sobre Segundo Uso M ´edico [online]. INPI. Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/
menu-esquerdo/patente/discussoes-tecnicas/ata-completa-da-1a-reuniao-do-grupo-de-
estudos-sobre-segundo-uso-medicoi [Accessed January 2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2007b) Ata da 2a Reunia˜o do Grupo de Estudos
sobre Segundo Uso M ´edico [online]. INPI. Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/menu-
esquerdo/patente/discussoes-tecnicas/resumo-2a-reuniao-do-grupo-de-estudos-sobre-
segundo-uso-medicoi [Accessed April 2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2007c) Diretrizes para o Exame de Pedidos de
Patentes na A´rea de Segundo Uso M ´edico (draft) [online]. INPI. Available at hhttp://
www.inpi.gov.br/menu-esquerdo/patente/discussoes-tecnicas/diretrizes-para-o-exame-
de-pedidos-de-patentes-na-area-de-segundo-uso-medico/i [Accessed April 2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2007d) Segundo Uso M ´edico [online]. INPI.

Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/menu-esquerdo/patente/discussoes-tecnicas/
segundo-uso-medicoi [Accessed January 2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2008a) Parecer Jur´ıdico do INPI [online]. INPI.
Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/noticias/Parecer%20patenteabilidade%20inovacao%
20incremental%20farmaceutica.doc/viewi [Accessed November 2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2008b) Parecer T ´ecnico do INPI:

Patenteabilidade de Novas Formas Cristalinas de Substaˆncias Polim ´orﬁcas e de Novos
Usos M ´edicos [online]. INPI. Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/noticias/Patentes%
20farmaceuticas-%20AUDIENCIA%20PUBLICA.doc/viewi [Accessed November
2008].

Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (2008c) Patenteabilidade da Inovac¸ a˜o

Farmaceˆutica Incremental [online]. INPI. Available at hhttp://www.inpi.gov.br/noticias/
patenteabilidade-da-inovacao-farmaceutica-incrementali [Accessed November 2008].

Licks, O. and Leonardos, L. (2002) ‘A Exegese do Art. 229-C da Lei de Propriedade
Industrial ap ´os a Edic¸ a˜ o das Medidas Provis ´orias 2.006, de 15/12/99 e 2.014, de
21/12/2000, e a Promulgac¸ a˜ o da Lei n1 10.196, de 14/2/2001’, Revista da ABPI, 61,
57–69.

Oswald, M. C. and Leonardos, L. (2007) ‘Direito de Patentes: Uma Proposta de Filtragem

Constitucional’, Revista da ABPI, 86, 3–17.

Paterson, G. (1996) ‘The Novelty of Use Claims’, International Review of Industrial Property

and Copyright Law, 2, 179–90.

Rodrigues Jr., E. B. and Murphy, B. (2006) ‘Brazil’s Prior Consent Law: A Dialogue Between

Brazil and the United States Over Where the TRIPS Agreement Currently Sets the
Balance Between the Protection of Pharmaceutical Patents and Access to Medicines’,
Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology, 16, 423–56.

Souza, M. T. (2008) ‘Should Brazil Allow Patents on Second Medical Uses?’, Revista da

ABPI, 93, 53–67.

Straus, J. (2004) ‘Patent Protection of Further Medical Uses’, in ‘Questo˜ es Atuais em Direito

Patenta´ rio’, proceedings of the XXIV Semina´ rio Nacional da Propriedade Intelectual
held in Bras ´ılia, 16–18 August, pp. 100–3.

US Food and Drug Administration (2005) NDAs Approved in Calendar Years 1990–2004 by

Therapeutic Potential and Chemical Type [online]. Available at hhttp://www.fda.gov/
cder/rdmt/pstable.htmi [Accessed April 2008].

316

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 4


