The  (2012) Vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 251–279
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2012.00441.x

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property:
The Differentiating Capacity (and Function) as the
Thread That Unites All its Components

Nuno Pires de Carvalho*
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), Geneva

The absence of a reliable and coherent theory of intellectual property has given rise to conceptual misunder-
standings and, in particular, has led policy makers to make poor choices as regards the formulation of decisions
on its protection and enforcement. This article proposes a new approach to the deﬁnition of intellectual prop-
erty. Basically, it suggests that, contrary to the general view, there is a thread that unites all the components of
intellectual property. That thread consists of the differentiating capacity and function of those components, in
addition to their intangible nature and susceptibility of use in activities of an economic nature. It is therefore
purported that intellectual property is about differentiation, whether it deals with invention and creation or
not. Once it is accepted that intellectual property is not necessarily an incoherent bundle of rights in intangible
assets of many sorts, its intrinsically pro-competitive nature becomes a matter of course. The crucially important
notion that intellectual property is part of the social fabric of free and organized societies becomes also an
almost self-evident matter.
Keywords intellectual property; law and economics; political economy

What is intellectual property?

The search for an answer to this question has solicited different approaches, from listing the
components of intellectual property to associating it with ideas that are somehow connected with
creation and innovation. The problem of such approaches is that they fail to identify the characteristic
that is common to all intellectual property components, and therefore do not explain the coherence
that is inherent to them. Ultimately, the explanations that have been provided by scholars, courts
or lawmakers are either too narrow, and therefore fail to embrace important intellectual property
sub-branches, or too broad, and therefore include areas that are not within intellectual property.

Lists of intellectual property components necessarily omit those areas not yet developed or that
are not deemed so by national statutes. The association of intellectual property with creation and
innovation neglects those ﬁelds that have nothing to do with creative or inventive efforts—and there
are many in intellectual property, namely those that are related to reputation built on continued and
honest activities in commerce and manufacture. The linkage of intellectual property with ideas is, by
contrast, too broad because not all ideas are protected.

The absence of a reliable and coherent doctrine of intellectual property has given rise to concep-
tual misunderstandings. This might not be a problem if it remained strictly conﬁned to the academic
world. The problem, however, is that a misguided notion of intellectual property leads policy makers
to make poor choices as regards the formulation of decisions on its protection and enforcement.

This article proposes a new approach to the deﬁnition of intellectual property. Basically, it
suggests that, contrary to the general view, there is a thread that unites all the components of
intellectual property. That thread consists of the differentiating capacity and function of those

*All views and opinions are the author’s exclusively and do not necessarily coincide with the views of WIPO Member
States.

C(cid:2) 251

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

components, in addition to their intangible nature and susceptibility of use in activities of an economic
nature. It is therefore purported that intellectual property is about differentiation, whether it deals
with invention and creation or not.

Because the misguided notions of intellectual property have been entrenched across the intellec-
tual property community—from academics to government ofﬁcials, from courts to policy makers,
from law practitioners to nongovernmental entities—what this article proposes is a true paradigm
shift. Therefore, as it happens with every paradigm shift, its acceptance requires a change in mindsets,
which means that it will not take place immediately and not without controversy.

However, once it is accepted that intellectual property is not necessarily an incoherent bundle of
rights in intangible assets of many sorts, its intrinsically pro-competitive nature becomes a matter of
course. The crucially important notion that intellectual property is part of the social fabric of free
and organized societies becomes also an almost self-evident matter.

This article opens with its core argument: intellectual property is about differentiation. In the
section “The differentiation function as the core function of all branches of intellectual property”, it
brieﬂy describes the three dominant approaches to deﬁning intellectual property and identiﬁes their
shortcomings. In that same section the article also explains how the differentiation element operates
as the thread that unites all components under intellectual property. It also shows that, on economic,
rather than on cultural grounds, intellectual property is, and has ever been, part of the social fabric
of free and organized societies. In the next section the article deals with the value of a uniﬁed theory
of intellectual property, which goes beyond a merely academic proposition. The conclusion is that
the time has come to have a freshly consistent look at intellectual property from a more structured
and coherent perspective.

The Differentiation Function as the Core Function of all Branches of Intellectual Property
(1) Traditional deﬁnitions of intellectual property

Admittedly, to deﬁne intellectual property is not an easy task. The problem stems from the
fact that intellectual property is the umbrella for a large number of legal sub-branches that seem to
serve different, if not sometimes conﬂicting, functions, obey varying rationales and are bound by
heterogeneous public policies. As a consequence, deﬁnitions of intellectual property have differed.
In this context, three major tendencies can be detected. Some attempts to provide for a deﬁnition of
intellectual property have relied on listing the various subject matters of protection. Another very
common approach has been to associate the subject matter of intellectual property with the products
of the human mind, or intellectual activity. A third widely spread practice is to reduce intellectual
property to legal measures that promote and protect invention and creation. Let us very brieﬂy look
at these three trends and their shortcomings.

(i) Deﬁning intellectual property by reciting its components

Deﬁning intellectual property by listing its components is an easy way of solving the problem
of ﬁnding a common denominator—or, more precisely, of avoiding to have to ﬁnd one. In a certain
way, to recite the components of an object operates by way of example. One introductory scholarly
study on intellectual property says so very eloquently:

A book presenting the basics of intellectual property faces two difﬁculties. First, intel-
lectual property traditionally includes the three legal areas of patents, trademarks, and
copyrights. However, except for tradition and the fact that the three subjects are com-
monly taught together in one survey course, one might question why a single book should

252

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

include these three divergent subjects. What they have in common is a relatively amor-
phous character and a highly abstract concept of property [ . . . ]. ‘Patents and copyrights
approach, nearer than any other class of cases belonging to forensic discussion to may
what be called the metaphysics of the law, where the distinctions are, or at least may
be, very subtle and reﬁned, and, sometimes, evanescent’. Folsom v. Marsh (C.C.D. Mass.
1841) (No. 4901) (Story, J.; Miller and Davis, 1990, p. 1).

This same approach of providing for a list of components as opposed to identify the characteris-
tics of subject matter was adopted by the ﬁrst multilateral convention on intellectual property. That
convention—the Paris Convention1—is not about intellectual property, but rather about industrial
property. However, given its very large coverage, the same difﬁculties occur. Indeed, the Paris Con-
vention has attempted to solve the elusive quest for consistency across the whole ﬁeld of industrial
property by listing its components.2

The problem with this approach is that any such list will always be incomplete, for industrial
property is a legal institution of an essentially dynamic nature. Therefore, its scope is fated to
constantly expand through the addition of new components. Conversely, it has happened that some
types of industrial property are abandoned as a result of the economic and legal evolution of societies.
For example, several decades ago shop signs and slogans were the subject of sui generis regimes of
registration and protection. They have now disappeared as autonomous categories of intellectual
property. In other words, a deﬁnition based on a list of components is under the risk of rapidly
becoming obsolete and inaccurate.

Moreover, because of its territorial nature, what constitutes intellectual property in one country
may not be so in another. Recently, for example, nonoriginal databases have become the subject
matter of a sui generis regime of intellectual property in the European Union, which continues being
a pioneer in that speciﬁc ﬁeld.3 Even more recently, a number of countries have started enacting
statutes on the protection of traditional knowledge.4

Actually, the apparent lack of cohesion among the numerous components of intellectual property
is not adequate for seeking a deﬁnition by way of example.5 Observers and stakeholders will not be
able to extract the element of commonality between copyright protection and repression of ambush
marketing, for example, just by verifying that both are part of the same list.

(ii) Deﬁning intellectual property by associating it with ideas

Many authors have taken a different route to identify intellectual property: they have associated
its overall scope of protection to ideas and information, or the fruits of the human mind, provided
they have some commercial value.6

However, the link between intellectual property and the fruits of the human mind is misleading
because it takes into account a very narrow dimension of intellectual property. It is true that behind
a large part of those intangible assets that are protected by intellectual property one can ﬁnd ideas
or mental creations. They are ideas to the extent they are abstractions. An invention is an idea, or a
group of ideas. The same can be said of a poem, a novel, a computer program, a cooking recipe.

But what can we say about a telephone directory? A telephone directory is a vast set of ideas
of all kinds: from the fundamental idea of placing the names of subscribers under an alphabetical
sequence to the commercial notices and advertisements disseminated throughout the many pages of
the directory (in particular, if the directory contains a supplement of yellow pages). In the background
of that telephone directory there are telecommunication services. In the background of those services,
there is the concept of telephone. Indirectly, when we think of an apparently simple and normal object
as a telephone directory, we are facing an enormous accumulation of inventions, patented or not.

C(cid:2) 253

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

We are facing thousands of ideas. The yellow pages themselves correspond to a business model,
identiﬁed by a trademark and a trade logo, which are well known in a large number of countries. But
the business model, in itself, is not protected. Anyone may collect the names of persons or businesses
and publish them together with the respective telephone numbers and addresses.

In spite of corresponding to a huge bundle of ideas, the telephone directory in itself is not
protected. Why? What is missing in a telephone directory that does not warrant its inclusion as
subject matter of intellectual property? Or, for that matter, in items of press information? Or in
substances that exist in Nature, even if not previously known? Are these ideas outside intellectual
property just because a statute or a court says no, or is there a more fundamental reason?

The answer to these questions will be provided next. At this point let us just notice that not all
ideas are protected by intellectual property.7 This brings us necessarily to the conclusion that the
linkage between intellectual property and ideas generates an incomplete notion of this branch of law.
Something is missing in that linkage, and that is the coherence factor that makes some ideas to be
protected, and others not.

(iii) Deﬁning intellectual property by associating it with innovation and creation

Intellectual property is also frequently deﬁned as a legal branch that deals with the protection
of creations and inventions. In this sense, intellectual property would be essentially a mechanism
of promotion of creation and innovation. Not only have a very large number of academic authors
provided for this sort of deﬁnition (Bishop, 2009, pp. 172–3; Cottier and Germann, 2008, p. 131;
Stiglitz and Charlton, 2005, p. 141), but it can also be found on some intellectual property ofﬁces’
websites (<www.ipaustralia.gov.au> and <www.ipo.gov.uk>) (accessed June 2011). The slogan that
was recently introduced on the ﬁrst page of WIPO’s website (WIPO—Encouraging Creativity and
Innovation; available at <www.wipo.int/portal/index.html.en>) speaks to this same issue and goes
in the same direction. And, strikingly, the TRIPS Agreement also has taken this avenue when, in its
article 7, says that “The protection and enforcement of intellectual property should contribute to the
promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology [ . . . ]”8
(emphasis added). In other words, for the TRIPS Agreement intellectual property seems to be the
result of a quest for innovation and technology.

However, one may wonder: where is the inventiveness or the creativity of using the word “Ford”
to designate cars that are made in a factory owned by Mr. Ford? Or where is the inventiveness or
creativity of designating mineral water extracted from the French Alps with the word “Evian”, a city
that is located near the French Alps? Or where is the originality or ingenuity of typing a list of clients
into a computer hard drive and protect it with a password (say, the birthday of the typist)?

Of course, the use of the words Ford and Evian in that context has nothing to do with cre-
ativity or inventiveness. Nor is there anything original or ingenious in setting up a list of clients
of a ﬁrm, and keeping it secret. The most important asset of businesses—reputation, which is
generally associated with a trade name—has nothing to do with invention or authorship either.
Nevertheless, all these assets are protected by intellectual property, as much as literary creations and
inventions.

The link between intellectual property and creativity, therefore, reﬂects a reductionist view,
because it takes into account a very narrow dimension of intellectual property. Actually, intellectual
property goes much beyond creations of the human mind, be they of a technical, literary, artistic, or
scientiﬁc nature.

(2) Proposal of a uniﬁed theory of intellectual property

(i) Differentiation as the uniting thread

254

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

If those three methods of deﬁning intellectual property are inadequate, how can we deﬁne it? The
solution is to identify the characteristic that is common to all components of intellectual property,
from copyright to repression of unfair competition.9

The common element that binds all aspects of intellectual property together is the differentiating
capacity (and, therefore, function) of the intangible assets that are its subject matter. The (i) intangible
or immaterial nature of intellectual property assets; their (ii) differentiating capacity; and (iii) their
susceptibility of being used in economic activities are the elements that characterize intellectual prop-
erty. Intellectual property, therefore, is everywhere (where a free-market economy prevails) because it
covers all those intangible elements that contribute to differentiate merchants and manufacturers, as
well as their products and services. It is the subject matter of intellectual property (in all its modalities)
that permits consumers to make choices. We are surrounded by intellectual property.

Every merchant, every artisan needs to protect and afﬁrm his/her individuality in order to carry
out his/her profession. It is by afﬁrming and using such individuality that businesses attract and
maintain their clients. In the absence of the intangible elements that distinguish one business from
another, clients do not know where to go to buy goods and services. Those elements are of many
kinds: from the names that identify and distinguish businesses and their products or services to the
products and services themselves and the knowledge about them. Intellectual property is pervasive
and frequently it manifests itself through expressions that we do not necessarily perceive.

A piece of knowledge may sometimes constitute the main element that distinguishes one business
from another. Take a cloth retailer in the souk of Muttrah, in Muscat, Oman, who has the reputation
of selling pashminas that are of a better quality than those that can be found in the neighboring
shops. That retailer buys those pashminas from a speciﬁc supplier, an old acquaintance who knows
the best manufacturers of pashminas in Kashmir. That simple piece of information—knowledge of a
particular supplier—is valuable in the sense that retailer is able to sell goods to which his competitors
have no access. Such piece of information, while it remains secret, is a differentiating intangible asset.
The words Evian and Ford, in the examples above, reﬂect a background of ideas, because they
symbolize businesses, entrepreneurship, risks. They are, ultimately, symbols of reputations, of ideas.
But those ideas are protected by intellectual property only to the extent they differentiate—they
are distinctive ideas that distinguish one manufacturer’s products from others’ products. Intellectual
property subject matter differentiates businesses from other businesses, creators from other creators,
merchants from other merchants, merchants’ goods from other merchants’ goods.

Actually, it is not the fact that a poem plagiarizes another that makes it ineligible for copyright
protection, but the fact that it is not distinguishable from it. The problem of plagiarism is the
elimination of differentiation. Likewise, it is not the fact that an invention is anticipated by another
that was previously made or disclosed that places it off patent protection, but the fact that it is not
sufﬁciently different from the previous idea. The organization of a new telephone directory—for
example, a directory that lists in alphabetical order the telephone numbers of the residents of Belo
Horizonte, Brazil, who have already visited the beautiful Greek island of Santorini—would not be
covered by intellectual property because it would not be sufﬁciently different from the organization of
other existing directories (likewise arranged under the form of lists of names of service subscribers put
in alphabetical order, followed by their telephone numbers). The telephone directory, regardless of its
nature or scope, is organized around a single concept: the alphabetical order of subscribers’ names.
Such order has no originality (in the sense that its source or origin cannot attributed to a speciﬁc
author, individual or collective) and thus it cannot be protected. As an idea, the telephone directory
does not deserve protection, as extensive and complex it may be, and as much costly its elaboration
may be. In a case involving the alleged infringement of copyright in the so-called “white pages”

C(cid:2) 255

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

(a directory of residential telephone service subscribers)—the landmark case Feist Publications, Inc.
v Rural Telephone Service Co. (1991)—the Supreme Court of the United States held that:

The raw data are uncopyrightable facts, and the way in which Rural [the plaintiff] se-
lected, coordinated, and arranged those facts is not original in any way. Rural’s selection
of listings—subscribers’ names, towns, and telephone numbers—could not be more ob-
vious, and lacks the modicum of creativity necessary to transform mere selection into
copyrightable expression. In fact, it is plausible to conclude that Rural did not truly ‘se-
lect’ to publish its subscribers’ names and telephone numbers, since it was required to
do so by state law. Moreover, there is nothing remotely creative about arranging names
alphabetically in a white pages directory. It is an age-old practice, ﬁrmly rooted in tra-
dition and so commonplace that it has come to be expected as a matter of course (Feist
Publications, Inc. v Rural Telephone Service Co., 1991, p. 341).10

In a nutshell, the telephone directory falls beside the scope of intellectual property protection
because the idea from which it arose is not a differentiating one. This is the essence of the originality
requirement that a work must meet in order to be eligible for copyright protection.

Actually, it is not conceptually wrong (even if it may be misleading) to say that intellectual
property starts with an idea. But it would be incorrect to say that all ideas start with intellectual
property. If it is true that intellectual property, directly or indirectly, covers ideas, it is not true
that all ideas are covered by intellectual property. Intellectual property only covers those ideas that
are sufﬁciently differentiating. This is also useful to explain why not all intangible assets—such as
personal rights of credit—fall outside intellectual property. Other than their economic value, which
may vary from one title to another, nothing distinguishes between two checks or two shares (unless we
think of the reputation behind the signature of the person who emitted the check or of the corporation
that issued the shares—but in this case, the reputation has been captured by means of the signature
and the corporation’s name, not by the titles per se). Checks, shares, promissory notes, etc., are not
differentiating in themselves. They represent intangible assets, but these are not intellectual property.
In the same token, where a merchant puts all his/her efforts and investment into the establishment
of a business and designates it with a name that is similar or identical to a competitor’s, he/she will
not have the right to use it, no matter how much effort and money he/she has invested. That name
is not differentiating. It is the capacity to differentiate that justiﬁes the use and the protection of the
distinctive sign, not the dimension of the business in the background.

It is for this reason that both well-known and regular trademarks are protected in the same way.
It is also for that reason that the invention whose making has required many years of inventive work
is protected in the same way as the invention that results from a moment of genius, inspiration or
luck. What justiﬁes protection is the capacity to differentiate.

In a nutshell, intellectual property, in all its modalities, permits businesses to capture those
intangible assets they own and that can serve to distinguish them from their competitors. It does not
matter if those intangible assets are knowledge embodied into a product that may save the life of
millions of persons or simply the knowledge of a certain supplier who produces better beans in his
farm. The simple knowledge of either piece of information may be a determinant factor for clients
to prefer the products of one supplier over those of another.

Therefore, when one thinks of the elements that help clients distinguish one business from another
(no matter the technical or economic importance of those elements); and when those elements are
intangible in nature; and when the use of those elements by rival ﬁrms is susceptible of being prohibited
by law—one is in the face of intellectual property. It is generally said that industry moves forward
by copying others’ ideas. That is true, but only to some extent. And the reason that simply copying

256

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

competitors’ products and processes is not the solution is that where factors of differentiation do
not exist, consumers have no elements that permit them to choose. If manufacturer A simply copies
the product of manufacturer B, how can A attract B’s clients? Copiers must add something to their
own products and processes if they want to attract consumers’ preference. That something may
come in the form of lower prices, and/or better distribution and technical assistance, and/or better
quality. All these differentiating factors are susceptible of being appropriated by mechanisms of
intellectual property, be they distinctive signs (which serve as symbols that convey a certain message
to consumers about the products or services they wish to buy) or legal tools for the appropriation of
information (such as patents, utility models, trade secrets, topographies of integrated circuits, etc.)
or their expressions (copyright).

To say that intellectual property has the function to promote invention is the same as saying that
a car has the function to brake. A few components of the car serve indeed the function of braking.
Likewise, a few components of intellectual property (patents, utility models, layout designs, and,
indirectly, the repression of breach of conﬁdentiality as regards trade secrets) serve the function of
promoting invention. But the car has other components likewise important: the accelerator, wheels,
windows, engine, body, and bumpers. Separately, those components perform different functions:
some make the car move, some protect against accidents, and some make the car more comfortable
or prettier. Together, they contribute to the core function of the car: to transport people from one place
to another. So is intellectual property: besides patents and utility models, intellectual property covers
copyrights, distinctive signs, repression of unfair competition, layout designs, etc. Separately, those
components perform different functions. But there is in them an element, not always perceptible to
the untrained eye, which is common to all components—the capacity to differentiate the merchants,
the manufacturers and the service providers, as well as their articles of trade, of industry or of service.
Having said this, we can now propose a deﬁnition of intellectual property that embraces all its
components, past, present, and future: intellectual property is the set of principles and rules that
discipline the acquisition, the use and the loss of rights and interests in differentiating intangible
assets susceptible of being used in the competitive production and circulation of goods and services.

(ii) The economics of intellectual property differentiation

The differentiating nature of intellectual property is grounded on well-established economic
theory. It was Edward Chamberlin (1933) who proposed the theory of monopolistic competition as
a more realistic alternative to the opposing situations of perfect (or pure) competition, in one pole,
and pure monopoly, in the other. In a situation of perfect competition, the products sold by various
sellers on the relevant market are entirely homogenous. Therefore, sellers do not have the power
to set the price, because consumers feel free (and capable) to shift from one product to the other
whenever they see a price increase. However, this is an extremely rare situation, if it ever happens. For
example, if ten products were absolutely identical and interchangeable, the respective manufacturers
and merchants would still struggle to beat rivals: they would differentiate products by pricing, timing,
location, or building consumer loyalty (by means of advertisement). Chamberlin (1933) proposed
that by introducing differences in products, competitors would be able to acquire a certain amount
of power to set prices—up to a certain level, beyond which consumers would feel motivated to seek
a substitute. Of course, the existence of differences eliminates the homogeneity of products: they
cease to be completely substitutable. A Blackberry and an IPhone are substitutable to the extent
they are both third-generation cell phones, but because they perform different functions, they are not
completely so. To the extent (larger or smaller, depending on the amount of differentiating features)
consumers are willing to pay a premium price to continue loyal to either of the devices, sellers are
able to set prices without concern with the potential reaction by competitors. Therefore, when a new

C(cid:2) 257

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Blackberry or IPhone model comes to the market, consumers will be price insensitive to a certain
extent. They will be locked-in to their personal preferences. This limited capacity to set prices based
on differentiation was characterized by Chamberlin (1933) as monopolistic competition.

The virtue of the theory of monopolistic competition is that it emphasizes the positive effects
of differentiation. But one has to take into consideration two caveats. In legal terms, monopolistic
competition is an oxymoron. Otherwise, every time a manufacturer introduced a differentiating feature
in a given product, with the effect of locking consumers in (or with the intent of doing it), he would
be guilty of violating section 2 of the Sherman Act.11 However, monopolistic competition is not a
situation of monopoly, because entry is free and substitutes are available.

Second, one has to understand the notion of product differentiation in a much broader sense
than proposed by the theory. Actually, differentiation does not necessarily concern a product in a
direct way, but rather the whole business that lies in the background of the product (or, for that
matter, of the service). By this broader approach, even commodities are differentiated—and this
explains why intellectual property is also important for commodities. “There is no such a thing as
a commodity. All goods and services are differentiable” (Levitt, 1980). In a groundbreaking article,
Levitt has persuasively demonstrated that there are two possible ways of introducing differentiation
in all sorts of products, commodities comprised: by augmenting the product or by lowering prices.
Product augmentation can come in many different ways, from modiﬁcations in technical features
and design to external services that accompany the product. As an example of external services,
Levitt mentions warehousing management advice and training programs for the employees of the
distributors of health and beauty aids. Commodities are also subject to differentiation, which results
from the way their delivery is managed. This applies to “primary metals, grains, chemicals, plastics,
and money” (Levitt, 1980, p. 83). If not in another way, commodity suppliers are differentiated by
trade names. The same goes for space differentiation, which is susceptible of being appropriated by
means of shop signs.

Moreover, there are also different costs of extraction, manufacture, and distribution, because
of the necessarily different distances of the manufacturers from the sources of raw materials as well
as from consumers. For example, supposing that ten totally identical and interchangeable products
compete on the market, the introduction of a new technical feature in one of them would introduce a
difference. If that difference increased efﬁciency or reduced the cost of making the product, the other
nine competitors, in the absence of patent protection, would imitate it, thus reestablishing a situation
of perfect competition. It is in this sense that some economists see a justiﬁcation of the patent system
as a necessary evil because, in spite of destroying perfect competition, it induces invention.

As noted, destroying perfect competition is not wrong, for the simple reason that it does not exist.
There is no product (or service) that is not differentiated. Some products may be more differentiated
than others, but all have some feature, internal or external, that may induce consumers to make
choices.

Consumers are informed about differentiation through intellectual property. Brands such as
Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola tell consumers that they correspond to different products that attend to
the same needs (that is, that they compete). They inform the consumer about different ﬂavors. Behind
the different ﬂavors there is an enormous variety of other differences, such as chemical formulae,
manufacturing processes, distribution and marketing strategies. In many products, the consumer will
see symbols such as C(cid:2), R(cid:2)
, TM, D, or P. These are indications that internal or external differences
have been introduced and are intrinsic to those products. Intellectual property, in all its facets and
modalities, ensures that those differences will not be eliminated by free riders, willing to acquire a share
in the monopolistic pie of product differentiation. Intellectual property, according to Chamberlin’s
(1933) model, is the visible expression of monopolistic competition.

258

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

This said, because intellectual property supports differentiation and because differentiation is the
basis of economic progress (Holcombe, 2009), it follows that intellectual property serves economic
progress, provided it is calibrated so as to ensure genuine differentiation, on the one hand, and that
it promotes—or at least does not hinder—entry, on the other. This idea that intellectual property
is useful when it comes in the right dosage only will be brieﬂy discussed below. At this point it
is important to emphasize the differentiating role of intellectual property as opposed, or as an
alternative, to fostering invention. As a legal mechanism integrated into monopolistic competition, the
protection of intellectual property promotes differentiation (of any sort). And the more competitors
introduce differences, the more incentives to entry are generated. Consequently, prices decrease.
This is what explains the constant and signiﬁcant reduction in prices of ﬂat TVs, cell phones and
personal computers. And this is what explains the lack of reduction in prices of diamonds and gold—
some differences are introduced (in marketing and distribution) but not sufﬁcient to compensate for
ﬁnancial speculation.

Unfortunately the notion that intellectual property has primarily a differentiating nature is fre-
quently distorted by debates on its role in the pharmaceutical sector. However, the references to the
pharmaceutical sector overlook a fundamental aspect: pharmaceuticals belong in a heavily regulated
market. Regulation distorts competition. And in doing so it distorts the nature and the function of
intellectual property as well. In effect, if pharmaceuticals were not regulated, a new medicine (a new
product is the ultimate difference) would not stand alone in the market for long: soon competing
products would promise to provide for the same or more efﬁcient therapies. Some of those products
would have no effect whatsoever. Some would kill the patients. And some would eventually be safe
and more effective. Besides, pharmaceutical companies would not need to spend time and money
obtaining test data. Without regulation pharmaceuticals would be much cheaper, but much less safe
and effective. But pharmaceuticals are regulated, and thus intellectual property as it applies to them
should not be seen the same way as intellectual property that covers toys. Intellectual property is so
different for pharmaceuticals because of regulation that those pharmaceuticals sold under prescrip-
tion could very well dispense with trademarks. These differentiate because they express information
or convey emotions to consumers. However, there is no need to create emotions on consumers when it
comes to choosing pharmaceuticals. Choices are made by doctors, and these are guided by technical
and scientiﬁc information. In other words, intellectual property in pharmaceuticals does not lend
itself to support or challenge a general theory.

It has been suggested that the differentiation model implies “that the case for expanding copyright
protection is at its strongest when markets are the most concentrated” (Yoo, 2004, p. 223). Actually,
more protection stimulates entry, and the increase in rivalry leads to more dissemination of the
work—and to decrease in prices.12 However, as it will be explained below, this is true provided that
only genuine differences are protected. Minor differences should be discarded by intellectual property
for the sake of promotion of rivalry among competitors and encouraging new entrants.13

On the other hand, the differentiation effect of intellectual property is not essentially an issue of
information costs, as it has been proposed (Long, 2004; Smith, 2007, 2008). First, one has to determine
what information has to be provided, and who has to provide it. If information is intended to mean
the subject matter of the right in question, then one might wonder what kind of information trade
secrets convey. But the information is intended to be about the existence of exclusive rights (equivalent
to a placard saying “Private Property. No Trespassing”), the same reductionist shortcoming can be
identiﬁed. The ﬁrst leg of this enquiry into information costs concerns the public notice to prospective
trespassers. This is an important element for reducing transaction costs to the extent the legal security
provided by the title in question permits a relatively accurate measure of the right transacted. In the
area of patents, this element is linked to various formal aspects of the application, such as the ﬁrst

C(cid:2) 259

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

to ﬁle rule versus the ﬁrst to invent rule, the accuracy of the speciﬁcations and the breadth of the
claims. But in other areas of intellectual property, the notion of public notice is much more subtle.
For trademarks, copyright, and designs, for example, public notice can be given by standardized
symbols, as noted. But the same cannot be said of trade dress or trade secrets. As far as copyrighted
works are concerned, in the absence of the codiﬁed symbol C(cid:2), a potential infringer can follow a linear
reasoning: “Because I have not created this work, it is copyrighted by someone else”. This reasoning
is necessary because of the absence of a formal title. But, like land, the absence of a fence around the
work does not mean that it is res nullius. As regards trade secrets, the problem of public notice is even
more complex. In many jurisdictions, trade secret protection does not even entail a direct right in the
secret information that can be claimed against infringers. The only claim possible is of dishonesty
[and of parasitism, in the case of test data (TRIPS Agreement, article 39.3)].

The second question about information concerns those upon whom the liability to inform falls.
Who bears the costs of making information available? Potential infringers (by making patent searches,
for example)? Intellectual property owners, by identifying property with any means available (such as
those symbols noted above, or electronic measures, and assuming the risks of innocent infringement
in the case of insufﬁcient information)? Intellectual property does not provide for a horizontal or
homogeneous treatment of information. Patents require a great deal of information to be provided
by inventors, and that is part of their functioning rationale. The same can be said, to some extent,
in relation to other rights that are based on registration. However, where protection is not based on
formal grants, information provided by the owners is very scarce, if any, as in the case of trade secrets.
The only possible conclusion is that the information costs model does not suit intellectual
property as a whole. There are information costs involved in intellectual property, that is true, but
those are not equally speciﬁc to all varieties of intellectual property, nor have all intellectual property
varieties been forged to address information costs. Information costs are incidental to intellectual
property. They may be of particular relevance for certain ﬁelds, such as those rights that are based on
formal grants, such as patents, trademarks, and designs, but the primordial element in all intellectual
property rights is differentiation. But looking at intellectual property from the perspective of certain
rights or titles is a reductionist—hence, inaccurate—view. The point this article makes is about the
common denominator of all elements of intellectual property, with no exception.

The value of the theory of monopolistic competition to explain the nature of intellectual property
is that it puts emphasis on product differentiation, no matter what causes that differentiation. It can be
a matter of price, of space, of innovation, or of design. All these differentiating factors are translated
(and captured) by intellectual property elements: certain brands designate the reputation of pricing
(high or low); certain other distinctive signs are linked to space, such as shop signs (and their electronic
version—domain names, which relate to virtual business spaces); designs can be captured by design
patents, design certiﬁcates, topography certiﬁcates, utility models, and trademarks; and new technical
and functional features in processes and products can be appropriated by patents, utility models, and,
indirectly, by distinctive signs.

In a nutshell, product differentiation results from a myriad of factors. When they are expressed
in an intangible form, they are susceptible of being appropriated by intellectual property. Ensuring
differentiation, ensuring rivalry, facilitating entry, is the core and the reason of being of intellectual
property.

(iii) Differentiation is an attribute of every intellectual property component

The capacity to differentiate is the common characteristic that brings all components of intel-
lectual property under its umbrella. It is not the fact that they correspond to ideas—because, as
noted, there are ideas that fall outside its coverage. It is not the fact that they promote creativity and

260

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

innovation either—because many elements of intellectual property have nothing to do with creativity
and innovation. And, as a matter of course, the many components of intellectual property are not put
together simply as matter of convenience even if they are of a disparate nature, as it is also sometimes
alleged as a (poor) substitute to the incapacity to ﬁnd an intellectual property common denominator.
Actually that is a self-defeating explanation. First, if convenience were the presiding criterion over
intellectual property, one might wonder why some subjects are selected and not others for being
placed under its cover. Why inventions, and not scientiﬁc discoveries? Why arbitrary words, and not
terms found in the dictionary? Why literary works and not telephone directories? And, secondly, one
might also wonder why should those intangible assets be placed under intellectual property law and
not under civil law, or administrative law, or contract law?

It is actually surprising that the identiﬁcation of differentiation as the core characteristic of
intellectual property has not been proposed before. The protection of all of its components has
always been based on a condition of differentiation, in one way or another. Novelty, inventive
activity (or nonobviousness), originality, distinctiveness, conﬁdentiality (or secrecy or nondisclosure)
are synonymous with differentiation. The prohibition of practices that constitute or lead to confusion,
imitation, plagiarism, deceit, reputation tarnishing, is another expression of differentiation.

Differentiation as the core characteristic is found across the whole spectrum of intellectual prop-
erty. For example, patents are very often associated with the idea of monopolies. It is also purported
very frequently that there is a natural and inherent tension between patents and competition. How-
ever, once it becomes clear that patents, like all other intellectual property components, are about
differentiation (of products, directly or indirectly, in the case of patents), those afﬁrmations—which
are often repeated as if they were mantras—become meaningless. The truth is that no company sinks
money into inventing for the sake of the public good or because of the kind souls of their managers.
Companies invent to compete for (and in) the market. Let us just think of the hundreds of different
cell phone models that are available on the market, each with different functions and capabilities,
covered by hundreds, if not thousands, of patents. Why do those phones work differently? The an-
swer is that they embody new technologies that are aimed at making new products different (not
necessarily better—they can simply be cheaper) and more attractive to consumers.

It must be said that not many scholars have been able to understand this particular and crucial
aspect of patents. One of the few is an eminent US antitrust academic, Prof. Herbert Hovenkamp.
In a sophisticated analysis of the pro-competitive nature of patent rights (in which he dispelled the
myth that patents generate market power per se), Prof. Hovenkamp wrote:

For example, suppose a paint manufacturer develops a process that makes its paint more
durable than the paint of competitors, without increasing the cost. Customers prefer this
12-year paint to the 8-year paint offered by rivals, and they are willing to pay more if no
one else manufactures the superior paint as well [ . . . ].

Note that the existence of the patent is only one element in this analysis. Every major
paint manufacturer probably has patents covering its products. But most patents cover
fairly idiosyncratic differences in manufacturing process or product. They serve to keep
the processes or products of rivals from being absolutely identical—that is, they facilitate
product differentiation. But just as the various products in a product differentiated mar-
ket are not ordinarily relevant markets unto themselves, so to the intellectual property
rights themselves do not serve to turn competitors into monopolists14 (emphasis added;
Hovenkamp, 1994, p. 136).

C(cid:2) 261

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

With this explanation, Prof. Hovenkamp concludes a thoughtful analysis of market power in
the context of patents. But his point also sheds light on the core nature of patents (and intellectual
property, for that matter): they serve to preserve differences. In fact, there is no point in manufacturers’
copying each other’s products in so completely a manner that consumers will not be able to make an
informed decision on which of them to choose.15

Patents are granted for solutions to technical problems that are new and nonobvious. Novelty,
for the purposes of the patent system, means that the solution must be different from what existed
in the prior art at a certain point in time. Nonobviousness is a qualiﬁcation of novelty. Novelty does
not always qualify for a patent: only novelty that is somehow unexpected, or, in other words, genuine
novelty, commands a patent. The inventive step is nothing else than the expression of a strengthened
novelty requirement.

The fact that policy makers may use the patent system as a tool to promote invention, or the
progress of arts does not change this. At the core of the very notion of patentable invention, there
is the notion of differentiation. It does not matter either that the inventor has or not in mind the
objective of departing from tradition and wishes to engage in creative thinking. What matters is that
if he/she has not produced a technical solution that is genuinely different from previously known
technical solutions, a patent should not be granted.

Differentiation in the ﬁeld of patents is linked to a more subtle and deeper concept, which has
been described somewhere else—the idea of alternativeness of inventions (Pires de Carvalho, 2004,
p. 725). In accordance with the condition of alternativeness of inventions, every technical solution
invented by humans is inherently susceptible of being alternated by a different solution, regardless of
the alternative solution being better, worse, or technically equivalent. No matter how revolutionary
an invention is, sooner or later a competitor may, if he/she so wishes, obtain a different technical
solution that does not infringe the rights of the ﬁrst inventor (in the event he has applied for a patent).
The condition of alternativeness stands on the principle that there is no human technical solution
that is perfect, deﬁnitive, and unique. Therefore, when a patent is written in a way that it claims a
process or a product and covers all manners possible to reach the same result or all products that
serve the same goal, there is a violation of the condition of alternativeness. Very probably, if it is a
process, that patent claims a law of Nature. If it is a product, very probably it is a natural substance.
The condition of alternativeness of inventions was enunciated by the US Supreme Court for the

ﬁrst time in Le Roy v Tatham (1852) and was invoked subsequently in O’Reilly v Morse (1853).16

In Le Roy v Tatham (1852), the Supreme Court examined allegations of infringement of a patent
on a machine that was the improvement of an earlier patent. In the allegedly improved machine, lead
pipes were “wrought under heat, by pressure and constriction, from set metal”, while the original
invention had them cast formed in a mould (Le Roy v Tatham, 1852, p. 172). The Circuit Court had
instructed the jury that the novelty of the invention was not in the machine itself, but in the practical
application of a principle, “by which a useful article of manufacture is produced, and wrought
pipe made as distinguished from cast pipe” (Le Roy v Tatham, 1852, p. 174). The Court held that
instruction was erroneous because the patent did not claim the practical application of the principle,
but the machine’s features only. The novelty of those features was the material fact for the jury (Le
Roy v Tatham, 1852, p. 177). Discoursing about how patent law addresses the issues of patentability
of principles of nature, the Court stated the condition of alternativeness of inventions for the ﬁrst
time in the following terms:

It is admitted that a principle is not patentable. A principle, in the abstract, is a funda-
mental truth; an original cause; a motive; these cannot be patented, as no one can claim in
either of them an exclusive right. Nor can an exclusive right exist to a new power, should

262

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

one be discovered in addition to those already known. Through the agency of machinery
a new steam power may be said to have been generated. But no one can appropriate this
power exclusively to himself, under the patent laws. The same may be said of electricity,
and any of other power in nature, which is alike open to all, and may be applied to useful
purposes by the use of machinery.

In all such cases, the processes used to extract, modify and concentrate natural agencies,
constitute the invention. The elements of the power exist; the invention is not discovering
them, but in applying them to useful objects. Whether the machinery used be novel, or
consist of a new combination of parts known, the right of the inventor is secured against
all who use the same mechanical power, or one that shall be substantially the same.
A patent is not good for an effect, or the result of a certain process, as that would prohibit
all other persons from making the same thing by any means whatsoever. This, by creating
monopolies, would discourage arts and manufactures, against the avowed policy of the
patent laws (emphasis added; Le Roy v Tatham, 1852, p. 175).

Under the condition of alternativeness, as enunciated by the Supreme Court, patents cannot be
granted on ideas or knowledge that other persons cannot create or obtain and use by other means.
A patent confers exclusive rights in a certain invention. But that exclusivity may not impede other
persons from using the same natural principle or material by means different from those that are
claimed in the patent. If the patent is granted not on the use (in broad terms) of the natural principle
or material but rather on the principle or material itself, other persons will be necessarily barred from
using that same principle or material, no matter the level of their ingenuity in developing different
means. Patents, therefore, become monopolies, because it will be impossible to substitute the patented
articles, and this discourages arts and manufactures, in sharp conﬂict with the very (differentiating)
function of the patent system.

In O’Reilly v Morse (1853) the Court scrutinized (and denied) the validity of one of the claims
of Morse’s patent on the telegraph. In that claim, Morse went beyond “the speciﬁc machinery or
parts of machinery [ . . . ], the essence of [his] invention being the use of the motive power of the
electric or galvanic current, which [he] call[ed] electromagnetism, however developed, for making or
printing intelligible characters, signs or letters at any distances [ . . . ]” (O’Reilly v Morse, 1853, p. 78).
The Court noted that Morse actually claimed “the exclusive right to every improvement where the
motive power is the electric or galvanic current, and the result is the marking or printing intelligible
characters, signs, or letters at a distance” (O’Reilly v Morse, 1853, p. 112). The Court acknowledged
that Morse’s claim at bar was not acceptable because:

If this claim is maintained, it matters not by what process or machinery the result is ac-
complished. For aught that we now know some future inventor, in the onward march of
science, may discover a mode of writing at a distance by means of the electric or galvanic
current, without using any part of the process or combination set forth in the plaintiff’s
speciﬁcation. His invention may be less complicated—less liable to get out of order—less
expensive in construction, and in its operation. But yet if it is covered by this patent the
inventor could not use it, nor the public have the beneﬁt of it without the permission of this
patentee.

Nor is this all, while he shuts the door against inventions of other persons [ . . . ].

[ . . . ][I]t makes no difference, in [ . . . ] respect [of using the means he [the applicant]
speciﬁes to produce the result or effect he describes, and nothing more], whether the effect

C(cid:2) 263

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

is produced by chemical agency or combination; or by the application of discoveries or
principles in natural philosophy known or unknown before his invention; or by machinery
acting altogether upon mechanical principles. In either case he must describe the manner
and process [ . . . ] and the end it accomplishes. And any one may lawfully accomplish the
same end without infringing the patent, if he uses means substantially different from those
described (emphasis added; O’Reilly v Morse, 1853, pp. 113, 119).

Because the telegraph as described and claimed by Morse could be alter-invented at any time in
the future by other persons, it was undoubtedly patentable. But the properties of electromagnetism
were not, because electromagnetism being a principle of nature, it was unique, nonsusceptible of
being alter-invented. If that speciﬁc claim of a general nature were allowed, any use by other persons
of its properties would therefore be blocked by the patent owner.

Actually, this same idea of alternativeness was enunciated by a Brazilian court much earlier.
Under the Royal Decree (Alvar´a) of 1809, patents in Brazil would be granted after being examined by
the Royal Court of Trade, Agriculture, Manufactures, and Navigation. In 1820, examining a patente
application (on a machine for bagging and baling cotton) ﬁled by Jos´e Joaquim Machado, the court
agreed to grant it and in a dictum in which it suggested that patents should be granted without prior
examination, it enunciated the alternativeness doctrine:

[ . . . ] given that by this mechanism society may immediately obtain possession of the
improvement, the inventor immediately enjoys with just title the reward for his invention,
investment and inventive risk, and those who use or wish to use the [patented] methods
have no sound reason to complain, because it is free to all parties to prefer the old over the
new technology (emphasis added; Pires de Carvalho, 2009a, p. 90).

In other words, if the patent system is about ensuring exclusivity in the manufacture, trade and
use of a better mousetrap, it follows that there is a worse mousetrap available on the market—and that
consumers may prefer the worse over the better one, if they are not willing to pay the price of the new
device (however, new mousetraps tend to be more efﬁcient and cheaper than the old ones—just think
of how the prices of the most recent personal computers, ﬂat TVs, and cell phones are dramatically
lower and better performing than they were 10 years ago).17

The core rationale of the patent system is, therefore, that it cannot interfere with pregrant existing
competition, nor can it prevent the postgrant development of technology in the same ﬁeld. Patents,
actually, are opposite to pure monopolies. And this is due to the fact that patents are based on a
function of differentiation.

For example, it is here that resides the problem of granting patents to unmodiﬁed genes or gene
sequences, just because the applicants have described their code and identiﬁed their functions. For
those patients who need to be tested so as to diagnosis the genetic disease or the eventual propensity
of developing it, where a patented (unmodiﬁed) gene is involved, there is no way of procuring a
different gene or diagnosis kit. There is no way that biotech companies are able to invent around
that gene or sequence for the simple reason that the gene in question is not a human invention. It
cannot be alter-invented, as every human invention is inherently supposed to be. The consequence is
a monopoly for lack of alternativeness.

The same rationale applies—even more evidently—to distinctive signs. Some distinctive signs
designate and differentiate the merchants and the manufacturers. Those are trade names. Some
distinctive signs perform their differentiating function by identifying and differentiating the places
where business is carried out. Those are the shop signs, in a more traditional version. Those are also
the domain names, in a more modern version. Shop signs, during a certain period, were the subject

264

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

of special regimes of registration and protection. Recently, the trend has been of dealing with them
not under sui generis regimes of protection but under the repression of fair competition.18 Some of
these distinctive signs, such as trade names, are so important that even counterfeiters and pirates
need them, otherwise they could not be identiﬁed (and differentiated) from other counterfeiters and
pirates. For example, they would not have access to banking accounts (otherwise, how could the
banker identify them?).

Products and services are also differentiated by means of distinctive signs: trademarks (individual
or collective), geographical indications, certiﬁcation marks. In general, they ensure that consumers
make informed choices without the need to test all available and substitutable products every time
they wish to buy. They reduce, therefore, the transaction costs in their search (Landes and Posner,
1987). In doing so, some signs protect reputation, others identify the origin, and others certify quality.
Certiﬁcation marks are generally associated with consumer protection and their distinctive function
has been challenged because they seem to create uniformity (all the products that conform to a
given technical standard tend to be identical) rather than ensuring differentiation. However, they are
ultimately distinctive signs as well. In this regard, section 2 of Schedule 2 (on certiﬁcation marks)
of the UK Act 1994, is noteworthy: “In relation to a certiﬁcation mark the reference in section 1(1)
(signs of which a trade mark may consist) to distinguishing goods or services of one undertaking
from those of other undertakings shall be construed as a reference to distinguishing goods or services
which are certiﬁed from those which are not” (emphasis added).

It should be emphasized that distinctive signs do not operate only as regards unique articles and
services. Commodities are also differentiated. First, intellectual property differentiates the traders
of commodities even when these are completely interchangeable. Second, commodities are rarely
identical or interchangeable. Oil extracted in Venezuela is very different from oil extracted in Saudi
Arabia. Iron ore from Caraj´as, Brazil, is very different from iron ore from Southern Angola. In this
regard, geographical indications may have a role to identify certain commodities by designating their
origin or quality. Commodities have quality and reputation embedded in them. They also need to
be differentiated. And third, as already noted, for marketing purposes, there are no commodities.
All products are differentiated, if not through pricing, location, or technical features, at least by
marketing techniques, technical assistance, and other external factors.

It is worth noticing that the principle of alternativeness also applies to distinctive signs, with
adaptations. As with patents, the basic rule is that no sign (or no intellectual property asset, for that
matter) can be appropriated that eliminates pregrant competition. No trademark can be registered
and/or protected in a manner that drives all preexisting competitors out of the market. For example,
a shoe manufacturer cannot register the word “shoe” as a trademark, because the exclusive rights
emanating from it would make competitors’ life practically impossible. This principle helps explain,
for example, the rationale for the nonregistrability of functional signs, this meaning those signs whose
constitutive elements perform or are the result of products’ functional features. In general, extending
the scope of trademark protection to products’ features that are not entirely arbitrary would eliminate
competition as regards those products. For example, the sound of an engine should not be registrable
when that particular sound results from technical and functional (and eventually, previously patented)
features of that engine. The same can be said of a plastic brick used in construction games. Its design is
not predominantly esthetical or arbitrary, and therefore registering it as a trademark would subvert
the rationale of industrial design protection, indeﬁnitely extending exclusivity in that design, and
driving competitors away. All these discussions are, ultimately, about alternativeness, which is an
expression of differentiation.

C(cid:2) 265

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

The application of the principle of alternativeness to trademarks was acknowledged by the
United States Supreme Court by the way of a dictum in Qualitex v Jacobson (1995), in which the
Court dealt with the functionality of trademarks:

Functionality doctrine therefore would require, to take an imaginary example, that
even if customers have come to identify the special illumination-enhancing shape of a
new patented light bulb with a particular manufacturer, the manufacturer may not use
that shape as a trademark, for doing so, after the patent had expired, would impede
competition—not by protecting the reputation of the original bulb maker, but by frus-
trating competitors’ legitimate efforts to produce an equivalent illumination-enhancing
bulb (Qualitex v Jacobson, 1995, p. 165).

The same understanding was expressed more recently by the European Court of Justice, in
the Lego Case (Lego Juris A/S v OHIM and Mega Brands, 2010). Analyzing an application for a
trademark registration of the three-dimensional design of a plastic brick that is used in construction
toys (which was previously registered as an industrial design), the Court upheld the refusal by the
Ofﬁce for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) and held it
nonregistrable. The Court said:

In that connection, it should be observed, as OHIM points out, that under Article 9(1) of
Regulation No 40/94 registration as a trade mark of a purely functional product shape is
likely to allow the proprietor of that trade mark to prevent other undertakings not only
from using the same shape, but also from using similar shapes. A signiﬁcant number of
alternative shapes might therefore become unusable for the proprietor’s competitors.

That would be particularly so if various purely functional shapes of goods were registered
at the same time, which might completely prevent other undertakings from manufacturing
and marketing certain goods having a particular technical function [ . . . ].

Such a registration would unduly impair the opportunity for competitors to place on the
market goods whose shapes incorporate the same technical solution.

That applies a fortiori in a case of this kind, where it has been found by the competent
authority that the solution incorporated in the shape of goods examined is the technically
preferable solution for the category of goods concerned. If the three-dimensional sign
consisting of such a shape were registered as a trade mark, it would be difﬁcult for
the competitors of the proprietor of that mark to place on the market shapes of goods
constituting a real alternative, that is to say, shapes which are not similar and which are
nevertheless attractive to the consumer from a functional perspective (Lego Juris A/S v
OHIM and Mega Brands, 2010, at paragraphs 56, 57, 59, and 60).

Repression of unfair competition ensures that competitors will abide by honest values and
will not use fraud to create confusion. The role of intellectual property to promote and preserve
differences between competitors is not only determinant of its legal structure but also gives rise
to a prominent issue of business ethics. The common practice in trade is that competitors will
respect others’ speciﬁc intangible assets and do not attempt to mislead consumers by eliminating
the differences that separate them from their competitors. Intellectual property and the respect of
intellectual property are, obviously, a matter of honest practices. A dishonest merchant will attempt
to cheat clients by trying to eliminate his competitors’ particular attributes. An honest merchant will
not imitate his rivals’ names—he will promote his own. An honest merchant will not copy his rivals’

266

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

special knowledge about making a product or using a process—he/she will ask for permission to
use it or will generate his/her own knowledge. An honest merchant will not bribe his competitors’
employees so as to have access to valuable information, and so on. An honest merchant will take
advantage, of course, of any opportunities the law gives him/her. For example, when the law says that
some particular piece of knowledge is no longer the property of an inventor (because of the expiry
of the right in question, as a matter of law), an honest competitor will use it (if it is valuable, i.e.
because most inventions are worthless). But an honest merchant will do everything to create his/her
own differentiating assets.

Intellectual property, therefore, is essentially a matter of honest business. It is no surprise,
therefore, that historically intellectual property has been closely associated with rules concerning
compliance with standard weights and measures. Both sets of rules speak against fraud. Today,
those are separate branches of law (consumers law, on the one hand, and intellectual property, on
the other), but the repression of fraud is the common element that still links them. For example,
under the Swiss Federal Law against Unfair Competition, of 19 December 1986, it is unlawful to
cheat consumers as to the price of goods by offering rebates or taking other measures that reduce
consumers’ freedom of choice (article 3(g) and (h)). The UK Trademarks Act 1994 gives authority to
local weights and measures authorities to enforce search and seizure warrants in cases of trademark
infringement (section 93). In a number of countries, it is not a coincidence that the service of invention
and trademark registration is placed under the same agency that deals with industrial certiﬁcation
(comprising, therefore, weights, and measures).19 Also, the WIPO Model Provisions on Protection
Against Unfair Competition provide for the repression of practices that mislead the public, which
may occur “with respect to (i) the manufacturing process of a product; (ii) the suitability of a product
or service for a particular purpose; (iii) the quality or quantity or other characteristics of products
or services; [ . . . ] (vi) the price of products or services or the manner in which it is calculated”.

These are examples of provisions that protect consumers directly but indirectly aim at repress-
ing unfair competition, which is an integral part of industrial property (article 1.2 of the Paris
Convention).

Finally, a word on copyright and its inherent function of differentiating. By contrast with
patents and distinctive signs, it is possible (even though not practically probable) that two identical
works produced independently by different authors may deserve protection. This could be seen as
an exception to the differentiating rule. If it were, actually, it would be the sort of exception that
conﬁrms the rule. However, that is not even an exception, but a consequence of the manner in which
differentiation is applied in the ﬁeld of copyright. Copyright does not protect works that are different
from what exists in prior art. Copyright protects works whose authorship is attributable to a certain
author. This is the meaning of the originality requirement. The reason is that copyright, by contrast
with patents and other titles of appropriation of inventions (in a broad sense), such as utility models,
traditionally endeavors to recognize the expression of the human spirit. Therefore, where two different
human spirits generate, independently, two works, these are covered by copyright, in spite of being
eventually similar or even identical. However, this happens very rarely, if it ever happens, given the
generally adopted rule that too short works are not worth of protection. In the absence of plagiarism,
it is extremely improbable that two authors come out independently with identical works, even where
they are afﬁliated with the same literary or philosophical school. That sort of coincidence simply does
not happen. Nevertheless, this is the way that copyright applies originality, as opposed to novelty.
Originality is a mechanism of differentiation, even if it is not as absolute as novelty. More than
the “sweat of the brow” is necessary to justify copyright protection (Feist Publications, Inc. v Rural
Telephone Service Co., 1991). In other words, it is necessary that the difference between copyrightable
and noncopyrightable works be based on elements that are “original to the author” (International

C(cid:2) 267

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

News Service v Associated Press, 1918, p. 234, quoted in Feist Publications, Inc. v Rural Telephone
Service Co., 1991, p. 353).

Things may become more blurred when originality is applied to technical works, such as computer
programs. Given the technological background of computer software and ﬁrmware, it is much more
probable that coincidences arise in the context of independent development of new products by rival
ﬁrms. But that is a problem of bad law—indeed a major mistake that negotiators of the TRIPS
Agreement made in bending to the lobbying of the then recently born software industry in the late
80s and early 90s of last century. Actually, if there are today serious problems of market concentration
in the software industries—just think of Microsoft, Oracle and SAP, each ﬁrmly encroached with
unchallenged power to their respective market niches—it is because of the poor decision then made
by TRIPS Agreement negotiators.20 Copyright applied to software is both a legal and economic
aberration.

Copyright, therefore, is oriented toward differentiation—like all other components of intellectual
property. Actually, the same reasoning could be extended to all other areas of intellectual property,
including those that are still emerging, such as repression of ambush marketing and protection of test
data, under unfair competition, or protection of traditional knowledge, under a sui generis regime.
They are expressions of differentiation, even where the concept of honesty requires some extended
understanding, from a more circumscribed notion of fraud to a broader value of economic parasitism.
There is no need, however, to visit all areas of intellectual property in detail to identify the common
thread that unites all them under the umbrella of intellectual property. Whenever we face an asset that
is susceptible of use in trade, and that is intangible, and that has some value that in a way or another
gives its holder a competitive standing against its rivals—past, present, or future—to the extent that
its rivals cannot use it (and it is here that the legal and economic expression of differentiation lies),
we are facing intellectual property.

In conclusion, intellectual property protection is based on values and principles such as novelty,
inventiveness, originality, creativity, priority, reputation, secrecy. All these terms are synonymous with
differentiation. It follows that intellectual property is against confusion and deceit. To lure clients
based on the elimination or reduction of differentiation is an act of socially reprehensible parasitism,
unless law permits it.

(iv) Intellectual property is a spontaneous legal tool that has embedded the social fabric of free,

organized societies since the dawn of civilization

If intellectual property is really about differentiation, and because free market oriented societies
rely on individual business initiatives, it should have emerged in History very early—as early as
economically free societies have emerged.

And actually, this is true. The ﬁrst known manifestation of legal protection of intellectual
property—actually, of industrial property—appears in the Code of Lipit-Ishtar, in Sumer, and about
two centuries later was reafﬁrmed in the Code of Hammurabi, circa 1750 BC.21 Law No. 188 of the
Code of Hammurabi provided for a mechanism that, even if immediately dealing with family law,
permitted private appropriation of technical knowledge. Law No. 188 provided that “If an artisan
has undertaken to rear a child and teaches him his craft, he cannot be demanded back”. This Law
must be contrasted with the next Law, which reads: “If he has not taught him his craft, this adopted
son may return to his father’s house”.22 This means that, if the artisan had transmitted his knowledge
and his technique to an adopted apprentice, the latter would continue under his authority until the
artisan decided otherwise. In practice, the artisan had the power to prohibit the apprentice to disclose
information received from him during the apprenticeship to other persons. As a matter of course, laws
only have meaning within their social and economic context. To understand clearly the dimension of

268

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Law No. 188, one must realize that the system of adoption performed an important role in the life
of Babylon. Among other objectives, as Carl Grimberg (1965, p. 176) wrote in his classical Universal
History, adoption was resorted to as a cheap method of obtaining human labor. Indeed, it is not
surprising that the Code of Hammurabi contained such a rule implying the private appropriation of
technical knowledge. The reason is that not all artisans in Sumer were patronized by the king or by
temples. In contrast with artists and some craftsmen who manufactured weapons and clothes that
were used by the royal family (those were supported by the king and lived in the royal palace), many
craftsmen owned their businesses, they were private entrepreneurs, and their income would come
from selling their crafts to the public (Margueron, 2002, pp. 335, 340; Bordreuil et al. (orgs.), 2008,
pp. 65–6). Protecting inventions by means of secrecy was, therefore, essential for the preservation of
their livelihood. At that time, civilization had already reached a point that social progress required
technical improvements. As J. Bronowski (1976, p. 195) noted, in Sumer laws regulated the organiza-
tion of society, the use of water, possession of land, mercantile agreements, and other social relations.
Artisans, he added, had already acquired the status of inventors.

This is not the place to engage in a long analysis of the historic origins of intellectual property.23
The point is that whenever organized societies based on free markets emerged, intellectual prop-
erty emerged as well, both as a spontaneous and a law-based regime. This is not a matter of cul-
ture, but rather of economics. Or, for that matter, it is a matter of economic culture. Therefore, it
should not come as a surprise that the ﬁrst conﬁrmed expressions of industrial property emerged in
Mesopotamia. The reason is that, as said, in Mesopotamia (both in Sumer as well as in Babylon) a
signiﬁcant number of artisans were not directly sponsored by the temples or the royal palace. Accord-
ing to Samuel Noah Kramer, the most capable manufacturers and artisans would sell the articles of
their manufactures on the town’s free market, and would be paid in species or in “money” (normally,
in the form of a silver disk or ring of a predetermined weigh). The Sumerian economy was relatively
free and private property was the rule rather than the exception (Kramer, 1973, p. 74). Babylonian
artisans were, therefore, private entrepreneurs and their revenue resulted from sales made directly
to the public (Margueron, 2002, pp. 335, 340). They were engaged in a commercial environment
of competition and rivalry. They needed to differentiate themselves from their rivals. They needed
to reserve to themselves knowledge they had acquired through experience. They needed to preserve
their reputation. Because Sumer was the ﬁrst historical civilization built on the foundations of relative
economic freedom, intellectual property naturally emerged as the legal expression of differentiation.
Industrial property was born by means of the appropriation of knowledge (through trade secrets)
as well as by the widespread use of distinctive signs (which started in Southern Anatolia, circa 3500
BC, where the ﬁrst urban civilizations erupted). From Mesopotamia industrial property spread
along the roads and sea routes through which merchants, their articles and their contracts, would
perambulate. Egypt and the Indus Valley also used the same tools of differentiation (Egypt with much
less intensity, because its economy was largely conducted by the State24). On the Island of Bahrain,
a large trade outpost to which the ships of those three early civilizations would call, seals belonging
to merchants (or their kings, in the case of Egyptian merchants, who were civil servants) from those
countries were found. The thread that links those three sources of the Western Civilization to early
expressions of intellectual property is the acceptance, to a varying extent, of the freedom of initiative
of merchants, artisans, and manufacturers.25

From Mesopotamia industrial property spread, through Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans,
along the arms of the Mediterranean basin half-moon. Eastwards, it did not reach beyond the Indus
Valley because of the ﬁrm grip that the State kept on the Chinese economy—even though some
vestiges of trademark uses can be found in early Chinese potteries. It is interesting to note that,
in Western Europe, after the fall of the Roman Empire, there are no archaeological vestiges of the

C(cid:2) 269

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

use of industrial property (rather than a few, isolated shop signs in hostels and taverns in the few
cities that remained). Appropriation of knowledge would result naturally from the isolation and
self-sufﬁciency of monasteries, which were then the main units of production and consumption.
And distinctive signs were not necessary, because there was no distance between producers and
consumers—producers were consumers and vice versa. Of course, when consumers and producers
are close, reputation is developed and maintained by personal contact. But when Western Europe
reemerged from its economic lethargy, after the tenth century, the instruments of appropriation of
differences naturally reemerged. The ﬁrst adventurer merchants resorted to heraldic signs to identify
themselves before their clients, following the example of the bands of knights who were preceded by
their ﬂags. At the outset of the Commercial Revolution (between the eleventh and the fourteenth
centuries), trademark law evolved from heraldry. The principles of distinctiveness and veracity that
are associated in different degrees with distinctive signs were likewise extracted from the principles of
heraldry.26 At the same time, the feudal lords started taking measures to lure foreign artisans aiming
at the expansion of their taxable economic basis, by means of legal tools similar to today’s patents.

As said, this is not the place for an extensive description of how industrial property evolved. The
point is that industrial property—and intellectual property, for that matter—is a spontaneous tool
of differentiation of businesses as well as of commercial articles. Whenever a society rose based on
a free-market structure, intellectual property was a necessary, if not unavoidable, tool that sustained
economic development.

Fernand Braudel has detected a civilization-wide coherence across the half moon shaped territory
around the Mediterranean Sea that societies occupied for thousands of years (Braudel, 1993; 2002).
In part, such coherence was obtained by means of the application of industrial property rules and
principles. These have contributed to form the background and the basis of all civilizations that are
based on individual freedom.

The role of intellectual property is that of organizing the allocation of resources to the creation
and preservation of differentiating intangible assets: the reputation, the knowledge, etc., everything
that differentiates one business from another. That is why intellectual property is so fundamentally
important to a competitive economy. Without intellectual property there are no differences or, when
there are, they are quickly absorbed by less-efﬁcient imitators. One economy without differences,
one dull, gray, uniform economy may be created by ideology—socialism—or, alternatively, simply by
eliminating intellectual property.27

The Value of a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property
The proposal of a uniﬁed theory implies a new way of understanding intellectual property and thus
entails a paradigm shift. Such a change in mind setting is not always easy—we naturally tend to
reject novelty when it requires us to modify deeply rooted beliefs. However, the identiﬁcation of a
common denominator across the whole spectrum of intellectual property has the value of introducing
coherence and cohesion in a ﬁeld that so far has been the subject of piece-meal approaches.

The idea that intellectual property, in all its components, is a tool of differentiation generates in
policy makers and lawmakers a sense of responsibility, because of its inherent link with economic
freedom. Policy makers interested in promoting free markets can only ignore an adequate protection
of intellectual property at the peril of undermining those very free markets.

On the other hand, the principle of differentiation generates two constraints on policy makers.
First, they must take the parameters resulting from the social construction of law into account and
decide what differentiating assets have to be protected. Indeed, intellectual property promotes and
protects differences, but it does not promote and protect all. That is a matter for society to decide

270

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

on economic, moral, or political grounds. For example, the protection of pharmaceutical inventions
has been a matter of much controversy in many countries that are importers of medicines, until
the TRIPS Agreement solved that issue at the multilateral level, in a harmonized manner.28 The
controversy continues as regards intangible assets that are differentiating but which society, for one
reason or another, decides to leave outside protection (hence, subject to imitation and confusion).
This applies to traditional knowledge, to a number of biotechnological inventions, and to certain
distinctive signs, such as single colors.

Furthermore, lawmakers have the responsibility of granting intellectual property protection to
intangible assets that are genuinely differentiating. It is differentiation that allows free markets to
thrive. The contrary undermines competition, because in the absence of differences, consumers will
not be able to make informed choices both as regards the merchants (or manufacturers) and their
products and services. To use a paradox, we can say that not all differences are differentiating. The
protection of patents for unmodiﬁed genes or other natural substances or for minor improvements,
and of copyright for compilations of factual information, and of trademarks for words found in the
dictionary or for features of an essentially functional nature, are examples of intellectual property
that generates confusion, instead of promoting differentiation. Those intellectual property rights
give origin to monopolies and monopsonies. They are the opposite of free-market tools. On the
other hand, to refuse intellectual property protection to genuine differences or to refuse that ef-
fective enforcement measures are made available to rights holders also lead to confusion, because
less-efﬁcient merchants and manufacturers are thereby allowed to imitate their more competent
rivals.

In the ﬁrst case we have too much intellectual property. Too much intellectual property covers
nonsufﬁciently differentiating assets and makes it impossible for competitors to use or to create
alternative intangible assets. It hampers pregrant existing competition (even if only potentially), as
the above-mentioned Qualitex and Lego opinions show. In the second case, we have too less intellectual
property. Too less intellectual property (such as the unavailability of protection for sounds, colors,
and smells as trademarks as well as insufﬁcient rules of enforcement) fails to cover differentiating
assets and therefore generates confusion. Consequently, less-efﬁcient competitors are able to imitate
more efﬁcient competitors and thereby destroy differentiation.

In very rare circumstances, a third situation may arise where competitors cannot create or
obtain intangible assets that are alternative to intellectual property—for example, when patents
cover inventions set as mandatory or generally agreed technical standards, or when the obtaining
of regulatory date puts the life of human beings and animals or the environment in risk. Those
are examples of situations in which the principle of alternativeness, which is inherent to intellectual
property and its differentiating nature, does not apply. In those rare cases, invariably dictated by
regulatory distortions of competition, the essential facility doctrine applies.

Ultimately, too much and too less intellectual property are the same, because both gen-
erate confusion, distort competition, and refuse consumers the possibility of making informed
decisions.

This apparently simple statement gives us a ﬁrst clue about the essentially pro-competitive nature
of intellectual property. If it promotes differentiation or rivalry, it promotes the freedom of choice by
consumers. Of course, the lack of freedom may be a fact of the market (a manufacturer who came
ﬁrst, for example), a fact of nature (a business who owns a naturally scarce resource, such as a mine
or a railroad) or the result of acts that lead to the acquisition or permit the maintenance of market
power. In the ﬁrst event, the market will operate naturally, and the essentially pro-competitive nature
of intellectual property will not stand in the way of new entrants. In the last event, the enforcement
of antitrust law will solve the problem. Where market power arises from nature, the government

C(cid:2) 271

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

must intervene, for example by resorting to mechanisms of price controls. Additionally, under certain
circumstances, bottlenecks are overcome by means of the operation of the essential facility doctrine.29
By contrast, if there is no intellectual property, there is no remedy available to solve problems of
lack of competition. In its absence, there are no differences (or, if there are, they tend to disappear).
And if there are no differences, there is no possible way for consumers to choose substitutes among
various sources. If this led to a situation of perfect competition, that would be a less-inefﬁcient result.
It would still be an inefﬁcient result, because without incentives to introduce differences, there would
be no economic progress. However, that is not the case. Elimination of intellectual property does
not lead to perfect competition because it simply does not exist. Elimination of differences leads to
confusion, inefﬁciency, lack of alternatives, a deﬁcit in economic democracy. Intellectual property is
the essential, sine qua non tool for the generation and preservation of interﬁrm rivalry. It fosters new
entrants and promotes economic progress.

Understanding this essential concept solves once and for all the generalized misunderstanding
that intellectual property is about monopolies or—another very generalized misconception—that
there is an inherent tension between intellectual property and competition. If there is tension, it is
about intellectual property and pure competition. But there is no tension whatsoever with imperfect
competition. Being about differentiation, intellectual property is in the core of competitive markets.
There is no conﬂict whatsoever when intellectual property corresponds to genuinely differentiating
assets.

Lawmakers and courts must also be attentive to abuses. The abuse of intellectual property rights
distorts their differentiating function, even when they do not destroy it entirely (where they are kept
conﬁned to few cases). Nevertheless, lawmakers and courts should not neglect the repression of abuses,
otherwise these may become generalized—and then lead to the elimination of the differentiating and
inherently pro-competitive nature of intellectual property.

Conclusion
This article proposes a paradigm shift: intellectual property is not what has been considered to be
by mainstream academics, courts, and policy makers. Intellectual property is about differentiation.
Its components, individually considered, may perform varied special functions, since promoting
of inventions to certifying quality of products and, more broadly, ensuring that merchants behave
honestly and do not cheat patrons. But, if we stop looking at the trees and start looking for an
adequate picture of the forest, what emerges is a coherent set of principles and rules that aim at
ensuring differentiation among businesses as well as among the articles and services they produce
and sell.

Intellectual property is about freedom. It is about economic democracy. Therefore, it is not
surprising that intellectual property has emerged as a spontaneous tool that has embedded the social
fabric of free and organized societies since the dawn of civilization.

It should not be surprising either that intellectual property, when well designed, protected, and
enforced, is the essence of a competitive economy. But the more intellectual property is not always
the better. The less-intellectual property is never the better either. The better is better intellectual
property, this meaning intellectual property that protects genuinely differentiating assets.

Once this is understood, all the pieces of the intellectual property puzzle fall into their places,
and a coherent broad picture emerges that helps society better organize itself by promoting economic
freedom and ensuring that, in our relentless pursuit of happiness, the very diverse economic decisions
relating to industry, commerce, and consumption are guided by honesty.

272

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

About the Author
Nuno Pires de Carvalho, LL.B., LL.M., S.J.D., Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil (1991).
LL.M., S.J.D., Washington University in St Louis, MO, United States (1993). Director of the
Intellectual Property and Competition Policy Division, World Intellectual Property Organization
(W(WIPO), Geneva. Av. de la Forˆet, 5, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland; e-mail: nuno.carvalho@wipo.int

Notes

1 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of 20 March 1883, as revised at Brussels on 14
December 1900, Washington on 2 June 1911, The Hague on 6 November 1925, London on 2 June 1934,
Lisbon on 31 October 1958, and Stockholm on 14 July 1967, and as amended on 28 September 1979. The
full text of the Convention is available on the WIPO website, at <www.wipo.int>.

2 Paris Convention, article 1(2) reads: “(2) The protection of industrial property has as its object patents,
utility models, industrial designs, trademarks, service marks, trade names, indications of source or appella-
tions of origin, and the repression of unfair competition”. It should be noted, however, that the deﬁnition
provided by article 1(2) is not purely academic. Actually, it has a very practical and concrete function: to
list those ﬁelds of industrial property to which Paris Union Members are bound to apply the principle of
national treatment, under article 2.

3 See Directive 96/9/CE of the European Parliament and the Council, of 11 March 1996, concerning the
legal protection of databases (Ofﬁcial Journal no. L 077, of 27/03/1996, p. 20). In the United States, there
has also been an initiative toward the protection of databases—or, more correctly, of the investment made
in elaborating databases—but without success. Bill H.R. 3531, introduced by representative Moorhead, in
1996 (104th legislature), has never been voted. See Database Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy
Act 1996, available at <thomas.loc.gov>. A proposal concerning the adoption of an international treaty
on the protection of date bases in WIPO, in 1996, was likewise unsuccessful and was abandoned.

4 Portugal and Peru have enacted laws on the protection of traditional knowledge associated to biodiversity.
Panama also has a system of registration and protection of indigenous handicrafts. Those statutes can be
found in WIPO, Information on National Experiences with the Intellectual Property Protection of Traditional
Knowledge, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/INF/2, 4 April 2003.

5 In very general terms, it can be said that intellectual property covers two main sub-branches: copyright and
related rights, on the one hand, and industrial property, on the other. Very roughly, copyright corresponds
to expressions, and industrial property corresponds to ideas with a commercial value. But this is a very
rough categorization, because copyright and industrial property may overlap—for example, the TRIPS
Agreement attributes copyright protection to computer programs, which are information of a technical na-
ture. Industrial property by itself covers three large ﬁelds: proprietary rights in technical creations (patents,
utility models, topographies of integrated circuits, etc.), proprietary rights in distinctive signs (trade names,
trademarks, shop signs, certiﬁcation marks, geographical indications, etc.), and nonproprietary interests in
competitive advantages (repression of unfair competition). Here there are also some problems of cohesion.
For example, industrial designs may be of a technical nature and, at the same time, acquire a distinc-
tive function based on esthetical values. Trade dress is generally deemed nonproprietary (hence, covered
by repression of unfair competition) but once it acquires distinctiveness, it is treated as a proprietary
distinctive sign. The same blurred frontier between proprietary and nonproprietary interests is present
across the whole ﬁeld of repression of unfair competition.

6 Naming all authors who have followed this route would be too long, if not impossible. Just to name two:
Maskus (2000, p. 27) and McCarthy et al. (2005, p. 308). In the same sense, see also ICC (2007, p. 9).
The Wikipedia provides for a very similar deﬁnition: “Intellectual property (IP) is a term referring to a

C(cid:2) 273

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

number of distinct types of creations of the mind for which a set of exclusive rights are recognized—and
the corresponding ﬁelds of law” (<en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellectual_property#cite_note-0> [Accessed
June 2011]). WIPO has also taken this view: “Intellectual property, very broadly means the legal rights
which result from intellectual activity in the industrial, scientiﬁc, literary and artistic ﬁelds” (WIPO, 2001,
p. 3). In 2006, the WIPO Secretariat celebrated the World Intellectual Property Day (April 26) with a
campaign based on the motto: “Intellectual Property—It starts with an idea”.

7 The main reason for this generalized misunderstanding lies probably in the name that legal tradition has
attributed to this branch of law. Indeed, one may be led to believe that if property is intellectual, that
is due to the fact that it is somehow connected with expressions of intellectual activity. But that is not
correct. Intellectual property is intellectual because it is the result of a mental abstraction—the abstraction
of establishing in the context of rights in intangible assets the same features that are associated with rights
in tangible goods. It is not the subject matter of intellectual property that is intellectual. It is property that
is intellectual. Actually, the term immaterial property would perhaps be more correct—or at least it would
not generate so much confusion.

8 Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), annexure 1C
to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, concluded on 15 April 1994,
and entered into force on 1 January 1995. The full text of the TRIPS Agreement is available on the WTO
website, at <www.wto.org>.

9 See in note 5, supra, a very brief description of the coverage of intellectual property.
10 The defendant (Feist) had solicited from the plaintiff a license to publish a directory of telephone service
subscribers in its speciﬁc region (Feist was engaged in publishing directories in areas that were much
broader than that in which Rural provided telecommunications services with exclusivity). Notwithstanding
the plaintiff’s refusal to grant the license, the defendant published a directory that reproduced parts of
Rural’s list of subscribers in its “white pages” (which, as the US Supreme Court noted, Rural did not
publish on its own initiative, but because it was obliged to do so under state law). The opinions of the
Supreme Court of the United States are available at <caselaw.lp.ﬁndlaw.com>.

11 Sherman Act, section 2 reads, in part: “Every person who shall monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or
combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce
[ . . . ] shall be deemed guilty of a felony [ . . . ]”.

12 The shortcoming of Yoo’s application of the theory of monopolistic competition to copyright is that he
suggests that efﬁciency in promoting increased entry would be best promoted by weakening certain aspects
of copyright protection. In other words, Yoo does not propose a blind, horizontal increase in the levels of
copyright. Instead, he proposes to narrow the concept of infringement, “in that new works could exhibit
a high degree of similarity without constituting infringement” (Yoo, 2004, p. 265). That seems to be in
conﬂict with the idea of promoting differences. The more pronounced the differences, the more locked
in, and thus the more price insensitive will consumers become. Minor differences do not have impact on
encouraging entry. That is why intellectual property should care of genuine differences only. And this is
also the economic foundation of the alternativeness principle, as discussed below.

13 Differentiation not only promotes new entries and leads to price reduction, but also keeps control over
demographic proliferation of competitors (or excessive entry). The reason is that, if prices continue de-
creasing, at some point to introduce new differences will become too costly in the face of reduced proﬁts.
14 Prof. Hovenkamp made the same point more extensively, as regards both patents and copyright, in another

of his works (Hovenkamp et al., 2002, pp. 4–10, 12).

15 The differentiating function of patents becomes conspicuous when companies use their portfolios to boast
the superiority of their products. For example, in a South African magazine, Enterprise, of October 2007
(Cape Edition), Audi advertised its S6 model with the following text: “9621 reasons you’ll be accustomed
to seeing the back of it. The superlative sporty performance you’ve come to expect from the Audi S-emblem

274

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

has been redeﬁned with the Audi S6. We ﬁled 9621 patents to achieve a new level of breathtaking power
(incidentally 3112 more patents than NASA ﬁled for the space programme to date)”. One can only wonder
what ﬁling 9,621 patents has to do with power efﬁciency. After all, it is technology—not the patent—that
responds for technological superiority. But here patents are about differentiation. It is as if Audi said:
“We have more patents than our competitors. Therefore, our products are better”. In the same token,
Bosch, the worldwide known manufacturer of electric and electronic components, a few years ago had an
enormous display at Terminal 2 of the Airport of Gale˜ao, in Rio de Janeiro, in which this text could be
read: “Commitment with sustainability. 14 patents per day for a better world”. The company’s logo was
accompanied by the following words: “Bosch—Technology for life”. In the background a photo of Earth
taken from space was shown. One may, indeed, wonder what do 14 patents per day have to do with a better
world. Those patents can very well cover polluting technologies. However, patents in this advertisement
were used to differentiate Bosch and its articles from rivals’: patents as tokens of reputation.

16 There are other cases. For example, in Corning v Burden (1853), the Supreme Court held that “[The patent
applicant] cannot describe a machine which will perform a certain function, and then claim the function
itself, and all other machines that may be invented to perform the same function” (Corning v Burden, 1853,
p. 269). Besides, even though not explicitly mentioned, the condition of alternativeness was the foundation
of the Court opinions in Funk Brothers Seed. Co. v Kalo Inoculant Co. (1948) and Diamond v Chakrabarty
(1980).

17 The reference to a better mousetrap as a symbol of innovation has been attributed to Ralph Waldo
Emerson. The aphorism goes as follows: “If a man can write a better book, preach a better sermon, or
make a better mouse-trap, than his neighbor, though he builds his house in the woods, the world will make a
beaten path to his door” (Adams, 1947). This aphorism was implied by the District Court of Massachusetts
in the landmark opinion of Data Gen. Corp. v Grumman Sys. Corp. (1991), in which it was held that the
essential facility doctrine does not apply (in general) to copyright due to the possibility of competitors to
independently create alternative works. Circuit J Luttig said: “The ‘bottleneck’ of its superior knowledge
in the design of DG computers is insufﬁcient to invoke the essential facilities doctrine; a better mousetrap
is not necessarily an essential facility” (Data Gen. Corp. v Grumman Sys. Corp., 1991, p. 192).

18 The fact that some shop signs are materially embodied in the building where the shop stands and cannot,
therefore, be removed if the merchant moves to another address does not mean that they cannot be
protected. They are protected as long as the merchant’s reputation is associated with the shop sign in
question. Moreover, shop signs are protected only in the geographical circumscription within which patrons
recognize them. To some extent, something similar happens with geographical indications. Because they
are linked to a territory, the producer that moves to a different territory will no longer be entitled to identify
his/her products with that indication.

19 These are the cases, among others, of Tunisia, where industrial property and standards are managed by
INNORPI (Institut National de la Normalisation et de la Propri´et´e Industrielle), and Peru, where industrial
property, together with consumer defense, competition policy, and standards are covered by INDECOPI
(Instituto Nacional de Defensa de la Competencia y de la Protecci´on de la Propiedad Intelectual).

20 The mistake is that rivals could not study the program codes of pioneer software developers so as to create
their own competing products. In order to study software, it is necessary to open its code and display it so
that it can be read and understood by a rival programmer. But the simple act of displaying a competing
software product is, under copyright law, an act of infringement. The world would have been much better
off if computer software were under the protection of patents or, as some countries had started doing in
the 1980s, under a sui generis regime.

21 The Code of Hammurabi, of circa 1750 BC, is a compilation of rules that presided over the society of the
kingdom controlled by Babylon. It reﬂects a complex organizational structure, thus revealing an advanced
Sumerian society. The Code contains laws on different matters, such as the management of ﬁelds and

C(cid:2) 275

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

irrigation canals, marriage, treatment of slaves, medical liability, etc. Unfortunately, it seems that a number
of laws are missing. Although the Code of Hammurabi is generally designated as the oldest code of
laws, other Sumerian kings who preceded Hammurabi had already codiﬁed laws (and ordered them to be
recorded in written form). The ﬁrst code of laws seems to be Ur-Nammu’s, a king of Sumer, in around
2100 BC, of which some vestiges inscribed on a clay tablet remain. Ur-Nammu’s code established criminal
sanctions for acts of body injury as well as trade-related rules, such as weights and measures. Later (around
1930 BC), another king, Lipit-Ishtar, also codiﬁed a number of legal rules, of which 37 were found (Kramer,
1994, pp. 77–81). The Code of Hammurabi was considerably inﬂuenced by those previous laws.

22 The complete text of the Code of Hammurabi, translated by L.W. King (1910), can be found at

<www.wsu.edu/dee/Meso/Code.htm>.

23 A more detailed analysis and description of the historical evolution of the patent and trademarks systems

since Pre-Classical Antiquity can be found in Pires de Carvalho (2009b).

24 One author suggests that one of the earliest expressions of trade secret appropriation can be found on
Egyptian Stella C 14, which was found in Abydos, Upper Egypt, and dates from the XIth Dynasty
(circa 2000 BC; Gollin, 2008, pp. 26–27). The author suggests, “[a]ccording to a translation”, that an
artisan claimed possession of secret knowledge, which the pharaoh would have authorized him to retain
and transmit to his son. Id. However, that is a problem of a wrong translation. Eminent Egyptologists,
such as G. Maspero (1877), have provided for a completely different translation of the same text, in
which there is no reference whatsoever to trade secret ownership. See G. Maspero, ‘The Stele C14 of
the Louvre’, [Extracted from TSBA 5, 1877, 555–62], available at <www.masseiana.org/maspero.htm>
(accessed June 2012). See also a translation (into French) provided by the University of Paris, at
<www.iut.univ.paris8.fr/∼rosmord/hieroglyphs/C14tra.html> [Accessed on July 2010]. On Stella C14,
the scribe and artisan Irtysen boasts his technique and secrets in sculpture and construction, and claims
that he was the only artisan who knows them. Likewise, his son also had that knowledge, because he had
been practicing it and he had been initiated (to the artisanship). But there is no reference whatsoever to any
sort of State recognition of property in those secrets. Indeed, it seems that there was some sort of protection
of trade secrets in Egypt, but they were those of military value, as Diodorus of Sicily noted in his Universal
History. Otherwise, private appropriation of knowledge in Egypt was expressed by means of higher wages
paid to those skilled artisans who worked in the construction of Royal tombs (and, as the ultimate and most
coveted reward, skilled artisans would be allowed to use leisure time to build their own tombs; Laza, 2001,
p. 23). The reason is obvious: the construction of tombs and monuments was a State-sponsored activity,
and thus the knowledge therein involved could not be privately appropriated. In the tomb of astronomer
Amenhemat, who served under Imhenotep I (fourteenth century BC), an inscription was found claiming
that he invented the water clock, the clepsydra: “I have invented a device to measure time, throughout
the year. [ . . . ] No one had ever made anything similar since the beginning of times. I have invented the
honorable clepsydra in praise of the King of High and Low Egypt [ . . . ]” (Dessoudex, 2010, p. 218). In
other words, the clepsydra was not invented for the sake of the inventor himself, but to serve the inventor’s
master, Pharaoh Amhenotep I. In his biography, found on the walls of his tomb, in Thebes (thirteenth cen-
tury BC), architect Ineni has left additional evidence that in Antique Egypt there was no legal recognition
of private appropriation of knowledge. After boasting his achievements as the head of many construction
sites, works that in many cases “had never been made before”, “fruits of his thinking, expressions of his
knowledge”, he described how he was rewarded for his creativity and dedication by means of personal
prestige and gifts from the pharaoh (Dessoudex, 2010, pp. 283–288). After all, his inventions were not his,
but the king’s property.

25 Artists and authors could not prescind from State patronage until very much later. Only after Gutenberg’s
invention made the competitive proliferation of publications possible (in the sixteenth century) could they
be entitled to a special regime of legal protection of their works (for a certain period, between the ﬁfteenth

276

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

and seventeenth centuries, European societies experimented to use industrial privileges for protecting early
publishers, but those did not work very well; Johns, 2009, pp. 28–29; Pires de Carvalho, 2009b, pp. 279–281).
26 It is not a coincidence that the ﬁrst treatise on trademark law ever published (in 1358) dealt with the law
of heraldry. The author was Bartolo da Sassoferrato and the treatise is De insigniis et armis. (Pires de
Carvalho, 2009b, pp. 512–536).

27 Just imagine: tomorrow the United States Congress convenes to amend the country’s Constitution and
abolishes every form of intellectual property. In a short time, the most competitive ﬁrms would stop to
differentiate themselves from less competitive businesses for the latter would easily imitate them. Trade
secrets would not be protected and espionage would be tolerated. Any business could use any name that
it saw ﬁt. Soon consumers would not be able to distinguish the goods they used to buy in stores and
supermarkets. In terms of impact on the democratic organization of the people of the United States, to ban
the protection of differentiating intangible assets would have the same consequences as of eliminating US
citizens’ right to vote. If not for another reason, political parties also resort to differentiation in order to
attract ﬁnancial contributions and votes from supporters. Ultimately, democracy is about differentiation
and meritocracy, be it political, legal, or economic. And also ultimately, the application of the rule sum
cuique tribuere, as expressed by Ulpian as one of the three basic principles of Law, depends on the correct
identiﬁcation of those who have legitimately appropriated the entitlements in question.

28 The prohibition to treat pharmaceutical inventions (and of all technological ﬁelds, for that matter) in a
negatively discriminatory manner is found in article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement: “[ . . . ] patents shall
be available for any inventions [ . . . ] in all ﬁelds of technology, [ . . . ]. [ . . . ] patents shall be available and
patent rights enjoyable without discrimination [ . . . ] as to the ﬁeld of technology [ . . . ]”.

29 However, in the ﬁeld of intellectual property, as a result of the operation of the alternativeness principle,
bottlenecks only occur when intellectual property covers subject matter that is of mandatory use (e.g.
patents for technical standards) or when it is improperly granted. In some rare circumstances, alter-
invention may be socially repudiated, which transforms intellectual property into an essential facility. This
applies, for example, to the case of test data whose duplication could put in risk the health of humans
or cause the suffering of animals. Invariably, the solution for an essential facility problem (provided it is
caused by intellectual property in the right dosage) is compulsory licensing.

References
Adams, R. (1947) ‘Emerson’s Brother and the Mousetrap’, Modern Language Notes, 62, 483–86. Available at

<www.jstor.org/stable/2909438> [Accessed December 2011].

Bishop, M. (2009) Economics—An A-Z Guide. The Economist, London.
Bordreuil, P., Briquel-Chatonnet, F. and Michel, C. (organizers) (2008) Les D´ebuts de l’Histoire—Le Proche-

Orient, de l’invention de l’´ecriture `a la naissance du monoth´eisme. Ed. de la Martini`ere, Paris.

Braudel, F. (1993) La M´editerran´ee et le Monde M´editerran´een `a l’ ´Epoque de Philippe II, 9th edition. Le Livre

de Poche, Paris.

Braudel, F. (2002) (trans. S. Reynolds). Memory and the Mediterranean. Random House, New York.
Bronowski, J. (1976) The Ascent of Man. BBC, London.
Chamberlin, E. (1933) The Theory of Monopolistic Competition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Cottier, T. and Germann, C. (2008) ‘Teaching Intellectual Property, Unfair Competition and Anti-Trust Law’,
in Yo Takagi, Larry Allman and Mpazi A. Sinjela (eds), Teaching of Intellectual Property—Principles and
Methods. Cambridge University Press and WIPO, Cambridge, pp. 130–65.

Dessoudex, M. (2010) Lettres ´Egyptiennes—La Naissance du Nouvel Empire, De Kamosis `a Thoutmosis II. Actes

Sud, Arles.

C(cid:2) 277

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Gollin, M. A. (2008) Driving Innovation—Intellectual Property Strategies for a Dynamic World. Cambridge Univ.

Press, Cambridge.

Grimberg, C. (1965) Hist´oria Universal, vol. 1, Da Aurora da Civilizac¸ ˜ao at´e ao Crescente F´ertil. Publicac¸ ¨oes

Europa-Am´erica, Lisbon (translated from the Swedish).

Holcombe, R. G. (2009) ‘Product Differentiation and Economic Progress’, The Quarterly Journal of Austrian

Economics, 12, 17–35.

Hovenkamp, H. (1994) Federal Antitrust Policy—The Law of Competition and Its Practice. West Publishing

Company, St. Paul.

Hovenkamp, H., Janis, M. D., Lemley, M. A. and Leslie, C. R. (2002) IP Antitrust—An Analysis of Antitrust

Principles Applied to Intellectual Property Law, vol. 2. Wolters Kluwer, London.

International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) (2007) Current and Emerging Intellectual Property Issues for
Business—A Roadmap for Business and Policy Makers, 8th edition. International Chamber of Commerce,
Paris.

Johns, A. (2009) Piracy—The Intellectual Property Wars from Gutenberg to Gates. University of Chicago Press,

Chicago.

King, L. W. (1910) The Code of Hammurabi, with Commentary from Charles F. Home (BiblioBazaar, 2007;

original copyright 1915).

Kramer, S. N. (1973) The Sumerians—Their History, Culture, and Character. University of Chicago Press,

London.

Kramer, S. N. (1994) (trans. J. Hesse et al.). L’Histoire Commence `a Sumer. Flammarion, Paris.
Landes, W. M. and Posner, R. A. (1987) ‘Trademark Law: An Economic Perspective’, Journal of Law and

Economics, 30, 265–309.

Laza, F. E. (2001) Los Obreros de La Muerte—La Historia de La Misteriosa Cofrad´ıa que Construy´o las Tumbas

Del Valle de los Reyes. Planeta, Barcelona.

Levitt, T. (1980) ‘Marketing Success Through Differentiation—Of Anything’, Harvard Business Review (January–

February), 83–91.

Long, C. (2004) ‘Information Costs in Patent and Copyright’, Virginia Law Review, 90, 465–549.
Margueron, J.-C. (2002) Los Mesopot´amicos, 2nd edition. C´atedra, Madrid (translated from the French).
Maskus, K. E. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Institute for International Economics,

Washington, DC.

Maspero, G. (2010) The St`ele C 14 of the Louvre. Available at <www.masseiana.org/maspero.htm> [Accessed

June 2012].

McCarthy, J. T., Schechter, R. E. and Franklyn, D. J. (2005) McCarthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual

Property, 3rd edition. BNA, Washington.

Miller, A. R. and Davis, M. H. (1990) Intellectual Property—Patents, Trademarks, and Copyright in a Nutshell,

2nd edition. West Publishing, St. Paul, MN.

Pires de Carvalho, N. (2004) ‘The Problem of Gene Patents’, Washington University Global Studies Law Review,

3, 701–53.

Pires de Carvalho, N. (2009a) 200 Anos do Sistema Brasileiro de Patentes: O Alvar´a de 28 de Abril de 1809—

Com´ercio, T´ecnica e Vida. Lumen Juris, Rio de Janeiro.

Pires de Carvalho, N. (2009b) A Estrutura dos Sistemas de Patentes e de Marcas—Passado, Presente e Futuro.

Lumen Juris, Rio de Janeiro.

Smith, H. E. (2007) ‘Intellectual Property as Property: Delineating Entitlements in Information’, Yale Law

Journal, 116, 1742–1822.

Smith, H. E. (2008) Information Costs in Property, Intellectual Property, and Organizations. Available at

<www.law.northwestern.edu/searlecenter/papers> [Accessed December 2011].

278

C(cid:2) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Intellectual Property

Nuno Pires de Carvalho

Stiglitz, J. E. and Charlton, A. (2005) Fair Trade for All—How Trade Can Promote Development. Oxford

University Press, NY.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (1996) Model Provisions Against Unfair Competition—Articles

and Notes. World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (2001) WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook: Policy, Law

and Use. World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (2003) Information on National Experiences with the Intellec-

tual Property Protection of Traditional Knowledge, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/INF/2, 4 April.

Yoo, C. S. (2004) `Copyright and Product Differentiation’, New York University Law Review, 79, 212–80.

CASES
European Union
Lego Juris A/S v OHIM and Mega Brands, Case C-48/09 P, Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber).
Available at <curia.europa.eu> [Accessed June 2011].
United States
Corning v Burden, 56 US 252 (1853).

Data Gen. Corp. v Grumman Sys. Corp., 761 F. Supp. 185 (D. Mass. 1991), aff’d, 36 F.3d 1147

(1st Cir. 1994).

Diamond v Chakrabarty, 447 US 303 (1980).
Feist Publications, Inc. v Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 US 340 (1991).
Funk Brothers Seed. Co. v Kalo Inoculant Co., 333 US 127 (1948).
International News Service v Associated Press, 248 US 215 (1918).
Le Roy v Tatham, 55 US 156 (1852).
O’Reilly v Morse, 56 US 62 (1853).
Qualitex v Jacobson, 514 US 159 (1995).

C(cid:2) 279


