The  (2010) Vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 744–769

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2010.00402.x

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in
Taiwan: A Struggle with International Trade Policy

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang
Intellectual Property Specialty Group, Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner, LLP

Unlike Taiwan’s Patent Law, which expressly permits parallel importation, and the Trademark Law, where
parallel imports have been held permissible by Taiwan courts, Taiwan’s Copyright Law, after amendment in
1993, basically forbids parallel imports (articles 87(4) and 87-1). This enactment essentially creates a new
distribution right for copyright owners. Since then, parallel imported copyright products have been treated as
unlawful copies. Distributors of those parallel imports in Taiwan are therefore subject to both civil and
criminal penalties. This article starts by covering the rules that govern parallel imports in Taiwan, their
impacts on Taiwan’s copyright market and assesses the role Taiwan’s international trade policy played in view
of its Copyright Law legislation. It also analyses the adverse effects of this ban on parallel imports on Taiwan’s
trade with other countries. As Taiwan joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2009, it is concluded
that the ban on parallel imports may be challenged by other WTO members as an unlawful trade barrier. The
existing ban under articles 87(4) and 87-1 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law does not properly address the parallel
imports issues or serve the objectives of Taiwan’s Copyright Law. Fair-use application on a case-by-case basis
should be a more adequate approach.

Keywords copyright exhaustion doctrine; international trade; parallel imports; TRIPS

Parallel Imports in Taiwan—Harry Potter Case as an Example

When the Harry Potter novel ﬁrst overwhelmingly drove readers crazy and swept over the whole
world in 2001, Crown Cultural Publication Corporation (Crown), a prominent Taiwanese publish-
ing company, acquired the exclusive licence to the ‘‘Complex Chinese Characters’’ version of Harry
Potter, and was thus entitled to distribute the books exclusively within the territory of Republic of
China, Taiwan. Crown, however, realized shortly thereafter that, at the same time, another
publishing company was also marketing their books by giving away the ‘‘Simpliﬁed Chinese
Characters’’ version of Harry Potter as a gift in a book festival held in Kaoshiung. Crown, as an
exclusive licensee, thereby ﬁled a criminal action in Kaoshiung District Court, alleging that the
distribution of those Simpliﬁed Chinese Harry Potter infringed its copyright and sought to impose
a criminal penalty on the defendants.1

Kaoshiung District Court, nevertheless, dismissed this action solely on a procedural ground
under article 319 of the Rule of Criminal Procedure.2 The court found that Crown had not
obtained the licence for the Simpliﬁed Chinese Characters version from the author J. K. Rowling.
Instead, what it obtained in its licence agreement was the copyright licence for ‘‘Complex
Characters only’’. The scope of Crown’s exclusive licence was thereby conﬁned to the Complex
Traditional Chinese version. Accordingly, Crown only has standing to sue for copyright infringe-
ment of the Complex Traditional Chinese version of Harry Potter. It lacks standing to sue the
distributor of the Simpliﬁed Chinese Harry Potter. As the defendants were licensed to distribute
the Simpliﬁed Chinese version ‘‘throughout the world’’, their conduct thus fell outside the scope of
the plaintiff’s copyright exclusive licence. As a result, the court concluded that no infringement

744

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

could be found because Crown, as a criminal plaintiff, was not a direct victim and thereby lacked
standing to sue against the defendants (see Kaoshiung District Court, 2001).

This case highlighted the long-standing legal problem in Taiwan as to whether parallel
importation is permissible, as well as how to strike a balance between the protection of a copyright
holder’s distribution right and the public interests in accessing copyrighted works in a grey market.
However, Kaoshiung District Court, in its judgment, did not address the issue regarding the
legality of parallel imports, nor did the Taiwan Supreme Court while afﬁrming Kaoshiung District
Court’s judgment.3

Today, copyright industries (i.e. publishing companies, television, motion picture, theatrical
production or software industries) are playing an increasingly important role in the economy of the
whole world (Siwek and Furchtgott-Roth, 1992, p. 3). However, a major problem facing copyright
industries engaged in international trade has been the development of the grey market,4 also
termed as parallel imports—the unauthorized importation of copyright products lawfully acquired
abroad.5

Parallel imports represent a situation where goods are initially manufactured under a licence
that grants the licensees or distributors the exclusive right to sell the goods in a particular country;
these goods then somehow ﬂow into other countries where the copyright licensor/owner is already
selling the same goods, where there are other licensees or where the goods have not yet been
marketed. These goods are not counterfeit or pirated; nevertheless, they indeed impose a signiﬁcant
hurdle for the copyright owner to maintain different price structures, product models and quality
standards among the countries where the goods are being marketed. This is particularly true in
countries that are members of a customs union or a free trade area where the free movement of
goods among member states is guaranteed.

From the policy perspective, parallel imports involve a country’s international trade concerns
as to whether free movement of intellectual property goods trumps the protection of copyright
owners. From the legal standpoint, nonetheless, whether a country allows parallel importation
primarily depends on whether the copyright owner is entitled to an import right in that country;
whether that particular country adopts the ﬁrst sale doctrine and to what extent it adopts it. The
ﬁrst sale doctrine has also been called the exhaustion doctrine.6 There are three approaches to
deﬁning its scope: (1) the national exhaustion approach, where copyrights are exhausted only in the
domestic market when the owner makes his/her ﬁrst sale; (2) the regional exhaustion approach,
where only when the copyright owner makes his/her ﬁrst sale in a particular region would his/her
copyright be exhausted;7 and (3) the international exhaustion approach, where a copyright product
marketed in one nation can be freely sold anywhere, based on the theory that all rights are
exhausted internationally upon its ﬁrst sale. Because there is no universal standard regarding this
issue, currently, a country may adopt any of the above legal approaches based on its own
circumstances and its international trade policy.

Before 1993, Taiwan’s Copyright Law was silent regarding parallel imports issues and, thus,
parallel importation of copyright products was allowed. Nonetheless, during the negotiations for
the US–Taiwan Copyright Pact in 1993, the United States required the creation of import rights for
copyright owners, which eventually led Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan to enact the parallel import ban
under article 87(4). Since then, importing lawful copyright products without the copyright owner’s
consent would result in both civil penalty and criminal imprisonment, and so is distributing those
parallel imports.

This enactment essentially created an inconsistency in Taiwan’s copyright regime, as an import
right is typically regarded as part of the distribution right, but Taiwan’s Copyright Law back then did
not provide a distribution right for copyright holders. Furthermore, although countries that recognize

r 745

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

a distribution right usually also adopt the ﬁrst sale/exhaustion doctrine to present the lawful copy
owner’s property right from being impeded by the copyright holder’s unlimited control over future
distribution, Taiwan’s Copyright Law did not adopt the exhaustion doctrine either back then.

Because of the inconsistency and the overwhelming criticisms from copyright practitioners and
scholars, Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan passed an amendment in 2003, which provided for a
distribution right and ofﬁcially adopted the national exhaustion doctrine. However, the 2003
amendment did not completely resolve this issue. The imbalance of the penalty between parallel
importers and its distributors, and the unclear standing requirement, remained problems.

As an existing World Trade Organization (WTO) member that heavily relies on international
trade, trade policy was inevitably taken into account by the Taiwan government when dealing with
parallel import issues. However, as the goal of WTO is to eliminate trade barriers and facilitate free
movement of goods, this parallel import ban essentially presents a substantial trade barrier, which
is inconsistent with the WTO rules and might be challenged by other WTO members. The ban is
also inconsistent with the objectives of Taiwan’s Copyright Law in that it obstructs the ﬂow of
foreign innovation into Taiwan, which makes it difﬁcult for Taiwan’s e-commerce industry to gain
access to the world’s creative and entertainment industry.

Obviously, the current ban is not a proper way to handle parallel imports. I believe that a fair-
use doctrine that takes into consideration public interest concerns and market failure theory
provides a better alternative. To implement a fair-use doctrine, it ﬁrst requires incorporating
speciﬁc parallel imports circumstances into the current fair-use section of Taiwan’s Copyright Law
(articles 44–64). Second, both public interest concerns and market failure theory should be the
guidelines for judges to assess the factors under article 65 for the fair-use doctrine to apply. In other
words, whenever public interests outweigh a copyright owner’s personal interests, or market failure
occurs in the copyright market (i.e. the transaction cost of obtaining a copyright owner’s consent is
too high, which prevents a copyright transaction from occurring), courts should favour the
defendant’s fair-use contentions.

Taiwan’s Copyright Law, Article 87(4)—Parallel Import Ban in the 1993 Amendment
Parallel imports are permissible under both Taiwan’s Patent Law8 and Trademark Law;9 yet, the
current framework of Taiwan’s Copyright Law apparently has a rather different view from the
Patent Law and the Trademark Law when dealing with this issue. Taiwan’s Copyright Law
basically prohibited parallel imports after the amendment in 1993, which can be traced back to the
fear of the potential special 301 trade sanction imposed by the United States during that period
(Winkler, 1993, p. 5). Under section 301 of the United States Trade Act of 1974 (Trade Act), the
violation of the intellectual property right is deemed as a type of anti-competitive conduct and also
a violation of the Omnibus Trade and Competitive Act that added special 301 to the original
section 301 of Trade Act in 1988. Special 301 is named for its close relationship with the special
investigative proceedings under section 301 of the Trade Act. According to this Act, the Ofﬁce of
the United States Trade Representative (USTR) is empowered to identify a ‘‘Priority Foreign
Country’’ if a trading partner has committed the most onerous or egregious acts, policies or
practices in denying adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights,10 or denying
fair and equitable market access to United States persons who rely on intellectual property
protection.11 Once a ‘‘Priority Foreign Country’’ is identiﬁed, the USTR then initiates an unfair
trade practice investigation according to the regular section 301 procedure. If a violation of a trade
agreement is found, the USTR is authorized to suspend, withdraw or prevent the application of
beneﬁts of trade agreement concessions as a trade sanction.12

746

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

In order to monitor the adequacy of a country’s protection of US intellectual property rights,
the USTR also creates three other categories in an increasing level of seriousness: countries of
‘‘Growing Concern’’, where the concern of US intellectual property protection is just growing;
countries on a ‘‘Watch List’’, where the United States needs to pay special attention because those
countries maintain intellectual property barriers to market access; and countries on a ‘‘Priority
Watch List’’, whose policies and practices meet some of the criteria for ‘‘Priority Foreign Country’’.
Taiwan has been constantly on USTR’s hit list since the enactment of the special 301 provision,
and, accordingly, USTR insisted that Taiwan needed to prohibit the parallel importation of
copyright products if a copyright owner’s prior authorization is not obtained (Alford, 1995). In
response to the tremendous political and economic pressure from the United States, although an
import right is arguably regarded as an extension of a distribution right, and Taiwan’s Copyright
Law back then did not give the copyright owner the distribution right, Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan
enacted article 87, paragraph 4 in 1993, which basically prohibited parallel importation with very
few exceptions outlined in article 87-1, and thus implicitly conferred the copyright owner with a
new import right. Violation of this article will lead to the conﬁscation of unlawful copies under
article 90-1 and a maximum of 2 years of imprisonment under article 93(3) of 1993.13

Article 87 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provides: ‘‘[a]ny of the following circumstances shall
be deemed as an infringement of copyright or plate right, unless this Law provided otherwise: . . .
(4) import[ing] any originals or [lawful] copies of a work without copyright owner’s authorization’’.
In comparison with paragraph 3 in this article, which prohibits the importation of any ‘‘unlawful’’
copies or pirated works, paragraph 4 is commonly interpreted as a ban on parallel importation of
‘‘lawful’’ copies.

Yet it is worth noting that, back in 1992, one group that exercised particular inﬂuence on the
USTR is the International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA), which represented eight major
copyright organizations and served as a coalition of movie producers, software publishers and record
companies. Each year, IIPA’s list of offending countries often became the basis for US trade action
under section 301 (Maggs, 1993, p. 2A(1)). As part of its lobby efforts, IIPA testiﬁed before the US
Congress that piracy in Taiwan cost the US motion picture, television, sound recordings, publishing
and computer software industries a loss of US$669 million in 1992 (Durney, 1993, p. 9), which made
Taiwan the largest violator that year. They also stated that this US$669 million loss consisted of
approximately US$585 million in piracy of computer software. However, because parallel imports are
not pirated goods and there is no evidence that people who purchase pirated goods would otherwise
buy parallel imports if illegal copies were not available, the justiﬁcation for a ban on parallel imports
should be based on the loss resulting from parallel imports, rather than from piracy. Two decades ago,
the US media estimated that sales of parallel imports accounted for approximately US$6 billion of the
total retail sales in the United States (Perl, 1990, p. 646); however, there is no reliable estimate for
proﬁts lost from the retail sales of parallel imports in Taiwan so far. IIPA actually confused the
American public and US Congress by failing to establish trustworthy statistics that proved that those
parallel imports contributed to this US$669 million loss. USTR, in fact, mistakenly relied on those
piracy loss ﬁgures to support a conclusion that parallel importation is a primary factor in Taiwan’s
inadequate protection of US intellectual property rights (Kim, 1995, p. 218).

Distribution Right and Exhaustion Doctrine in Taiwan

Distribution Right—Created under Article 28-1 of the Copyright Law in the 2003 Amendment
Historical Development
Whether parallel importation is permissible involves whether a copyright owner or licensee has the
exclusive import right to block the entry of the authorized copyright products legally obtained

r 747

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

abroad. The import right is arguably regarded as a part of a distribution right because it
essentially allows the copyright owner to control not only the distribution chain in the domestic
market but also the entire future distribution to a foreign distributor/licensee in a different
geographic market. However, before 2003, Taiwan’s Copyright Law did not include a distribution
right in the bundle of copyright owner’s property rights speciﬁed in articles 22–29.14 Instead, the
Copyright Law merely deﬁnes distribution in article 3, paragraph 12, as ‘‘the activity of providing
the original of a work or its reproduction to the general public for trading or circulating,
regardless of whether it’s with or without compensation’’. Although a rental right is regarded as a
form of distribution right, it was separately given to copyright owners and performers in article
29.15 Before the 2003 amendment, the distribution right is implicitly inferred, partly from the
rental right under article 29 and partly from the reproduction right under article 22, based on the
assumption that reproduction would not have taken place but for the intent to distribute, and that
therefore the law providing an exclusive reproduction right is directed to control distribution
(Chang, 2001).

Distribution Right and Parallel Imports in the 2003 Amendment
The Copyright Law’s implicit import right, coupled with the failure to provide a distribution right
and the lack of exhaustion doctrine to balance the parallel import ban, have been criticized by
numerous copyright practitioners and scholars for years (Chang, 1997; 1998; Fong, 1998, pp.
86–93). Therefore, Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan, by referencing to article 6 of the World Intellectual
Property Organization Copyright Treaty (WIPO Copyright Treaty, WCT),16 article 8 of the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)17 and US section 106 of the Copyright Act,18
enacted article 28-1 in 2003, which expressly provided a distribution right to copyright owners.
Article 28-1 states that ‘‘[e]xcept otherwise provided in this Law, authors of works have the
exclusive rights to distribute their works through transfer of ownership; performers have the
exclusive right to distribute their performances reproduced in sound recordings through transfer of
ownership’’.19 However, this statutory language of the distribution right remains controversial
because some scholars argue that the scope of the distribution right should not be conﬁned to the
transfer of ownership only (Chang, 2004). It is arguable that the distribution right should also
extend to conducts like public display or the possession of the works with the intent to distribute,
because those acts make copyright goods accessible to the public as well (Chang, 2004).

Exhaustion Doctrine—National Exhaustion Doctrine Codiﬁed under Article 59-1 of the Copyright
Law in the 2003 Amendment
The exhaustion doctrine serves as an important limit that extinguishes a copyright owner’s control
of what the purchaser or future owners might do with the work once the compensation for a copy is
already received by the copyright owner. It mandates that once a copyright owner makes a ﬁrst
sale, he has exhausted his copyrights embodied in his goods, regardless of whether he received the
full value from that sale, because the continuation of his control would unjustiﬁably permit him to
obtain excessive compensation and deprive the buyer of the freedom to assign his property. Aiming
to prevent restraints on property transactions, this doctrine is a primary limitation on a copyright
owner’s distribution right. Before 2003, nevertheless, the partial exhaustion doctrine could only be
found in article 60 of the Copyright Law, which merely limits a copyright owner’s right to rent and
confers on the owner of lawful copies, excluding the owner of a computer program and sound
recording, the right to rent them out.20 However, the exhaustion exemption under article 60 does
not apply to other types of distribution such as sale, lending, bestow, exchange or various sorts of

748

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

ownership transfer; therefore, even under article 60, owners of originals or lawful copies may only
rent those copies to a third party—they may not resell, lend, exchange or distribute them in other
forms absent the copyright owner’s consent.

During the 2003 amendment, with an effort to balance the distribution right that enlarges the
scope of copyright, the Legislative Yuan codiﬁed the exhaustion doctrine in article 59-1, which
provides that ‘‘[a] person who has acquired ownership of the originals or a lawful copy of the
originals within the territory of the Republic of China [Taiwan] may distribute it through
ownership transfer’’. The national exhaustion doctrine was therefore ofﬁcially adopted. The
legislative history suggested that this provision was corresponding to the US Supreme Court’s
decision in Quality King Distribution Inc. v L’Anza Research Int’l, 523 US 135 (1998) (Sun, 1998,
nn. 151–2), which adopted the exhaustion doctrine and allowed parallel imports as long as they are
manufactured in the United States, be they distributed/acquired within or outside the United
States.21

Under Quality King, if the work is acquired outside the United States, they can still be
imported back to the United States without the copyright owner’s consent should they be
originally manufactured in the United States (the round-trip scenario of parallel importation)
because the copyright owner’s distribution right has been exhausted. However, when interpreting
the language ‘‘acquired ownership of the originals or a lawful copy of the originals within the
territory of Republic of China [Taiwan]’’ in article 59-1, the exhaustion doctrine here seems to
adopt a more stringent standard than Quality King because it requires the ﬁrst sale, not only the
manufacture of copyrighted goods, to take place ‘‘within Taiwan’s territory’’ in order for the
distribution right to be exhausted. Therefore, only when the ﬁrst sale was made in Taiwan will the
copyright owner’s distribution be exhausted. If the ﬁrst sale took place abroad, and an importer
subsequently acquired the lawful copies from an authorized distributor overseas, those imports will
still be barred even if they are originally manufactured within Taiwan, because a copyright owner’s
distribution right is not exhausted under article 59-1.

Exemptions for the Liability of Parallel Importers—Articles 87-1, 59-1 and 60 of the
Copyright Law
After the 1993 and 2003 amendments, there are currently two exemptions for the liability arising
from the parallel imports ban. One is quantitative exemptions in article 87-1, which allows a certain
amount of parallel
imports to enter into Taiwan under speciﬁc circumstances; the other is
exhaustion exemptions under article 59-1 and article 60. Articles 59-1 and 60 do not provide
exemption for parallel imports themselves; nevertheless, they do exempt certain types of distribu-
tion after parallel importation (i.e. rental of parallel imports) based on the exhaustion doctrine.
The quantitative exemptions under article 87-1 are rather limited; they apply only when the
imported goods are fewer than a ‘‘certain amount’’, and only when they are imported for
governmental use, for the purpose of preserving data in educational, academic or religious
institutions, for preserving data in the library, for personal use without the intent to distribute
or when the copyright products are attached to a lawfully imported commodity or machines.22
Furthermore, according to the Meaning of Certain Amount in article 87-1 promulgated by the
Ministry of Interior (MOI) Affair, importers are prohibited from importing more than one copy
when the imports are audiovisual goods preserved for academic, educational or religious purpose,
or for personal use without the intent to distribute. Only when the imports are non-audiovisual
goods intended for use in a non-proﬁt academic or religious library can importers be allowed to
bring up to ﬁve copies to Taiwan.23

r 749

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Consequently, no individual may bring into Taiwan more than one copy of parallel imports
from other countries, unless the work is a non-audiovisual product and it is for use in the academic,
educational or religious library. Violators are not only subject to civil penalty24 but also to the
conﬁscation of the excessive copies pursuant to article 90-1.25

Problems of Parallel Imports Ban Continued after the 2003 Amendment
Imbalance of Penalty
One issue that was not resolved after the 2003 amendment is the imbalance of penalty on parallel
importers and the distributors of those imports. Under article 93 of the Copyright Law of 1993, the
violation of article 87(4) will
liability of up to 2 years’
imprisonment. As a result of the video rental industry’s lobby efforts, this criminal penalty was
eventually abolished in 2003;26 however, parallel
importers remain liable for civil damages
pursuant to article 88.

importers to criminal

lead parallel

Because parallel importation is still regarded as a conduct that infringes copyright, Taiwan
courts still treated those imports as unlawful copies, holding that those imports do not qualify for
the exhaustion exemption under article 59-1 and article 60, and thus could not be rented without
the copyright owner’s consent. Accordingly, if one sells, rents or distributes those goods with the
knowledge of parallel importation, he is still subject to the criminal penalty under article 91-1(2)27
and article 92,28 and may be held civilly liable29 as well. This, in effect, creates an ironic situation in
which parallel importers themselves are not criminally punishable, while distributors of parallel
imports are nonetheless both criminally and civilly liable for knowingly distributing those copies
made under the copyright owner’s authorization abroad.

Who Qualiﬁes as the Claimant Remains Unclear
Another issue is who has the standing to seek remedy when the parallel import ban is violated.
Under Taiwan’s copyright regime, once an original work is created, the author enjoys two types of
copyright—one is his moral right to publish the work, to show he is the author, to prevent any
revision of the work and any destruction of the integrity of his work that might damage his
reputation.30 These rights are attached to the author’s personality, and thus could not be assigned or
licensed. The other type is a bundle of property rights, including the right to reproduce, publicly
perform and distribute his work, etc., which are articulated in articles 22–29, and may be assigned or
licensed as a whole or in part under article 36.31 An author may therefore assign the distribution
right in article 28-1 to one person, while assigning other exclusive rights to another. Technically
speaking, for a copyright work, there could conceivably be many copyright property owners of
different property rights, yet the ambiguous language of article 87 leaves unanswered the question as
to who qualiﬁes as the claimant to sue parallel importers. It appears that article 87 does not limit the
potential claimant to the holder of the distribution right, and yet it is unclear whether the claimant
must own all of the rights enumerated in articles 22–29 to have standing for a legal action, namely,
whether only the holders of the rights related to distribution have standing, or whether the standing
requirement is satisﬁed as long as a copyright holder owns any of the speciﬁed property rights.

One latest case regarding this issue is a US case—Brilliance Audio, Inc. v Haights Cross
Communications, Inc., 474 F. 3d 365 (6th circuit, 2007), where the 6th circuit held that a rental or a
lease agreement that does not transfer title will not trigger the ﬁrst sale doctrine and therefore the
lessee is barred from selling the leased copy. This suggests that US courts took the position that the
ﬁrst sale doctrine only limits the distribution right, but does not limit any of the copyright owner’s
other exclusive rights under section 106 of the Copyright Act of 1976.

750

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Exhaustion Doctrine under WTO and International Treaties

The rule governing parallel importation is not uniform within the international legal community.
The Berne Convention does not provide a wholesale distribution right to all types of copyright
owners;32 neither does it stipulate that the importation of a lawful copy of a copyright work
should be banned. In addition, neither WTO’s Agreement in Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (the TRIPS Agreement)33 nor the WCT require member states to adopt the
exhaustion doctrine. Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement states, in pertinent part, that ‘‘[f]or the
purpose of dispute settlement under this Agreement . . . nothing in this Agreement shall be used to
address the issue of exhaustion of intellectual property rights’’.34 It appears that WTO member
states participating in the Uruguay Round negotiations were unable to agree on how to treat
parallel imports and deal with exhaustion. The TRIPS Agreement thus expressly refused to
address the issue of parallel imports and, instead, left this issue up to the discretion of each WTO
member.

The Doha ministerial meeting declaration (Doha declaration)35 in 2001 further conﬁrmed this

position by declaring that:

[t]he effect of the provisions in the TRIPs Agreement that are relevant to the exhaustion
of intellectual property rights is to leave each Member free to establish its own regime
for such exhaustion without challenge, subject to the MFN [Most Favored Nation
Treatment] and national treatment provisions of Article 3 and 4.36

A member state is therefore free to choose the international, regional or national exhaustion
doctrine. It turns out that currently each country adopts a different standard to resolve parallel
imports cases based on their own policy concerns.

Likewise, article 6(2) of WCT provides:

[n]othing in this Treaty shall affect the freedom of Contracting Parties to determine the
conditions, if any, under which the exhaustion of the right in paragraph (1) applies after
the ﬁrst sale or other transfer of ownership of the original of a copy of the work with the
authorization of the author.

Apparently, both the TRIPS Agreement and the WCT have no intent to provide protection for
copyright owners against parallel imports. The underlying reason appears to be political, based on
the fear among signatories that doing so would assist multinational enterprises, mostly from
developed countries, in engaging in global market division, price discrimination and other anti-
competitive practices.

Free Trade Theory and Copyright

Traditional free trade theory is based on an economic analysis that the world, as well as each
country, would be better off with the free movement of goods because the price of goods could
therefore be closest to the lowest marginal cost as a result of increased supply, the consumer cost
could be minimized and each nation would be beneﬁted by the elimination of trade barriers
because consumer welfare is maximized. In light of intellectual property rights, a larger market, as
a product of free trade movement, can also lead to more intellectual products because it creates
incentives for the global industries to produce them. Today, copyright goods already account for a
signiﬁcant and growing segment in the ﬂow of international trade. The goods and licences supplied
by copyright industries are highly exportable commodities, and copyright holders can also increase
their revenue and market appeal through copyright licence agreements. However, if copyright

r 751

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

industries are to beneﬁt from a larger market, the provisions in a global copyright licence
agreement have to align with the goal of free trade.

Conﬂict between Free Trade and Copyright

Different Economics of Copyright Products as Opposed to Normal Products
The traditional free trade theory assumes that, by establishing a free trade regime, the price of
goods will be reduced close enough to the marginal costs; it therefore beneﬁts the world’s
consumers with lower prices. Trade in copyright products, nevertheless, is different from trade
in ‘‘normal’’ products. The unique feature of copyright products is that it usually requires a
substantial production cost in their development or creation, but, once created, copyright products
could be reproduced at a relatively low marginal cost. The most obvious examples are movies,
computer software and data, whose creations require tremendously expensive investment, but
whose reproduction is essentially costless. Copyright law therefore steps in to restrict third parties’
access to the copyright work, which enables the copyright owner to charge a price above the
marginal cost once an additional copy of their work is produced. The result is that consumers who
are willing (or able) to purchase copies of copyright work at a price higher than the work’s
marginal cost (but lower than the monopoly price) can still obtain access to the copyright products.
Scholars have termed this effect the ‘‘deadweight loss’’ created by copyright law (Cohen, 2000).
Therefore, even with a free trade agreement in place, the royalty arrangement between a copyright
licensor and his licensee does not necessarily make the retail price of copyright goods decline
toward the marginal cost. The market price of copyright goods will probably still be signiﬁcantly
higher than their marginal costs; in fact, it is the ability to sell these products above the marginal
cost that stimulates the incentive for intellectual creativity and innovation.

Different Stance between Free Trade Theory and Copyright Principles in View of Parallel Imports
The economics of parallel imports presents some of the most complex challenges to the interna-
tional trade system. Very little empirical research has been conducted, and it is extremely difﬁcult
to quantify the beneﬁts and costs attributed to parallel imports in international trade. Under
traditional free trade theory, the international exhaustion doctrine, rather than the national
exhaustion doctrine, is more desirable because it facilitates the movement of goods in the global
trade. A tension between free trade theory and the copyright owner’s import right in the context of
parallel imports thus arises from the danger that prohibiting parallel imports might be deemed as a
trade barrier that undermines the objectives of the free trade agreement and the WTO system
(Abbott, 1998).

Therefore, unlike the traditional free trade theory, which is based on the economics of a
‘‘normal’’ product, a different approach is needed to determine whether the world is better off with
the free trade of copyright products. The issue thus turns on whether an exclusive right, such as
import right, offers a favourable trade-off between price cost to consumers (enhanced price in the
short term) and innovation beneﬁt to consumers (enhanced innovation incentives in the long run).

Taiwan’s International Trade Policy and Its Copyright Law

As a small island that relies heavily on the imports and exports of hi-tech products (especially
semiconductors, integrated circuit chips, computer software, liquid crystal displays and light emitting
diodes) as its comparative advantage in the global market, there is no doubt that international trade
plays a signiﬁcant role in shaping Taiwan’s economy. Taiwan’s international trade policy concerns
thus inevitably come into play when it comes to parallel imports of copyright goods. The intellectual

752

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

property industry has been enjoying a tremendous boom in Taiwan. Nevertheless, Taiwanese
multinational corporations that distribute its copyright goods also encounter the direct conﬂict
between free trade theory and the copyright owner’s exclusive import right. The concept of free trade
focuses on the reduction of trade barriers while the idea of copyright is based on conferring the
copyright owner with a bundle of exclusive rights in order to stimulate incentive for innovation. The
parallel import ban under article 87(4) initially may not violate the rules in international trade;
however, after Taiwan’s accession to the WTO in 2002, it could possibly result in a trade barrier that
represents protectionism and might be challenged by other WTO members.

According to the latest statistics from the WTO, Taiwan was ranked the world’s eighteenth
leading importer and exporter in 2008 (Bureau of Foreign Trade, Taiwan, 2009; WTO, 2009). It
has US$29 billion foreign reserve, ranked the fourth in the world (Bureau of Foreign Trade,
Taiwan, 2009).37 There is little doubt that Taiwan has been developing its economy primarily in
reliance on international trade. However, the policy concern regarding international trade, as a
practical matter, put the Taiwanese government into a painful dilemma when dealing with parallel
imports. On the one hand, Taiwan’s commitment to be a WTO member presumably supports its
adoption of the international exhaustion doctrine to eliminate trade barriers and facilitate free
movement of intellectual products; on the other, nonetheless, the political pressure from the US
trade sanction forced Taiwan to choose the national exhaustion doctrine, because Taiwan still
depends heavily on the exports to the United States in support of its economy.38 Obviously,
Taiwan has a larger economic stake in maintaining trade relations with the United States than the
United States does with Taiwan, and this susceptibility explains why Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan
preferred to revise its Copyright Law in 1993 in order to meet the demand from the United States,
even though it initially reserved its ratiﬁcation of article 14 of the US–Taiwan Copyright Pact,39
while the MOI also suggested that the Copyright Law was not the proper avenue for banning
parallel imports (Winkler, 1993, p. 5).

The Inconsistency of a Parallel Import Ban with WTO Rules

The restrictions on parallel imports could be a substantial trade barrier. Article XI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) provides that:

[n]o prohibitions or restrictions other than duties, taxes or other charges, whether made
effective through quotas, import or export licenses or other measures, shall be instituted
or maintained by any contracting party on the importation of any product of the
territory of any other contracting party or on the exportation or sale for export of any
product destined for the territory of any other contracting party (Quantitative
restriction).

In light of the parallel imports ban in the Copyright Law, through the interpretation of article
87-1 and the Meaning of Certain Amount in article 87-1, only a certain amount of parallel imports
may legally enter into Taiwan, which may constitute a quantitative restriction prohibited per se
under GATT, article XI, unless it qualiﬁes under the general exceptions in article XX40 or the
security exception in article XXI.41

A quantitative restriction may be justiﬁed under article XX if the restrictions are for the
purpose of protecting public moral, human, animal or plant life or health, exhaustible natural
resources or if it is necessary to secure compliance with laws not inconsistent with GATT, etc. To
qualify for security exception in article XXI, the restriction must involve the protection of a
country’s security interests. In view of article XX and article XXI, the only possible exception to

r 753

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

justify Taiwan’s parallel import ban is article XX(d): a measure is justiﬁed if it is necessary to secure
compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of GATT.
Nevertheless, as there is little literature or study showing that a ban on parallel imports is necessary
to induce grey marketer’s compliance with Taiwan’s Copyright Law, the quantitative restriction
argument could be a powerful challenge to article 87(4) as a violation of the WTO rule (Dolmo,
2001).42

The Inconsistency of the Parallel Import Ban with Taiwan’s Copyright Law Policy

Article 1 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law expressly states that ‘‘the objective of this Law is to protect
copyright owner’s rights and beneﬁts, mediate public interest and promote the progress of the
nation’s culture’’. There is no doubt that the protection for a copyright owner must be consistent
with this purpose. As a small island striving to base its economy on technology and hoping to make
itself a ‘‘Green Silicon Island’’, Taiwan urgently needs to attract greater inﬂows of technology and
facilitate the free movement of trade in order to carry out this future blueprint. However, the ban
on parallel imports in article 87(4), in my view, creates a hurdle toward this goal.

First, article 87(4) does not exempt parallel imports where the free riding problem does not
exist when there is no authorized distributor or exclusive licensee in Taiwan at the time the parallel
importation occurs. This lack of exemption imposes an undue burden for an importer to transport
his lawful copies freely into Taiwan. On the other hand, in situations where the local distributors or
exclusive licensees do exist, article 87(4) unjustiﬁably beneﬁts copyright owners who have already
been adequately compensated in their ﬁrst sale by allowing them and their authorized distributors
continuously to monopolize the Taiwanese market and earn additional proﬁts. When the copyright
owner ﬁrst sold the copyright product or licence to sell the product in a given territory, the owner
has been given ample opportunity to draft a restrictive licence or a distribution agreement through
the protection from contract; he or she should not be entitled to gain beneﬁts twice by restricting
the future distribution chain. The restrictions on the entry of parallel imports limit the availability
of foreign innovation to the hi-tech and e-commerce industry, and thus makes it difﬁcult for those
critical industries to gain access to the world’s cutting-edge technology in a timely fashion.

Impacts of the Parallel Imports Ban on Taiwan’s International Trade

Purchase Copyright Products Online
Pursuant to article 87(4) and the Meaning of Certain Amount in article 87-1, no importation of
more than one copy of copyright works is permissible; the same applies to copies or original works
carried by an individual in their luggage while entering into Taiwan, even if the importers do not
have the intent to distribute. In other words, if an individual, for the sole purpose of personal use,
places an order on the internet (i.e. Amazon online bookstore) to purchase two or more copies of
the original works manufactured abroad and imports them to Taiwan, the copyright owner may
request for an injunction relief to enjoin the importation under article 8443 and is entitled to money
damages under article 88.44 Upon the copyright owner’s request, Taiwan’s custom may also seize
the imports exceeding one copy under article 90-1.45 This consequence highlights the inadequacy of
the restriction on parallel imports. It apparently ignores the fact that ordering copyright products
such as books, CDs or VCD/DVDs online is a common business practice in today’s e-commerce
world. It may be possible for e-commerce business operators to acquire the copyright owner’s
consent for their importation; however, for individual consumers, it is not feasible to acquire the
import licence from every single copyright owner in order to bring more than one original work
solely for personal use, especially when the copyright owner resides abroad. By doing so, Taiwan’s

754

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Copyright Law has placed an undue burden on consumers in Taiwan because the transaction cost
is so high that a reasonable person would either avoid an online purchase or break the law rather
than pay for an import licence to comply with this rigid requirement. This restriction would in
effect discourage Taiwanese consumers from purchasing copyright products from other countries
through cross-border transactions, and further frustrate international trade between Taiwan and
other trading partners.

Internet Caf ´e and Computer Program
Is it a violation when internet caf ´es purchase a parallel imported computer program and instal it on
their computers for commercial use? Pursuant to the proviso of article 60, the owner of lawful
copies of a computer program does not have the rental right because the copyright owner of the
computer program will not exhaust his rental right upon its ﬁrst sale under article 29. Furthermore,
the contract between an internet caf ´e and its customers is characterized as rental contracts because
the internet caf ´e operator is essentially renting his/her computer programs to customers for a
certain period of time. This kind of use of a computer program is thus regarded as a copyright
infringement. Accordingly, an internet caf ´e may still violate article 87(5)46 due to its knowingly
commercial use of a computer program that infringes the copyright owner’s rental right, and is
thereby subject to a criminal penalty of up to 2 years’ imprisonment pursuant to article 93(3).47

Impacts on the Foreign Entertainment Industry in the Taiwan Market
It is true that foreign copyright owners may beneﬁt from the prohibition of parallel imports under
article 87 of the Copyright Law; however, where the foreign exporter has obtained the goods
without knowledge of the geographic resale restrictions imposed by the original copyright owner,
the parallel import ban will actually penalize an innocent foreign exporter who subsequently
exports copyright goods to Taiwan. This problem is acute for many foreign copyright licensees
whose proﬁts are earned not only from domestic sale but also from international sale because each
of their Taiwanese importers or distributors, as a result of this ban, will have to review the original
licence contract, making sure whether the copyright owner authorizes the importation to Taiwan in
order to avoid the potential penalty on parallel imports. Because of the high transaction cost in
tracing the original licence and verifying the copyright owner’s authorization, the ban on parallel
imports may discourage distributors or importers in Taiwan from importing foreign entertainment
products.

Impacts on Foreign Copyright Owners and Taiwanese Consumers
Since the price of CD reproduction equipment has been drastically reduced and second-hand
equipment is more accessible, piracy is increasing in Taiwan. Therefore, while parallel imports
have decreased due to the enactment of article 87(4), piracy remains rampant in Taiwan. In
addition, with the ban on parallel imports, the government essentially frustrates consumer choice
and reduces the availability of copyright goods in Taiwan. In fact, foreign copyright owners are
hurt not only by the lack of adequate protection against piracy but also by limiting the availability
of their goods to meet the consumer demand. Take the US music and ﬁlm industry for example:
local Taiwanese distributors typically select their supplies from albums listed on the top 100 lists in
the United States, acquire the copyright licence and then import them to Taiwan. As for other US
classical music albums or independent music titles and ﬁlms, as they are usually not considered ‘hot
sellers’, local distributors are reluctant to pay royalties, and retailers therefore often have difﬁculty
in obtaining those products from local distributors. Even if local distributors do supply these
products, their supply is rather limited, and thus they tend to sell to retailers at higher prices, which
in turn results in higher prices to consumers. Parallel imports become an alternative channel for

r 755

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

this supply. After the ban in 1993, retailers inevitably encounter the shortage that was previously
ﬁlled up by parallel imports. Article 87(4) actually forced local retailers to acquire US music or
movie products solely through reliance on local licensed distributors and copyright owners. The
consequences of narrowing retailers’ supply channels include retailers’ ﬁnancial loss, the lack of
choice and increased prices for Taiwan consumers.

In addition to the lack of supply previously provided by parallel imports, the retailers in
Taiwan must also compete with pirated goods. Pirated goods offer lower prices, while the price in
retail stores is more expensive due to the limited distribution. In addition, pirates also offer greater
selection by distributing albums and ﬁlms that local distributors fail to supply to retailers as a result
of the parallel import ban. In this sense, the ban on parallel imports is not helpful in reducing
piracy; instead, it actually fosters the competitiveness of pirated products.

As a policy matter, developing countries tend to allow wide exceptions in order to encourage
the development of the indigenous intellectual property industry by importing new technology or
follow-on innovation. Based on the same reason, they generally favour the international exhaus-
tion doctrine, while developed countries have been mostly in support of the national exhaustion
doctrine.48 Taiwan, as a developing economy with an emerging hi-tech industry that focuses on the
research and development of computer programs and integrated circuit designs, should adopt a
more relaxed regulation on imports from developed countries, rather than imposing the ban.
Article 87(4) essentially obstructs the foreign creative industry from ﬂowing into Taiwan and, at
the same time, constrains the freedom of individual Taiwanese consumers to shop for goods
abroad.

Recommendation—Lift the Parallel Import Ban and Apply the Fair-Use Doctrine

Because of its adverse impacts on Taiwan and foreign companies, I believe that the current ban is
not a proper way to deal with parallel imports. We therefore have to ask a key question: other than
the ban, is there a legal doctrine that is better suited to resolve parallel imports issues? Under
Taiwan’s Copyright Law regime, in my opinion, a proper alternative will likely be the fair-use
doctrine.

The fair-use doctrine originated during the 1700s from the English courts of equity, ﬂourished
in the common law and was later codiﬁed in the United State’s 1976 Copyright Act. In the United
States, the fair-use doctrine has developed through a number of judicial decisions so that parody,49
satire, quoted passages, critical reviews and commentaries are regarded as fair use of copyright
works. The Quality King court suggested that, in addition to the exhaustion doctrine provided in
section 109 of US Copyright Act, the fair-use doctrine could also serve as a limitation of a
copyright owner’s import right in section 602.50 It explained that if section 602 were interpreted to
function without considering the limitations on section 106 (distribution right),51 then section 602
would be free of the fair-use doctrine in section 107.52 This result, according to the court, would be
wrong. The court noted that ‘‘[i]t is difﬁcult to believe that Congress intended to impose an
absolute ban on the importation of all such works containing any copying of material protected by
a United States copyright’’.53 The court also expressed its doubt as to whether the grey market was
a bad thing.54

Similarly, Taiwan’s Copyright Law has adopted the fair-use doctrine in articles 44–63 and

article 65. Article 65 provides, in relevant part:

[f]air use of a work shall not constitute infringement on the property rights of the work.
In determining whether the use of a work complies with the provision of Article 44–63 or
other conditions of fair use, all circumstances shall be taken into account, particularly

756

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

the following factors: (1) the purpose and nature of the use, including whether such use is
of a commercial nature or is for nonproﬁt educational purpose; (2) the nature of the
work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the work as a
whole; (4) effect of the use on the work’s current and potential market value . . .55

By specifying a number of circumstances that constitute fair use in articles 44–63, the fair-use
doctrine becomes essentially the most important limitation on copyright under Taiwan’s Copyright Law.

Public Interest Concerns in Application of the Fair-Use Doctrine
The intellectual property regime cannot exist in a vacuum. It should be used as an instrument to
implement public policy. Instead of a rigid rule, the fair-use doctrine apparently provides a more
ﬂexible application that weighs public and private interests in the context of parallel imports. By
applying the fair-use doctrine, each case involving parallel imports would compel an evaluation
based on its unique facts and a determination of the public interest at stake. Whether fair use
provides a viable argument for parallel importers in a particular case depends on whether the
society has an interest in the grey market that is strong enough to overcome the private interest of
copyright owners. Accordingly, each parallel imports case would conceivably render a different
outcome based on the evaluation in every single case, which is a better way to strike a balance
between an all-out ban and an all-permissible open-door approach on parallel imports cases.

Market Failure Theory in the Application of the Fair-Use Doctrine
Copyright Market
In addition to the public interest consideration, economic consideration should also be taken into
account when applying the fair-use doctrine in parallel imports. Economists tend to characterize
intellectual property law as a regime designed to resolve a type of market failure stemming from the
presence of ‘‘public goods’’ characteristics. A public good is typically described as having two
characteristics. First, once produced, they are virtually inexhaustible because supplying additional
access to new users would not obstruct the supply available to others. Second, and most
importantly, it is difﬁcult, if not expensive, to prevent persons who have not paid for access from
using a public good (Olson, 1971). Because of the second characteristic, it is commonly believed
that public goods require government control or taxation because they will be under produced if
left to the private market as a result of the free-riding problem.56

All copyright works, digital works in particular, exhibit certain public goods characteristics.
Once the literary work is made available to the public, its content might be used by countless
consumers without exhausting the supply. A book or a DVD may be simultaneously read or
viewed by a number of persons without physically depriving others of its use. Furthermore, it is
very hard to prevent a free-rider from accessing those works once they are created. However,
government control and taxation is generally deemed not an appropriate approach for these
literary works because freedom of expression and idea will very likely be curtailed by the chilling
effect resulting from government control. Instead, copyright statutes create special property rights
for authors to sell the physical copies of their works and, at the same time, retain control over the
reproduction and other uses of the work embodied in those copies in order to exclude free-riders.
In other words, by doing so, the Copyright Law allows a private market for intellectual property to
function. The Copyright Law also makes it easy to transfer this property right with a lower
transaction cost by speciﬁcally deﬁning the scope of these exclusive rights, and setting out the legal
effects of the licence and assignment. It further provides an enforcement mechanism for the
infringement and thus secures the predictability of the transaction and facilitates the operation of
this private market.

r 757

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

When the copyright market functions properly, people who would like to access or use
copyright works may identify copyright owners, bargain with them and pay royalties to obtain the
licences. Therefore, if copies are made without permission, the court assumes that the defendant
could have, and should have, proceeded through the market, but failed to do so, which justiﬁed the
penalty on the defendant for their failure to make use of this existing mechanism.

However, the copyright market does not always function adequately; sometimes, bargaining
may be extremely expensive, it could be too difﬁcult to locate the copyright owner, it may be
impractical to obtain enforcement against free-riders or other market ﬂaws might preclude
desirable property exchanges. In those cases, the market cannot be relied on to balance public
interests in the dissemination of the original works and the copyright owner’s interests in gaining
rewards from them. In some extreme cases, the legislative branch may correct market dysfunction
by imposing a regulatory solution, such as a compulsory licensing scheme.

Market Failure and Fair Use
When market failure occurs, people who would like to make use of the original works may not
effectively gain the permission through the purchase even if they want to. If this happens, a penalty
on these users may be unjustiﬁable. Professor Wendy Gordon in Boston University therefore
proposed a market failure approach in the analysis of the fair-use doctrine, arguing that:

[f]air use should be awarded to the defendant in a copyright infringement action when
(1) market failure is present; (2) transfer of the use to defendant is socially desirable; (3)
an award of fair use would not cause substantial injury to the incentives of the plaintiff
copyright owner (Gordon, 1982, p. 1614).

Where the socially desired transfer of the copyrighted work is unlikely to take place
voluntarily, or where special circumstances, such as market ﬂaws, impair the market’s ability to
serve as a measure of how resources (i.e. the copyright work) should be allocated, the ﬁrst market
failure element is satisﬁed. The court should further determine whether the use is more valuable in
the defendant’s hands than in the hands of the copyright owner, which makes the transfer to the
defendant socially desirable. Fair use is thus often found where the defendant’s use of the work is
non-commercial and creates external beneﬁts to the society, such as the use for educational or other
non-proﬁt purposes. Finally, the last element for the fair-use doctrine to apply is the lack of
substantial injury to copyright owners’ incentives. If the use would impair the copyright owner’s
incentives to create another original work, the court should deny the fair-use defense. On the other
hand, when giving protection will not serve as a disincentive for the copyright owner to create, fair
use should be granted. For example, where the transaction cost is so high that copyright owners
and the potential users ﬁnd that the costs of locating and bargaining with each other exceed the
proﬁt they might expect to gain from the transaction, no reasonable person would even enter into
negotiations. In this case, enforcement of copyright would unjustiﬁably beneﬁt the copyright
owner; it would also signiﬁcantly harm the potential user who is denied access, as well as the
general public who might beneﬁt from the use. Therefore, courts’ refusal to enforce the owner’s
exclusive right of control here, which does not deprive him of any revenues he would otherwise
receive, may be the only way to correct a dysfunctional copyright market.

Market Failure in the Grey Market
The market failure problem appears in the grey market for parallel imports. The costs for an
individual to negotiate with copyright owners in order to acquire permission for his importation
are typically high, and so exceed the proﬁt both the importer and the copyright owner could gain

758

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

from the transaction. In addition, how can an innocent purchaser in a given territory know the
geographic restriction that the copyright owner initially imposes in the ﬁrst sale of his works when
importing them to another territory? In view of article 87(4), article 87-1 of the Copyright Law and
the Meaning of Certain Amount in article 87-1, for example, suppose one purchased ‘‘two’’ lawful
copies of audiovisual works (i.e. VCD or DVD) from an authorized foreign distributor, and then
imported them to Taiwan for use in non-proﬁt academic, educational or religious institutions.
Because the amount he imports already exceeds the permissible amount under the Meaning of
Certain Amount in article 87-1 (according to this regulation, only one copy is permissible), to avoid
the violation of article 87(4), he or she ﬁrst needs to verify whether Taiwan is an authorized market
in the original copyright licence between the copyright owner and that particular foreign
distributor. If not, he/she needs to seek the copyright owner’s consent and pay royalties. However,
the costs involved in bargaining and reaching an agreement here are extremely high. It includes the
time and resources in the efforts to locate the original copyright owner, to review the terms and
conditions in the original
licence agreement between the copyright owner and the foreign
distributor, to negotiate with the copyright owner and determine how much the monetary value
for this authorized importation is. This is particularly costly when the copyright owner is in a
remote country. The overall transaction cost would conceivably exceed the proﬁts gained from the
transaction because only one excessive copy requires the copyright owner’s consent. The copyright
market here cannot function properly and the threshold market failure element is thus fulﬁlled.

The second element is easily satisﬁed in this hypothetical situation as well because those
parallel
imports are for non-proﬁt use and contribute to social welfare, which makes their
importation socially desirable. The importer’s use of these works actually makes them more
valuable to the society. Finally, the third element is also met here because the copyright owner’s
incentive to create another original work will not be impeded because parallel imports are genuine
goods initially authorized by the copyright owner. This type of parallel import should therefore be
justiﬁed under the fair-use doctrine.

Apply the Fair-Use Doctrine to Parallel Imports Cases
In my opinion, there are two steps to put the application of fair use into practice. The ﬁrst step
requires legislative efforts to specify the circumstances that qualify fair use of parallel imports and
incorporate them into the fair-use section of Taiwan’s Copyright Law (articles 44–64). Although
article 59-1, providing a national exhaustion doctrine for copies lawfully acquired within Taiwan’s
territory, is categorized as a type of fair use, it does not specify the circumstances where parallel
importation is justiﬁed on the basis of fair use.

The second step would be to leave it for the judge to evaluate the factors articulated in article
65. This will possibly lead each parallel imports case to a different outcome depending on how
judges weigh those factors. Judges should keep in mind that, when exercising their discretion in
weighing fair-use factors, both public interest concerns and market failure theory must be taken
into account. In other words, when public interest outweighs the copyright owner’s personal
interest, courts should favour fair-use assertions. Similarly, when market failure occurs in the
copyright market as indicated above (i.e. the transaction cost of obtaining authorization from the
copyright owner is too high), parallel importation should be permissible to redress a dysfunctional
copyright market.

Nonetheless, lifting of the parallel import ban may lead to political tension between Taiwan
and the United States, as the United States may deem it as an indicator that shows Taiwan’s
reluctance to offer adequate protection for US copyright holders. Because both Taiwan and the
United States are WTO members, and parallel import issues apparently involve not only free

r 759

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

movement of goods between the United States and Taiwan but also Taiwan’s trade with all other
WTO members, the dispute-settlement mechanism in the WTO should be a better forum to resolve
this problem, as opposed to a bilateral US–Taiwan negotiation.

Conclusion

Although the TRIPS Agreement and WCT did not require members to restrict parallel imports and
explicitly left this issue for each member state to decide, Taiwan’s Legislative Yuan nevertheless
enacted strict restrictions on parallel imports in article 87(4) in 1993, which, as analysed above, has
essentially led to adverse effects on both foreign copyright owners and Taiwan itself.

Because of criticisms from many practitioners and scholars, the Legislative Yuan ﬁnally
amended the Copyright Law, and eliminated criminal penalty for parallel importers in 2003.
However, the 2003 amendment did not really liberalize this grey market for parallel imports. The
beneﬁts of parallel importation rest on distributing those copyrighted products to another market
free from penalties, and yet, under the current copyright regime, the distributors of parallel imports
are still subject to both civil and criminal penalties.57

Political concerns should not trump a sound copyright policy. Copyright amendments should
be designed to fulﬁll the purpose of the Copyright Law and be drafted to minimize undesirable
effects. Rather than an all-out restriction or a complete permission for parallel imports, this article
has proposed a lifting of the existing parallel import ban, with fair use applied on a case-by-case
manner. Speciﬁcally, when the court applies the fair-use doctrine under article 65, public interest
and market failure theory should be taken into consideration. In other words, courts should favour
parallel imports where public interest concerns outweigh copyright holder’s personal interests, or
where market failure occurs so that parallel importers may not efﬁciently reach an agreement with
copyright holders due to the unreasonably high transaction costs.

Nevertheless, lifting the parallel import ban would probably, once again, lead Taiwan to
encounter tremendous pressure from potential section 301 sanctions by the US. Section 301 has
actually been analysed by the WTO panel as a ‘‘prima facie’’ violation of WTO rules in an action
brought by the European Union against the United States in 1999 (WTO, 1999).58 The WTO
panel, in that case, ended up being overly cautious and leaving the legal questions regarding the
consistency of section 301 in the context of grey market goods unresolved, which led to numerous
criticisms from scholars (Chang, 2000, p. 1156; Chen, 2003, p. 429). However, based on the
reasoning in that case, the United States actually does not have legitimate justiﬁcation to impose its
section 301 sanction.59 On the other hand, the current parallel import ban might risk Taiwan being
charged due to a violation of quantitative restriction prohibition per se under WTO laws. Given the
complexity of this issue, which involves not only the bilateral trade between Taiwan and the United
States but also the international trade ﬂow in the global market, this article proposes that the
US–Taiwan negotiations should be conducted under WTO’s multilateral dispute-resolution
framework, rather than through a bilateral agreement.

About the Author

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang, J.D., LL.M., is an attorney in the Intellectual Property Specialty
Group at Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner, LLP in Washington, DC; Ms
Chiang is also a former Intellectual Property Prosecutor at Tao-Yuan District Public Prosecutors
Ofﬁce, Taiwan; e-mail: yuanchen31@hotmail.com

760

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Notes

This article is based on an earlier study and the author would like to thank Professor Shang-Jyh Liu, Professor
Min-Chiuan (Eric) Wang and Professor Grace Shao at National Chiao-Tung University for their comments.
All errors and omissions are those of the author.

1 Under article 91-1 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law, a person who distributes the original of a copyrighted
work or its copy through the transfer of ownership (including sale, gift) is subject to a maximum of 3
years’ imprisonment.

2 Article 319 of Taiwan’s Rule of Criminal Procedure provides: ‘‘[t]he victim of a crime may ﬁle a private

prosecution. Where he is without legal capability, of limited legal capability, or dead, such private
prosecution may be ﬁled by his statutory agent, lineal relative, or spouse’’. It has been widely accepted by
the courts and scholarship that only a ‘‘direct victim’’ of a crime is entitled to ﬁle private prosecution.
When ﬁling a criminal case in Taiwan, the default is ﬁling through the public prosecutor; private
prosecution is ﬁled only under exceptional circumstances.

3 This lawsuit was initially brought by the Crown against the managing agency of this book festival,
including the Kaoshiung World Trade Center, the Asia-American Publication Company and the Hong-
Tzung Cultural Entertainment Company. The Kaoshiung District Court’s decision was eventually
afﬁrmed by the Taiwan Supreme Court on 20 March 2003. See Zuai Kao Fa Yuan (2003).

4 See Ferrero USA, Inc. Ozak Trading, Inc., 952 F.2d 44, 46 fn.1 (3d circuit 1991) (deﬁning grey market goods).
5 A similar deﬁnition established by the US District Court for the Central District of California is ‘‘goods
that are intended to be sold outside the United States but which are imported into this country without
the consent of the owner of the United States trademark or copyright associated with the goods’’.
Parfums Givenchy v C & C Beauty Sale, 832 F. Supp. 1378 at 1382 n. 1 (C.D. Cal. 1993).

6 ‘‘First sale’’ doctrine is known as the ‘‘exhaustion doctrine’’ in Europe, meaning that the copyright

owner’s distribution right is exhausted after its ﬁrst sale.

7 The EU basically adopts this approach by exhausting the copyright owner’s distribution right only within

the European Community (EC).

8 Taiwan’s Patent Law has explicitly adopted the international exhaustion doctrine since the amendment in

1997. Article 57 of the Patent Law provides, in relevant part:

1. The invention patent right shall not extend to any of the following circumstances:

(6) [w]here the patented product manufactured by the patentee or under the patentee’s
consent is used or re-sold after such patented product was sold. The territory where the
above stated manufacture or sale is conducted shall not be limited to within this country.

2. The user referred to in items 2 and 5 of this article shall conﬁne his continued use of the
invention within the existing enterprise only. The territory where one is allowed to sell the
patented product stated in item 6 shall be determined by the court based on the fact.

Under this provision, the Taiwan Patent Law apparently adopted the ‘‘international exhaustion doctrine’’,
which allows parallel importation of patented products from a country where the product is manufactured
under the patentee’s consent.

9 Paragraph 2, article 30 of the Trademark Law of 2003 provided:

[w]here goods bearing a registered trademark are traded or circulated in the marketplace by
the trademark right holder or by an authorized person, or are offered for auction or
disposal by a relevant agency, the right holder shall not claim trademark rights on the said
goods. However, the aforementioned shall not apply in case of preventing deterioration or
damage of goods or any other fair reasons.

r 761

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Even before the amendment on 28 May 2003, it was well settled by conventional wisdom and numerous
precedents that parallel imports of trademark products were lawful. In Zuai Kao Fa Yuan 81 Nen Tai Shan
Tzu No. 444 Min Shi Pan Jue (No. 444 of Civil Judgment of the Taiwan Supreme Court, 1992), the Taiwan
Supreme Court held that where the parallel importation of genuine trademark goods has the same quality as
the products marketed by the trademark holder in Taiwan, and creates no danger of misleading, confusing
or concealing the consumers, those imports harm neither the good will of trademark holders nor the interest
of consumers; it actually beneﬁts the society by preventing the risk of a monopolistic price controlled by the
trademark holder, and thereby facilitates competition and provides more options for consumers, which does
not undermine the aim of the Trademark Law, and, therefore, infringement was not found. Likewise, in
1993, the Taipei District Court, one of the largest District Courts in Taiwan, ruled for the defendant in 82
Nen Du Sue Tzu No. 1718 Hsi Shi Pan Jue (No. 1718 of Criminal Judgment of the Taipei District Court,
1993), a case regarding the Nintendo computer game. The court held that ‘‘the defendant’s computer games
at issue are legitimate goods, the trademark on those goods is genuine mark, the goods are not pirated, and
thereby neither defendant’s importation nor exportation did not constitute the infringement of trademark’’
[online]. Available at hhttp://jirs.judicial.gov.tw/i [Accessed September 2009].

10 According to 19 USC 2242 (a)(1)(A), a country ‘‘denies adequate and effective protection of intellectual

property rights’’ if it:

denies adequate and effective means under the laws of the foreign country for persons who
are not citizens or nationals of such foreign country to secure, exercise, and enforce rights
relating to patents, process patents, registered trademarks, copyrights and mask works.

11 According to 19 USC 2242 (a)(1)(B), a country ‘‘denies fair and equitable market access’’ if it:

effectively denies access to a market for a product protected by a copyright or related right,
patent, trademark, mask work, trade secret or plant breeder’s right, through the use of
laws, procedures, practices or regulations that—

(A) violate provisions of international law or international agreements to which both the
United States and the foreign country are parties or

(B) constitute discriminatory non-tariff trade barriers.

12 See 19 USC 2411 (c)(1)(A).
13 Article 93 of 1993 also stated that in addition to the imprisonment sentence, a ﬁne of a maximum of

500,000 new Taiwan dollars may be imposed.

14 Taiwan Copyright Law, articles 22–29 enumerates eight exclusive property rights: rights for

reproduction, public recitation, broadcast, presentation, performance, exhibition, adaption and rent.

15 Article 29 of the Taiwan Copyright Law provides: ‘‘Except as otherwise provided in this Act, authors of

works have the exclusive right to rent their works. Performers have the exclusive right to rent their
performances reproduced in sound recordings’’.

16 Article 6 of the WCT deﬁnes the scope of right of distribution as ‘‘authors of literary and artistic works
shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorizing the making available to the public of the original and copies
of their works through sale or other transfer of ownership’’.

17 WPPT, article 8, Right of Distribution: ‘‘(1) [p]erformers shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorizing the

making available to the public of the original and copies of their performances ﬁxed in phonograms
through sale or other transfer of ownership’’.

18 US section 106 of the Copyright Act of 1976 provides:

[s]ubject to section 107 through 122, the owner of copyright under this title has the
exclusive rights to do and to authorize any of the following: (3) to distribute copies or

762

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other transfer of ownership,
or by rental, lease, or lending.

19 The legislative record of article 28-1 stated that the Copyright Law then only protected a copyright

owner’s rental right as part of the distribution right, which was insufﬁcient, and thus a wholesale
distribution right should be added. Available at hhttp://lis.ly.gov.tw/ttscgi/lgimg?@923402;0003;0168i
[Accessed September 2009].

20 Article 60 of the Taiwan Copyright Law provided:

[o]wners of originals and lawful copies of original works may rent such originals or copies,
yet this shall not apply to sound recordings and computer programs. However, where
computer programs are incorporated in products, machinery or legally rented equipment,
which are not the subject matter of such rental, the proviso in ﬁrst paragraph does not apply.

21 After Quality King, the parallel import issue was brought up on several occasions during a series of

meetings between a US delegation and senior Taiwan ofﬁcials in May 1998. The US delegation is
organized by the Asia Paciﬁc Legal Institute (APLI) and its members, which included the Honorable
Randall R. Rader (Circuit Judge of the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit), Marybeth Peters
(US Register of Copyrights), Professors Martin J. Adelman of Wayne State University, Charles M.
McManis of Washington University, Paul C. B. Liu of APLI, Jerome H. Reichman of Vanderbilt
University, Toshiko Takenaka of University of Washington, along with Michael N. Schlesinger (Counsel
to the IIPA) and Andy Y. Sun (Associate Director of the Dean Dinwoodey Center for Intellectual
Property Studies, The George Washington University Law School). The Quality King decision then
apparently generated Taiwanese legislators’ and scholars’ interests to re-examine the enactment of article
87(4). Subsequently, in the 2003 Amendment, the legislative record indicated that the purpose of article
59-1 is to balance the relationship between a copyright owner’s distribution right and a lawful copies
owner’s right to dispose of his property. It also speciﬁcally stated that the round-trip type of parallel
imports is permissible as concluded in the Quality King decision. Available at hhttp://lis.ly.gov.tw/ttscgi/
lgimg?@923402;0003;0168i [Accessed September 2009].

22 Article 87-1 of the Taiwan Copyright Law provides:

article 87(4) does not apply in the following situations:

(1) Certain amount of copies of work intended to be used by central or local governments,
but not including copies for use in schools or other educational institutions, or copies of
any audiovisual work imported for purposes other than archival use.
(2) Certain amount of copies of any audiovisual work for archival purposes of an
organization operated for scholarly, educational or religious purposes and not for private
gain; copies of any other work for library lending or archival purposes of such organization
where use is in conformity with provisions of article 48.
(3) Certain amount of copies of a work for private use of importer, if such importation is not for
distribution, or by any person arriving from outside the territory if such copy forms a part of
such person’s personal baggage.
(4) Work incorporated into any goods, machinery or equipment otherwise legally
imported where such work cannot be copied during the ordinary operation or use of the
goods, machinery or equipment.
(5) Instructional or operational manual, accompanying any goods, machinery or
equipment otherwise legally imported. However, prohibition applies where importation of
such work is an essential object of the act of importation of the goods, machinery or
equipment.

r 763

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

23 The Taiwan MOI Affair in 1993 issued an administrative regulation ‘‘The Meaning of Certain Amount in

Article 87-1’’ deﬁning the meaning of ‘‘certain amount’’ in article 87-1, which provides:

Certain amount of copyrighted products in article 87-1 (2) and (3) means the following: (1) for
the importation of audio-visual copyrighted goods intended for preserving them in academic,
educational, or religious library, no more than one copy is permissible; (2) for the importation
of copyrighted goods other than audio-visual goods intended for the same purpose, no more
than ﬁve copies are permissible; (3) for the importation of a copy for personal use without the
intent to distribute, no more than one copy each time is permissible; (4) imported as a part of
individual’s luggage, no more than one copy each time is permissible.

24 Article 88 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provides: ‘‘[a] person who unlawfully infringes another person’s

copyright or plate rights intentionally shall be liable for damages. Where multiple persons engage in
unlawful infringement, they shall be jointly and severally liable for damages’’.

25 Article 90-1 provides, in pertinent part, that ‘‘copyright owner or plate right holder may request custom

to conﬁscate imports or exports that infringe their copyright or plate right’’.

26 The new article 93 of 2003 eliminated the criminal liability for violation of article 87, paragraph 4.
27 Article 91-1 provides:

(1) [a] person who infringes the property rights of another person by distributing the
original of a work or a copy by transfer of ownership is subject to imprisonment for no
more than three years, detention, or, in addition to the criminal punishment, a ﬁne no more
than seven hundred and ﬁfty thousand New Taiwan Dollars. (2) [a] person who distributes,
publicly displays or possesses copies with the intent to distribute, with the knowledge
that the copies infringe on another person’s copyright, is subject to imprisonment for no
more than three years, detention, or, in addition to the criminal punishment, a ﬁne no fewer
than seventy thousand and no more than seven hundred ﬁfty thousand New Taiwan
dollars.

28 Article 92 provides:

[a] person who, with the intent to proﬁt, infringes on the property rights of another person
by means of public recitation, public broadcast, public presentation, public performance,
public transmission, public display, adaptation, compilation, or leasing shall be punished
by imprisonment for no more than three years, detention, or, in addition to the criminal
penalty, a ﬁne of no more than seven hundred and ﬁfty New Taiwan Dollars.

29 The Taiwan Supreme Court, held in Zuai Kao Fa Yuan 85 Nen Du Tai Shan Tzu No. 5500 Hsi Shi Pan Jue
(No. 5500 of Criminal Judgment of the Taiwan Supreme Court, 1996), held that since parallel imports are
not authorized to import to Taiwan and constitute infringement of the copyright owner’s property rights
under article 87, they are still regarded as unlawful copies; therefore, if a third party knowingly acquires
those copies, he does not qualify as ‘‘the owner of original works and lawful copies of works’’, and
thereby does not enjoy the exhaustion exemption under article 60. As a result, he is still subject to the civil
liability under article 88 of the Copyright Law.

30 Article 15 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provides the author with the right to publish his work; article 16
provides the author with the right to name himself as the legitimate author; article 17 provides the right to
prevent any changes of the work that might damage the author’s reputation.

31 Article 36 of the Copyright Law provides, in relevant part: ‘‘(1) [t]he property rights of a copyright owner
may, in whole or in part, be assigned to another person, or jointly owned with another person; (2) [t]he
assignee’s property right is conﬁned to the scope of the assignment’’.

764

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

32 Article 14 of the Berne Convention simply confers a distribution right to the author of literary or artistic

work for authorizing the distribution of cinematographic production or reproduction of the original
work. The statutory language provides, in relevant part:

(1) [a]uthors of literary or artistic works shall have the exclusive right of authorizing: (i) the
cinematographic adaptation and reproduction of these works, and the distribution of the
works thus adapted or reproduced; (ii) the public performance and communication to the
public by wire of the works thus adapted or reproduced.

33 TRIPS Agreement, 15 April 1994, Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO, annexure 1C, Legal

Instruments—Results of the Uruguay Round vol. 1 33 I.L.M. 81 (1994).

34 Ibid.
35 Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (14 November 2001), Doc. WT/MIN (01)/

DEC/2 (20 November 2001). Available at hhttp://www.wto.orgi [Accessed September 2009].

36 See Doha Declaration, section 5. Although the ministerial declarations within the WTO are not legally
binding, it is a primary interpretive tool of imprecise language in the TRIPS Agreement, and likely to be
the persuasive authority in the interpretation of the TRIPS Agreement.

37 Statistics are available at the website of the Bureau of Foreign Trade, Taiwan Ministry of Economics.

Available at hhttp://www.trade.gov.twi [Accessed September 2009].

38 Taiwan exported products worth US$1,301 billion to the United States in July 2009, which is an incre-

ase of 12%. The United States continues to be the largest importer of Taiwan’s products; it accounts
for 8.1% of Taiwan’s total exports. Statistics are available at the website of the Bureau of the Foreign
Trade, Taiwan Ministry of Economics. Available at hhttp://www.trade.gov.twi [Accessed September
2009].

39 The Legislative Yuan’s reservation stated that the importation of ‘‘legal’’ copyrighted works shall not be

banned, noting that:

since the bilateral agreement [with the US] does not provide an import right or a
distribution right, the importation of legal copyrighted works will not infringe the
author’s copyright . . . if the TRIPs Agreement is amended to provide an import right
and distribution right, the Legislative Yuan will consider amending the Copyright Law to
provide those rights.

See AIT/CCNAA IPR Quarterly Consultations.

40 Article XX of GATT 1994 provides:

[s]ubject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustiﬁable discrimination between countries where the
same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any contracting
party of measures: (a) necessary to protect public morals; (b) necessary to protect human,
animal or plant life or health; (c) relating to the importations or exportations of gold or
silver; (d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to customs
enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies operated under paragraph 4 of Article II and
Aricle XVII, the protection of patents, trademarks and copyrights, and the prevention of
deceptive practices; (e) relating to the products of prison labour; (f) imposed for the
protection of natural treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value; (g) relating to
the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are made effective in

r 765

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption; (h) undertaken in
pursuance of obligations under any intergovernmental commodity agreement with
conforms to criteria submitted to the CONTRACTING PARTIES and not disapproved
by them or which is itself so submitted and not so disapproved; (i) involving restrictions on
exports of domestic materials necessary to ensure essential quantities of such materials to a
domestic processing industry during periods when the domestic price of such materials is
held below the world price as part of a governmental stabilization plan; Provided that such
restrictions shall not operate to increase the exports of or the protection afforded to such
domestic industry, and shall not depart from the provisions of this Agreement relating to
non-discrimination; (j) essential to the acquisition or distribution of products in general or
local short supply; Provided that any such measures shall be consistent with the principle
that all contracting parties are entitled to an equitable share of the international supply of
such products, and that any such measures, which are inconsistent with the other
provisions of the Agreement shall be discontinued as soon as the conditions giving rise
to them have ceased to exist. The CONTRACTING PARTIES shall review the need for
this sub-paragraph not later than 30 June 1960.

41 Article XXI of GATT 1994 provides:

[n]othing in this Agreement shall be construed (a) to require any contracting party to
furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential
security interests; or (b) to prevent any contracting party from taking any action which it
considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests- (i) relating to
ﬁssionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; (ii) relating to the trafﬁc
in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such trafﬁc in other goods
and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a
military establishment; (iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international
relations; or (c) to prevent any contracting party from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

42 Similar to WTO laws, article 30 of the EC Treaty also prohibits ‘‘quantitative restrictions on imports and
all measures having equivalent effect’’. Although article 36 of the EC Treaty provides exceptions to this
rule by stating that prohibitions or restrictions on imports may be justiﬁed on grounds of public morality,
public policy or public security, the European Court of Justice has narrowed the scope of article 36
exceptions, holding that the protection of intellectual property rights should not come under a disguised
restriction of trade within the meaning of the treaty. It is fair to say that the ofﬁcial EU attitude to
parallel imports is tolerance.

43 Article 84 of the Copyright Law provides the injunction remedy for the copyright owner by stating that

‘‘[t]he copyright or plate right owner may request to enjoin the infringement activities. Where there is
likelihood of infringement, an injunction may be requested to prevent such infringement’’.

44 Article 88 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provides: ‘‘ [a] person who unlawfully infringes another person’s

copyright or plate rights intentionally shall be liable for damages. Where multiple persons engage in
unlawful infringement, they shall be jointly and severally liable for damages’’.

45 Supra n. 25.
46 Article 87 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provided: ‘‘[a]ny of the following circumstances shall be deemed as
an infringement of copyright or plate right, unless this Law provided otherwise: . . . (5) use the unlawful
copy of a copyrighted computer program’’.

766

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

47 Article 93 of Taiwan’s Copyright Law provides: ‘‘[i]n any of the following circumstances, a sentence of up

to two years’ imprisonment or detention shall be imposed . . . (3) infringement of another person’s
copyright by any means speciﬁed in Article 87 (1), (3), (5), or (6)’’.

48 There are a few interesting exceptions, such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand and most Scandinavian

countries, which supported international exhaustion during TRIPS Agreement negotiations.

49 See Campbell v Acuff-Rose Music, Inc, 510 US 569 (1994).
50 523 US 135 (1998).
51 US section 106 of the Copyright Act of 1976 provides: ‘‘[s]ubject to section 107 through 122, the owner of
copyright under this title has the exclusive rights to do and to authorize any of the following: . . . (3) to
distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other transfer of
ownership, or by rental, lease or lending’’.

52 Ibid.
53 523 US 135, at 150.
54 Ibid.
55 This article is similar to article 107 of the US Copyright Act of 1976, which states:

[n]otwithstanding [the exclusive rights of authors], the fair use of a copyright work,
including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means
speciﬁed by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching
(including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research,
is not an
infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use made of a work in any
particular use is a fair use, the factors to be considered shall include- (1) the purpose
and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for
nonproﬁt educational purposes; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and
substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4)
the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.

56 A familiar example of a public good is national defence. Since it is impossible to distinguish one person
who has paid for defence and the other who does not, government control and some kind of compulsory
payment, such as taxation, is necessary to eliminate the free-rider problem and achieve the optimal
amount of defence. It is generally believed that if the purchase of defence is left for private market
mechanisms to decide, the defence service will produce less than the optimal amount because of the fear
of the free-riding problem.

57 As indicated above, article 91-1(2) subjects distributors of parallel imports to a maximum of 3 years’

imprisonment.

58 The complaints against US section 301 sanction have been going on for years and it eventually led to the
EC action challenging section 301’s inconsistency with the WTO laws against the United States at the
WTO Dispute Settlement Body in 1999. The WTO panel noted that section 301 was in ‘‘prima facie
violation’’ of article 23 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding, and yet ended up concluding with
cautious language and limiting the decision to the speciﬁc claims in that particular case, stating that:

[w]e are not asked to make an overall assessment of the compatibility of Sections 301–310
with the WTO agreements . . . We are, in particular, not called upon to examine the WTO
compatibility of US actions taken in individual cases in which Sections 301–310 have been
applied. See Section 301–310 of the Trade Act of 1974 case, para.7.97. and 7.13.

This decision has been strongly criticized because its ambiguous language essentially left the legal
questions regarding the consistency of Section 301 with WTO rules, especially in the context of gray
market goods, unanswered.

r 767

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

59 Although the WTO panel eventually did not rule section 301 a violation of WTO rules, by bringing the

action challenging section 301, the EU effectively curtailed the ability of the United States Trade
Representative to impose sanctions regarding intellectual property under section 301.

References

Abbott, F. (1998) The Exhaustion of Intellectual Property Rights and Parallel Importation, Report Presented to

the International Trade Law Committee of WIPO, Geneva, 25 June.

Alford, W. P. (1995) To Steal a Book Is an Elegant Offense: Intellectual Property in Chinese Civilization.

Stanford University Press, Palo Alto CA.

Anawalt, H. C., Enayati, E. and Callaghan, C. B. (eds) (1997) IP strategy, Complete Intellectual Property

Planning, Access and Protection. Carswell Legal Publication, Toronto.

Bureau of Foreign Trade, Taiwan, Ministry of Economics (2009). Available at hhttp://www.trade.gov.twi

[Accessed September 2009].

Chang, C. H. (1998) ‘Research on Parallel Importation of Copyright Goods’, Science & Technology Law

Review, 10(7), 58–74.

Chang, C. H. (2001) ‘Review of ‘‘Distribution Right’’ in Copyright Law’, Formosa Transnational Law Review,

116, 74–91.

Chang, C. H. (2004) ‘Comments on Related Regulations of Distribution Right in New Copyright Law’,

NCCU Intellectual Property Journal, 1(2), 49–72.

Chang, K. N. (1997) ‘Comments on Parallel Copyrighted Imports Legislation’, Moon Sun Law Journal, 26,

86–93.

Chang, S. W. (2000) ‘Taming Unilateralism Under the Multilateral Trading System: Unﬁnished Job in the
WTO Panel Ruling on U.S. Section 301–310 of the Trade Act of 1974’, Law and Policy in International
Business, 31, 1151–6.

Chen, A. (2003) ‘The Three Big Rounds of U.S. Unilateralism versus WTO Multilateralism during the

Last Decade: A Combined Analysis of the Great 1994 Sovereignty Debate, Section 301 Disputes
(1998–2000), and Section 201 Disputes (2002–present)’, Temple International and Comparative Law
Journal, 17, 409–29.

Cohen, J. E. (2000) ‘Taking Stock: The Law and Economics of Intellectual Property Rights: Copyright and

the Perfect Curve’, Vanderbilt Law Review, 53, 1799 Symposium.

Durney, E. G. (1993) Copyright Law in China and Taiwan, 367 PLI/Pat 311, Global Intellectual Property

Series 1993: Protecting Trademarks and Copyrights Successful Strategies, Patents, Copyrights,
Trademarks and Literary Property Course Handbook Series. Practicing Law Institute, New York.

Fan, J. (1999) ‘The Dilemma of China’s Intellectual Property Piracy’, The UCLA Journal of International Law

and Foreign Affairs, 4, 207–8.

Fong, C. Y. (1998) ‘Parallel Imports Ban in Copyright Shall Be Lifted’, Commercial Times, 13 March.
Gordon, W. J. (1982) ‘Fair Use As Market Failure: A Structural and Economic Analysis of the Betamax Case

and Its Predecessors’, Columbia Law Review, 82, 1600–14.

Kaoshiung District Court (2001) 90 Nen Du Tze Tze No. 237 Hsin Shi Pan Jue (No. 237 of Private Prosecution

Criminal Judgment of the Kaoshiung District Court) [online]. Available at hhttp://fyjud.lawbank.
com.tw/i [Accessed September 2009].

Kim, S. (1995) ‘In Pursuit of Proﬁt Maximization by Restricting Parallel Imports: The U.S. Copyright Owner

and Taiwan Copyright Law’, Paciﬁc Rim Law & Policy Journal, 5(1), 205–36.

Maggs, J. (1993) ‘Group Releases ‘‘Hit List’’ of Countries Seen as Lax on Copyright Protection’, J. Com., 2A(1).
Olson, M. (1971) The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, revised edition.

Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.

768

r Parallel Importation of Copyright Products in Taiwan

Yuan-Chen (Jessica) Chiang

Siwek, S. E. and Furchtgott-Roth, H. (1992) Copyright Industries in the U.S. Economy: 1977–1990, Report

Prepared for the International Intellectual Property Alliance, p. 3.

Sun, A. Y. (1998) ‘From Pirate King to Jungle King: Transformation of Taiwan’s Intellectual Property

Protection’, Fordham Intellectual Property, Media & Entertainment Law Journal, 9(1), 67.

Winkler, R. (1993) ‘Taiwan: Parallel Imports—The Debate Continues’, IP Asia, 6 August, 5–6.
World Trade Organization (WTO) (1999), United States—Section 301–310 of the Trade Act of 1974—Report

of the Panel (22 December) WT/DS152/R.

World Trade Organization (WTO) (2009) WTO Sees 9% Global Trade Decline in 2009 as Recession Strikes

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres09_e/pr554_e.htmi. Also available at
Bureau of Foreign Trade, Taiwan Ministry of Economics hhttp://www.trade.gov.tw/i [Accessed January
2010].

Zuai Kao Fa Yuan (2003) 92 Nen Du Tai Shan Tzu No. 1372 Hsin Shi Pan Jue (No. 1372 of Criminal Judgment
of the Taiwan Supreme Court) [online]. Available at hhttp://jirs.judicial.gov.tw/i [Accessed September
2009].

r 769


