Registered Geographical Indications 
Between Intellectual Property and  Rural Policy-Purt 

II 

Wifiam van CAENEGEM* 

Part I  of this article dealt with some of the theoretical issues underlying registration 
systems for geographical indications (GIs). Part 11 considers some aspects of the historical 
development in France and present regulatory structures of GI registration in Europe 
and the New World. 

I.  HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF REGISTERED  GIs 
A.  The History .f GIs in France: Reclamation of Lost Property? 

Since so much of the impetus for the expansion of GIs emanates fiom France, it is 
useful  to  delve into some of the history of GI protection in that  country. This aids a 
proper evaluation of the French and European positions in the global GI debate, in the 
light of the theoretical discussion in Part I  of this article. The current struggle to regain 
some control over French (and other EU Member country) GIs around the world is a 
geographic extension of a process that began at a more local level. 

Of further interest is  the fact that in the history of the privileges of French wine- 
growers,  as  illustrated by  Bordeaux and Champagne, one finds that  combination  of 
elements  of  rural  policy,  guarantees of  authenticity and  the  search  for  competitive 
advantage which marks today’s  debate about global expansion of GI registration. The 
historical background provided below is not intended to be comprehensive, but rather 
illustrative. It focuses on wine, and in particular on the two wine-growing regions of 
Bordeaux and of Champagne. 

1.  BORDEAUX’S EARLY  HISTORY: PRIVILEGES, 

IDENTIFYING MARKS AND RURAL POLICY* 

In the Middle Ages in the South-West of France, and also in other French wine- 
producing  regions,  the  sale  and  consumption  of  wines  &om  other  regions  were 
prohibited.  Only wines  originating in the  region were allowed entry into  its towns. 

September 2003 issue of The J.W.I.P. 

* Associate Professor of Law, Bond University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia. 
For acknowledgements relating to  research  and writing of this article, see  Part  I,  whch appeared in  the 
The author may be contacted at: ~cwiUian-van-caenegem@bond.edu.aun. 

1  The information in this  part  is  largely  drawn fiom A. Richard, De  la protection  des  appellatiom d’origine  en 

matiPre vinicole, Impnmeries Gounouilhou, Bordeaux, 1918. 

862 

THE  

&ght  up until the time of the French Revolution  of 1789, the Bordeaux region2 also 
benefitted from two additional privileges: 

the privil2ge de la  descente; and 

(a) 
(b)  the privilige  de la  barrique. 
The  latter  is  said  to  have  been  akin  to  a  mark  of  origin,  and  thus  an  early 
manifestation  of  the  use  of  such  marks  to  prevent  confusion  between  wines  from 
different regions. Nonetheless, both actually had protectionist motives and effects. 

Most, if not all, transport of wine in that region of France was by river. The privil2ge 
de la descente meant that wines from outlying regions, not being part of the Bordeaux area, 
were not to be brought down by river to Bordeaux for sale before 11 November of each 
year, and some even later. This gave the Bordeaux wines a valuable window of monopoly 
over  the  sale  of  wines  into  the  lucrative markets  of England  and  Holland,  whence 
transport became very difficult later in the year because  of weather condtions and the 
icing up of northerly ports. When the wines &om outside Bordeaux were brought into 
the city, they were held in discrete cellars in a specific area of the city. The effect of this 
privilege,  although  its  intent  was  predominantly  to  stifle  competition,  was  also 
“l’authenttjication ci peu pr2s absolue des vins de la sinichaussie pendant une phriode de l’annie.”3 
As to privilege (b), the wines ofBordeaux ( v i m  de ville) were the only ones entitled 
to a  barrique  (barrel) of a special form and dimensions. This differentiated them from 
wines from other regions; hence Richard says: 

“Nous trouvons ici la premiere mangestation  de la protection des appellations de provenance en matiere 
vinicole;  il  s’agissait  bien  d’une  viritable  marque  d’origine.  D’autres  villes  ont  eu  elles  aussi  une 
barrique spiciale.”  (emphasized in the original) .4 
But although the special shape was intended to prevent confusion, it also resulted 
in hrther trading privileges for the  Bordelais: bigger  barnpes,  made of better wood, 
which the Bordelais succeeded in preventing other regions from using, meant that the 
wine travelled better during export.5 Because &eight was the same whatever the size of 
the b a m p e ,  transport costs were also lower than for those who were forced to use smaller 
barriques. Ths was a distinct advantage in the all-important export trade to England. 

A significant development occurred when, in 1764, to prevent the lllicit use of the 
Bordeaux barrique, each wine-grower was compelled to identify, by way of a red brand 
on the bottom of each barn’que, his name and that of the paroisse (parish) of origin.6 This 
move was, in fact, opposed by  the dealers of Bordeaux. They argued that rather than 

year.” (all translations made by the author): see Richard, supra, footnote 1, at 50. 

2  The Sinichaussie  de  Guyenne. 
3  “. .. the well nigh absolute authentication of the wines of the Bordeaux region during a certain time of the 
4  Id.:  “We see here the first appearance of the protection  of appellations of origin in relation to wines; it did 
5  This monopoly over barrel shapes brings to mind one of the contentious issues in the contemporary debate 
6  An& de la  Cour du  Parlement concernant  la police  des  uins,  18 July 1764, Article 3. 

concerning the extension of rights to the shape of bottles, e.g. Champagne bottles. 

amount to a m e  mark of origin. Other towns also had a special barrel.” 

REGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

863 

prevent fraud, thls measure would encourage it. Nothing would stop dishonest traders 
from sendmg poor wine in casks with the most desirable brands, and keeping the best 
wines for themselves in casks with  the less-favoured brands.’  The ability to hide true 
origin  by  misuse  was  to  bedevil  the  use  of  marks.  In  the  wine  industry,  where 
adulteration, cutting, admixing and other unsavoury practices were rife, and difficult to 
detect and control, this takes on additional significance. 

But another significant problem was that the branding requirement would render 
illegal certain  established practices  of  mixing  and  deriving  supplemental wine  from 
neighbouring, sometimes better-quality-producing parishes. Much wine was sold under 
the well-regarded name of a certain parish or vineyard location, but was, in fact, derived 
from contiguous parishes  which  were  considered to  have  similar, if not  even better 
characteristics. Again, this is  illustrative of a  modern  problem-that 
of imposition of 
rigid  regional  delimitations  and  the  resulting  impossibility  of  deahng  flexibly  with 
varying levels of production within the area of demarcation or, more generally, to meet 
demand while effectively maintaining quality. The GI can act as a brake on growers’ 
genuine attempts at maintaining consistent quality and supply of wine. 

As  well as enjoying other privileges, in Bordeaux (as in some other regions) wine 
sales  were  also  protected  against  the  sale  of other  beverages, such as  beer  and  cider. 
Neighbouring regions constantly fought to deprive Bordeaux of its privileges, but in a 
sense were swimming against the swehng tide of monopolies in the period of the Ancien 
REgirne.8 Although in an edict of April 1776 free trade in wine was declared in the whole 
of France, Bordeaux was able to maintain most of its privileges, in practice at least. By 
November  1776 most of the effects of the edict of April 1776 were suspended. It was 
only  with  the  abolition  of  all  privileges  of  towns  on  4 August  1789,  during  the 
Revolutionary period, that Bordeaux’s privileged position came to an end. 

It  was  at  the  time  of  the  struggles about  abolition  that  an  interesting  shift  in 
argumentation occurred. In fighting for its privileges, Bordeaux emphasized that they 
were justified for the purpose of guaranteeing the genuineness of the crus (vintages) for 
foreigners. It also emphasized, invoking agricultural policy, that the land of Bordeaux 
was  not  amenable to  the  growing  of  other  crops; therefore  the  growing  of  vines 
deserved  encouragement.9  Protectionist  measures  also  allowed  the  people  of 

J  One should remember that this was during a time when such crude impostures could not readily be exposed 
through chemical analysis and testing, as would now be possible.  And, in the words of Thomas Barton  who, on 
behalf of the traders, drew up a Memorandum to be presented to the Conseil du Roy: “On ne jugepoint de la qualid 
du vin, ny de pas une liqueur quekconque, d l’aspect de lnfutaille ou du fotineau qui le contient; c’est par legoirt qu ’on en decide, 
et c’est une vague illusion depensn qu’une marque empreinte sur un tonneau puissefaire  frouver le vin qu’il contietit de meilleure 
quatiti qu’ik  ne Pest en effef.” (“One does not judge the quality of wine by its container’s appearance; one determines 
it by  taste, and it is an illusion  to think that the mark on the outside of a cask will make the quality of the wine 
contained any better than it actually is.”) As  quoted in Richard, supra, footnote 1, at 55. 

8  Richard argues that Bordeaux went so far in its protection  of its wines that it managed to turn every other 

region against it, contributing to the eventual demise of the privileges; see Richard, supra, footnote 1, at 60. 

9  It  was well recognized that where soil was poor, the growth of vines was often one of the few options open, 

and deserved to be encouraged, by  the grant of monopolies. 

864 

THE  

Bordeaux to build  up a financial surplus so they could afford to import grain to feed 
the population. 10 

The  injection  into  the  debate  of  rural  and  agricultural  policy  considerations 
deserves attention. It was for the purpose of ensuring that poor soil areas were indirectly 
protected  or  subsidized  in  relation  to  growing  vines  that  much  of  the  original 
geographically-based  protection  systems  were  devised.  The  fact  that  GIs  are  an 
instrument  of rural  policy  is  stdl in  evidence  today-as  mentioned  in  Part  I  of  this 
article-and  the Preamble to Regulation 2081192 of the European Union states, in part: 
“ ...  whereas  the  promotion  of  products  having  certain  characteristics  could  be  of 
considerable benefit to the rural economy, in particular to less-favoured or remote areas, by 
improving the incomes of farmers and by  retaining the rural population in these areas;”.” 

2.  CHAMPAGNE: 

REGULATION  FROM  PAST  TO PRESENT 

Champagne has a somewhat different history.12 In 1670 the sparung “mousse” style 
was accidentally discovered by Dom Perignon, a Beneddne monk, cellar master at the 
Abbey of Hautvillers near Epernay in France. Initially the new style came under vigorous 
attack. But the reputation of Champagne grew steadily both in France and, importantly, 
also  abroad. By  1854-1855  nearly 2.5 d i o n  bottles  of wine were sold in France and 
nearly  7  million  abroad;  in  1872-1873  19 million  were sold  abroad,  and just  before 
World War I total sales were about 30 d i o n  bottles, two-thirds  ofwhich was abroad.13 
The Champagne appellation in the modern  sense was initially delineated  in 1908 
over an area of 15,000 hectares. In 1927 it was definitively circumscribed for an area of 
34,000  hectares. A set of thirty-five  rules  controls  every  aspect  of the production  of 
Champagne: 

planting and pruning of vines; 

-  the grape varieties used; 
- 
-  limited yields; 
-  harvest by hand; 
-  minimum ageing periods.14 

‘0  In fact, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, much ofthe central attack on Bordeaux’s privileges was 
inspired by the desire to encourage the growing of wheat; authorities wanted to prevent  the substitution of vines 
for wheat to ensure a sufficient supply of the latter. The Bordelais twisted this argument to their advantage: giving 
Bordeaux more privileges would turn others off planting vines, thus maintaining wheat production! 

11  Council Regulation  (EEc)  No. 2081/92 of 14 July 1992 on the protection of geographical indications and 
designations of origin  for agricultural products  and foodstuffi, 0.J. L.  208, 24 July  1992; see also D.  Hangard, 
Protection  .f Trademarks  and  Geographical Indications  in  France  and  in  the  European  Union,  Symposium  of  the 
International Protection of Geographical Indications 65,75,  1999. 
12  The information provided in this part is largely derived &om R. Hodez, Du droif d I’appellafion Champagne, 

Presses Univenitaires de France, 1923. 

‘3  See Hodez, ibid., at  12. 
l4  Recently, the minimum ageing period was increased to fifteen months for non-vintage  and three years for 
vintage Champagnes. The use ofvintage and non-vintage Champagnes adds vital flexibility to the system and allows 
some balancing out qua production  levels over time. 

REGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

865 

Vineyards are not allowed to be planted just anywhere in the Champagne region, 
but are restricted to hasides with particular soil characteristics. Nigociants (merchants) 
buy  grapes  to  augment  their  own  vineyard’s production  and  then  go  through  the 
complex and labour-intensive production processes required. 

The result is said to have a unique character, notwithstanding the fact that there are 
numerous  imitations  around  the  world.  The  system  of  regulation  and  control  is 
the  model  of  an  Appellation  d’Origine  Confr6lEe  (Aoc);  wine  production  is  heavily 
regulated, in an endeavour to guarantee its close connection with both the human and 
the physical characteristics of a  narrowly circumscribed region. Stringent quality and 
production  control  ensures stability over  time,  to  a  degree  at  least.  In  the  result,  as 
Hodez says: 

“Le vin de  Champagne correspond  d  des  qualitis obtenues avec les plus grandes  dgcultis et  ci grand 
frais; il est donc nicessaire de protiger le  mot qui sert d  le disigner.”15 

3.  NATIONAL REGULATION  T O  PREVENT ABUSES 

Regulation in the Ancien REgime was piecemeal and adapted to local political and 
historical privileges and conditions, rather than based on a uniform national approach. 
It was very much inspired by the fear of fraudulent admixtures and false attachment of 
names. At that time, since it was not possible to test adulteration chemically, a very high 
degree  of specific regulation and supervision of production  was  required to  prevent 
subterfuge.  This  obviously  imposed  enormous  costs  and  resulted  in  regulatory 
constraints whose effect was anti-competitive. It was only with difficulty that the notion 
of  appellation  of  origin  managed  to  emerge  from  ths  regulatory  morass  once  the 
privileges were later abolished, and to become the focus of regulatory efforts: 

“Pendant la grande partie  du xrxiPme  siMe, les  abus  en matiPre de  marques et  d’appellations itaient 
giniralement considiris comme des faits nomaux . . . Quant  au respect de l’appellation d’origine, il n’a 
p u  s’obtenir que progressivement et avec beaucoup de peine.”16 
Early twentieth-century  France saw the start of an era of more general regulation 
of production and trade in foodstuffs, and of wines in particular. Uncertainty about the 
delimitation of wine-producing regions, and adjacent frauds, was finally removed by the 
Law of 6 May 1919 concerning Appellations  d’origine. This Law fured the principles of 
delimitation of regions, and defined the characteristics that the products had to have, as 

‘ 5   “The wine of Champagne has characteristics that are obtained at very great cost and with great dificulty; 
therefore it is necessary to protect the word that identifies it.” 
‘6  “During  the  greater  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  abuses  of marks and  appellations were  generally 
considered to be par for the course . . . Respect for appellations of origin only emerged gradually and with great 
effort.”: see Hodez, supra, footnote 12, at 18-19,  This despite several general measures aimed at protecting regional 
names against imitation and against uses such as  “in the style of ...”; see Law of 22 Germinal XI,  12 April 1803. 
General provisions of Napoleon’s Code  Civil (Article 1382) and Code  Phal (Article 423) were applicable but the 
Law of 28 July 1824 was a complementary and more specific measure expressly making Article 423 applicable to 
false  indications on  goods,  inter  alia  concerning  the  place  where  they  were  made.  Other laws  were  directed 
specifically at fraudulent adulteration and achxture, culminating in the law of 1 August 1905 “Concerning fraud 
in the sale of goods and falsification of foodstufi and agricultural products.” 

866 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

well  as  the  protection  measures  afforded  them.”  In  1935,  the  general  system  of 
establishment of Aocs, under the supervision of a Committee that, fi-om 1947 onwards, 
became the INAO (Institst National des Appellations d’origine), was set up under the Law 
( h i - d h e t )  of 30 July. 

Nonetheless,  a  well-protected  AOC such  as  Champagne,  with  all  its  attendant 
goodwill, naturally encouraged rival traders if not actually to use the same name to make 
their goods more attractive, then  at least to attempt to ride on its coat-tails “tantdt par 
d’adroits subtefuges ou de dijormations de mots qui leurpermettentpafois  d’iviter  de tomber sous 
le coup de la lei".'* The modern-day approach to registered GIs for wines, which is very 
strict  and  does  not  permit  the  use  of  the  GI  in  combination with  other  terms,  in 
translations, in  the  form  of  “ ... -style”,  etc.,  or with  clear  disclaimers, originates in 
earlier recognition of, and attempts to stamp out, this kind of duplicity. 

4.  FROM NATIONAL TO INTERNATIONAL  PROTECTION 

Although the protection of GIs, as  it emerged during the nineteenth century and 
then  evolved  from  piecemeal  regulation  to  generally  applicable  ahnistration,  was 
gradually strengthened and the use of names such as Champagne brought under control 
within France, unrestrained use of French names continued abroad. International treaties 
such as Paris  1883 and Madrid 189119 did contain provisions against Mse inmcations of 
origin. But neither these nor more spec&  treaties signed during the twentieth century- 
in particular Lisbon-had  much effect outside a s m a l l  number ofjurismctions that already 
favoured registered  GIs.20  Thus,  before  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and recent bilateral agreements, it fell to non-State 
actors to pursue the cause of the protection of GIs around the globe. 

The actions of the  Comitt! Interprofessionnet  du  Vin de  Champagne  (CIVC) are well 
known  in this regard.  However, the  efforts of the  CIVC did not meet with  universal 
success,21 and in any case they were oflittle or no assistance to owners of other registered 
GIs.  Hence,  the  international  treaty  negotiations  in  the  context  of  TRIPS offered 
proponents an opportunity to make uniform advances favouring all producers using GIs, 
continuing the expansion of protection by  registration from the local, to the national, 
to the regional and finally to the global arena. In France, historical developments have 
culminated in the current system combining the pre-existing system of Aocs with the 

See Hodez, supra, footnote 12, at 20. 

the effect of the law.” 

18  Ibid., at 21:  “ ... by cunning subterfuge or modification of terms which sometimes allowed them to escape 
l9  The Paris Convention for the  Protection of Industrial Property,  1883; The Madrid  Agreement  for the 

Repression of False or Deceptive Indications of Source on Goods, 1891. 

2o  The Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration, 

1958; the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 
Articles 22-24. 

21  See, for instance, in Australia, Comitt Intetprofpssionel du  Vin de Champagne u. N.L. Burton Pfy Ltd., (1981) 57 

FLR 434. 

REGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

867 

superimposed structure of PDO/PGIS (protected designations of origin/protected  GIs) 
resulting  from  European  Council  Regulation  2081/92,  which  deals  with  such 
protection (see further below). Olszak points out that: 

“Malgre  le  souci  habitue1 de precision  que  l’on  connait  en  droit,  la  teminologie  employee  duns  notre 
domaine demeure malheureusement  assezjuctuante.”22 
Terminological confusion abounds in this area of the law, but there is no doubt that 
the system of AOCS is universally recognized as the high water mark of protection for 
registered GIs.  The description below illustrates the  complexity and pervasiveness of 
such a high-level system of registration of GIs. Together with the EU PDO/PGI model, 
it is a significant model in terms of the global expansion of GI protection by registration 
proposed by the EU in the context of TRIPS. 

5.  THE CURRENT SYSTEM OF  GI REGISTRATION IN FRANCE 

Leaving registered  trade-marks  law  issues  aside,  French  law  relating  to  GIs  in 
general has  three  levels  of  regulation; one  general,  aimed  at  preventing  misleading 
conduct  in  relation  to  geographical names,  and  two  relating  to  the  regstration  of 
geographical  indications  with  varying  levels  of  quality  significance.  As  a  general 
principle,  geographical  indications  can  be  used  freely,u  subject  to  the  general 
prohibition on the use of false indications of orign, by virtue of Section L 217-6 of the 
Code de  la  Consommation. Any person who attaches or knowingly uses any indication 
on or in relation to any goods, in a manner that causes others to believe that they have 
an  origin other  than  their  true  origin, is  in breach of the  Code.  However,  the  law 
expressly provides that if the true origin is clearly marked on the product, no liability 
wdl  ensue, unless  the false indication of origin is  a protected  (i.e. registered) regional 
designation.24 

22  The current system of protection of geographical indications in France is well described in N. Olszak, Droit 
des  Appellationr  d’Ongine, Tec&Doc,  Chapter 111, Le droit j a n p i s  des  indications  Ceographiques,  2001.  For a recent 
precis of  the  protection  of GIs  in  the broad  sense, see  also  F.  Pollaud-Dulian,  Droit  de  la  propriitl  industnulie, 
Montchrestien, 1999.  For  this  passage,  see  Olszak,  at  69:  “Despite  the  usual  desire for  precision  in  law,  the 
terminology in our area of study [i.e. that of GIs in general] unfortunately remains fluid.” 

23  See Olszak, ibid., at 152. 
24  For all products  in  general, Article L  115-2  to  4C of the  Code de  la  Consommation does provide  for an 
administrative procedure for the registration of designations of origin. A prescribed process of public inquiry and 
consultation with affected industry groups results in a decree of the Conseil d’Etat. Only very few registrations have 
been  granted by  this method,  and  now it is  only relevant for industrial products, as  procedures for agricultural 
produce and foodstuffs are now integrated in the regular procedure for PDOS (or AOPS, to use the French acronym), 
Aocs for wines, and PCIS (or IGPS), paralleling the European Union system (see further below). The administrative 
procedure is an alternative to the longer establishedjudicial procedure, finding its origins in the Law of 6 May 1919 
and now codified in Article L 115-8  to L 115-15 of the Code de la Consommation. This procedure allows conflicts 
concerning  the  legitimate use  of denominations  to  be  referred  to  a  court, which  can  resolve the  conflict and 
determine for the future the delimitation of an area and the characteristics of the product concerned. This process 
was previously mainly used  in  relation  to  wine, and  only rarely  in relation  to industrial products;  according to 
Olszak, supra, footnote 22 at p.  15, it was  last used  in  1986. DEcision  Crenoble,  Ire  Ch., 14 February  1989, PIBD, 
1989, 111,  118, relating to the term Raviole du Dauphine. 

868 

THE  

But  agricultural  produce  and  foodstuffs,  inclulng  wines,  are  far  more 

prescriptively regulated than products in general. As  Olszak puts it: 

“. . . les produits agricoles et les denries alimentaires font l’objet  d’une politique particuliirement ditaillie 
et complexe, en raison de l’importance ividente des terroirs dans leur cas.”25 
This level of regulation is  so  extensive and pervasive  that  Olszak  argues  that  the 
exercise of the theoretical right/fieedom to employ simple indications of provenance is 
now liable, in almost every case, to fall foul of the protection afforded to Aocs and PGIS 
(the French acronym is IGP). In other words, the system of registered GIs has progressively 
become more predominant and virtually displaced reliance on unfair competition torts. 

6.  ADMINISTRATION OF THE GI  REGISTRATIONS BY THE INAO 

The registration system for food and wine GIs is administered through the Institcrt 
National des Appellations  d ’Ongine, which previously (before 1990) was only responsible 
for wines and spirits and in relation to the grant of Aocs, but now is responsible also for 
the grant of PGIs, and for all agricultural products and food. The system administered by 
the  INAO, which itself is  a  complex body constituted of numerous national and local 
committees,  is  the  apogee  of  regulation,  enforcing the  closest  connection  between 
origin and quality control. 

Although  this,  accordmg  to  Olszak,  is  not  essential,26  the  registration process  is 
n o d y  instigated  by  an interested local  synlcate.27 The request  is  examined by  INAO 
officials and then, after  consultation of the relevant  regional committee, by  the national 
committee responsible for the produce category in question. Ths committee then opens an 
inquiry and commissions experts’ reports (whch are submitted to the national committee). 
The committee then rejects, adjourns or approves the proposed project, in the latter case 
appointing a delimitation committee to determine the definition of the terroirs (soils) withn 
the denomination. Ths, in turn, is incorporated in a draft Decree whch, once approved, 
is submitted for promulgation to the Minister for Agriculture. The Minister cannot amend 
but  can  rehse  to promulgate, and thus the process is  subject to an  ultimate exercise  of 
political rather than administrative control. The whole process is subject to review by  the 
Conseil d’Etat. According to Olszak, applications for review to the  Conseif are now more 
common, in particular with respect to anti-competitiveness and procedural conformity.28 
When the Decree is promulgated, the INAO is responsible,  through its inspection system, 
for the supervision and control required by the Decree’s provisions.  It is  also competent, 
both nationally and internationally, to pursue infiingers, as are the relevant syndicates. 

because of the evident importance of terroin [soils].” 

25  “. . . agricultural produce and foodstut5 are subject to a particularly detailed and complex policy approach, 
26  See Olszak, supra, footnote 22, at 158. 
27  Indeed,  in  order  to  obtain  EU  registration  under  Regulation  2081/92  this  is  mandatory-a 

instigated by the INAO itself would result in a registration ineligible for European notification. 

process 

28  See Olszak, supra, footnote 22. 

REGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

869 

The AOC corresponds to the Community FDO, and the EU definition is said by Olszak 

to be applicable. He summarizes the characteristics of the AOC in the following terms: 

“C’est d’abord  utae appellation d’ongine encadrhe par un ensemble complexe de controles administratiji 
et syndicaux, dans la  reconnaissance, la  dhlimitation et la prod~ction.”~~ 
Whereas the AOC system pre-dates  European Regulation 2081192, the grant of PGIs 
represents a systematization  of previously  &sparate approaches.  As  such, it  is  a  relative 
novelty in the French legal landscape. The pre-existing system of “labeZs”30 and “Certfiation 
de Confomitk”  forms the exclusive basis for the grant ofPGIs via the INAO processes. In other 
words,  PGIS cannot  be  granted  unless  they  incorporate  a  “label”  or  a  certificate  of 
conformity  which  has  been  granted  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  adrmnistrative 
procedure. Not all labels or certifications, of course, incorporate a geographcal element.31 
As dustrated above, the French system is partly the inspiration for, and partly based 
on, the EU Regulation 2081/92 system of registration of PDOs and PGIS. It is therefore 
opportune  to  examine  the  EU rules  for  registration of GIs  more  closely  as  to  their 
substantive requirements and rights. The EU-wide registration system for the protection 
of  GIs  also  illustrates the  steady expansion of high-level  registration: from local,  to 
national, to regional, to global. 

B.  T h e  European  System $Registration 

It is not the case that there was strong universal support for the expansion of high- 
level GI protection beyond its heartland by way of adoption of an EU regional system 
of registered G I s . ~ ~  Certain northern-European countries, although recognizing actions 
for  unfair  competition  and  the  like  in  relation to  place  names,  did  not  provide  for 
registration for products at all, or only for wine.33 Nonetheless, European harmonisation 

29  Ibid., at  162-163:  “It is above all a designation of origin surrounded by a complex set of administrative and 

syndicate controls, both in its recognition, its delimitation and in production.” 

30  The English term “label” is the term used in France in this context. 
31  Labels will only be granted where the product to be labelled (with what is known as a label rouge, i.e. a red 
label)  is  an  edible  or  other  unprocessed  agricultural  product,  which  itself  is  different  &om  the  currently 
commercialized product, in either production, processing or geographical origin.  This implies  a quality at  least 
different from, if not better than,  the norm, usually due to its artisanal and local production.  The Certificate of 
Conformity,  on the other hand,  implies no more than that  the  goods are produced in conformity with certain 
certified requirements  in  relation  to  production, processing or  geographical origin.  In  truth,  Certificates  only 
indicate conformity to certain rules of production, which does not necessarily imply greater quality than the norm. 
But,  according  to  Olszak,  they  are  usually  promoted  as importing guarantees  of better  quality.  Again,  only 
recognized Certificates incorporating a geographical indlcation will be able to be registered as PGK. 

32  The EU  system is  not  the  only  regional  registration system  for  GIs;  e.g.  Decision  486  of the  Andean 
Community concerning a Common Intellectual Property Regime, which entered into force on 1 December 2000. 
Note that by virtue ofArticle 212 of that Decision, there is no limitation as to type ofproduct for which appellations 
of origin can be protected, whether natural, agricultural, handicraft or industrial. 

33  Germany, incidentally, undertook, in the Treaty of Versailles, to protect a large number of French GIs. Another 
example of a country without registration for goods in general is Ausma; as pointed out in the Opinion of the Advocate- 
General in the Spreeudder Gurken case (see Opinion of the Advocate-General, 5 April 2001, in Cad Kuhne GmbH & Co. 
u. Juho  f i m m f & i k   GmbH  G Co.  KG, Case  C-269/99),  the  northern  Member  States in  general did  not  have 
registration systems, relying on legislation relating to misleading and deceptive conduct. This caused some ditficulty, since 
these States did not dispose of established lists fiom which to noafv names to the Commission when Regulation 2081192 
came into force-they had to draw up such lists and determine whch names would qualify as registrable indications. 

870 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

was  achieved by  the  introduction  of an EU-wide  registration system  for  GIs  for  all 
foodstuffs, in  1992.34 Partially, the  Register  consists of notified  GIs  emanating from 
national Registers pre-dating the EU-wide  system, and partly it consists of applications 
made since. This Register excludes wines,35 which are the subject of a separate system 
by  virtue  of  Council  Regulation  1493/99  of  17  May  1999  on  the  Common 
Organisation of the Market in Wine. 

The most  celebrated case  under Regulation  2081/92  is,  arguably, the  Feta  cheese 
decision.36  The  long  process,  which  ultimately  resulted  in  the  registration  of feta, 
dustrates some of the difficulties faced with the introduction of new levels of protection 
for GIs across still disparate jurisdictions, and the dsruption to well-established practices 
and uses  that can result. The European Commission ultimately recognized  ‘tfeta”  as  a 
registered GI, rejecting arguments that  the term was  a  generic descriptor of a style of 
cheese. As a result the term can only be used by producers in certain areas in Greece in 
accordance with  strict product  standards. Well-established  producers of  cheese  who 
employed the denomination as  a  generic will be compelled to convert to alternative 
names or alternative products, or cease production altogether. 

1.  REGULATION  2081/92: PDOS AND PGIS 

EC Regulation 2081/92  provides for two  categories of registered  GIs: protected 
designations of origin and protected geographical indcations.37 The essential dfference 
between  the  two  categories  is  that  for  a  PDO, all  the  production,  processing,  and 
preparation  must  occur  within  the  designated  area.  For  a  PGI, only  one  of  either 
production, processing  or  preparation  must  take  place  within  the  designated  area.38 
Further, whereas indirect GIs can be registered as PDOS, they cannot be registered as PGIS. 
The PDO category equates to the previously established AOC system for wines in Fran~e.3~ 

As well, for a PDO, the quality or characteristics of the product must be “essentially 
or exclusively due to a particular geographical environment with its inherent natural and 
human factors”, whereas for a PGI, “a specific quality, reputation or other characteristics 
[must be]  attributable to that geographical orign” (Article 2(a) and (b)). So, even if a 

34  Council Regulation (EEc) No. 2081/92, 14 July 1992, supra footnote 11, 1-8. 
35  Ibid., Article 1. 
36  See Council  Regulation  (EC) No.  1829/2002 of 14 October 2002.  Subject to  the fulfilment of certain 
conditions, producers in other States of the European  Union dispose of a five-year  transition period before they 
have to change the name of their product or cease production. 

37 In this sense, and in the statutory definitions of Regulation 2081, the European model and categorizations 

parallel the French AOC system; see G. Schricker, Recht  der  Werbung in Europa, Nomos (Looseleaf), at 47. 

38  So, for example, ham may be processed and prepared in the designated area, but if the pork is derived from 
pigs imported from outside the area, the resulting ham may be entitled to a “protected geographical indication” but 
not to a “protected designation of origin”. Nonetheless, by virtue  of Article 2(4) of Regulation 2081, if the raw 
material comes from a different, but defined area, production there is under special conditions, and the condxions 
are enforced by an inspection system, then the product concerned is entitled to a “protected designation of origin” 
rather than a mere “protected geographical indication”. 
Protectionfor  Geographical Indications in the  Wro TRIPS Agreement,  5 J.W.I.P.  6, November 2002, at 865. 

39  See  F.  Addor  and A.  Grazioli,  Geographical  Indications  beyond  Wines and  Spirifs-A  Roadmapfor  a  Better 

REGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

871 

product emanates from within an area and is entirely processed and prepared there, it 
may not be entitled to a PDO if it cannot be established that its quality or characteristics 
are  “essentially or exclusively” due to the  geographical environment which  includes 
both human and natural characteristics.40 In the Spreewalder  Gurken case the Advocate- 
General,  in  his  Opinion,  touched  upon  the  essential  hstinction:  the  Spreewalder 
gherkins were known to consumers to originate &om the Spreewald area and therefore 
have certain qualities, hence they would be entitled to registration as a PDO, rather than 
just  as  a  PGI, which  would  have  been  appropriate had  the  term  been  regarded  by 
consumers as simply referring to the style of processing or recipe of the gherluns.41 

AU applications for PDO or PGI registration must be accompanied by specifications, 
including  details  concerning  geographical  limits,  production  methods,  “and,  if 
appropriate, the authentic and unvarying local methods” (Article 4(2)(e)), and the link 
between  geography  and  qualities  of  the  product.  Member  States  must  police  the 
continued application of the specifications in the relevant area. 

2.  THE SCOPE OF PROTECTION 

Although  more  stringent criteria  apply  to  the  grant  of  PDO status,  there  is  no 
difference in the protection enjoyed by both PDOS and PGIS. A registered GI cannot be 
used  in  relation  to  products  that  do  not  comply  with  the  specification-producers 
within the designated area are thus compelled to use the specified processes and sources, 
etc. By virtue of Article 13 of Regulation  2081/92,  the protection has  all  the typical 
characteristics of high-level GI registration? 

- 
- 

- 

prohibiting any use of the name on comparable products; 
prohibiting  use  in  any  circumstances-i.e. 
products-if  using the name exploits the reputation of the protected GI; 

also  in  relation  to  unrelated 

prohibiting imitations, evocations, translations or use with  certain qualifying 
terms such as “imitation”; 

-  prohibiting  false  or  misleading  indications  of  any  kind  on  containers, 
packaging, advertising, etc.,  and  use  of  containers liable  to  convey  a  false 
impression as to origin; or 
anything else  that is liable to mislead  the public  as  to the true  origin of the 
product (see Article 13(1)). 

- 

Registered names also cannot become generic (Article 13(3)), but as seen above, a 

name that is generic cannot be registered. 

40 The differences between  the French and Enghsh versions are the source of some uncertainty. The French 

text being clearer, I have preferred that. 

4’  See Opinion of the Advocate-General in the Spreewalder Gurken case, supra, footnote 33. 
42  As analysed in Part I of this article. 

872 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

The term “evocation”-which 

is weaker than “imitation” and thus further extends 
the  scope  of protection  of  the  registered  name-was 
considered  in  the  Cambozola 
decision of the European Court of Justice  (EcJ). Because “Cambozola” has  the same 
number of syllables, and the same ending (-ola) as the registered term  “Gorgonzola”, 
the phonetic and visual simdarity would conjure up a mental association in the minds 
of  consumers,  given  the  similarity  between  the  products.  It  was  not  necessary  to 
establish a likelihood of confusion.43 

The  scope  of  protection  under  Regulation  2081/92  is  thus  undoubtedly  very 
broad. One would expect the threshold for registration to be concomitantly high. This 
is  clearly  the  case  for PDOS, but  the  requirements for  registration  of  a  PGI are  less 
stringent. Nonetheless,  the  two  requirements of geographical origin  and  enforceable 
product standards are present to some degree for both categories. If one accepts that the 
level of geographical connection required for the  grant of a PGI is  sufficient, the EU 
system has  the  characteristics, identified above, of a  system  with  a  sound theoretical 
basis.  However,  it  emerges  clearly  from  the  foregoing  discussion  of  the  associated 
administrative, regulatory and supervisory structures that such a system comes at a high 
cost, both  in financial terms and in terms of administrative constraints on agricultural 
and commercial decision-making. 

By  contrast,  under  the  Australian  system of  registered  GIs  for  wines,  which  is 
briefly outlined below, such costs and constraints are much reduced, because it imposes 
minimal product  standards. The guarantee  of consistent quality is  almost exclusively 
indirect, i.e. it is derived from a requirement of geographical origin only, without any 
additional requirements to follow more- or less-elaborate specifications. This Australian 
wine system (there is no general product equivalent) parallels the U.S. approach as, for 
instance, employed in the wine-growing areas of Cahfornia, and is thoroughly different 
from the EU system.44 While more flexible, it is arguably less sound in theory, although 
it  does  have  the  incidental benefit  of  reducing  future  transaction  costs  by  a  p~iori 
delineation of geographical boundaries. 

C.  THE AUSTRALIAN  MODEL: REGISTERED  GIS FOR WINE 

The  Australian  system  was  established  in  the  wake  of  the  signature  of  the 
Australia-EU  Wine  Agreement.45  This  Agreement  bound  Australia  to  providing 
registered GI-type  protection  for European registered wine  GIs; for that purpose  an 
Australian  Regster  of  some  sort  was  required.  Because  the  Agreement  also 

43  Gorgonzola/Cambozola, ECJ, 4 March  1999, (1999) ECR I,  1301, as commented upon by  R. Knaak,  Case- 
Law  of the  ECJ on  the  Protection  of Geographical  Indications  and  Designations  of  Origin  Pursuant  to  EC  Regulation 
No. 2081/92, IIC 32, 375-484,  2001, at 383. 
44  The Australian  system  approximates the  Californian  system  much  more  closely;  see  W.  Moran,  Wine 
Appellations as  Territory in France and California, 83 Annals ofthe Association ofAmerican Geographers, Vol. 4,1993, 
at706 et seq. 

 
_
45  By way of amendment of the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Act, 1980  l h ) .  

_

mGISTERED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 

873 

incorporates  an  undertaking  by  the  EU  to  protect  Australian  regstered  GIs,  the 
legislation also provides for a mechanism for assessment and registration of Australian 
wine GIs.46 

In contrast to the European model, the connection between geography and quality 
required  under  the  Australian provisions is  tenuous; as  long as  the  wine  concerned 
contains 85 percent or more of grapes grown in the designated area, the registered GI 
can  be  used.47  It  does  not  matter  how  or  where  the  wine  is  processed.  The  only 
guarantee of consistent quality or character lies in the fact that the area of the designation 
is  determined on the basis  of statutory factors that  should ensure a  certain degree of 
homogeneity of geographical features and conditions.48 But in truth, the designated area 
can be quite large and because there is such a multitude of factors that the Act requires 
to be considered, it can also be geographically heterogenous.49 Not one single further 
requirement is  imposed: no  specifications, no restrictions qua varietals, production  or 
processing methods, colour or style of wine, etc. Although an Australian registered GI 
may  thus have a reputation predominantly for certain varietals-for 
example, Barossa 
is no legal restriction on dfferent varietals being sold 
for Cabernet Sauvignon-there 
under the same GI as long as 85 percent of the grapes are from within the designated 
area.50 

Contrast t h s  with French Aocs, or the requirements to be met for European PDOS. 
It  is  immediately apparent  that  the  Australian system  is  based  on  a  rather  different 
philosophy. Partly, of course, it is not based  on any philosophy at all, but was simply a 
minimal response to the exigencies of the EU Agreement. Some have argued that the 
connection between geography and quality ofwines is unproven at the best oftimes, and 

46  The complexities involved in administering a system even as relatively simple as this are well illustrated by 
the  case  concerning the  Coonawarra  GI;  see  Coonawarra  Penola  Wine Itgdustry  Association,  fnc.  G. Others  and 
Geographical Indications  Committee, [2001] AATA 844, 5 October 2001. 

47  Regulation 21 of the Australian  Wine and Brandy Corporation Regulations,  1981, provides that  at least 
85 millilitres per litre must originate from grapes within the designated region; see also Section 5D of the Australian 
Wine and Brandy Corporation Act, 1980 (Cth): Where  Wine Originates. 

48  It has been advocated that it may make sense in some cases to restrict the types of grape variety grown in a 
GI: “Restrict the we ofa G I  to wines that are made onlyfrom  limitedgrape varieties?  ‘Never!’ we say. However, we know that 
there is a much greater value  to  the name  or desctiption  ‘Coonawarra Cabernet’  than  to  ‘Coonawarra Riesling’.  Perhaps that 
is only because of a lack of adequate experimentation to date, but the concept of particular regions being best suited 
to particular grapes is well acknowledged in  Australia. That is, of course, the first step on the path.”  (emphasis 
added): see S. Stern and  C. Fund,  The Australian System of Registration and  Protection of Geographical  Indicationsfor 
Wines, Flinden Journal of Law Reform, Vol. 5, Issue 1, 2000, on page accompanying footnote 7. The term “Gl” 
in Australia does “not necessarily mean, or imply anything unique about the location’s climate or environment.“: 
id. Yet, further  in the same article, the authors say:  “Our system of wine GIs is,  at  the present time, no more 
informative to consumers than the indication of source ‘Carrera [sic] Marble’. This is because they tell consumers 
nothing about the product save the source ofthe raw materials, namely, the grapes. There is nothing said even about 
the quality ofthe grapes themselves let alone about the wine that incorporates them. It is this omission that I believe 
needs to be addressed, if not now, at some time in the near future.  Certainly I hope that this can happen before 
consumers see  that  our  system  gives  little  useful  information  about  the  wine  bearing the  GI.”:  text  on  page 
accompanying footnotes 10 and 11. 

49  See Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Regulations,  1981, Regulation 25. 
50  In  California, where a very sirmlar system exists, the ATF, which  is  the responsible administrative body, 
stresses  that  they  do not  wish  to  “give the  impression by  approving  a viticultural area that  it  is  approving  or 
endorsing the quality ofthe wine &om this area”, and that granting an area status implies it is different but not better 
than surrounding areas: as quoted in Moran, supra, footnote 44, at 707. 

874 

THE  

the  Australian  system  seems  to  implicitly  endorse  this  sce~ticism.5~ With  areas  of 
provenance that are both large and geographically diverse, the system requires little real 
connection between local conditions and quality characteristics of the wine.52 It may well 
be that the Australian system of GI registration, therefore, given the conclusions arrived 
at above, has little to  commend it in theory. But it is  an  unsurprising adaptation of a 
European registration model to manifestly different Australian agricultural and industrial 
policies, conditions and practices. Legitimacy is traded off in favour of flexibility. 

11.  CONCLUSION 

This trade-off illustrates the conundrum faced when considering policy in relation 
to  GI  registration systems.  On the one hand, to justify the  strong rights granted, not 
subject to any defence of genericness-and  with a strict prohibition on use even in good 
system  of  registered  GIs  should 
faith  or  in  the  absence  of  consumer  deception-a 
require an intimate geographical connection and high and pervasive product standards. 
O n  the  other  hand,  if  a  system  with  such  characteristics  is  adopted,  restraints  on 
competition, grave rigihties in terms of land use, production levels and innovation, and 
considerable private and social costs are imposed. 

Some might question whether GI regstration really should be regarded as a branch 
of intellectual property at all, and belonging in TRIPS. In many ways, it is a system which 
contributes to the implementation of rural and agricultural policies. Whether or not a 
system of GI registration should be adopted, and the shape it should have, is  therefore 
largely a question determined by  the nature of rural industries in a gven jurisdiction, 
the  broader  agricultural and  rural  policy  framework, and  historical conditions. It  is 
certainly the  case  that  where some regulatory fiamework does not  already exist, and 
regional reputation is less pervasively used  in the market for foodstuffs, the arguments 
for and against the introduction of a GI Register should be very carefully weighed. 

enhanced  by  imitation  or  not-the 

Furthermore, GI registration does not in itselfresult in a valuable reputation. While 
some  geographical  terms  from European  countries may  benefit  from  an  established 
worldwide  reputation-whether 
investment 
required  to  generate  positive  consumer  recognition  for  little-known  terms  is  very 
considerable. Such efforts at differentiation can only generate adequate returns in the 
long  run.  It  may  also  be  that  there  are  more  flexible  alternatives available  for  the 
promotion  of local reputation,  such as  certification  trade  marks,  or  that  reliance  on 
corporate brands is a perfectly effective tool for the promotion of rural and agricultural 
produce, just as it is for other products. 

51  See Section IV.C in Part I  of this article. 
52  See Moran, supra, footnote 44. 


