The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 1–2, pp. 65–85

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12031

Plant Variety Protection Regime in Relation to
Relevant International Obligations: Implications
for Smallholder Farmers in Kenya

Peter Munyi
Law and Governance Group Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands

Together with other laws affecting agriculture, Kenya’s plant varieties protection legislation was radically amended in
2012. The amendments were mainly driven by the quest to comply with international obligations, principally the 1991
UPOV Convention. However, the country is also a contracting party to other international treaties affecting seeds such as
the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and the WTO Agreement on Trade Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. Moreover, the national Constitution obligates statutory recognition and
protection of the ownership of indigenous seeds and plant varieties, their genetic and diverse characteristics, and their use
by the communities of Kenya. The obligations deriving from all these international agreements must be fulﬁlled against
a backdrop of farming systems that are predominantly smallholder farmer-based. This article discusses how the
amendments in the new Kenya plant variety protection law depart from the former legal regime and analyzes whether
the current regime is compliant with international obligations, and the implications for smallholder farmers.

Keywords breeders-rights; plant varieties; smallholder farmers

International PVP Obligations and Domestication Dilemmas

This article analyzes the revision of a domestic plant variety protection regime in Kenya against the
backdrop of a set of international obligations and farming systems that are predominantly smallholder
farmer based. The article addresses questions regarding how the global PVP architecture has inﬂuenced
domestic legislation, and its implications for smallholder farmers. In the area of intellectual property
protection, globalization, and the correspondent development of international instruments deﬁning
relations among nations has become a catalyst to proliferation of legislation governing intellectual
property rights (IPRs), in particular to developing countries such as Kenya.

Adopted in 1994, the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) stands out in this context, foremost because it constitutes part of an
international legally binding agreement to which an enforcement mechanism is available. National
compliance with its provisions is therefore one of the key pillars of the implementation of TRIPS. The
requirement under TRIPS that intellectual property protection must be provided for plant varieties
provided a logical opportunity for the International Union for Protection of New Varieties of Plants
(UPOV) to present itself as the obvious de facto sui generis mechanism for protection of plant varieties
(PVP). Seen in the broader context of IPRs, contention exists on whether PVP promotes industrial
enterprise, enabling innovation, and ultimately providing farmers and gardeners more choice and varieties
of better yield and quality.1 Mooney (1979) argues that PVP among other effects: (i) encourage economic
concentration; (ii) threaten traditional agriculture and food security; (iii) constrain free exchange of
germplasm; (iv) contribute to genetic erosion; (v) threaten biodiversity; and (vi) lead to appropriation of
what is otherwise common heritage for mankind.

This debate was at the heart of the negotiations throughout the 1980s and 1990s that culminated in
the adoption of Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), and the International Treaty on Plant

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

65


