The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 189–212

Elements for Legislation in User Countries
to Meet the Fair and Equitable
Benefit-Sharing Commitment

Morten Walle Tvedt

Fridtjof Nansen Institute

The third objective of the Convention on the Biological Diversity, the fair and equitable
beniﬁt sharing of the use of genetic resources, is lagging behind at the implementation phase.
Very few countries have taken effective measures to promote sharing of beneﬁts arising from
the use of genetic resources. This article offers some suggestions as to why this is the case and
poses a number of questions that need to be dealt with before such a system can be in place. It
develops the concept of genetic resources and suggests that the focus need to be at the
successful end uses of genetic material rather than at the point in time when genetic material
is found in the nature.

Kewords genetic resources; user-country legislation; beneﬁt sharing

Introduction

Implementation of the third objective of the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD), ‘‘the fair and equitable sharing of the beneﬁts arising out of the utilization
of genetic resources’’, lags behind at the implementation phase.1 This became
clearly apparent at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in
Johannesburg, which emphasized that the CBD is ‘‘. . .the key instrument for the
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and the fair and equitable
sharing of beneﬁts arising from use of genetic resources’’.2 All the countries present
agreed and recognized that:

A more efﬁcient and coherent implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention and the achievement by 2010 of a signiﬁcant reduction in the
current rate of loss of biological diversity will require the provision of new and
additional ﬁnancial and technical resources to developing countries, and
includes actions at all levels . . .3

Therefore, the World Summit agreed by consensus to:

(o) Negotiate within the framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
bearing in mind the Bonn Guidelines, an international regime to promote and
safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of beneﬁts arising out of the utilization
of genetic resources;4

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

189

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

The seventh Conference of the Parties (COP-7) of the CBD mandated the so-
called Ad Hoc Working Group on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing (the Working Group)
to:

. . . elaborate and negotiate an international regime on access to genetic
resources and beneﬁt-sharing with the aim of adopting an instrument/
instruments to effectively implement the provisions in Article 15 and Article
8(j) of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the three objectives of the
Convention;5

The Working Group met in Bangkok in February 2005.6 It emphasized a gap
analysis as one step forward towards fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing. In
September 2005, the governments of South Africa and Norway hosted an interna-
tional expert meeting in Cape Town with the aim of creating a better understanding
of key issues in the CBD negotiations on an international regime on access and
beneﬁt sharing (ABS) and to identify relevant gaps that must be solved. The co-
chairs’ summary and the record of the discussions from the workshop will be
submitted to the CBD Secretariat for distribution as information documents in
advance of the fourth meeting in the Working Group.7 At the meeting in September
2005, important gaps were already identiﬁed. This article discusses some of the gaps
and concerns raised in the discussions at the Cape Town meeting as a point of
departure for technical legal analysis relevant to the future work of the Working
Group.8

The goal of the work in the Working Group

The mandate of the Working Group opens for ‘‘. . . adopting an instrument/
instruments to effectively implement the provisions in Article 15 . . . and the three
objectives of the Convention’’. The emphasis is on the effective implementation of
the already existing obligations according to Article 15 of the CBD. Equally
important according to the mandate is the effective implementation of the three
objectives of the CBD.

The terms ‘‘instrument/instruments’’ are broad. They include, but are not
restricted to, the negotiation of an annex to the CBD,9 a protocol to the CBD,10
a guideline undertaken by a regular decision (such as the Bonn Guidelines), or could
consist of any other legal form that emphasizes the effective implementation of
Article 15 and the objectives of the CBD. The outcome could, for example, be a
model law for user countries or an international mechanism for beneﬁt sharing.
Each of these instruments will entail different procedures for adoption. The
Working Group might also adopt more than one instrument. The mandate uses
the term ‘‘regime’’, but this does not give much guidance. ‘‘Regimes’’ are often
deﬁned as ‘‘implicit or explicit principles, norms, rules and decision-making
procedures around which actors’ expectations converge in a given issue-area’’.11
According to this deﬁnition, the CBD is clearly a regime. When the mandate uses

190

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

the term ‘‘regime’’ it must clearly also encompass an element or single stand-alone
instrument.

The content of the expected outcome is also speciﬁed in the wording of the
mandate. It shall ‘‘. . . effectively implement the provisions in Article 15 . . . and the
three objectives of the Convention’’. The objectives of the outcome are clearly
deﬁned and, thus, indicate the direction for the negotiations. The mandate leaves
considerable manoeuvring room for the Working Group to choose the most
relevant methods to implement Article 15 and the objectives of the CBD.

Even though the objectives are so clearly deﬁned, Finston (2005) for example,
confuses the debate by stating that there is no consensus among members to the
CBD on where this process shall lead.12 Unfortunately, she emphasizes problems
rather than solutions by concluding that ‘‘Now more than ever, it is important for
the developing country Members of the CBD to identify their destination in terms
of their strategic commercial interests, and to map out a strategy for reaching their
goals’’.13 First, the interest of developing countries is probably broader than
‘‘strategic commercial interests’’. Second, the aim of the process is the effective
implementation of the objectives of the CBD including ‘‘the fair and equitable
sharing of the beneﬁts arising out of the utilization of genetic resources’’.14 This was
agreed by all countries at the WSSD, follows clearly from the mandate from COP-7
of the CBD and is not altered later in the process.15 How this can be done most
effectively is the topic up for discussion.16 The Cape Town meeting organized by the
governments of South Africa and Norway gave a number of interesting leads on
this.

Identifying two major gaps for fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing

The problem of access legislation
To ﬁnd adequate solutions, there is a need to analyse the reasons for the present
problems. Until the COP-7, focus has been foremost on access legislation. The
Bonn Guidelines illustrate this by almost exclusively addressing measures to be
taken in the provider country.17 There is an emerging common understanding that
perhaps access legislation is not the only accurate approach needed to achieve fair
and equitable beneﬁt sharing. States are parties to the CBD. Value in biotechnology
is created foremost by private parties under the jurisdiction of another country or
under the jurisdiction of a number of countries. A general principle of law is that if
private persons or companies shall be legally obliged, the obligation must be
implemented in the relevant jurisdiction. The principle of legality applies if the
state or anyone other than a contractual partner seeks to establish a burden upon a
private person. In most countries the parliament must have implemented such an
obligation in the national legal system before a private party shall be obliged to
share a part of the beneﬁts. A major obstacle for access legislation is that the law of
one country is to be enforced upon private parties under the jurisdiction of another
country.18 This is a general problem faced by international law for most cross-

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

191

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

boundary activities and global interaction. This obstacle can probably not be solved
generally, but needs to be particularly addressed regarding access and beneﬁt
sharing under the CBD. The speciﬁc way in which this problem can be solved is
to implement legislation in the countries where genetic resources are being used.

Access legislation is also under pressure from industry representatives, who
identifying it as a major cause for creating legal uncertainty.19 Often this uncer-
tainty is argued to have led to a declined interest in biological and genetic material.
The warning from industry regarding the problems created by access legislation
should be taken into account in future works. Perhaps one important virtue of the
new instruments is to establish a predictable and clear situation for industry and
research, within the countries where they operate.

Problems stemming from a contractual approach
Private law contracts are often promoted as the solution instead of and in
combination with access legislation.20 The concept ‘‘mutually agreed terms’’
indicates some kind of agreement. ‘‘Prior informed consent’’ indicates more of a
one-sided approval by the providing country. These two legal concepts have been
addressed extensively. An obvious advantage to using contracts is that industry is
accustomed to this legal tool. Effective contract laws including systems for
enforcement are also in place in the majority of countries, increasing the chance
of achieving the content of an agreement. There are, however, some serious gaps
before the contractual approach is likely to fulﬁl the objectives of the CBD.

Contracts are legal arrangements between two (or more) private parties. The
system rests upon the basic assumption that these two private parties have partly
overlapping interests that they negotiate and enter into a more or less balanced
agreement. For access to genetic resources, this is seldom the situation. On one side
of the negotiations there is one clearly deﬁned private party: the company or
research institution seeking access. On the other side of the negotiations, there is a
less clearly deﬁned or totally undeﬁned party. The lack of the evident counterpart
entails an obstacle for industry willing to enter into an access contract. There are
some experiences of this problem applying to industry that tried to enter into a
contract, but ended up being accused of biopiracy due to failure to ﬁnd a coherent
and representative counterpart for the access agreement. From the perspective of
developing countries, there are a couple of major obstacles. The private party could
easily obtain the same or similar genetic material from other sources or without
entering into negotiation. There is also often a gap in negotiating capacity between
the private corporation and the government of a developing country, placing the
latter in a difﬁcult negotiating position.

A contract applies between the two parties signing the contract. Biological
material is often transferred from one user to another. Therefore, a contractual
strategy leaves a gap of legal uncertainty for users of genetic material. One strategy
could be to include a clause that limits the right to transfer the genetic material to
third parties to the contract; another strategy could be allowing such transfer only if

192

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

the next person or company agrees to the same conditions as the primary user. The
possibility for enforcement with respect to these third parties and later successors
will be limited as they are not obliged by the ﬁrst contract. Another problem of
these strategies is that this type of contractual restriction upon transfer might have a
chilling effect on exchange of genetic resources.

At the Cape Town meeting, Clive Stannard raised the issue of whether it is at all
possible to create public goods by using private contracts. This is a relevant
question for a number of reasons. First, the basic assumption of contracts that
there is a legal arrangement between two private parties does not necessarily take
into account the plurality of needs. Second, on many occasions the ones most in
need of a share of the beneﬁts arising from biotechnology are those with the least
capacity to fulﬁl their needs by using contracts. One typical example is sick people
in poor countries. Their capacity to achieve their needs by the use of contracts is
very limited. Depending only upon a bilateral private law contractual approach will
hardly ever have a potential to fulﬁl their needs. Third, several actors using genetic
material do not have specialized knowledge about law, contracts or the interna-
tional legal system. This also exposes them to the risk of not succeeding by the use
of contracts.

Possible solution to these problems—implementation of legislation in user countries
The experience from 12 years with the CBD is that to rely only upon the twofold
approach—access legislation in provider countries and private contracts—has not
been sufﬁcient to reach the third objective of the CBD. The challenge rests in
creating an international and national legal situation that is more efﬁcient in respect
of providing beneﬁt sharing. At the Cape Town meeting, several of the speakers
identiﬁed the lack of implementation rather than the lack of international obliga-
tions as the major obstacle for fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing. For example:
‘‘Many of the perceived ‘gaps’ that have created a demand for development of
an [international regime] are, arguably, actually gaps in the development of
national policies, laws and regulations’’.21 Implementing national measures target-
ing private parties (person or company) in the jurisdiction where the value of genetic
resources is being captured will overcome these two main obstacles. Perhaps, the
Working Group should therefore single out one topic to deal with ﬁrst: how to
create a legal situation that will ensure fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing in the user
countries.22

The remainder of this article explores options and obstacles for such user-
country legislation. The fourth section explores genetic resources as a particular type
of natural resources. The ﬁfth section looks at principles for valuation of genetic
resources. The sixth section discusses various options and elements that could form
a part of an international regime for ABS. The seventh section provides a look at
the negotiations in the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) most
relevant for having an effect upon the conditions for beneﬁt sharing under the CBD.

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

193

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

The subject matter for user-country legislation—genetic resources

The point of departure—the wording of the CBD
A basic question that needs to be clariﬁed before implementing user-country
legislation is the scope of its obligations. Thus, the legal concept genetic resources
must be clariﬁed, as it presently is used with a number of different meanings, which
raise distinct challenges. The term genetic resources builds upon the deﬁnition of
genetic material, which is ‘‘any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin
containing functional units’’.23 Genetic material includes all biological material
where there are functional units of heredity.

Perhaps some samples of genetic material could be traced and followed by
certiﬁcates, disclosure requirements or private law agreements, for example genetic
material of cattle. Generally, these legal tools, however, presuppose a complex web
of legislation to be enforceable. There are considerable obstacles related to follow-
ing genetic material from the time it is accessed until
it is successfully used
commercially. In the majority of situations, tracing the origin of the genetic material
used in the end product will involve substantial problems.24 Functional units of
heredity (e.g. genes) are present in all biological material, also when used for bulk
purposes. For example, a ﬂower exported for horticulture purposes will typically
contain seeds and thus genetic material. Grains exported as food contain genes and
could potentially be used in breeding. Biological material contains genes and thus
may potentially be used for its genetic material. Small quanta of biological samples
can be sufﬁcient to capture the interesting genetic material. A necessary precondi-
tion for effective access legislation to create beneﬁt sharing would require preven-
tion of unauthorized access or use. As there are major obstacles related to
controlling the export of genetic material, such exclusive control will not be effective
to achieve beneﬁt sharing.

The qualifying term ‘‘actual or potential value’’ establishes an important
distinction between genetic material and genetic resources. The focus is on certain
types of value arising from the use of biological or genetic material. The difﬁcult
issue is to determine the types of value the CBD seeks to capture by this deﬁnition of
genetic resources. The term ‘‘actual or potential value’’ can be understood as the
value of the biological material when it is used to take advantage of the functional
units of heredity. If this understanding of the legal concept is applied, the concept
genetic resources will be geared towards uses of biological material for certain
purposes or categories of uses.

Could the purpose of the access be the relevant criterion?
One theoretically clear understanding of genetic resources could be the intentions or
purpose of the person or company having access to the biological material. This,
however, implies a challenge for access legislation: as functional units of heredity
are present in all biological material, also when sold for the purpose of commod-
ities, the scope of the access legislation would have been solely dependent upon the
purpose or intention of the one seeking to move the biological resources across a

194

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

boarder. It is hardly possible to survey the intention of every individual transfer of
biological material containing functional units of heredity. The intention is not
manifest in any objective manner at the point of time of access. To base enforce-
ment mechanisms or a court case upon a criterion as subjective as the original
intention of the exporter is close to impossible. Both researchers and industry need
to be faced with a clear legal situation for the genetic material brought to the
laboratory for doing research. Choosing intention as a criterion will also not create
the predictable situation for research and industry receiving the biological material.
The primary intention for the access to biological material also changes over time
after the genetic material has left the country. Access legislation targeting the
primary intention will therefore not be robust enough to capture the value created
later. To link the obligation to the intention of the user is probably not a successful
strategy to achieve beneﬁt sharing. Thus, the deﬁnition cannot be linked to such a
subjective criterion.

Drawing beneﬁts from utilization of genetic material
The qualifying term ‘‘of actual or potential value’’ and, thus, the concept genetic
resources must be understood in the context used in the CBD. The beneﬁt-sharing
obligation is focused on sharing ‘‘the beneﬁts arising out of the utilization of genetic
resources’’25 and ‘‘the results of research and development and the beneﬁts arising
from the commercial and other utilization of genetic resources’’.26 Common for these
formulations is that they are geared towards the utilization of, rather than the
access to or export of, biological material. They cover the value of biological
material when used for capturing the actual or potential value of genetic material. A
practical application of the deﬁnition of genetic resources should strive towards
capturing the actual or potential value of the use of functional units of heredity. At
present, the scope of the existing legislation and the international discussions is
seldom focused on the value created by the utilization of genetic material, but rather
is focused on an unpredictable deﬁnition of ‘‘genetic resources’’. This is an
important gap that needs to be bridged by the Working Group to reach the
objectives of its work.

The legal concept ‘‘genetic resources’’ could be understood as all activities that,
in result, capture the actual or potential value of genetic material by taking
advantage of the ‘‘functional units of heredity’’. The terms utilization, results of
research and development and commercial and other utilization indicate a compre-
hensive scope. The solution for implementation of access legislation rests in an
interpretation of the CBD, and could be found by linking the concept genetic
resources to speciﬁc uses of biological material. Linking the deﬁnition to the end use
rather than the intention will clearly prepare the ground for legislation in user
countries.

This, however, does not solve all challenges. The scope of Article 15 of the CBD
targets the cross-boundary situation when genetic resources are used in another
country. The gap of enforcement under the jurisdiction of another country will not

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

195

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

automatically be bridged. Implementation in user countries is still required. To
focus the deﬁnition of genetic resources on a number of uses prepares the ground
for implementing legislation in user countries.

Which uses of genetic material should be included?
The concepts utilization, results of research and development and commercial and
other utilization are also somewhat broad and need to be developed more speciﬁ-
cally. The lack of physical control over genetic material by possession emphasizes
that the beneﬁt-sharing obligation should be triggered by speciﬁc uses of genetic
resources or for certain forms of drawing beneﬁts from them rather than access to
the genetic material.27

Innovation and development in biotechnology are dynamic by nature. For a
legal system to be able to keep up with development in such a dynamic area, there is
a need for robust deﬁnitions that are able to adapt to all relevant changes. A lesson
can be learned from patent law, where all the main criteria (e.g. invention, novelty
and inventiveness) are dynamic and evolutionary by nature, making the patent
system perfectly robust in adapting to changes in technological research and
development. Changes are done by altering the interpretation and practice of the
terms rather than amending the wording of the acts. If the CBD-related law is to
learn from the patent system, there is a need to include dynamic elements in the
legislation. The deﬁnition of genetic resources is well suited for including such a
dynamic element.

The most comprehensive approach would be to specify that all results of
biotechnology based upon biological and genetic material are covered and should
trigger beneﬁt sharing. Such a broad approach would lead to a wide and unspeciﬁc
scope of the obligation, and would disregard the differences among users of genetic
resources. Therefore, the Working Group might want to specify the uses included in
more detail.

Catalogue of uses or manners to draw beneﬁts
A related approach could be that clearly deﬁned uses of biological and genetic
material count as genetic resources. This could be called a catalogue approach.
Biological material is, however, used in numerous ways. It is a difﬁcult task to list
all kinds of use of biological material when the beneﬁts have been drawn from the
direct use of the genetic resources. A great deal of ﬂexibility might be lost by such an
approach. This is perhaps an obstacle for approaching the conﬁnement of the term
genetic resources by listing a catalogue of uses. If establishing a clear list, one should
have the need for ﬂexibility in mind and develop categories that are formulated in a
dynamic manner.

Conﬁning use of genetic material by criteria
An alternative or perhaps supplemental approach could be a criteria approach. If
the plurality of uses shall be taken sufﬁciently into account, perhaps the deﬁnition
of genetic resources could be based on certain criteria. The challenge would be to

196

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

formulate the relevant criteria taking the need for a dynamic situation and
predictability equally into account.

Perhaps, one relevant trigger criterion could be that the genetic material used
would no longer be open for being used by others.28 This could be formulated as if
the use of others is reduced or delimited. To establish exclusivity over a shared
resource is in economic theory a successful way of creating or increasing the value of
the open resource. Thus, it would probably be an effective tool to capture the value
added by the genetic resources to link the beneﬁt-sharing obligation to the capture
of such a value. One way of establishing a time-limited exclusive right to use genes is
to grant a patent. Perhaps, therefore, the issuing of a patent could trigger beneﬁt
sharing. One advantage of this criterion is that it is a well-deﬁned point of time that
is fairly transparent. Being granted a patent is, however, not identical to creating
any economic or other beneﬁts from the use of genetic material. Also, to link the
beneﬁt-sharing obligation to patenting would leave the user-country legislation
dependent upon the practice of another legal system, which might turn out to
become a challenge.

If academic use of genetic material is not included as one beneﬁt-sharing
activity, the system will probably create a ﬂexible situation for research. If the
outcome of the academic research is formulated as one relevant category of uses of
genetic resources that trigger beneﬁt sharing, perhaps the need of the provider
country to capture a part of the subsequent commercial success of academic use
may also be met.

The Working Group should discuss and deﬁne the relevant uses of genetic
material that are covered by the scope of the beneﬁt-sharing obligation. These
deﬁning criteria must be concrete and speciﬁc if they are to serve as a model for how
user countries can implement it in their legislation. The Working Group should
address relevant criteria or formulate a catalogue of uses that would be relevant for
conﬁning the user obligation.

Derivatives from genetic resources—unknitting a Gordian knot
A contiguous or tense issue for the negotiations in the CBD is that of derivatives
from the use of genetic resources.29 The whole problem of derivatives arises from
looking at genetic resources as a static type of natural resources that could be
regulated at the point of time of access. The difﬁcult question is: what is the degree
of similarity between the accessed material and the end product that is under the
scope of access legislation and beneﬁt-sharing obligation?30

The solution to this problem can be found directly in the interpretation of the
term genetic resources presented above. If beneﬁt-sharing legislation is linked to the
end uses and the value created by the use of genetic material rather than to access to
it, the problem of derivatives will automatically be solved. The deﬁnition of genetic
resources understood as the utilization, results of research and development or
commercial and other utilization already encompasses what is often referred to as
‘‘derivatives’’, since they refer to the point in time when the value of the genetic

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

197

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

material is captured. Thus, the problem of derivatives will be avoided by the
deﬁnition of the relevant activities drawing beneﬁts from the functional units of
heredity (acts of utilization) that will be required to meet the beneﬁt-sharing
obligation.

In a situation where there is either a catalogue of uses or well-deﬁned criteria for
uses that trigger the beneﬁt-sharing obligation according to the CBD, the next topic
to address is the level of beneﬁts that should be shared.

Principles for calculating beneﬁt sharing

Beneﬁt sharing shall be ‘‘fair and equitable’’
The CBD uses the term ‘‘fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing’’ both as the main
objective and an operational obligation. Member countries to the CBD are legally
obliged to ensure a certain level of beneﬁt sharing. The concept fair and equitable
beneﬁt sharing is the most neglected term in the CBD. Not all levels of beneﬁt
sharing comply with the obligation fair and equitable. The difﬁcult question that
must be dealt with is: what is the content of the legally binding obligation? When is
beneﬁt sharing fair and equitable?

Despite the fact that this obligation follows directly from the wording, it is
among the topics in the CBD that have received least attention. For example, in one
of the more recent publications on the subject of ‘‘beneﬁt sharing’’, it is dealt with as
follows:

The adjectives ‘‘fair’’ and ‘‘equitable’’ remain unclear. This is probably due to
the fact that the adequacy of the beneﬁts depends on the circumstances of the
individual case. Generally, conditions shall be fair and practical for both the
provider and the user.31

This formulation expresses that the content of the term remains unclear. One
reason for this legal concept remaining unclear is perhaps that it is seldom
addressed. The book Beyond Access will deal with this concept of law, both at
the level of international law (the obligation according to the CBD) and in national
legislation (in the user countries).32

Recognizing the value of genetic resources

One step on the path to achieving fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing is to rethink the
value added by genetic resources. The value created by agriculture and other
applications of genetic resources is substantial. Biotechnology contributes to added
value to society.33 It is dependent on genes, cells, proteins, biological material,
related knowledge and various forms of technology. The term ‘‘biotechnology’’
covers a twofold dependency relationship constructed by the two terms ‘‘bio’’ and
‘‘technology’’, emphasizing two equally important components: technology and
biology. Imagine genes removed from the picture; then gene- and biotechnology
would not have been possible. Knowledge is the other necessary factor. Both of

198

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

these essential pillars are preconditions for one of the most rapidly growing parts of
society.

The emphasis on access rather than end use has also led to a gap with respect to
the valuation of genetic resources. The estimates of the value of genetic resources
are repeatedly claimed to be insigniﬁcant.34 These low estimates are then used as an
argument against regulating rights to genetic material and beneﬁt sharing.35
Interestingly enough, this argument is often claimed by the biotech industry,36
which inherently depends upon the use of biological material (in addition to
synthetic products). Correspondingly, the value creation from sectors of industry
using genetic resources is substantial and increasing.37 This is a paradox, which
turns into an obstacle for fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing.

Some attempts have been made to articulate the value of genetic resources. One
common approach is to repeat that the value of genetic resources is determined by
negotiation between two private parties. The CBD is, however, not primarily a tool
for creating a well-functioning international market for the negotiation and sale of
resources. If that had been the intention, the ABS legislation could have formed a
part of the international trade regime in the World Trade Organization (WTO). The
obligation and the objective of fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing emphasizes that the
scope for the CBD is not primarily to create such a market. Beneﬁt sharing is
phrased as a goal in itself according to the objectives of the CBD. In addition, it is a
tool and a mechanism to achieve the other two main objectives: conservation and
sustainable use.

Due to a number of reasons, including, for example, unequal negotiating power
and market failures, such a contractual approach to valuation does not necessarily
lead to a fair and equitable result and value of genetic resources. In Cape Town, this
was phrased as: ‘‘[c]urrent form of contractual approach is leading to low value of
individual transactions and not to full valuation of environmental services provided
by biodiversity’’.38

The private contract approach fails to include the value of the historical
contribution and value-adding efforts put into genetic resources. Genetic material
is not only pre-existing in nature, but is partly dependent on efforts by man. Genetic
material is exposed to being regarded as yet another commodity or natural resource
open for being conquered. The political choice of not harvesting the beneﬁts of
natural resources in bulk, as, for example, timber, oil or minerals, can easily be
altered. Thus, one can argue that there is a need for building an alternative value of
biological diversity. As the economic alternative value of biodiversity, as bulk
natural resources, is often high, the valuation of the genetic material must be
established adequately high in order to be a counterweight in balanced decision
making for the future. From this perspective, the manner for determining the value
of the genetic material is an important element of the political choice about whether
or not to reduce biodiversity in order to exploit other natural resources.

Unpredictability is often used as an argument to support a low estimate of the
value of genetic resources. In bioprospecting, the chance of a hit in random

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

199

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

screening may be low. Industry needs to do research on a number of samples in
order to get one hit. This low probability is often used as a main argument for
concluding that genetic material is of no value or of very low value. At the time of
access to genetic material, it is impossible to predict the value of the future outcome
from its use. This unpredictability is an important argument in favour of approach-
ing beneﬁt sharing at the point in time of success rather than at the uncertain time of
access. When the product is developed and sold in a market, the value of the total
end product becomes more evident. The gross sales income will give guidance to the
value of the outcome from the use of genetic resources.

Much of the value of genetic resources rests in the diversity per se: only a very
small amount of biological material is required to explore and exploit genetic
material. Therefore, it has been argued that the value of genetic material is very low.
This rests on the misassumption that the value of the genetic material is equal to
the cost of buying or acquiring the biological material. For example, the assumption
is that the buyer of a sack of beans on the market in a developing country pays the
price and thereby determines the value of the genetic material in the beans by the
same transaction. Sales of biological material are, however, geared towards its value
as a commodity. The buyer expects primarily to have a right to the bulk value of the
physical natural or biological resource. The valuation mechanisms in the commod-
ity markets do not reﬂect the potential and actual value of the genetic material. To
include these aspects in the value estimates of transactions involving bulk biological
material would put a burden of transaction costs on trade in commodities that these
markets could hardly be prepared for. Therefore, buying commodities can hardly
include the appropriation of a legitimate or legal right to the genetic material that is
inherently a part of the organisms sold for gross or bulk purposes. One consequence
is that the value of the single specimen of biological samples as commodities is not a
well-suited principle of valuation of genetic resources.

There is also a tendency of disregarding diversity as a resource. Each single
payment for acquisition is not primarily a compensation for one sample of a ﬂower
or a micro-organism. It is not the one ﬂower that is the resource that has been used.
The resource that has been used is the diversity per se. The resource for biotechnol-
ogy is not single specimens, not even the single species, but the fact that there is a
diversity of species and genes being kept and maintained available, often through
access to nature or collections in other countries. To maintain this possibility to
search for and ﬁnd the one useful specimen or genetic sequence, entire ecosystems
must be preserved, so that species can continue to ﬂourish and be of future interest
and value in research and development.

The question of value could be phrased as: what would the value of the product
have been without the genetic resources? Rather than asking how much it costs to
buy one sample of a specimen. It would be impossible to give an exact estimate of
this value to answer this question at the point in time of access or exchange of
genetic material. When the genetic material is accessed, the value it contributes is
completely uncertain and undetermined. This emphasizes the need for linking the

200

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

beneﬁt sharing to the use of genetic resources rather than to the access to such. This
solution to the beneﬁt-sharing requirement is consistent with the wording of the
CBD as it emphasizes ‘‘. . . sharing in a fair and equitable way the results of research
and development and the beneﬁts arising from the commercial and other utilization
of genetic resources . . .’’. The focus is on the results from the utilization that will be
evident when the genetic resources have already been used.

Linking the calculation of the amount of beneﬁt sharing to the outcome from
the end use would help reduce uncertainty for business compared to imposing a
beneﬁt-sharing obligation at the point of time of access. The methodology for
stipulating the beneﬁts that are to be shared must be developed so that business can
include it as a cost in the total budget of each project as a dependent variable linked
to the success of sales (perhaps weighed towards the relative contribution to the
total income). More speciﬁc methods for calculating such a level of beneﬁt sharing
need to be further developed in detail.

Developing a methodology for evaluating the contribution from genetic
resources

The recognition of the value of genetic resources needs to be turned into principles
for assessing the contribution made by this resource. A manner/approach/metho-
dology for the valuation of genetic resources that is internationally recognized
must be developed.39 Hardly any work has been done to develop these principles in
the time after the CBD entered into force.40 Thus, one important (or basic) issue to
be dealt with by the Working Group is how to award the value of the genetic
resources.

This is more of a technical question than a political question. Thus, there is a
pressing need for profound technical assistance and analysis with the aim of
presenting a methodology or concept for valuation of genetic resources.41 One core
issue is to have a method for calculating the size of the value added to the ﬁnal
product from the genetic resources that have been used to reach the said product or
process. The interesting question is how the relative contribution of all the necessary
elements can be measured.

A Norwegian—international group cooperating with Nordic and European
universities and research institutes is working on developing a distributed and
decentralized ‘‘open-source’’ system including a pool of knowledge. This system
includes a process for calculating the relative contribution from each individual
contribution in the pool of knowledge to each end product developed drawing upon
this pool. The main thought is to develop a system that, based on semantic analysis,
is able to track dependencies between formalized reports on development within a
deﬁned ﬁeld. The dependencies will create estimates of part of the revenue generated
from commercialization of mature products that depend upon each contribution to
the pool of knowledge. Monetary beneﬁts are intended to ﬂow back from the
commercialized end product to each relative contributor. The challenge, which is

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

201

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

not yet solved, is how to calculate the relative contribution from genetic resources
(traditional knowledge) to the commercialized end product. This is however
probably a technical question. It is particularly important, from a beneﬁt-sharing
perspective, that the value that genetic resources give to the technologies of the
future, such as nanotechnology, is recognized and made possible to enforce. In the
future, genetic materials may be analyzed and replicated in synthetic mechanical
nanoscale systems, and not used directly as genetic resource. It will be essential that
they are included in a common platform for calculating dependency and relative
contribution of value from genetic resources to such advanced systems to achieve
beneﬁt sharing in the future.

Products in gene- and biotechnology draw upon and are heavily dependent
upon the past work of a number of contributors. In agriculture, development is
much more of a continuum than an idea of one genius. A general idea for beneﬁt
sharing, that this system builds upon, is to create a system where not only the last
entity bringing a product to a market is rewarded. The relevant contributors to each
commercial product need to be recognized and receive their fair share of the value
according to their contribution. If a situation is created where the relative
contribution of genetic resources to products can be determined, there is still a
question of how to identify with whom the beneﬁts shall be shared.

With whom should such beneﬁts be shared?
The question of with whom beneﬁts shall be shared is a difﬁcult and perhaps
therefore a seldom discussed question. Analytically, it covers two different ques-
tions: (1) how shall beneﬁts be distributed internationally among countries; and (2)
how should they be distributed within each country, e.g. with private or public
entities? The second question perhaps needs differentiated solutions within different
countries.

For the ﬁrst question, one fundamental distinction may perhaps be drawn
between cases where it is not possible to identify the provider or origin of the genetic
resources and those cases where credible information exists about the provider. In
the latter situation, it will be possible for the creator of beneﬁts to identify the
receiver of beneﬁts. A well-functioning system for certiﬁcates of origin or provider
could be a helpful tool in this respect. When it is not possible to identify the provider
for any reason, the question of who should be the receiver arises. This is a practical
situation, since it is often difﬁcult to determine the source for genetic material if
information is not already there.42

In cases where information does not exist, the obligation in the CBD applies
just as strongly in favour of requiring beneﬁt sharing. Where no speciﬁc information
exists, beneﬁts might be shared in an international fund for conservation of
biological diversity that could distribute beneﬁts back to such efforts.43 This might
also have a long-term effect that users of genetic resources will provide better
information about from where the genetic material is found.

202

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

Choosing relevant instruments for implementation

Implementation of a beneﬁt-sharing obligation in user countries
The mandate of the Working Group is geared towards the implementation of both
access and beneﬁt sharing. As this article does not cover all topics relevant for
future work, its main focus will be on the beneﬁt-sharing aspects. To build a system
for beneﬁt sharing will affect the potential for ensuring access. The challenge dealt
with here is which legislative tools can be used to meet the beneﬁt-sharing
commitments according to the CBD.

Incentives and enforcement mechanisms
One gap is the lack of clear incentives for researchers and industry to comply with
the beneﬁt-sharing obligation. As the primary goal of private enterprises is to earn
money, beneﬁt sharing might easily become an extra cost for which there is no
economic spending justiﬁcation. The success of patent law partly rests in the fact
that the patentee has a very clear interest in enforcing the patent upon all other
commercial users of the invention. It is in the interest of the private party that others
comply with it. The incentive structure in the patent system brings economic
beneﬁts to the patentee. One challenge for the Working Group is how to establish
a sufﬁcient level of incentives for industry to share a fair and equitable part of the
beneﬁts arising from the use of genetic resources.

In a situation where there are few or weak incentives to comply with an
obligation, there is a stronger need for enforcement mechanisms. The mere presence
of effective enforcement mechanisms will often in itself have the effect of creating
incentives to comply with the obligation. This is a reason for including enforcement
mechanisms in the legislation in user countries. Due to the problem of enforcing
access legislation of another country, it will probably not be sufﬁcient to depend
only upon legislation in provider countries if the goal is to create an enforceable
system. Certiﬁcates of origin/legal provenance and disclosure of information are
two tools often being mentioned as mechanisms to implement ABS legislation.

International tools
Important work has been done to clarify how these legal tools could be developed.44
The difﬁcult question is how these tools shall function in the larger picture.

Certiﬁcates
Several interesting analyses and suggestions have been developed regarding certi-
ﬁcates suggesting different types of information to be certiﬁed, e.g. origin of the
genetic resources or the legal provenance of the access. There are some obstacles
that must be dealt with before a certiﬁcate system is going to create sharing of
beneﬁts. One gap is the special characteristics of genetic resources as a natural
resource. Genetic material can easily be transferred across borders and be used
whether or not they are followed by a certiﬁcate. Certiﬁcates are often used as
documentation of legality of activities. For example, you are only allowed to drive a
car with a permit, a certiﬁcate of your driving skills. However, the reason why the

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

203

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

lack of a driving license will hinder you from driving is not the mere absence of the
certiﬁcate, but the legislation saying you will be severely ﬁned or punished if driving
without a certiﬁcate. Applied to certiﬁcates on genetic resources, there is a need for
norms including sanctions if genetic resources are used without proper certiﬁcates.
If the lack of a certiﬁcate does not have any legal consequences, the likelihood of a
certiﬁcate system altering the behaviour of bio- and gene-technology users when it
comes to beneﬁt sharing is quite low. Therefore, the Working Group needs to
discuss how certiﬁcates can be included as a tool in the ABS legislation. A system
for certiﬁcates can be a relevant tool for identifying ‘‘with whom’’ beneﬁts shall be
shared.

Disclosure requirement
An often-quoted solution is to require disclosure of information about the sources,
the provider or the legal provenance of the genetic resources in the patent
application. There are proposals to include disclosure requirement in the patent
system in several fora.45 The proposals include various types and levels of
information.46 The patent system has been very reluctant to include such a
requirement. The reluctance has been especially strong towards including this as
a criterion for being granted a patent. A lot of political effort has been invested in
these proposals. Less attention has been given to how this information is supposed
to be used in order to achieve the objective and to fulﬁl the obligation of fair and
equitable beneﬁt sharing.

The primary outcome from requiring information about the origin of the
genetic material
is a large amount of information. This information will not
necessarily convert into any distribution of beneﬁts. One gap that will need to be
bridged is how to make use of this information for the purpose of meeting the
beneﬁt-sharing commitment. Therefore, disclosure requirements of any kind must
be paired with enforcement mechanisms to be a successful strategy. To avoid the
problem of extra-territoriality, the legal obligation must be geared towards the user
and the one capturing the beneﬁts. An obligation to give information can probably
function as an element of a system for distributing beneﬁts. Therefore, the high level
of political attention and pressure for an obligation to give information must be
discussed in a broader context addressing how this information is going to be used.

Obligations in user countries
These observations on certiﬁcates and disclosure of origin lead to the need for
institutions that can make use of such information and the need for interlinked
legislation in the user country. Before any of these tools are likely to create any
beneﬁt sharing, they must be enforceable in the jurisdiction where the beneﬁts from
genetic resources are generated.

Default contracts
One method to implement legislation in user countries that came up at the Cape
Town meeting, introduced by Jos ´e Carlos Fernandez, was by ‘‘Default Contracts/

204

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

Clauses’’. He described this as a legal tool applying to the use or capture of beneﬁts
from the use of genetic resources (ex post to access to genetic material). The details
in this suggestion need to be further developed. Perhaps one way to implement this
could be requirements that have to be met in the contract with the provider. Such a
general obligation could be coupled with a requirement to provide such contracts
when the trigger uses of genetic material occur. Such a minimum condition for
contracts could probably avoid some of the problems with private law contracts
discussed above if, for example, the level of beneﬁts to be shared is speciﬁed in the
legislation. Perhaps this can create sufﬁcient incentives for the users of genetic
material to comply with the beneﬁt-sharing commitments.

Such a solution would also provide stability for industry and research. A
default approach can create a clear and certain legal situation for biotechnology and
industry. Industry can, for example, calculate the percentage of their gross sales that
they must stipulate as beneﬁt-sharing costs. If such a minimum solution is chosen,
this would provide ﬂexibility for countries and companies as they still may enter
into contracts supplementing the minimum standard.

Developing standard user-country legislation
One instrument that might prove to be effective for the implementation could be for
the Working Group to develop a Standard User-Country Legislation.47 The
experience from the Bonn Guidelines is that offering a too broad scope of measures,
and thus numerous alternative possibilities, reduces the rate for successful imple-
mentation. Therefore, perhaps a concrete Standard User-Country Legislation could
be developed in a manner ready to be implemented directly into the legislation of
each country after translating them into the ofﬁcial language or languages of that
country. From the perspective of industry, to have a similar legal system in all
countries will create a clear and predictable legal situation. The various harmoniza-
tion treaties in the patent system contain clear treaty texts that are to be translated
into the legal language of each country. The result from this is a higher degree of
harmonization between countries. This emphasizes that there is also a need for the
beneﬁt-sharing legislation to create close to identical obligations in all user
countries. The content of such a Standard User-Country Legislation must contain
all the elements described and discussed above.

A look to the important draft substantive patent law treaty in WIPO

There are a number of parallel ongoing processes in other international fora
relevant to the work of the Working Group.48 The most important and most
neglected process is the negotiation of a Substantive Patent Law Treaty (SPLT) in
WIPO. In CBD fora, a surprisingly low degree of attention is given to the Standing
Committee on Patent Law.49

The draft SPLT suggests standards governing the patent criteria (novelty,
inventive step and industrial application), issues relevant for the patent applications
and the patent claims.50 The draft Treaty also includes a codiﬁcation of a severe

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

205

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

doctrine of equivalence that will give a legal basis for an expansive interpretation of
each patent that has been granted. This will affect patenting living organisms and
genes, especially since the draft SPLT is unclear whether it will maintain or close the
ﬂexibility provided in Article 27.3 of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement). The negotiations of the SPLT
have an holistic view covering all ﬁelds of innovation, even though special ﬁelds of
technology raise distinct challenges.51 This leads to a situation where it is quite
challenging to predict the consequences from the draft SPLT for each speciﬁc ﬁeld
of technology.

The SPLT negotiation includes three separate legal documents: the draft Treaty
(Substantive Patent Law Treaty, SPLT), the draft Regulations under the Substan-
tive Patent Law Treaty and the draft Practical Guidelines. Probably, only the draft
Treaty will be legally binding in the classic sense of international law, while the
Regulations and Practical Guidelines will not have treaty status and will not be
subject to ratiﬁcation by the parliaments of the contracting parties. Even though
these instruments are not treaties, they will have a normative effect when the SPLT
enters into force. Understanding the total effect of these three legal documents read
in conjunction is a complex issue.52 This exposes the negotiations to being biased in
favour of the countries pushing for the highest degree of harmonization.

The on-going negotiations are sailing under the ﬂag of technical negotiations of
patent law. The negotiations are undeniably technical. Several of the articles in the
draft Treaty and the draft Rules in the draft Regulation will
inﬂuence the
possibilities for achieving beneﬁt sharing.53 Little has been written about the
negotiations and they are barely within the scope of public attention. The Working
Group should probably analyse the effects that this treaty will have for future ABS
regulations.

Conclusion

One important lesson learnt in this article is that one major gap for achieving fair
and equitable beneﬁt sharing rests in the lack of implementation of clear obligations
upon the beneﬁciaries of genetic material. Therefore, the Working Group could
start with discussing how this gap could be bridged and look at elements in a
Standard User-Country Legislation. If there is also a need to look for other gaps, the
Working Group could conduct such a gap analysis in a parallel process.

This article has focused upon the need for clarifying the scope for a beneﬁt-
sharing obligation. One important step to bridge the beneﬁt-sharing gap is therefore
to deﬁne which uses of genetic material shall be under the scope of the term genetic
resources and thus are required to distribute a part of the beneﬁts arising from their
use. It is important to develop an understanding of genetic material as a resource
and not only any other raw material. These needs for conceptualizing user-country
measures and mechanisms for beneﬁt sharing were also the main ﬁndings from the
Cape Town meeting.

206

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

Since beneﬁts arising from the use of genetic resources are diverse, there is a
need for including dynamics and ﬂexibility into the legal system regulating them as
well. Such ﬂexibility, however, cannot include the possibility of industry not
complying with the norms embedded in the CBD at all. This emphasizes the need
for a minimum obligation applying to all as a supplement to the contractual
approach.

A dangerous strategy for developing countries is to put a too high a stake in the
disclosure requirements or in the certiﬁcates systems if they are not developed as
part of a total package of implementation of enforceable beneﬁt-sharing commit-
ments upon the beneﬁciaries. The discussions in the WIPO and the CBD indicate
that there is too much of a focus on these tools, and too little focus upon other more
legally binding mechanisms. Countries must be aware of the limits embedded in
these strategies regarding the potential to create any beneﬁt sharing.

The Working Group has a broad mandate. Its work could follow a number of
paths. Perhaps several instruments should be adopted to serve speciﬁc purposes.
The less discussed and most unclear concept, namely fair and equitable beneﬁt
sharing, needs to be discussed. The complexity of these topics underscores the need
for the Working Group to take one step at a time. Perhaps the most urgent issue to
address is the implementation of beneﬁt-sharing obligations upon the private party
beneﬁciaries of genetic resources. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of the Working Group
should be to focus on developing a Standard User-Country Legislation for user
countries.

Acknowledgements

The research presented in this article was ﬁnanced by the government of Norway
and the Norwegian Genetic Resource Council. The author wants to thank Senior
Research Fellow Kristin Rosendal at the Fridjof Nansen Institute, Birthe Ivars,
Grethe H. Evjen, Hadil da Rocha Vianna, Kees Noome and Preston Scott for
useful comments. He also wants to thank Tomme R. Young for inviting him to
participate in the Access Project at the World Conservation Union (IUCN), and
research assistants Ade` le and Therese for their help. The views presented in this
article do not reﬂect those of the Norwegian Government, of the participants at the
Cape Town meeting, or any of the persons having commented on the manuscript.

About the Author

Morten Walle Tvedt, research fellow at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Oslo, Norway,
and Cand. Jur., University of Oslo; e-mail: mwt@fni.no. Tredt has been working for
the Nordic Council of Ministers and the Norwegian Government on ABS issues. He is
currently involved in a Food and Agriculture Organization project on regulatory
options for farm animal genetic resources.

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

207

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Notes

1 The objectives of the CBD are as follows: ‘‘ . . . to be pursued in accordance with its

relevant provisions, are the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its
components and the fair and equitable sharing of the beneﬁts arising out of the
utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and
by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those
resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding’’ (Article 1).

2 Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, Article 42.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid., Article 42(o).
5 Decision by COP-7, UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, VII/19 D, p. 299.
6 The documents from the meeting are available at hhttp://www.biodiv.orgi.
7 See also hhttp://www.norsafworkshop.comi.
8 The mandate for the Working Group also covers implementation of the Article 8(j)

of the CBD, and thereby regulation of traditional knowledge (TK). Genetic resources
and TK are rather different kinds of resources and thus this article cannot cover
them both. Canada has announced that there will probably be an expert meeting on this
topic before the next meeting of the Working Group on Article 8j of the CBD. TK is also
dealt with in the work of the Intergovernmental Committee under WIPO, at
hhttp://www.wipo.orgi.

9 CBD, Article 30.

10 Ibid., Articles 28, 29 and 32.
11 Krasner (1982, pp. 185–205).
12 Finston (2005, pp. 141–155).
13 Ibid., p. 155.
14 CBD, Article 1.
15 Several speakers at the Cape Town meeting took this for granted, e.g. da Rocha Vianna

(2005).

16 Scott (2005) emphasizes that ‘‘It seems that one of the greatest contributions that an

ABS/IR could make towards more widespread implementation of the ABS provisions of
the CBD would be through development of an equitable, efﬁcient, transparent and
enforceable instrument that would facilitate access to genetic resources, encourage
research involving the use of those resources in ways that can generate added value
through new and useful discoveries and inventions, and provide for the sharing of
beneﬁts (as in any healthy cooperative joint venture)’’.

17 Bonn Guidelines, Articles 7, 16 and 42c.
18 Barber (2005) describes implementation as one of the main obstacles for beneﬁt-sharing.
19 E.g. Finston (2005, pp. 141–155). Safrin (1998) formulates a related question.
20 Scott (2005).
21 Barber (2005).
22 For an early discussion of the need for implementing user-country legislation see

Hendrickx, Koester and Prip (1993, pp. 254–255).

23 CBD, Article 2, tenth section read in conjunction with ninth section.
24 See, e.g., Fowler, Smale and Gaiji (2001) and Fowler et al. (2004).
25 CBD, Article 1 (emphasis added).
26 CBD, Article 15.7 (emphasis added).

208

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

27 Pythoud (2005) raises a question if ‘‘. . . there [is] a speciﬁc type of use of genetic

resources that might require additional international instruments to support
implementation of CBD Art. 15?’’.

28 See, e.g., the beneﬁt sharing of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for

Food and Agriculture, Article 13.2 (dii) 13.2(dii).

29 Fowler et al. (2004) and Chambers (2003, pp. 318–320).
30 Casas-Casta ˜neda (2005) argues that derivatives should be included in the calculation of

the fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing.

31 Dross and Wolff (2005, pp. 56–59) (with further references).
32 Tvedt and Young (2006), a forthcoming analysis called Beyond Access, part of the

Access Project at the IUCN. See aldo Dahr and Anuradha (2004).

33 Hodges (2005) and Osman (2005).
34 For example, Hirsch (2005), argues that: ‘‘We need to get past the green gold

expectation’’. One of his points is that ‘‘Perhaps there will be a few blockbuster drugs
created that will make fortunes for the lucky country of origin of the original substance,
but most new products are not the results of a single gene expression’’.

35 Hirsch (2005). Wolfe and Zycher (2005) present ﬁgures illustrating that value created

from biotechnology being high; and uses that as an argument for developed countries to
refrain from regulating beneﬁt sharing.

36 See, e.g., Finston (2005) (with further references).
37 Hodges (2005) refers to sales of only marine biotech products being estimated at some

US$100 million in 2000 (with further references).

38 Jos ´e Carlos Fernandez in his presentation in Cape Town.
39 da Rocha Vianna (2005).
40 A Norwegian study by Romstad and Stokstad (2005), Valuation of Genetic Resources,
discusses valuation of genetic resources but focuses only on the genetic resources as an
input to biotechnology rather than looking at the contribution made by genetic
resources. Their literature review concludes that due to the lack of alternate scenarios,
‘‘. . . the value estimates of most applied studies to date are questionable’’, at p. 24.

41 See, e.g., Casas-Casta ˜neda (2005).
42 Fowler et al. (2001).
43 Casas-Casta ˜neda (2005) suggests: ‘‘An international fund to reward efforts of

indigenous and local communities regarding the conservation and sustainable use of
biological resources, particularly of endemic resources in situ conditions’’.

44 Dutﬁeld (2002, pp. 899–932), UNU/IAS et al. (2003), Girsberger (2004, pp. 451–490),

Biswajit and Anuradha (2004, p. 610 sig) and WIPO Study No. 3.

45 Fora include the TRIPS Council of the WTO (see the proposal from the EU WTO

document IP/C/W/383); the Patent Cooperation Treaty under the WIPO (see the Swiss
proposal, WIPO document PCT/R/WG/4/13); the Intergovernmental Committee on
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC). It is, however, not
suggested in the Standing Committee on Law of the Patents for the draft Substantive
Patent Law Treaty (draft SPLT).

46 See, e.g., the implementation in the Norwegian Patent Act, section 8b: ‘‘For inventions

including or having used biological material, the patent application shall include
information of the country from where the inventor received or collected the material
(providing country). If the national law of the providing country requires a prior

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

209

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

informed consent for use of biological material, the application shall include information
regarding whether such prior informed consent is received.
In the case where the providing country is another than the country of origin for the
biological material, information about the country of origin shall be included. Country
of origin shall in this context be understood the country where the material was brought
out of its natural environment. If the national law of the country of origin requires a
prior informed consent for use of biological material, the application shall include
information regarding whether such prior informed consent is received. If information
described in this section is not known or available, the applicant shall include stating
this’’ (translation from Norwegian for this purpose). Such a solution to the beneﬁt-
sharing challenge was already suggested by Hendrickx et al. in 1993.

47 For a discussion of a mediation mechanisms under the CBD, see Chaytor, Gerster and

Herzog (2002).

48 For example, the Intergovernmental Committee on Genetic Resources, Traditional

Knowledge and Folklore (WIPO), the Development Agenda in the WIPO, the ongoing
work in the TRIPS Council of the WTO, and the negotiations of the standard material
transfer agreements for the multilateral system under the International Treaty on Plant
Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture in the Food and Agriculture Organization.
49 It was mentioned in the paper presented by the WIPO representative at the Cape Town

meeting, but the presentation did not analyse the interrelationship between the SPLT
process and the work of the Working Group.

50 These are the main topics regulated in the draft Treaty.
51 For example, Westerlund (2001) discusses profoundly the concepts of invention or

discovery, enabling disclosure and the doctrines of equivalence for biotech patents; and
Bostyn (2002) who discusses the requirement for enabling disclosure in depth. See also
the report from the Nufﬁeld Council (2001), which expresses several concerns.

52 See Tvedt (2005).
53 For an analysis of the effect of the draft SPLT on the public domain to genetic resources,
see, Tvedt (2005). Correa (2004) has, on behalf of the South Centre prepared a position
paper analysing the text from a developing-country perspective. This article does not
take a pure developing-country perspective, but a wider look at the relationship between
the new WIPO treaty and the public interest.

References

Barber, C.V. (2005) Deﬁning the Purpose, Scope and Modalities of an International Regime on

Genetic Resources Access and Beneﬁt Sharing: Some Issues for Discussion, paper
presented at the International Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources and
Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23 September 2005.

Biswajit, D. and Anuradha, R.V. (2004) Access, beneﬁt-sharing and intellectual property

rights, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 7(5), 597–640.

Bostyn, S.J.R. (2002) A European perspective on the ideal scope of protection and the

disclosure requirement for biotechnological inventions in a Harmonised patent system—
the quest for the Holy Grail?, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 5(6),
1013–1046.

210

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Morten Walle Tvedt

Casas-Casta ˜neda, F. (2005) User and Provider Country Measures in the Context of the

International Regime on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing, paper presented at the International
Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town,
20–23 September, 2005.

Chambers, W.B. (2003) Emerging international rules on the commercialization of genetic

resources—the FAO International Plant Genetic Treaty and CBD Bonn Guidelines, The
Journal of World Intellectual Property, 6(2), 311–328.

Chaytor, B., Gerster, R. and Herzog, T. (2002) The Convention on Biological Diversity—

exploring the creation of a mediation mechanism, The Journal of World Intellectual
Property, 5(2), 157–180.

Correa, C. (2004) The WIPO Draft Substantive Patent Law Treaty: a review of selected

provisions, Working Papers 17, South Centre.

da Rocha Vianna, H. (2005) Objectives and Possible Elements of an International Regime, and
its Nature, paper presented at the International Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic
Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23 September 2005.

Dahr, B. and Anuradha, R.V. (2004) Access, beneﬁt-sharing and intellectual property rights,

The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 7(5), 597–639.

Dross, M. and Wolff, F. (2005) New Elements of the International Regime on Access and

Beneﬁt-Sharing of Genetic Resources—the Role of Certiﬁcates of Origin, Federal Agency
for Nature Conservation, Germany.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2002) Sharing the beneﬁts of biodiversity—is there a role for the patent system,

The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 5(6), 899–932.

Finston, S.K. (2005) The relevance of genetic resources to the pharmaceutical industry—the

industry perspective, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 8(2), 141–156.

Fowler, C., Hawtin, G., Ortiz, R., Iwanaga, M. and Engels, J. (2004) The question of

derivatives—promoting use and ensuring availability of non-proprietary plant genetic
resources, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 7(5), 641–663.

Fowler, C., Smale, M. and Gaiji, S. (2001) Unequal exchange? recent transfers of agricultural
resources and their implications for developing countries, Development Policy Review,
19(2), 181–204.

Girsberger, M.A. (2004) Transparency measures under patent law regarding genetic

resources and traditional knowledge—disclosure of source and evidence of prior
informed consent and beneﬁt-sharing, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 7(4),
451–490.

Hendrickx, F., Koester, V. and Prip, C. (1993) Convention on Biological Diversity

access to genetic resources: a legal analysis, Environmental Policy and Law, 23(6),
254–255.

Hirsch, L. (2005) Provider and User Country Measures—Do Two Wrongs Ever Make a Right?,
paper presented at the International Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources
and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23 September 2005.

Hodges, T.J. (2005) Deep Sea Genetic Resources and the International ABS Regime:

Reﬂections on the Challenges Ahead, paper presented at the International Expert
Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23
September 2005.

Krasner, S. (1982) Structural causes and regime consequences: regimes as intervening

variables, International Organization, 36(2), 185–205.

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2

211

Morten Walle Tvedt

Elements for User-Country Legislation

Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics (2001) The Ethics of Patenting DNA, The Nufﬁeld Foundation

of Bioethics.

Osman, Mohamad bin (2005) Issues of Bioprospecting and Implementation of ABS Legislation
at National and Regional Levels, paper presented at the International Expert Workshop
on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23 September
2005.

Pythoud, F. (2005) The International Treaty on Plant genetic Resources for Food and

Agriculture, a Key Component of the International Regime on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing,
paper presented at the International Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources
and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town, 20–23 September 2005.

Romstad, E. and Stokstad, G. (2005): Valuation of Genetic Resources, study provided by the

Norwegian Council of Genetic Resources, at hhttp://www.genressurser.noi.

Safrin, S. (1998) Hyperownership in a time of biotechnological promise: the international

conﬂict to control the building blocks of life, The American Journal of International Law,
98, 641.

Scott, P.T. (2005) User and Provider Country Measures in the Context of the International

Regime: Some Thoughts and Observations Based on the Experiences of the Uniform
Biological Material Transfer Agreement Project, paper presented at the International
Expert Workshop on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing, Cape Town
20–23 September 2005.

Tvedt, M.W. (2005) How will a substantive patent law treaty affect the public domain for
genetic resources and biological material?, The Journal of World Intellectual Property,
8(3), 311–344.

Tvedt, M.W. and Young, T. (2006) Beyond Access, IUCN.
UNU/IAS, Barber, C.V., Johnston, S. and Tobin, B. (2003) User Measures—Options for
Developing Measures in User Countries to Implement the Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing
Provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations University of
Advanced Studies, March 2003.

Westerlund, L. (2001) Biotech Patents—Equivalency and Exclusions under European an US

Patent Law, Juridiska fakulteten vid Stockholms universitet.

WIPO Study No. 3. WIPO Technical Study on Patent Disclosure Requirements Related to

Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge, WIPO Publication No. 786(E).
Wolfe, T.A. and Zycher, B. (2005) Biotenological and Pharmaceutical Research and

Development Investment Under a Patent-Based Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing Regime,
Paciﬁc Research Institute.

212

r 2006 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2006) Vol. 9, no. 2


