The  (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 75–101

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2010.00410.x

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology
Transfer: A Conceptual–Empirical Synthesis of US
Evidence and Lessons for India

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Jawaharlal Nehru University

India’s post-independence technology policies relied heavily on public-funded research for indigenous technological
capacity building and technology development. However, public-funded research has failed to adequately
contribute to India’s industrial catch-up. India is now contemplating a new legislation similar to the US Bayh–Dole
Act 1980, to energize public-funded research for effective technology transfer. The Bayh–Dole Act was passed in
the United States in 1980 in response to the growing concern over the fact that federally funded inventions in the
United States were not reaching the market place. The act allowed universities to retain patent rights over
inventions arising out of federally funded research and to license those patents exclusively or non-exclusively at
their discretion. In this paper, we present a critical review of the US experience after the Bayh–Dole Act and argue
that the evidence is far from being unambiguous. We discuss the debate surrounding the act—the extent to which it
was successful in achieving its objectives, the unintended consequences, if any, and more generally, the effectiveness
of intellectual property rights as a vehicle of technology transfer from universities. The paper presents an Indian
perspective against the backdrop of the US experience in an attempt to draw concrete lessons for India.

Keywords public-funded research; Bayh–Dole Act; patents; India

Public-funded research is expected to play a key role in ushering in innovations for competitiveness and
economic growth, and inﬂuence a country’s technology trajectory. In the United States, public-funded
research has always been an integral part of the national economic strategy. Many US innovations,
especially in the areas of pharmaceuticals and computer systems, had their origins in federally funded
research conducted at universities and laboratories. Indeed, the leading global economic power of the
previous century had reached the highest standards (in both quality and quantity) of academic research,
largely funded by public resources, by the decades of the 1960s and the 1970s. This had potentially
enormous spillover effects on the industrial and strategic technological capability of the nation.

However, beginning from the 1970s, there was growing concern about the apparent decline in the
social value of public research in the United States as policy makers began to realize that innovations
resulting from public-funded research were not reaching the market place (Mowery, 2005). This
pessimism prompted US lawmakers to seek institutional intervention in the form of new legislations
to promote industrial application, coupled with a smooth transfer of technologies generated from
publicly funded research. It was with this vision that two consecutive legislations were passed in the
United States in the year 1980. The ﬁrst statute, Stevenson–Wydler Technology Innovation Act 1980,
made technology transfer an integral part of the research and development (R&D) responsibilities of
federal laboratories and their employees (Eisenberg, 1996). The second statute was the University and
Small Business Patent Procedures Act (1980), commonly known as the Bayh–Dole Act, which got its
name from the two sponsors of the bill—senators Birch Bayh of Indiana and Robert Dole of Kansas.
The Bayh–Dole Act rationalized the patent ownership provisions for outputs of public-funded
research, allowing universities and not-for-proﬁt agencies to retain patent titles for all inventions

r 75

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

arising out of research sponsored by federal agencies. They were also given the statutory authority to
license these patents to industry on an exclusive or a non-exclusive basis.

This development triggered off a new strand of research in economics, often with a multi-
disciplinary perspective, on academic research and intellectual property rights (IPR). Although there
is a large body of empirical literature on the impact of the Bayh–Dole Act on university research and
technology transfer in the United States, the conclusions are far from being unambiguous.
Nevertheless, the US experiment encouraged policy makers across the world to replicate similar
legislations in their own countries to stimulate industrial application of public-funded innovations.
India is presently contemplating a new legislation (The Protection and Utilisation of Public-
Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008), inspired by the US Bayh–Dole Act 1980, to energize
public-funded research for greater industrial application. Over the past decade and a half, India
has emerged as a major player in the world economy. According to Ray (2008), if one looks at
India’s economic progress in the last decade or so, it is quite evident that knowledge-intensive
industries have been driving India’s growth, be it IT, biotech or pharmaceuticals among the many
skill-intensive sectors. The role of technology and high-end human capital in India’s economic
success cannot be overemphasized, thanks to its post-colonial policy thrust on higher education
(speciﬁcally scientiﬁc and technical) and public-funded science and technology (S&T).

Indeed, India’s post-independence technology policies relied heavily on public-funded research
for indigenous technological capacity building and technology development. However, it is often
contended that even though Indian universities and public-funded research institutes have been
quite active in their research pursuits, their interface with industry has remained sub-optimal and
public-funded research has failed to adequately contribute to industrial catch-up in India (Ray,
2003). The proposed bill seeks to encourage disclosure and patenting of the results of public-
funded research by universities and institutes and uphold their right to license these patents, either
exclusively or non-exclusively, in order to incentivize industry to come forward and pick up
inventions from government-funded institutes for commercial development. The National Knowl-
edge Commission constituted by the Government of India in 2005 has been candid in stating that
such legislation would beneﬁt all stakeholders—the university (generating royalty revenues as
incentives for research, patenting and licensing), industry (getting to know about university
innovations and to invest in downstream R&D for their commercial application) and the public
(enjoying the fruits of public-funded research through commercial applications). However, such a
linear view is not shared universally and concerns have been expressed as to how far such a
legislative intervention would be effective in the Indian context. Although there has been some
discussion in the popular media in this direction, there is a lack of nuanced analytical under-
standing of the core debate regarding patenting of public-funded research in India.

The present paper is an attempt to provide an analytical perspective to this debate in terms of a
conceptual–empirical synthesis of the US literature on this subject to draw policy lessons for India.
In particular, we address three distinct research questions. First, why is it important to have an IPR
legislation for public-funded research in India? Second, is it necessary to replicate the Bayh–Dole in
India? Finally, is this the right juncture to introduce such legislation in India? Admittedly, these
research questions are India speciﬁc, but not in any way unique to India. Similar questions may be
posed in the context of other emerging economies that have traditionally emphasized public-funded
research for technological development. Needless to mention, the answers will be context speciﬁc
and perhaps unique in each case. Nevertheless, the Indian lessons could prove to be useful for other
emerging economies, insofar as public-funded research is driven by a common set of parameters.
The paper has six sections. The following section presents the broad canvass of public-funded
research in India. The next three sections present our conceptual–empirical synthesis of the US

76

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

literature, keeping in mind the broad research questions posed above. In particular, the third
section discusses the genesis, rationale and consequences of the Bayh–Dole Act, the fourth section
summarizes the US experience with university–industry interface and technology transfer and the
ﬁfth section presents the core issues surrounding the debate on patenting public-funded research.
Finally, the sixth section again focuses on India to derive lessons from the US experience. The ﬁnal
section highlights some of the key conclusions.

The Landscape of Public-Funded Research in India

India’s post-independence vision of home-grown S&T was in perfect consonance with its broader
policy goal of self-reliance in practically all spheres of economic activity. Although India’s
economic performance under this broad policy regime during the ﬁrst four decades after
independence is highly debated, there is little disagreement that it was only because of India’s
post-colonial policy thrust on higher education and S&T that it could actually take off during the
1990s (see, for instance, Ray, 2006).

Science in India, as understood from the perspectives of research, technology generation and
human resource generation primarily through government initiatives, posits an interesting evolu-
tionary picture. The ediﬁce of science in India stands on a very complex but appropriately
integrated network of public-funded institutions at various levels, comprising of universities,
research laboratories and various other autonomous organizations. Although these institutions are
differently identiﬁed, based on pre-conceived mandates for their research focus and skill genera-
tion, they might not be very different from one another operationally. Arguably, in most cases,
their activities overlap in the primary disciplines of scientiﬁc research and modes of human resource
generation—divergences in the institute-speciﬁc expertise, facilities and infrastructure notwith-
standing. However, as already stated in the introduction, science research in India is enormously
heterogeneous in terms of quality, and in many cases, registers a rather slow pace of change.

The network of institutions, universities and organizations that ideally represent science
research in India is vast and impressive. To sketch the entire map of the S&T landscape in India
and portray the broad co-ordinates of the role of different organizations in the S&T landscape of
India, we use the following diagram categorizing the entire network of science research in India as
we ﬁnd it at present.

Public Funded 
Research in India

MHRD                  MS&T                            MoD         MH&FW        MoA                  State Govt. 
                                                                     DRDO       ICMR            ICAR       Universities & Labs.

              DST     DSIR     DBT      DAE     DoS     Autonomous Research  
                           CSIR                                ISRO   Organisations 

University Education          Technical Education       Science Education
Central Universities               IITs, IIITs, NITs              IISc, IISERs 

Figure 1: Network of public-funded science research in India

r 77

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

As Figure 1 shows, the canvas of India’s science research and education is very broad and complex.
The task of building up a nation-wide infrastructure for higher education in S&T rests with the
department of higher education under the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD).
The MHRD has constituted the University Grants Commission (UGC) and several professional
bodies to overlook the functioning of the otherwise autonomous universities and institutions.
Universities in India are understood to perform research in various core disciplines of science and
engineering along with training students up to the doctoral and post-doctoral levels. The number
of central universities at present is 39 and the number of state universities stands at 251. Note that
at the time of independence, there were just 20 universities in total in India. Of late, the UGC has
also built inter-university centres at various places (like the Inter-University Accelerator Centre,
New Delhi, and the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune) as specialized
centres with highly sophisticated facilities and infrastructure for common use. Out of the 39 central
universities, 12 were established only this year (2009) under the Central Universities Act 2009.

For technical education, MHRD has set up the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs),
followed by the Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) and the National Institutes of
Technology (NITs). Today, there are seven IITs located at Bombay, Delhi, Kanpur, Kharagpur,
Madras, Guwahati and Roorkee. There are proposals to open eight more. The IITs are governed
by the Institutes of Technology Act 1961 and are principally responsible for churning out high-
quality engineering graduates and to conduct research in relevant ﬁelds. IITs have also ventured
into research and teaching in basic science disciplines like physics, chemistry and mathematics.
Thus, we notice that there is co-existence of the traditional university system along with
competently designed apex institutions for technical education (IITs) under the MHRD.

Alongside broad-based technical education and research, it has always been felt that research
in basic sciences is equally important for India and it is, therefore, equally important to produce
scientists of the highest calibre from its own institutions. This required institutes with highly
competent research faculty and excellent infrastructure. India was fortunate to have institutes like
the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, established under the private patronage of
Jamshetji Tata in the early decades of the last century. After independence, IISc has been publicly
funded and has recently been given a privileged status by the central government. The objective is
to help the institution reach the highest echelons of cutting-edge scientiﬁc research. The central
government has very recently set up ﬁve Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research
(IISERs) on the lines of IISc.1

Having discussed the primary role played by the poster-boys of higher education in India, we
come to the second group of S&T organizations, primarily under the Ministry of Science and
Technology (MST), which have evolved parallel to the IITs and other institutes of higher learning.
Some of them command equal prestige and recognition.

The Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research (CSIR) under the department of scientiﬁc
and industrial research of the MST covers an extensive network of 40 public-funded research
laboratories and 100 ﬁeld stations spread across the country. These are dedicated to R&D in well-
deﬁned areas for industrial application and are solely aimed at achieving technological self-reliance
and facilitating technology transfer. CSIR today boasts of a diverse portfolio of research, which
includes biotechnology, chemicals, aerospace, etc. Many of the CSIR laboratories have designed
their own doctoral programmes in various applied and multi-disciplinary areas. However, in most
cases, these programmes are run closely in association with a university for the award of the degree
and evaluation.

There are several autonomous S&T organizations, primarily funded by the department of
science and technology (DST) under MST. Some of them engage primarily in research in basic

78

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

sciences and enjoy international repute. These include the Indian Association for the Cultivation of
Sciences (established way back in 1876), S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences (in
Kolkata), Indian Institute for Astrophysics, Raman Research Institute and Jawaharlal Nehru
Centre for Advanced Scientiﬁc Research (JNCASR) (all in Bangalore). All these research institutes
run their doctoral programmes and consider training research students an integral part of their
research mission.

The Department of Biotechnology (DBT), established in 1986, has been a relatively new
addition to the existing structure within the MST. This department adopts a two-pronged
approach to boost modern biotechnology and biomedical research in India. It funds premier
autonomous institutes dedicated to focused areas of research within the broader ambit of
biotechnology. It also awards sponsored research projects as well as network projects to various
institutes, research laboratories and university departments. Biotechnology research in India is
carried out today in most S&T organizations, IITs and universities. This speaks of the vigour and
enthusiasm with which biotechnology is being pursued in India for industrial applications, drug
development and agricultural innovations. The prominent institutes working in this ﬁeld include
the National Institute of Immunology and the National Institute for Plant Genome Research, both
in Delhi.

The two other important departments under MST, namely the Department of Atomic Energy
(DAE) and the Department of Space (DOS), engage in strategic areas of S&T research in India.
Both have been successful in carrying out cutting-edge research in their ﬁelds and have beneﬁted
from international collaborations. Apart from the MHRD and MST, the other key ministries of
the central government that patronize research in related areas of S&T include the ministries of
defence, health and family welfare and agriculture. These have their own ﬂagship organizations
responsible for core research tasks—the Defence Research and Development Organization
(DRDO), the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) and the Indian Council for
Agricultural Research (ICAR), respectively. These bodies have an organizational structure similar
to that of the CSIR and consist of a network of public-sector research laboratories, each of which is
devoted to a particular type of research in their respective ﬁelds.

Public-Funded Research in India—Expenditure and Outcomes
R&D expenditure as a percentage of gross national product in 2005–6 stood at 0.89%.2 In 2005–6,
the government incurred 74.1% of the total R&D expenditure, with the remaining 25.9% being
accounted for by the private sector. Of the total government expenditure, the central government
accounts for the lion’s share (57.5% of the total R&D expenditure). The bulk (86%) of central
government expenditure on R&D gets distributed among the major scientiﬁc agencies listed in the
previous section, namely CSIR, DRDO, DAE, DBT, DST, DOS, MOES, ICAR, ICMR, the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT), etc. DRDO gets the highest
share (about 34.4%). Apart from providing the core funding for its own agencies and laboratories,
the central government also allocates project-speciﬁc funds to the academic sector. This is known
as extra-mural funding and the three departments (DST, DBT and MCIT) together disbursed the
highest extra-mural support during 2005–6.3

The pool of patents generally represents tangible R&D outcomes for S&T efforts by a
particular country. It is believed that these patents hold the key to innovations and competitive-
ness. Out of the total number of patents granted in India in 2006–7 (7,539), 74.7% were in the name
of foreign citizens and only 25.3% were assigned to Indian citizens. Although patenting is still not
very common among academic researchers in India, some of the S&T institutions, particularly the
CSIR network, have put in place an institutional framework to encourage patenting of their

r 79

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

research output. It may be noted that the number of US patents granted to CSIR jumped to 196 in
2005 from just six in 1990–1 (Kaul, 2006).

Although there appears to have been a spurt in patenting activity from a handful of
laboratories, very few of these patents have actually been licensed to industry. It has to be kept
in mind that public-sector R&D in India did not contribute signiﬁcantly to improve industrial
competitiveness and encourage technological learning by Indian industry. Even though Indian
universities and research institutions have been quite active in their research pursuits, their
interface with industry, not only through formal channels of patent licensing but also through
other channels like collaborations and consultancies, has remained sub-optimal (Ray, 2003). It is
now felt that India’s transition to a knowledge-driven economy would be much easier if the
available research potential of its huge pool of premier universities and institutions could be
harnessed for effective commercial application and industrial development.

On the publication front, the scenario appears to be more encouraging. Based on core
databases, DST reports that the total number of papers from public-sector R&D institutions
increased from 59,315 in 2001 to 89,297 in 2005. The distribution of the publications according to
research areas shows that, in 2005, physical sciences accounted for 11% (9,574), agricultural
sciences 18.5% (16,526), biological sciences 14% (12,491), chemical sciences 26.5% (23,668),
engineering 13% (11,945) and medical sciences 14% (12,142). Overall, India’s contribution in
world publications has increased marginally from 2.1% during 1995–2000 to 2.3% during 2000–5.
With this increase, the effective contribution of Indian scientists in the international scientiﬁc
community has also risen. Although India’s impact factor (average number of citations per paper)
is not yet at par with the world average in most scientiﬁc ﬁelds, it has made signiﬁcant gains in
physics, with an average of 3.13 cites per paper for the period 2003–7.

Public-Funded Research in India—Issues of IPR
Until recently, scientists in India, in universities and public-funded research laboratories, have not
shown much keenness in obtaining patents on their research outputs. There did not exist any
institutional/organizational mechanism to facilitate patenting and licensing of public-funded
research. Only from the decade of the 1990s have a few select institutes started putting in place
such institutional structures. By and large, dedicating research outputs to the public domain
through copyrighted publications has been a standard practice in public-funded research in India.
However, this has often been viewed as ‘‘lethargy’’ towards active participation in the commercia-
lization of inventions on the part of the Indian academic community. This is not to suggest that
Indian policy makers did not realize the importance of publicly funded scientiﬁc research and the
possible role it could play in boosting industrial competitiveness. But university–industry interface
has remained sub-optimal and institutional research has failed to adequately contribute to
industrial catch-up in India (Ray, 2008).

At this juncture, there is a considerable policy debate on whether inadequate and loosely
deﬁned IPR provisions for academic research in its present form in India have indeed posed a
serious bottleneck in facilitating successful commercialization of public-funded inventions. In
India, unfortunately, much of the inventions generated out of public-funded research remain
unnoticed by industry, and even when noticed, not picked up by them due to heavy development
costs and uncertainties. It is argued, therefore, that industry is reluctant to make this investment
unless the embryonic innovations are protected by secured IPR owned by the university with
exclusive licensing provisions. Accordingly, there is now a concerted effort to put in place an
institutional framework for IPR on public-funded research in India. This is why a proposed

80

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

legislation called the Protection and Utilisation of Publicly Funded Intellectual Property Bill (2008)
has been tabled in the Indian parliament.

This bill has been designed on the lines of the US Bayh–Dole Act 1980. At present, in India,
public-funded research is carried out (in many cases with extramural funding from government
agencies) without any express contract specifying ownership over the intellectual property
generated. The forthcoming bill proposes to streamline IPR provisions in these cases by allocating
patent rights to universities and research institutions (identiﬁed as ‘‘recipients’’ in the bill) over
inventions arising from government research grants. Disclosure norms appear to be strong, given
the fact that the recipients shall not be allowed to publicly disclose, publish or exhibit the public-
funded intellectual property till patent applications are formally made in India or abroad.4 If the
recipient university or institute fails to do so within a stipulated period, the funding government
agency will retain the rights to apply for a patent. The bill also allows exclusive licensing at the
discretion of the patent holder to anyone who manufactures products using such public-funded
intellectual property within India.

The principal arguments favouring such an enactment in India are based on expectations of an
increase in industry interest in exploring commercially applicable, public-funded research output.
The increase is expected to be driven by greater clarity on who owns these patents and who to
negotiate with. The exclusive licensing provision is expected to incentivize industry to come
forward and invest in the development of university-generated prototypes. Enthusiasts argue that
the present bill, when made into law, will lead to greater university–industry collaborations by
reducing the transaction costs of IPR negotiations. It is also believed that this bill would enhance
the revenue prospects of an individual university through licensing of patented inventions. One can
infer from these arguments that institutional intervention in this case is meant to rejuvenate the
process of technology transfer from Indian universities and research institutes to industry.

Against the backdrop of this proposed Indian legislation, we attempt to draw concrete lessons
for India from a critical review of the US experience. Despite the absence of a clear understanding
of the potential impact of such legislations, the way the Bayh–Dole legislation has been emulated in
many of the developed as well as emerging economies has increased its appeal to policy makers.
However, at the policy-making level, at least in India, the original US Bayh–Dole Act, rather the
variants adopted by other countries, remains the benchmark to be cited in support of the move to
implement this law in India.

The Bayh–Dole Act of the United States: Genesis, Rationale and Consequences

Run-Up to the Bayh–Dole Act: A Historical Perspective
The introduction of the US Bayh–Dole Act 1980 has an interesting genesis. The US research
culture, which pioneered the advancement of the global frontiers of technology during much of the
last century, was seen to be developing some intrinsic mismatches. There was a lack of clarity
regarding patent ownership of innovations arising out of academic research, which even had
partial federal funding. This distanced industry from any public-funded academic research in the
majority of areas (Etzkowitz and Stevens, 1998), biomedical research, perhaps, being a notable
exception (Cohen et al., 2002).

US universities have been patenting faculty inventions since as early as the 1920s, although
before the early 1940s, few institutions had developed formal patent policies and most of them
seemed ambivalent towards patenting (Mowery, 2005).5 Interestingly, many of the universities did
not manage patenting activities themselves, mainly to avoid the political consequences of
conveying the impression of proﬁting from faculty inventions or to avoid losing their non-proﬁt

r 81

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

tax status. Many universities, especially public-funded ones, engaged in patenting of faculty
research through the establishment of afﬁliated, but legally separate, entities like a research
foundation. Others engaged third-party specialists like the Research Corporation—founded way
back in 1912 by Frederick Cottrell—a faculty inventor at the University of California, to manage
their patenting and licensing activities (Mowery and Sampat, 2004). Columbia University’s policy
maintained that while patenting is the responsibility of the inventor, patent administration is best
carried out by the Research Corporation, as ‘‘it is not deemed within the sphere of the university’s
scholarly activities’’. Similar stances were adopted by Harvard, Chicago, Yale, Johns Hopkins, etc.
Universities like Ohio State and Pennsylvania discouraged or prohibited medical patents.

During the early post-war period in the United States, only non-exclusive licenses could be
obtained to exploit the results of academic research results by industry. By engaging more than one
company to practice a given invention through non-exclusive licenses, the system encouraged
competition to keep prices ‘‘reasonable’’. In the pre-Bayh–Dole era, patenting and licensing of
university research was centrally managed by an entity called the National Technical and
Information Service (NTIS), under the aegis of the Department of Commerce. This arrangement,
however, had serious limitations. Although it was effective for ﬁelds such as mechanical devices,
electronics and chemical processes, which were characterized by short product development
durations and reasonably low risks, it was completely ineffective for ﬁelds like pharmaceuticals,
which have longer development timeframes.6 Indeed, a study conducted by the federal government
in 1968 found that no government-owned patent in pharmaceuticals was ever developed for
commercial use.

This ambivalence towards university patenting started changing in the 1960s and the pace of
change accelerated later during the 1970s in response to greater federal initiatives in R&D funding.
In fact, institutional patent management agreements (IPAs), ﬁrst implemented by the Department
of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW) and later by the National Science Foundation, may be
considered a ﬁrst response towards resolving this long-standing institutional bottleneck. The IPAs
allowed institutions to negotiate title rights to inventions arising out of federally funded research.
According to Etzkowitz and Stevens (1998), these agreements between individual government
research funding agencies and universities contributed to the growth of university patenting during
the 1970s. Many universities started creating their own technology transfer ofﬁces (TTOs).
Moreover, this period also witnessed the maturing of ﬁelds like biomedical research with
patentable outcomes for industrial application. This also acted as a signiﬁcant factor promoting
university patenting. However, according to a Senate Judiciary Committee in 1978, the govern-
ment owned the title to more than 28,000 patents but licensed fewer than 4% of them. In fact, the
IPAs did not provide an adequate institutional framework for encouraging patenting and licensing
of university research for commercial development.

In 1978, Purdue University’s attempt to negotiate an IPA to commercialize a promising
medical device technology was scuttled by HEW (Etzkowitz and Stevens, 1998). Birch Bayh, the
Democrat senator, took up the issue. The cause was equally patronized by the Republican senator,
Robert Dole. Bayh and Dole jointly initiated the enactment of a legislation to correct these
weaknesses. Meanwhile, the Department of Commerce, seriously concerned about the United
States’ declining international competitiveness, was earnestly looking for ways to bridge the divide
between academic research and industrial R&D. Some universities like Wisconsin University and
Stanford University also joined the lead with Purdue, supporting this initiative for bringing a
change in the existing institutional set-up that required a complex arrangement of individual IPAs.
The period coincided with academic research witnessing a number of breakthroughs in the
biomedical and biotechnology ﬁelds, with promises of successful commercial development by

82

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

industry. It was, therefore, in 1979 that serious efforts were made to formalize the so-called
Bayh–Dole bill—‘‘the most inspired piece of legislation to be enacted in America over the past half
century’’ according to The Economist (2002).

Rationale for the Bayh–Dole Act
University ownership of patent titles on inventions generated out of public-funded research under
the statutory provisions of the Bayh–Dole Act 1980 was supposed to facilitate patenting and
licensing of university research in the United States. The passage of the Bayh–Dole Act was part of
a broader shift in US policy towards a stronger IPR regime (Mowery and Sampat, 2004). This law
was seen to be the much-needed instrument that would ensure the best development and
application of university-generated research results.7

According to Eisenberg (1996), the earlier institutional framework in this regard in the United
States had typically encouraged or mandated federal agencies sponsoring research to make the
results widely available to the public through publications made available in the public domain or
through government ownership of patent titles for non-exclusively licensing to multiple industry
players. However, this same public domain was perceived by many to be a treacherous sand pit,
engulﬁng many potential seed ideas and inventions generated in universities that might otherwise
have been put to actual application. Firms, in many cases, did not even get to know about the
inventions taking place at universities and, even if they did, they were not willing to pick up these
inventions in their nascent stage without an exclusive patent license. The Bayh–Dole Act 1980 was
intended to reverse this unfavourable trend in the United States by allowing universities to own
patent titles on outputs of public-funded research and license them exclusively at their discretion.
Traditionally, patents are understood to facilitate a market for technology exchange through
licensing and other agreements that permit the use of the technology (Gallini, 2002). The Bayh–Dole
Act 1980 was principally meant to incentivize industry to come forward, pick up university research
results and explore the possibilities of further development into marketable products. The incentive
scheme was legally routed through the provision of allowing exclusive licensing on all patented
inventions generated out of public-funded research at universities at their discretion. It was argued
that without this provision, ﬁrms could not afford to take the risk of committing enormous
expenditures needed to develop university innovation that was often embryonic for commercial
application.8 In fact, it was particularly emphasized that commercialization of university inventions
was neither the function nor the responsibility of the university and, therefore, industry participa-
tion was essential (Stevens, 2004). It was argued that stronger and well-deﬁned IPR for university
research would accelerate their commercial exploitation (Mowery et al., 2001).

It is not very clear from the literature whether policy makers were also thinking of directly
incentivizing university research itself through the Bayh–Dole enactment. But the rationale for the
Bayh–Dole Act, in popular parlance, is often interpreted as a ﬁnancial incentive to university
researchers not only to stimulate quality research but also to disclose and patent ‘‘proﬁtable’’
discoveries for commercial use and consider it as a new source of income (Coupe, 2003). According
to Mowery and Sampat (2005), the theoretical underpinnings of the Bayh–Dole legislation suggest
that it is the ultimate expression of faith in the ‘‘linear model’’ of innovation a la Bush (1945)—if
basic research results can be purchased by would-be developers, commercial innovation will be
accelerated.

Consequences: Trends in Patenting and Licensing Post-Bayh–Dole
The surge in university patenting in the United States in the last couple of decades has spurred
research into its cause and effect. The cause may be linked to changes in the research environment
resulting from the new IPR framework established by the Bayh–Dole Act 1980. The effects are

r 83

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

evaluated in terms of commercialization of university/laboratory-generated, embryonic inventions
and research tools along with unintended consequences for university research proﬁle and culture,
if any. At the outset, we present some of the ﬁndings sketching the overall trends in the proﬁle of
university patenting in the United States, both before and after the Bayh–Dole Act.

There has been a phenomenal expansion of university patenting in the United States over the
last three decades of the last century. Comparing the rates of growth of university patents vis-a` -vis
total US patents (domestic and overall) between 1965 and 1988, Henderson et al. (1998) observed
that university patents grew more rapidly than overall US patents and much more rapidly than US
domestic patents. Mowery (2005) reports that the share of university patents in total US patents
with domestic assignees increased from o0.5% in 1970 to nearly 4% by 1999, and the rate of
growth of this share began to accelerate just before 1980.

This process was facilitated by new organizational structures, whereby universities assumed a
more prominent role in managing their patenting and licensing activities through the establishment
of TTOs. The number of TTOs increased from 25 in 1980 to 200 in 1990 and, by the end of 1990s,
TTOs became an integral part of virtually all US universities (Nelson, 2001). According to
Henderson et al. (1998), there has been a signiﬁcant increase in the number of universities taking
out patents—from 30 in 1965 to nearly 150 in 1991. However, the study reports that university
patenting remained highly concentrated with the top 20 institutions accounting for 70% of the
total number of patents. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the most proliﬁcally
patenting institution, alone commands about 8% of the total.

Interestingly, the surge in university patenting has been largely limited to a few speciﬁc ﬁelds.
According to Henderson et al. (1998), between 1965 and 1988, universities are seen to be more
inclined towards patenting drug and medical technologies and less towards patenting mechanical
technologies. Fields like chemical and electronic technologies were in between in this regard. The
study by Mowery et al. (2001) show that biomedical patents outnumber non-biomedical patents in
three of the top US universities (Columbia, Berkeley and Stanford). This dominance of biomedical
patents is perhaps a reﬂection of the fact that this area of research carries greater commercial
promise.

Along with a surge in university patenting in the United States after Bayh–Dole, commercia-
lization of university innovations and technology transfer to industry through licensing has also
gone up. According to the report of the Association of University Technology Managers in 1998,
there was a 75% increase in licenses executed between 1991 and 1997. Although this reﬂects the
positive attitude of universities towards appropriating returns from faculty research, it does not
unequivocally establish a success story for commercialization of university research as a result of
the Bayh–Dole Act. Indeed, Thursby and Thursby (2002) show that the increase in the number of
university licenses executed is deﬁnitely not commensurate with the massive increase in the number
of university patents. Mowery et al. (2001) report that biomedical inventions accounted for the
lion’s share of revenues generated from licensing of university patents. For the three universities
studied by them, this share exceeded 80% of revenue generated from their respective top ﬁve
inventions during 1985–95. University-generated innovations require substantial ‘‘development’’
after licensing. Based on a survey of 62 universities, Jensen and Thursby (2001) show that over
75% of the licensed inventions were at the proof-of-concept stage and only 12% were ready for
commercial use.

Consequences: Performance of Universities Under the Bayh–Dole Act
The observed surge in US university patenting and licensing was not necessarily a post-Bayh–Dole
phenomenon. There were two categories of universities in the United States before the enactment

84

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

of the Bayh–Dole Act. The ﬁrst category included universities like the University of California,
Stanford University, MIT and University of Wisconsin, which had the culture of patenting and
licensing university inventions even before the Bayh–Dole Act; the other group (which included
prominent universities like Harvard, Columbia and Yale) were less active in this regard. Mowery et
al. (2001) observe that Columbia University started to actively patent and license only after 1980.
The growth in the numbers of patents across US universities after the Bayh–Dole Act is
evidence of its success in generating university research for commercialization.9 However, there are
other aspects that quite justiﬁably attracted serious research attention. We now discuss some of this
literature based on a more disaggregated proﬁle of US evidence, focusing speciﬁcally on issues of
commercialization of university research, patent quality, research culture and focus and the role of
the TTOs.

Disclosure, Patenting and Licensing
Commercialization of university inventions arising out of public-funded research is a multi-step
process. It begins with the inventor realizing his invention to be patentable (in terms of novelty,
inventive step and commercial application) and willingly seeking IPR protection through dis-
closure. The next step involves the award of patent. According to the provisions of the Bayh–Dole
Act, once the patent is granted, the patent title for all inventions arising out of federally funded
research would be owned by the university itself. Naturally, in the third step, the responsibility of
licensing these patented inventions would now rest with the university. It is presumed that the
expected revenue gains from royalty would drive the university towards licensing their patents.
Thus, broadly speaking, there are three steps leading to commercialization of university inven-
tions—disclosure, patenting and licensing. In this sub-section, we focus on these three activities of
universities to understand the possible consequences of the Bayh–Dole Act for commercialization
of university research.

Thursby and Thursby (2002) model disclosure, patenting and licensing as a three-stage
production process involving multiple inputs at each stage. Faculty disclosure is modelled as a
function of several inputs, both observable (including faculty size,10 research funds and the size of
the TTO) and unobservable (propensity to disclose). In the second stage, patent application is
considered to be the output determined by observable inputs (like the number of disclosures, TTO
size and a measure of faculty quality) and an unobservable input (the propensity to patent,
indicative of the commercial aggressiveness of the university administration). Finally, in the third
stage, licensing is modelled as a function of observable inputs (including the number of disclosures,
number of patent applications, the size of the TTO and faculty quality) and unobservable inputs
(propensity to license reﬂecting the ability, knowledge and aggressiveness of the TTO in
determining the fate of a patent).

Using a sample of 64 universities, Thursby and Thursby (2002) estimated total factor
productivity (TFP) growth for each of the three production functions using data envelopment
analysis. The estimated TFP growth rates were 12.1% in the patent stage as compared with 2.7%
for disclosures and  1.7% for licenses executed. From these estimates, Thursby and Thursby
(2002) conclude that disclosures have gone up essentially due to the increase in direct inputs (like
faculty size) and once we control for these inputs, the increase in disclosures due to unobservable
factors like rising propensity to disclose is only marginal. However, it is patenting that has shown a
phenomenal rise even after controlling for direct inputs, including the number of disclosures.
Finally, licensing has effectively declined once we control for the massive increase in patenting,
although the number of licenses executed might have gone up in absolute terms. This perhaps
reﬂects a decline in the commercial appeal of the rising number of disclosures and patents.

r 85

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

In another paper exploring the nature of inventions licensed by universities, Colyvas et al.
(2002) presented case studies of inventions licensed by Columbia and Stanford. The inventions
covered fundamental techniques, biotechnology research tools, biological processes, medical
devices and software programs. While most of the cases fell into the category of ‘‘embryonic’’
inventions, some of them were ‘‘ready-to-use’’ technologies. The paper suggests that IPR and
exclusivity are likely to be most important for ensuring the industrial development of ‘‘embryonic’’
inventions.

Quality of Patents
It follows from the discussions presented in the previous section that US universities had
experienced a surge in patenting after 1970, with a marked upward movement after 1980. Whether
this growth in patenting could have been sustained without the Bayh–Dole Act remains an
inconclusive debate in the literature (Mowery et al., 2001). However, a pertinent issue that has been
extensively researched and debated in this context is whether the massive rise in the number of
university patents has been accompanied by any changes in the overall quality of such patents.

Patent quality is judged in terms of both its importance as well as its generality. The index of
importance constructed in terms of patent citations, discounting for second generation citations, is
a measure of the technological impact of an invention as reﬂected in the number and importance of
its descendants. The second index formalizes the generality of patents in terms of citations to
capture the extent to which follow-up technical advances are spread across diverse technological
ﬁelds, rather than being concentrated in just a few of them.

Citation-based studies of US patents, notably by Henderson et al. (1998), suggest that, before
the mid-1980s, university patents used to receive more citations compared with patents from other
sources and university patents were more widely cited in a diverse range of ﬁelds. Regressing the
measures of importance and generality on a series of dummy variables capturing application years,
technological areas and patent origin (university versus non-university), Henderson et al. (1998)
found that university patents received almost 25% more citations on an average and were 15%
more general (both these differences being highly signiﬁcant statistically). The regression was
carried out controlling for possible ﬁeld-speciﬁc effects and time effects. This difference was seen to
be the largest in electronics and mechanical patents and the smallest in the drug/medical ones.
However, this difference in the patent quality for university and non-university patents seemed to
narrow down after 1983. This was attributed to the decline in the relative importance and generality
of university patents, because there was no evidence of the rising importance and generality of non-
university patents. The declining quality of university patents triggered off apprehensions about the
possible accumulation of low-quality university patents in the United States.

However, Mowery et al. (2002) show that the decline in patent quality after the Bayh–Dole Act
was not true for all universities. They argued that the poor performance of the entrants, as opposed
to the incumbents, explains the overall decline in the quality of university patents in the United
States.11 The results from negative binomial and probit regressions suggest that the entrants’
patent importance was signiﬁcantly lower than that of the incumbents for the period 1981–6.
However, these differentials were statistically insigniﬁcant for the period 1987–92. Non-biomedical
patents, for which the incumbent–entrant importance differential was the most pronounced during
the 1981–6 period, showed convergence during the later period. These results conﬁrm that entrants’
patents quality has improved over time, while there has been no decline in the quality of
incumbents’ patents.

The convergence of patent quality reﬂects a gradual learning process for the universities to
patent their research outputs. Their experience and familiarity with the patenting process itself do

86

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

matter. In the United States, before the Bayh–Dole Act, it was the Research Corporation that was
primarily engaged in managing the patenting and licensing activities of nearly 200 universities—a
task that later on became the responsibility of the TTOs of the respective universities. One possible
explanation is that TTOs established by earlier (incumbents) were more efﬁcient because of their
links with bodies like the Research Corporation. The entrants did not have much links with the
erstwhile Research Corporation and, therefore, had little by way of learning through their own
patenting experience (Mowery et al., 2002). However, the entrants did enjoy the beneﬁt of learning
from the experience of successful incumbents through various direct and indirect spillover effects
that might have accounted for improvements in the importance of entrant university patents
during the late-1980s and the 1990s.

Effect on Research Focus and Culture at the US Universities
The survey of three universities conducted by Mowery et al. (2001) comes up with interesting
insights on the focus and culture of university research. Nelson (2001), drawing upon this survey,
says that the allocation of university research effort between fundamental and applied research did
not alter signiﬁcantly after the Bayh–Dole Act and there has not been any shift away from
fundamental research. In other words, according to Nelson (2001), university research has not
become any less fundamental at these three universities after the Bayh–Dole Act. However, as far
as research portfolios of US universities are concerned, there has been a deﬁnite shift towards
biomedical research, and this could partly explain the rise in university patenting and licensing
after Bayh–Dole. However, it is not clear whether the act itself has anything to do with this shift
(Mowery et al., 2001).

With regard to research culture and motivation, the 11 case studies from Columbia University
and Stanford University by Colyvas et al. (2002) failed to ﬁnd any evidence to support the
hypothesis that expected ﬁnancial gains shape scientists’ motivation to carry out research.
According to this study, one cannot conclusively determine whether scientists were indeed directed
towards less fundamental or less ‘‘deep probing’’ research because of the policy changes, notably
the Bayh–Dole legislation. In fact, in many cases, the main objective of research was to make
fundamental advances in research techniques and methods and the results of such research not
only proved to be useful for other researchers in a wide range of areas and applications, they also
had signiﬁcant commercial appeal.

Indeed, the very fact that over 75% of the licensed inventions required further interactions
between the inventor and the licensee to develop commercially viable products (Jensen and
Thursby, 2001) was a clear indication that university research continued to be fundamental in
nature, the increased licensing activity notwithstanding (Rafferty, 2008). This perhaps suggests
that more areas within university science could now be accessed through the market mechanism.12
There has been a long-standing debate on whether industrial development of university
research outputs through the proprietary route (patenting and licensing) actually stimulates
scientiﬁc and technological progress. Studies on the post-Bayh–Dole experience seem largely
inconclusive with regard to a broader debate on the privatization of scientiﬁc commons. Scientiﬁc
commons, largely promoted by public-funded research, has broadened the knowledge base of
modern science and created a culture of open science, encouraging competition among potential
innovators (Nelson, 2004).

The Role of the TTOs
The Bayh–Dole Act led to the creation of new organizational structures within the universities
through the establishment of TTOs. The TTOs were meant to facilitate patenting of university

r 87

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

research and its commercialization. The number of universities with TTOs increased from 25 in
1980 to 200 in 1990 and, by the end of the century, virtually all US universities created their TTOs.
The TTOs were supposed to act as the interface between individual inventors, the university and
the market for technologies. Because the TTOs were self-ﬁnancing, they were presumably
functionally autonomous.13

It has been contended that the spurt in university patenting and licensing post-Bayh–Dole was
essentially spearheaded by the initiatives of the TTOs. Coupe (2003), based on maximum
likelihood estimations, ﬁnds that a typical university, spending the mean expenditure on R&D,
will have an expected number of patents that is about 45% higher if it has a TTO compared with
one without a TTO. Moreover, universities that established TTOs in response to the Bayh–Dole
Act are most likely to experience increased licensing activity compared with those that did not
establish one. This shows that the Bayh–Dole Act could actually play its intended role through a
two-step process of creating TTOs in the ﬁrst place and patenting and commercializing university
research thereafter.

Jensen and Thursby (2001), through a survey of technology managers of 62 US universities,
concluded that technology managers viewed themselves as balancing the interests of university
administrators with those of the inventors. While the former considers revenue generation to be the
most important, the latter is essentially inclined towards sponsored research. For TTOs, generating
royalty fees was extremely important, followed by activities leading to the actual commercializa-
tion of inventions. Facilitating sponsored research was found to be only moderately important,
while the number of patents awarded seemed to be the least important. Using Kendall’s t, Cohen’s
k and McNemar’s test to test for the association between the nature of responses from TTOs,
university administration and faculty, it was concluded that for most of the outcomes, TTO
managers’ objectives were more closely aligned with that of university administrators.

University–Industry Interface and Technology Transfer from Public-Funded Research:
The US Experience

The outcomes of public-funded research, spanning from knowledge and knowhow to technologies
and prototypes, need to be transferred to agencies that would put in the necessary effort required to
develop them further for scaling up and commercial use. Public-funded research has evidently
played a signiﬁcant role in generating fundamental ideas (or techniques) that have contributed to
the overall technological progress in a society,14 while private in-house R&D has been driving
speciﬁc product and process innovations that boost productivity, competitiveness, economic
growth and welfare. Therefore, it is crucially important that the industry–university interface
occurs in a manner that ensures the best utilization of university-generated research results.
However, such interactions are far from being linear in spirit or singular in approach. This brings
us to a discussion of the possible channels of university–industry interface, their effectiveness and
the implications for university–industry technology transfer.

Industry might consider public-funded research as a breeding ground of forward-looking ideas
that they could possibly harness for further development.15 However, as we understand in the case
of the United States, such university–industry interface was not visible to the extent possible and
desirable during the 1970s for various reasons—the lack of a proper IPR framework being the most
frequently noted. Indeed, this slack in university–industry technology transfer is what is believed to
have fuelled the legislative intervention in the form of the Bayh–Dole Act 1980.

Santoro and Chakrabarti (2002) identify technology transfer as one of the four main forms
of industry–university interaction. The other three forms are identiﬁed as research support,

88

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

co-operative research and knowledge transfer. Research support refers to contributions by
industry to universities in the form of research funds and equipment. Co-operative research is
supposed to be more interactive than research support and includes contract research with
individual investigators, consulting by faculty and group arrangements to address immediate
industry problems speciﬁcally. Knowledge transfer broadly refers to formal and informal interac-
tions, co-operative education, curriculum development and personnel exchanges, extending to
research consortia, co-authoring of research papers by members of a university and industry and
employing university graduates. Therefore, knowledge transfer may be considered to have a far-
reaching and long-term impact while technology transfer serves more speciﬁc and immediate
industry needs. It is under technology transfer that public-funded research provides both basic and
technical knowledge along with the technology patent and/or licensing services, while the industrial
community provides a clear problem statement related to market demand in a speciﬁc applied area.
The other most common forms of technology transfer have been identiﬁed as technological
consulting arrangements, sponsored extension services and joint ventures.

Santoro and Chakrabarti (2002), based on a ﬁrm-level survey in the United States, show that
larger (more mechanistic) ﬁrms use knowledge transfer and research support relationships to build
competencies in non-core technological areas. By contrast, smaller ﬁrms, particularly those in high-
tech industrial sectors, focus more on problem solving in core technological areas through
technology transfer and co-operative research relationships.

Cohen et al. (2002) use data from the Carnegie Mellon Survey on industrial R&D to evaluate
the inﬂuence of ‘‘public’’ (i.e. university and government R&D lab) research on the US
manufacturing sector and explore the pathways through which that effect is exercised. They have
identiﬁed the following pathways of technology transfer (or sources of university information)—
patents, informal information exchange, publications and reports, public meetings and confer-
ences, recently hired graduates,
joint or co-operative ventures, contract research,
consulting and temporary personnel exchanges. The paper reveals that 41% of the respondents
rate publications/reports as at least moderately important; it, therefore, forms the dominant
channel. Informal information exchange, public meetings or conferences, and consulting are next
in importance, accounting for 31–36% of the responses. Channels like recently hired graduates,
joint and co-operative ventures and patents constitute 17–21% of the responses. Licenses and
personnel exchange are found to be the least important channel, with a share of o10%. These
results clearly indicate that for most industries, patents and licenses are not nearly as important as
other channels of transferring public research results to industry, especially publications, confer-
ences, informal information exchange or consulting.

licenses,

The above studies look at university–industry technology transfer from the demand side, that
is, the industry perspective. There are studies that look at the issue from the supply side, that is, the
university perspective. The new knowledge that is created through public-funded research is
generally the outcome of laboratory experiments or theoretical analysis and is generally published
in peer-reviewed journals and/or patented. University professors have traditionally been transfer-
ring knowledge through mentoring students’ research, through conference presentations and
notably through publications placed in the public domain.

Agrawal and Henderson (2002) suggest that patents only represent a small proportion of all
work being conducted within academia and may not be the representative mode of what we have so
far been calling technology transfer. Their study of technology transfer from MIT is focused on the
departments of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering and computer sciences. Their results
show that on an average, only about 10–20% of faculty members in their sample patent their
research in any given year and only 3–7% license their invention. However, more than 50% of

r 89

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

them publish at least one paper in any given year. In a startling revelation, they conclude that half
of their sample population have never patented at all. Clearly, publishing academic papers appears
to be a far more important activity than patenting. The paper has also attempted to provide
important insights regarding the channels of university–industry technology transfer drawing upon
the perceptions of faculty. The relative importance of the channels of technology transfer, as
perceived by the faculty, is summarized as publications 18%, conferences 5%, consulting 26%,
conversations 6%, collaborative research 12%, co-supervising 9%, recruiting graduates 17% and
patents and licenses 7%. These results suggest that a focus on patenting as a measure of the impact
of university research must be carefully qualiﬁed, given the fact that patenting seems to play a
relatively small role in the transfer of knowledge.

Patenting Public-Funded Research: The Debate

The empirical literature so far discussed contains rigorous analyses of the consequences of the
Bayh–Dole Act (1980) in the United States. Evidently, there is a strong lobby of policy makers and
stakeholders across the world, which believes in the positive inﬂuence of such legal interventions in
stimulating the process of technology transfer from university research. Countries like Austria,
Denmark and Norway changed their employment norms for academic staff by abolishing faculty
rights on university-generated research results. Some Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) countries like Japan and Germany by now have legislations along the lines of
the Bayh–Dole Act to energize the process of technology transfer from their universities. Most
interestingly, the idea did appeal to the emerging economies as well. Countries like Brazil, China and
South Africa already have similar legislations in place, while in India, the process of enacting a similar
law is underway.16 However, the policy debate is not as unidirectional and linear as might appear at
ﬁrst glance. The key issues that form the discourse in this regard are rather broad and complex.

First, it is unclear whether the outputs of government-funded research projects are more
effectively disseminated through publications than through patenting, although we must note that
publication and patenting are not to be treated as alternatives. There are many instances of
publication–patent pairs. Second, it is debatable whether patenting and exclusive licensing should
assume the most important mode of university–industry interface, ignoring other important and,
perhaps, more effective channels. Third, such public policy to promote exclusive licensing of
public-funded research has its ﬂip side in terms of monopoly rent seeking on publicly funded
research outputs by industry. This effectively implies double taxation of taxpayers (Eisenberg,
1996). Finally, it is yet to be ascertained whether IPR can actually incentivize scientiﬁc research.
‘‘unintended’’ consequences of
Bayh–Dole-type legislations Act. For instance, the excessive thrust on monetary incentives
(beyond the traditional norms of academic rewards) might shift the focus of public-funded
research away from basic to more applied (and commercially oriented) ﬁelds and thus hamper
the pursuit and progress of ‘‘science’’ (Mowery et al., 2001; Nelson, 2004). Another issue arising
out of the Bayh–Dole Act relates to expanding the scope of patentable research to include a wide
range of output in areas of basic research and research tools. It is also argued that the culture of
patenting might lead to an uneasy environment of secrecy and may impede and delay the process of
information sharing. Remotely, though, such tendencies come in the way of potential collabora-
tions crucially important for large-scale scientiﬁc research.

Moreover, there are serious concerns regarding possible,

Dissemination: Publication Versus Patents
There is a fundamental philosophical domain of intellectual debate that addresses concerns related
to the privatization of scientiﬁc commons. According to Nelson (2004), the Bayh–Dole Act

90

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

endorsed the notion that dedicating research results to the public commons discourages the use of
these results. However, he strongly believes that university research is most effectively disseminated
to users if they are placed in the public domain. Indeed, exclusive (or restricted) licensing may deter
widespread use at considerable economic and social cost. Nelson (2004) also points out that the
current zeal of universities for patenting represents a major shift from universities’ traditional
support of open science. The paper highlights the potential downside of exclusive licensing of
university research results. This may be particularly relevant in the case of research tools, medical
remedies, etc. that are meant for wider application. Nevertheless, initially, the argument supporting
the Bayh–Dole Act focused primarily on pharmaceuticals where patent protection continues to be
justiﬁed.

Dasgupta (2000) analyses the choice between ‘‘disclosure and publication-priority’’ versus
‘‘secrecy and patents’’. He argues that inventors are often faced with such choices where the urge to
disclose their ﬁndings to the world at large clashes with the compulsion to restrict their spread to
earn commercial rents from them. Taking into account the principal arguments behind the
Bayh–Dole Act, Mazzoleni (2006) attempts to theoretically model R&D competition to determine
the conditions under which IPR and exclusive licensing induce an increase in downstream R&D
and explores the implications of ‘‘open access’’ versus ‘‘university patenting’’ in terms of social
welfare. He shows that under ‘‘university patenting’’, the equilibrium number of ﬁrms engaged in
the development of embryonic inventions is clearly less than the optimal level. He argues that in the
case of a transition from an ‘‘open access’’ to a ‘‘university patenting’’ regime, if the aggregate
R&D spending is below the socially efﬁcient level under ‘‘open access’’, then university patenting
decreases social welfare unambiguously. However, if a patent race takes place among ﬁrms
engaged in downstream R&D under ‘‘open access’’, then university patenting may either decrease
or increase social welfare. Even when the ‘‘university patenting’’ regime brings about an increase in
social welfare, it does so only at the expense of consumer surplus.

Importance of Patents as a Channel of Technology Transfer
To understand the importance of patents as a means of technology transfer from academic
research, we take a look at some factual evidence provided by Agrawal and Henderson (2002).
They suggest that patents represent only a small proportion of all research being conducted within
academia and may not be the representative mode of technology transfer. Publishing academic
papers is far more important an activity for university faculty than patenting. Even from the
perspective of the industry, as shown by Cohen et al. (2002), patents and licenses are not nearly as
important as other channels of transferring public research results to industry, especially publica-
tions, conferences, informal information exchange or consulting.

Knowledge as a Public Good
Encouraging patenting of university research to the extent of enacting laws (Bayh–Dole Act) may
be in direct conﬂict with the ‘‘public good’’ nature of university R&D. Government-subsidized
academic research is based on the premise that the beneﬁts or knowledge derived from these
scientiﬁc discoveries would remain in the public domain (Devaney, 2004). Eisenberg (1996) is
critical of the Bayh–Dole Act on the ground that it was actually counterintuitive to provide
incentives to patent and restrict access to discoveries made through public funding in institutions
that have traditionally been the principal performers of basic research. There is a possibility that
this might result in shrinking the public domain of scientiﬁc research on the one hand and taxing
the general taxpayer twice before they can actually enjoy the fruits of such research by purchasing
the follow-on patented product from the market at the rent-seeking price charged by the patent
holder.

r 91

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

IPR and the Progress of Scientiﬁc Research
Whether IPR promotes research at universities has also been highly debated. It has been argued
that if the discoverer or the developer of a knowledge output can control its use, it acts as a major
incentive for them to carry out research (Nelson, 2004). Post-Bayh–Dole Act, many members of
the academic and scientiﬁc fraternity in the United States began to think of their discoveries as
private, valuable and licensable products or processes (Slaughter and Rhoades, 1996). Theoreti-
cally, one can also argue that when research is sequential and builds upon previous discoveries,
stronger patents may discourage subsequent research on valuable, but potentially infringing,
follow-on inventions. Murray and Stern (2007) look at the debate on ‘‘how IPR over a given piece
of knowledge affect the propensity of future researchers to build upon that knowledge in their own
scientiﬁc research activities’’ and ﬁnd evidence of a modest anti-commons effect.

In debating the usefulness of patent enforcement, it is argued that stronger patent rights are
both a blessing and a curse. Such provisions protect the patent holder in terms of future
infringements but it also makes the same inventor vulnerable to charges of infringement of the
work of previous inventors. Thus, the link between patent strength and innovation incentives is
highly ambiguous (Gallini, 2002). According to Bhaduri (2008), there are not many empirical
studies on whether patenting fundamental research raises the costs of follow-up innovations.
Walsh et al. (2003) do not ﬁnd any evidence of cancellation/curtailment of any academic ‘‘follow-
up’’ projects due to problems of accessing ‘‘upstream’’ patented technologies. In many cases,
patent holders have tolerated minor infringement by the university researchers.

Unintended Consequences of Patenting Scientiﬁc Research
Apart from the issues highlighted so far, there may be several other ‘‘unintended consequences’’ as
evident from the US experience. We discuss some of them.

Financial Motivation and Focus of Research
Nelson (2001) comments on the possible conﬂict of interest when faculty members have over-
lapping ﬁnancial and scientiﬁc interest in certain areas of research like those related to new medical
treatments. Several American research universities have established faculty committees to deal with
such conﬂicts as and when they are reported. However, concerns that the expectation of ﬁnancial
gain could adversely affect the motivation for university research have been allayed by Colyvas et
al. (2002). Based on case studies, they concluded that ﬁnancial returns do not appear to have
played a signiﬁcant role in motivating research among scientists.

Gallini (2002) makes an important observation regarding the possible redirection of research
effort from basic research to potentially ‘‘lucrative’’ applied research because of the Bayh–Dole
Act. Mowery et al. (2001) found that while there is a perceptible change in the research portfolio of
US universities towards biomedical research, there is no evidence of any signiﬁcant shifts away
from fundamental research.

Range of Patentable Outputs
The objective of the Bayh–Dole Act was to facilitate utilization of patents resulting from university
research, without changing the range of output that universities patent (Sampat, 2006). However,
several court decisions in the United States after the Bayh–Dole Act expanded the patenting
provisions beyond ‘‘technologies’’ to include elements of basic research and research tools. Thus,
research output on an increasingly wider range of subject matter could be patented (Gallini, 2002).
Nelson (2004) argues that the potential problems associated with expanding the scope of patents
into the conventional realms of science could be alarming. Conventionally, scientiﬁc facts or
principles or natural phenomena are not patentable. However, the Supreme Court judgement in

92

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

the famous Diamond v Chakrabarty case (1980)17 upheld the US principle to deﬁne patentable
subject matter to ‘‘include anything under the sun that is made by man’’. The Bayh–Dole Act did
not distinguish between patents on basic versus applied science, although ignoring this subtlety
might have serious consequences. While patents on commercially viable inventions foster product
development, patents on basic scientiﬁc discoveries may impose serious costs on entrepreneurial
science that have no economic justiﬁcation (Devaney, 2004).

Secrecy
To establish the link between the ‘‘culture of patenting’’ and ‘‘secrecy’’, one may argue that,
typically, the ﬁnancial incentives embodied in patents may discourage academics from sharing
knowledge, data and other material with their peers. However, Walsh et al. (2007) ﬁnd that while
access to knowledge inputs is largely unaffected by patents in biomedical research, access to
materials used may be restricted because of scientiﬁc competition. Pineda (2006) discusses rather
the far-reaching inﬂuence of the Bayh–Dole Act in affecting the mood and spontaneity of
international scientiﬁc collaborations. Although international collaborations are recognized as a
common scientiﬁc endeavour, economic and institutional obstacles might prevent access to both
codiﬁed and tacit knowledge. The legislative initiatives in developed countries (led by the United
States through the Bayh–Dole Act 1980) changed the academic research environment by
implementing special secrecy provisions to protect the patentability of research in progress. Pineda
(2006) also cites cases where it is seen that such legislative frameworks have prompted developed
country universities to adopt an extremely aggressive stance when negotiating collaborations with
their developing country counterparts in a bid to stake claim on the intellectual property arising
out of joint research.

To conclude, it is conceded that commodiﬁcation of science-based intellectual knowledge
through patenting will lead to greater contract-based regulations and bureaucratization in research
universities (Slaughter and Rhoades, 1996). Speciﬁcally, it has been observed that universities’
efforts to enhance the commercial value of life sciences research have serious consequences that
include politicization of government research funding, disparity across universities and changes in
the culture of academic research (Powell and Owen-Smith, 1998).

Streamlining IPR for Public-Funded Research: Lessons for India

The US evidence with regard to the acclaimed consequences of the Bayh–Dole Act is far from
unambiguous. The expected impact of a similar legal intervention in India will clearly depend on
the context and environment, that is, on the nature and culture, of public-funded research in India.
For deriving lessons for India, based on the conceptual–empirical synthesis of the US evidence, we
pose three distinct sub-questions:

(1) Why IPR legislation for public-funded research in India?
(2) Why a Bayh–Dole for India?
(3) Why at this juncture in India?

Why IPR Legislation for Public-Funded Research in India?
It has often been felt that public-funded research in India needs to be re-energized. One channel is
through a legal framework protecting intellectual property to incentivize public-funded research.
This is essentially a re-assertion of the age-old conviction of the efﬁcacy of the IPR system in
creating innovation incentives in the framework of the so-called linear approach to innovation.
This approach is based on the understanding that the promise of private appropriation of research
results drives creativity and innovation. Interestingly, the opposite viewpoint is equally strong and

r 93

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

it considers knowledge as a public good (non-rivalrous and non-excludable) where market-based
private incentives like IPR would lead to socially sub-optimal levels of knowledge creation.
However, even from the perspective of individual scientists, there is a pertinent debate on whether
their motivation for research is ‘‘extrinsic’’ or ‘‘intrinsic’’ in nature. If indeed scientists respond to
extrinsic motivations, IPR would incentivize research.

But is there any evidence to suggest that extrinsic motivations indeed dominate the pursuit of
knowledge? According to Thursby and Thursby (2007), there may be little need for patents to
provide academic scientists the appropriate incentives to invent or disclose, because the rewards
associated with the norms of science itself encourage both invention and public disclosure. This is
in perfect consonance with the prima facie impression about the mental frame of Indian academic
scientists, who have never been quite concerned about patent ownership or ﬁnancial incentives for
their research pursuits. Hence, how far IPR legislation will help energize research in India remains
a matter of debate.

Apart from incentivizing public-funded research itself, the IPR legislation is also expected to
incentivize industry to come forward and pick up ideas and inventions (often embryonic) arising
out of public-funded research by assuring them exclusive licensing rights of these ideas with a clear
patent ownership title. In fact, this, perhaps, is the primary objective of such legislations. However,
as already discussed, public-funded research in India has not succeeded much in contributing
adequately to the process of technological learning and catch-up by Indian industry. While Indian
industry is considered immature, myopic and risk averse, university research in India is allegedly
too tangential to have direct commercial application. It, therefore, remains to be seen whether
industry would be incentivized to come forward and pick up novel ideas from university labs just
because they are assured of IPR protection.

Finally, it has also been argued that an IPR law may result in better regulation of patenting
activities at universities through a judicious auditing of patent disclosure, application and licensing.
In fact, the draft of the Indian bill clearly spells out its intention to guide public-funded research
organizations to establish a mechanism to promote the culture of innovation and public-funded
intellectual property generation. In the United States, although patenting of university research
was viewed with some sort of ambivalence earlier, a major organizational change was the creation
of TTOs in the wake of the US Bayh–Dole Act 1980. However, there is clear evidence to show that
most of the TTOs in US universities spent more on their operations than they received as income
from licensing and other activities. This raises serious doubts as to whether they have indeed been
able to regulate university patenting and licensing activities viably and judiciously. In India, so far,
only the top-tier institutes have established TTOs and, at this juncture, one cannot envisage
making them self-sustaining through successful licensing of university patents. Indeed, an IPR
legislation may result in establishing such TTOs indiscriminately across all public-funded institutes
and become another futile public-policy exercise, resulting in ﬁling and maintaining a large number
of unutilized government patents at the cost of the public exchequer!

Why a Bayh–Dole for India?
The US Bayh–Dole Act 1980 was perhaps the ﬁrst uniform IP legislation that sought to assign IPR
to universities and institutions for all federally funded research. As discussed earlier, this was felt to
be necessary at that juncture to save public-funded inventions from the clutches of the funding (and
other government) agencies that held the primary stake. This unnecessarily delayed the process of
technology commercialization. These agencies were sometimes obstructive. The consequences were
visible in terms of the minimal technology commercialization that took place out of federally
funded research and the United States losing out on industrial competitiveness during the 1970s.

94

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

If we seek to replicate such a law in India, it becomes important to understand the pre-
conditions that bind us to do the same thing here as well. The Bayh–Dole Act, by assigning clear
IPR in the hands of the universities/institutions, in a way wanted to do away with the operational
hassle that existed in the form of unwarranted tensions between funding agencies and institutions
over IP ownership. Such operational bottlenecks were considered the most crucial barriers to
technology commercialization in the United States. But this is certainly not the case in India.
Government funding agencies hardly stake their claims, perhaps with some exceptions in the case
of funding by the DBT. In most cases, the CSIR retains the right to patent and license all research
conducted at their laboratories. IITs, on the other hand, have both inventor- as well as institution-
owned patens. Research in Indian academia has so far been known to promote ﬂexibilities in
research scope and modes of dissemination. Terms and conditions from government-funding
agencies have never been perceived as a serious problem. Hence, the basic tenet of the arguments
for introducing the Bayh–Dole Act in the United States is not valid in the case of Indian public-
funded research.

The mode of licensing also has implications for market competition in product development.
After the World War II, only non-exclusive licensing of public-funded research was allowed in the
United States to promote competition. However, faced with the competitiveness crisis of the 1970s
and the large pool of unutilized government patents, it was thought that non-exclusive licensing did
not provide adequate incentives to private industry to come forward and pick up university
technologies for commercialization. Therefore, the Bayh–Dole Act for the ﬁrst time allowed
exclusive licensing of federally funded research at the discretion of the institution. In India,
licensing of public-funded research has always been a strategic decision on a case-by-case basis.
Generally, the option of exclusive licensing is practiced only in areas that run high risks during
development and where the transaction costs associated with the transfer of technology are fairly
high. As we have mentioned, Indian institutions and universities have taken steps (and some of
them for quite sometime now) to put in place organizational structures to facilitate technology
transfer. These have been done following models adopted by the West, particularly the United
States, as a matter of institutional policy and not because of any law. Thus, it is unclear why one
needs a replication of the Bayh–Dole Act in India, explicitly accommodating possibilities of
exclusive licensing, when the provision for such licensing already exists.

Why at this Juncture in India?
How could such a law help public-funded research in India now is a substantially nuanced
question. Whether the law achieves its objectives, namely, facilitating commercialization of public-
funded research output as well as ushering in creativity in public-funded research, depends
crucially on the existing research culture in India and the way in which both academia and
industry respond to such a legal intervention. When the Bayh–Dole was introduced, the United
States had already attained the highest standards of scientiﬁc research. The only aim now was to
rejuvenate the process of technology transfer from public-funded research, which had slowed down
during the 1970s. US industry was the world leader in generating cutting-edge technologies with
frontier R&D effort. Many of them have been actively interfacing with the academic world
through various modes and channels, including sponsored research and consultancy agreements.
Hence, they were perhaps in a position to explore university patents for commercial development
once an appropriate incentive structure was put in place through legal intervention.

Perhaps this is not quite the case in India today. On the academic front, India will have to take
its scientiﬁc achievements to a higher level through greater creativity and innovation. Science in
India, pursued in public-funded research institutions since independence, has now received

r 95

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

renewed focus through this impending bill. However, as already argued, whether such a law provides
the right kind of incentives for science research and innovation per se is an open question. Apart
from the state of academic research, industry in India is also perhaps not mature enough to engage
in effective university–industry interface. Both have remained shy of each other for a long time.

Although it is evident that university–industry technology transfer can actually occur through
multiple channels, intellectual property protection in academic research has been in focus for quite
sometime now, even in India. It is true that scientists in Indian universities have been patenting
their research, albeit to a very limited extent, but the confusion regarding a possible conﬂict
between publication and patenting, both in operational as well as in philosophical terms, still
persists. In fact, ethical issues about IPRs in academic research connected to norms of ‘‘disin-
terestedness’’ of the academic profession have always been a common sentiment in Indian
academia. This is not to suggest that such issues were fully resolved among the US academic
community at the time the Bayh–Dole Act was introduced. However, perhaps the US academic
world was more attuned to the idea of patenting their research and far more aware of IPR
provisions, compared with what we observe among Indian academia now. Therefore, the
introduction of the law at this juncture may at best be slightly pre-mature.

The other two issues that should possibly be taken into perspective are—ﬁrst, the existence of a
large pool of unutilized government patents already in India, something very similar to the
situation in the United States before the Bayh–Dole Act but with very different implications, and
the second, the heterogeneity in the quality of academic research across the spectrum of public-
funded institutions in India.

The CSIR, which is the largest repository of government held patents in India, is a prime
example of an institution with a large number of unutilized patents. To the best of our knowledge,
the structure of patent ownership and the licensing clauses in this set-up are very similar in spirit to
that being proposed by the new Indian legislation. Indeed, the CSIR holds the right to patent all
public-funded research output and license them exclusively. Hence, any bottleneck in the process of
commercialization of unutilized patents cannot be directly linked to IP ownership per se.

The last issue is that of the heterogeneity in the quality of academic research across the
spectrum of public-funded institutions in India. Universities, institutes and laboratories, which are
the pillars of public-funded research in India, do not uniformly perform in terms of the quality of
research or human resource generation. Only a handful of premier institutes and universities can
compare themselves with international standards. Such a skewed research performance may be
linked to the concentration of good minds in the top-tier institutions only. Therefore, it remains to
be seen how a uniform IP law can be tailored to suit every tier of the quality spectrum in India, if at
all. Different constituencies are expected to respond differently to a new institutional framework
triggered by a new law. It is here that one fears that a ‘‘one size ﬁts all’’ approach could prove to be
counter productive.

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we have reviewed the economics literature on the implications and consequences of
institutionalizing IPR in academic research. In the United States, the culture of patenting in
universities and institutions existed for a long time. However, it was only in the 1970s that US
policy makers felt the need for a legislative intervention to promote university patenting in order to
facilitate the transfer of technologies generated out of federally funded research at universities.
This led to the introduction of the Bayh–Dole Act 1980, which assigned patent ownership to
universities for all publicly funded research outcomes.

96

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Today, nearly three decades after this legislation, we are still unsure about its consequences
and implications. Of course, there was a spurt in university patenting in the United States after the
Bayh–Dole Act, but there has not been a commensurate rise in licensing of federally funded
university patents. Moreover, there is ambiguity as to whether there has been a decline in the
general ‘‘quality’’ of university patents after Bayh–Dole, their rising numbers notwithstanding.
Another issue that has received considerable research attention pertains to the culture and focus of
a university being shaped by the ﬁnancial incentives embedded in IPR. The US evidence allays
fears of any permanent shift in the research focus of universities away from basic research,
although biomedical and other applied research ﬁelds emerged in the research portfolio in a big
way. The US literature also fails to conﬁrm that ﬁnancial incentives drive academic scientists in any
major way. Nevertheless, studies do suggest that excessive emphasis on patenting as the only (or a
major) channel of technology transfer might blinker our vision and lead us to ignore other very
important channels of effective university–industry interface.

Later, from the latter half of the 1990s, many OECD countries (including France, Denmark
and Japan) along with several emerging economies (like Brazil, China and South Africa) have
enacted Bayh–Dole-type legislations to promote university–industry interface and technology
transfer. However, there is little by way of concrete empirical evidence from these countries of the
consequences of such legislations.

At present, India is also contemplating a similar legislation to stimulate public-funded research
for greater industrial application. The landscape of public-funded research in India is vast and
impressive, although diverse and heterogeneous, and its contribution to society has remained far
below its potential. It is expected that public-funded research in India will be energized for more
effective technology transfer through streamlining the IPR provisions. It is in this context that
the proposed Indian legislation is discussed against the backdrop of the conceptual–empirical
synthesis of the US literature on Bayh–Dole to draw lessons for India. We argue that an IPR law
will perhaps not act as a magic formula to achieve the intended goals of rejuvenating India’s
public-funded research and encourage greater industry applications. Although, this paper has
not examined the context of any other emerging economies in this regard, the lessons drawn for
India would provide broad policy directions for other emerging economies as well, once we
appropriately juxtapose these against the backdrop of individual country-speciﬁc contexts and
experiences.

Of course, we have seen how universities in the West have assumed new roles in the innovation
process by codifying knowledge through patenting and licensing of their research, by actively
supporting the creation and development of spin-offs and by engaging in contract research and
joint ventures. They tried out various operational business models to encourage university
scientists to become entrepreneurs with equity share holding in spin-offs. This worked very well
in some cases—the Silicon Valley around Stanford University and the Route 128 around MIT are
two prominently successful examples of this attempt. However, if we attempt to replicate these
models in universities in India or elsewhere simply by institutionalizing IPRs for academic
research, ignoring the realities of the differences in context, environment, culture and levels of
scientiﬁc achievements, we may end up with misplaced priorities.

About the Authors

Amit Shovon Ray, is a development economist specializing in the areas of technology, IPR,
TRIPS and public health. He received his D.Phil. in Economics from the University of Oxford and
is presently Professor of Economics at the Centre for International Trade and Development,

r 97

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

School of International Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India; e-mail:
amit.shovon.ray@gmail.com
Sabyasachi Saha, obtained his M.A. and M.Phil. in Economics from the Centre for International
Trade and Development, School of International Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, India. He is presently Research Ofﬁcer and a Ph.D. scholar at the same Centre.

Notes

We gratefully acknowledge the comments and suggestions made by anonymous referees of JWIP.

1 Information obtained online on the MHRD website.
2 A quick international comparison reveals that developed countries on an average spend over 2% of their
gross domestic product (GDP) on R&D, a cut above India’s spending. China spends 1.42% of its GDP
on R&D, again ahead of India. However, another emerging economy, Brazil, is somewhat close to India,
with 0.82% of GDP being spent on R&D.

3 It may be noted that the government also spends on industrial R&D through its public-sector industries.

In the case of industrial R&D, defence industries in the public sector accounted for 38.8% of R&D
expenditure, followed by the fuels industry in the public sector, with 24.2% in 2005–6. Private-sector
industrial R&D expenditure was primarily concentrated on drugs and pharmaceuticals, with 45.1%,
followed by transportation, with 16.7%.

4 hhttp://rajyasabha.nic.in/legislative/amendbills/Science/protection_utlisation.pdfi [Accessed September

2009].

5 By contrast, the UK Patents Act 1977, which pre-dates the US Bayh–Dole Act, clearly allocated

ownership of intellectual property rights for all university research to universities.

6 Moreover, this system posed procedural hurdles for seeking inventor collaboration during commercial
development due to a fundamental disconnect between the inventor (at the university) and the licensing
authority (at NTIS).

7 It may be noted that UK Patents Act 1977, which clearly allocated ownership of intellectual property

rights for all university research to universities, pre-dates the US Bayh–Dole Act.

8 This was highlighted by Birch Bayh in his Senate speech to introduce the Bill on 13 September 1978.
9 A detailed study on Denmark by Valentin and Jensen (2007) conﬁrms that after the Danish Law on
University Patenting (LUP) came into force in 2000, there has been an observable increase in the total
number of patents held by universities in Denmark. However, on the ﬂipside, they ﬁnd that the previous
trend of academic participation in company-owned patents (here, drug discovery research) has suffered in
Denmark because of the introduction of the LUP.

10 This is represented by three separate variables capturing faculty size in biological sciences, engineering
and physical sciences, keeping in mind the differences in methods and marketability of research in these
areas.

11 These two terms are appropriately deﬁned by Mowery et al. (2002)—incumbents being those universities

with at least six patents granted during 1975–80, while entrants as those having less than six patents
during the same period.

12 Nelson (2004) suggests that, post-Bayh–Dole, there had been profound changes in the ways in which
universities provided access to their research results, with dissemination taking the patent route in more
areas of science than it used to. On the other hand, US court rulings allowing patents in some areas of
basic research increased incentives for for-proﬁt ﬁrms to engage in areas of basic research.

13

98

Few (13 per cent) of the TTOs reported that their ofﬁce is a part of a foundation, and 20 per
cent reported that the university has a foundation that provides support for the TTO. Only

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

15 per cent of the TTOs are corporations that are separate from their universities, and 4.8
per cent are for-proﬁt. On average, 42 per cent of the support for the TTOs is based on a
line item in the university budget and 43 per cent comes from royalties/license fees. Most
(80 per cent) of the TTOs report directly to an academic university ofﬁcial (typically, the
vice president for research) rather than a university business or ﬁnance ofﬁcial. More than
40 per cent use brokers or consultants to aid the TTO

Thursby et al. (2001).

14 Indeed, the key role played by universities and public research institutes in the process of technological

catch-up has been highlighted by Mazzoleni and Nelson (2007). Jaffe (1989) had earlier found a
signiﬁcant effect of university research on corporate patents in the areas of drugs and medical technology,
electronics, optics and nuclear technology.

15 A somewhat less ambitious expectation by industry is guided by their more speciﬁc and immediate needs
(both with respect to minor trouble shooting and problem solving as well as major product and process
development) through leveraging public-funded research and its associated talent pool.

16 But this is not to suggest that this bandwagon has been pervasive. Countries like Sweden have not

abolished professor’s privilege and Canada still does not have a separate legislation similar to the
Bayh–Dole Act. However, there has been consistent effort in Canada towards harmonizing divergent
rules of IP ownership by universities, at least with respect to R&D funded by the federal government
(Cervantes, undated).

17 Diamond v Charabarty 447 US 303, 206 USPQ (BNA) 193 (1980).

References

Agrawal, A. and Henderson, R. (2002) ‘Putting Patents in Context: Exploring Knowledge Transfer from

MIT’, Management Science, 48(1), 44–60.

Bhaduri, S. (2008) ‘Patenting Biotechnology’, in H. Patzelt and T. Brenner (eds), Handbook of

Bioentrepreneurship. Springer, Berlin, pp. 211–48.

Bush, V. (1945) Science: The Endless Frontier. U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC.
Cervantes, M. (undated) ‘Academic Patenting: How Universities and Public Research Organizations are

Using Their Intellectual Property to Boost Research and Spur Innovative Start-ups’, WIPO Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises Documents [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/sme/en/documents/
academic_patenting.htmi [Accessed October 2010].

Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R. and Walsh, J. P. (2002) ‘Links and Impacts: The Inﬂuence of Public Research on

Industrial R&D’, Management Science, 48(1), 1–23.

Colyvas, J., Crow, M., Gelijns, A., Mazzoleni, R., Nelson, R. R., Rosenberg, N. and Sampat, B. N. (2002)

‘How Do University Inventions Get into Practice’, Management Science, 48(1), 61–72.

Coupe, T. (2003) ‘Science is Golden: Academic R&D and University Patents’, Journal of Technology Transfer,

28(1), 31–46.

Dasgupta, P. (2000) ‘Science as an Institution: Setting Priorities in a New Socio-Economic Context’, Text of a
Lecture Delivered at the Plenary Session on Science in Society at the UNESCO/ICSU World Conference
on Science, Budapest 26 June–1 July 1999.

Devaney, M. (2004) ‘Government Subsidised Academic Research: Economic and Ethical Conﬂicts’, Journal of

Academic Ethics, 2(3), 273–85.

Eisenberg, R. S. (1996) ‘Public Research and Private Development: Patents and Technology Transfer in

Government-Sponsored Research’, Virginia Law Review, 82(8), 1663–727.

r 99

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Etzkowitz, H. and Stevens, A. J. (1998) ‘Inching Toward Industrial Policy: The University’s Role in

Government Initiatives to Assist Small, Innovative Companies in the United States’, in H. Etzkowitz, A.
Webster and P. Healy (eds), Capitalising Knowledge: New Intersections of Industry and Academia. SUNY,
Albany, NY, pp. 215–38.

Gallini, N. T. (2002) ‘The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent Reform’, The Journal of

Economic Perspectives, 16(2), 131–54.

Henderson, R., Jaffe, A. B. and Trajtenberg, M. (1998) ‘Universities as a Source of Commercial Technology:
A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965–1988’, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1),
119–27.

Jaffe, A. B. (1989) ‘Real Effects of Academic Research’, The American Economic Review, 79(5), 957–70.
Jensen, R. and Thursby, M. (2001) ‘Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of University Inventions’,

The American Economic Review, 91(1), 240–59.

Kaul, S. (2006) Higher Education in India: Seizing the Opportunity, ICRIER WP No. 179.
Mazzoleni, R. (2006) ‘The Effects of University Patenting and Licensing on Downstream R&D Investment

and Social Welfare’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 31(4), 431–41.

Mazzoleni, R. and Nelson, R. R. (2007) ‘Public Research Institutions and Economic Catch-Up’, Research

Policy, 36(10), 1512–28.

Mowery, D. C. (2005) ‘The Bayh–Dole Act and High-Technology Entrepreneurship in U.S. Universities:

Chicken, Egg, or Something Else?’, Paper prepared for the Eller Centre conference on Entrepreneurship
Education and Technology Transfer, University of Arizona.

Mowery, D. C. and Sampat, B. N. (2004) ‘Universities in National Innovation Systems’, Globelics Academy

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.globelicsacademy.net/programme.htmli [Accessed October 2010].

Mowery, D. C. and Sampat, B. N. (2005) ‘The Bayh–Dole Act of 1980 and University–Industry Technology
Transfer: A Model for Other OECD Governments?’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 30(1–2), 115–27.

Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N. and Ziedonis, A. A. (2001) ‘The Growth of Patenting and

Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of the Effects of the Bayh–Dole Act of 1980’, Research
Policy, 30(1), 99–119.

Mowery, D. C., Sampat, B. N. and Ziedonis, A. A. (2002) ‘Learning to Patent: Institutional Experience,

Learning, and the Characteristics of U.S. University Patents after the Bayh–Dole Act, 1981–1992’,
Management Science, 48(1), 73–89.

Murray, F. and Stern, S. (2007) ‘Do formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free Flow of Scientiﬁc

Knowledge?’, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 63(4), 648–87.

Nelson, R. R. (2001) ‘Observations on the Post-Bayh–Dole Rise of Patenting at American Universities’,

Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 13–9.

Nelson, R. R. (2004) ‘The Market Economy, and the Scientiﬁc Commons’, Research Policy, 33(3),

455–71.

Pineda, C. F. (2006) ‘The Impact of Stronger Intellectual Property Rights on Science and Technology in

Developing Countries’, Research Policy, 35(6), 808–24.

Powell, W. W. and Owen-Smith, J. (1998) ‘Universities and the Market for Intellectual Property in the Life

Sciences’, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 17(2), 253–77.

Rafferty, M. (2008) ‘The Bayh–Dole Act and University Research and Development’, Research Policy, 37(1),

29–40.

Ray, A. S. (2003) A Study of R&D Incentives in India: Structural Changes and Impact, Project Report

Submitted to the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, May.

Ray, A. S. (2006) ‘Going Global: India’s Aspirations and Apprehensions in the New Millenium’, in F. Villares

(ed.), India, Brazil and South Africa: Perspectives and Alliances, Editora UNESP, Sao Paulo.

100

r Patenting Public-Funded Research for Technology Transfer

Amit Shovon Ray and Sabyasachi Saha

Ray, A. S. (2008) ‘Emerging Through Technological Capability: An Overview of India’s Technological

Trajectory’, ICRIER WP, No. 227.

Sampat, B. N. (2006) ‘Patenting and U.S. Academic Research in the 20th Century: The World Before and

After Bayh–Dole’, Research Policy, 35(6), 772–89.

Santoro, M. D. and Chakrabarti, A. K. (2002) ‘Firm Size and Technology Centrality in Industry–University

Interactions’, Research Policy, 31(7), 1163–80.

Slaughter, S. and Rhoades, G. (1996) ‘The Emergence of a Competitiveness Research and Development

Policy Coalition and the Commercialisation of Academic Science and Technology’, Science, Technology,
and Human Values, 21(3), 303–39.

Stevens, A. J. (2004) ‘The Enactment of Bayh–Dole’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(1), 93–9.
The Economist. (2002) ‘Innovation’s Golden Goose’, Unsigned article, 12 December.
‘The Protection and Utilisation of Public-Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008’, Bill No. LXVI of 2008 of
Rajya Sabha, Parliament of India [online]. Available at hhttp://rajyasabha.nic.in/legislative/amendbills/
Science/protection_utlisation.pdfi [Accessed 10 September 2009].

Thursby, J. G. and Thursby, M. C. (2002) ‘Who is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth in University

Licensing’, Management Science, 48(1), 90–104.

Thursby, J. G. and Thursby, M. C. (2007) ‘University Licensing’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23(4),

620–39.

Thursby, J. G., Jensen, R. and Thursby, M. C. (2001) ‘Objectives, Characteristics and Outcomes of University

Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S. Universities’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 59–72.

Valentin, F. and Jensen, R. L. (2007) ‘Effects on Academia-Industry Collaboration of Extending University

Property Rights’, Journal Technology Transfer, 32(3), 251–76.

Walsh, J. P., Arora, A. and Cohen, W. M. (2003) ‘Working Through Patent Problem’, Science, 299(5609),

1021.

Walsh, J. P., Cohen, W. M. and Cho, C. (2007) ‘Where Excludability Matters: Materials Versus Intellectual

Property in Academic Biomedical Research’, Research Policy, 36(8), 1184–203.

r 101


