European Privacy Standards and their Implications 

for International Trade 

The EU Data  Protection Directive 

Fiona M. CARLIN* 

I. 

INTKODUCTION 

During the last  twenty years, most European countries have  enacted legislation 
designed  to  balance  the  individual’s right  to  privacy  with  the  legitimate needs  of 
public  authorities,  employers,  and  others  to  process  personal  data.  These  domestic 
laws  are  similar  in  many  respects  since  they  are  based  on  the  data  protection 
principles  embodied  in  a  1981 Council  of  Europe  Convention.’  The  Convention 
left  signatory  States  considerable  discretion  in  establishing  their  national  data 
protection  systems  and  in  defining  the  scope  of  the  individual’s right  to  privacy. 
Consequently, data protection standards and procedures vary, sometimes considerably, 
&om one country to another. 

In  an  attempt to  reduce  these  dfferences, and  to  facihtate  the  ever  increasing 
flow of  personal data  in  the  electronic age,  the  European  Commission published  a 
proposal  for  European  Union-wide  legislation  on  data  protection  in  1990.2 The 
U.K.  government  initially  opposed  the  Directive,  arguing  that  it  would  impose 
burdensome obligations on  companies and  that  the  Council of Europe Convention 
provided a sufficient degree of protection. The proposal languished until  1994 when 
the  “Bangemann  Group”  of  experts  advising  the  European  institutions  on  the 
Information Society, urged the  adoption of  the proposed Directive to  increase legal 
certainty and  consumer confidence. After  protracted negotiations, the  Directive was 
finally adopted in October  1995.3 

The  Data  Protection  Directive  enters  into  force  on  24  October  1998.  EU 
Member  State  governments  are  amending  their  national  laws  to  comply  with  its 
obligations; Greece has  already done so,  and preparations are well under way  in  the 

*  Partner, Oppenheimer Wolff & Donnelly, Brussels, Belgium. 
’ Council  of  Europe  Convention  No.  108  of  28 January  1981 for  the  Protection  of  Individuals with 
Proposal for a  Council Directive concerning  the protection  of individuals in relation to the processing of 

regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data. 

personal data: O.J. 1990 C 277/3. 

Directive 95/46  of the European  Parliament and of the Council of  24 October  1995 on  the protection 
of individuals with regard  to the processing  of personal data  and on the  free  movement of such data: O.J.  1995 
L 281131. 

540 

THE JOURNAL OF  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

remaining  fourteen  States.  The  Directive  is  being  stuhed  with  equal  intensity by 
governments  outside  the  EU,  particularly  in  the  United  States  since  it  not  only 
affects  the  processing  of  personal  data  within  the  EU,  but  also  the  transfer  of  data 
from the EU to third countries. 

The  Data  Protection  Directive  will  introduce  common  standards  of  privacy 
protection  and  ensure  that  personal  data  may  be  f?eely  transferred  throughout  the 
EU. It imposes obligations on those who process personal data (data controllers), and 
provides  individuals  (data  subjects) with  certain  rights  to  ensure  that  data  are  not 
misused. 

The Directive establishes a basic fiamework of data protection principles and the 
regulatory  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  those  principles  are  respected.  It  does  not 
establish a  single body  of rules  enforced by  one  central authority. The  enforcement 
powers  and  approach  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities  in  applying  those 
standards may  therefore continue to  vary  from one  country to  another. A Working 
Party,  comprising  representatives of  national  data  protection  authorities,  has  been 
established  under  the  Directive  to  advise  the  European  Commission  on  data 
protection issues.  Its work wdl hopefully reduce the potential for disparate standards 
at the national level. 

In  the  era  of  digital  telecommunications, the  Internet,  and  the  emergence of 
electronic commerce, the  Data  Protection Directive  has  significant implications for 
public authorities, multinational corporations, and indeed anyone processing personal 
data  relating  to  individuals.  Ths  article  outlines  the  scope  of  the  Directive  and 
examines its potential impact on international trade. 

11.  OVERVIEW OF  THE DIRECTIVE 

A.  Scope 

The  Directive  protects  only  the  indwidual’s  right  to  privacy;  it  does  not 
concern legal persons.  It  applies where  any  information relating to  an identified or 
identifiable  natural  person,  the  “data  subject”,  is  processed  wholly  or  partly  by 
automatic means,  and  by  non-automatic  means  where  the  data  are  part  of  a  filing 
system. 4 

A  filing system  is  defined  as  any structured set  of personal  data  accessible according  to  specific criteria. 
“Unstructured” files do not fall within the scope of the Directive where they  are processed manually. The U.K. 
Data Protection  Bill  (HL Bill  61, s.l(l))  intended to implement the Directive,  defines filing system  as:  “._. any 
set  of  information  relating  to  individuals  to  the  extent  that  ___  the  set  is  structured,  either  by  reference  to 
individuals or by  reference to criteria  relating to individuals, in such a way  that parricular information relating to 
a particular  individual is  readily  accesible.”  (emphasis added).  The U.K.  Data Protection Registrar  has  recently 
published a  “provisional interpretation” of this concept to reject the view that information held by  an employer 
in  a  personnel  fite  would  not  constitute  “particular”  information since  it  is  likely  to  contain  a  range  of  data 
concerning  issues  such  as  sickness,  absence, performance,  pay,  next  of  kin.  According  to  the  Registrar,  this 
information is  “particular”  in  that  it  is  all  information held  for and  relevant to employment;  to exempt these 
files from data protection rules would be “perverse”.  See http://www.open.gov.uk/dpr/nianua1.ht111. 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY STANDAKDS 

541 

The requirement that the individual be  “identified” or “identifiable” means that 
the  Directive  does  not  apply  to  processing  once  data  are  made  anonymous,  e.g. 
where names are replaced by  an identification number, but will apply where the data 
controller  maintains  a  key  enabling  him  to  re-establish  the  identity  of  any  given 
individual.  The  controller  is  the  body  (individual/company/public  authority,  etc.) 
which determines the purposes and means of the processing. 

Processing is very broadly defined to include any operations: 
“ ...  performed  upon  personal  data,  whether  or  not  by  automatic  means,  such  as 
collection,  recording,  organization,  storage,  adaptation  or  alteration, 
retrieval, 
consultation,  use,  disclosure  by 
transmission,  dissemination  or  otherwise  making 
available, alignment or combination, bloclung, erasure or destruction.” (Article 2(b)). 
Member  States  may  exempt  data  controllers  from  the  obligations  to  comply 
with  the  rules  on  data  quality,  consent  and  sensitive  data  (described  below)  in 
relation  to  existing manual  filing systems  (e.g. card  indexes,  microfiches) for  up  to 
twelve years  from  the  date  of  adoption  of  the  Directive, i.e.  up  untd  2007.  Data 
subjects must nevertheless be  entitled to the rectification or erasure of incomplete or 
inaccurate data  stored in  such files. Recital  69  of the Directive provides  that where 
data  contained  in  existing filing systems  are  manually processed  during the  twelve- 
year  transition  period,  those  systems  must  be  brought  into  conformity  with  the 
Directive  “at  the  time  of processing”. This caveat  was  originally in  the  text  of the 
Directive  itself;  it  was  relegated  to  the  Recitals-which 
are  explanatory but  not 
legally binding in naturepresumably  due to the U.K.’s  cost objections. 

The Directive does not apply to processing related to  State security matters and 
to  processing  in  the  course  of  a  natural  person’s  purely  personal  or  household 
activities (e.g. compiling a telephone and address &rectory). 

B.  Applicable  LAW 

Article  14  of  the  Directive provides that  the  law  applicable to  any  processing 
operation is  determined  by  the  place  of  establishment of  the  data  controller.  The 
concept of “establishment” under EU  law has been defined broadly by  the European 
Court  of  Justice  to  include  agencies,  branches  or  subsidiaries,  or  any  other 
permanent presence.’  This  is  reflected  in  Recital  19 of  the  Directive, which  states 
that  establishment implies  the  effective  and  real  exercise  of  activity  through  stable 
arrangements;  the 
a  branch  or 
subsidiary-is 
not a  determining factor. Consequently, if the controller is  established 
in  more  than  one  Member  State,  he/she  will  have  to  comply  with  the  laws 
applicable in each country. 

legal  form  of  such  establishment-whether 

Member  States  have  residual  jurisdiction  where  the  controller  is  established 
outside  the  EU  but  nonetheless  makes  use  of  equipment  in  their  respective 

Case C-205/84, Commission  R Germany.  119861 ECR 3793 521 

542 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

territories  to  process  personal  data,  unless  the  equipment  is  used  only  for  the 
purposes of transit  through the  territory  of the EU.  Given  the very broad  definition 
of processing, this transit exception is likely to be of little practical significance. 

C.  Data  Quality  Principles and  the Data  Subject’s Consent 

The  Data  Protection  Directive  lays  down  five  data  quahty  principles.  These 

require the data controller to ensure that personal data are: 

-  processed fairly and lawfully; 
-  collected and processed for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes which 

- 

- 
- 

are determined at the time of the collection of the data; 
adequate,  relevant  and  not  excessive  in  relation  to  the  purposes  for  which 
they are collected; 
accurate and updated where necessary; and 
kept  in  a  form  which  permits  identification  of  individuals  for  no  longer 
than  necessary in view of the purposes of the processing. 

As  a  general rule, the  data subject must  unambiguously give his  consent to  the 
processing  of  personal  data  for  such  processing  to  be  lawful.  Article  7  of  the 
Directive permits a number of exceptions to this rule,  intw alia, where the processing 
is  necessary: 

- 
- 
- 

for the performance of a  contract to which the data subject is  party; 
for compliance with the controller’s legal obligations; 
in  the  legitimate  interests pursued by  the  controller or  by  a  third  party  to 
whom  the  data  are  dsclosed,  where  these  outweigh  the  interests  of 
bndamental rights of the data  subject. 

In weighing the respective interests of data controller and  data subject, Recital 30 
recognizes that  Member  States may  determine  the  circumstances in which  personal 
data may be used or dsclosed to a third party in the context of the legitimate ordinary 
business  activities of companies. These circumstances may  vary  from one country to 
another, although it is  likely that  common  activities which  do not  entail  appreciable 
risks  will fall within  the  exception to  the  consent  principle, e.g.  processing of data 
necessary for payroll management or customer invoicing. 

D.  Protection of  Special  Categories .f Sensitive  Data 

Subject  to  a  number  of limited  exceptions, it  is  prohibited  to  process  personal 
data  revealing  sensitive  information  concerning  racial  or  ethnic  origin,  political 
opinions,  religious  or  philosophical  belie&,  trade-union  membership,  and  an 
individual’s health or sex life. 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY  STANDARDS 

543 

Article  8(2)  of  the  Directive  provides  for  specific  derogations  from  this  rule, 

inter  alia,  where: 

as  a  matter  of  national  law  he 

the  data  subject  explicitly consents-unless 
cannot waive his privacy; 
the processing is required by  national employment law; 
processing is  carried out in the  course of the  legitimate activities of a non- 
profit  organization  with  a  political,  philosophical,  religious  or  trade-union 
aim,  provided  the  data  subjects  have  a  regular  connection  with  the 
organization  and  the  latter  does  not  disclose  the  data  to  a  third  party 
without  the subjects’ consent;6 and 
the  processing relates  to  data which  are  manifestly made public by  the  data 
subject  or  are  necessary  for  the  establishment, exercise  or  defense  of  legal 
claims. 

There  is  an  explicit  exception  for  the  health  care  industry  where  data  are 
processed  by  a  health  care  professional  who  is  subject  to  the  obligation  of 
professional secrecy under national laws or professional codes. 

E.  The Data  Subject’s Rights 

Where  data  are  obtained directly from  the  data  subject, Article  10 requires the 
controller to reveal his  identity and the purposes of the  processing. The data  subject 
must  be  provided  with  any  further  information  (identity of  recipients  of  the  data; 
whether  replies  to  questions,  for  example,  are  obligatory  or  voluntary;  possible 
consequences  of  failure  to  reply;  existence  of  the  right  of  access  to  and  right  to 
rectie  the  data),  but  only  to  the  extent  that  this  information  is  necessary  to 
guarantee  fair  processing,  having  regard  to  the  specific circumstances in  whch  the 
data  are collected. How  this proviso is  translated into  national law will be  critical in 
terms  of  the  overall burden  for  controllers. The basic  principle is  that  data  subjects 
should not be deceived or misled as to the purpose for which the data will be used. 
Where  data  are  not  obtained  directly from  the  data  subject,  the  obligation  to 
inform d not  apply  where  this would  be  impossible or involve a disproportionate 
effort.  In  such  circumstances,  Member  States  are  directed  to  provide  “appropriate 
safeguards”. The implications of this  provision,  e.g. for  controllers buying lists from 
third  parties,  will  only become  apparent  once  the  national implementing legislation 
is  in place. 

The  data  subject  must  be  entitled  to  access  the  data  and  to  have  the  data 
rectified or erased if it is  incomplete, inadequate or otherwise infringes the Directive. 

Amnesty  International  lobbied  unsuccessfully  for  a  derogation  for  human  rights  organizations  arguing 
that  compliance  with  the  obligations  imposed  on  controllers  would  undermine  its  activities  which  involve 
collecting and storing information  on human rights victims. 

544 

THE JOUKNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  controller must  notifjr  any rectification or erasure to  thrd parties  to whom  the 
data  have  been  disclosed,  unless 
impossible  or  would  involve  a 
disproportionate effort. 

this  proves 

The Directive  provides for  certain  exceptions  to  these  rights where  processing 
of  personal  data  is  carried  out  solely  for  journalistic  purposes  or  the  purpose  of 
artistic and  literary expression to  the  extent  necessary in  the  interests  of fi-eedom of 
expression.  On  25  February  1997,  the  Working  Party  adopted  Recommendation 
1/97  on Data  Protection  Law  and  the  Media’  defining  the  limits  to  this  exception 
and  requiring any exceptions to comply with the principle of proportionahty. 

E 

The Direct  Marketing  Rule 

The data  subject must be given the right: 
- 
- 

to object to data  processing for the purposes of lrect marketing; or 
to  be  informed before  data  are disclosed for  the first  time to  third parties- 
or  used  on  their  behalf-for 
expressly offered the right to object to such dlsclosure or usage. 

the  purposes  of  direct  marketing,  and  to  be 

G.  Automated  Individual  Decisions 

Article  15  of  the  Directive  confers  on  each  individual  the  right  not  to  be 
subject to  a  decision  which  produces  legal  effects  or which  otherwise  significantly 
affects  him/her,  and  which  is  based  solely  on automated processing of data intended 
to evaluate certain personal  aspects relating to himher. Examples cited are decisions 
relating to performance at work, credit-worthiness, reliability,  conduct, etc. 

Recital  41  specifies  that  every  data  subject  must  have  the  right  to  know  the 
logic involved in  the automatic processing of data concerning him/her,  although this 
right  must  not  adversely affect  intellectual  property  rights,  including the  copyright 
protecting software. Member  States may  create  exemptions  to  t h s  rule where  such 
decision is  taken on the course of entering into/performing  a  contract at the  request 
of the data  subject, and particularly where there are suitable safeguards protecting the 
data  subject’s legitimate interests. This  implies that  the  individual ought  to  have  the 
opportunity  to  at  least  make  hidher  views  known  to  the  controller.  A  second 
exception is  foreseen where the decision is  authorized by  a law which also safeguards 
the data subject’s legitimate interests. 

’ See http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/dglS. 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY  STANDARDS 

545 

H.  Security  of  Processing 

Only the  controller, or someone authorized by  him, may  process personal data 
(Article  17(1)).  The  controller  is  obliged  to  implement  appropriate  technical  and 
organizational measures to protect against accidental destruction or loss, and all forms 
of  unlawful  processing  including  unauthorized  disclosure  or  access,  in  particular 
where  the  processing involves the  transmission  of  data  over  a  network. There  is  a 
requirement  to  ensure  that  such  measures  provide  an  appropriate level  of  security 
commensurate with the nature of the data concerned. 

Where  data  are  processed  by  a  thxd  party  on  behalf of  a  data  controller,  the 
latter  is  obliged  to  select  a  processor  providing  sufficient  guarantees.  Their 
relationship  must  be  governed  by  a  contract  imposing these  same  data  protection 
requirements  on  the  processor  and  requiring  the  processor  to  act  only  on 
instructions &om the controller. 

I. 

The Role of 

the National  Supervisory Authorities/Not$cation  Requirements 

The  Directive  obliges  the  Member  States  to  appoint  a  national  supervisory 
authority (NsA) to  enforce the national laws  implementing the Directive. Each NSA 
must be  endowed with powers to investigate and  intervene, including the  ability to 
order the erasure or destruction of data. 

It  is  the  duty of  the NSAS to  ensure that  the  data  controller complies with  lus 
the 
obligations  under  the  Directive.  In  principle,  the  controller  must  no* 
appropriate authorities before  carrying out any automatic processing operation, and 
provide  detailed information  on  the  purposes  of  the  processing,  the  categories of 
data  subjects  and  data  concerned,  the  potential  recipients  of  the  data,  proposed 
transfers  of  data  to  third  countries,  etc.  NSAS are  obliged  to  keep  a  register  of 
processing operations notified which must be open to inspection by  the public. 

Member  States  are  free  to  provide  for  exemption  from  or  simplification  of 
notification requirements where,  for  instance, the processing is  unlikely to  adversely 
affect the rights and freedoms of data subjects. The appointment by  the controller of 
a  "personal data  official",  responsible for ensuring compliance with the national law, 
is  an  additional  factor  that  may  fachtate  lighter  reporting  requirements.  A  data 
protection official must  ensure the  internal application  of the  relevant national data 
protection law and is obliged to  keep a  register of processing operations for possible 
inspection. According to Recital 49 of the Directive, a data protection official can be 
an  employee  of  the  controller,  provided  he  is  able  to  exercise  his  functions  in 
complete independence, especially from management. 

On  3  December  1997, the  Working  Party  adopted  a  document  reflecting  its 
discussions on the  notification process.8 In its view, notification is  intended to  serve 

' Working Document: Notification. not yet  published. 

546 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PKOPEKTY 

as the basis  for selective monitoring of the legitimacy of processing operations by  the 
NSA; the  intention  is  not  to  introduce a  system  of prior  approval or  authorization 
except in the  case  of processing operations constituting specific risks.  The Working 
Party  notes 
the  discrepancies  in  current  notification  requirements.  Spain, 
Luxemburg,  Austria,  Portugal,  Sweden  and  the  United  Kingdom  require  all 
processing operations to  be  notified, subject to  a  variety of limited  exceptions; this 
approach is  inefficient both  for controllers and NSAS in terms of time  and resources 
required to  ensure compliance. In Belgium and The Netherlands on the other hand, 
it  is  estimated that approximately 80 percent  of  all processing operations are exempt 
fiom notification. In Denmark, Germany, Ireland and  Finland, only certain types  of 
processing  operations  must  be  notified.  In  Germany,  for  instance,  in  the  private 
sector, only credit reference operators, direct marketers, and organizations processing 
data on behalf of others are required to noti+. 

The Working Party intends to develop a list of processing operations unlikely to 
adversely affect  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  data  subjects.  It  cites  data  relating  to 
payroll management, accounting, customers and suppliers as  examples. The extent to 
which  these  notification  obligations are  waived  or  simplified will  obviously greatly 
impact the burden on data controllers. 

The Workmg Party fbrther concludes that it is  important that  NSAS require the 
purposes of the processing operations notified to be adequately specified, since overly 
generic  definitions  deprive  the  system  of  its  effectiveness  allowing  neither  data 
subjects nor NSAS to assess  compliance. The Working Party will study the possibility 
of  defining  a  standardmed  description  of  the  purpose  of  common  processing 
operations  and  has  signalled  its  intention  to  develop  common  methods  for  the 
assessment of the compatibility of processing operations with the purpose as  declared 
in  the notifications. Differences in the way  the  purpose is  described in the  Member 
States is  a  burden  on  data  controllers, and  threatens the  equivalence of the  level  of 
protection available throughout the EU. 

J.  Remedies  and  Sanctions 

Individuals must  have  the  right  to  a  judicial  remedy  for  any  breach  of  the 
guarantees provided by  the Directive. Anyone who has  suffered damage as  a result of 
an  unlawful processing operation will be  entitled  to  receive compensation fiom the 
controller. The controller may  be  exempted from  t h s  liability if he/she  proves that 
he/she  is  not  responsible for  the  event  giving  rise  to  the  damage. Member  States 
must also provide for sanctions to be imposed in case  of violations. A controller who 
does  not  comply  with  the  law  implementing  the  Directive  could  therefore 
potentially be  sued for damages by  an  aggrieved data  subject and  prosecuted by  the 
NSA. The  Directive  does  not  mandate  the  nature  of  the  sanctions which  may  be 
civil and/or  criminal. 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY  STANDARDS 

547 

K.  Codes of Conduct 

EU  Member  States  and  the  Commission  are  mandated  to  encourage  the 
formulation of sectoral codes of conduct to contribute to the proper implementation 
of the  Directive.  Trade  associations and  other bodies  representing categories of data 
controllers  may  draft  national  codes  and  submit  them  for  approval  to  the  NSA. 
Proposals  for  EU-wide  industry  codes  may  be  submitted  to  the  Worlung  Party 
which will determine whether  they comply with the national implementing laws. 

The  Worlung  Party  is  due  to  adopt  a  paper  setting out  the  procedure  it  will 
apply  in assessing  EU-wide  codes of conduct.  Its  methodology is  likely to focus on 
the  application  of  a  “value-added  test”  implying  that  it  will  not  be  prepared  to 
rubber-stamp  codes  of  conduct  which  merely  reflect  the  legislation.  Codes  of 
conduct  will be  expected  to  contain  specific standards of  data  protection  reflecting 
the particularities of a given sector. 

Compliance with  an  approved  code  will  not  exempt  those  bound  by  it  fi-om 
having to  notify  their  activities to  the  appropriate NSAS, neither will  it  qualitjr  data 
controllers for  simplified  notification  requirements.  National  or  EU-wide  codes  of 
conduct,  therefore,  offer  few  advantages  other  than  the  ability  to  advertise 
compliance  with  a  code  to  customers,  for  instance.  In  contrast,  compliance  with 
voluntary  codes  of  conduct  offers  a  potentidy  significant  advantage  for  data 
controllers established in or transferring data to third countries, as hscussed below. 

111.  TRANSFERS 
A.  Article  25-Application  of the Adequacy Test 

OF DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES-THE ADEQUACY TEST 

By  far  the  most  controversial  provision  of  the  Directive  is  Article  25(1).  It 
obliges  EU Member States to  ensure that personal data  may  only be transferred to  a 
country  outside  the  EU  provided  that  country  ensures  an  “adequte  level  of 
protection”.  Member  States may  allow  for  exemptions  where  the  data  subject  has 
given  h s  consent, where  the  transfer  is  necessary  in  relation to  a contract or a  legal 
claim,  or  where  the  public  interest  so  requires  (e.g.  transfers  between  tax/social 
security administrations). 

The adequacy of the level  of data protection afforded by  a  third country wdl be 
judged  in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances  surrounding  a  data  transfer  operation. 
T h s  requires  an  assessment  of  the  nature  of  the  data,  the  purpose  and  duration  of 
the proposed processing operations, the rules of law in the third country in  question, 
and,  significantly,  the  professional rules  and  security  measures  which  are  complied 
with in that country. The benchmark for the adequacy test applied to third  countries 
is  likely  to  reflect  the  standards that  the  Data  Protection  Directive  sets  within  the 
EU. 

548 

T H E  J O U R N A L  OF  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The Member  States and  the European  Commission must  inform  each  other  in 
cases where they consider that a third country  does not  provide an  adequate level of 
protection. Where  the  Commission  confirms  the  lack  of  adequate  protection  (after 
consultation with  an  advisory Committee  made up  of Member State representatives), 
Member States  will  be  obliged to  prohibit  the  transfer of  data  to  that  country. The 
Directive  empowers 
into 
negotiations  with  the  thrd  country  in  question  with  a  view  to  “remedying” the 
situation. 

in  such  circumstances 

the  Commission 

to  enter 

The  Commission may  also  find  (after  consulting  the  Committee)  that  a  third 
country ensures an  adequate level of protection by  reason of its  domestic law or  the 
international commitments it has  entered into  (Article 25(6)). 

B.  Blacklists  or  whitelists! 

Assessment  of  “adequacy”  is  particularly  dfficult  in  the  U.S.  context,  where 
there  are  specific laws  for  some  sectors  (credt reporting,  video  rental  records), and 
differing  rules  amongst  the  federal  states.  Industry  groupings  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic  have  been vocal  in urging the  European Commission not  to  use  its  powers 
under Article 25 to  dsrupt business  and stifle  the growth of electronic commerce. In 
a joint  statement in July  1997, an  akance  of telecoms, information  technology  and 
publishing  lobbies  warned  the  Commission  that  any  move  to  ban  exports  to 
“blackhsted”  countries  outside  the  EU  would  violate  World  Trade  Organization 
(WTO) rules and provoke a  damaging trade  dspute.  They proposed that  industry be 
6-ee to rely on self-regulation by  embodying data protection standards contractually. 

The Commission  is  of the  view  that  any  eventual prohibition  on  data  transfers 
to  third  countries  would  be  permissible  by  virtue  of  Article  XIV  of  the  General 
Agreement  on  Trade  in  Services 
It  has  requested  the  Workmg  Party  to 
consider  possible  ways  of  assessing  whether  third  country  privacy  standards  are 
“adequate”. 

Industry  fears  of  a  blackhst  of  third  countries with  inadequate  data  protection 
standards were somewhat allayed when  the  Working Party  mooted  the  concept of a 
“whitelist”  of  countries  which  can  be  assumed  to  ensure  an  adequate  level  of 
protection.’” Such  a  list  would  be  used  by  data  controllers, NSAS and  the  Member 
States  as  a  guide  to  their  own  decisions  on  data  exports.  It  would  be  without 
prejudice  to  particular  cases  which  might  present  a  specific  risk  which  should  be 

’ Article  xw(c)(ii) explicitly permits  GATS signatories  to  adopt  measures necessary  to  protect  the privacy 
of  individuals  in  relation  to  the  processing  and  dissemination  of  personal  data  and  the  protection  of 
confidentiality  of  individual  records  and  accounts,  provided  such  measure  do  not  constitute  a  disguised 
restriction on trade in services. 

First  Orientations  on  TranSfers  of  Peenonu1  Data  to  7kkf  Colmfries-Possible  W7ys  Fornard  in  Assessing 

Adequacy,  Discussion Document  adopted by the Working Party on 26 June 1997, not  ofhally published. 

1 0  

EUROPEAN PRIVACY  STANDAKDS 

549 

treated with  particular caution. In this context,  the Working Party has  identified the 
following categories of data which it considers pose particular risks  to privacy: 

transfers of sensitive data (as defined above); 
transfers  which  carry the risk of financial loss  (e.g. credit card payments over 
the Internet); 
transfers  made  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  decision  which  significantly 
affects  the  individual  (e.g.  recruitment  or promotion  decision, the  granting 
of credit, etc.); 
transfers  which  carry  a  risk  of  serious  embarrassment  or  tarnishing  an 
individual's reputation; 
transfers which  may  result  in  specific actions which  constitute a  significant 
intrusion into an individual's private life  (e.g.  unsolicited telephone calls); 
repetitive transfers  involving massive  volumes  of data  (e.g.  transactional data 
processed via  telecoms networks, the Internet); 

-  transfers  involving  the  collection  of  data  in  a  particularly  covert  or 

- 

- 

clandestine manner fe.g. Internet  cookies' '). 

The Working Party  is  of the  opinion  that  an  analysis  of whether  protection  is 

adequate must address two main  issues: 

-  the scope of the rights of the  data  subject and  the obligations on those who 

process  data; and 
the procedural means for ensuring their enforcement. 

- 

The fact that a third country has ratified Council of Europe Convention No.  108 
may  be  an  idcation  of  adequacy. However,  the  Convention  contains  no  rules  on 
transfers  of  data  to  countries  not  party  to  it;  there  is,  therefore,  concern  that  a 
Convention country could be used  as a staging post in a data transfer fiom the EU to 
a  third  country  with  inadequate  protection.  The  fact  that  that  country  has  an 
independent  supervisory  authority  with  enforcement  powers,  and  provided  the 
country  is  the  final  destination  and  not  an  intermediary  country,  is  likely  to  be 
sufficient to allow for a presumption of adequacy. 

In  order  to test  how  this  proposed whitelist  approach would  work  in  practice, 
the  Commission  has  announced  its  intention  to  fund  a  case  study  which  will 
examine  concrete  examples  of  data  transfers  to  third  countries.I2  However,  the 
results  are  unlikely  to  be  made  known  before  the  Directive  enters  into  force  in 
October. 

" Internet  cookies  are  small  data  structures delivered by  a  Web  site  to  the  user's  hard  drive which  allow 

Web sites to  maintain information that  the user has disclosed on site. 

12 

Official  Journal  of  the  European  Communities,  S  184137  of  23  September  1997.  The  countries 
concerned  include  Australia,  Canada,  China, Japan,  and  the  United  States.  The  practical  case  studies  will 
examine  issues  relating  to  the  management  of a  human  resources  database  of  a  multinational  company,  the 
results  of medical  research, electronic commerce and global information  networks, and the treatment of data  in 
the framework of air transport reservation systems. 

550 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PKOPERTY 

There  is  unlikely  to  be  a  broad  approval/disapproval  of  all data transfers  to  any 
particular country; a whitelist approach which  is  issue/sector specific and kept under 
constant review is the most likely scenario. 

C.  The Role qf Thluntary  Codes 

The  Working  Party's  June  1997  document,  First  Orientations  on  Transfers  4 
to  Third  Countries  noted  that  voluntary  codes  may  offer  adequate 

Personal  Data 
protection if they ensure: 

- 
- 
- 

a good level of general compliance; 
support and help to indvidual data subjects; and 
appropriate redress,  including compensation where appropriate. 

On  14 January  1998,  the  Working  Party  adopted  a  document  setting  out 
specific guidelines on what  types  of voluntary  codes  will  be  considered to  offer  an 
adequate level  of data protection in the  context of transfers  to third c~untries.'~ 

Specifically,  there  must  be  an  association  or body  responsible  for  the  code,  in 

relation to which the following questions will be asked: 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 

Does the governing body ensure that its members are aware  of the code? 
Does it require evidence from its members that  they have  put  the provisions 
of the code into practice? How often? 
Is  such  evidence provided  by  the  member  company itself,  or  does  it  come 
from an  external source (e.g. an accredited auditor)? 
Does the body investigate alleged or suspected breaches of the code? 
Is  compliance with  the  code  a  condtion  of  membership  or  is  compliance 
purely voluntary? 

- 

-  Where  a  member  has  been  shown  to  breach  a  code,  what  forms  of 
dsciplinary  sanction  are  available  to  the  representative body  (expulsion or 
other)? 
Is  it  possible  for  an  individual  or  company  to  continue  workmg  in  the 
particular profession or industry even after expulsion from the representative 
body? 
Is  compliance with  the code enforceable in  other ways,  for example, by  way 
of the courts or a specialist  tribunal? 

- 

An  indlvidual  data  subject  must  have 

institutional  support  allowing  any 

dlfficulties to be  addressed. The following factors will be  considered pertinent: 

-  Is  there a system of investigation of individual complaints? 

13 

fudging  Industry  SeFRegulation:  When  does  it  make a  hfeaningtitl  Contrihutiorz to  the  Levd  qf  Dam  Pmtection 

ut  a  Third  Corrntty? 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY STANDARDS 

551 
-  How are data subjects made  aware of this system and  of the  decision taken 
- 
- 
- 

in individual cases? 
Are there any costs involved for the data subject? 
Who carries out the investigation and with what powers are they endowed? 
Who  adjudlcates on  an  alleged  breach  of  the  code? Are  they  independent 
and impartial? 

The  impartiality of  the  arbiter  or  adjudlcator is  paramount;  he/she  should be 
independent  in  relation  to  the  data  controller,  i.e.  coming  from  outside  the 
profession or  sector concerned. Failing this,  the  neutrality of the  adjudicating body 
can be assured by  including consumer representatives in equal numbers alongside the 
industry representatives. 

or  deleting  inaccurate  data-and 

The  data  subject  should  be  offered  appropriate  remedies  to  put  right  the 
problem-correcting 
allow  for  payment  of 
appropriate  compensation  for  physical  damage  and  financial  loss  and  for  any 
psychological  or  moral  harm  caused.  Without  a  clear  system  of  dissuasive  and 
punitive  sanctions,  the  adequacy  test  will  not  be  met-unless 
there  is  a  rigorous 
system  of  external  verification such  as  a  public  or  private  authority  competent to 
intervene in case of non-compliance. 

The  code  should  be  binding  on  all  the  members to  whom  personal  data  are 
transferred,  and  provide  adequate  safeguards  if  the  data  are  passed  on  to  non- 
members. The co-existence  of several different codes risks creating confusion in the 
minds  of  the  consumer  and  uneven  standards  of  data  protection  if  data  are 
transferred  between  dlfferent  companies  within  the  same  sector  (e.g.  dlrect 
marketing). This  creates problems in  terms  of  investigating and  setthng complaints 
fi-om individual data subjects. 

These  principles  and  criteria  are  being  used  in  efforts  to  encourage  U.S. 
industry  in  particular  to  adopt  a  coherent  self-regulatory approach  in  an  effort  to 
satis@ the adequacy test. 

D.  Contractual Solutions 

Article  26  of  the  Directive allows  Member States the  possibility to  permit  the 
transfer  of  data  to  a  third  country  which  does  not  ensure  an  adequate  level  of 
protection where,  for  example, the  data  subject gives  hidher unambiguous consent 
to  the transfer, or where the transfer  is  necessary for  the performance of a  contract, 
or for the exercise or defense of legal claims. 

By  virtue  of Article 26(2),  Members States may  also  authorize transfers where 
the  controller  puts  in  place  adequate  safeguards to  protect  the  data  and  the  data 
subject’s  rights,  “ ...  such  safeguards  may  in  particular  result  t?om  appropriate 
contractual clauses.”  Transfers pursuant  to  Article  26(2)  require  authorization, and 
the Member  State granting authorization is  required to  notifj the  Commission and 

552 

THE JOURNAL O F  WOKLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

the  other  Member  States.  Should  the  latter  object  to  the  transfer,  it  falls  to  the 
Commission  to  take  “appropriate  measures”.  These  procedural  requirements  could 
mean that recourse to Article 26 is likely to be the exception rather than the rule. 

The  Commission  is  also  empowered  to  decide  if  certain  standard  contractual 
clauses  offer  sufficient  safeguards.  However,  it  recognizes  that  contractual solutions 
have  inherent  problems, not  least  the  difficulty for  the  data  subject in  enforcing his 
rights under  a  contract to which  he  is  not  a party.  The Working Party is  currently 
studying this  matter and its conclusions may  be critical in determining the likelihood 
of data transfers  becoming an issue disrupting international trade. 

E. 

Impact  of Directive  on  Third  Countries 

The lack  of  any  federal  regulatory  fiamework in  the  United  States means  that 
should  the  wlutelist  approach  advocated  by  the  Worlung  Party  be  adopted,  tlus 
could lead to  a  partial whitelisting of certain categories of data transfer to the United 
States, whilst  other categories would require authorization depending on  the  degree 
of risk  to  the  data  subject. At  this  stage, restrictions on exports of certain  categories 
of personal data to the United  States cannot be ruled out. 

The  U.S.  Adrmnistration  has  favoured  a  seK-regulatory  approach  to  data 
protection.  It  is  expected  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  industry  efforts  to  draft 
voluntary  codes  in  the  summer of  1998. There  are  also  a  number  of  bills  pending 
which would raise  standards on a  sectoral level. The Adrmnistration may  yet  support 
legislation  if  it  is  determined  that  the  self-regulatory  approach  will  not  be  timely/ 
sufficient to prevent a trade hspute. 

The impact  of the  Directive is  clearly  not  limited to  the  United  States. At  the 
time  of  writing,  it  is  intended  that  the  Directive  will  be  implemented  on  24 
October  1998 not  only  in  the  Member  States of the  European Union,  but  also  in 
those  of the  European Economic Area,  namely,  Iceland, Liechtenstein and  Norway. 
The  countries of Central  and  Eastern  Europe  are  also  expected to  adopt or amend 
their  national  legislation  to  comply  with  the  Directive  in  anticipation  of  their 
accession  to  the  EU.  Some  countries,  such  as  Hungary,  already  have  strong  data 
protection laws  in place.  Others will need  to  make changes ranging from setting up 
or  strengthening  the  role  of  the  NSA (Slovenia,  Estonia)  to  introducing  data 
protection  rules  for  the  first  time  (Bulgaria, Romania).  As  they  progressively  adopt 
the necessary  legislation, there will evidently be  less  room  for disputes in  relation to 
transfers of data fkom the EU to these countries. 

The Japanese  government is  also  considering ways  of adopting data  protection 
standards  equivalent  to  those  laid  down  in  the  Directive.  The  impact  of  the 
Directive is therefore being felt in areas far beyond the European continent. 

EUROPEAN PRIVACY STANDARDS 

553 

Iv  DATA PROTECTION AND THE INFORMATION SOCIETY 

How  the  data  protection  rules  are  applied  to  electronic  transactions  will 
obviously be  of  paramount  importance for  international trade.  Although  the  Data 
Protection Directive does not  deal specifically with  the  issues  arising in  the  on-line 
environment, a myriad of recent initiatives means that regulation is inevitable. 

Recital  14  of  the  Directive  recognizes  that  given  developments  in  the 
techniques  used  to  capture,  transmit,  manipulate,  record,  store  and  communicate 
sound  and  image  data  (e.g.  data  recorded  on  security cameras, digitized signatures, 
integrated  soundhnage  telecoms  exchanges),  the  Directive  should  apply  to  the 
processing of such data relating to natural persons. However, the Directive does not 
specifically address  the  issues  which  the  inclusion  of  ths  type  of  data  raises.  The 
Commission is mandated to study this matter firther and propose amendments when 
it reviews the operation of the Directive three years after its entry into force. 

Sirmlarly, Recital 47  indicates that  where a  message  containing personal data  is 
transmitted  by  means  of  a  telecommunications  or  electronic  mad  service,  the 
controller of the personal data contained in the message wdl normally be  considered 
to be  the person horn  whom  the message  originates. Transmission service providers 
wdl  normally  be  considered controllers in  respect  of  the  processing  of  additional 
pesonal  data necessary for the  operation of the  service. These liability issues are not 
specifically  addressed  in  the  Directive  itself.  However,  a  complementary  EU 
Directive  on 
the  context  of  Agital 
telecommunications networks  was  adopted  in  December  1997,  also  to  enter  into 
force in  October  1998.’4 Ths text is  intended to  ensure the fiee movement of data 
and  of  telecoms  equipment  and  services  in  the  EU  by  harmonizing the  level  of 
protection  of  subscribers and  users of public  telecommunication services  (including 
legal  persons) in  relation to  the  processing of personal  data  in  the  telecoms sector. 
Other relevant initiatives are also under way. 

the  protection  of  personal  data 

in 

On 3  December  1997,  the  Workmg  Party  set  up  under  the  Data  Protection 
Directive  adopted  a  Recommendation  (entitled “Anonymity  on  the  Internet”)  in 
which it  expresses concern about the  generation  of huge  quantities of  transactional 
data through the use  of telecoms networks and the Internet, and suggests anonymity 
as  the solution. It urges recognition of the principle that the collection of identifiable 
personal  data  should be  limited to  the  minimum necessary in  fiaming national and 
international laws  dealing with the Internet and in codes of conduct and other  ‘‘soft 
laws”  being  developed. The  Workmg  Party  concludes  that  legal  restrictions whch 
may  be  imposed  by  governments  on  the  right  to  remain  anonymous  or  on  the 
technical means  of doing so  (e.g.  encryption products),  must  be  proportionate and 
limited  to  what  is  necessary  to  protect  a  specific public  interest  in  a  democratic 
society. 

14 

Directive 97/66  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  of  15  December  1997  concerning  the 

processing of personal data  and the protection of privacy in  the telecommunication sector: O.J. 1998 L  2411. 

554 

THE J O U R N A L  O F  W O R L D  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

In  March  1998, the  European  Commission was  mandated  to  represent the EU 
withn  the  Council  of  Europe  which  is  drafting  “guidelines for  the  protection  of 
indwiduals  with  regard  to  the  collection  and  processing  of  personal  data  on  the 
information  highways”.  The  Council  of  Europe  is  due  to  publish  a  consultative 
paper  on  the  matter  by  the  summer  of  1998  with  a  view  to  formally  adopting 
guidelines towards the  end of the year. The guidelines are likely to mirror  the  basic 
principles set out in the Directive, and most European countries will be  expected to 
take  account of them in drafting and enforcing their national data protection laws. 

The Commission has  also  raised  the matter of data protection at  the level  of the 
WTO  in  the  context  of  on-going  hscussions  on  electronic  commerce.  Data 
protection  is,  therefore,  likely  to  be  the  first  issue  which  will  directly  impact  the 
regulation  of the  Internet.  The discussions  in  international fora  will  inevitably have 
to take account of the new regulatory environment in Europe. 

V.  CONCLUSIONS 

Data  protection is  high  on the  political agenda in  Europe. The proliferation of 
on-line  services,  the  availability  of  genetic  fingerprinting,  the  increasing  use  of 
multipurpose chip cards for consumer purchases and health records, Internet  cookies, 
etc., raise  issues concerning individuals and regulators alike. 

For their  part, European national supervisory authorities are showing increasing 
wangness  in  applying and  developing the  law.  Statistics from  Spain  quoted  in  the 
Workmg Party’s  First  Annual Report15 illustrate the  trend. In  1996, the  Spanish  data 
protection  authority  dealt  with  1,192  complaints  (an  increase  of  245  percent 
compared to  1995), carried  out 286 inspections of files  (+160 percent), and initiated 
90  disciplinary  proceedings  (+200  percent)  and  534  adrmnistrative  proceedmgs  to 
enforce rights to access, rectification and cancellation (+534 percent). The regulatory 
burden  on  data  controllers  can  only  be  expected  to  increase  as  existing  rules  are 
tightened  and  as  a  wider  range  of  countries  on  the  European  continent  and 
elsewhere  are  obliged  to  take  account  of  the  standards  laid  down  in  the  Data 
Protection Directive. 

Although it  is  currently difficult  to  predict how  data  processing operations will 
need  to  be  reorganized  to  comply  with  the  Directive,  transitional periods  of  up  to 
three years  are permitted by  the  Directive and  are likely to be provided for by  most 
Member  States.  The  regulatory  fi-amework will  not,  therefore,  change  overnight. 
Nonetheless,  the scope for Member  States to  enact hffering  rules and procedures in 
implementing the  Directive  into  national  law,  the  lack  of  concrete  progress  in  the 
United  States,  and  the  proliferation  of  international  initiatives  on  electronic 
commerce are  all elements addmg to  the  current  climate of uncertainty. Watch  this 
space. 

15 

Adopted on 25 June  1997, not officially published. 


