Further Protection of Intellectual Property Rights 

in the WTO 

Linking  Transfer of Technology with Foreign Direct Investment 

Yong Jian W A N G *  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

An  ever-important  need  for  the  protection  and  enforcement  of  intellectual 
property rights (IPRS)  in the world trading system was implemented by the Agreement 
on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPS Agreement) in the 
WTO framework after the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations. However, 
the TRIPS Agreement only imposes the minimum standards for the protection  of IPRS 
with  which WTO Members  are obliged to comply  and leaves countries  to decide for 
themselves whether  to provide  higher  levels of IPR protection.‘  In  this  context,  the 
TRIPS Agreement can be the maximum concession of some WTO Members if they are 
not willing to provide a higher level of IPR protection. Moreover, the TRIPS Agreement 
explicitly allows WTO Members  to  afford the  implementation  of national  needs  and 
objectives precedence over the protection of  IPRS. For example, in conformity with the 
TRIPS Agreement, a WTO Member’s national legislation may take into account certain 
national needs such as public health and social and technological development.2 

Under certain  circumstances, a  WTO Member’s national legislation is  allowed to 
licensing  and  “adequate 
determine  the  domestic  establishment  of  compulsory 
remuneration”  without  the  consent  of the  IPR holder.3 As  evidenced  by  South Afn’ca 
Competition Commission v .  GlaxoSmithKline,4 WTO Members can take over a patented 
product  and distribute it dbmestically at a low price through  compulsory licensing and 
with limited  remuneration.  However,  this may usually cause some degree of financial 
loss for the IPR holder because the royalty cannot be fully compensated. 

Therefore,  as IPRS are increasingly involved in international  trade and investment, 
a higher level of IPR protection  within the WTO framework  needs to be implemented 
to balance the interests of IPR holders with development needs. As  will be discussed in 

He may be contacted at: <ywang@utpa.edu,. 

*  College of Business Administration,  Univenity of Texas-Pan  Amencan, Edinburg, Texas. 
1  TRIPS Article  1.1. 
2  Ibid.,  Article  8.1.  See  also  [he  Declaration  on  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  Public  Health,  WTO 

Doc. WT/MIN(OI)/DEC/~, 20 November 2001. 

3  TAWS Article 31. 

health/cl/cl-africa.html,  (last visited 27 January  2005). 

See  CPTech,  Health  Care  and  1P:  Compulsory  Licensing  in  Ajica;  available  at:  twww.cptech.org/ip/ 

798 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Section  II  of  this  article,  the  protection  of  IPRS within  the  WTO needs  to  be  better 
understood in conjunction with the issues of foreign direct investment (FDI) and transfer 
of technology  and  in light  of achieving  the  institutional  objectives of development.5 
Section 111 will analyze the potential  of the WTO framework for the protection  of IPRS 
on  the  basis  of  the  ongoing  discussion  held  in  the  WTO Working  Group  on  the 
Relationship between  Trade and Investment. 

11. 

IPK PROTECTION 

IN THE CONTEXT OF  FDI AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY 

The protection of IPRS within the WTO framework is not merely a means to specify 
the rights and obligations of WTO Members.  It is also a means to actualize a variety of 
social  and  development  needs.6  The  understanding  of  IPR protection  needs  to  be 
connected with  a broader  comprehension of the relationships between  FDI, transfer of 
technology and development objectives. 

A.  THE CONTRIBUTIOX OF FDI AND  TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY 

TO DEVELOPME.VT 

Diffusion  of  technology  has  been  considered  the  key  factor  in  the  economic 
development of developing countries.7 Diffusion of technology in a developing country 
can be in the form of the importation of certain technologies from abroad. Furthermore, 
technology spillover effects of FDI can facilitate technology diffusion in the host country 
in various contexts.8 In the WTO, the contribution  of FDI to the development of host 
countries,  particularly  developing  countries,  has  been  extensively  examined.9  The 
effects  of  FDI on  development  are  significant  in  regard  to  “capital  formation, 
technologcal  and  managerial  know-how,  access 
to  export  markets,  domestic 
entrepreneurship  and  forward  and  backward  linkages,  competition,  employment, 
balance-of-payments  and macroeconomic stability”.’0 Therefore, since the majority of 
WTO Members  are  developing  countries,  the  adequate  promotion  of  FDI flow  and 
transfer  of  technology  in  the  WTO trading  framework  creates  opportunities  for 

5  See  WTO Doha Ministen’af Declaration, WT/MIN(O~)/DEC/I, 20 November 2001, paras. 4 and 6. 
6  See, for example, TKIPS Articles 7 and 8. 
7  Akio  Okochi  and  Hoshinii  Uchida,  Development  and  D@Dirsioti  .f Technolocqy, University  of Tokyo  Prers, 

Tokyo, Japan, 1980. 

See Magnus Bloiiutrom and An Kokko, Forciyn Direct  Invesfnient and  Spillovers  qf  Technohigy, International 
Journal of Technology Management, Vol. 22, No. 5/6, 2001, pp, 435-454;  Zhiqiang Liu, Foreigti Dirert  Investnirrit 
and  Techndqcy  Spiilover:  Evidence  f.im  Chirra,  Journal  of  Comparative  Economics,  Vol.  30,  No.  3,  2002, 
pp. 579-602;  Evis Sinani and Klaus E. Meyer,  Spillovers  of  Technology T r a n s f r j m  FDI:Thr  Case qf  Estonia, Journal 
of Comparative Economics, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2004, pp. 445-466. 

9  See  Working  Group  on  the  Relationship between  Trade and  Investnient,  Report  (1998) .f the  Workin2 
Group on tlw Relatioriship between  Trade and  Invesfment to the General  Coiincil, WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/2,  8 December 
1998, paras.  28-44;  idem, Report  (1999) qfthe Working Group on the Relationship between  Trade and  Investment  to the 
General  Coiincil, WTO Doc. WT/Wc;Tl/3,  22  November  1999, paras.  19-32;  idem, Report  (2000) qf  the  Working 
Group on the Relationship betweeii  Trade and Invesfment to fhr General Council, WTO Doc. W T / W m / 4 ,  27 November 
2000, paras.  9-23;  idem, Report  (2001) qfthe  Working Group on  the  Relationship between  Trade and  Investment  to  the 
General  Coiincil, WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/5/Add.l.  8  October  2001, paras.  23-25;  and  ideni, Report  (2002) ($the 
Working  Group on  fire Relationshb  between  Trade  and  Investment  to  the  General  Corincil,  WTO Doc. WT/WcT1/6, 
9 December 2002, paras.  15-18. 

1”  WTO Doc. WT/WGTr/2,  supra, footnote 9, para. 19. 

LINKING TRANSFER  OF TECHNOLOGY  WITH FDI 

799 

implementing the development needs reaffirmed by the Doha Ministerial Declaration. 
The need to expand FDI and transfer of technology to developing countries in the WTO 
framework was emphasized in the Doha mandate." 

B.  THE RELATIONSHIP 

BETWEEN  FDI A N D   TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY 

Transfer  of  technology, 

including  know-how  and  advanced  management 
methods, may take place via a number of WTO channels, such as trade in goods, trade 
in  services,  technology  licensing,  technical  assistance,  government  procurement, 
trade-related  FDI, etc.I2 According  to  research  conducted  by  the  United  Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development  (UNCTAD), 
the major generators, transferors 
and  diffusers  of technology  to  developing  countries  are  multinational  corporations 
(MNcs). l 3   MNCS transfer  technology  to  host  countries  either  through  internal 
channels  by  internalizing  the  technologies  to  afiliates  under  their  ownership  and 
control  in  the  host  countries  or  through  external  channels  by  externalizing  the 
technologies  to other firms in the form of franchising,  licensing, technical service or 
subcontracting.14 Due  to  the anti-competitive  nature  of MNCS, a substantial part  of 
technology  transfer occurs through  the internal channel.15 In the WTO, the spillover 
effects of FDI have been considered the most significant channel for the dissemination 
of advanced technology.16 Hence, FDI flows may be deemed to be the main carrier of 
technology  in its international  diffusion and the engine that can impel the transfer of 
technology  to the local economy of host  countries. 

On the other hand, the  degree  and  extent to which technologies  are transferred 
usually determine the level of the technological content of FDI. For example, FDI with 
a low level of technology transfer is usually labour-intensive  and, thus, does not require 
a  high  level  of  technology  involvement  in  the  operation  of local  affiliates or joint 
ventures. It is argued that labour-intensive  FDI cannot effectively benefit the structural 
improvement  of  the  local  economy.17  In  the  W T O ,   although  the  importance  of 
technology  transfer has  been  addressed, the balance between  technology  transfer and 
FDI has  not yet been emphasized. In spite of the overall positive  effects of FDI, it was 
found  that  some  developing  countries  encountered  negative  effects  of  FDI. Such 
negative  effects  include  the  risk  encountered  by  some  developing  countries  of 
becoming locations for simple assembly operations and the impact of foreign affiliates 

1 I  W I  o  Doha  Miriisrerial  Derlaration,  supra,  footnote  5,  paras.  20-22  (Relationhsip  between  Trade  and 

Investment) and pxa. 37 (Trade and Transfer of Technology). 

Doc. WT/WGTTT/~, 10 June 2002, paras. ( 2 4 .  

I2 Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology, Communicahnfiom the European  Communities, WTO 
13  UNCTAU, Tranifer of Technology, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements, United 
'4  Ibid. 
Ibid. 

Nations Publications, New York, 2001, Section I.A. 

l 6   WTO Doc. WT/WGT1/3,  supra,  footnote 9, para. 21. 
1'  Yasheng Huang,  W y  More  is Actirnlly  Less: New Interpretations  of China's  Labor-Intensive Fix; available at: 

~eres.bus.umch.edu/docs/workpap-dav/wp375.pdf, (last visited 2 February 2005). 

800 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

on  domestically  available  financing  and  competition  in  the  domestic  market.18 
Therefore,  in light of development  objectives,  it  is  important  to call for  appropriate 
trade  policies  to  expand  the  transfer  of technology  by  enhancing  the  technological 
content of FDI in order to reduce such negative effects of FDI on the economy of the 
developing countries. 

C.  THE ROLE OF IPR PROTECTION IN PROMOTING FDI FLOW AND TRANSFER OF 

TECHNOLOGY 

On  the  basis  of  the  analysis  above,  it  could  be  argued  that  there  is  a  positive 
correlation between FDI and transfer of technology to the benefit of development because 
FDI and transfer of technology have  enormous  impacts on each other in the process of 
operationahzing  maximum  development  benefits.  However,  the  experience  of  some 
WTO Members has indcated that more FDI does not necessanly lead to more technology 
transfer.19 A major reason for this may be that the volume and effectiveness of technology 
transfer from abroad depends on the economic conhtions of the host country, such as its 
legal regime, entrepreneurial environment, education level of the work force, etc.20 

The  role  of  IPR  protection  in  the  context  of  technology  transfer  is  salient. 
Economic research based on U.S., Japanese, and  German  outward  investments found 
that, in certain high-technology  industries being investigated, a country’s regime for the 
protection  of IPRs has a significant effect on the volume and type of technology transfer 
and  F D I . ~ ~  Although  economists  have  not  reached  a  consensus  on  the  relationship 
between  the  extent of protection  of IPRS and transfer of technology, WTO Members 
have generally agreed that a country’s regime of IPR protection  has a direct impact on 
the mode and the effectiveness of technology transfer.22 

Therefore,  at  the  institutional  level  of  the  WTO, “a  transparent,  stable,  and 
predictable  regulatory  framework  for  trade  and  investment”23  (which  includes  the 
multilateral rules regulating the protection  of IPRS) facilitates FDI flow  and transfer of 
technology, particularly frop the  perspective  of a  developing  country.  Although  the 
issue of  IPR protection  at the national legislation level has been frequently discussed,24 
how to implement  the  protection  of IPRS at  the  multilateral level beyond  the  TRIPS 
Agreement has  been  neglected  in the WTO’s ongoing discussions. As  observed in the 
discussions in the Workmg Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment, 

18  Workmg  Group  on  the  Relationship  between  Trade and  Investment,  Report  on  the  Meeting  of  30 and 

31 March  1998, Note by the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WGTI/M/~, 5 June 1998, para. 20. 

l9  Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology,  Trade and  Transfer  of  Technology, Background  Note 

by the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WGTTT/W/~, 2 A p d  2002, paras. 77-89. 

2o  Ibid., para. 74. 
2‘  Edwin Mansfield, Intellecfual Property Protection, Direct Investment and Technology Transfer:  Germany,]apan  and 

the United States, International Journal of Technology Management, Vol.  19, No.  1/2, 2000, pp. 3-21. 

Technology  Transfers,  Note by  the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WGTTT/W/3,  11 November 2002, para. 42. 

22  Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology, A  Taxonomy on Countty Experiences on International 
23  WTo Doha Ministerial Declaration,  supra, footnote 5 ,  para. 20. 
24  For example, WTO Doc. WT/WGTTT/~, supra,  footnote 12, para.  10. 

LINKING TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY  WITH FDI 

80 1 

further improvement of multilateral IPR protection rules in the world trading system has 
not been considered for FDI and technology transfer issues. This article suggests that, at 
the institutional level of the WTO, multilateral trade policies regarding the protection of 
IPRS can be crucial for a sound interaction between FDI and transfer of technology. 

111.  KEY  ISSUES REGARDING  FDI, TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY 

AND  PROTECTION  OF 
IN  THE  WORKING  GROUP O N   THE  RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN 

IPRS  DISCUSSED 
TRADE AND  INVESTMENT 
For  the  purpose  of  analyzing  the  investment-related  issues  in  the  multilateral 
trading  framework,  the  Worlung  Group  on  the  Relationship  between  Trade  and 
Investment was formed in 1996 by the WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore. The 
issue of IPR protection in the context of FDI and transfer of technology is covered in the 
Checklist  of Issues  Suggested for  Study  designated for  the  Working 
It  was 
proposed  that the Working Group should examine  in depth the relationship between 
transfer of technology and effective protection of IPRs in the context of FDI flow as part 
of the research on the relationship between  FDI and transfer of technology.26 

A.  TECHNOLOGY 

TRANSFER 

REQUIREMENTS 

V E R S U S  FDI LIBERALIZATION 

With  respect to  the  discussions in the  Worlung  Group  over  technology  transfer 
requirements  related  to  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Investment  Measures  (the 
TRIMS Agreement),  there  has  been  an  ideological argument  between  the  developing 
countries and the developed countries. The TRIMS Agreement, which is also a result of 
the  Uruguay  Round  negotiations,  prohibits  WTO Members  from  deploying  certain 
trade-related investment measures that infringe either the national treatment principle set 
up by the General Agreement  on Tariffs and Trade  (GATT) Article 111  or the provisions 
of GATT Article XI against quantitative restrictions on imports and exp0rts,~7 including 
local  content  requirements,  trade-balancing requirements,  foreign  exchange-balancing 
requirements,  exchange  restrictions and  domestic sales  requirements.28 However,  as  a 
compromise  between  the  d.eveloping countries  and  the  developed  countries  in  the 
Uruguay  Round  negotiations,*9 the  TRIMS Agreement  stdl allows WTO Members  to 
impose  other  trade-related  investment  measures  as  conditions  for  foreign investment, 
such  as  export-performance  requirements,  product-mandating 
requirements  and 
technology-transfer requirements.30 

1997, Note by the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WGTI/M/~, 2 July  1997, Annex 2. 

7 October  1997, Note by  the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/M/2,  10 November  1997, para.  16. 

25  Working Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment, Report  on the Meeting  of2 and  3&ne 
26  Working  Group  on  the  Relationship  between  Trade  and  Investment,  Reporl  on  the  Meeting  of  6  and 
27  Article 2 of the TRIMS Agreement. 
28  Illustrative list of TRIMS, Annex of the TRIPS Agreement. 
29  Juris International, Trade-Related Investment Mensures; available at: ~jurisint.org/pub/06/en/doc/C 13.pd6 

3"  General Council, Prepararions for  the  1999 Ministerial  Conference-General  Council  Discussion  on  Mandated 
the  Built-In  Apenda,  Conintunication  from  the  United  States,  WTO  Doc.  WT/GC/W/ll5, 

(last visited 19 February 2005). 

Nepofiationr  and 
19'November 1998, para.  II.C. 

- 

802 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Along with the attempt of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment  (MAI) by the 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  ( O E ~ D ) ,  which  would 
have  explicitly  prevented  contracting  parties  from  imposing  technology-transfer 
requirements  in  order  to  achieve multilateral FDI liberalization,31 it was  suggested by 
several  developed  countries  that  the  Working  Group  on  the  Relationship  between 
Trade  and Investment  make  a further investigation, in light  of Article 9 of the TRIMS 
Agreement,  on  whether  technology-transfer  requirements  should  be  added  to  the 
illustrative list of the prohibited trade-related investment measures annexed to the TRIMS 
Agreement.32 According to I t m i  III of the Checklist of Issues Suggested for Study,33 the 
Working  Group  studied  the  proposals  by  WTO Members  in  the  late  1990s  that 
addressed the issue of technology-transfer  requirements  versus FDI liberalization. 

represented  by 

It  was  argued  by  developed  countries, 

the  European 
that  FDI liberalization,  together  with  sound 
Communities34 and  the  United State~,3~ 
economic  infrastructure,  advanced  technology  capabilities  and  a  stable  regulatory 
framework, would create optimal conditions for the contribution of FDI to technology 
transfer and technological  development.  Foreign  investors would transfer technology 
in a higher degree to the host economy when higher levels of infrastructure and a legal 
system for IPR protection  were  built.  Government  intervention, such as  technology- 
transfer  requirements,  would  create  obstacles  for  the  flow  of  FDI because  such 
requirements  could  not  assure  foreign  investors  that  technology  transfer  would  be 
useful and profitable  for their  own business development.  Because of  the risk of  the 
takeover  of IPKS, foreign  investors would  withdraw  the  investment  plan  or bring in 
only less-advanced  technology if a local government were to compel them to transfer 
technology to the host country. 

However, developing countries, represented by India,36 Pakistan37 and Egypt,3* did 
not believe that  FDI liberalization would  automatically cause technology  transfer on a 
large scale. They  insisted that,  unlike  the  establishment of manufacturing  and  service 
facilities  in  developing  countries,  foreign  investors  would  not  voluntarily  and 
unconditionally  transfer  their  technology  because  technology  is  the  key  competitive 
advantage of the firms from developed countries. Confidentiality and assignability issues 

3'  Article  l(Q  of  Pcrfonnance  Rcquirernents,  Multilateral Agrcement  on  Investmcnt,  Organisation for 

Economic Co-operation  and Developrncnt (Negotiating Text as of 24 April  1998). 

23 March  1999, Note by the Secretariaf, WTO Doc. WT/Wcm/M/8,  11 May  1999, para. 52. 

32  Working  Group  on  the  Relationship  between  Trade  and  Investment,  Report  on  the  Meeting  oj' 22  and 
33  WTO Doc. WT/WGTI/M/I, supra, footnote 25, Annex 2, Item 111. 
34  WTO Doc. W T / W G T I / M / ~ ,  rirpra, footnote 32, para.  17; Working Group on the Relationship between 

Trade and  Investment, Report  on the Meeting 4.3 June  1999, Note by  the  Secretariat, WTO Doc.  WT/WGTI/M/~, 
the  Meetin2  oj'  16  h'ouembrr  2000,  Note  by  the  Secretariat,  WTO 
I9  July  1999,  para.  5;  idem,  Report  on 
Doc. WT/WGTl/M/13,  7 March 2001, para. 6. 

35  WTO  Doc. WT/WcTI/M/8,  sirpra, footnote 32, para.  22;  WTO  Doc. WT/WGTI/M/9,  ibid.,  para.  6; 

WTo Doc. WT/WGTr/M/13,  ibid., para. 3. 

36  WTO Doc. WT/Wcrl/M/8,  supra, footnote 32, para. 24; WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/M/9,  ibid., para. 7. See 
also  Working  Group  on  the  Relationship  between  Trade  and  Investment,  FDr  Flows  and  Technolqy  Transfer, 
ComrnunicalionJrom  India, WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/W/105,  26 June 2001 

37  WTO Doc. WT/Wcn/M/9, ibid., para.  14. 
38  WTO Doc. WT/WGTI/M/~, supra, footnote 32, para. 56. 

LINKING TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY WITH  FDI 

803 

set  up  by  the  technology  holders  restrict  the  actual transfer  to  host  countries  if  the 
technology  transfer  is  completely  subject  to  market  forces.  Moreover,  empirical 
evidence of a negative effect of technology-transfer  requirements  on FDI has not been 
found.  In  contrast,  some  developing  countries  in  Africa,  absolutely in  favour  of FDI 
liberalization, have received  only labour-intensive  FDI but  not  advanced technology. 
Therefore,  developing  countries  maintained  that  the  role  of  technology-transfer 
requirements is effective in promoting the transfer of technology  to host countries. 

It  can  be  seen  that,  while  WTO Members  held  different  opinions  about  which 
approach was better  for the interaction between  FDI and transfer of technology,  there 
was  no  disagreement  between  developed  countries  and  developing  countries  on 
whether FDI and technology should be transferred to developing countries. They both 
recognized that the role of  FDI in the process of technology transfer is prominent. Due 
to  the  essential  needs  to  control  the  FDI environment  to  optimize  their  business 
operations and to protect  IPRS to maintain their competitiveness, developed  countries 
tend  to  support  a  “market-based  development  approach”39 which  relies  on  market 
mechanisms with a system of complete protection of IPRS for FDI flow and technology 
transfer. However, because of the under-development  of their economic, technological 
and  market  infrastructures,  developing  countries  prefer  a  “regulatory  approach”40 in 
addition to the market mechanism. The feature of this approach is the use of trade policy 
intervention to promote the transfer of technology by setting up the preconditions  for 
FIX, such as technology-transfer  requirements. 

The need for FDI liberalization in developed countries and the need for technology 
transfer  to  developing  countries  seem  to  be  in  conflict  for  achieving  development 
objectives.  O n  the  one  hand,  a  completely  unrestrained  FDI regime  would  favour 
investors from  developed  countries  but  would  not  facilitate  the  transfer  of expected 
technology  to  developing  countries  with  an  imperfect  infrastructure.  O n  the  other 
hand, the technology transfer requirements set up by some developing countries would 
force technology transfer to take place but, in the  meantime,  create an unpredictable 
market  condition  for  investors  from  developed  countries.  The  Working  Group’s 
relevant  Secretariat  failed  to  provide  any  evidence  of  the  dichotomy  between  FDI 
liberalization and technology-transfer  requirements  on the basis  of the  submissions in 
the late 1990s and the early 2000s. Because of this divergence, no relevant decision was 
made by the last Ministerial Conference in Cancun in 2003. 

Is there a third approach that offers a better way for the balanced expansion of FDI 

and technology transfer? 

The  answer  is  yes.  Certain  improvements  in  the  current  WTO investment 
framework can be made to promote technology transfer associated with FDI. It has been 
admitted by developing countries that the transfer of technology and FDI flow would be 

39  UNCTAD, supra, footnote 13, Section  11 B . I .  
4’’  Ibid., Section II.B.Z. 

804 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

best achieved under market forces, but for a long time developing countries have been 
experiencing difficulties by relying entirely on market forces to achieve the technology 
transfer associated with  FDL41 What developing countries  should focus on is  how to 
deploy any feasible mechanism to maximize technology transfer. If developing countries 
can  offer  a  higher  level  of IPR  protection  to  the  transferred technology  than  to  the 
untransferred,  a market-friendly  mechanism would be created in favour of technology 
transfer.  Meanwhile,  what  the  developed  countries  expect  is  the  maximization  of 
benefits, including the maximization of options under trade liberalization. If the transfer 
of technology  creates larger perceived  benefits  for  the  investors than  not  to  transfer, 
investors would be more likely to transfer technology.  Such benefits may be a variety 
of incentives offered by a host country, such as  tax advantages.42 

At the WTO institutional level, whether certain incentives can be offered is worth 
further deliberation.  Thus, the key issue for the WTO should be the design of optimal 
multilateral  frameworks  for  technology  transfer  in  order  for  developed  countries  to 
realize  the  benefits  of  technology  transfer  through  FDI. In  this  context,  a  stronger 
multilateral IPR regime for the protection  of transferred IPRs, as compared with that for 
the untransferred,  which provides a market-oriented  incentive for technology transfer 
can  be  one  of the  potential  solutions that  meets  the  interests of both  developed  and 
developing  countries.  From  the  perspective  of  a  multilateral  trading  system,  the 
establishment of a  stable and predictable  regulatory  framework  for  IPR protection  in 
terms  of  transferred  technology  associated  with  FDI can  be  implemented  through 
clarification work on the “scope and definition” of investment to be carried out by the 
Working Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment. 

B. 

IPRS I N  S C O P E  AND DEFINITION O F  INVESTMENT 

As mentioned  in the introduction  of this article, the TRIPS Agreement offers only 
the  minimum  standards  for  the  protection  of  IPRs.  WTO  Members,  particularly 
developing  countries,  have  been  concerned  that  the  benefits  of  IPR  holders  and 
development objectives have not been properly balanced in the TRIPS Agreement and, 
thus, the transfer of technology would be negatively influenced.43 Actually, no matter 
whether the IPR holders transfer technology to a host country or not, they would face 
a  potential  threat  that  some  countries  could  arbitrarily  take  over  their  IPRS by 
compulsory licensing which is explicitly allowed by the TRIPS Agreement. 

However, if the IPRS can be treated as  one sort of FDI, the rules of expropriation 
imposed  by  a  particular  international  investment  agreement  might  prevent  host 
countries from using certain measures, such as  compulsory licensing to take over IPRS. 
In fact, IPRs are included in the scope of foreign investment in most of the international 

WTO Doc. WT/WGT[/M/9,  supra, footnote 34, paras. 7, 12 and 13. 
WTO Doc. WT/WGTt/M/8,  supra, footnote 32, para. 56. 

43  Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology, Communicationfrom Cuba, India, Indonesia,  Kenya, 

Pakistan,  Tanzania and  Zimbabwe, WTO Doc. WT/WGTTT/W/6,  7 May 2003, para. 3(11). 

LINKING TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY  WITH  FDI 

805 

investment  agreements  that  established  standards  for  the  protection  of  foreign 
investment.44 With respect to  around 2,000 bilateral investment  agreements that have 
been signed between  developed and developing countries, it has been  noted  that IPRS 
are usually included in an dustrative list of investments defined in these agreements as 
an  item  subject  to  pr0tectior-1.~~ IPRS can  also  qualify  for  the  scope  of investment 
contained  in  the  major  plunlateral  and  multilateral  agreements  regarding  foreign 
investment, such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) ,46 the North 
American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA)47  and  the  OECD version  of  the  M A I . ~ ~  
Standard  bilateral  or  multilateral  investment  agreements  lay  down  clear  rules  for 
expropriation of covered investments, including IPRs.~~ 

Therefore, the issue of definition  and scope of investment  can play  an important 
role  in  shaping  the  framework  of  IPR protection.  Although  a  consensus  on  the 
establishment  of an  investment  agreement  under  the  WTO was  not  achieved  at  the 
Singapore  (1996), Geneva  (1998), Seattle  (1999), Doha  (2001)  or  Cancun  (2003) 
Ministerial Conferences, ongoing discussions and arguments on the topic of investment 
are still furious.  Among  all  the  further  works  listed  for  clarification by  the  Working 
Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment, the “scope and definition” 
of investment within the WTO framework is the first item on which a consensus must 
be reached  between  developed  and  developing  countries.50 Indeed,  the  definition  of 
foreign investment forms the basis for subsequent issues such as expropriation and most- 
favoured-nation  treatment. The Doha Mandate also emphasized that, in implementing 
the clarification work, “account should be taken, as appropriate, of existing bilateral and 
regional  arrangements  on  in~estment”.~~ Thus,  as  in  bilateral  and  multilateral 
investment frameworks, if IPRS associated with FDI can be chstinctly understood as one 
sort of foreign investment in the WTO multilateral framework, the abuse of compulsory 
licensing  of  transferred  technology  can  be  effectively  prohibited  by  the  rule  of 
expropriation.  If this  consideration  can be  carried  out, there  may  exist a solution  to 
compensate for the defects of the TRIPS Agreement to realize the benefits of technology 
transfer. Once a technology becomes  FDI and is  transferred to a host  country, higher 
protection  of  IPRS would be offered because a host country  can no longer  arbitrarily 
take over the IPR for the purpose of national needs. 

44  UNCTAD, Scope  and  Definition, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements, United 

Nations Publications, New York, 1999, Section IIA. 

45  Working Group on the Relationship  between  Trade and  Investment,  Bifateral, Regional,  Philateral  and 

Multilateral Agreements,  Note by the Secretariat, WTO Doc. wT/WGrr/W/22,  26 January 1998, para. VI. 

46  Article 11 of the Agreement among the Governments of Brunei Danissalam,  the  Republic  of Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the  Republic of  the  Philippines, the  Republic  of  Singapore and  the  Kingdom  of Thailand  for  the 
Promotion and Protection of Investments (amended in 1996). 

47  Article 1139 (Definitions) ofthe North Amencan  Free Trade Agreement (1992). 
48  Article 2 of Definitions, the OECD Multilateral Agreement on Investment (Negotiating Text as of 24 April 
49  WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/W/22,  supra, footnote 45, paras. Ix  and Lx. 
5* Ibid., last sentence. 

WTO Doha Ministerial Declaration, supra, footnote 5, para. 22. 

1998). 

806 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  definition  and  scope  of  investment  in  the  WTO  framework  has  been 
extensively discussed in the Working  Group on the Relationship between  Trade and 
Investment  since  the  late  1990~.~* The  argument  is  principally  between  two  main 
approaches: the broad approach of an asset-based definition and the narrow approach of 
an enterprise-based definition.53 An asset-based definition covers both FDI and portfolio 
investment,  including  equities,  debts,  contractual  interests  and  other  tangible  or 
intangible properties. Such a definition was deemed preferable for developed countries 
in  order  to  provide  high  standards  of  treatment  for  all  sorts  of  investments  and  to 
maximize  the  benefits  from  all  sorts of investments.54 Developing  countries  tend  to 
adopt an enterprise-based definition  that only focuses on FDI in order to eliminate the 
risk of short-term investment flows on economic and technological development.55 

Based on existing discussions, IPRS meet the criteria laid down by both sides with 
regard to  the  definition of investment  in  the WTO framework. From  the  developing 
countries'  perspective, IPRS can be evaluated from an enterprise-based approach for the 
control  of  capital  flow  and  market  access.  At  the  same  time,  from  the  developed 
countries'  perspective, IPRS can be covered by provisions on investment  protection  to 
ensure their security. Therefore, it is practically in compliance with the interests of both 
developed  and  developing  countries  to  include  IPRS in  the  definition  and  scope  of 
investment in the WTO framework. 

C .   HIGHER PROTECTION OF IPRS AS AN INCENTIVE FOR FDI FLOW AND  TRANSFER 

OF TECHNOLOCY 
For  developed  countries,  the  inclusion  of  IPRS in  the  definition  of investment 
within the WTO framework will not only reassure the uniform standards of treatment for 
FDI suggested  by  the  principles  of  the  international  investment  agreements but  also 
confirm a better protection of the IPRS compared with the provisions laid down by the 
TRIPS Agreement. As a multilateral framework, it w d  contribute to ensuring the stability 
of  host  countries'  trade  policies  regarding  IPR  protection.  When  IPRS, in  most 
circumstances through the transfer of technology, become investment in host countries, 
distorting trade policiessuch  as  compulsory licensing under  the  TRIPS Agreement- 
will  not  be  arbitrarily  exerted  by  the  host  country.  This  creates  a  market-fnendly 

52 See WTO Doc. WT/WGTl/6,  supra, footnote 9, paras. 14-28; and Working Group on the Relationship 
between Trade and InveFtment, Reporf (2003) Dfthe  Working Croup on the Relationship between  Trade and Inveslnient 
to  the  General  Council, WTO Doc.  WT/WGTI/~, 11 July 2003,  paras.  13-21.  See also  Communications  from 
WTO Members  on Scope and Definition  of investment  to  the Working Group on the Relationship  between 
Trade and Investment:  Communicationfrom/an,  WTO Doc. W T / W G T I / W / ~  11, 12 April 2002; Communication 
12 April 2002; Communicationfrom the Separate  Customs Territory of 
from  Canada, WTO Doc. W T / W G T I / W / ~ ~ ~ ,  
Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu, WTO Doc.WT/WGTI/W/128,  1 July 2002; and Communicationfrom China, 
WTO Doc. WT/WGTI/w/r/l59,  15 April 2003. 

53  WTO Doc. WT/Wclr/6, supra,  footnote 9, paras.  18-28.  A third, hybrid approach suggests FDI for the 

pre-establishment stage and a wide range of assets for the post-establishment stage of investment. 

54  Working Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment, Report on the Meetin2 .f 16 and  l7June 

1998, Note by the Secretariat, WTO Doc. WT/WcTI/M/5,  29 July  1998, para. 54. 

55  Ibid., para. 56. 

LINKING  TRANSFER  OF TECHNOLOGY WITH  FDI 

807 

incentive for foreign investors to transfer technology to developing countries rather than 
to leave the technology  in their home countries in order to pursue stable protection  of 
IPRS and maximize the benefits from them. 

The inclusion of  IPRS in the definition of investment within the WTO framework 
also benefits developing countries  significantly. As  previously discussed in this article, 
the  regulatory  system  of  a  country  for  the  protection  of  foreign  investment  is  an 
important  factor  for  foreign  investors  in  considering  their  investment  options.  For 
foreign  firms  involved  with  high  technology,  the  regime  for  IPR protection  is  of 
particular importance. Since a number  of developing countries have an IPR protection 
standard that only meets the lowest requirement  of the TRIPS Agreement, the lack of 
stability for  IPR  protection  may  bring  uncertainty  and high  costs  to  foreign investors 
carrying out long-term business plans in any technology-related  sector, even though the 
countries impose the technology-transfer  requirement. 

The chance of  technology  takeover  for “national  needs”  may be  higher  when 
foreign  investors present  the IPRS in a  developing  country  because  of the exposure 
of  information.  Accordingly,  the  inclusion  of  IPRS in  the  WTO  definition  of 
investment will help to ensure that technologies,  once transferred  to a host country 
in association  with FDI, are under clear rules  of takeover.  The uncertainty in terms 
of technology  takeover  can be eliminated. A developing country may still pursue its 
own trade policies involving technology-transfer  requirements  for the promotion of 
certain  technology  transfer  but,  since  potential  takeover  can  be  controlled  by  the 
rules, such as expropriation, the use of technology-transfer  requirements is no longer 
market-distorting.  A stable  rule  for  IPR  protection  does  not  conflict  with  market- 
friendly  technology-transfer  requirements,  since  both  have  the  same  objective  in 
promoting technology  transfer  to  a  developing  country.  In  addition,  as  a  uniform 
multilateral rule  of protection, the inclusion  of IPRS in the definition  of investment 
does  not  require  developing  countries  to  expend  extra  efforts  to  improve  their 
domestic  regulatory framework. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

In terms of IPR protection, the current WTO framework is subject to improvement 
because  the  TRIPS Agreement  is  limited  by  its  standards.  In  fact,  in  achieving  the 
development  and growth  of developing  countries  as  an objective set up by the WTO, 
the need to balance FDI flow with transfer of technology has not been emphasized. The 
dichotomy  between  a  short-term  objective  of  protecting  IPRS in  the  interest  of 
developed countries and a long-term  objective of development needs in the interest of 
developing countries needs to be bridged. At the institutional level of the WTO, a higher 
level of multilateral protection  of IPRS is worth  further deliberation in order to give a 
solution to this dilemma. 

808 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The inclusion of  IPRS in the definition of investment within the WTO framework 
will highlight  the value of IPRS both  for investors and for FDI recipient  countries  and 
w d  benefit both developed and developing countries. Compared with the standard laid 
down  by  the  TRIPS Agreement,  the  treatment  of  IPRS as  FDI will  contribute  to  the 
establishment of a stable, transparent and predictable multilateral framework for FDI and 
transfer  of technology.  As  a  result,  the  treatment  of IPRS as  FDI will provide  higher 
multilateral protection  for  IPRS, guarantee  security  to  foreign  investors, promote  FDI 
flow  and  transfer  of  technology  and  eventually  facilitate  the  development  of  the 
developing countries. 

In the forthcoming Sixth WTO Ministerial Conference that will be held in Hong 
Kong  in  December  2005,  WTO Members  need  to  take  into  consideration  these 
suggestions on the further protection of IPRs in the WTO. If a consensus can be reached 
to include IPRS in the definition and scope of investment, FDI and transfer of technology 
will bring larger benefits for both developed and developing countries. 


