The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 1–2, pp. 29–40

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12029

Inﬂuence of Patent Policy in the South on the
Research and Development of the North:
Exploration of the Foreign Direct Investment
Channel

Ruchi Sharma
School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, India

Developing countries have harmonized and subsequently strengthened their patent regime to comply with the Trade
Related Intellectual Property Rights agreement. Theory suggests that developing countries beneﬁt from strong patent
protection as such rights shift innovation in developed countries to meet the needs of the South. Empirical studies,
however, do not support this hypothesis in its entirety. There is an inter-link between research and development in the
North, foreign direct investment ﬂows, and patent rights in the South that remains unexplored in the empirical studies.
As the South provides strong patent protection, innovating ﬁrms based in the North shift production to the South,
releasing resources in the North for R&D. Consequently, FDI outﬂows to the South along with its patent protection
determine R&D undertaken in the North. This study veriﬁes this hypothesis by performing a two-stage least square
model on a panel of 78 developing countries from 1990–2010, to study the impact of their patent regimes on FDI
inﬂows from developed countries and consequently on respective R&D expenditure. This empirical analysis shows a
positive impact of the South's patent protection on innovation in the North.

Keywords patent policy; r&d expenditure; trade related intellectual property rights agreement

The Context

Developing countries have harmonized and subsequently strengthened their patent regimes to comply with
the Agreement on Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) under the aegis of the World Trade
Organization (WTO). The ensuing changes are expected to stimulate innovation and facilitate technology
transfer to developing countries. According to Article 7 of TRIPs that enunciates its objective, IPRs should
contribute “… to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of
technology …” A strong patent regime incentivizes research and development (R&D) resources by
ensuring the appropriability of the investment. R&D investments are essentially concentrated in the global
North and are allocated according to demand considerations. Access to the global South's market opens
new vistas for innovations in the North since needs, tastes and preferences differ between both regions.
Strong patent protection in the South ensures that innovators successfully capture the market and recoup
their investments made in R&D of new products to cater to the needs of the South. Grossman and Helpman
(1991) also advocate that the international economic environment impinges upon incentives that ﬁrms in
speciﬁc countries have to invest in the creation of knowledge. Studies that focus on the empirical impact of
the patent policy of the South on the innovation in the North do not show any signiﬁcant results. One
possible explanation for the same could be the complexity of the relationship that can be explained through
foreign direct investment (FDI) channels.

Compliance with TRIPs beneﬁts developing countries as strong patent rights open the market for
technology and facilitates its transfer from developed countries through FDI routes or other modes of
transfer.1 Strong patent policy in the host country attracts FDI by ensuring returns to intangible assets of
multinational enterprises (MNEs). Empirical studies do not support this hypothesis in its entirety but

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

29


