DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12072

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Intellectual property and
development—narratives and their
empirical validity

Alexander Peukert

Goethe-Universität Frankfurt am Main −
Exzellenzcluster Normative Ordnungen,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Correspondence
Prof. Dr. Alexander Peukert, Goethe-
Universität Frankfurt am Main –
Exzellenzcluster Normative OrdnungenMax-
Horkheimer-Str. 2, Postfach EXC-12, D-60323
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Email: a.peukert@jur.uni-frankfurt.de
URLs: Available online at
http://www.jura.uni-frankfurt.de/peukert/,
http://ssrn.com/author=1244916

The article gives an overview of the relationship between
intellectual property (IP) and development. The first section
shows that the dominant assumption in the history of IP was that
IP rights are generally favorable to socio-economic progress. The
second section explains that economic and historical research has
proven this linear expansionist narrative to be untenable. In doing
so, the article compares the arguments of IP optimists with
counterarguments of IP pessimists in the light of empirical studies.
The final section addresses the consequences of these findings for
the future of the international IP system.

K E Y W O R D S
colonialism, development, history, industrialization

1 |

INTRODUCTION

What significance do intellectual property (IP) rights have in terms of the development of individual economies and
the global information society? Before pursuing this question, we must further define the two rather generic terms
“intellectual property” and “development”.

Intellectual property rights include exclusive rights in innovations in a broad sense, in particular works of literature,
science and art (copyright) and inventions in the field of technology (patents). This protection of innovation is to be
distinguished from trade marks and other rights in signs that do not concern innovative products as such, but their
designation by brands (“Coca Cola”) and other signs. Trade mark rights are intended primarily to allow consumers to
distinguish products and their origins and prevent confusion that could distort competition.

The term “development” does not lend itself to a definition with sharp distinctions. For the most part, it is understood
to be both a process and at the same time an objective with economic, social, political, cultural and ecological dimensions.
The objective is the “advancement of all peoples” (Myrdal, 1974; Payne & Phillips, 2010).1 Its central goal remains to fight
poverty by means of sustainable economic growth. Related values include “freedom, peace and security, respect for all
human rights, . . . the rule of law, gender equality and an overall commitment to just and democratic societies”.2

© 2017 The Author. The  © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

2 | wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip

J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:2–23.

PEUKERT

| 3

Placing these two multi-layered generic terms in relation to one another, we arrive at the more concrete
question of whether IP rights, which have come to be acknowledged practically worldwide, do in fact, as
proclaimed by article 7 Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS),3 “contribute to the
promotion of technological
innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual
advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations”. More specifically, three assumptions that are ancillary to each
other can be distinguished: (1) IP rights promote innovation; (2) innovations are meaningful instruments to combat
poverty and achieve further goals (public health, climate change) and (3) these improvements contribute to overall
development.

The presupposition that there is a positive correlation between technological progress and development has a
long history. As early as 1949, it was a central theme in US President Truman’s inaugural speech, which is widely
considered to mark the birth of the development paradigm in politics.4 Taken together, steps (1) through
(3) mentioned above yield the further conclusion that IP rights are also conducive to development. This assumption is
consistent with the expansion narrative, which dominated the discourse for many years and is still today widespread.
According to this narrative, ever-increasing legal protection will result in ever more innovations and, with them,
greater achievements in development.

2 | THE IP EXPANSION NARRATIVE IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

2.1 | Content of the expansion narrative

Proponents of a “logic of property” or “IP maximalism”5 presume, as mentioned, that there is a positive, linear
relationship between IP rights and innovation and/or development (Dreier, 2001: pp. 70 et sequentes, pp. 76
et sequentes [“property logic”]). Causality progresses from legal protection to technological and other progress. As
progress is good, IP rights are good. Consequently, IP appears to be worthy of protection for its own sake (Peukert,
2011).

This logic pervades, for example, EU policy in this area (for a US perspective see Halbert, 2011, pp. 81
et sequentes). The Enforcement Directive of 2004 states: “The protection of intellectual property is important
not only for promoting innovation and creativity, but also for developing employment and improving
competitiveness”.6 The European Commission proclaims: “The virtuous IPR circle relies on an IPR policy that
incentivizes innovation, which in turn attracts investment, thereby resulting in new products and services for
new consumer demand which enhances growth and employment”.7 This wondrous upward dynamism—which
the casual reader must not confuse with the devilish vicious circle—informs the overall development policy of
the EU. In this context as well, we read: “Protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights in line with
international obligations and taking into account development levels and needs can play an important role to
support innovation”.8

The expansion narrative is, however, not limited to the EU. It is championed as a universal programme,
especially by the G8: “Given the importance of intellectual property rights (IPR) to stimulating job and economic
growth, we affirm the significance of high standards for IPR protection and enforcement,
including through
international legal instruments and mutual assistance agreements . . .”.9 This outlook is shared— naturally—by
private market players whose assets and market position depend crucially on effectively enforceable intellectual
property rights (International Chamber of Commerce, 2005). Last not least legal scholars have emphasized the
positive effects of the international IP system, not least for developing countries (Straus & Klunker, 2007, pp. 91
et sequentes).

A cursory look at the history of IP rights shows how doggedly the expansion narrative has stood its ground against

manifold challenges. In this history, five periods can be made out.

4 |

PEUKERT

2.2 | Establishment of the idea of modern intellectual property law (1624–1883)

Current IP law is characterized by the exclusive rights that patent, copyright and trade mark holders can acquire
according to statutory schemes that also define the scope of protection and the limits of these rights. This is a
specifically modern concept of regulation that took the place of early-modern privileges granted in individual cases. It
took hold first in England. There, patent law dates back to 1624 and the Statute of Monopolies, which granted to the
“first and true inventor” of a “new Manufacture” a patent for a limited time. The world’s first copyright law is
considered to be England’s Statute of Anne of 1710, an “Act for the Encouragement of Learning” (on the Venetian
Patent Act of 1474 see Kurz, 2000, pp. 52 et sequentes). The very title of this law shows that English legislation deemed
the new rights to be instruments with which to convert the basic rule for dealing with knowledge from one of
absolutist control to one of access organized in terms of a market economy.

This fundamental change initially succeeded without recourse to what is at its core a natural-law narrative of
“intellectual property”. This line of thought only developed its influence toward the end of the eighteenth century, in
particular in the form of the French Revolutionary laws on patents and author’s rights of 1791 and 1793. In the course
of the nineteenth century, IP legislation spread to ever more parts of Europe. The crowning act of this first phase of
expansion was a double one: the conclusion of two multilateral international-law agreements, the Paris Convention
for the Protection of Industrial Property (PC) in 1883 and the Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works (BC) in 1886 (Hesse, 2002). The conventions are based on two principles. First, they set certain
minimum rights, and second, the nationals of any country of these IP Unions are guaranteed in all other countries of
the Union the advantages that their respective laws grant to their nationals (national treatment).10

Admittedly, this mainly European consensus came nowhere near today’s global level of protection. The nation-
states of the nineteenth century used their IP policy in order to secure their competitive position in the international
arena, or to catch up with other countries technologically. The propertization logic was operating, but it had not yet
displaced an instrumental understanding of IP rights.11

2.3 | Global expansion during the colonial period (1800–1960)

The next phase of expansion was of an imperial-territorial character. As the Western European colonial powers
widened their sphere of influence, they extended their IP laws and the international conventions to which they were
bound to their colonies. This geographical expansion took place in two ways (see Kongolo, 2013, pp. 105 et sequentes;
Kongolo, 2014, pp. 163 et sequentes; Peukert, 2012).

The purely national way consisted of amending the domestic copyright and patent legislation so as to give these
rights validity not only in the metropoles, but also in the colonies. The territorial reach of British copyright law, for
instance, was extended between 1801 and 1911 in a whole series of laws to the constantly growing Empire. France
followed suit in 1857, Germany, in 1901 and, later, Belgium, in 1948. In addition, the colonial territories were
integrated into the system of international conventions. Formally independent protectorates (Tunisia, Morocco) and
de facto dependent states (Haiti, Liberia) were among the first members of the Paris and Berne Conventions. In this
respect, special clauses on in the IP conventions on the status of “certain territories” took on crucial significance. For
example, article 31(1) BC still states:

“Any country may declare in its instrument of ratification or accession, or may inform the Director General
by written notification at any time thereafter, that this Convention shall be applicable to all or part of those
territories, designated in the declaration or notification, for the external relations of which it is
responsible”.12

All the colonial powers made exhaustive use of this option, ensuring that, at the dawn of the twentieth century,
the scope of application of the IP conventions covered practically the entire planet (Kongolo, 2013, pp. 115
et sequentes; Kongolo, 2014, pp. 163 et sequentes). And yet this was only true in geographical terms, for the sole

PEUKERT

| 5

purpose of including the colonies was to protect the citizens of the colonial powers, for instance book publishers
based in London or Paris. These were to enjoy the same protection of their rights in the conquered markets as in the
home metropole (Bently, 2011, p. 198; Drahos & Braithwaite, 2002, p. 74; Seville, 2006, pp. 41 et sequentes). The
colonized people, on the other hand, were barred from obtaining copyrights or patents, whether de iure (Lüders, 1914,
pp. 37 et sequentes)—as in the case of “natives” in the German colonial law—or de facto, through requirements such as
first publication in the United Kingdom, or restrictions on access to the courts (Peukert, 2012). If the age of IP
colonialism was about progress, then only as regarded the metropoles and the enterprises established there.

2.4 | Decolonization and integration of developing countries (1945–1990)

After World War II, colonies became independent states and simultaneously developing countries. Thus, the
entire topic of development is inseparably connected to (de-)colonization. This is the point of departure for
postcolonial criticism, which raises the claim that the development discourse merely re-names an “other” that
despite the new name still is perceived as the “other”, as something yet to develop (see Lepenies, 2008, pp. 202
et sequentes).

Such a strictly superficial integration can indeed be observed in the special subject under analysis here. When the
trend toward decolonizing became clear, the Bureaux Internationaux Reunis pour la Protection de la Propiete
Intellectuelle (BIRPI, the predecessor of WIPO), the administrator of the Paris and Berne conventions, feared an
exodus of newly independent states and consequently a drastic shrinking of the global IP territory (Masouyé, 1962,
p. 86; critical Lazar, 1969, pp. 17 et sequentes [“neo-colonialism”]). In the 1960s, India, in particular, in fact raised the
claim that the BC’s high level of protection stood in opposition to the developing countries’ primary interest in gaining
access to available knowledge in order to promote education and technological progress (Chagla, 1967, p. x).

And yet the system did not implode. On the contrary, only a handful of developing countries cancelled their
membership in the BC (Kongolo, 2014, pp. 170 et sequentes; Ricketson & Ginsburg, 2006, paragraph 17.59). Today the
World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) has 188 members, all of whom have committed “to promote the
protection of intellectual property throughout the world”.13 Of the least-developed countries (LDCs) only East Timor
is not yet a member; only 5 of the 31 World Trade Organisation (WTO) Members listed as LDCs had not already been
signatories of an international or regional IP agreement when the TRIPS Agreement entered into force on
1 January 1995.14 The reasons for this stability and the slow but constant expansion of the IP law system in the
postcolonial era are complex (see Peukert, 2012 with further references).

First, the development discourse was quite soon fueled into the IP realm, which proved the responsiveness of the
IP system. In copyright law, the Stockholm conference to revise the BC in 1967 was dominated by the dispute over the
needs of developing countries (Johnson, 1970, pp. 158 et sequentes). Consensus was reached, initially, on a “separate”
protocol that allowed the developing countries to limit the rights in translations and the grant of compulsory licences
for the local production of books not otherwise available. This protocol, however, never entered into force, as it was
rejected by the United Kingdom and other industrial nations as being too far-reaching (Ricketson & Ginsburg, 2006,
paragraph 14.16 et sequentes). The breakthrough was finally achieved in 1971, at a further revision conference held in
Paris. On the one hand the “special provisions regarding developing countries” were integrated into the Convention,
thereby formally raising their status. On the other hand, several material concessions were withdrawn. Since then,
developing countries are only allowed to grant compulsory licences in individual cases in order to provide for
translations in the official language and for the copying and dissemination of works for educational and research
purposes (Olian, 1974, p. 104).15 However, the formal and material requirements for such a case are so high as to
render this system of compulsory licensing practically irrelevant (Lewinski, 2008, paragraph 5.233; Ricketson &
Ginsburg, 2006, paragraph 14.106).

In international patent law, there are likewise traces of the development discourse to be found as early as the
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) of 1970. In its desire “to foster and accelerate the economic development of
developing countries”, WIPO pledges to furnish developing countries at net cost with “technical and any other

6 |

PEUKERT

pertinent information available to it on the basis of published documents”. And yet this goal is only sought in
conformity with the IP system, by improving the effectiveness of the international patent system and its information
services.16 The true effect of the PCT consists in the simplifying of multinational patent registrations. In substantive
patent law, everything remained the same.

Second, the integration of the development discourse was accompanied by various system-stabilizing
measures on the part of BIRPI, WIPO, UNESCO, the former colonial powers and the representatives of the right
holders. Starting in the 1960s, seminars and workshops were held in Africa, Asia and South America in which the
expansion paradigm was presented as being advantageous to the newly independent countries. At this occasion, a
local IP elite was generated whose members were more concerned with the development of the international IP
system as such than with the development of their home countries (Okediji, 2003). Furthermore, accession to the
key conventions, of which both the Western and the Eastern bloc were a part, held out the promise of
international recognition. After all, this was the only way to ensure that the citizens of the developing countries
would be granted legal protection in the former metropoles (via the principle of national treatment). Critical voices
like that of India therefore remained an exception, to quickly fade altogether at the end of the 1960s. At least as
marginal were the topic of “innovation” and the question of the significance of IPRs in the general development
discourse (see International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, 1990; International
Labour Office, 1976, pp. 144 et sequentes).

2.5 | Washington consensus 1990–2000

The expansion paradigm experienced another upswing with the fall of the East bloc and the victory march of the
Washington Consensus, which propagated a universally valid version of the open market economy and set this
liberalization in tandem with the instrument of unequivocally defined and effectively protected titles of property
(Williamson, 1990/2002 [“there is general acceptance that property rights do indeed matter”]). This standpoint, which
temporarily dominated the scene, forms the backdrop to the establishment of WTO and in particular the Agreement
on TRIPS as a component of WTO law (Gervais, 2014; Netanel, 2009, p. 3).

On the one hand, WTO law on the whole professes the need “for positive efforts designed to ensure that
developing countries, and especially the least developed among them, secure a share in the growth in international
trade commensurate with the needs of their economic development”.17 For this purpose, developing countries are
granted “special and differential treatment” in all respects. They especially enjoy a greater substantial and temporal
flexibility in the implementation of world trade law (for an overview see Berman & Mavroidis, 2007).18 The preamble
of the TRIPS Agreement also refers to “developmental and technological objectives” as well as the “special needs of
the least-developed country Members in respect of maximum flexibility in the domestic implementation of laws and
regulations in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base”.

These aims are reflected in additional transitional periods for implementing the Agreement, during which,
however, the general national-treatment and most-favored-nation principles must be observed.19 In addition,
developed countries are to promote private technology transfer for the benefit of least-developed countries and to
cooperate with all developing countries in technical and financial matters in order to support the implementation of
the Agreement and the erecting of an IP infrastructure.20

On the other hand, these avowals and concessions should not blind us to the fact that the TRIPS Agreement
continues to advance the expansion paradigm. TRIPS goes far beyond the scope of protection of the PC and the BC,
for instance regarding the patentability of pharmaceuticals and plant varieties and the scope of exclusivity a patent
holder enjoys. These obligations are to be fulfilled, post-transitional phase, by all of the 161 WTO members equally.
TRIPS grants no substantial flexibilities (as, e.g. in the area of tariff and subsidies regulation) to the developing
countries. As to the effectiveness of the promised technology transfer, we will return to this below. Just how
marginalized critical approaches to the relationship between IP law and development were at the apex of the
Washington Consensus era is demonstrated by the two WIPO Copyright Treaties of 1996, which extend the reach of

PEUKERT

| 7

copyright into the digital world. In these documents, developing countries are only mentioned to the extent that
WIPO promises to reimburse the travel expenses of their delegates.21

2.6 | Conflicting tendencies since 2000

The globalization agenda, with its goals of opening and liberalizing markets, found itself in a crisis in the late 1990s.
This was manifested in the failure of the Third WTO Ministerial Conference in Seattle in December 1999. At this point
criticism of the orthodox IP paradigm and in particular of the TRIPS Agreement also began to be voiced. The event that
triggered this protest was the attempt of pharmaceutical companies together with the United States and the EU to
topple a South African law intended to secure better provision of affordable HIV/AIDS medicine through parallel
imports and compulsory licences. An international campaign raised the claim that patents hindered access to vital
medicines. This was effective: as a result, US President Clinton expressly ordered in May of 2000 that pressure on
South Africa be dropped (Fisher & Rigamonti, 2005). These events, and the rise of the Internet suddenly focused the
spotlight on IP rights. As a consequence we can observe a convergence of the development discourse and the IPR
discourse, two previously unrelated debates.

For one thing, general development policy increasingly reflects the significance of innovation and the protection
of IP rights. In the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) the category “access”—whether to water,
food, health care, education or information and communication technologies—plays a central role. Under the
impression of the South African HIV/AIDS case, the pharmaceuticals sector is expressly expected to make essential
medicines available and affordable for all people in developing countries.22 Later resolutions on the MDGs emphasize
“that science, technology and innovation, including information and communications technologies, are vital for the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals . . ., and for the full participation of developing countries
in the global economy” (see also van Genugten & Meijknecht, 2011).23 At this occasion, the UN General Assembly
recognized also “the importance of the creation of a conducive environment that attracts and supports private
investment, entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility, including an efficient and effective intellectual
property framework”.24 Eventually, the aim to foster innovation features prominently as one of the 17 goals of the
post-2015 UN development agenda.25

At the same time, the issue of development has penetrated the multilateral IP discourse. The WTO
responded to the globalization criticism with the “Doha Development Agenda”, begun in 2001 and not yet
successfully concluded, which is supposed to center on the needs and interests of the developing countries (see
van Dijck & Faber, 2006).26 How strong an impression was made by the controversy on patents and HIV/AIDS,
in particular, can be seen in the fact that the Ministers’ Conference of 2001 released a special declaration on
TRIPS and public health.27 This document clarifies that the Agreement does not prevent Members from taking
measures to protect public health. Rather, it is to be interpreted and applied flexibly so as to promote access to
medicines for all. Moreover, a number of formal decisions were taken. First, the transitional phase for
introducing patent protection for pharmaceutical products was extended to 1 January 2016 in favor of the
least-developed countries.28 Second, the obligations of an exporting WTO Member under article 31(f) of the
TRIPS Agreement were waived so as to allow exports to countries that cannot manufacture pharmaceuticals
themselves.29 In the year 2005, it was agreed to codify this “Doha Waiver” in the form of a new article 31bis and
an annex to the TRIPS Agreement.30

This development is remarkable in that it represents the only amendment ever made to WTO law. And yet, even
10 years after their adoption, the provisions concerned have not entered into force due to an insufficient number of
ratifications.31 In addition, there has so far only been one documented case of a compulsory export licence under this
regime, namely, for delivery of a medicine from Canada to Rwanda (Dutfield, 2008, pp. 1 et sequentes).32 The
extension of the transitional phase for least-developed countries, also resolved in 2005, has proven to be similarly
ambivalent. At first sight, it means that these countries are not required to implement any minimum rights pursuant to
TRIPS until 1 July 2021.33 At the same time, however, LDCs agreed in 2005 to a no-roll-back clause, according to

8 |

PEUKERT

which they promised to ensure that any changes in their laws would “not result in a lesser degree of consistency with
the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement”.34 Since many LDCs, particularly in Africa, have already established a post-
colonial standard of protection that surpasses that of TRIPS (see above), the extended transition period in most cases
runs idle.

WIPO, the second multilateral actor on the scene of international IP law, is practically bound by its founding
document to the expansionist narrative, as it is supposed to “promote the protection of intellectual property
throughout the world”.35 As late as 2003 its Director General was still touting IPRs as a “power tool” for economic
development and welfare (see Netanel, 2009, p. 2 with further references). Somewhat of a change came only in
2004 with the demand from Argentina and Brazil that, as a UN organization, WIPO should also promote the
universal developmental goals. IPRs, they argued, are not an end in and of themselves; the effects of WIPO’s policy
to push for an expansion of IP protection on developing countries must also be examined. The petitioners stressed
the need for a balanced approach that gives equal consideration to both the advantages and the disadvantages of
IPRs.36 Since then, these questions have been discussed regularly in the framework of the WIPO’s “Development
Agenda” (on similar and eventually failed attempts to introduce a development aspect to WIPO’s agenda in the
1970s and early 1980s see Sell, 2011, pp. 17 et sequentes).37 Besides a series of commissioned studies, WIPO
adopted no fewer than 45 recommendations that are intended to contribute to a greater coherence between IP
policy and development policy.38 Among these is a re-orientation of technical assistance and capacity building
programs that shall no longer be committed solely to the universal expansion narrative (critical Deere Birkbeck &
Roca, 2011; more optimistic Pederson, 2014, p. 202 [“WIPO has already distanced itself considerably from the
“maximalist rights culture” that was said to have dominated the organization when the Agenda was first
adopted”.]).

In sum, both within the WTO and WIPO, critical voices have begun to be raised against the expansion narrative.
These critics strongly relied on concepts of development. The resulting conflict has led to a near-total blockade of the
multilateral IP system. However, this has by no means caused the development of international IP law to come to a
standstill. The proponents of a high level of protection have merely changed their forum, and are now pursuing their
goals on the plurilateral and bilateral level (Helfer, 2004). The anti-piracy agreement ACTA was agreed among a select
group of nations sympathetic to the cause but failed eventually when submitted to the European Parliament.39
Bilateral agreements on a TRIPS-plus level, however, continue to proliferate. The external IP policy of the EU can again
exemplify this observation.

The EU is, on the one hand, obligated to take account of the objectives of development cooperation in the
policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries.40 And indeed, the option to grant
compulsory export licences for medicines, in accordance with the WTO’s Doha Declaration, was implemented in
EU law.41 On the other hand, the European Commission conceives of a “balanced IPR policy toward developing
countries” as one that aims at enhancing respect of IPR standards and “stronger” IPR protection, in particular for
middle-income countries.42 This policy corresponds to the 2011 IPR strategy of the Commission, which states
that “IPR constitute a major asset for the EU’s competitiveness on emerging markets”.43 Accordingly, the
Commission will continue to aim at “improving protection and enforcement of IPR at global level”, though
conscious of the obligation to provide for coherence between IP policy and DC.44 What this means concretely
becomes apparent in the example of the “Economic Partnership Agreement” concluded by the EU with a
number of developing countries in the Caribbean (CARIFORUM). The relevant commitments, especially those
regarding enforcement, go far beyond the level of TRIPS. In general, also, the parties to the agreement
recognize “that the protection and enforcement of intellectual property plays a key role in fostering creativity,
innovation and competitiveness, and are determined to ensure increasing levels of protection appropriate to
their levels of development”.45 EU Commissioner Malmström goes so far as to attribute the fact that trade
between the EU and the CARIFORUM countries has not increased significantly since the conclusion of the
Agreement in 2008 inter alia to the fact that some Caribbean countries have not yet implemented the IP rules of
the Agreement (Malmström, 2015, p. 3).

PEUKERT

| 9

3 | THE UNTENABILITY OF THE EXPANSION PARADIGM

The expansion paradigm, then, is still alive and well. This is a vexing conclusion, because the hypothesis that increasing
legal protection fosters economic development can now be considered refuted.

3.1 | Arguments of IP optimists with regard to developing countries

IP optimists hold the opinion that a high, globally harmonized level of protection is advantageous even—and
particularly—for developing countries (see Beier, 1979, pp. 227 et sequentes; Straus, 2012). The reasons put forward in
support of this opinion have long been criticized because empirically they stand on shaky ground.

The central, effects-based argument in favor of IPRs is that they provide incentives for investing in R&D, and thus
indirectly for innovation, by protecting the respective investments and facilitating a market-compliant use of the
results of the research. Even if one presumes that every patent application maps this logic (more on this below),
statistics reveal a mixed result (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2014, p. 14, p. 23): the most significant
change in patent applications by country income group between 2003 and 2013 concerned the share of 52 high-
income and 39 upper middle-income countries, where applications in China rose sevenfold, while those in Japan fell
by a fifth, which resulted in an increase of the share of upper middle-income group countries in the worldwide patent
applications from 11.9% to 36.4%, whereas the share of high-income countries fell from 85.7% to 60.3%. But without
China, the share of the remaining upper middle-income countries would have dropped from 5% to 4%. The 31 lower
middle-income countries accounted for a marginal share in patent applications of 1.9% in 2003 and of 2.9% in 2013,
the 17 low-income countries for 0.5% and 0.4%, respectively. In addition, the lion’s share (c. 85%) of applications in
African, Latin American and Caribbean, and Oceanian offices was constantly filed by non-residents (World Intellectual
Property Organization, 2014, p. 24).

More important than the sheer numbers is the insight that the basic assumptions of the IP optimist are
contradicted by research findings. First,
it is meanwhile acknowledged among economists that patents, and
particularly mere patent applications, must not be equated with innovations, as the technological quality of patents
(applications) is highly diverse (e.g. Mann & Underweiser, 2010). In many empirical studies on individual rights,
branches and countries, a positive correlation between IP protection on the one hand and R&D expenditures and
innovations on the other, could not be confirmed (Bessen & Meurer, 2008, pp. 73 et sequentes; Landes & Posner, 2003,
pp. 326 et sequentes; Branstetter et al., 2010, pp. 93 et sequentes, all with further references; Maskus, 2008, p. 497,
p. 507); this regards even the pharmaceuticals sector, which is supposed to be the prime example of the necessity of
patent law (Qian, 2009, pp. 191 et sequentes). Though IP protection has expanded world-wide between 1981 and
2011, the percentage of R&D spending in the gross national product in the United States and in Germany has
increased only slightly (2.34–2.88%), and in the United Kingdom even decreased clearly (2.35–1.77%). Only in certain
Asian countries such as Japan (2.26–3.39%) and China (0.73–1.84%) can a significant increase be made out—although
Chinese IP law has been considered inadequate for most of this period (National Science Foundation 2014). The
empirical basis for the incentive theory is even weaker with respect to developing countries. The evidence for patents
as drivers of local innovation activity has been anecdotal (Odagiri, Goto, & Sunami, 2010a, p. 412, p. 418, p. 427 [“little
support for this claim”]). The phenomenon of neglected diseases refutes the assumption that global IP law generates
innovations that are especially tailored to the needs of developing countries (Chang, 2001, pp. 27 et sequentes;
Maskus, 2008, p. 515). HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria are still primarily combated using the classic tools of
development cooperation (United Nations, 2011, p. 47).

That patent rights alone do not trigger technological catch-up processes is something many IP optimists will
readily admit. Instead, they argue, technology has to be transferred from the industrial to the developing countries.
And for such transfers, IP law is again considered to be an incentive and a legal basis (Islam, 2010, pp. 7 et sequentes;
World Trade Organization, 2010: paragraph 6). Yet doubts abound as to the tenability of this argument. First of all,
increasing patenting rates of foreign enterprises in developing countries must not be equated with technology

10 |

PEUKERT

transfer (Moser, Bilir, & Talis, 2011). For a patent need not be worked nor licensed locally, but can be held strategically
as a defensive position. Technology agreements with firms in least-developed countries have not been documented
(Beattie, 2007, pp. 6, 19 et sequentes with further references; Chang, 2001, p. 27; Michaels, 2009, p. 223, p. 224
[“implementation of article 66.2 thus far has been moderately successful at best”]; World Trade Organization, 2010,
paragraph 38). Senegal, for instance, has complained to the WTO that although many high-tech products are imported
for use, only an “extremely limited” amount of technology is transferred for purposes of production.46 Several reasons
have been cited for this. In many developing countries there are no local actors who are capable of absorbing complex
technologies for production purposes (Claessens, 2009, pp. 539 et sequentes; Greenhalgh & Rogers, 2010, p. 253;
Odagiri, Goto, Sunami, & Nelson, 2010a, p. 415). From the perspective of potential licensors, developing countries are
attractive merely as retail markets for goods produced elsewhere. For this purpose, all that is needed is well-
functioning trade mark protection to prevent piracy (Maskus, 2008, p. 506). Finally, the public authorities who
promised technology transfer have only very limited influence on the considerations of individual patent holders
(Cottier, 2006, p. 779, p. 789).

Even if an IPR-based transfer of technology should fail to materialize, IPRs are, in the view of the IP optimists, still
advantageous to developing countries because they offer legal security for foreign direct investment (FDI) by
multinational corporations (MNCs). Indeed it has been shown in economic models as well as empirically that without
legal protection there is less inclination on the part of MNCs to set up technology-intensive production operations in
developing countries (Branstetter, Foley, & Saggi, 2010, pp. 93 et sequentes with further references; Comune,
Naghavi, & Prarolo, 2012). However, this consideration seems not to be of the highest priority, as high direct
investments are documented in large emerging economies—specifically, China and India—who are accused at the
same time of not combating local IPR infringement effectively enough (Ganea & Haijun, 2009, p. 17, pp. 43
et sequentes with further references; regarding India see Nandkumar & Srikanth, 2011). For less-developed countries
with small retail markets, moreover, no reliable data are available (Beattie, 2007, p. 6, pp. 16 et sequentes with further
references; Branstetter et al., 2010, p. 93, p. 98; Chang, 2001, p. 27; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights,
2002, p. 24; Maskus, 2008, pp. 507 et sequentes). It is even argued that the effects of stronger IPR protection are
generally negative and not significantly correlated to FDI (as a percentage of GDP) for countries with relatively large
shadow economies (Canavire, Saravia, & Rios-Avila, 2012).

As a final point, the advocates of a high international standard of protection argue that the disadvantages this
might have for the developing countries (more on that below) would be compensated for by an improved access to the
global market for their own products and thus greater participation in the globalization process. Admittedly, the TRIPS
Agreement must not be regarded in isolation. It is one of a whole bundle of agreements within the WTO framework.
Bilateral free-trade agreements also give developing countries benefits,
in return for which they accept the
concessions of a potentially detrimental IP chapter. However, this package-deal argument, which by the way is hardly
quantifiable, likewise meets with strong reservations (Maskus, 2008, p. 514). For one thing, tariffs and export
subsidies are still particularly high in the agricultural sector, causing harm to poor rural producers by eroding their
competitiveness and affecting international prices (Bartley et al., 2015, p. 31, p. 44). Over and over again, the UN
General Assembly recognized “the need to address market access for developing countries, including in the sectors of
agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in particular those of interest to developing countries”.47

3.2 | Arguments of the IP pessimists with respect to developing countries

In light of these findings and the costs of IP protection, IP pessimists are of the view that a protection of IPRs that is
introduced too early on too high a level would have the potential to prevent a country from catching up over a long
term (e.g. Islam (2010) with further references; Maskus, 2008, pp. 508 et sequentes with further references). They
argue that a low level, or even total lack, of protection in developing countries has hardly any negative effects on
worldwide innovativeness, provided there is effective protection in the industrial and upper middle-income countries
as the key production markets. On the global scale, then, it does no harm if the least-developed countries in particular

PEUKERT

| 11

enjoy greater leeway (Grossman & Lai, 2004, pp. 1635 et sequentes). These countries often lack the basic prerequisites
for the absorption and further improvement of existing technologies, especially skilled workers and legal certainty for
enterprises operating in the formal sector of the economy (for Central America see Rodríguez-Clare (2005)).

However, it does not follow from these relativizing observations that the IP policy in general, and the politically
dominant IP maximalism in particular, are insignificant. Sceptics put forward a number of empirically supported
arguments that make the negative potential of this agenda clear.

First, it is undisputed among economists that exclusive IPRs limit the dissemination of explicit knowledge, which is
not rivalrous in its use and therefore not scarce, and therefore lead to a lower degree of satisfaction of needs
(summary in Boldrin & Levine, 2008, pp. 1 et sequentes). This becomes evident when the right holder does not work her
invention or otherwise limits access to it. For example, the highly restrictive licensing policy of James Watt with
respect to his steam engine patents is alleged to have slowed down the entire industrialization process for several
years (Kurz, 2000, pp. 302 et sequentes, p. 306 [one of the few cases where it is pretty sure that patents slowed down
technological progress]). And even if the proprietor allows the use of an innovation in exchange for remuneration, this
leads to inefficient underuse since not everyone is willing or able to pay the price asked. That IPRs, as their purpose
dictates, significantly raise the price of products is proven, for example regarding patent-protected medicines as
compared to generics (European Commission, 2009, p. 9 [generics on average 25% cheaper than the patented
original; 2 years after market entry, prices for generics are on average 40% lower than the price of the patented
product]) and in the book sector.48 This effect results in high trade deficits of innovation importing countries with
regard to license fees (Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 21 [“Between 1991 and 2001, the net US
surplus of royalties and fees (which mainly relate to IP transactions) increased from $14 billion to over $22 billion. In
1999, figures from the World Bank indicate a deficit for developing countries for which figures are available of $7.5
billion on royalties and licence fees”.]). Furthermore, the combating of “piracy” in developing countries leads to the
repression of locally existing production (see the country reports in Karaganis (2011)).

Second, it is a recognized fact that IPRs limit not only the mere consumption of existing knowledge, but also its
further development. Here one must keep in mind that no one creates ex nihilo. Every innovation builds on previous
achievements (Boldrin & Levine, 2008, pp. 124 et sequentes), which are learned by the anthropological constant of
imitation (Boldrin & Levine, 2008, p. 145; locus classicus: Tarde, 1962 [1890] [imitation is human]). The higher the
number of people who have an intensively cultivated access to the state of the art in a certain field of knowledge, the
higher the probability that this knowledge will be used innovatively and creatively.

Third, the establishment and administration of a functioning IP system causes considerable costs, for instance for
a patent office, the education of judges or the enforcement of laws. It is estimated that a developing country has to
spend at least one million US dollars per year to cover these costs (Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002,
p. 145). The question arises whether these sums would be better invested elsewhere.

Fourth, it is pointed out that an effectively enforced IP system can additionally increase the oftentimes already
considerable market power of multinational enterprises in developing countries. Formal technology transfer and
foreign direct investments can force out local production (“piracy”) and impede the market entry of domestic
companies (Greenhalgh & Rogers, 2010, p. 337; Saikia, 2015, p. 521 [rising market share of MNCs on the Indian
pharmaceutical market]). Such limited competition in turn leads to welfare losses. Japan, after all, chose a different
strategy to effect its technological catching-up process: up until the late 1960s, most foreign direct investments were
limited by regulation, and instead competition among domestic industries was promoted (Odagiri et al., 2010, p. 95,
pp. 113 et sequentes).

Fifth, a trade policy that gives away market access to textiles or agrarian products, for instance, in return for high
IPR protection levels threatens to peg developing countries to the comparative advantage they have today over a long
term. This advantage consists of labor-intensive but not very innovative activities that have a lesser added value than
high-tech products. If an economy is not able to generate this added value and thus rise to the ranks of the technology
exporters, at a certain point the catch-up process will begin to stall (Llewelyn, 2010, p. 285 [“competing on price alone
is a business strategy with a limited shelf-life”]; Ostergard, 2014, pp. 3 et sequentes, p. 40). The innovation gap will

12 |

PEUKERT

remain, and could even grow wider. In his famous report on the industrial policy of the then technologically backwards,
predominantly agrarian USA, Alexander Hamilton formulated this idea in 1791: “In such a position of things, the United
States cannot exchange with Europe on equal terms; and the want of reciprocity would render them the victim of a
system, which should induce them to confine their views to agriculture, and refrain from manufactures” (Hamilton,
1791/1901, p. 25).

3.3 | In particular: IPRs in the process of industrialization of developed countries

Hamilton’s warning shows plainly that today’s developed countries, which export knowledge commodities and
advocate for a high global level of IP protection, at one time had yet to reach their stage of development. Each of these
countries began with what from today’s perspective was an extremely low level of innovation, technologically and
otherwise. In most cases (e.g. United States, Germany, Japan) these countries lagged behind in international
comparison and first had to catch up. Economic history can thus provide us with important insights on the framework
conditions that promote such a catch-up (Gerschenkron, 1962/1979; International Labour Office, 1976, p. 141;
Payne & Phillips, 2010, pp. 33 et sequentes; Rostow, 1987; with regard to IPRs Greenhalgh & Rogers, 2010, pp. 250
et sequentes with further references). In this respect, there is consensus that technological progress and thus
innovation policy, including IPRs, play a central role (Chang, 2002, p. 126). Turning to these questions, it quickly
becomes clear that today’s proponents of IP maximalism followed a completely different policy during their own
catch-up phase.

First of all, it is striking that the first states to have modern patent laws, such as (temporarily) the city-state of
Venice in the fifteenth century and England, from the seventeenth century, assumed a leading role in economy and
technology at the time (Lerner, 2000, p. 15; on the United Kingdom see Chang, 2002, pp. 19 et sequentes). The
Venetian laws, furthermore, primarily served to promote the influx of professionals and the local practice of new
trades (Kurz, 2000, pp. 41 et sequentes; MacLeod & Nuvolari, 2010, p. 5). Not until the informal transfer of knowledge
by means of the immigration of people skilled in the art no longer sufficed, due to the complexity of technology, did
patent law become relevant (Chang, 2002, p. 56). And even then only very few patents were granted; in Great Britain,
from 1760 c. 20 patents, around 1840 c. 450 patents per year. Besides, wide areas of the British industrialization
process, such as the set-up of modern infrastructure and transportation, took place entirely without patenting activity
(Kurz, 2000, pp. 178 et sequentes; MacLeod & Nuvolari, 2010; p. 577; Moser, 2013, pp. 25–28). Incidentally, the
history of economics presents not a single case in which a high level of IP protection was intentionally established that
was then followed by a catch-up process. On the contrary, the states that today are developed all followed strategies
that were characterized by a thoroughly conservative, instrumental IP policy (Chang, 2001, pp. 3 et sequentes;
Ostergard, 2014, p. 3, p. 39).

Many countries only introduced patents for technical inventions when their economic development was already
advanced and thus a foundation was laid for innovative activity (Lerner, 2000, pp. 14 et sequentes). In Germany, for
instance, patent law was up against not only the lack of a central state but also the anti-patent movement, borne on
the wave of the free-trade idea. It was not until the 1870s that protectionist tendencies in the wake of that era’s
financial crisis prepared the ground for the Patent Act of 1877, which exempted precisely those two branches from
patent protection—medicines and chemical products—in which Germany was already an international leader of the
time (Kurz, 2000, pp. 332 et sequentes, pp. 372 et sequentes). Switzerland introduced a Patent Act only in 1888, under
massive international pressure, but granted no protection for methods and for chemical products until 1907. This
allowed the Swiss chemical and pharmaceutical industry to copy products patented in France and other places
without hindrance; at the same time, the late nineteenth and early twentieth century are seen as the golden age of the
Swiss pharmaceutical and chemical industry (Kurz, 2000, pp. 393 et sequentes; Schiff, 1971, pp. 85 et sequentes). In
1869, the Netherlands completely revoked their patent law, which up until that point had been used predominantly by
foreign registrants, and did not re-instate it until 1912. Here again, this period in fact marks the high point of the
industrialization of the Netherlands. Dutch companies remained innovative in international comparison, registering

PEUKERT

| 13

patents in foreign countries, while a shift took place toward branches, such as construction of complex instruments,
that operated more intensively with trade secrets (Moser, 2005, p. 1214, p. 1223 [patents channel innovative activity
to certain industries but do not influence the overall level of innovation]). New on the scene were large companies
whose business models were based on unlawful imitation (“piracy”). Thus the Lever Brothers (Unilever) produced
margarine in disregard of the patent protection that existed in several European countries; Philips manufactured light
bulbs without paying licensing fees to Edison (Kurz, 2000, pp. 388 et sequentes; MacLeod & Nuvolari, 2010, p. 23;
Schiff, 1971, pp. 19 et sequentes, pp. 124 et sequentes). India pursued a similar strategy in doing away with product
patents in the pharmaceutical and food sector in 1972. This gap in protection, which under the maximum transition
period for TRIPS was valid until 2005, is said to be partly responsible for the creation of the Indian generics sector
(Chaudhuri, 2009, pp. 265 et sequentes; on the comparable development of the Israeli pharmaceutical industry see
Odagiri, Goto, Sunami, & Nelson, 2010b, pp. 361 et sequentes). Japan, to name one last example, has had a patent law
since as far back as 1885. But up until the late 1990s, the scope of protection of a patent was construed so narrowly
that Japanese companies had an easy time of circumventing this protection by means of slight changes in the drafting
of the claims (Ganea & Nagaoka, 2009, p. 87, p. 140; Odagiri et al., 2010, p. 122. On the comparable situation of the
Republic of Korea see Lee & Kim, 2010, p. 133, p. 142, p. 165 [reduction of the patent term in 1961 and expansion of
IP protection since the late 1980s]).

Moreover, many patent laws of the nineteenth and early twentieth century contain elements that aim at
formal and informal importing of technology (Khan & Sokoloff, 2009, p. 215, pp. 232 et sequentes). One common
scheme (e.g. in England, France and the German state of Württemberg) was the granting of a patent for the first
person to introduce an innovation to the country. The patent holder—who as a rule was not a foreigner—was thus
not rewarded for bringing about an innovation in the first place, but for introducing it to the local market without
the permission of the inventor (Kurz, 2000, p. 338, p. 577 [patents on imported technology as the “true” root of
modern industrial property law]; Chang, 2001, p. 7). In addition, there was often a legal duty to work a patented
technology within the country. If this requirement was not met, the patent could be revoked or a compulsory
license granted to competitors (for France see Khan & Sokoloff, 2009, pp. 222 et sequentes).49 Last but not least,
up until the late nineteenth century it was common policy for a country to grant patents only to its nationals. Such
a discrimination against foreigners was practiced for instance in Prussia (Kurz, 2000, pp. 332 et sequentes), in
Japan, until 1899 (Ganea & Nagaoka, 2009, pp. 134 et sequentes), and finally, in the United States, the nation held
up as the poster-child of patenting (on the US Patent Act of 1790 see Kurz, 2000, pp. 251 et sequentes). Here,
foreign applicants were not able to obtain patent protection until 1836, and even then, until 1861, only at
additional costs. While US citizens had to pay a mere 30-dollar registration fee, foreigners were charged 300 US$,
and citizens of the United Kingdom as much as 500 US$ (Mowery, 2010, p. 31, p. 36).50 This policy of
discrimination contributed to there being only very few foreign patents documented in the United States up until
the early twentieth century, when the country finally caught up technologically to Europe (Khan & Sokoloff, 2009,
pp. 226 et sequentes).

In the area of copyright as well, up until the late nineteenth century there existed several European “copying hubs”
(Hofmeister, 1987, pp. 173 et sequentes). The US Supreme Court calls the nineteenth century United States in
retrospect a “Barbary coast of literature”, where “buccaneers of books” had an easy time.51 And indeed, from 1791 to
1891, works by foreign authors that were not first published in the United States enjoyed no protection whatsoever.
Until 1976, US law required that certain formalities be met in order to obtain copyright protection; predictably, it was
foreigners above all who failed to meet them. Finally, up until 1986 a so-called manufacturing clause was in place
which required that a book must be printed in the United States in order to enjoy protection by law. These regulations
had the purpose of promoting the national publishing and paper industries and to provide the public in the settler
colonies with the cheapest and widest access possible to all sorts of information (Hamilton, 1791/1901, pp. 83
et sequentes; Patry, 2003, p. 749, p. 750).52 They were only dropped in the year 1989, when the United States acceded
to the Berne Convention, at which point the United States had already become the world’s largest exporter of
entertainment and other information commodities. Since then, the United States has been among the most vehement

14 |

PEUKERT

proponents of IP maximalism. The goal of this policy is to help the nation’s own companies attain legal protection all
over the world.

All in all, it is clear that today’s developed countries had established a much lower level of IP protection during
their technological catch-up phase than that demanded of the developing countries by today’s multilateral and
bilateral treaties. Their IP system was only expanded step by step when a certain potential for innovation—and the
corresponding need for protection within a country’s own industry—was present. This instrumental policy is now
blocked off for the most part (Beattie, 2007, p. 6, pp. 24 et sequentes; Kurz, 2000, p. 578; Maskus, 2008, pp. 502
et sequentes; on discrimination of foreigners see Qian, 2009, p. 207 with further references; Commission on
Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 20). In particular, it is not allowed to wholly exclude foreigners or certain areas of
technology, such as pharmaceuticals, from legal protection or to provide that formalities must be fulfilled in order to
secure a copyright.53

It is this background against which we must see China’s example. China joined the key intellectual property
conventions quite soon (PC 1985, BC 1992) after the gradual opening of its economy, and finally, in 2001, the WTO.
On paper, the Chinese IP law conforms to the international standards. In reality, however, the enforcement of rights is
still considered lacking, so that informal technology and knowledge transfer is taking place on a large scale (Ganea &
Haijun, 2009, pp. 17 et sequentes). Whether the accelerated patenting activity of Chinese enterprises truly signals that
the hurdle from a mere supplier to an innovator has already been taken is doubtful. An alternative reading sees in this a
strategy with the intention of hindering both foreign access to the Chinese market and the exodus of MNCs producing
in China (e.g. Apple), since these cannot simply transfer the incremental improvements of their Chinese suppliers to a
different place of production (Eberhardt, Helmers, & Yu, 2011; contra Straus & Klunker, 2007, p. 91, pp. 99
et sequentes [patent law decisive for the Chinese success story]).

4 | CONCLUSIONS

4.1 | From the perspective of social sciences

Based on this state of research, economists and economic historians have come to the unanimous conclusion that the
expansionist paradigm, which holds that IP protection is good, and more protection is better, is untenable (Beattie,
2007, p. 6, p. 29 [“One can still argue that it will have net positive effects on developing economies . . ., but one cannot
in good faith argue that it is the ideal regime for the developing world to adopt”.]; Cimoli, Dosi, & Stiglitz, 2009, p. 1,
p. 10 [effects irrelevant or negative]; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 22; Greenhalgh & Rogers,
2010, p. 331 [“it is difficult to find a consistent, positive association between the strength of IPRs and economic
growth”]; Kurz, 2000, p. 389 [“untenable”]; Machlup, 1958; Moser, 2013, p. 40 [“Overall, the weight of the existing
historical evidence suggests that patent policies, which grant strong intellectual property rights to early generations of
inventors, may discourage innovation”.]; Netanel, 2009, pp. 4 et sequentes with further references; Odagiri et al.,
2010a, p. 430; Ostergard, 2014, p. 3, p. 39 [at best an argument on shaky ground]). IP optimists, meanwhile, have
dropped their consequentialist argument in favor of the legal-philosophical concept that it is right to accord to
inventors and authors the rights in the fruits of their labor (see Merges, 2011; Spinello & Bottis, 2009, pp. 177
et sequentes). In the final analysis, then, the question is one of orthodoxy.

Of course it would be foolish to draw the opposite conclusion from the refutation of the expansion narrative: that
IPRs always have negative effects on technological and other developments. In the model, the correlation between IP
and innovation or welfare is represented not as a straight line, but as a converted U-curve. If legal protection is
altogether lacking or too slight, certain economic activities such as costly film productions will not take place. If IP law
expands beyond a certain point, however, innovations and creativity will decline, since too many rights must be
respected. Examples of this are patent thickets in the ICT sector,54 or the practical impossibility of legally creating
mash-ups of music videos (Gangopadhyay & Mondal, 2012; Maskus, 2008, p. 505; Park, 2008, p. 289, p. 323). With

PEUKERT

| 15

regard to developing countries, mono-causal conclusions are likewise a dead end. IP law is neither the sole
requirement for nor the sole or even the most significant impediment to closing the development gap (generally
Gerschenkron, 1962/1979, p. 360; regarding IPRs Bessen & Meurer, 2008, p. 92; Maskus, 2008, p. 515; Odagiri et al.,
2010a, p. 420; Qian, 2009, pp. 191 et sequentes).

Instead, a rule of differentiation is formulated: equal chances for development55 require unequal regulations of
innovation, including the option to provide for no or only minimal IP protection. Instead of a universal standard,
individual states should pursue innovation policies that are tailored to their actual needs (Gervais, 2014, p. 86, pp. 100
et sequentes; Khan & Sokoloff, 2009, p. 241; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 20; generally Cimoli
et al., 2009, p. 3 [Ricardo vs. List]). While knowledge exporters profit from a high level of IP protection and threshold
countries have to strike a tricky balance between legal protection and access, the least-developed countries are
suffering negative effects from the current system (Adusei, 2013; Maskus, 2008, pp. 512 et sequentes; Park, 2008,
p. 290). A globally uniform IP law contributes to cementing these relative advantages and disadvantages. The small
group of technologically leading countries and companies is protected from imitators; the great number of latecomers
is not allowed to learn at the lowest possible cost. The overall effect of this regime on global economic development is
judged to be chiefly negative (Claessens, 2009, pp. 598 et sequentes; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights,
2002, p. 20; Greenhalgh & Rogers, 2010, p. 333; Maskus, 2008, pp. 497 et sequentes; Moser, 2005, p. 1232; Odagiri
et al., 2010a, pp. 418 et sequentes; contra Straus & Klunker, 2007, p. 91, pp. 101 et sequentes [further harmonization of
patent law necessary]).

Another idea that must be rejected is one that some commentators prefer not to state openly: that many
developing countries are so backward that IP law cannot hurt them either. Not only are there are no right holders who
would be interested in these markets, but the local population is not even capable of infringing the rights. Such a
degree of cynicism makes a mockery not only of the demand for global protection that is made at the same time.
Precisely in the situation described here, it is preferable to save the costs of this manifestly superfluous system
altogether. Furthermore, history has taught us that “piracy” can prepare the field for economic development. Let us
remember Unilever, Philips or the American publishing companies. A more recent lesson is the Nigerian film industry,
which likewise has its roots in the industrial-scale production of unlawful video copies, and yet now is one of the most
productive locations in the world for producing films, and is itself afflicted with mass infringement of rights (Pager,
2012). The further formalization and professionalization of Nollywood, however, is also deterred by the dubious status
of the companies involved. Unlike Unilever or Philips in their day, the Nigerian video pirates violated copyright laws
from the very beginning, since Nigeria had a valid copyright law in place. Today, when these same producers make
films and take action against right infringements, the accusation of piracy falls back on them. Whereas the nineteenth-
century imitators, who were operating completely legal, had to adjust ex nunc to a newly introduced IP regime, the
infringers from today’s developing countries bear the “pirate” stigma, and this by itself makes it harder for them to
leave the informal system for the formal structure that would offer them better long-term planning and investments
opportunities (Bartley Johns, Brenton, Cali, Hoppe, & Piermartini, 2015, p. 34 [“Research provides evidence of a
strong correlation between poverty and informality”.]; de Beer et al., 2014, p. 52 [fear of IP infringement may be
a disincentive for players in the informal economy to innovate and expand the reach of their innovations]). This is a
further important and yet subtle level on which IP protection introduced too early harbours the potential for negative
consequences.

All these considerations lead back to the question of causality: do IPRs generate economic development, or is the
opposite true? Admittedly, the very complexity of the problem makes it difficult to give an unequivocal answer
(Maskus, 2008, p. 504). However, the presumption underlying the expansion narrative, is hardly advanced anymore in
view of the historic-empirical evidence, and when it is, then strangely enough by members of the IP elite from the
southern hemisphere (Waziri, 2011). The overwhelmingly prevailing opinion, instead, assumes the opposite, quite
compelling causality. According to this argument, an economic-technological development leads to a private need for
legal protection. The governments of the industrialized states have gradually met this need and then exported their
system telle quelle (Lerner, 2000; MacLeod & Nuvolari, 2010, p. 28 [“Industrialization promoted the patent system”];

16 |

PEUKERT

Bessen & Meurer, 2008, p. 84 [causality unclear], p. 92; Ganea & Nagaoka, 2009, p.143 [higher spending on R&D leads
to more patenting]; Chang, 2010, p. 1, p. 5; Greenhalgh & Rogers, 2010, pp. 332 et sequentes; Mowery, 2010, pp. 58
et sequentes [patenting per capita during industrial catch-up between 1870 and 1910 decreased]; Olwan, 2013,
p. 361; Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 22).

4.2 | With regard to international IP law and innovation policy

These observations have prompted a discussion about reforms of the international IP system and about alternative
ways to foster technological catch-up. Some commentators call for a formal amendment of the global IP regime, for
instance by adding flexibility to the TRIPS Agreement in the interest of the developing countries. Specifically, the
proposals suggest expanding the limitations to protection and introducing definite ceilings to exclusivity (Hugenholtz
& Okediji, 2009, pp. 473 et sequentes; Kur & Levin, 2011, pp. 455 et sequentes). Another approach would make the
duty to respect TRIPS provisions dependent on a country having reached a certain state of development in terms of
economic, social and other indicators. Accordingly, patent protection for medicines, for instance, could only be
introduced when a state has its own production capacities and is able to shoulder the additional health costs that
patents entail (Cottier, 2006, p. 779, pp. 794 et sequentes; Ghidini, 2014, pp. 132 et sequentes). A final topic of the
current debate are international treaties that specifically aim at improving and safeguarding rules that provide access
to knowledge, for example in the area of copyright limitations and exceptions.56

Such proposals, however, presuppose a broad consensus in the international arena, which at the moment is not in
evidence. As explained, IP maximalism still enjoys wide support. There exists a structural asymmetry between the
powerful, concentrated interests in legal protection and the diffuse and not always congruent interests in access to
information (Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, 2002, p. 7). A paradigm shift in international IP law is
therefore just as improbable as the radical step of one or more countries leaving the IP system, and thus the WTO. The
latter option of taking a separate path does furthermore not seem advisable, because this rule-based, multilateral
system of global trade does make a significant, if unevenly distributed, contribution towards combating poverty
globally (Bartley et al., 2015, p. 7 [“there is no doubt that the integration of global markets through trade openness has
made a critical contribution to poverty reduction”]).

More promising, at least on the middle term, are thus strategies that operate without amending international
IP law. Here I refer, for one thing, to classic instruments of development cooperation such as the global fund to fight
HIV/AIDS. Second, there exist a whole series of alternative innovation concepts to allow greater access. For example,
the so-called Health Impact Fund is intended to persuade the pharmaceutical industry, even without exclusive patent
protection, to develop medicines for hitherto neglected diseases and sell them at low prices.57 In the creative
industries and in academia, concepts like Free/Open Source Software, Open Access and Creative Commons hold the
promise of greater freedom for users while reserving some rights to authors.

At the same time, further expansions of the multilateral or bilateral IP system are and indeed should be considered
with great caution. The UN General Assembly expressly demanded, in the interest of an effective combating of HIV/
AIDS, that the level of protection prescribed by TRIPS must not be raised to a “TRIPS-plus” level within the framework
of bilateral free-trade agreements.58 Developing countries are recommended to fully exploit the leeway that is in fact
provided by the IP treaties in the interest of a national innovation policy and thus to create an appropriate balance
between exclusivity and access (Gervais, 2014, pp. 96 et sequentes; Odagiri et al., 2010a, pp. 420 et sequentes; Turk,
2010, p. 981).59 In this context, the least-developed countries should also be allowed to use an extended
implementation deadline pursuant to article 66(1) TRIPS to reduce their existing level of protection.

Leaving aside these possible solutions for better coordinating IPRs and development, in the end the question
remains whether the level of protection existing today, which unlike in the past is universally high, represents a historical
injustice (Chang, 2001, pp. 31 et sequentes; Chaudhuri, 2009, p. 289). Critics invoke the German economist Friedrich List,
who in 1841 wrote: “It is a very common clever device that when anyone has attained the summit of greatness, he kicks
away the ladder by which he has climbed up, in order to deprive others of the means of climbing up after him”. (List, 1841:

PEUKERT

| 17

371, cited in Chang (2002)). As demonstrated above, IPRs are not the ladder which helps one to reach the technological
summit, but rather a means to secure the head-start one has already gained on those who joined the race late. The
technologically leading nations in Europe and North America must take all the more care not to fall behind: for if they do,
the spirits they themselves have conjured up will not be inclined to let them take the lead again (on the growing
importance of China and other Asian countries also in the context of the IP system see Llewelyn (2010)).

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Alexander Peukert, born in 1973, studied law and obtained his Dr. iur. (s.c.l.) at the University of Freiburg (1993–9).
After his second state examination (2001), he practiced law in a Berlin law firm specializing in copyright and media law.
From 2002 to 2009, he was senior research fellow and head of the US department at the Max Planck Institute for
Intellectual Property and Competition Law in Munich. In 2008, he was awarded the qualification of university lecturer
(Habilitation) by Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich. After refusing offers for professorships at the Universities of
Bonn, Siegen and Linz, Austria, he has since 2009 been professor of civil law and commercial law with a specific focus
on international intellectual property law at Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Cluster of Excellence “The
Formation of Normative Orders”. His main research interest is in intellectual property and unfair competition law. He
teaches international IP law at the universities of Strasbourg (Intellectual Property Law and Management) and Lyon III
(LL.M. International and European Business Law); email: a.peukert@jur.uni-frankfurt.de

ENDNOTES
1 See UN Resolution 69/181, The right to development, 18 December 2014, preamble no. 1.
2 See UN Resolution 65/1, Keeping the promise: united to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, 19 October 2010,
paragraph 3, 43; Joint statement by the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States meeting
within the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission on European Union Development Policy: “The European
Consensus”, OJ C 46/1, 24 February 2006, paragraph 5, 7.

3 Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, annexure 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World

Trade Organization, signed in Marrakesh, Morocco on 15 April 1994.

4 Truman’s Inaugural Address (20 January 1949) available online at: www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/50yr_archive/
inagural20jan1949.htm [accessed on 9 November 2015] (“Greater production is the key to prosperity and peace. And the
key to greater production is a wider and more vigorous application of modern scientific and technical knowledge”.); see also
United Nations, Measures for the economic development of under-developed countries (1951), pp. 28 et sequentes.

5 See Washington Declaration on Intellectual Property and the Public Interest (25–27 August 2011), available online at:

http://infojustice.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/Washington-Declaration.pdf [accessed on 9 November 2015].

6 Recital 1 s. 3 European Parliament and Council Directive 2004/48 of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual
property rights, O.J. L 157, pp. 45–86; CJEU Huawei Technologies (C-170/13) [2015], paragraphs 57–58 (need for a high
level of protection for intellectual-property rights).

7 Communication from the European Commission, A Single Market for Intellectual Property Rights. Boosting creativity and
innovation to provide economic growth, high quality jobs and first class products and services in Europe, COM (2011) 287
final, p. 4.

8 European Commission, Green Paper EU development policy in support of inclusive growth and sustainable development.

Increasing the impact of EU development policy, COM (2010) 629 final, p. 15.

9 G8 Camp David Declaration, paragraph 9, available online at: https://www.g7germany.de/Content/DE/_Anlagen/
G8_G20/g8-camp-david-eng.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2 [accessed on 9 November 2015]; for US law see Golan v.
Holder 132 S. Ct. 873 [2012].

10 See article 2 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (PC), article 5 Berne Convention for the Protection

of Literary and Artistic Works (BC).

11 See infra.
12 Article 31(1) BC; see also artcile 24 PC, artcile XIII Universal Copyright Convention, article 27(1) Rome Convention for the
Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations; article 16bis(1)-(2) Paris Convention,
London Act of 1934 and Lisbon Act of 1958.

18 |

PEUKERT

13 Article 3 i, 4 i Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization of 14 July 1967.
14 These are the Portuguese colonies Angola and Mozambique, the French colony Djibouti in East Africa and the British
colonies Burma and Solomon Islands in Asia. Sources: List of contracting parties, available online at: www.wipo.int/treaties/
en/ [accessed on 9 November 2015] and also www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm [accessed on 9
November 2015]; further the information concerning the status of national legislation on intellectual property rights,
available online at: www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/ [accessed on 9 November 2015] and http://copyright-watch.org/
[accessed on 9 November 2015].

15 See article 21 BC and appendix BC.
16 See recital and article 50 Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT).
17 Recital 2 Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization.
18 See article 15 Agreement on Agriculture, 12 Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), 27 Agreement on Subsidies
and Countervailing Measures; 4 Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures, 15 Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (Anti-dumping), IV General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS).

19 See article 65, 66.1 TRIPS.
20 Article 66.2, 67 TRIPS.
21 Article 15(1)(c) WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT), 24(1)(c) WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT).
22 UN Resolution 55/2, United Nations Millennium Declaration, 8 September 2000, paragraph 20.
23 UN Resolution 68/220, Science, technology and innovation for development, 20 December 2013, paragraph 4; UN
Resolution 69/235, Industrial development cooperation, 19 December 2014, preamble (“Underscoring the importance of
using science, technology and innovation to . . . achieve inclusive and sustainable industrial development”); UN Resolution
69/204, Information and communications technologies for development, 19 December 2014 (“freedom of expression and
the free flow of information,
ideas and knowledge are essential for the information society and are beneficial to
development”).

24 UN Resolution 68/220, Science, technology and innovation for development, 20 December 2013, preamble.
25 See goal no. 9, Draft outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development

agenda, Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 12 August 2015, A/69/L.85.

26 WTO Ministerial Declaration, 14 November 2001, WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1, paragraphs 2, 17.
27 WTO Ministerial Declaration, Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, 14 November 2001, WT/MIN(01)/

DEC/2.

28 Council for TRIPS, IP/C/25, 1 July 2002.
29 WTO General Council, Implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health,

1 September 2003, WT/L/540.

30 WTO General Council, WT/L/641, 8 December 2005; Ministerial Declaration, Doha Work Programme, 22

December 2005, WT/MIN(05)/DEC.

31 Available online at: www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/amendment_e.htm [accessed on 9 November 2015].
32 See https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/public_health_notif_export_e.htm [accessed on 9 November 2015].
33 Decision of Council for TRIPS, Extension of the Transition Period Under Article 66.1 for Least-Developed Country

Members, 29 November 2005, IP/C/40, paragraph 1.

34 Decision of the Council for TRIPS (n 36), paragraph 5; see also Decision of the Council for TRIPS, Extension of the Transition

Period Under Article 66.1 for Least Developed Country Members, 11 June 2013, IP/C/64, paragraph 2.

35 See preamble no. 2, Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization, signed at Stockholm on 14

July 1967 and as amended on 28 September 1979.

36 Proposal by Argentina and Brazil for the Establishment of a Development Agenda for WIPO, 27 August 2004, WIPO

Document WO/GA/31/11.

37 Available online at: www.wipo.int/ip-development/en/agenda/ [accessed on 9 November 2015].
38 The 45 Adopted Recommendations under the WIPO Development Agenda, available online at: www.wipo.int/ip-

development/en/agenda/recommendations.html [accessed on 9 November 2015].

39 See European Parliament rejects ACTA, 4 July 2012, available online at http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/news-

room/content/20120703IPR48247/html/European-Parliament-rejects-ACTA [accessed on 9 November 2015].

PEUKERT

| 19

40 Article 208(1) Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, OJ C 326/1 of 26 October 2012; see also “The European

Consensus” (n 2), paragraph 9.

41 European Commission, Policy Coherence for Development. Accelerating progress toward attaining the Millennium

Development Goals, 12 April 2005, COM (2005) 134 final.

42 European Commission, EU 2013 Report on Policy Coherence for Development, 31 October 2013, SWD (2013) 456 final,

pp. 64–66.

43 European Commission, A Single Market for Intellectual Property Rights. Boosting creativity and innovation to provide
economic growth, high quality jobs and first class products and services in Europe, 24 May 2011, COM (2011) 287
final, p. 6.
44 Ibid., p. 20.
45 See article 131(2), 139, 151 et sequentes Economic Partnership Agreement between the CARIFORUM States, of the one

part, and the European Community and its Member States, of the other part, OJ L 289/I/3 of 30 October 2008.

46 See WTO TRIPS-Council, “Communication from Senegal”, 27 June 2011, IP/C/W/555.
47 Cf. UN Resolution 60/157, The right to development, 16 December 2005, no. 18 with UN Resolution 69/181, The right to

development, 18 December 2014, no. 26.

48 Donaldson v. Becket [1774] Hansard, 1st ser., 17 (1774), 953, 1,000, also available in Bently and Kretschmer; German
Federal Constitutional Court, case 1 BvR 1143/90, 29 July 1998 (1999) GRUR, 226 (broad access to governmental
publication for a small fee).

49 See also article 5A PC.
50 Section 9 Patent Act of 1836, Ch. 357, 5 Stat. 117, 4.7.1836.
51 See Golan v. Holder [2012] 132 S.Ct. 873, 879.
52 Golan v. Holder [2012] 132 S.Ct. 873, 879.
53 See article 3, 27.1, 66.1 TRIPS; article 2 et sequentes PC; article 5 BC.
54 Cf. CJEU Huawei Technologies (C-170/13) [2015], paragraph 62 and Opinion of Mr Advocate General Wathelet Huawei
Technologies (C-170/13), 20 November 2014, paragraph 81 (more than 4.700 patents have been notified to the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute as essential for the “Long-Term Evolution (LTE)” standard, and “a large proportion
of those may not be valid or essential to the standard”).

55 UN Resolution 69/181, The right to development, 18 December 2014, preamble.
56 See www.wipo.int/copyright/en/limitations/index.html [accessed on 9 November 2015]; Treaty on Access to Knowledge

(2005), available online at: www.cptech.org/a2k/a2k_treaty_may9.pdf [accessed on 9 November 2015].

57 Available online at: http://healthimpactfund.org/
58 UN-Resolution 65/277, Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS: Intensifying our Efforts to Eliminate HIV/AIDS, 10 June 2011,

paragraphs 35, 71(a) and (b), 72.

59 UN-Resolution (n 2), paragraph 36.

REFERENCES

Adusei, P. (2013). Patenting of pharmaceuticals and development in sub-Saharan Africa. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Bartley Johns, M., Brenton, P., Cali, M., Hoppe, M., & Piermartini, R. (2015). The role of trade in ending poverty [online], World
Trade Organization, Geneva. Available online at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/06/24708511/
role-trade-ending-poverty [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Beattie, P. M. (2007). The (intellectual property law and) economics of innocent fraud − the IP and development debate.

International Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law, 48(1), 6–30.

Beier, F.-K. (1979). Die Bedeutung des Patentschutzes für den technischen, wirtschaftlichen und sozialen Fortschritt.

Gewerblicher Rechtsschutz und Urheberrecht International, 28(5), 227–235.

Bently, L. (2011). The ‘extraordinary multiplicity’ of intellectual property laws in the British colonies in the Nineteenth century.

Theoretical Inquiries in Law, 12(1), 161–200.

Bently, L., & Kretschmer, M., Primary Sources on Copyright (1450–1900) [online]. Available online at: http://www.

copyrighthistory.org/cam/index.php [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Berman, G. A., & Mavroidis, P. C. (Eds.). (2007). WTO law and developing countries (1st ed.). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge

University Press.

20 |

PEUKERT

Bessen, J., & Meurer, M. J. (2008). Patent failure. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Boldrin, M., & Levine, D. K. (2008). Against intellectual monopoly. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Branstetter, L., Foley, C. F., & Saggi, K.(2010). Has the Shift to Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Promoted Technology

Transfer, FDI, and Industrial Development? WIPO Journal, 2(1), 93–98.

Canavire, G., Saravia, A., & Rios-Avila, F. (2012) Intellectual property rights, foreign direct investment and the shadow economy
[online]. Available online at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2647096 [Accessed on 9
November 2015].

Chagla, S. (1967). Address. In Indian Copyright Office (Ed.), International copyright. Needs of developing countries (p. x). New

Delhi: Ministry of Education, Copyright Office.

Chang, H. (2001). Intellectual property rights and economic development − historical lessons and emerging issues. Penang: Third

World Network, Intellectual Property Rights Series 3.

Chang, H. (2002). Kicking away the ladder: Development strategy in historical perspective. London: Anthem Press.

Chang, H. (2010). Institutions and economic development: Theory, policy and history. Journal of Institutional Economics, 7(4),

473–498.

Chaudhuri, S. (2009). Is product patent protection necessary to spur innovation in developing countries? In N. W. Netanel

(Ed.), The development agenda (pp. 265–288). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cimoli, M., Dosi, G., & Stiglitz, J. E. (2009). The political economy of capabilities accumulation. In M. Cimoli, G. Dosi, & J. E.

Stiglitz (Eds.), Industrial policy and development (pp. 1–24). New York: Oxford University Press.

Claessens, F. (2009). Intellectual property and developing countries. Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers.

Commission on Intellectual Property Rights. (2002). Integrating Intellectual Property Rights and Development Policy [online].
Available online at: www.iprcommission.org/papers/pdfs/final_report/ciprfullfinal.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Comune, M., Naghavi, A., & Prarolo, G. (2012). Intellectual Property Rights and South-North Formation of Global Innovation
Networks [online]. Quaderni − Working Paper DSE No. 764. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1873264
[Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Cottier, T. (2006). From progressive liberalization to progressive regulation in WTO law. Journal of International Economic Law,

9(4), 779–821.

de Beer, J., Sowa, I., & Holman, K. (2014). Frameworks for analysing African innovation: Entrepreneurship, the informal
economy and intellectual property. In J. de Beer, C. Armstrong, C. Oguamanam, & T. Schonwetter (Eds.), Innovation &
intellectual property. Collaborative dynamics in Africa (pp. 32–58). Cape Town: UCT Press.

Deere Birkbeck, C., & Roca, S. (2011). An External Review of WIPO Technical Assistance in the Area of Cooperation for
Development [online]. World Intellectual Property Organization. Available online at: www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/mdocs/
en/cdip_8/cdip_8_inf_1-annex1.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Drahos, P., & Braithwaite, J.(2002). Information feudalism: Who owns the knowledge economy? London: Routledge.

Dreier, T. (2001). Primär-und Folgemärkte. In G. Schricker, T. Dreier, & A. Kur (Eds.), Geistiges Eigentum im Dienst der Innovation

(pp. 51–81). Baden-Baden: Nomos Verlag.

Dutfield, G. (2008). Delivering drugs to the poor: Will the TRIPS amendment help? American Journal of Law & Medicine, 34(2–

3), 107–124.

Eberhardt, M., Helmers, C., & Yu, Z. (2011). Is the Dragon Learning to Fly? An Analysis of the Chinese Patent Explosion [online].
CSAE Working Paper WPS/2011-15. Available online at: http://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/workingpapers/pdfs/csae-wps-
2011-15.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

European Commission. (2009). Executive Summary of the Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry Report [online]. European Commission.
[Accessed on 9

Available online at: http://ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/pharmaceuticals/inquiry/index.html
November 2015].

Fisher III, W., & Rigamonti, C. P. (2005). The South Africa AIDS Controversy. A Case Study in Patent Law and Policy [online].
Harvard University. Available online at: http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/tfisher/South%20Africa.pdf [Accessed on 9
November 2015].

Ganea, P., & Haijun, J. (2009). China. In P. Goldstein & J. Straus (Eds.), Intellectual property in Asia (pp. 34–54). Berlin: Springer.
Ganea, P., & Nagaoka, S. (2009). Japan. In P. Goldstein & J. Straus (Eds.), Intellectual property in Asia (pp. 129–54). Berlin:

Springer.

Gangopadhyay, K., & Mondal, D. (2012). Does stronger protection of intellectual property stimulate innovation? Economic

Letters, 116(1), 80–82.

PEUKERT

| 21

Gerschenkron, A. (1962/1979). Economic backwardness in historical perspective. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Gervais, D. (2014). IP calibration. In D. Gervais (Ed.), Intellectual property, trade, and development (2nd ed., pp. 86–114). Oxford:

Oxford University Press.

Ghidini, G. (2014). On TRIPS’ impact on ‘least developed countries’: The effects of a ‘double standards’ approach. In G. Ghidini,
R. J. R. Peritz, & M. Ricolfi (Eds.), TRIPS and developing countries. Towards a new IP world order? (pp. 132–141). Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar Publishing.

Greenhalgh, C., & Rogers, M.(2010). Innovation, intellectual property, and economic growth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

Press.

Grossman, G. M., & Lai, E. L.-C.(2004). International Protection of Intellectual Property. American Economic Review, 94(5),

1635–1653.

Halbert, D. (2011). The Politics of IP Maximalism. WIPO Journal, 3(1), 74–92.

Hamilton, A. (1791/1901). Report on the subject of manufactures. Washington, DC: Department of the Treasury.

Helfer, L. R. (2004). Regime shifting: The TRIPS agreement and new dynamics of international intellectual property lawmaking.

Yale Journal of International Law, 29, 1–83.

Hesse, C. (2002). The rise of intellectual property, 700 B.C.-A.D. 2000: An idea in the balance. Daedalus, 131(2), 26–45.
Hofmeister, H. (1987). Bemerkungen zur Geschichte des österreichischen Urheberrechts. Ufita, 106, 173–187.

Hugenholtz, P. B., & Okediji, R. L. (2009). Contours of an international instrument on limitations and exceptions. In N. W.

Netanel (Ed.), The development agenda (pp. 473–497). New York: Oxford University Press.

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. (1990). World Development Report.

International Chamber of Commerce. (2005). Intellectual Property: Source of innovation, creativity, growth and progress [online].
Available online at: http://www.iccwbo.org/advocacy-codes-and-rules/bascap/value-of-ip/innovation,-creativity,-
growth-and-progress/ [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

International Labour Office. (1976). Employment, Growth and Basic Needs: A One-World Problem.

Islam, M. T. (2010). TRIPS agreement and economic development: implications and challenges for least-developed countries
like Bangladesh. Nordic Journal of Commercial Law [online], 8(2), 1–48. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1745450 [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Johnson, C. F. (1970). The origins of the Stockholm protocol. Bulletin of the Copyright Society of the USA, 18(2), 91–181.

Karaganis, J. (2011). Media piracy in emerging economies. New York: Social Science Research Council.

Khan, Z., & Sokoloff, K. L. (2009). Historical perspectives on patent systems in economic development. In N. W. Netanel (Ed.),

The development agenda (pp. 215–243). New York: Oxford University Press.

Kongolo, T. (2013). Historical developments of industrial property laws in Africa. WIPO Journal, 5(1), 105–117.
Kongolo, T. (2014). Historical evolution of copyright legislation in Africa. WIPO Journal, 5(2), 163–175.

Kur, A., & Levin, M. (2011). Intellectual property rights in a fair world trade system. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Kurz, P. (2000). Weltgeschichte des Erfindungsschutzes. Köln: Carl Heymanns Verlag.

Landes, W. M., & Posner, R. A. (2003). The economic structure of intellectual property law. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Lazar, A. H. (1969). Developing countries and authors’ rights in international copyright. Copyright Law Symposium, 19, 1–42.

Lee, K., & Kim, Y. K. (2010). IPR and technological catch-up in Korea. In H. Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami, & R. Nelson (Eds.),

Intellectual property rights, development, and catch-up (pp. 133–62). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lepenies, P. H. (2008). An inquiry into the roots of the modern concept of development. Contributions to the History of

Concepts, 4(2), 202–225.

Lerner, J. (2000). 150 Years of Patent Protection [online]. NBER Working Paper Series No. 7478. Available online at: http://

ssrn.com/abstract=179188 [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Lewinski, S. v. (2008). International copyright law and policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
List, F. (1841). Das Nationale System der politischen Ökonomie. Stuttgart: J.G. Cotta’scher Verlag.

Llewelyn, D. (2010). Invisible gold in Asia. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish Business.

Lüders, E. (1914). Die Anwendung des deutschen Urheber-und Erfinderrechts in den Schutzgebieten. Hamburg: Gräfe & Sillem

[Komm.].

Machlup, F. (1958). An economic review of the patent system. Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office.

22 |

PEUKERT

MacLeod, C., & Nuvolari, A. (2010). Patents and Industrialization. An Historical Overview of the British Case, 1624–1907 [online].
Intellectual Property Office. Available online at: http://www.lem.sssup.it/WPLem/files/2010-04.pdf [Accessed on 27
March 2017].

Malmström, C. (2015). The way ahead for the EU-Cariforum Economic Partnership Agreement, 16 July 2015 [online]. Available

online at: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2015/july/tradoc_153649.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Mann, R. J., & Underweiser, M. (2010). A New Look at Patent Quality: Relating Patent Prosecution to Validity [online]. Columbia
Law and Economics Working Paper No. 381. Available online at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1671784 [Accessed on 9
November 2015].

Maskus, K. (2008). Incorporating a globalized intellectual property rights regime into an economic development strategy. In K.

Maskus (Ed.), Intellectual property, growth and trade (vol. 2, pp. 497–524). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Masouyé, C. (1962). Decolonization, independence and copyright. Revue International du Droit d’Auteur, 36, 85–145.

Merges, R. P. (2011). Justifying intellectual property. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Michaels, A. C. (2009). International technology transfer and TRIPS article 66.2: Can global administrative law help least-

developed countries get what they bargained for? Georgetown Journal of International Law, 41(1), 223–261.

Moser, P. (2005). How do patent laws influence innovation? Evidence from nineteenth-century world’s fairs. The American

Economic Review, 95(4), 1214–1236.

Moser, P. (2013). Patents and innovation − evidence from economic history. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1), 23–44.

Moser, P., Bilir, K., & Talis, I. (2011). Do Treaties Encourage Technology Transfer? Evidence from the Paris Convention [online].

Available online at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1893052 [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Mowery, D. (2010). IPR and US economic catch-up. In H. Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami, & R. Nelson (Eds.), Intellectual property

rights, development, and catch-up (pp. 31–62). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Myrdal, G. (1974). What is development? Journal of Economic Issues, 8(4), 729–736.

Nandkumar, A., & Srikanth, K. (2011). Patently different? How does the strength of patents influence globalization of R&D?
Empirical evidence from the 2004 Indian Patent Reforms [online]. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1885246
[Accessed on 9 November 2015].

National Science Foundation, National Science Board. (2014). Gross expenditures for R&D and expenditures for R&D as share of
gross domestic product, for selected countries: 1981–2011 [online], in: Science and Engineering Indicators 2014, Chapter 4,
Appendix Table 4–13. Available online at: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind14/content/chapter-4/at04-13.pdf
[Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Netanel, N. W. (2009). Introduction. In N. W. Netanel (Ed.), The development agenda (pp. 1–32). New York: Oxford University

Press.

Odagiri, H., Goto, A., & Sunami, A. (2010). IPR and catch-up process in Japan. In H. Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami, & R. Nelson

(Eds.), Intellectual property rights, development, and catch-up (pp. 95–132). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Odagiri, H., Goto, A., Sunami, A., & Nelson, R. (2010a). Conclusion. In H. Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami, & R. Nelson (Eds.),

Intellectual property rights, development, and catch-up (pp. 412–430). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Odagiri, H., Goto, A., Sunami, A., & Nelson, R. (2010b). Introduction. In H. Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami, & R. Nelson (Eds.),

Intellectual property rights, development, and catch-up (pp. 1–30), Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Okediji, R. L. (2003). The international relations of intellectual property: Narratives of developing country participation in the

global intellectual property system. Singapore Journal of International & Comparative Law, 7(2), 315–385.

Olian Jr., I. A. (1974). International copyright and the needs of developing countries. Cornell International Law Journal, 7(2),

81–112.

Olwan, R. M. (2013). Intellectual property and development: theory and practice. Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Ostergard Jr., R. L. (2014). Economic growth and intellectual property rights protection: A reassessment of the conventional
wisdom. In D. J. Gervais (Ed.), Intellectual property, trade, and development (2nd ed., pp. 3–40). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Pager, S. A. (2012). Accentuating the positive: Building capacity for creative industries into the development agenda for global

intellectual property law. American University International Law Review, 28(1), 223–294.

Park, W. G. (2008). Intellectual property rights and international innovation. In K. E. Maskus (Ed.), Intellectual property, growth

and trade (vol. 2, pp. 289–327). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Patry, W. (2003). The United States and International Copyright Law. Houston Law Review, 40(3), 749–762.

PEUKERT

| 23

Payne, A., & Phillips, N. (2010). Development. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.

Pederson, R. (2014). Progress on the implementation of the WIPO development agenda: Coordination, core development

programs and budget allocations. WIPO Journal, 5(2), 189–203.

Peukert, A. (2011). Intellectual property as an end in itself? European Intellectual Property Review, 33, 67–71.

Peukert A. (2012). The Colonial Legacy of the International Copyright System [online]. Available online at: http://papers.ssrn.

com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2057796 [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Qian, Y. (2009). Are national patent laws the blossoming rains? In N. W. Netanel (Ed.), The development agenda (pp. 191–213).

New York: Oxford University Press.

Ricketson, S., & Ginsburg, J. C. (2006). International copyright and neighbouring rights (vol. II). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2005) Innovation and Technology Adoption in Central America [online]. Inter-American Development Bank,
Working Paper No. 525. Available online at: http://www.iadb.org/res/publications/pubfiles/pubwp-525.pdf [Accessed
on 9 November 2015].

Rostow, W. W. (1987). The stages of economic growth (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Saikia, M. (2015). Impact of the TRIPs agreement on the Indian pharmaceutical industry: An assessment from 1995 to 2011-

12. European Intellectual Property Review, 37(8), 515–522.

Schiff, E. (1971). Industrialization without national patents. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sell, S. K. (2011). Everything old is new again: The development agenda then and now. WIPO Journal, 3(1), 17–23.

Seville, C. (2006). The internationalisation of copyright law. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Spinello, R. A., & Bottis, M. (2009). A defense of intellectual property rights. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Straus, J. (2012). A marriage of convenience: World economy and intellectual property from 1990 to 2012. AIPLA Quarterly

Journal, 40(4), 633–683.

Straus, J., & Klunker, N. S.

(2007). Harmonisierung des internationalen Patentrechts. Gewerblicher Rechtsschutz und

Urheberrecht International, 56(2), 91–104.

Tarde, G. (1962) [1890]. The laws of imitation. New York: Henry Holt and Company.

Turk, M. C. (2010). Bargaining and intellectual property treaties: The case for a pro-development interpretation of TRIPS but

not TRIPS-plus. NYU Journal of International Law and Politics, 42(3), 981–1029.

van Dijck, P., & Faber, G. (2006). Developing countries and the doha development agenda of the WTO. London: Routledge.

van Genugten, W., & Meijknecht, A. (Eds.) (2011). Harnessing intellectual property rights for development objectives. The double

role of IPRs in the context of facilitating MDGs nos. 1 and 6. Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers.

United Nations.

(2011). The Millennium Development Goals Report [online]. Available online at: http://www.un.org/

millenniumgoals/pdf/(2011_E)%20MDG%20Report%202011_Book%20LR.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Waziri, K. M. (2011). The Legal Regime of Patents and Designs Law and Its Effect on National Development [online]. Available

online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1875725 [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

Williamson, J. (1990/2002). What Washington Means by Policy Reform [online]. Available online at: www.iie.com/publications/

papers/paper.cfm?ResearchID=486 Speeches and Papers [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2014). World Intellectual Property Indicators [online]. Available online at: http://

www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2014.pdf [Accessed on 9 November 2015].

World Trade Organization. (2010). ‘Report of the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology to the General

Council’, WT/WGTTT/12.

How to cite this article: Peukert A. Intellectual property and development—narratives and their empirical
validity. J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:2–23. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12072


