The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2, pp. 53–82

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12054

Enforcing IPRs Through Investor-State Dispute
Settlement: A Paradigm Shift in Global IP Practice

Pratyush Nath Upreti
Upreti and Associates, Kathmandu, Nepal

Globally, we are moving towards stronger Intellectual Property Rights. Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) have
become an integral part of the regulatory system and they are included in investment, regulations and trade policies. It
is now important to understand the linkage between them. Recent practices of International Investment Agreements
(IIAs) include intellectual property as a deﬁnition of investment, giving the investor an alternate forum to enforce their
IP under International arbitration tribunal. International investment laws focus mostly on the rights of the investor and
diverse opinions of generally accepted international principles such as fair and equitable treatment that encourage
investors to litigate intellectual property through Investor State Dispute Settlement (ISDS). This article will focus on
the relationship between intellectual property and investment agreement in three aspects. The ﬁrst part of the article
will focus on how intellectual property is treated as an investment. The second part emphasizes how an investor uses an
investment agreement as a tool to enforce intellectual property. The last part of the article highlights the possible
impacts of litigating intellectual property under ISDS, particularly focusing on TRIPS ﬂexibility.

Keywords investment; ISDS; TRIPS; intellectual property

In recent years, the relationship between intellectual property and investment related issues have been
widely discussed. In an open market economy, developed countries have opted for investment agreements
such as Free Trade Agreements (FTA), Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) to attract investors by
strengthening the intellectual property regime. Recent cases have revealed the complexity and potential
overlap between intellectual property and international investment law.

The overlap received greater attention through Tobacco plain packaging policy and the subsequent
dispute, which were brought before the arbitration tribunal. The plain packaging was result of the World
Health Assembly’s adoption of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (WHO FCTC). Article 13(4)(a) of the FCTC states that each member shall: “prohibit all forms of
tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship that promote a tobacco product by any means that are
false, misleading or deceptive or likely to create an erroneous impression about its characteristics, health
effects, hazards or emissions.”

The WHO member countries have adopted such provisions, which prima facie seem to undermine two
important functions of trademark: (i) the origin’s indicator and (ii) the communicative function as a
conveyor of expectation, feeling and any other psychological message. Additionally, The tobacco
companies generate substantial goodwill from the use of tobacco product and packaging, which also
require immense investment. Moreover, companies use investment agreement to claim that the plain
packaging legislation results in the expropriation of investment due to substantial deprivation of the
intellectual property and goodwill, which consequently undermines the economic rationale of its
investments and substantial destruction of the value of the tobacco company.1 Therefore, tobacco
companies have a strong reservation on the above clause as it will have an adverse impact on their business.
The national court in some jurisdictions have rejected such claims of trademark owners on the ground that
the imposition of control on the packaging and presentation of tobacco products does not involve the
accrual of a beneﬁt of a proprietary character, which would constitute an acquisition of property.2

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

53

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Furthermore, scholars have justiﬁed plain packaging under public heath consideration (Voon et al., 2012).
After the exhaustion of remedy at the national level, an investor has relied on alternative forums, such as
international arbitration tribunal under International Investment Agreements (IIAs). The larger question
associated is whether an investor could use investor-state dispute settlement to enforce IP rights? If so,
under such circumstances, the investor may use the alternative forum, but to what extent are such
intellectual property claims justiﬁed?

At the international level, the World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute settlement body decides on
matters related to intellectual property. On the other hand, investor state dispute settlement (ISDS) has
jurisdiction over any dispute arising from an investment. In most of the recent IIAs cover intellectual
property as the form of investment, advancing an alternative way for an investor to protect their intellectual
property rights. Under such circumstances, investors have challenged traditional intellectual property
through claims of Most Favor Nation (MFN), fair and legitimate expectation, expropriation, full protection
and security. Such practices have a severe impact on international intellectual property standards and also
bring concerns of TRIPS ﬂexibility, which is discussed, in this paper. In addition, ISDS has been the
concern for countries in negotiating investment agreements like Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (TTIP) between the European Union and the United States and Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
(TPP), where twelve countries throughout the Asia paciﬁc region are members. There has been a serious
concern raised in the European community on ISDS for they believe it creates a risk of “regulatory chill.”
The issue is not yet settled. There are four ongoing cases: one at WTO Dispute settlement body,3 and
the remaining three at international arbitration tribunal.4 This article aims to focus on the relationship
between investment laws, intellectual property in light of recent cases and analyzes possible impacts of
litigating IPRs through investor state dispute settlement.

Intellectual Property as an ‘‘Investment’’
The term “investment” is generally used in two senses. The ﬁrst sense is the process or transaction by
which a person or legal entity makes an investment (Salacuse, 2013). The second meaning refers to the
asset acquired as a result of investing (Salacuse, 2013). In both deﬁnitions of investment, does intellectual
property ﬁt? The legal deﬁnition of investment, as it appears in the investment agreement is not necessarily
in line with the economic deﬁnition. Most of the investment agreements deﬁne “investment” to include
“every kind of asset” and accompany this deﬁnition with an illustrative list of assets that fall within the
deﬁnition (Muchinski et al., 2008).

In order to bring a claim under investment agreements, the burden lies on the investor to prove that he/
she has made an investment within the scope of the agreement. Recent IIAs explicitly include intellectual
property as one of the items under the deﬁnition of investment. For example, under the Australian-India
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), investment is deﬁned as “every kind of asset, including intellectual
property rights invested by an investor . . .”5 In addition, few IIAs expressly mentioned the kinds of
intellectual property protected under the agreement. For example, under article 6(d) of the Energy Charter
Treaty, it deﬁnes investment as every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an
investor and includes “intellectual property.” Furthermore, intellectual property is explained as copyrights
and related rights, trademarks, geographical indication, industrial designs, patents, layout-designs of
integrated circuits and the protection of undisclosed information.6 A similar deﬁnition is incorporated with
additional kinds of intellectual property in the Australia–Hungary BIT, which includes copyright,
trademarks, patents, trade name, industrial design, trade secrets, know-how and goodwill.7 In addition, the
Canadian Model BITs even includes “plant breeders” rights under the deﬁnition.8

Some scholars have argued that even if intellectual property is not explicitly mentioned under the
investment agreement, there can be claims of intellectual property under other aspects of the deﬁnition of

54

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Investment (Voon et al., 2012). Some characteristics of investment include real estate or tangible or
intangible property9 or any kind of assets and any contribution in cash, in kind or in services, invested or
reinvested in any sector of economic activity.10 This characteristic of investment would be considered as a
broad domain of property rights, which include intellectual property. The speciﬁc incorporation of
intellectual property under the deﬁnition of an investment means it could potentially subject IP to the
general guarantee afforded to the investor under the BITs. Therefore, a broad form of intellectual property
gives an advantage to the Investor. Although, some BITs include “good will” under the deﬁnition of
investment, but there has been debate whether, folklore, traditional knowledge and genetic resources are to
be covered under the deﬁnition of investment.11

Definition of Investment in the ICSID Convention
To bring a claim under the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
Convention, it is not enough to demonstrate investment under BITs or FTAs (Mitchell and Wurzberger,
2011). Since ICSID has jurisdiction over legal disputes arising directly out of an investment, the
investor must prove that the activity of the investor must come within the “investment” deﬁnition under
article 25(1) of ICSID Convention;

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment, between a contracting state and a national of another contracting state, which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. . .” (emphasis added)

The term “investment” is not deﬁned under ICSID Convention. The drafters having thought that the
state should have broad discretion to deﬁne the terms of purposes of their consent to the ICSID jurisdiction
(Vandevelde, 2010). In general, the tribunal, while determining the dispute arising out of investment
within the meaning, examines whether there exists the risk in the expectation of periodic return and assets
that contribute to economic development. In addition, the tribunal follows some other criteria commonly
known as Salini criteria. The tribunal in Salini v Morocco12 laid down four characteristics of investment;
(i) commitment (ii) duration (iii) risk and (iv) contribution to economic development in determining
investment within the Convention. Although, these criteria were previously identiﬁed in Fedax v.
Venezuela,13 it received wider acceptance through the Salini case. In subsequent cases, the reliability of
the Salini criteria was raised. The important question was whether any factors of Salini criteria must be
fulﬁlled to identify investment under the convention or if all the factors are to be considered together. The
same issue was raised in the Malaysian Historical Salvors v. Malaysia14 case arising under the United
Kingdom–Malaysia BIT where the arbitrator found that the other tribunal had been split over the question
and suggested that the tribunal might be more inclined to treat the criteria as necessary when the evidence
in favor of their existence or nonexistence was strong, but to treat them as a factor where the evidence was
less conclusive.15 The arbitrator’s emphasis was on the fourth point of the Salini criteria and found that
contribution to development must be “signiﬁcant” because to ﬁnd otherwise, as a practical matter, would
eliminate the requirement.16 Furthermore, the tribunal reviewed the history of the convention and found
that the drafting committee deliberately omitted the deﬁnition of investment in order to permit the parties,
through their consent, to determine the kinds of disputes that would be considered disputes arising directly
out of an investment.17 The fourth criteria of Salini test are securitized in several cases. Recently the
tribunal in Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey18 was not convinced on fourth criteria of Salini test and found
that:

“the economic development of a host State is one of the proclaimed objectives of the ICSID
Convention, this objective is not in and of itself an independent criterion for the deﬁnition of an

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

55

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

investment. The promotion and protection of investments in host States is expected to
contribute to their economic development. Such development is an expected consequence, not
a separate requirement, of the investment projects carried out by a number of investors in the
aggregate.”19

A similar approach20 was taken in Biwater v. Tanzania21 a case arising under the United Kingdom-
Tanzania BIT. The tribunal observed that “ there is no basis for a rote, or overly strict, application of saline
criteria in every case. These criteria are not ﬁxed and mandatory as a matter of law. They do not appear in
the ICSID convention.” Further, the tribunal refers to the history of the convention where several attempts
to incorporate a deﬁnition of “investment” were made but ultimately did not succeed. In the end, the term
was left intentionally undeﬁned, with the expectation that a deﬁnition could be subject to agreement
between contracting parties.22 Other tribunals found the Salini criteria were difﬁcult to judge and the
criteria are not inherent as to whether property rights constitute investment.23 Interestingly, both the
Biwater and Malaysian historical cases were not willing to accept the Salini criteria as mandatory, but
these cases hint that the Salini criteria were merely guidelines and the scope of investment is very much
subjective to the agreement.

There is so much of divergence on acceptance of the so-called Salini criteria. However, sometimes the
tribunal directly applies Salini criteria in determining “investment” without reﬂecting into BITs. The
tribunal in Philip Morris v. Uruguay found the investment under article 25(1) must be analyzed on
interplay with the deﬁnition of “investment” under the BIT without going beyond the outer limits set by
ICSID Convention.24 The outer limit refers as “the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty
in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. The notion covers a wide range of economic
operations conﬁrming the broad scope of its application, subject to the possibility for States to restrict
the jurisdiction rational material by limiting their consent either in their investment legislation or in the
applicable treaty.” Further, the tribunal disagrees to accept that the ICSID Convention and BITs preamble
makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the meaning and scope of the term investment.

On the other hand, the tribunal in Ambiente Ufﬁcio v. Argentina25 have found Salini test as useful
guidelines, which may help to identify and exclude extreme phenomena that must be outside of the term
“investment” in article 25 of ICSID Convention.26 Therefore, the current trend of decision highlights
Salini criteria as guidelines but not the rule (Gaillard, 2009). In Apotex Holding vs. United States of
America,27 Apotex claimed marketing rights, goodwill and intellectual property rights involved in the
product which was imported, to be qualiﬁed as an investment. Although the tribunal rejected the argument
of Apotex and held that it lacked jurisdiction over the claims of the Canadian company in respect of its
efforts to bring new generic drugs to the market in the United States (Tan and Bouchenaki, 2014). The
interesting aspects of Apotex argument were that his investment of millions of dollars in developing drugs
and preparing for the United States regulatory ﬁling in order to attain an economic beneﬁt in the United
States should be seen as an “investment.”28 Additionally, Apotex substantiated his argument on the
premises that the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) application is considered as property, tangible or
intangible.29 The tribunal dismissed Apotex arguments based on the ground that Apotex did not have a
place of business in the US and all the investment in drug development was done outside the United States.
Also, FDA approval was a regulatory requirement to do business in the US and thus did not amount to an
investment.30 It is evident that Apotex’s argument was very far-fetched. However, it elevates an interesting
question: whether a product that possesses intellectual property, although not commercialized in the host
country but only exported, comes within the preview of investment? It seems to be that the decision in the
Apotex case has limited such scenarios.

In Philip Morris vs. Uruguay,31 under “Switzerland-Uruguay BIT” Phillip Morris argued that the
ordinance of Uruguay related to mandatory packaging requirement restricted his rights to use its trademark

56

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

(mandatory 80% health warning), and that the ordinance has forced to discontinue a number of its products
varieties. Overall, it caused a deprivation of its intellectual property and a substantial reduction in the
values of a company. As a result, they have already sustained and will continue to sustain a substantial
loss.32

On the other hand, Uruguay argued that the “investment” must contribute positively and signiﬁcantly
to development33 where Philip failed to make such contribution. The argument of respondent was based on
the preamble of the ICSID Convention, which refers to the need of international co-operation for economic
development34 as a result of the investment, which will have a positive impact on the development of
the host state. In addition, Uruguay argued that the negative impact of consumption of tobacco product
results to the economic harm of Uruguay.35 The tribunal analyzed the concept of investment under
article 25(1), where it observed that investment must be interpreted by reference ﬁrst of all to “the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose”
(Dekastros, 2013). Tribunal refuses to accept arguments of respondent as to preamble of BIT, which
highlights the important role of foreign investment in economic development processes and considered to
be too general. Tribunal in determining investment observes, “ the four constitutive elements of the Salini
test does not constitute jurisdictional requirements to the effect that the absence of one or the other of these
elements would imply a lack of jurisdiction. They are a typical feature of investments under the ICSID
Convention, not a set of mandatory legal requirements.” The Salini test will assist in identifying presence
of an investment but cannot defeat the broad and ﬂexible concept of investment under the ICSID
Convention to the extent it is not limited by the relevant treaty, as in the present case.36

To conclude, the recent trends of the deﬁnition of investment under IIAs are so broad, that it is easily
equated with a broad approach of investment under the ICSID Convention. The reason behind the open-
ended deﬁnition of investment was a strong attraction for promoting investment ﬂow (Sauvant and Ortino,
2013). The broad deﬁnition gives clarity on the scope of protection with a predictable subject matter.
However, a disadvantage of the open-ended deﬁnition is it gives no opportunity for states to avoid ICSID
jurisdiction. As a result, it will encourage more investors to use the Investor-state dispute settlement. At the
end, to argue intellectual property comes under these criteria is determined on a case-by-case basis.

Possible Investment Claims Invoking Intellectual Property Obligation in Investment
Disputes
The IPR challenge against a state is not a new approach for an investor. One of the ﬁrst cases of IPR
challenge against the state was in 1994 that US tobacco companies brought against Canada under NAFTA
(Liberti, 2010). The issue in dispute was the generic plain packaging of cigarettes but did not get much
attention because the Canadian Supreme Court later, in 1995, struck down the regulation as the violation of
the tobacco industry’s freedom of expression and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Liberti,
2010). Similarly, in Nicaragua S.A v. The Republic of Nicaragua37 under Netherlands–Nicaragua BIT, the
seizure of Intellectual property was argued as unlawful expropriation and an unfair and inequitable act.
Later the case was amicably settled outside tribunal. These two were the early cases where IP claims
brought under investment tribunal but did not receive greater attention like Australian tobacco plain
packaging and the Eli Lilly case. It is evident from practice that “intellectual property” is an important
component of the deﬁnition of investment under IIAs. In general, investors have mostly invoked IP claims
only after exhausting their domestic remedy. The nature of diverse tribunal opinion allows intellectual
property investors to formulate border claims and expects the favorable result. This is because the tribunal
has adopted the investor-centered interpretative approach (Huiping, 2011). In this section, I will analyze
possible investor arguments before tribunal through claims such as MFN, Fair and Equitable treatment
standards, Expropriation and Full protection and security, respectively.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

57

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Intellectual Property and Most Favored Nation (MFN) Principle
The Most Favored Nation (MFN) principle is the cornerstone of International investment law. MFN
protects foreign investors any beneﬁt or advantage granted by the host country to investors from any third
country (Huiping, 2011). It enables an investor to take advantage of the higher standards of investor
protection that may be contained in investment treaties to which a host country is a party (Huiping, 2011).
In relation to invoking MFN principle in investment disputes claiming intellectual property protected as an
investment, there exist important questions: can an investor rely on IIAs MFN provision to demand a more
favorable treatment that may be available under international IP treaty to protect intellectual property
rights as an “investment” under IIAs. The relevant International IP treaty includes TRIPS or TRIPS-plus
Agreement (Trade agreement with a high level of IP protection). This question is important not from a
point of view of the scope of MFN rules in a IIAs, rather consequences of invoking IP obligation through
ISDS. Although, WTO TRIPS agreement does not allow a private person to depend on MFN provision,
so does IIAs under ISDS offer a substitute?

How Far do MFN Principles Offer Protection to Intellectual Property Rights?
The question becomes more relevant as MFN principle is not only incorporated under IIAs, it is also well
referred under TRIPS Agreement. The only relevant difference between two systems of protection is,
TRIPS allows the state to rely on MFN clause in dispute under WTO Dispute Settlement body. The scholar
H. Ruse Khan in his work (Khan, 2014) raises a question: can an investor rely on the IIAs MFN rule in
order to challenge compliance of the host state with IP protection or enforcement obligations under TRIPS
or even TRIPS-plus FTA by arguing that such protection must be made available to him as more favorable
treatment of his IP rights as investments? The question raised by H. Ruse. Khan is very challenging. But in
the recent cases of plain packaging, the claimant may use MFN of IIAs to have more favorable treatment.
Illustrative in the case of plain packaging, Philip Morris may use MFN principle under IIAs to enforce host
state to comply with TRIPS obligation in respect of article 20 of TRIPS. However, MFN clause is yet to be
argued to enforce “intellectual property” under IIAs. But there has been a case where MFN provision is
used to claim the beneﬁt of more favorable procedural and substantive protection.38 Therefore, the
language used in IIAs such, as “in like circumstances” may be used to function MFN clause to oblige treaty
obligation to protection intellectual property.

Scholars and commentators like Tania Voon (Voon et al., 2012) and Bertram Boie (Boie, 2010) have
suggested that the answer to above question could be found by applying “ejusdem generis,” to which MFN
provisions apply to “those rights, which fall within the limits of the subject matter of the clause” (Ziegier,
2008). In Maffezini v. Spain39 tribunal have stated that:

“If a third party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes that are more
favorable to the protection of the investor’s rights and interests than those in the basic treaty,
such provisions may be extended to the beneﬁciary of the most favored nation clause as they
are fully compatible with the ejusdem generis principle.40 Of course, the third-party treaty has
to relate to the same subject matter as the basic treaty, be it the protection of foreign
investment or the promotion of trade, since the dispute settlement provisions will operate in
the context of these matters, otherwise there would be a contravention of ‘ejusdem generis.”

The ratio of the above case is that the “ejusdem generis” principle is to be applied in determining
whether the provision of the third party treaty relates to the treatment accorded under MFN clause of the
main basic treaty. Further, tribunal also made a reference to Ambatielos case41 where relevance of
“ejusdem generis” principle conﬁrmed and veriﬁed that s clause can only attract matters belonging to the
same category42 of subject matter as that to which the clause itself relates.43 This raises important

58

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

questions such as to how would tribunal determine that the subject matter of IIAs relates to the subject
matter of another Treaty. It is not clear how the tribunal would determine the subject matter but it may be
assessed through the intention of parties to the agreement.

From the above case law, it is clear that intellectual property per se, may not necessarily be the core
subject matter of IIAs. But again it depends upon the wording of IIAs. In Plama v. Bulgaria,44 under the
Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, tribunal emphasis the scope of MFN is to determine by the intention of parties in
IIAs that must also be clear and unambiguous.45 In addition, Tribunal observes that;

“Dispute resolution provisions in a speciﬁc treaty have been negotiated with a view to
resolving disputes under that treaty. Contracting states cannot be presumed to have agreed
that those provisions can be enlarged by incorporating dispute resolution provisions from
other treaties negotiated in an entirely different context.”46

This observation may not be a very rationale to the support the argument. But to some extent, it does
makes clear that MFN provision incorporated under investment agreement should not be presumed to be
used in the context of other international IP treaties. This is because both IIAs and TRIPS use MFN
provision in different contexts and cannot be treated by MFN as a same ﬂoor in both forums. Thus, it
appears from case law that MFN provision should not used as a “treaty shopping” tool (Alvik, 2011).

MFN Under TRIPS
The very fundamental question, which may be raised in WTO dispute settlement unit, is the extension of
TRIPS MFN provision to ISDS with respect to intellectual property. Under such circumstances, it may be
important to analyze the rationale47 of MFN provision under TRIPS. Although, scholars (Voon et al.,
2012) are not skeptical regarding the interpretation of WTO Appellate Body in extension of TRIPS MFN
to ISDS under Ukraine WTO claim against plain packaging.

The issues seem to be more complex, if it is accepted that MFN under IIAs gives an obligation to the
host country to extend protection or enforce an obligation under TRIPS then two complex problems arise.
First, there would be the situation where before a country (who is also a member of TRIPS agreement)
would implement TRIPS provision in domestic law, it gets implemented on the ground that relevant IP
treaty directly provides more favorable treatment to the right holder from contracting state (Alvik, 2011).
Second, whether the member of TRIPS agreement also party to the BITs is obliged to extend these
standards to all world Trade organization (WTO) members under MFN principle enumerated under TRIPS
agreement?

To answer this question, we need to analyze article 4 of the TRIPS agreement, which states:

“With regard to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or
immunity granted by a Member to the nationals of any other country shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the nationals of all other Members.” (emphasis added)

The key difference between MFN in WTO agreements and TRIPS is that later does not contain the
explicit exception for MFN principles (McRae, 2012). The historical development of TRIPS highlights
that the initial draft of TRIPS includes exception on MFN but later it was excluded (Correa, 2010). The
rationale of excluding MFN exemption would be to give way in which intellectual property chapters in
FTAs are encouraged, which can be used to increase intellectual property standards in the multilateral
framework (Correa, 2010). Even the application of MFN principle under GAAT and TRIPS is different.
For example under GAAT if a tariff is lowered down, then it must be applied to all WTO members unless it
is subject to MFN exception (Correa, 2010). Whereas, under TRIPS agreement, changes in IP provision as
a result of FTAs applies to the local right holder and with national treatment provision, it is applied to the

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

59

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

foreign nation within the jurisdiction (Correa, 2010). Therefore with more FTAs, a new provision is added;
as a result with the passage of time it is likely to be a norm.

This means that omitting exception to MFN principle is a way to promote FTAs. Does this mean that
the intention of the maker of TRIPS was that the MFN principle under FTA is read as MFN under TRIPS?
Neither the history of TRIPS or any scholars have argued on this. But if we analyze the footnote of article 4
of TRIPS, MFN does give the answer to this context. Article 4 of TRIPS states;

“For the purpose of articles 3 and 4, “protection” shall include matters affecting the
availability, acquisition, scope, maintenance and enforcement of intellectual property rights
as well as those matter affecting the use of intellectual property rights speciﬁcally addressed
in this agreement.”

The above “footnote” of article 4 of TRIPS clearly highlights the scope of article, is only limited to
intellectual property within the agreement. It means MFN principle under TRIPS does not extend to the
investment agreement. Hence, claiming MFN provision to litigate IP claims seems notorious and far-
fetched. Although MFN principle is enumerated in both TRIPS and IIAs, the intention of adding them to
both agreements has a different purpose. The MFN principle under TRIPS was introduced with an
intention that WTO members would integrate IP ﬁrmly into the multilateral trading system or to have
common “ﬂoor of IP right internationally (Boie, 2010).” On the other hand, the rationale of MFN clause in
BITs was to spread equal rights internationally (Boie, 2010).48 Even, MFN principle under article 4 is
ambiguous, what constitutes, advantage, favor, privilege’ in IP protection is not much clearer and what
type of advantage would be considered against MFN principle is difﬁcult to determine (Yamane, 2011).
For example: In a hypothetical scenario, the requirement of patent ﬁling should be made not only in the
language of the country but also in English, which would offer an advantage to English speaking nationals
(Yamane, 2011). Can such a scenario be considered as the violation of MFN? Certainly not. Therefore,
framers of TRIPS do not intend in extending MFN principle under TRIPS to free trade agreement and such
practices will lead into a more complex scenario.

Fair and Equitable Treatment
Fair and equitable treatment (FET) is one of the golden rules embedded in all international investment
agreements. Its application in most cases is difﬁcult for various reasons. First, investment treaties do not
deﬁne the term “fair and equitable treatment.” Second, the vagueness of the concept has lead to several
interpretations in judicial and arbitral practice, and added to an elaborate content (Weil, 2000). The
tribunal generally rely in some criteria (Salacuse, 2010) to determine whether the host state has acted in fair
and equitable treatment standard; (i) failed to protect the investor’s legitimate expectation (ii) the host state
failed to act transparently (iii) acted arbitrarily or subjected the investor to discriminatory (iv) denied the
investor access to justice or procedural due process (v) acted in bad faith.

The recent trend of IP investment claims shows that investor often relies on fair and equitable
treatment to make their argument. The question is to what extent investor can rely on FET clause to protect
their intellectual property.

How Much Intellectual Property Must the Investor Expect?
The very idea of an investment agreement is to create an expectation of proﬁt in the mind of investor that
will lead into capital and technology ﬂows to the country in question.49 The investor’s legitimate
expectations are fundamental to the investment process. There have been several attempts to deﬁne
“legitimate investor expectation.” In the NAFTA case of International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v
United Mexican States,50 legitimate expectation was deﬁned as “a situation where a contracting party’s

60

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

conduct create reasonable and justiﬁable expectations on the part of an investor (or investment) to act in
reliance on said conduct and failure by party to honor those expectations could cause the investor (or
investment) to suffer damages.”

In Philip Morris v Uruguay under Switzerland-Uruguay BIT, Philip argument was based on premises
that it violates the reasonable expectation of Philip as an investor. Philip argued that even though the host
state has a sovereign right to change its regulatory framework, such changes must be fair and equitable in
light of the investor’s legitimate expectations. By issuing an ordinance, which contains both the single
presentation requirement and the requirement concerning the demanding pictograms and excessive health-
warning requirement in tobacco package failed to maintain a stable and predictable regulatory framework
consistent with Philip Morris legitimate expectations. In particular, the measures frustrate one of the most
fundamental expectations that any investor may have, which is that a host state will comply with its own
law and respect private property.51

Similarly, Philip Morris Asia v The Commonwealth of Australia, under Australia–Hong Kong BIT,
PMA argues that plain packaging legislation frustrate Philip Morris Asia’s legitimate interests and
expectations given the fundamental and adverse impact on the value and proﬁtability of its investment in
circumstances where plain packaging will actually undermine rather than support the purported public
health rationale of the legislation and where the measure violates international law.52 Additionally, PMA
argues that Australian plain packaging policy severely affects their goodwill, effectively reducing it to a
manufacturer of an undifferentiated commodity and undermining the economics of its business model. On
the other hand, Australia justiﬁes legislation on the ground of right to regulate public health measures. But
PMA argues that the plain packaging regulation has no demonstrable utility to improve public health,
violates international law and effective alternative measures are available. In such scenario, the state
cannot justify the imposition of the regulation on the investor. These cases show that investor’s expectation
directly comes in conﬂict with state sovereign right to regulate on public interest matters such as health.

Fair and Equitable Treatment and State Right to Regulation: Investor Mind the Gap
On the similar line, in Eli Lilly vs. Canada53 under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
Eli Lilly a pharmaceutical company invoked investment claims under UNCITRAL, on the ground that the
patent invalidation by Canadian Court violated the principle of fair and equitable treatment, including
Lilly’s legitimate expectation about the treatment of its investment and Canada’s obligation to refrain from
conduct that is arbitrary, unfair, unjust and discriminatory.54 The claimant concern was Canada’s failure to
rectify the promise doctrine under their patent system, which has lead to unsettled precedent on
patentability in the pharmaceutical sector. Further, it was argued that “Eli Lilly was entitled to reasonably
rely on the stability, predictability, and consistency of Canada’s legal and business framework existing at
each stage of the establishment, expansion, and development of Lilly’s investment.”55 In addition, a very
interesting argument was advanced, as Eli Lilly through public disclosure of patent had a contract with the
State to have an exclusive right to exploit its invention for a speciﬁed period of time. So, Eli Lilly could not
have anticipated that requirement for utility at the time of its investment would be so drastically altered by
the creation of the promise doctrine, which has been applied discriminatorily and arbitrarily to invalidate
pharmaceutical patents.56

The above cases raised a fundamental question on the scope of application of “fair and equitable
treatment or reasonable expectation of investment” under intellectual property investment claims. The
investor expectation should not be subjective and not all expectation of investor is legitimate (Tellez,
2012). Moreover, the arguments put forwarded by Eli Lilly directly come in conﬂict with state’s sovereign
right to regulate the domestic intellectual property. The investor completely ignores the difference
between pre-existing rights and post-existing rights. Both pre and post rights have limitations. The right
does not arise if a prerequisite is not fulﬁlled. Similarly, once rights are acquired, it cannot be absolute; it is

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

61

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

subject to changes on several grounds. For example, combined reading of TRIPS and DOHA allow a
member state to impose a compulsory license on existing Patent. Additional, the scope of a compulsory
license is broadening through Doha Declaration where a member state is free to determine national
emergency and there may also be a need of access to medicine. In such circumstances, a patent may be
revoked through compulsory license. The broad approach of FET may give a platform for an investor to
argue that at the time of investment he had granted the patent and had a reasonable expectation of
exploitation of investment (patent) over a period of time, without any barrier (compulsory license) from
the state. Further, this argument is coupled with contracting state promise to give some degree of protection
and security. It means the host state has the obligation to take measures to protect the investor (investment)
from negative action, which may affect them (Dolze and Schreuer, 2008). But the concept itself is very
ambiguous, some BITs has recognized “full protection and security” as an obligation to provide the level
of police protection.57 In some cases, the tribunal has taken into consideration the deﬁnition of investment
which includes both tangible and intangible assets, and found such concepts as obligation to provide full
protection and security is wider than “physical” protection and security.58 So, it is not only physical
protection, rather the stability afforded by a secure investment environment, which is important from an
investor point of view.59

In practice, fair and equitable treatment, full protection and security are not absolute; there are
limitations. Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Lithuania60 analyzes that the state’s sovereign power to
regulate lies on higher foot then claims of fair and equitable treatment. Tribunal states;

“It is each state’s undeniable right and privilege to exercise its sovereign legislative power. A
state has the tight to enact, modify or cancel a law at its own discretion. Save for the existence
of an agreement, in the form of a stabilization clause or otherwise, there is nothing
objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory framework existing at the time
an investor made its investment. As a matter of fact, any businessman or investor knows that
law will evolve over time. What is prohibited however is for a State to act unfairly,
unreasonably or inequitably in the exercise of its legislative power.”

It is an established principle, that “fair and equitable” treatment must be seen in light of an agreement
and must not be unjust or in an arbitrary manner to a level unaccepted in international practice,61 but
when its comes to conﬂict with regulatory right of state, the tribunal generally weigh claimants legitimate
and reasonable expectation on the one hand and the respondent’s legitimate regulatory interest on the
other.62 Similarly, tribunal decisions highlights that the host state may take public policy argument even if
it affects investment, but the host country must have implemented policies bona ﬁde. And such conduct
does not noticeably violate the requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and non-
discrimination. The tribunal in Waste Management II interpreted NAFTA and establishes a test;

“the minimum standard of treatment to the claimant if the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair,
unjust, idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional or racial
prejudice, or involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends judicial
propriety-as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural justice in judicial proceedings
or a complete lack of transparency and candor in an administrative process.”

Particularly in Europe, the critics of ISDS have raised that such limitation of the state’s right to
regulate may bring the regulatory snare. Therefore, Europe is trying to narrow down the scope of the
provision under an agreement to avoid vague interpretation by a tribunal. The previous agreement such as
CETA63 and EU- Singapore64 FTA was drafted in a way to have a higher benchmark on the right to

62

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

regulate. For example under CETA, article X.9 clears list down the contents of fair and equitable treatment
such as (i) denial of justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings (ii) fundamental breach of due
process (ii) arbitrary conduct and among others. The closed list avoids unwarranted interpretation by the
tribunal, which may affect state right to regulate. Similarly, article X.11 excludes expropriation claims on
compulsory license and exclusively explains that
indirect expropriation occurs when measures
substantially deprive the investor property right such as (i) right to use (ii) enjoy and dispose of its
investment (iii) transfer of title or seizure. In spite of such approach, public outcry on ISDS provision
seems to be a major hurdle for the European Union. Therefore, to negate such scenario and create a positive
public opinion on TTIP, the commission has proposed “Investment Court”65 to address investor claims.
The proposed “investment court system” is in the initial phase, but it gives us an impression that countries
have realized the need to limit the expectation of investor through strict language in the agreement or
alternative option also needed to be thought.

To conclude, the diverse decision has created several criteria of determining fair and equitable
treatment. Generally fair and equitable treatment is seen by an investor as a hurdle to proﬁt making or
depriving fruits of the investment. Therefore, in most of the investment claims, FET is ought to be argued
upon. Thus, it is very important to undermine the expectation of Investor.

Fair and Equitable Treatment (FET) and International Treaty Obligation
Mostly, investors have enjoyed FET arguments with a great amount of success as nearly 75% with
investment disputes have been found to be a violation of FET.66 As, discussed earlier, an investor may use
international treaty obligation such as TRIPS agreement to enforce their IP rights under IIAs. It is also
important to note that the concept of fair and equitable treatment is also embedded in the TRIPS Agreement
under part III; Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights. Unlike, MFN and National treatment, “fair and
equitable treatment” is not standardized under the agreement. But it does have reference to enforcement of
IPR, which states:

“Proceeding concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and
equitable. They shall not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-
limits or unwarranted delays.”67

Prima facie, it looks like the reference of “fair and equitable treatment” under TRIPS does not mean it
must be treated with the same meaning as under investment law. However, reference under TRIPS may
make an investor greedy to argue to claim broader protection. The ground for FET has become more
controversial in respect of IP claims under investment agreement through Eli Lilly case. There have been
serious concerns raised by scholars regarding the broad scope of FET68 and some are advocating on
narrowing the scope of FET in IP claims (Khan, 2014). Even though, concerns are raised in academia, a
leading international law ﬁrm Jones Day has a different opinion. The ﬁrms makes reference to Supreme
Court of India’s decision in Natco v. Bayer and argues that such a decision on compulsory license without
time limit violates a foreign pharmaceutical company’s legitimate expectations:69

“The basic patentability standards of the TRIPS Agreement have been guaranteed to Novartis
Investment in India ever since India agreed to become TRIPs-complaint in 2005; denying a
patent in violation of those standards, therefore, may constitute a violation of those standards
therefore may constitute a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. In Bayer’s
case, the sheer length of time for which the compulsory license was granted to the India
the patent’-and the fact that no national health
company- i.e.,
‘emergency’ exists to justify such a license over a ‘non-life saving drug’, are just two reasons
to suggest that India has run afoul of article 31 of TRIPS”

the ‘balance term of

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

63

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

This leads to an important question; can an International treaty obligation be a source of legitimate
expectation under IIAs? Both PMA and Eli Lilly have argued on the basis of host country international IP
obligation under TRIPS and Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT). Eli Lilly makes reference to the disclosure
obligation in the PCT obligation, which was reﬂected in Canada’s statutory law, and such changes in
disclosure agreements, was not anticipated. Such additional disclosure obligation by the Canadian court
resulted in invalidation of Eli Lilly patent, violating the legitimate expectation of Eli Lilly as investor.70
Similarly, PMA argued that the tobacco packaging is incompatible with Uruguay’s treaty obligations
under TRIPS and Paris Convention.71 In general, the tribunal does not take other sources of law in
determining the matter in dispute. However, considering a wide range of interpretation by the tribunal, you
cannot negate the possibilities. In Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., et al v. the United States of
America under NAFTA, the important question in consideration was whether the claimant reference to the
treaty and other laws to assert reasonable expectation was within the customary international law.72
Tribunal concludes;

“the customary standard of protection of alien investors investment does not incorporate
other legal protections that may be provided investor or classes of investors under other
sources of Law. To hold otherwise would make article 1105 a vehicle for generally litigating
claims based on alleged infractions of domestic and international law.”

It is clear that the international treaty obligation, as a source of legitimate expectation argued by Philip
Morris and other, does not have greater signiﬁcance because legitimate expectation is not absolute and the
host state is not obliged to block its legal system for investor beneﬁts. Moreover, making reference to the
TRIPS Agreement to treat “fair and equitable treatment” as same as investment law is a very weak
argument. Therefore, there is no overlap of principle within IIAs and TRIPS but investors under IIAs have
used FET to bring IP claims based on several decisions of the tribunals. We have yet to see how tribunals
will rationale such arguments.

Expropriation of Property
The concept of “expropriation” under international investment law is controversial. Under international
law, “expropriation” is not illegal per se’ (Schreuer, 2005). It illustrates both the infringement of private
property and State sovereignty (Nikiema, 2012). A common example of expropriation clause incorporated
in IIAs is found in NAFTA;

No party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an investment of an investor of another
party in its territory or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such an investment
(“expropriation”), except;

(1) for a public purpose
(2) on a non-discriminatory basis
(3) in accordance with due process of law and article 1105(1) and
(4) on payment of compensation in accordance with (certain speciﬁed requirement)

The above provision emphasis on protection from expropriation applies both to tangible assets and
any other form of investment, which have economic signiﬁcance to an investor (Sampliner, 2003). Even
the UNCTAD study recognizes expropriation of intellectual property under IIAs:

“In the past, the concern was only with the physical property of a foreign investor. In modern
times, the concern is not so much with the physical property but with the antecedent rights that

64

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

are necessary for the enjoyment of these property rights as well as with incorporeal
property. . .. most recent BITs include intellectual property within the deﬁnition of foreign
investment in treaties.”

The tribunal in Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v Iran recognized the scope of expropriation rights
extends to intangible property. Similarly, the tribunal in Chorzow Factory73 case—the Polish measure to
direct Germany Company who had a contractual relationship with Chorzow was considered as
expropriated by factory owner. According to Permanent court of International Justice;

“it is clear that the rights of the Bayerische to the exploitation of the factory and to the
remuneration ﬁxed by the contract for the management of the exploitation and for the use of its
patents, licenses, experiments, etc., have been directly prejudiced by the taking over of the
factory by Poland.”74

Generally, there are two kinds of expropriation: (i) direct expropriation (ii) indirect expropriation.
Mostly, intellectual property claims are brought through indirect expropriation of rights. Although there is
no standard deﬁnition of indirect expropriation, it depends upon a case-to-case basis. In determining
deprivation, three questions75 need to be analyzed (i) has the measure reduced the economic value of the
investment? (ii) Does measure deprive investor control over investment? (iii) What is the nature of the
measure, temporal or permanent? On these criteria, I will examine Philip Morris v. Uruguay and
Australian plain packaging case.

In Philip Morris v Uruguay, PM raised expropriation claim on premises that the health measure taken
by Uruguay was not as per due process of law as Uruguay used public health regulations without any
compensation, to effect the expropriation.76 Similarly, in Australian plain packaging, PMA argued
expropriated PMA investment by two ways: (i) limitation on the ability to use intellectual property through
plain packaging reduces the value of share in PMA and severely impacted investment.77 (ii) Plain
packaging affected the “good will” derived from use of intellectual property and loss of commercial use of
IP and deprived PMA to be distinguished from other competitors product, destroying the commercial
values of the intellectual property and goodwill.78

The argument of Philip Morris does not have strong ground because, limitation on the use of the
trademark is not absolute, and they can still use their trademark/brand name. Similarly, the plain packaging
does make all packaging similar, but the regular smoker who has a habit of using a particular brand could
surely identify a Philip Morris product and goodwill can be maintained. In spite of this argument, the major
issue lies on public health and policy, and state right to regulate. In addition, the intellectual property part is
smaller in the context of investment; therefore, tribunal may not accept such argument. On the other hand,
there is a situation, where the tribunal has found that expropriation could occur when an investor is
deprived of only part of its investment (Isakoff, 2013). In plain packaging context, scholars (Davison and
Emerton, 2014) argue that the right of the trademark owner is negative, not positive.79 So, the trademark
owner can exclude others from using it to mark and with respect to plain packaging, trademark registration
does not give liberty to use trademark freely.80 Therefore, a trademark’s mere negative right does not
deprive of its use through plain packaging. Thus, there is no deprivation of property.

Similarly, Eli Lilly vs. Canada, Eli Lilly raised that Canadian court approach through promise doctrine
was to revoke the patent ab initio, resulting into a deprivation of Eli Lilly exclusive right to prevent third
parties from making, constructing, using or selling its patented product and to enforce it. In addition, Eli
Lilly argued;

“The expropriations are contrary to the public purpose that is inherent in the grant of a patent,
which creates a bargain between the patentee and the government (representing the public

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

65

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

interest) pursuant to which the patentee receives an exclusive right to use the invention for a
speciﬁed period of time in exchange for disclosure to the public of the invention. Canada’s
failure to fulﬁll its side of this bargain is unfair and contrary to recognized principles for the
protection of intellectual property.”81

The Eli Lilly argument brings a very fundamental question: can invalidation of patents be considered
as expropriation of property in breach of investment obligation? Moreover, the important question is
whether the decision of the highest court of a country is challenged under ISDS? In the Eli Lilly case, the
action is not taken by the regulator or through legislation, but it was state action through Judiciary. The
concerns have raised over such practices, as it threatens the fundamental principle of national judicial
system.82 However, the tribunal in Saipem vs Bangladesh83 highlights that the state judiciary action may
be considered as expropriation only if does not abide by generally accepted standards of the administration
of justice, arbitrary, unjust or violation of international law.84 The similar situation does not arise in Eli
Lilly case. In general, governments defend such action on two grounds. First, through the government’s
power of “Eminent Domain,” which entitle the government to take property for public beneﬁt. In this case,
invalidation of the patent of Eli Lilly gives an opportunity to the generic company to manufacture drugs at
lower price and citizens of Canada would beneﬁt. This argument does not hold great signiﬁcance because
the “Eminent Domain” rule is subject to meaningful compensation.

The issue is whether the invalidation of Eli Lilly patent amounts to indirect expropriation? The
situation favors for indirect expropriation, because even though invalidation of patent Eli Lilly still posses’
ownership of patent (investment) it cannot reduce the beneﬁt of the patent. The standard practice in
determining indirect infringement is based on the establishment of the essential question: whether the
enjoyment of the property has been effectively neutralized?85 In order words, the state interference was to
the extent that the property rights are rendered so useless.86 It seems like indirect infringement is the
strongest argument for Eli Lilly because; the invalidation of patent completely makes patent (investment)
useless, although the patent holder may still have ownership. Even though, it may be Eli’s strongest
argument, the tribunal may overlook it because of the host state legitimate interest.

The scope of legitimate interest is not clear – it is considered as state police power.87 Even though
what constitutes legitimate interest or state police power is not clear in International law, recent IIAs gives
us an impression on what is generally accepted as the content of police power. For example, United States
recently reviewed their older BIT model and introduced new 2012 US Model BIT aiming to address the
broader public concern. Under new model an investor can claim indirect expropriation “except in rare
circumstances, non-discriminatory regulatory actions by a party that are designed and applied to protect
legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public health, safety, and the environment. . .”88 Even, though
state has some legitimate interest, tribunal applies proportionality principle, aiming to weight the charge
imposed to the investor and aim sought to be realized by an expropriating measure.89 Further in
determining expropriation, tribunal sill considers “whether measures are proportional to the public
interest presumably protected thereby, and to the protection legally granted to the investments, taking into
account that the signiﬁcance of such impact has a key role upon deciding the proportionality.”90
Therefore, state action under public interest would be justiﬁed only when the measure is the only option
left to protect the public at large. Similarly, Comprehensive Trade and Investment Agreement (CETA)
have limited the scope of expropriation with speciﬁc exclusion under article X.11 (6) CETA which states:
“for greater certainly, the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights to the extent that
these measures are consistent with TRIPS and Intellectual Property chapter of this Agreement, do no
constitute expropriation.” Similarly, it also restricts the use of expropriation argument for the action
inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement. Thus, safeguard clauses used on the Agreement will certainly
restrict the broad claim of expropriation.

66

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

TRIPS Flexibility and Investor Claim: How Far it Would Go?
The Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS) was a result of comprise between developed
and developing countries, which signiﬁes in TRIPS preamble that purportedly recognizes development
and technological growth are the necessary basis of national IP laws, and that developing countries have
“special needs” requiring ﬂexibility in the implementation of their IP Laws. The TRIPS Agreement
provides a long list of ﬂexibility given to member states to adopt the law as per their country’s status. To
analyze the impacts of ISDS, this section will deal with some of the ﬂexibility of TRIPS.

Can Investor Challenge Patentability Standards?
The patentability standards are the most vulnerable and can be challenged by the investor. Article 27 of
TRIPS allows invention whether product or process in all ﬁelds of technology: if it is new, involve an
inventive step and are capable of industrial application. Further, it lists subject- matter excluded from
patentability. Article 27 does not deﬁne the terms “new,” “Inventive step” and “industrial application.” It
allows a member state to deﬁne the terms in its own way. Similarly, article 28 confers the right of the patent
holder to prohibit third parties from the act of making, using, selling, or importing. The combine reading of
article 27 and article 28 makes clear that a pharmaceutical product or process comes within the TRIPS
Agreement. However, a member state has the liberty to deﬁne terms in a way that would be a barrier to the
pharmaceutical industry.

India, one of the global players in drug manufacture,91 introduced the Patent Act in 2005 after
completion of 10 years of transition. The 2005 version of Indian Patent Act introduced very debated and
controversial provisions under chapter II on no patentable invention. According to article 3(d) of Indian
Patent Act;

“the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the
enhancement of the known efﬁcacy of that substances or the mere discovery of any new
property or new use for a known substances or of the mere use of a known process, machine or
apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new
reactant.”

Further explanation illustrates as: for the purposes of this clause, salts, ethers, polymorphs,
metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other
derivative of known substances shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ
signiﬁcantly in properties with regard to efﬁcacy.

The Pharmaceutical giant Novartis challenged the constitutional validity of the above section and its
compatibility with TRIPS in 2007. The Madras High Court declared it as constitutionally valid and
declared enhanced efﬁcacy in section 3(d) as enhanced therapeutic effect. Further, on the question on
TRIPS compatibility, High Court sidelined the issues on jurisdiction ground. Later, in 2014, Supreme
Court of India upheld the decision of High Court and interpreted the meaning of “efﬁcacy” in section 3(d)
as—the new form of drug must demonstrate an improvement in its therapeutic effect or curative property
as compared to the old form in order to secure a patent and further held enhanced efﬁcacy standard is
accordance to TRIPS ﬂexibility.92

The issue is whether section 3(d) of Indian Patent Act is TRIPS compatible? The scholars (Basheer
and Reddy, 2008) seem to be divided on this issue. It has almost been 15 years of Indian adoption of article
3(d), yet there has been no complaint against TRIPS compatibility in the WTO Forum. The recent Eli Lilly
case has brought a series of arguments, which will be used by an investor in mostly Pharmaceutical claims
under IIAs. Before Section 3(d) of the Indian Patent Act, which was introduced in 2005, India is party to
several Investment Agreements,93 which has embedded the principle of fair and equitable treatment, and

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

67

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

security to the investor. Let’s assume a hypothetical situation: if a pharmaceutical company of a country
under BIT with India applies for patent for second medical use and the patent application gets rejected,
then could section 3(d) be claimed as direct or indirect expropriation of property or violation of legitimate
expectation of investor, or can investor claim section 3(d) as being inconsistent with TRIPS and violating
India’s obligation to international treaties?

As emphasized earlier, section 3(d) being consistent with TRIPS Agreement is very controversial. The
Indian Supreme Court makes it clear that “efﬁcacy” is viewed as industrial applicability and there is an
inventive step requirement. Further, considering article 27 TRIPS does not deﬁne these terms, so India is
right in adopting its own deﬁnition in a manner that suits their national interest. India is not the only one to
have introduced new criteria to further ﬂexibility provided under article 27. For example, the United States
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) have adopted guidelines for subject matter eligibility, analysis of
claims reciting or involving laws of nature, natural phenomena and natural products.94 Therefore, such
TRIPS consistency questions may be raised through IIAs.

The possible expropriation of property argument against section 3(d) seems to be a weak argument
because; section 3(d) is pre-requisite for a valid patent. Therefore, once an investor does not qualify as
patent then it cannot be considered as an investment under IIAs. So, there can be no direct expropriation
by the act of patent denial. While indirect expropriation is concerned, substantive deprivation on the
property must be shown. In this case, the investor does not have a patent to claim as an investment.
Furthermore, even if a patent denial is considered as indirect expropriation, the host state may raise an
issue of public interest. As section 3(d) is introduced to deal with the problem of “ever-greening”
(Basheer, 2005) and patent denial may also force pharmaceutical innovators to lower their drug prices
to compete with a generic competitor (Banerjee, 2013). Therefore, the expropriation argument does not
hold substance.

Similarly, section 3(d) may not violate the fair and equitable treatment standard under IIAs because
the patentability criteria are very clear and further to claim FET, the investor expects state not to revoke
pre-existing decisions which the investor have relied or deprive of their investor without compensation
(Banerjee, 2013). As in this case, section 3(d) is highly debated and is presumed that every foreign
pharmaceutical investor willing to invest is aware of such provisions in India. Therefore, under this
circumstance, the argument of FET also does not hold any basis.

Can Issuance of a Compulsory License be Considered as a Deprivation of Investment?
One of the key features of TRIPS is ﬂexibility in a compulsory license, as emphasized in the Doha
Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health.95 A compulsory license is deﬁned as the granting of a license by
a government with adequate compensation to use a patent without the patent holder’s permission (Ford,
2000). In other words, it is a phrase used in domestic legislation in implementing article 31. The TRIPS laid
down minimum standards in implementing compulsory license. The ground for a compulsory license is
not limited to TRIPS: a member state can freely adopt the necessary measure to issue a compulsory license
based on national interest. Further, Doha Declaration afﬁrms the freedom of the member state to determine
grounds upon which compulsory licenses can be granted. In addition, it also gives liberty to a member state
to determine what constitutes a national emergency or extreme urgency.96 Thus, article 31 is the
cornerstone for public heath measure/access to medicines for developing countries.

Some scholars have suggested the compulsory license may result to an indirect expropriation of
property if a foreign investor is not satisﬁed on the ground of issuing licensing (Rutledge, 2012).
Technically compulsory license is TRIPS compliant, but it cannot be denied if it deprives investor rights.
There would be two possible circumstances where an investor may claim indirect expropriation. First,
working requirement, which refers to a requirement of patentee who must manufacture patented product or
process within the patent granted country (Halewood, 1997). This will force the patentee to transfer the

68

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

patented technology or the technology needed to produce the patented product into the country (Halewood,
1997). However, “working requirement” under TRIPs itself is very controversial. The article, 27(1) of
TRIPS emphasises that “the patent shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as
to the place of invention, the ﬁeld of technology and whether products are imported or locally produced.”
The plain reading of the article clearly prohibits working requirements. However, working requirement
under TRIPS is understood from a collective reading of article 7, 8, 30 and 31. The objective of TRIPS is
technological innovation, transfer and dissemination and use of knowledge of technology, which is
accomplished with public interest principles.97 Further, rights under article 27(1) are subject to an
exception under article 30 and article 31 TRIPS. It is essential to consider article 8 of TRIPS, which allows
a member state to take measures needed to prevent abuse of intellectual property rights. Due to such
provisions, a country like India has included the working requirement under its patent system. No working
of a patent in India on a commercial scale is the ground of compulsory license.98 In addition, if the
commercial working of the patented invention is hindered or prevented by the import of the patented article
by patentee or patent licensee or with patentee consent, it is also considered as a ground for a compulsory
license.99 There is no clear interpretation of TRIPS on working requirement. Countries like India and
Brazil have interpreted it in light of the various provision of TRIPS and incorporated it into national law.
Under these circumstances, there may be a possible claim of deprivation of property of investor under
working requirement and also the investor may raise such requirement as against article 27.1 of TRIPS.
Although, it is very hypothetical, chances of such challenge cannot be ignored. Moreover, when such
claims are raised, the tribunal must refer TRIPS provision or interpret TRIPS, which again raise the issue of
overlap in jurisdiction.

Second, under article 31(h) of TRIPS, a member state is obliged to pay adequate remuneration in the
circumstances while imposing compulsory license. TRIPS do not deﬁne the term “adequate.” There may
be a situation where an investor may not be pleased by adequate remedy, and may claim it against indirect
expropriation. Let us take an example of recent compulsory license in Natco Pharma Limited v. Bayer
Corporation where Controller of patent issued the compulsory license to Natco pharma on the Nexavar
drug with 6% as royalty. Later in 2013, Intellectual Property Appellate Board of India upheld the controller
decision with increased royalty rate from 6% to 7%.100 Bayer declined to present evidence regarding the
investment done on R&D for development of the drug.101 But publicly available information emphasizes
that Bayer with Onyx has invested more than $275 million only in FDA approval. Considering that the
investment done by Bayer is a seven percent royalty adequate enough? Jones Day, an international law
ﬁrm, considers 6% royalty devalues the assets of investor resulting in expropriation under international
law;

“Nearly all modern BITs forbid the expropriation of a foreign investment which includes
intellectual property without due compensation. Because exclusivity is a central feature to an
intellectual property asset like a patent, the grant of a compulsory license signiﬁcantly
devalues that asset, and thus arguably “ha[s] an effect equivalent to. . .. [an] expropriation”
under international law. In that situation, “compensation. . .shall be equivalent to the value of
the expropriated. . .. investment immediately before the date on which such expropriation. . ..
became publicly known. A nominal 6 percent royalty-which Bayer received as compensation
for the Nexavar compulsory license-may arguably fall below this threshold and give rise to an
actionable claim for indirect expropriation.”

Since, there is no deﬁnition of “adequate” there is a possible chance of the company challenging the
royalty fee as indirect expropriation of property. Even though, there are no guidelines on royalty payment,
in general, royalty is also based on the capacity of government (Love, 2005) and it should not present a

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

69

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

barrier for access to medicine (Love, 2005). Therefore, a developing country like India has incorporated
ground for compulsory license to drugs, which may not be available at affordable prices.102 Tribunals
may look upon this from the public interest viewpoint when the issue of expropriation is raised. In
addition, regarding indirect expropriation, companies may claim violation of the reasonable expectation
of investor or fair and equitable treatment on grounds that the company at the time of investment
was in expectation that their patent may not be devalued by compulsory license (Ho, 2015). Upon such
an argument, tribunal may see the legitimate expectation of investor on premises that previously in
host state there has been any compulsory license issued (Ho, 2015). If so, tribunal may not be
considered as a violation of legitimate expectation. Applying this argument to the ﬁrst compulsory
license issued in India, assuming that would come under IIAs with India, under certain circumstances
legitimate expectation of Natco may be considered as a violation? It is very difﬁcult to expect tribunal
decision, there may be a risk of tribunal ﬁnding as expropriation or violation of a legitimate expectation of
the investor.

In recent years, a compulsory license is increasing in developing countries. In Thailand, there were
seven compulsory licenses issued from 2006 through 2008 (Thomas, 2014). Similarly, recently the
Indonesian government issued the compulsory license on pharmaceutical patents for seven HIV and
Hepatitis B Medicines.103 In most cases, the pharmaceutical patent is a victim of compulsory license. In
such a situation, pharmaceutical investors may claim discrimination as to the ﬁeld of technology under
article 27.1 (Baker, 2013).

Today’s compulsory license is viewed as a middle path between extreme patent protectionism and
patent abolitionism,104 and most likely, the number of compulsory licenses will increase globally. There
has been an attempt to exclude compulsory license under Investment Agreement to avoid such claims. For
example, article 110 (7) of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) eliminates application of
expropriation to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property. Similarly
EU-Canada: Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) excludes compulsory license from
the scope of expropriation claim. Article X.11 (4) on expropriation states;

“This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to
intellectual property rights, to the extent that such issuance is consistent with the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreements
(TRIPS Agreement)”

To have a greater certainty, CETA excludes the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual
property rights, which are consistent with TRIPS from expropriation.105 On the other hand, scholars
have been expecting such argument (Gibson, 2010) to rise under IIAs. There has been no claim as
such until now, but with the recent case of Eli Lilly, such challenges are highly venerable in near
future.

Inadequate Data Exclusivity Measure is Expropriation of Property?
Data exclusivity is deﬁned as a form of intellectual property protection that protects the data submitted by
the pharmaceutical company to regulatory authorities for marketing approval (Palmedo, 2013). This
concept of data exclusivity is incorporated in article 39.3 of TRIPS Agreement, which state;

“Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or of
agricultural chemical products which utilize new chemical entities, the submission of
undisclosed test or other data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, shall
protect such data against unfair commercial use. In addition, Members shall protect such data

70

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

against disclosure, except where necessary to protect the public, or unless steps are taken to
ensure that the data are protected against unfair commercial use.”

There is a diversion of opinion on article 39.1 from both developed106 and developing countries (Bivol
and Soltan, 2012). The lack of clarity of article 39.1 resulted in two approaches. A country like the United
States recognized article 39.1 as a requirement of data exclusivity and data protection. Whereas,
the European Union has interpreted it as additional data protection and exclusivity measures under
TRIPS- plus measures (Bivol and Soltan, 2012). On the other hand, a developing country like India does
not recognize data exclusivity under their respective IP regime.107 Under such circumstances, the
pharmaceutical company may challenge the host country, where there is no protection of data exclusivity
for the initial drug manufacturer. As a result, all generic companies can easily access clinical data
information. This leads to an important question: whether the clinical data information is considered as an
investment under IIAs? There is no decision on this. But research shows that the cost for developing a drug
has increased rapidly. The estimated cost of drug development was $800 million in 2003, which has
doubled in 2013 with expenses of $1.3 billion to $1.8 billion in 2013.108 Among costs, the clinical trial has
a signiﬁcant contribution to the total cost of drug development.109

The issue of drug development as an investment was touched in Apotex Holding vs. United States of
America, where Apotex argued that application of Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) applicant is
being considered as property, tangible or intangible.110 Further, it was argued that he had invested millions
of dollars in developing drugs and preparing for U.S, regulatory ﬁlling in order to attain an economic
beneﬁt to the United States.111 Although tribunal rejected such arguments because Apotex did not have a
place of business in U.S. and all his investment on the drug were done outside the United States.112 This
case gives us an impression that, if the development of the drug were done in the United States then tribunal
may consider it as an investment.

In a country where there is no data exclusivity, a generic company is allowed to use information of
clinical trial done by another pharmaceutical company. Once approved, the generic company may market
at low price. The important question is, whether access of clinical trials data by the generic company leads
to substantial inference in investment resulting in expropriation. Further, an absence of data exclusivity
law is considered as a limitation to intellectual property, under IIAs? If so then does it lead to indirect
expropriation? It is likely that a pharmaceutical investor may raise such argument. However, claims of
TRIPS ambiguity on data exclusivity raise very fundamental question: whether data exclusivity is a type of
intellectual property right?

There is a difference of opinion among commentators. Some argue it as a form of intellectual property
protection for pharmaceutical safety, efﬁcacy and quality data.113 Whereas, few advocate for the need of
conclusive empirical data to assess the positive and negative implication of data exclusivity (Pugatch,
2014) to identify the form of IP it constitutes. This unsettled interpretation of article 31 may give an
advantage to a pharmaceutical company to challenge the expropriation claim, because if data exclusivity
were considered as a separate intellectual property in compliance with TRIPS, then it would be considered
as an exception to expropriation. On the other hand, the possible claim of fair and equitable treatment
maybe raised if an existing country with data exclusivity believes that such measure should be abandoned.
Then the pharmaceutical investor may claim the legitimate expectation of stability, predictability and
consistency of the host country’s IP Law, which may violate the expectation of investor. Even though, such
an argument is highly possible, the tribunal will also take into consideration the state’s legitimate right to
regulate in the interest of public welfare. Under the foreign relation law, the “state is not responsible for a
loss of property or for other economic disadvantages resulting from bona ﬁde general taxation, regulation,
forfeiture for crime, or other action that is commonly accepted as within the police power of states, if it is
not discriminatory.”114

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

71

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Is Mandatory Requirement to Disclose Clinical Data of Approved Drugs (Trade Secret) Considered as
Expropriation?
An important issue attached under article 39 of TRIPS is the protection of undisclosed information. TRIPS
agreement does not use phrase “trade secret,” but obliges WTO member states to protect undisclosed
information having commercial value and reasonable steps taken to keep it secret, from unauthorized
disclosure or manner contrary to honest commercial practice.115 Few countries have enacted speciﬁc
legislation on trade secret and mostly protect trade in patchwork of different forms of protection (Yeh,
2014). The trade secret law was not developed before TRIPS; countries mostly used investment agreement
to protect the trade secret. The pharmaceutical industry often argues clinical data as being commercially
conﬁdential or sensitive.116

Recently, Europe has advocated for transparency in clinical data. In Nordic Cochrane Center vs.
EMA, it was held that the clinical trial data does not consist of information that could be classiﬁed as a trade
secret.117 Later Europe introduced regulation that does not consider clinical data as commercially
conﬁdential. The Regulation No 536/2014 states:

“for the purposes of this Regulation, in general, the data included in a clinical study report
should not be considered commercially conﬁdential once a marketing authorization has been
granted, the procedure for granting the marketing authorization has been completed, the
application for marketing authorization has been completed, the application for marketing
authorization has been withdrawn. In addition, the main characteristics of a clinical trial, the
conclusion on Part I of the assessment report for the authorization of a clinical trial, the
decision on the authorization of a clinical trial, the substantial modiﬁcation of a clinical trial,
and the clinical trial results including reasons for temporary halt and early termination, in
general, should not be considered conﬁdential”118

This provision implies that the clinical trial data shall be publicly accessible after marketing approval.
Further Regulation also has an exception to the above clause, where clinical trial data may not be published
if its conﬁdentiality justiﬁed on few grounds.119 Although Regulation was adopted in May 2013, will be
applied only from May 2016.120 The pharmaceutical industries are not happy about the regulation and also
mobilize patient groups to express concern on the possible misinterpretation of such information, which
impose a risk to public health by non-scientiﬁc re-use of data.121 Further, it has been argued that pubic
interest.122 Recently, UK-based pharmaceutical company
disclosure jeopardizes their commercial
challenged UK clinical trial Transparency Rules.123 Under such a scenario, the pharmaceutical investor
may claim that such transparency is considered as substantial interference to the investment and might
raise indirect expropriation. In general, such an argument may face a barrier because most of the
contemporary BITs exclude public health, safety from indirect expropriation. For example BIT between
Colombia and the United Kingdom (2010) states;

“Non-discriminatory measures that the Contracting Parties take for reasons of public
purpose or social interest (which shall have a meaning compatible with that of ‘public
purpose’) including for reasons of public health, safety and environmental protection, which
are taken in good faith, which are not arbitrary and which are not disproportionate in light of
their purpose, shall not constitute indirect expropriation.”

However, the government may not escape from the investor claim of fair and equitable treatment
because the policy of clinical trial data transparency will be considered as the change in business
environment. But Europe has shown concern about public health issues and has introduced numerous

72

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

public heath measures.124 This would give an impression to an investor that there would be possible
changes on the health sector. Even Regulation (536/2014) emphasis on EU database aims to protect
public heath and fostering innovation capacity of European medical research.125 Further, legitimate
expectations cannot be assessed in isolation from the character of the governmental action or its economic
impact.126

As discussed above, all possible claims are linked with the state’s legitimate right to regulate and the
public interest consideration under TRIPS and Doha Declaration. On the other hand, the tribunal also has a
diverse opinion. It is important to balance the relationship between foreign investor right and state
legitimate right to regulate. The concern was raised in the fourth World Trade Organization (WTO),
Ministerial Conference Doha 2001 where the agenda of the next round was identiﬁed to clarify on scope
and deﬁnition: transparency: non-discrimination in context of relation between trade and investment. . .
(emphasis added).127 Further, it emphasized that “any framework should reﬂect in a balanced manner, the
interests of home and host countries, and take due account of the development policies and objectives of
host governments as well as their right to regulate in the public interest.”128 But past tribunal decision on
expropriation and legitimate expectation of investor have been treated too broadly and under such broad
interpretation, the pharmaceutical investor may not lose this opportunity to claims under investor dispute
settlement body.

Can Lack of Intellectual Property Enforcement in Host State be Against Legitimates Expectation of
Investor?
Intellectual Property has global mobility129 and there has been harmonization of intellectual property
across the globe through international intellectual property such as TRIPS and the Paris Convention. The
level of protection, which TRIPS provided, may not be of greater advantage for a developed country.
Therefore, most of the developed countries in investment agreements include a stringent IP enforcement
standard clause to keep pace with changes in technology. In fact, developed countries adopt measures to
ﬁght against IPR infringement within Europe and internationally. The recent decision of the European
Commission to ban developing countries from EU programes, or cut their funding in breach of Intellectual
property, is an example of how developing countries are giving emphasis on rewarding creativity and
innovative efforts of inventors and creators.130 The evident question is whether the failure to enforce
intellectual property of investor by the host state, is considered as a violation of the legitimate expectation
of investor or home state obligation to provide full protection and security to the investor. To illustrate this
by the example of “piracy” or counterfeit goods, where the government unable to cope with such
infringement act may result in deprivation of investment. Moreover, investors have the strong claim under
the host state obligation of full protection and security standard. As I discussed above, tribunal has
considered obligation to provide full protection and security are wider than “physical” protection and
“security” as physical security. In Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, Siemens argued that the
meaning of security has wider connotation than mere physical security. Tribunal determines on the basis of
agreement and refers to a security not as physical but legal within the context of the agreement. Tribunal
states:

“In its ordinary meaning ‘legal security’ has been deﬁned as ‘the quality of the legal system
which implies certainty in its norms and, consequently, their foreseeable application.”

It gives us the impression that state obligation to the protection and security does not mean only
physical but also legal security as deﬁned by the tribunal. Additionally, most of IIAs deﬁne investment as
both tangible and intangible property, so security must not be understood only as physical security—it
should cover legal security as well. Similarly, the tribunal in Biwater v. Tanzania131 observed that the full

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

73

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

protection and security implies “a State’s guarantee of stability in a secure environment, physical,
commercial and legal.”132 In tribunal view, it will be “unduly artiﬁcial to conﬁne the notion of
“full security” only to one aspect of security, particularly in light of the use of this term in a BIT, directed at
the protection of commercial and ﬁnancial investments.”133 Further, tribunal went a step ahead and said
“tribunal also does not consider that the “full security” standard is limited to a State’s failure to
prevent actions by third parties, but also extends to actions by organs and representatives of the State
itself.”134

A company with a strong intellectual property portfolio may invoke full protection and security clause
for lack of enforcement of intellectual property. For example, in the case of good in transit, if host state fails
to identify the counterfeit goods and enters the national market, then the investor may suffer a loss. Under
such circumstances, the investor may not hesitate to invoke the full security protection clause. In addition,
recent cases highlight the scope of full protection and security, which has been widely broadened by the
tribunal. Even the failure of the host state to comply with court decision is considered as a breach of
the duty of protection and security.135 This implies adequate legal protection to investor comes within the
scope of protection and security. Therefore, even if the host country lacks strong IP enforcement measures
then, such inadequate framework may be considered as a breach of a duty of protection and security.
However, when analyzing such claims duly, tribunal keeps in mind the state right to regulate for the public
good. Tribunal in cases has acknowledged that the state duty is to provide a reasonable measure of
prevention, which a well-administered government could be expected to exercise under similar
circumstances (Malik, 2011).

Conclusion
In today’s industrialized world, the landscape of intellectual property is changing. There is a forum shift
from IP being seen as incentive-commodity to assets. Similarly, expectation of an IP investor is increasing.
From above discussion, it is clear that investor’s like to ﬂirt with international intellectual property
instruments to enforce their rights. Although, ISDS provides investors an alternate forum to enforce their
right, such practices have a severe impact on international intellectual practice. The very fundamental and
important aspect of TRIPS is to provide ﬂexibility on IP standards to balance the position between north
and south countries. The claims brought by an investor have not only risked TRIPS ﬂexibilities but have
had a severe impact on ongoing International Investment Agreements like Transatlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the European Union and the United States. With respect to
ongoing negotiations, there has been a serious concern raised in the European community on ISDS
creating the risk of a “regulatory chill.”136 The whole idea of ISDS to protect rights of the investor, now
with globalization and the importance of foreign investment, is realized by every country. Further,
diplomatic political relations between countries have narrowed down host country discrimination on the
foreign investor. Therefore, ISDS is needed to examine, as there is no evidence to show that IIAs with or
without ISDS have any impact on investment ﬂows.137 Thus, it is very important that an investor,
irrespective whether they are foreign or domestic, must be treated fairly and equally but not to the extent
that it undermines the state right to regulate in public interest. The argument raised in both plain packaging
and the Eli Lilly case will encourage frivolous practices and certainly open gates for more IP related cases
in ISDS. The relationship between both the ﬁelds does not have a clear boundary, and very less
jurisprudence exist in academia. But there has been an attempt to narrow down such claims through
restricting an investor to raise matters regarding intellectual property under IIAs. This approach seems to
be appropriate at the moment but we cannot negate the possible overlap of both the ﬁelds. Moreover, the
impending decision on plain packaging and Eli Lilly will certainly bring new jurisprudence in the subject
matter.

74

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

About the Author
Pratyush Nath Upreti is a lawyer at Upreti & Associates, a law ﬁrm based in Kathmandu. He has recently
completed Advanced Master (LL.M.) Intellectual Property Law and Knowledge Management (IPKM)
Degree from Maastricht University, Netherlands. His current interests include Intellectual Property Law,
International Investment law, WTO-related issues, among other areas. He is also leading “New IP Lawyers
Network,” a wing of school of law and its research center SCule (Science, Culture and the Law) under
University of Exeter, United Kingdom, as an Executive Committee Member. He also teaches Intellectual
Property Law at Chakrabarti Habi Education Academy, College of Law. He has published several articles
in Journals and Newspapers; e-mail: upretipratyush@gmail.com

Notes
This article is the outcome of Master Thesis for the fulﬁllment of Advanced Master (LL.M.) Intellectual
Property Law and Knowledge Management (IPKM) Degree, 2014–2015 from Maastricht University,
Netherlands. The author would like to thank Professor Anselm Kamperman Sanders for his lecture on
“Global policy and Economics of IP law,” which generated interest and inspired the author to do further
research. Also, the author expresses gratitude to Dr. Anke Moerland and Dr. Dalindyebo B. Shabalala for
their guidance. Views, errors, and omissions are solely the author’s responsibility.

1. JT International SA v Commonwealth of Australia (2012) HCA 43.
2. Ibid.
3. See WT/DS434/11: The Ukraine, Honduras initiated WTO dispute settlement proceedings against Australia and
Panel is formed in 2014, available at https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds434_e.htm
(last visited 10 April, 2015).

4. See ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, UNCITRAL Case No. UNCT/14/2, UNCITRAL Case No. 2012-12.
5. See Article 1(c) of Australia-India, BIT, 1999, Available at: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/Download/

TreatyFile/154 (last visited 2 April 2015).

6. Energy Charter Treaty, signed 17 December 1994. Available at: http://www.encharter.org/ﬁleadmin/

user_upload/document/EN.pdf (last visited 8 April 2015).

7. Article 1(a)(iv) of Agreement between Australia and the Republic of Hungary on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments, signed 15th August 1991. Available at: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/
Download/TreatyFile/153 (5 April 2015).

8. Canadian Model BIT Available at: http://www.italaw.com/documents/Canadian2004-FIPA-model-en.pdf

(11 April 2015).

9. Agreement between Japan and the United Mexican States for the Strengthening of the Economic Partnership,

Art. 96(i) (GG), Sep. 17, 2004.

10. Agreement Between the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union and the Government of the Republic of India

for Promotion and the Protection of Investment, art. 1(b), Oct. 31, 1997.

11. Ibid at p. 6.
12. Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A. v kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No ARB/00/4, Decision on

Jurisdiction, 23 July, 2001.

13. Fedax N.V. v. The Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No ARB/96/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 11 July, 1997.
14. Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN BHD v. The Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case No ARB/05/10, Decision

on Annulment, 16th April, 2009.

15. Ibid at 135.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid at 136.
18. Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20 (Award) July 14, 2010.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

75

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

19. Ibid at para 111.
20. Also see Philip Morris v. Uruguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7) and KT Asia v. Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No.

ARB/09/8).

21. Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. V. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Decision on

Award, 24 July, 2008.

22. Ibid at para 312.
23. Romak SA v. Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No AA280, Decision on Award, 26th November 2009.
24. Philip Morris v. Uruguay at para 199.
25. Ambiente Ufﬁcio S.PA. and others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/9 (Jurisdiction)

February 8, 2013.
26. Ibid at para 481.
27. ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/12/1.
28. Investment narrowly construed under NAFTA in Apotex v. United States, by Jones Day. Available at: http://
www.jonesday.com/investment-narrowly-construed-under-nafta-in-apotex-v-united-states-08-26-2013/ (last
visited 19 April 2015).

29. Ibid.
30. Ibid.
31. Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A and Abal Hermanos S.A v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,

ICSID Case No: ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction, 2013.

32. Ibid at p. 1.
33. Patrik Michell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo.
34. Uruguay’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, p. 82–89 (2011), Available at: http://www.italaw.com/sites/default/ﬁles/

case-documents/ita0346.pdf (last visited 15 April 2015).

35. Ibid at p. 87.
36. Ibid at 206.
37. Nicaragua v. Republic of Nicaragua, ICSID Case no. ARB/06/14.
38. Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of Jurisdiction,

January 25, 2000.

39. Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction), ICSID

Case No, ARB 97/7, 25 January 2000. (2002) 5 ICSID Rep p. 396.

40. Ibid at para 56.
41. Greece v United Kingdom, (1952) ICJ 1.
42. United Nations, Reports of International Arbitral Awards, 1963, p. 107.
43. Ibid at para 49.
44. Plama Consortium Ltd v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,

8th February 2005.

45. Ibid at para 200.
46. Ibid at para 207.
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid.
49. The Role of International Investment Agreements in Attracting Foreign Direct Investment to Developing

Countries, UNCTAD Series on International Investment Polices for Development (2009).

50. International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v. United States, Decision on award, 26th January, 2006.
51. FTR Holdings S.A. (Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A (Switzerland) and Abal Hermanons S.A

(Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, Request for Arbitration, 19th February, 201, para 84.

52. Philip Morris Asia Limited v The commonwealth of Australia, Notice of Arbitration, 21st November, 2011,

para 7.7.

76

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

53. Eli Lilly and Company v. Government of Canada, Notice of Arbitration, 12th September, 2013.
54. Ibid at para 81.
55. Ibid at para 82.
56. Ibid.
57. See US-Uruguay BIT, Art 5(2) (B).
58. Siemens A.G.v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Award, 17th January, 2007.
59. Supra note 75, at 210–217.
60. Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/08, Decision on award.
61. S.D. Myers, Inc. Decision on partial award, p. 268. Available at: http://www.italaw.com/documents/SDMeyers-

1stPartialAward.pdf (last visited 25 April 2015).

62. Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, decision on partial award, 17 March, 2006,

UNCITRAL, para 306.

63. Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/in-

64. EU-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (May, 2015). Available at: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.

focus/ceta/ (last visited 12 October 2015).
cfm?id¼961 (last visited 19 October 2015).

65. Draft text of Investment chapter of Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the US
and the EU (2015). Available at: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2015/september/tradoc_153807.pdf
(last visited 16 November 2015).

66. Public Citizen, Memorandum on Fair and Equitable Treatment and investor reasonable expectation: Ruling
in U.S. FTA & BITs Demonstrate FET Deﬁnition must be narrowed. Available at: http://www.citizen.org/
documents/MST-Memo.pdf?iframe=true&width=100%&height=100% (last visited 20 May 2015).

67. Article 41(2) TRIPS Agreement.
68. Fair and Equitable Treatment, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (2012)

p. 11.

69. Jones Day Commentary, Treaty Protection for Global Patents: A Response to a Growing Problem for
Multinational Pharmaceutical Companies, Available at: http://www.jonesday.com/ﬁles/Publication/96b88f45-
3c81-4e6e-b640-9ca243920ad5/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/523d7608-c58a-4bab-bd96-9e1d121287ea/
Treaty%20Protection.pdf (last visited 22 May 2015).

70. Eli Lilly and Company v. Government of Canada, Notice of Arbitration, 12th September, 2013, para 84.
71. Philip Morris v Uruguay, para 85.
72. Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd, et al v. the United States of America, Decision on Award,

12 January 2011, para 218.

73. Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland), Judgement, 15 May,

1926, PCIJ, Series A, No 9 (1927).

74. Ibid at p. 44.
75. Expropriation, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (2012).
76. Philip Morris v Uruguay, para 83.
77. Ibid at para 7.3 (a).
78. Ibid at para 7.3 (b).
79. Also see Justice Heydon dissenting opinion on JT International SA v. Commonwealth of Australia; British

American Tobacco Australasia Limited v. Commonwealth of Australia (2012) HCA 43 (5 October 2012).

80. Ibid.
81. Supra note 53, at 78.
82. Investor-State Dispute in Trade Pacts Threaten Fundamental Principles of National Judical Systems. Available
at: https://tpplegal.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2012/05/isds-domestic-legal-process-background-brief.pdf (last visited
14 June 2015).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

77

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

83. Saipem S.p.A v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No; ARB/05/7, Decision on Arbitration,

30 June, 2009.

84. Also see Azinian v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case no ARB (AF)/97/2, Decision on Award, November 1,

1999.

85. CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, Award, 12 May 2005, at para. 262.
86. Ali Ghassemi, Expropriation of Foreign Property in International Law, A Doctrinal thesis (1999). Available at:

http://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/2731706.pdf

87. Expropriation, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (2012).
88. 2012 U.S. Model Bilateral Investment Treaty, Annex B- Expropriation, 4(b). Available at: http://www.state.gov/

documents/organization/188371.pdf (last visited 2 June 2015).

89. Tecnicas MedioambientalesTecmed S.A. v. The United Mexcian States, Case no. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award,

May 29, 2013, para 122.

90. Ibid.
91. World Drug Report, 2014, United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime.
92. Inside Views: The Judgement in Novartis v. India: What the Supreme Court of India Said (2013) Available at:
http://www.ip-watch.org/2013/04/04/the-judgment-in-novartis-v-india-what-the-supreme-court-of-india-said/
(last visited 2 June 2015).

93. Bilateral

Investment Treaties (BITs)

(2015). Available at: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA/

CountryBits/96 (last visited on 19 August 2015).

94. Guidance for determining subject matter eligibility, Analysis of Claims Reciting or Involving Laws of Nature,
Natural Phenomena, & Natural products (2014). Available at: http://www.uspto.gov/patents/law/exam/myriad-
mayo_guidance.pdf (last visited 3 June 2015).

95. Article 31 of TRIPS read with Doha Declaration. Available at: https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/

min01_e/mindecl_trips_e.htm (last visited 3 June 2015).

96. Article 5(b) (c) of Doha Declaration, 2001.
97. Article 7 & 8 of TRIPS Agreement.
98. Section 84(1)(d) of The Patents Act, 1970.
99. Section 84(1)(e) of The Patents Act, 1970.
100. Supreme Court says No to Bayer, upholds compulsory License on Nexavar (2014). Available at: http://www.
lawyerscollective.org/updates/supreme-court-says-no-to-bayer-upholds-compulsory-license-on-nexavar.html
(last visited 29 May 2015).

101. Afﬁdavit ﬁled by James Packard, director of Knowledge Ecology International (KEI), in Natco Pharma Limited
v. Bayer Corporation (2012). Available at: http://keionline.org/sites/default/ﬁles/aff-jameslove_13Feb2012_
as_Filed.pdf (last visited 30 May 2015)

102. Section 84 The Patents Act, 1970.
103. Indonesia Licenses Patents for Seven HIV & Hepatitis B Medicines. Available at: http://www.citizen.org/PC-

statement-on-compulsory-licensing-in-Indonesia (last visited 30 May 2015).

104. India’s First Compulsory License upheld, But Legal Fights likely to continue (2013). Available at: http://www.
ip-watch.org/2013/03/04/indias-ﬁrst-compulsory-licence-upheld-but-legal-ﬁghts-likely-to-continue/ (last vis-
ited 2 June 2015).

105. Article X.11 (6) CETA.
106. In United States (market exclusivity) & Europe (data exclusivity) for period of three and ten years,
generic company cannot obtain regulatory approval on respective data of originator pharmaceutical
company.

107. Scholars in India have often argued that provision of data exclusivity would jeopardize availability of generic
medicine. See Manthan D Janodia, Data Exclusivity Provisions in India: Impact on Public Health, Journal of
Intellectual Property Rights, Vol 13, September 2008, pp. 442–446.

78

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

108. Clinical Data And Disclosure Policies: The European Union, Member States, and International Best Practices,
Global Intellectual Property Center, U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2015) p. 8, Available at: http://www.pugatch-
consilium.com/reports/EMA_Study.pdf (last visited 22 May 2015).

109. Ibid.
110. Investment narrowly construed under NAFTA in Apotex v. United States, by Jones Day. Available at: http://
www.jonesday.com/investment-narrowly-construed-under-nafta-in-apotex-v-united-states-08-26-2013/ (last
visited 21 May 2015).

111. Ibid.
112. Ibid.
113. A Prescription for Failure: Health and Intellectual Property in the Dominican Republic, Georgetown Human
Rights Action/Human Rights Institute Fact-ﬁnding Mission (2010) Available at: http://www.law.georgetown.
edu/academics/centers-institutes/human-rights-institute/fact-ﬁnding/upload/ﬁnaldrreport.pdf (last visited
1 June 2015).

114. AES v. Republic of Hungary, Tribunal cited American Law Institute, Restatement of the Law (third edition) of

Foreign Relations Law of the United States, section 712, Vol 2, 1987.

115. Foot note of Article 39 TRIPS deﬁne ‘honest commercial practices as practices such as breach of contract, breach
of conﬁdence and inducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed by third parties who knew,
or were grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in acquisition.

116. European Directive on trade secrets: A threat to access to public heath data (2015), p. 1. Available at:
http://english.prescrire.org/Docu/DOCSEUROPE/20150210_TradeSecretsJointBrieﬁngPaper.pdf (last visited
30 May 2015).

117. Nordic Cochrane Center vs. European Medicines Agency, Case No: 2560/2007/BEH.
118. Recital 68 Regulation (EU) No 536/2014.
119. Article 81(4) Regulation (EU) No 536/2014.
120. New European Clinical Trials Regulation: A major advance in transparency, to be conﬁrmed (2014). Available
at: http://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-2014-068_ipa_new_eu_clinical_trials_regulation-joint_letter.pdf
(last visited 2 June 2015).

121. Pharma Industry tries to mobilize patient groups in clinical trials battle (2013). Available at: http://www.

euractiv.com/health/pharma-industry-tries-mobilise-p-news-529498

122. Protecting citizens’ heath: Transparency of clinical trial data on medicines in the EU, policy paper of
Heath Action International (2013). Available at: http://haieurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/HAI_
Protecting-citizenshealth-transparency-of-clinical-trial-data-on-medicines-in-the-EU.pdf (last visited 31 May
2015).

123. Company Challenges UK Clinical Trial Transparency Rules (2015). Available at: http://www.raps.org/
Regulatory-Focus/News/2015/05/18/22217/Company-Challenges-UK-Clinical-Trial-Transparency-Rules/ (last
visited 1 June 2015).

124. Concern for Europe’s Tomorrow: Health and the Environment in the WHO European Region. Available at:

http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0004/98266/WA3095CO.pdf (last visited 1 June 2015).

125. Recital 67, Regulation (EU) No. 536/2014.
126. Expropriation, UNCTAD Series on issues in International Investment Agreements II (2012) p. 76.
127. DOHA WTO Ministerial Declaration (2001), para 22, Available at: https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/

minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.htm (last visited 26 May 2015).

128. Ibid.
129. Harvard College v. Canada (Commissioner of Patents) 2002 SCC 76 (Canada).
130. Developing countries face EU funding ban if they break intellectual property rules (2014). Available at: http://
www.euractiv.com/sections/innovation-enterprise/developing-countries-face-eu-funding-ban-if-they-break-
intellectual (last visited 1 June 2015).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

79

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

131. Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22 (Award), July 24,

2008.

132. Ibid at para 729.
133. Ibid.
134. Ibid at para 730.
135. Waguih Elie George Siag v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15(Award). June 1, 2009.
136. See S & D Position Paper on Investor- State Dispute settlement mechanism in ongoing trade negotiations, Group

of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists & Democrats in the European Parliament (2015).

137. Ibid.

References

Alvik, I. (2011) ‘Most Favoured Nation Treatment Application in International Investment Arbitration: A Study on
Conﬂicting Precedence in International Dispute Settlement Procedure’ [online]. Available at <https://www.duo.
uio.no/bitstream/handle/10852/22714/Master_thesis.pdf?sequence¼1> [Accessed 28 May 2015].

Baker, K.B. (2013) ‘Corporate Power Unbound: Investor-State Arbitration of IP Monopolies on Medicines-Eli Lilly
and the TPP’, Program on Information Justice and Intellectual Property (PIJIP) Research Paper Series,
American University Washington College of Law [online]. Available at http://digitalcommons.wcl.american.
edu/research/36/ [Accessed 26 February 2015].

Banerjee, R. (2013) ‘The Success of, and Response to, India’s Law Against Patent Layering’, Harvard International

Law Journal, 54, 224.

Basheer, S. (2005) ‘Limiting the Scope of Pharmaceutical Patents and Microorganism: A TRIPS Compatibility

Review’, Intellectual Property Institute, London.

Basheer, S. and Reddy, P. (2008) ‘Ducking’ TRIPS in India: A Saga Involving Novartis and the Legality of

Section 3(d)’, National Law School of India Review, 20(2), 131–155.

Bivol, S. and Soltan, V. (2012) ‘Negative Impact of Data Exclusivity on Access to Medicines’, Center for Heath
Policies and studies [online]. Available at: <http://aids.md/aids/ﬁles/1273/express_analysis_1_2012_en.pdf>
[Accessed 5 March 2015].

Boie, B. (2010) ‘The Protection of Intellectual Property Rights Through Bilateral Investment Treaties: Is There a
TRIPS-Plus Dimension?’ Working Paper no. 2010/19, Swiss National Centre of Competence in research
[online]. Available at <http://www.wti.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/nccr-trade.ch/wp3/3.4/The%20Protection%
20of%20IPRs%20through%20BITs.pdf> [Accessed 13 May 2015].

Correa, M.C. (ed.) (2010) Research Handbook on the Interpretation and Enforcement of Intellectual Property Under
WTO Rules: Intellectual Property in the WTO, vol. 2. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, United Kingdom, p. 17.
Davison, M. and Emerton, P. (2014) ‘Rights, Privileges, Legitimate Interests, and Justiﬁability: Article 20 of TRIPS

and Plain Packaging of Tobacco’, American University International Law Review, 3(29), 505–580.

Dekastros, M. (2013) ‘Portfolio Investment: Reconceptualising the Notion of Investment Under the ICSID

Convention’, The Journal of World Investment & Trade, 14, 286–319.

Dolze, R. and Schreuer, C. (2008) Principle of International Investment Law. Oxford University Press, Oxford,

p. 149.

Ford, S.M. (2000) ‘Compulsory Licensing Provisions Under the TRIPs Agreement: Balancing Pills and Patents’,

American University International Law Review, 15(4), 945.

Gaillard, E. (2009) ‘Identify or Deﬁne? Reﬂections on the Evolution of the Concept of Investment in ICSID Practice’,
in C. Binder, et al. (ed.), International Investment Law for the 21st Century, Essays in Honour of Christoph
Schreuer, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 412–413.

Gibson, C. (2010) ‘A Look at the Compulsory License in Investment Arbitration: The Case of Indirect Expropriation’,

American University International Law Review, 25(3), 357–422.

80

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Halewood, M. (1997) ‘Regulating Patent Holders: Local Working Requirements and Compulsory Licences at

International Law’, Osgoode Hall Law Journal, 35.2, 249.

Ho, M.C. (2015) ‘Sovereignty Under Siege: Corporate Challenges to Domestic Intellectual Property Decisions’,

Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 30(1), 67.

Huiping, C. (2011) ‘The Expansion of Jurisdiction by ICSID Tribunal: Approaches, Reasons and Damages’,

The Journal of World Investment & Trade, 12(5), 133.

Isakoff, P.D. (2013) ‘Deﬁning the Scope of Indirect Expropriation for International Investments’, The Global Business

Law Review, 3, 189.

Khan, R.G.H. (2014) ‘Litigating Intellectual Property Rights in Investor-State Arbitration: From Plain Packaging to
Patent Revocation’, Fourth Biennial Global Conference of the Society of International Economic Law (SIEL)
Working Paper No. 2014–21 [online]. Available at <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id¼
2463711> [Accessed 2 May 2015].

Liberti, L. (2010) ‘Intellectual Property Rights in International Investment Agreements: An Overview’, OECD
Working Papers on International Investment, 2010/01 OECD Publishing [online]. Available at <http://dx.doi.
org/10/1787kmfq1njzl35-2n> [Accessed 10 April 2015].

Love, J. (2005) ‘Remuneration Guidelines for Non-Voluntary Use of a Patent on Medical Technologies’, World
Health Organization (WHO), p. 6. Available at <http://keionline.org/sites/default/ﬁles/who_undp_2005_
royalty_guidelines.pdf> [Accessed 31 May 2015].

Malik, M. (2011) ‘The Full Protection and Security Standard Comes of Age: Yet Another Challenge for States in
Investment Treaty Arbitration?’ The International Institute for Sustainable Development, p .9. Available at
<http://www.iisd.org/pdf/2011/full_protection.pdf> [Accessed 31 May 2015].

McRae, D. (2012) ‘MFN in the GATT and the WTO’, Asian Journal of WTO & International Health Law and Policy,

7(1), 1–24.

Mitchell, D.A. and Wurzberger, S. (2011) ‘Boxed in? Australia’s Plain Tobacco Packaging Initiative and International

Investment Law’, The Arbitration International, 27, 6.

Muchinski, P., Ortino, F. and Schreuer, C. (2008) The Oxford Handbook of International Investment Law. Oxford

University Press, Oxford.

Nikiema, S.H. (2012) Best Practices Indirect Expropriation. The International Institute for Sustainable Development
(iisd), Geneva [online]. Available at <http://www.iisd.org/pdf/2012/best_practice_indirect_expropriation.pdf>
[Accessed 25 May 2015].

Palmedo, M. (2013) ‘Do Pharmaceutical Firms Invest More Heavily in Countries with Data Exclusivity?’ Currents
International Trade Law Journal, Summer [online]. Available at <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id¼2259797> [Accessed 25 May 2015].

Pugatch, P.M. (2014) ‘Intellectual Property and Pharmaceutical Data Exclusivity in the Context of Innovation and
Market Access’, ICTSD-UNCTAD Dialogue on Ensuring Policy Options for Affordable Access to Essential
Medicines Bellagio [online]. Available at <http://www.iprsonline.org/unctadictsd/bellagio/docs/Pugatch_
Bellagio3.pdf> [Accessed 4 June 2015].

Position Paper on Investment-State Dispute Settlement mechanisms in ongoing trade negotiations, Group of the
Progressive Alliance of Socialists & Democrats in the European Parliament, March 2015 [online]. Available at
<http://www.socialistsanddemocrats.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/
position_paper_investor_state_dispute_settlement_ISDS_en_150304.pdf> [Accessed 25 June 2015].

Rutledge, B.P. (2012) ‘TRIPS and BITs: An Essay on Compulsory Licenses, Expropriation, and International

Arbitration’, North Carolina Journal of Law & Technology, 13, 149.

Salacuse, W.J. (2013) The Three Laws of International Investment; National, Contractual and International

Frameworks for Foreign Capital. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Sampliner, G.H. (2003) ‘Arbitration of Expropriation Cases Under U.S. Investment Treaties-A Threat to Democracy

or the Dog that didn’t Bark?’ ICSID Review-Foreign Investment Law Journal, 1, 14.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

81

Pratyush Nath Upreti

Enforcing IPRs Through ISDS

Sauvant, K. and Ortino, F. (2013) ‘Improving the International Investment Law and Policy Regime: Options for the
Future’ (Helsinki: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland) [online]. Available at <http://works.bepress.com/
karl_sauvant/112/> [Accessed 16 April 2015].

Schreuer, C. (2005) ‘The Concept of Expropriation under the ETC and other Investment Protection Treaties’ [online].

Available at <http://www.univie.ac.at/intlaw/pdf/csunpublpaper_3.pdf> [Accessed 7 May 2015].

Tan, L. and Bouchenaki, A. (2014) ‘Limiting Investor Access to Investment Arbitration: A Solution without a
Problem? Reshaping the Investor State Dispute Settlement System: Journeys for the 21st Century’, edited by Jean
E. Kalicki and Anna Joublin-Bret.

Tellez, M.F. (2012) ‘Conditions and Criteria For The Protection of Legitimate Expectation Under International

Investment Law’, ICSID Review, 27(2), 432–442.

Thomas, R.J. (2014) ‘Compulsory Licensing of Patented Inventions’, Congressional Research Service Report
[online]. Available at <http://ipmall.info/hosted_resources/crs/R43266_140114.pdf> [Accessed 29 May 2015].
Vandevelde, J.K. (2010) Bilateral Investment Treaties: History, Policy, and Interpretation. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Voon, T., Mitchell, A. and Munro, J. (2012), ‘Intellectual Property Rights in International Investment Agreements:
Striving for Coherence in National & international law’ [online]. Available at <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id¼2318955> [Accessed 10 June 2015].

Weil, P. (2000) ‘The State, the Foreign Investor, and International Law: The No Longer Stormy Relationship of

Menage a Trois’, ICSID Rev-FILJ, 15, 401–415.

Yamane, H. (2011) Interpreting TRIPS: Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights and Access to Medicine. Hart

Publication Ltd., United Kingdom.

Yeh, T.B. (2014) ‘Protection of Trade Secrets: Overview of Current Law and Legislation’, Congressional Research

Service [online]. Available at <http://fas.org/sgp/crs/secrecy/R43714.pdf> [Accessed 3 June 2015].

Ziegier, R.A. (2008) Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) Treatment. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

82

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2


