The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 171–198
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2012.00437.x

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and
Maintaining Policy Space in Intellectual Property
Policy in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights Era: A Preliminary
Look at the Ethiopian Patent Regime in the Light of
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights Obligations and
Flexibilities

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu
Addis Ababa University

After having stayed as an observer for about 6 years, Ethiopia formally applied for membership at the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in January 2003, and it has since been going through the accession negotiations. One
of the areas of scrutiny by the WTO members as part of the accession process has been Ethiopia’s intellectual
property (IP) regime. Indeed, a number of issues were raised in relation to Ethiopia’s IP regime in the three
rounds of questions the country received from WTO members. In its replies to the questions from WTO members,
Ethiopia has promised to revise this law in the light of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (the TRIPS Agreement). The accession process has thus given impetus for Ethiopia to embark
on a reform of its IP regime, which is being carried out in two fronts: the enactment of new IP laws in areas
where little or none existed before, and revising existing IP laws, particularly the patent law. This article analyzes
Ethiopia’s patent regime in light of the TRIPS Agreement, identiﬁes the obligations that might need to be met as
part of the accession, as well as the ﬂexibilities that might be available to Ethiopia as a least-developed country
(LDC).
Keywords Ethiopia; ﬂexibility; patent regime; TRIPS Agreement

With a total land area of 114 million hectares and a population of about 80 million, Ethiopia is the
ninth largest and the second most populous nation in Africa. It is one of the Sub-Saharan African
countries in the ofﬁcial United Nations (UN) list of least-developed countries (LDCs). The Ethiopian
economy relies heavily on agriculture, which contributes about 50% of the GDP, 90% of export and
84% of total employment (Ministry of Finance and Economic Development [MoFED], 2007, p. 25).
Agriculture in Ethiopia is dominated by small-scale farmers who are responsible for 95% of the
cultivated land, mainly for subsistence needs (MoFED, 2007, p. 84). Not surprisingly, agriculture has
been at the center of national development thinking and an agriculture-led development strategy has
been the overarching development policy in the country where food security and poverty alleviation
feature prominently. Following the end of the centrally planned economic order in 1991, Ethiopia has
undertaken different reform measures in its economic policy, including domestic and foreign trade
policy, along the lines of market economy principles. An attempt is also being made to consolidate

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

171

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

the measures taken at the national level by integrating the country’s economy into the world economy
by acceding to the World Trade Organization (WTO; WTO, 2011).

In recognition of the important role of Research and Development (R&D) in science and tech-
nology for socioeconomic development, the Transitional Government of Ethiopia (TGE) issued the
National Science and Technology Policy (NSTP) in 1993 with the objectives, inter alia, to build na-
tional capability to generate, select, import, develop, disseminate and apply appropriate technologies
for the realization of the country’s socioeconomic objectives, and to promote the development of
traditional, new and emerging technologies (Science and Technology Commission, 1993, p. 3). The
NSTP aspires to achieve these objectives by building the capacity to research, select, negotiate, pro-
duce and exchange; by introducing technologies suitable to Ethiopia’s socioeconomic conditions as
well as by encouraging the private sector and its capital to participate in the promotion and de-
velopment of scientiﬁc and technological activities. The patent system was taken as one strategy in
the NSTP, which speciﬁcally sought to establish an efﬁcient patent and technology transfer system
so as to support local technological innovations and creative activities. The patent system was thus
envisioned as an instrument to promote local innovation and transfer of technology.

However, like in other LDCs, investment in R&D in Ethiopia has been limited; the average
share of R&D in national GDP from 2005 to 2008 has been 0.17% (TradingEconomics, 2011).
Understandably, much of the limited R&D investments have been made in the agriculture sector. The
role of private sector in R&D has been insigniﬁcant, and the little research so far has been carried
out almost exclusively by the public sector (Mengiste, 2006).

As could be gathered from the NSTP, the patent system is seen as an important tool to promote
local innovation and to encourage the transfer and adoption of foreign technology with the ultimate
goal of building national technological capacity and assisting in the economic development of the
country. The preamble of the Proclamation Concerning Inventions, Minor Inventions and Industrial
Designs1 (the Patent Proclamation) also reiterated the standard utilitarian objectives for patent
protection: to encourage local inventive activities so as to build technological capability; and to
encourage the transfer and adaptation of foreign technology.

Whether intellectual property (IP) protection in general and patent protection in particular
encourages local innovation, facilitates transfer of technology and thereby promotes economic de-
velopment or whether it hurts technical progress and economic development by restricting access to
knowledge has been the subject of an important discourse for long. In general, Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs) are seen as one among a multitude of factors, which may affect innovation or transfer
of technology (UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005, p. 15). Factors that may impact innovation or transfer of
technology include the sector of the economy, the economic status of the country in question, market
regulation in the country and the development of other competition regulations in the market and
R&D capability and infrastructure (Lall, 2003; Markus, 2000). In particular, economic researchers
question the role of IPR in innovations and transfer of technology in the context of LDCs. It has
been argued that the small market sizes of LDCs in particular would not provide adequate incentives
for changing either the level or direction of total R&D expenditure, even under strong IPR regimes
such as those in developed nations and such considerations as marketing strategies and the difﬁculties
in copying and imitating are likely to be more important than IPR protection (Fink and Maskus,
2005, p. 20; Markus, 2000). On the other hand it has been argued that, at certain stages of develop-
ment, weak levels of IPR protection are more likely to stimulate economic development and poverty
alleviation than are strong ones (Chang, 2002; Kim, 2003). The channels of acquiring knowledge
for LDCs are usually through imitation of existing technologies, reverse engineering and applying
knowledge and technologies described in patent papers. In that regard, patents may become barriers
in acquiring technology and, given the state of R&D and innovation in LDCs, these countries have

172

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

been advised to give priority to the utilization of knowledge available elsewhere over the provision of
incentives for local innovation in these countries (Odagiri et al., 2010, p. 11).

A patent system directed at promoting local innovation in developing countries in general and
LDCs in particular has largely been a failure and while the number of patents in these countries has
been limited, they have been largely owned by foreigners (Mengistie, 2009, p. 22). The same is true in
Ethiopia. Despite the availability of a patent law for the last decade and a half the number of patents
in general and those owned by Ethiopians in particular has been very limited. In a period stretching
a decade (1995–2005), there were only 56 applications for patents of which only nine applications
were made by Ethiopians (Mengiste, 2006). While 34 patents were granted to foreigners, only one was
granted to an Ethiopian in the same period (Mengiste, 2006). This limited number of applications
for patents shows not only the low level of local innovation but also the lack of interest on the part
of foreign patent owners to apply for patents in the country.

In 2010, the Ministry of Science and Technology introduced a more ambitious national Science,
Technology and Innovation Policy (the STIP) which aims, among others, to build national capability to
generate and apply scientiﬁc knowledge and appropriate new, indigenous and emerging technologies
and to develop and improve national productive capacity and competitiveness through efﬁcient
application of innovation (Science and Technology Commission, 2010, section 2). The STIP targets
to increase R&D expenditure from the current 0.2–1.0%, 1.5% and 2.0% in 2015, 2020 and 2025,
respectively (Science and Technology Commission, 2010, section 2.3). If fully implemented, the STIP
has the potential to make the country one of the few LDCs that allocate as much as 2.0% of national
GDP for R&D, which will contribute to an improved R&D environment. However, innovation
in countries such as Ethiopia needs to be considered from a broader perspective and apart from
investment in R&D, innovation in these countries is affected by a range of factors such as the
education status of their workforce, the structure of R&D, the management of technological assets
and the existence of IPR complementary institutions such as technology transfer ofﬁces (Commission
on Intellectual Property, 2002). The SITP, an important policy document as it is, it has nonetheless
failed to critically assess the existing problem in R&D and innovation in the country. For example,
it does not provide a strategy to address the critical issue of lack of communication channel between
public research institutions and industry. The STIP targets to increase the number of patents to be
granted to nationals to 10, 35 and 110 in 2015, 2020 and 2015, respectively (Science and Technology
Commission, 2010, section 2.3). An innovation policy that fails to articulate the idea of innovation
in the context of Ethiopia by capitalizing on minor and incremental innovations such as adaptations
of exiting knowledge, and focuses instead on major innovations, is bound to fail again as it does not
take the existing reality in the country. Ethiopia needs to learn lessons from the experiences of Japan,
Taiwan, Korea and the like that have made effective use of this approach (Odagiri et al., 2010, p. 15).
The SITP has also failed to critically examine the challenges of the existing patent system, why it
failed to realize its objectives, and come up with a strategy to make it more operational and useful
in the country’s context. SIPS’ diagnosis of the problem with the current regime as being a result of
lack of information about IPRs certainly plays a role, but the problem is much greater than that.

The TRIPS Agreement, which will be binding on Ethiopia once it joins the WTO, has prescribed
minimum, albeit high, standards of IP protection, including patents (Correa, 2000; Reichman 2008,
p. 25; Sell, 2003). As noted, while the role of strong IP protection in promoting economic development
particularly in the context of LDCs such as Ethiopia is questionable, the costs are immediate and
visible. In addition to losing policy space in designing IP regulation in a manner compatible with
its developmental needs, a WTO member country will have to spend its meager resources for IP
protection, and potentially in payment of royalties. As an LDC, Ethiopia’s position in the negotiations
relating to the TRIPS Agreement is thus largely defensive, its interest mainly centered on how best

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

173

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

to use the TRIPS Agreement ﬂexibilities to promote its developmental needs. Indeed identifying and
making effective use of these ﬂexibilities has been a challenge for developing countries (Musungu
and Oh, 2006, pp. 32–71). Upon accession to the WTO, Ethiopia will assume the obligation to give
effect to the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement at the national level. That will include an obligation
to accord treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its own nationals with regard to the
protection of IPRs (national testament),2 and to treat all foreign IP holders in the same manner as
its nationals (Most-Favored Nation Treatment).3

There are limited ﬂexibilities for LDCs included in the TRIPS Agreement, such as the provisions
designed to promote and encourage transfer of technology to LDCs.4 But this depends on how
developed countries implement this ﬂexibility and the ability of LDCs to use them. There are also
ﬂexibilities in terms of transition periods, which would be explored in detail in this article. However,
the TRIPS Agreement provides no ﬂexibility in relation to substantive obligations even if TRIPS
Agreement provisions may be interpreted in the light of the unique challenges and circumstances
of LDCs as provided for under articles 7 and 8. It is also to be noted that Ethiopia’s case as an
acceding country is different from the exiting LDC WTO members because its IP laws would be
closely scrutinized as part of the accession process.

Emergence and Development of Patent Protection in Ethiopia
Modern IPR law making in Ethiopia goes back to the 1950s when the country embarked upon the
codiﬁcation of its laws. The codiﬁcation project had resulted in the promulgation of the Penal Code
of Ethiopia (1957), the Civil Code of Ethiopia (1960), the Commercial Code of Ethiopia (1960),
the Maritime Code of Ethiopia (1960), the Criminal Procedure Code of Ethiopia (1961) and the
Civil Procedure Code of Ethiopia (1965). As stated in the Preface to the 1960 Civil Code, which still
is largely in force, Ethiopia needed to modernize its laws in order to keep pace with the changing
circumstances of the world, to consolidate the progress already achieved and to facilitate further
growth and development. The modernization of the laws in the form of codiﬁcation was seen as an
instrument for growth and development in the country. The desired growth and development could be
promoted by a legislation that encourages local innovation and transfer of technology from abroad,
among other things. The Civil Code came up with the ﬁrst speciﬁc rules on Copyright, under Title
XI (Literary and Artistic Ownership).5 Provisions were also included in the Civil Code on publishing
contracts dealing, inter alia, with such issues as transfer or assignment of copyright.6 Similarly, the
Penal Code of Ethiopia established criminal offences and penalties for infringement of copyright
works.7

However, the Civil Code provided no speciﬁc rules on the protection of inventions through
patents. On the other hand, the 1960 Commercial Code of Ethiopia does make reference to patents
albeit only in two provisions. Article 127 mentions patents together with other IPRs as elements of a
business while article 148 envisaged the enactment of a special law, which happened only in 1995. The
1957 Penal Code created offences for infringement of industrial property rights, including patents,
but the provisions were not applicable with regard to patents until 1995 when the envisaged speciﬁc
law on the subject was issued for the ﬁrst time.

The 1995 Patent Proclamation was followed, in 1997, by its implementing regulations.8 The
provisions of the Patent Proclamation are not limited to inventions; they also extend to minor
inventions (utility model certiﬁcates) and industrial designs.

The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Constitution9 (the FDRE Constitution) does not
make use of the term “IP” but it makes reference to patents and copyrights in the context of
the distribution of state powers between the federation and the regional states. Under the FDRE

174

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Constitution, only the Federal Government can patent inventions and protect copyrights,10 with the
Federal House of Peoples’ Representatives mandated to enact speciﬁc laws on these matters.11 Pro-
tection of patents and copyrights is thus within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Government.
In addition, as part of its Cultural Objectives, the FDRE Constitution obliges the government
to support the development of the arts, science and technology to the extent its resources permit.
Protection of patents and copyrights could play an important role in the realization of this objective
of the FDRE Constitution. Institutionally, IPRs are now administered by the Ethiopian Intellectual
Property Ofﬁce (EIPO) that was established in 2003 as an autonomous Federal Government organ
accountable to the Ministry of Science and Technology.

Ethiopia is not a party to any of the treaties on IPRs including the Paris Convention, Berne
Convention and Rome Convention but, as will be discussed in this article, Ethiopian IP laws have
drawn on these treaties.12 The 1995 Patent Proclamation should thus be viewed as an instrument
chosen by the legislator in order to further the objectives of the STP rather than for the implementation
of an international treaty obligation, since the country is a party to none. That will change with
Ethiopia’s accession to the WTO. Indeed, to the extent that the substantive provisions of the major
IP treaties, such as the Paris and Berne Conventions, have already been incorporated into the TRIPS
Agreement, Ethiopia’s WTO accession would mean, in effect, accession to those IP treaties. At the
same time, given that the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation and its implementing regulation have drawn
on the relevant international treaties, the gap between Ethiopian law on patents and the requirements
of the TRIPS Agreement should not be too wide.

Overview of the Patent Regime: Patents Available in Any Field of Technology
Under the Patent Proclamation, patents are available for inventions that meet the standard conditions
of novelty, inventive step and industrial applications. The Proclamation requires that the patentee
disclose the invention whose protection he is seeking, prescribes rules on how to make applications
and the examination thereof (including the ﬁrst-to-ﬁle rule and the right of priority), sets down
negative criteria that make an invention nonpatentable, provides for the patentee’s exclusive rights
and limitations thereto and prescribes the conditions for patent termination and surrender. The
duration of a patent is 15 years, which could be extended by another 5 years on condition that the
invention is worked in Ethiopia. Ethiopians and foreigners have equal rights and obligations based
on reciprocity or on the basis of an agreement to which Ethiopia is a party.

The Patent Proclamation does not exclude any speciﬁc technology from patent protection as such
and patents are available to any invention in any technology that would meet the standard patentability
requirements. Ethiopia has recognized patent protection for an invention in any technology without
exception long before it applied for WTO membership. In the pre-TRIPS Agreement era, several
countries used to exclude patent protection in some important ﬁelds of technology to ensure wide
accessibility of critically important goods and services. For example, the Indian Patents Act 1970
speciﬁcally prohibited product patents on substances intended for use, or capable of being used as
food or as medicine or drug while allowing the processes for the making of such substances to be
patentable for a short period of between 5 and 7 years, compared to the 14-year term of protection
for all other types of patents. In the same vein, countries such as Japan, Argentina and Brazil did not
allow patents for chemicals and pharmaceutical products for a long period of time (Odagiri et al.,
p. 9). When the Uruguay Round was launched in 1986, more than 50 countries did not allow patent
protection in one or more ﬁelds with the understanding that patent protection for, for example,

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

175

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

pharmaceutical products hinders their efforts to promote public health (Correa and Yusuf, 2008,
p. 229). It appears that Ethiopia saw no merit in that approach.

One may thus wonder why Ethiopia made available patent protection in all ﬁelds of technology
in the absence of any treaty obligation to do so and in view of the widely shared view relating
to the negative impact of patents on access to essential goods and services as well as the long
practice of several countries in excluding important products, such as pharmaceuticals, from patent
protection in the pre-TRIPS Agreement era to promote public policy objectives. Different reasons
may explain this. First, one explanation could be the general trend of copying patent laws from the
more advanced countries, which is a common phenomenon in the developing world. Indeed one of
the main reasons for the failure of the patent systems in developing countries, including Ethiopia, has
been the replication of patent standards of the developed world without an attempt to reconﬁgure
them in the context of their own needs and priorities (Endeshaw, 1996, p. 263). Second, the Patent
Proclamation seeks, among other things, to encourage local innovation and the drafters might have
had faith in the utilitarian justiﬁcations for patent protection that making patents available to any
technology would encourage local innovation in all sectors as well as facilitate transfer of technology.
As noted, the experience since 1995 shows that this has not happened. Third, the Patent Proclamation
was promulgated in 1995, at the time when the WTO Agreements including the TRIPS Agreement
came into force. The Patent Proclamation might have been informed by the TRIPS Agreement
with the possible understanding on the part of the drafters that sooner or later the country would
become a WTO member and ensuring TRIPS Agreement compatibility of the Patent Proclamation
was hence a forward looking approach. Indeed, as will be shown later in this article, several key
provisions of the Patent Proclamation appear to be in conformity with the TRIPS Agreement. In a
situation where WTO-member LDCs are struggling to implement TRIPS Agreement even after over
15 years of membership and while they are calling for further extensions to their transition periods
for implementation, it is difﬁcult to justify the wisdom of the Ethiopian legislator’s choice to follow
TRIPS Agreement.

Whatever the reason might have been, today that question is no longer that important: Ethiopia
is now in the accession process at the WTO and it has to, inter alia, ensure compliance of its IP
laws with the TRIPS Agreement. The implication is signiﬁcant, certainly more so than, for example,
acceding to the Paris Convention because the TRIPS Agreement is the ﬁrst international instrument
to impose the obligation to make patents available for any invention, whether products or processes,
in all ﬁelds of technology. Today exclusion of any ﬁeld of technology from patent protection has
been outlawed by the TRIPS Agreement. WTO members may in principle no longer exclude any
technology from patent protection.

Under article 28 of the TRIPs Agreement, a patent related to a product confers on the owner the
right to prevent third parties from the acts of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing
for these purposes the product without the owner’s consent. Where the subject matter is a process,
a patent confers on the owner the right to prevent third parties from the act of using the process,
and from the acts of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for these purposes the product
obtained directly by that process without his/her consent. In deﬁning the exclusive rights of a patent
in Ethiopia, article 21.1 of the Patent Proclamation states that a patentee shall have the exclusive right
to make, use or otherwise exploit the patented invention and that third parties are prohibited from
exploiting the patented invention without securing the consent of the patentee. The term “otherwise
exploit” is broad enough to include all the acts included under article 28 of the TRIPS Agreement.
However, the formulation of article 21.1 of the Patent Proclamation seems to have suffered from a
conceptual defect. A patent does not grant an exclusive right to make, use or exploit the patented

176

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

invention but only to exclude third parties from these acts without securing the consent of the
patentee. This has been made clear under article 28 of the TRIPS Agreement.

On the other hand, the Patent Proclamation under article 21.2 clearly stipulates that the patentee
shall not have an import monopoly right over the products of the patented invention to Ethiopia.
While this was taken as an important instrument to check the monopoly associated with patents, it
now stands in clear conﬂict with article 28.1(a) of TRIPS Agreement which provides that the exclusive
right of a patent shall extend to the right to prevent importation. Similarly, the Patent Proclamation
includes no provision similar to article 28.1(b) of TRIPS Agreement, which authorizes that exclusive
rights of a patentee extend to products that are directly obtained by a patented process or method.
The term of protection under the Patent Proclamation is 15 years, which could be extended for
5 more years on condition that the invention was properly worked in Ethiopia. While this appears
to be another attempt to check the abuse of the monopoly associated with patents it again obviously
falls short of the 20-year minimum set by article 33 of the TRIPs Agreement. It is also questionable
if this linkage between the term of a patent and the working of the invention is in line with article
5(A) of the Paris Convention. It appears that the remedy envisaged under that article for failure to
work is grant of a compulsory license (CL) under speciﬁc conditions.

Article 5 of the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation, titled the “Rights of foreign nationals”, provides
for national treatment and states that foreign nationals shall have the same rights as Ethiopians under
two conditions: based on reciprocity or on a treaty to which the country is a party. This means that
the national treatment principle will be applicable to all members of the WTO automatically when
the country becomes a member to that organization. The provision is thus consistent with article 3
of TRIPS Agreement.

The Ethiopian Patent Regime and TRIPS Agreement: Making the Best Out of Flexibilities
Exclusion from Patentability/Use of Protection Criteria
The TRIPS Agreement contains exceptions by which WTO members may exclude from patent
protection an otherwise patentable subject matter. These include inventions that are contrary to ordre
public or morality,13 diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or
animals,14 and plants and animals other than microorganisms, and essentially biological processes
for the production of plants or animals other than nonbiological and microbiological processes.15
However, any member excluding plant varieties from patent protection must provide an effective sui
generis system or a combination of a patent and a sui generis system of protection for such varieties.16
Likewise, the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation also excludes from patentability inventions contrary
to public order or morality;17 plant or animal varieties or essentially biological processes for the
production of plants or animals18 and methods for treatment of the human or animal body by
surgery or therapy, as well as diagnostic methods practiced on the human or animal body.19

For the exclusion of the invention to be justiﬁed on account of ordre public or morality under
article 27.2 of TRIPS Agreement, the risk needs to come not from the invention as such but from
the commercial exploitation of it and the impact is to be considered only within the territory of
the country in question (Gervais, 2008, p. 181). In excluding inventions contrary to public order
or morality from patent protection, article 4.1(a) of the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation does not
clearly prescribe the conditions stated in article 27.2 of the TRIPS Agreement. For example, the
Patent Proclamation does not clearly include the condition “[t]he prevention within their territory
of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to
protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment . . . ”.
However, several patent laws of even the developed countries do not strictly follow the language of

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

177

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

article 27.2 with the possible understanding that the conditions under the TRIPS Agreement could
be considered in the actual interpretation and application of the law.20 But again the Ethiopian case
could be different. Now that the country is negotiating its accession at the WTO, its patent regime
would obviously be scrutinized by WTO members with a possible demand to revise the provisions of
article 4.1(a) of the Patent Proclamation using the speciﬁc language in the TRIPS Agreement. Even
if no question has been raised in relation to this particular provision from WTO members during
the questions–answers stage of the accession so far, it could still be raised at any time during the
accession process and Ethiopia may be required to include the speciﬁc conditions under article 27.2
of TRIPS Agreement. The precise scope of “public order” or “morality” remains unknown since
it has never been subjected to interpretation in Ethiopia. As these terms are not deﬁned by TRIPS
Agreement, there is ample ﬂexibility to interpret the terms on a case-by-case basis (Gervais 2008,
pp. 342–43; Grubb, 2004, p. 281).

In relation to plant varieties, Ethiopia has opted for a sui generis system and while no patent
protection is available for animal or plant varieties or essentially biological processes for the produc-
tion of plants or animals, a plant variety protection is available under, the Proclamation Providing
for Plant Breeders’ Rights (the PBR Proclamation).21 The TRIPS Agreement provides no speciﬁc
rules on what a sui generis system should include except that it must be “effective”. Apart from that
it neither provides a deﬁnition for the term “effective”, nor does it state any standard against which
the effectiveness of the sui generis system is to be assessed. Different authors have tried to interpret
the term “effective” in different ways (International Seed Federation, 2003; Leskien and Flitner,
1997; Lesser, 2000; UPOV, 2002) but we do not yet have an agreed interpretation of the term at the
TRIPS Agreement Council or the DSB of the WTO. Indeed, the submissions to the on-going review
of article 27.3(b) at the TRIPS Agreement Council show the divergent views of WTO members on
this issue (WTO, 2006), which is likely to remain controversial until such time that an authoritative
interpretation emerges either from the TRIPS Agreement Council or from the WTO case law.

The absence of any guide in the TRIPS Agreement on these issues may call for the examination
of article 27.3(b) from within the TRIPS Agreement itself particularly in light of its objectives. The
TRIPS Agreement is founded on the belief that “the protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights should contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer
and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological
knowledge and in a manner conducive to socioeconomic welfare and to the balance of rights and
obligations” (article 7, TRIPS Agreement). The key phrases under article 7 such as “mutual advantage
of producers and users”, “conducive to socioeconomic welfare”, “balance of rights and obligations”
may provide important guidance in designing the effective sui generis system (Leskien and Flitner,
1997).

The PBR Proclamation deﬁnes its subject matter (plant varieties; provides the protection
criteria,22 delimits the subject matter of the right (propagating material of the variety) as well as
the acts requiring the authorization of the breeder (sale and production for sale of the propagating
material of the protected variety),23 and includes different civil and penal sanctions in the event of
infringement of the rights of the breeder.24 These constitute basic elements of a property right. It also
includes exceptions and limitations such as the breeder’s exception and a CL. Farmers are accorded
the right to save, use, exchange and sell farm-saved seed of any protected variety.25 However, the right
of the farmers in relation to a protected variety is limited in two ways. First, the right applies only to
farm-saved seed of a protected variety. Second, even then farmers are prohibited from selling such
seed as certiﬁed seed in the seed industry, which is intended to protect the commercial interest of
the plant breeders. This is in line with the ideas of “mutual advantage of producers and sellers” and
“balance of rights and obligations” under article 7 of the TRIPS Agreement. Given the extremely

178

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

crucial role farmers play in plant breeding and the seed supply system in the country, providing for
their protection is only natural. There is a need to ensure that farmers in Ethiopia continue to access
improved varieties, breed new ones and maintain genetic diversity in their communities while at the
same time providing protection for the commercial interests of the plant breeder. That exactly is what
the PBR Proclamation attempted to do and this is in essence what article 7 of the TRIPS Agreement
prescribes. In the absence of any speciﬁc requirement in the TRIPS Agreement, it is basically up to
each member to deﬁne the scope of the rights of the breeder and limitations to such rights. As things
stand now it is not possible to challenge the PBR Proclamation as incompatible with the TRIPS
Agreement. Some developed countries air the view that the UPOV Conventions should be taken as
a standard to gauge the effectiveness of any sui generis system under the TRIPS Agreement.26 It has
even been argued that to be effective, a plant variety protection should as a minimum conform to
the requirements of the 1991 Act of UPOV (International Seed Federation, 2003). In fact one of the
questions Ethiopia received during the questions–and-answers stage of the accession process is if and
when it would join the UPOV Convention. However, the TRIPS Agreement, which is characterized
by its extensive references to preexisting international treaties, did not refer to the UPOV Conventions
even if the latter predates TRIPS Agreement. This clearly shows that WTO members did not wish
to make use of the UPOV standards to determine the effectiveness of the sui generis system for plant
variety protection. It follows that Ethiopia should not be required to join UPOV as a condition for
its accession to the WTO.

The Patent Proclamation does not mention the term “microorganisms” at all; it does not say
whether such organisms are patentable or if they are excluded from patent protection. The Proclama-
tion singles out plant and animal varieties and if the intention was to exclude all plants, all animals
and microorganisms (life forms in general) a more general provision would have been made to the
effect that “living organisms” were excluded from patentability. This is not the case. In addition,
article 4 of the Proclamation is an exception from the rule that patents apply to all inventions in all
ﬁelds. It follows from this that “microorganisms” are not excluded from patentability. This is con-
sistent with article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement, which unequivocally requires patent protection
for “microorganisms”. Obviously, naturally existing microorganisms could still be excluded from
patentability depending on the interpretation of the terms “inventions” or that of the patentability
requirements provided for by the Patent Proclamation. The same could be the case for “isolated” or
“puriﬁed” microorganisms. That is not inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement to the extent that
the latter does not deﬁne those terms.

Article 4 of the Patent Proclamation also excludes “essentially biological processes for the pro-
duction of plants or animals” from patentability; microbiological processes are not again excluded
from patent protection that is consistent with the TRIPS Agreement.

TRIPS Agreement does not deﬁne such key concepts as “inventions”, “novelty”, “inventive
step” and “industrial application”, and it is basically up to the laws of each member to deﬁne these
concepts. An application for a patent could be rejected as not being an “invention” or if the invention
on which the application has been made does not meet the patentability requirements of novelty,
inventive step and industrial application as these concepts are deﬁned under the Patent Proclamation.
The term “invention” is deﬁned as “[a]n idea of an inventor which permits in practice the solution
to a speciﬁc problem in the ﬁeld of technology”.27 Similarly, standard deﬁnitions have been included
in the Patent Proclamation for the terms, novelty,28 inventive step29 and industrial application.30
Even if the Patent Proclamation has adopted the standard deﬁnitions for the terms there could still
be ample room to interpret the terms taking into account the level of technological innovation in
the country. This is not something to be affected by the TRIPS Agreement. Depending on actual
interpretations of these terms naturally exiting substances may be excluded even when isolated from

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

179

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

nature.31 The same could happen to patentability of new uses of known inventions. This issue could
be clariﬁed during the revision of the Patent Proclamation either by excluding, for example, naturally
existing substances even if isolated from nature speciﬁcally or by including a clear deﬁnition of the
term discovery that does not exist in the Patent Proclamation.

In general, TRIPS Agreement offers two important ﬂexibilities in terms of the protection criteria.
First, the interpretation of these concepts is left to national laws and second, it does not prevent
members from providing protection for minor inventions through other mechanisms such as through
utility models.

The Patent Proclamation also requires disclosure of the invention in a manner sufﬁciently clear
and complete for it to be carried out by a person having ordinary skill in the art, and such a
disclosure shall, in particular, indicate at least one mode known to the applicant for carrying out the
invention.32 A similar provision is found in article 29.1 TRIPS Agreement. The Patent Proclamation
requires the applicant to “indicate at least one mode . . . for carrying out the invention” while the
TRIPS Agreement requires “best mode” disclosure. The latter requirement seems to be more in line
with the policy objectives behind disclosure requirements and this could be taken into account in the
revision of the Patent Proclamation. Disclosure is an important element in the grant of a patent; it is
what the inventor pays in exchange for a monopoly for a long duration. Disclosure allows others to
exploit the invention without difﬁculty after the expiry of the patent (Gervais, 2008, p. 378).

Limitations to Patent Rights
Prior to the coming into force of the TRIPS Agreement, countries were largely free to provide
for exceptions to patent rights in order to promote their socioeconomic development (Garrison,
2006). However, the TRIPS Agreement has introduced some conditions on the nature and scope of
permissible exceptions to patent rights. Under the TRIPS Agreement, national laws could still make
exceptions to patent rights under article 28.1. There is no list of exceptions as such provided for by
the TRIPS Agreement but whatever exception national laws may adopt needs to meet the conditions
under article 30.

Article 30 states:

Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent,
provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conﬂict with a normal exploitation of
the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner,
taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

While there is a general understanding that article 30 may accommodate such exceptions as
private and noncommercial use of the patent, and some use of the invention for research, experi-
mental or academic purposes, the precise scope of the exception remains undeﬁned (Garrison, 2006;
UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005) .

Article 30 was a subject of interpretation by the WTO Panel in Canada-Patent Protection of
Pharmaceutical Products (Canada-Pharmaceutical),33 where the EC challenged the consistency with
the TRIPS Agreement of two provisions (section 55.2(1) and section 55.2(2)) of the Canadian Patent
Act. The ﬁrst allowed third parties to make, construct, use or sell the patented invention for uses
related to the development and submission of information required for the purpose of obtaining
regulatory marketing approval without the consent of the patent owner (regulatory review exception)
and the second allows the same acts for the manufacture and storage of articles intended for sale
after the date on which the term of the patent expires (stockpiling exception).

Some of the ﬁndings of the Panel are discussed here only to the extent necessary as a basis for
the discussion on TRIPS Agreement compatibility of the exceptions under the Ethiopian Patent

180

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Proclamation. The Panel identiﬁed three cumulative criteria to be complied with in order for an
exception to be justiﬁed under article 30: the exceptions should (1) be limited, (2) not unreasonably
conﬂict with the normal exploitation of the patents and (3) not prejudice the legitimate interest of
the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties (the “three-step test”).34
Each condition needs to be viewed as a separate and independent requirement and failure to meet
one will mean the exception is not justiﬁed under article 30. In relation to the ﬁrst criterion, that
is, that the exception must be “limited”, the Panel stated that the exception should be narrow in
scope, that it should “make only a small diminution of the right in question”.35 The limiting effect
of the exception has to be considered on a case-by-case basis and an exception may not necessarily
be considered “limited” simply because it was conﬁned to a certain area of technology.36 But the
Panel noted that this condition does not address the economic impacts of the exception on the right
holder; such impacts are taken care of by the second and third conditions.37 While the Panel found
that the regulatory review exception was limited, it noted that in the absence of any limitation on the
quantity of production the stockpiling exception removes the exclusive rights and hence abrogates
such rights entirely during the time it is in effect and hence not limited.38 The Panel however did not
deﬁne what level of limitation could be justiﬁed under article 30 for the use to be limited, suggesting
that this should be considered on a case-by-case basis. In relation to the second condition, the Panel
started its analysis by deﬁning “exploitation” and “normal”. The former is deﬁned as a “commercial
activity by which patent owners employ their exclusive patent rights to extract economic value from
their patent”, while the latter is deﬁned as “the kind of commercial activity Article 30 seeks to
protect”.39 The Panel found out that the “Normal exploitation of the patent” has to be seen in the
light of the patentee’s “right to exclude all forms of competition that could detract signiﬁcantly from
the economic return anticipated from the patent’s grant of market exclusivity”.40 The important
message the Panel wanted to convey in the interpretation of article 30 is that patent owners have the
legitimate interest that competitors be prevented from competing with them as regards the patented
invention and thus deprive them of signiﬁcant commercial gain. Nonetheless, in evaluating whether
or not the exception prejudices the legitimate interests of the patent owner article 30 provides that the
“legitimate interests of third parties” should be taken into consideration. The Panel interpreted the
phrase “legitimate interest” as “interests that are justiﬁable in the sense that they are supported by
relevant public policy or other social norms”.41 Such interests are broader than “legal interests”.42
But the Panel left open the question of the scope of the “legitimate interest of third parties”.

The Panel recognized that articles 7 and 8 of the TRIPS Agreement need to be considered in
determining the scope of article 30 in general.43 The Doha Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health
(the Doha Declaration)44 also requires that the TRIPS Agreement should be interpreted in light of
its object and purpose, which is a standard principle of interpretation of treaties under the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (Abbott, 2004 p. 447). The idea conveyed in these articles is that
protection and enforcement of IPRs should not only be about protecting the interests of the patentee;
the different technological, developmental and other public policy interests should also be taken into
account. These are interests that need to be taken into account as the “legitimate interests of third
parties” in crafting the exceptions to the right of the patentee under article 30.

Article 25.1 of the Patent Proclamation lays down different limitations on the rights of the paten-
tee. Under this provision, the rights of the patentee do not extend to (1) acts done for noncommercial
purposes; (2) the use of the patented invention solely for the purposes of scientiﬁc research & exper-
imentation; (3) acts in respect of patented articles that have been put on the market in Ethiopia, by
the owner of the patent or with his consent or (4) the use of patented articles on aircraft, land vehicles
or vessels of other countries which temporarily or accidentally enter into the air space, territory or
waters of Ethiopia.

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

181

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

While these are standard exceptions found in the patent laws of many countries, the language
used could vary from one national law to another and in all cases their validity under article 30 of
TRIPS Agreement will be determined on a case-by-case basis.

Acts Done for Noncommercial Purposes
It has long been recognized that patents should shield the patent owner from commercial exploitation
of his invention and the rights do not extend to noncommercial and private use of the patents,
ostensibly because of the understanding that such uses would have little impacts on the economic
interest of the patent owner (Garrison, 2006). As a result “private and noncommercial” use, that
is, both private and noncommercial use of the patented invention has been a common exception in
many jurisdictions. Under such formulation of the exception, neither private commercial activities
nor public noncommercial activities would be covered. This may thus exclude the use of patented
inventions by not-for-proﬁt organizations such as schools, hospitals, charities etc.

The formulation under the Patent Proclamation is somehow different and the language of
“noncommercial use”, without the qualiﬁcation of “private”, appears to be broader than the standard
“private and noncommercial use” exception. It appears that the exception covers both public and
private uses of the invention as long as such uses are noncommercial. The broad approach pursued
by the Patent Proclamation could provide a shield to those carrying on noncommercial activities on
a more broad scale, including the activities of not-for-proﬁt entities. Whether this broad approach
would survive scrutiny under article 30 cannot be determined as it has not been directly addressed
in the WTO case law. For example, it could be controversial if the exception could be said to be
limited as that term was interpreted by the WTO Panel in view of the fact that it covers both private
and public use even if only for noncommercial purposes. Obviously, the article has tried to protect
the economic interests of the patentee by limiting the use only for noncommercial purposes. In the
absence of clear requirements under TRIPS Agreement, Ethiopia stands to beneﬁt by maintaining
this exception as it is since access to the invention by private and public entities promotes a wider
public policy objective in the context of Ethiopia.

Experimental/Scientiﬁc Use Exception
The idea that exclusive rights of the patent owner should not go to the extent of hampering scientiﬁc
progress is a long standing one and there has been a long tradition of permitting use of the patented
invention for scientiﬁc research and experiments (Garrison, 2006, p. 4). Experimental or scientiﬁc use
exception allows researchers and scientists to use patented inventions for carrying out experiments
and scientiﬁc research, including experimenting on the patented invention so as to improve on it
without requiring a license to use the patented invention. Depending on the scope of the exception
under national law, it may also allow manufacturing of the patented invention for the purpose of
experimentation or for scientiﬁc research. Thus, although several jurisdictions recognize research
exception in their patent laws, the scope of the exemption varies from country to country. There
appears to be little controversy when the use of the protected invention is for research and experi-
mentation purposes provided it is not intended for commercial purposes (Eaton and Tongeren, 2004).
In some jurisdictions, the exception could also include research even when some commercial activity
is involved (Cornish, 1998, p. 736). A survey of the patent laws of 27 countries shows that research
exception is recognized in at least 25 of the countries either by law or through case law, though
the scope of the exception varies across countries surveyed (Gold et al., 2005). The technologically
advanced countries generally tend to have a more restrictive research/experimental exception, which

182

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

apply only on a patented invention not with the patented invention (Gold et al., 2005). The exception
is even more restricted in some of the technologically advanced countries such as Canada where it
applies only for the purpose of regulatory approval. In the United States, the Courts have adopted
a more restricted experimental use exception, which allows use of the patented invention “solely for
amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly philosophical inquiry”.45 It is argued that such
a narrow understanding of the exception may have a signiﬁcant adverse impact on the ability of
researchers to operate in the United States (Miller, 2003).

In Japan, the experimental use exception is speciﬁcally provided for in the patent law.46 The
exception has been interpreted to apply for two purposes: one is to verify that a patented invention
is working and can be repeated based on patent speciﬁcation (experiment) and second, in order to
develop better products and processes based on the invention (research; Johnson, 2003, p. 499). The
Japanese Supreme Court has also ruled that the breadth of section 69(1) of the Patent Law should
allow beneﬁcial experimental use such as investigating the patentability of an invention, analyzing
the function of the invention and developing and improving on the invention (Katsuya, 2006). The
exception applies to a research on or with the patented invention, that is, to use patented inventions
to improve on them as well as to use them for further improvement of products and processes, and
thus is more liberal than that in the United States.

On the other hand, the survey discussed above shows that most of the developing countries
generally recognize a broad research exception, which allow research on or with the patented invention
as in the Japanese Patent Law (Gold et al., 2005).47

Under article 25.1(b) of the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation, the rights of the patentee shall
not extend to “the use of the patented invention solely for the purpose of scientiﬁc research and
experimentation”. The scope of the exception remains unknown because it has never been subjected
to interpretation in Ethiopia. In particular, it is not clear whether the exception is limited only to
experiments or researches of noncommercial nature or if it could on a case-by-case basis extend to
experiment or research even with some commercial end. It is to be noted that the Patent Proclamation
does not require that this exception apply when the use relates to the subject matter of the patented
invention.

It may be argued that if the intention was to limit the experiment/research exception to noncom-
mercial acts there was then no need to make a speciﬁc exception for experiment/research since the
general exception of use of the patent for noncommercial purposes would take care of any act done
for noncommercial purposes. This may lead to the conclusion that whether the act is commercial or
noncommercial is not an important factor to assess the validity of the exception under article 25.1(b).
On the other hand, the use of the term “solely” under article 25.1(b) seems to have been intended
to limit the scope of the exception in relation to scientiﬁc research and experimentation. The Chinese
patent law uses the same provisions as the Ethiopian one: “solely for scientiﬁc, research and experi-
mentation”, which was interpreted to allow only experimentation on the patented product or use of
the patented process in experimentation; only for experimentation on the invention and not with the
invention (Yuhe and Yanfeng, 2008, p. 19).

Such a narrow interpretation of the exception is unwarranted in Ethiopia as it may have a negative
implication on research and experiments given the current conditions in the country and makes the
Ethiopian Patent Regime more restrictive than the laws of several developing countries or even some
of the developed countries (Garrison, 2006).

The issue as to what kind of activities in relation to experiment or research would meet the
requirements of article 30 TRIPS Agreement remains unclear, but there is no speciﬁc condition
under article 30 that dictates that this should necessarily be noncommercial. The whole purpose of
the exception is to ensure that the exclusive rights of patents do not stiﬂe technological progress and

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

183

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Ethiopia needs to encourage the generation of new knowledge by allowing a more generous exception
for the purpose of experiment/research. Researchers in Ethiopia may need to use a patented invention
to understand and gain knowledge about the invention as well as to use the invention to undertake
further research. Ethiopia needs to clearly recognize the use of a patented invention for the purpose
of research and/or experimentation on or relating to the patented invention (research on); with or
using the patented invention (research with) and that the commercial intention of the use should not
be the sole ground to exclude experiment/research from being part of the exception. In a country
where the few patents are almost entirely owned by foreigners, which is likely to remain the case
for the foreseeable future, a broader exception is a much preferred approach. It is to be noted that
this exception is one of the key instruments to translate into reality the objectives of both the Patent
Proclamation and the STP and as such it should be considered seriously. A broad research/experiment
exception may play an important role to foster innovation by the small- and medium-sized enterprises
that do not have the capacity to negotiate for licenses as well as to enable local researchers and
institutions to better understand technologies and engage in incremental innovation.

Foreign Vessels, Aircraft or Land Vehicles Exception
Under article 25.1(d) of the Ethiopian Patent Proclamation, the right of the patentee shall not
extend to “the use of patented Articles on aircraft, land vehicles or vessels of other countries which
temporarily or accidentally enter into the air space, territory, or waters of Ethiopia”. Article 5ter of the
Paris Convention has also taken this as a mandatory exception using the phrase “In any country of the
Union the following shall not be considered as infringements of the rights of a patentee . . . ”, which
has also become a mandatory exception for all WTO members by virtue of article 2.1 of the TRIPS
Agreement. Article 25.1(d) of the Patent Proclamation employs the same terms of “temporarily” or
“accidentally” entering a territory, just as the Paris Convention does. However, it does not limit the
use of the patented product to the body of the foreign vessels, aircrafts or land vehicles exclusively for
the needs of the vessel, aircraft or land vehicle as in the Paris Convention. This is a clear requirement
under the Paris Convention/TRIPS Agreement, which needs to be taken into account while revising
the Patent proclamation

Prior Use Exception
Under article 26.1 of the Patent Proclamation any person who in good faith has been using the
invention covered by an application for protection on or prior to the ﬁling date or, where priority is
claimed, the priority date of the application, has a personal right to continue to use that invention
despite the existence of the patent. This means that a third party who had already been using the
invention in different ways before the inventor makes an application for a patent in relation to the
same invention is allowed to continue to use it despite the fact that the invention is now protected
by a patent. This is clearly a limitation on the rights of the patent owner since his rights would not
extend to such uses.

The scope of this exception remains largely undeﬁned and it is not clear what kind of limitation on
this exception would make it compatible with the conditions under article 30 of TRIPS Agreement.
One way to limit such an exception for the purpose of article 30 is to allow third persons only to
continue doing whatever they were doing before the patent application was made even if some argue
this alone will not adequately limit the exception (Carvalho, 2010, p. 423). The Patent Proclamation
seems to have included this and other conditions that limit the scope of this exception. First, the
use of the phrase “ . . . has a personal right to continue to use that invention . . . ” seems to suggest

184

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

that third parties are allowed only to continue doing whatever they were doing before the grant of
the patent. They cannot use the patent more than they did before. Second, the right is limited to
“person in good faith” whatever that means in practice. Third, the reference to a “personal right”
suggests that the use of the exception is limited to the prior user alone. This means, for example, that
while the patentee may grant licenses for the working of his invention, the prior user can work it
only personally. Fourth, article 26.2 clearly prescribes that the right of prior users may be transferred
only together with the enterprise or business or with that part of the enterprise or business, in which
the use or preparations for use have been made. It is thus clear that the Patent Proclamation has
attempted to limit the scope of this exception with a view to protecting the economic interests of the
patentee while allowing third parties who have been using the patent in good faith to continue with
the use.

Parallel Importation
There has been a long-held understanding that the IP holder “exhausts” his exclusive rights when
he freely places on the market the products or services containing the IP (UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005,
p. 93). When the rights are thus exhausted the goods or services embodying the IP would be out of the
control of the IP holder in that particular market and the goods or services could be imported from the
country where they were ﬁrst released in parallel to the ofﬁcial channels of distribution established by
the IPR holder (parallel imports; UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005, p. 93). For different reasons, companies
may sometime sell their products at different prices in different markets and parallel importers take
advantage of these price differences and purchase certain IPR-protected products at low prices in a
low-price country and sell them in high price countries.

Under article 25.1(c) of the Patent Proclamation patent rights do not extend to “acts in respect of
patented Articles which have been put on the market in Ethiopia, by the owner of the patent or with
his consent”. It means that exhaustion is considered as a limitation to the rights of the patent holder.
Under the exhaustion rule discussed above there is no need to make a speciﬁc exception since the
ﬁrst sale of the product or service containing the patent simply exhausts the patent right. Under the
Patent Proclamation exhaustion is considered as an exception with the implicit understanding that
the patentee’s right extends to acts even after the products or services containing the patent are put
on the market by the patentee or with his consent. Conceptually, this is different from the principle
of exhaustion as discussed above.

The most important issue in relation to exhaustion of IPRs is whether such rights exhaust locally
or internationally. Under article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement exhaustion of IPRs is not a subject
of dispute settlement except in cases relating to national treatment and MFN. Article 6 does not
describe what exhaustion is; nor does it clearly say whether members are free to determine their own
exhaustion regime. However, this has been elaborated by the Doha Declaration, which states that it
is up to each member to determine its own exhaustion regime.48 If a country adopts an international
exhaustion rule, the ﬁrst sale or marketing of the good or service containing the IPR in another
country exhausts the IP of the right holder in the country concerned. As a result, the right holder
could not oppose importation of the product or service from the country where the product was ﬁrst
marketed or sold. On the other hand, if a country opts for a national exhaustion rule, the IPR will
only exhaust when the ﬁrst sale or marketing of the good or service occurs within the territory of the
country concerned.

Under article 25.1(c) of the Patent Proclamation, patent rights shall not extend to articles that
have been put on the market in Ethiopia by the patent owner or with his consent. This appears to
be a national exhaustion regime where patent rights extend to those articles that have been put on

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

185

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

the market outside of Ethiopia by the patent owner or with his consent. A patentee who puts his
invention on a market outside of Ethiopia will not lose his right to control further distribution and
resale of the product in Ethiopia. In other words, the products cannot be parallel imported form a
foreign market where they were put on that market by the patent owner or with his consent.

On the other hand, under article 22(b) of the Patent Proclamation a patent does not confer the
exclusive right to import the product containing the invention. This means that the patentee cannot
prohibit third parties from importing the product of a patented invention put on the market outside
of Ethiopia by the patentee or with his consent. Under such circumstances, the issue of national
exhaustion makes little sense simply because the patentee does not have an import monopoly right.
Nonetheless, excluding the right to importation from the ambit of the patent right is in clear conﬂict
with article 28 of the TRIPS Agreement, which states that the exclusive right of the patent owner
includes importation of the patented product or the product of the patented process. The best option
for Ethiopia is to provide that a patent right extends to importation but patent rights shall not extend
to articles put on the market anywhere in the world legitimately (international exhaustion). This
avoids any conﬂict with the TRIPS Agreement while allowing potential beneﬁts of an international
exhaustion regime. Though international exhaustion would not be a magic bullet to resolve problems
associated with import monopolies, it could be of help under some speciﬁc circumstances. Under
speciﬁc cases, international exhaustion might allow the country to purchase patented products at
the lowest prices charged for that product on foreign markets. It may also bring a greater degree of
international competition since it allows purchase from different markets.

The exception applies to “Articles which have been put on the market in Ethiopia, by the owner
of the patent or with his consent”. The consent of the patent owner is thus a condition for the
application of this provision. It appears that the exception does not apply to a situation where the
goods have been put on the market by legitimate acts of the government but without the consent of
the right holder such as through a CL. The TRIPS Agreement does not address this issue as it did
not attempt to deﬁne exhaustion. Under the TRIPS Agreement, a CL should only be made upon
payment of fair compensation to the right holder.49 To the extent that a CL is a legitimate right of
governments recognized under the TRIPS Agreement and it is made with adequate compensation
of the right holder, it could be argued that the placing on the market of the product through a
CL exhausts the right. Section 107 (A) of the Indian Patent Act has been amended to address this
situation by replacing the language “from a person who is duly authorized by the patentee to sell
or distribute the product” to a new language: “from a person who is duly authorized under the law
to produce and sell or distribute the product”. This clearly includes production under a CL since as
could be understood from the phrase “duly authorized under the law”. Unfortunately, there is no
much jurisprudence on exhaustion since the major IP treaties do not speciﬁcally deal with the issue.
Ethiopia as a LDC need to facilitate access to patented products and as such it stands to beneﬁt to
pursue India’s approach by adopting an international exhaustion regime that would apply when the
products containing the invention is put on the market anywhere in the world for a legitimate ground
including a CL.

Regulatory Approval Exception
Another important exception very relevant particularly in the context of promoting access to af-
fordable medicines is what is known as the regulatory approval exception. A patent confers upon its
holder the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, etc. the protected product or process;
it, however, does not entitle the right owner to put the patented product on the market. With respect
to pharmaceutical products, such authorization may only be obtained from a specialized government

186

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

regulatory body, in the case of Ethiopia, the Ethiopian Food, Medicine and Healthcare Administra-
tion and Control Authority. Obtaining approval for the marketing of a drug might take time and the
patentee could use his exclusive right to prevent generic producers from using the patented substance
for the purpose of obtaining marketing approval. If the patentee were allowed to do so, a generic
producer could only submit his request for marketing approval after the expiry of the term of the
patent. Since the approval process may take time, the generic drugs would be available long after the
expiry of the patent. If again, the patentee was allowed to do so it would mean that he would
have effective control of the market even after the term of the patent has elapsed. This would cer-
tainly have important implications on access to drugs at affordable prices and that is why the issue
of making speciﬁc exception to use the patented invention for requesting regulatory approval has
become an important issue.

Under the Patent Proclamation the patentee shall have the right to preclude any person from,
among others, using the patented product.50 The term “using” could possibly be construed to
include the submission of a patented substance to secure regulatory approval. The exceptions under
article 25 of the Patent Proclamation do not include any reference to use of patented substances
for the purpose of requesting marketing approval before the expiry of the patent term. This may
become an important bottleneck for generic manufacturers. Inclusion of this speciﬁc exception in
the Patent Proclamation would be an important measure from the point of view of promoting access
to affordable medicine in Ethiopia. As noted earlier a WTO Panel in Canada—Pharmaceuticals has
ruled that such exceptions fall within the ambit of article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement. The revision
work of the Patent Proclamation should clearly provide for this exception.

Article 39.3 of the TRIPS Agreement imposes an obligation on WTO members to protect against
unfair commercial use of conﬁdential data (e.g. trials data) on new chemical entities submitted by
companies to obtain approval for marketing new drugs from the concerned regulatory agency. The
TRIPS Agreement does not require the imposition of data exclusivity as such on these test data,
but only protection against unfair commercial use of the data. In the light of this, while Ethiopia
would be required to protect test data against unfair commercial use in order to protect the legitimate
interests of the originators of data, the TRIPS Agreement gives the freedom on how this may be
done. Ethiopia may allow health authorities to approve equivalent generic substitutes by relying on
the original data. In other words, data protection could be granted without hindering the entry of
generic competitors in the Ethiopian market. In other words, Ethiopia might be required to provide
protection of test data but this could be done while at the same time allowing use of the data by local
pharmaceutical companies so that they would be able to produce generic versions of the drug upon
the expiry of the patent on the particular drug.

Compulsory Licensing/Government Use of Patents
Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement permits WTO members to grant a CL subject to fulﬁlment
of certain conditions.51 It lists some speciﬁc examples as possible grounds for issuing a CL but
provides no exhaustive list of grounds for such licenses. However, it lays down some obligations of
a substantive and procedural nature aimed at protecting the legitimate interests of the right holder.
Article 31 combines a CL with that of a government use of inventions even if a distinction between
the two is made in different national laws (Wata, 2000, p. 319). Government use, also known as
“public noncommercial use” is an authorization of a government given to a government department
to exploit by itself or through a contractor a patented invention without the consent of the right
holder, for a noncommercial purpose (Correa, 2007, p. 317). Government use of inventions is an easier
mechanism to address public needs because fewer conditions are attached to it than a standard CL.52

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

187

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

The TRIPS Agreement itself provides less-stringent conditions for government use of inventions than
a standard CL.53

Coming to Ethiopia, article 25(2) of the Patent Proclamation provides that patented inventions
could be exploited without the consent of the patentee where such a measure is deemed necessary
on account of public interest particularly for reasons of health, nutrition, national security or for
the development of other vital sectors of the national economy.54 The Patent Proclamation deals
with these measures as limitations to patent rights separate from a CL, which is treated under
section 7. Article 25(2) of the Patent Proclamation speciﬁcally includes some of the important
conditions under article 31 of the TRIPs Agreement with regard to public noncommercial use while
some of the conditions could be inferred from the provisions of article 25(2). The requirement
of “equitable” remuneration under the Patent Proclamation may take care of the condition of
“adequate” remuneration under article 31(h) of the TRIPs Agreement. In the same vein, while
article 31(j) of the TRIPS Agreement requires review of the amount of compensation by a “distinct
higher authority”, which may not necessarily be judicial, the Patent Proclamation allows review
of the amount of compensation by a court of law. This is actually TRIPS-plus. Under the TRIPS
Agreement as in the Patent Proclamation, there is no obligation for prior negotiation with the
patentee for voluntary license in case of use of the patented invention for public noncommercial use.
Moreover, in the case of public noncommercial use the patent holder may be informed after the use
of the invention has taken place, as soon as it is reasonably practicable (article 31.b), a condition
which is not clearly stated under the Patent Proclamation. This is also TRIPS-plus. Some of the
conditions under article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement such as the requirement that authorization be
“predominantly for the supply of the domestic market of the member authorizing such use” under
article 31(f) and “the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it
was authorized” under article 31(c) could be inferred from the purpose of granting the authorization
under article 25(2) of the Patent Proclamation. In any case, there is no need to follow the exact
wordings of article 31 and some of the conditions could be applied in the actual interpretation and
use of the provisions (Wata, 2000, p. 326).

Section 7 of the Patent Proclamation deals with a “CL”. Under article 29, there are two important
grounds justifying a grant of a CL. First, when an invention cannot be worked without the invention
patented earlier or when, earlier invention cannot be worked without a later invention (dependent
patents). While the issue of dependent patents is treated even under the TRIPS Agreement, a CL on
this ground is subject to special conditions under the Agreement.55 The Patent Proclamation has not
speciﬁcally included these requirements.

The second ground for a grant of a CL is when the patentee fails to exploit the invention in
Ethiopia within a period of 3 years from the date of the grant of the patent or 4 years from the
date of ﬁling of the patent application whichever expires last, which is exactly the same as article
5(A) (4) of the Paris Convention. Under the Patent Proclamation, the patentee is under obligation to
work the invention in Ethiopia or to authorize third parties to do so in a scale that is adequate and
reasonable in the circumstances.56 “Working of a Patented Invention” is deﬁned as “the manufacture
of a patented article or the application of a patented process, by an effective and serious establishment
existing within Ethiopia”.57 Noncompliance with such an obligation does not lead to cancellation or
forfeiture of the patent; there are two other consequences: ﬁrst, the possibility of a CL being issued,
and, second, denial of the additional 5-year term (renewal of the patent for 5 more years). Whether
this linkage between the term of patents and lack of working is in accordance with article 5(A) of
the Paris Convention is questionable and in any case such a linkage is not possible under the TRIPS
Agreement because as noted the term of patent is 20 years in all cases without any condition.

188

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

The TRIPS Agreement does not speciﬁcally prohibit the granting of a CL in cases of lack
of working or insufﬁcient working. However, article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement stipulates that
“patent rights shall be enjoyable without discrimination . . . whether the products are imported or
locally produced”. The issue is whether the working obligation could be met by supplying the market
with the patented article or the article manufactured by the patented process without the need to
manufacture the patented article in the country where it was granted. Under article 5(A) (2) of the
Paris Convention, a CL could be granted in order to check the abuse of the exercise of a patent right,
and “failure to work” was speciﬁcally mentioned as one example of abuse of a patent right warranting
a CL. Bodenhausen (1999, p. 71) suggested that the local working requirement entails an obligation
to industrially manufacture the patented product or industrial application of the patented process
and importation or sale will not be regarded as working. There is general view that the working
requirement is not thus in conﬂict with article 27.1 of TRIPS Agreement (Correa, 2007, p. 285;
Halewood, 1997, p. 263). A different view is that importation should be considered working and
that a CL on the basis of whether the patent is locally manufactured or imported would constitute
discrimination under article 27.1 (Carvalho, 2010, p. 284; Gervais, 2008 p. 340). The different views
notwithstanding, several WTO members maintain that the TRIPS Agreement does not prohibit
them from requiring the local working of inventions (WTO, 2001). The Preamble of the TRIPS
Agreement, as well as articles 7 and 8, make it clear that one of the objectives of the Agreement is
to promote technology transfer, which may be ensured in some circumstances by allowing a CL on
grounds of lack of working or insufﬁcient working. Ethiopia needs to maintain its position in this
regard.

Under the Patent Proclamation, a CL for lack of working applies only to cases where the patentee
fails to work the invention without “legitimate reason to justify his action” (article 29.3). It means
that the patentee could defend himself by stating that his inaction was due to a legitimate reason,
which is again consistent with article 5(A) (4) of the Paris Convention. The person seeking a CL
should also prove that his attempt to secure a voluntary license on reasonable terms has failed.58
But no time period has been given as a reasonable time within which such an attempt should have
been made as stated under article 31(b). When granted, a CL does not prevent the owner from the
exploitation of the invention or licensing the patent to third parties.59 The licensee has neither
the exclusive right to exploit the invention nor the right to authorize third parties to do the same.60
The licensee should also pay a reasonable exploitation fee to be ﬁxed by the parties failing which
it will be ﬁxed by the Commission (now EIPO).61 However, article 25.2 of the Patent Proclamation
allows appeal to a court only with regard to the amount of remuneration and not on the legal validity
of the decision for authorization as stated under article 31(i), which should be considered in the
revision of the law.

The Patent Proclamation does not state the possibility of granting a CL for the purpose of
remedying anticompetitive behavior on the part of the patent holder, resulting in excessive prices
of the patented product. While a CL could be granted on account of “public interest”, which may
possibly be deﬁned broadly to include this situation, from the point of view of facilitating competition
between or among patent owners, there may be a need to make a speciﬁc reference to anticompetitive
behavior and resulting excessive prices as a reason for the granting of a CL. Ethiopia may also consider
allowing for the grant of a CL and/or government use on the ground of “national emergency” or
“circumstances of extreme urgency” making use of the more ﬂexible condition as provided for under
the TRIPS Agreement.

In general, Ethiopia should maintain this provision with some adjustment as outlined in the
foregoing paragraphs. A number of developing countries have used a CL to facilitate access to

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

189

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

essential goods and services to their citizens.62 There will certainly be a time where a CL would
become an important to promote a range of public policy objectives in Ethiopia.

Transition Periods for Implementation of TRIPS Agreement Obligations: What Does it
Mean for Ethiopia as an Acceding LDC?
Transition periods are important instruments for countries such as Ethiopia where capacity is limited
and resources are scarce. They may also provide policy space in IP policy for these countries to
promote their developmental objectives.

The TRIPS Agreement granted a transition period, until 1 January 2006, for the introduction
of minimum standards of IPR protection in LDCs.63 Under the Doha Declaration64 and the 2002
Decision of the TRIPS Agreement Council (the 2002 Decision),65 this period was extended until 1
January 2016 with respect to pharmaceutical products. Even though this is not expressly stated in the
2001 Decision or in the Doha Declaration, the extension presumably encompasses pharmaceutical
processes needed for the manufacture of the respective products for otherwise the extension would
be of little value, as exclusive rights on the required manufacturing process would still block access
to the pharmaceutical product directly obtained through the patented process.

It is to be noted that the existing transition periods are of little relevance to Ethiopia since it is still
at the initial stage of the accession process and it is not certain that the accession will be completed
before the expiry of the 2016 transition period for LDCs. Even if the accession is completed before
then, the remaining period would be too short to fully implement TRIPS Agreement and in such
cases it is advisable to try to secure a separate transition period for implementation. The discussion
in this section is made with the assumption that the existing transition periods would be extended
further in which case they become very relevant for Ethiopia.

One issue in relation to the extended transition period for LDCs is whether or not Ethiopia, as
an acceding LDC would be entitled to it automatically. This is because the obligations of acceding
members are determined by their terms of accession and these countries may not necessarily be
entitled to the rights accorded to existing LDC members. What the accession experience of Cambodia
and Nepal suggests is that acceding countries may not necessarily be entitled to the rights of the LDC
WTO members and their fate is determined more by the terms of accession than the WTO rules
(Grynberg and Joy, 2004). Both countries were required to enforce the TRIPS Agreement fully by
July 2007 (WTO, 2003). On the other hand, Cape Verde was entitled to the full 2016 transition
period (WTO, 2007). While the accession experiences vary, Ethiopia should strive to beneﬁt from the
extension period in full based on the recent experience of Cape Verde’s accession.

Assuming that the transition period applies to Ethiopia, the next issue is as to whether or not
the transition period will beneﬁt Ethiopia—a country that has already recognized patents in all ﬁelds
of technology and though few patents for pharmaceutical products have already been granted. In
general, the TRIPS Agreement states that a member availing itself of a transition period under article
65.5 “shall ensure that any changes in its laws, regulations and practice made during that period do
not result in a lesser degree of consistency with the provisions of this Agreement”.66 However, this
provision does not apply to LDCs such as Ethiopia whose transition period is provided for under
article 66, which does not carry a similar limitation to that under article 65.5. On the other hand, the
2005 Decision of the TRIPS Agreement Council to extend the transition period to implement the
entire TRIPS Agreement by LDCs until 1 July 2013 (the 2005 Decision) contains a similar provision
to the one under article 65.5.67 Under the 2005 Decision, LDCs cannot thus reduce the level of
consistency of their laws with the TRIPS Agreement but they can bring their TRIPS Agreement plus

190

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

provisions down to the TRIPS Agreement level. Nonetheless, the 2002 Decision does not include
a similar limitation of not going below the minimum standards of TRIPS Agreement. Arguably,
LDCs could go below the minimum TRIPS Agreement standard in relation to the protection of
pharmaceutical products and their protection through patents and undisclosed information until the
2016 transition period expires.

For Ethiopia, the above means that it may bring down its TRIPS-plus IPR regimes down to
the TRIPS Agreement level and until 1 January 2016, it may choose to discontinue protecting
pharmaceutical products through patents or undisclosed information. This may be done through
actual amendments to the Patent Proclamation, or by nonenforcement of patents and undisclosed
information in relation to pharmaceuticals.

A particular issue arises with respect to patents granted in Ethiopia already. The 2002 Decision
states that members will not be obliged, with respect to pharmaceutical products, to enforce rights
provided for under the TRIPS Agreement provisions on patents and undisclosed information. Though
not clear, the language appears to include rights already granted. In any case, this would not be a
serious issue for Ethiopia to the extent that patent protection in general and for pharmaceutical
products in particular remains quite limited at the moment.

Enforcement
Part III of the TRIPS Agreement provides detailed rules on enforcement of IPRs. The Agreement lays
down certain general principles applicable to all IPRs as well as provisions on civil and administrative
procedures and remedies, provisional measures, special requirements related to border measures and
criminal procedures including the procedures and remedies that must be available so that right holders
can effectively enforce their rights. Article 41 describes the general obligation of members, both with
respect to enforcement of IPRs and procedural due process. Article 41.2 makes a general enforcement
obligation:

Members shall ensure that enforcement procedures . . . are available under their law so as
to permit effective actions against any act of infringement of intellectual property rights
covered by this Agreement, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and
remedies which constitute a deterrent to further infringements. These procedures shall
be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to
provide for safeguards against their abuse.

It is clear that the obligation is not to place a separate judicial organ or to put additional resources
for the enforcement of IP rights. Enforcement could be accommodated in the existing system. While
article 41.2 makes use such terms as effective, fair, equitable expeditious there is no standard to
measure fulﬁllment of these standards.

The Patent Proclamation contains few provisions on infringement and remedies for infringement.
Indeed, the only provision that deals directly with this issue is article 24, which entitles the patentee
to bring an action in court when his rights are infringed by a third party. This is in addition to
“any other rights, remedies or actions available to him” in any other law. In contrast to the Patent
Proclamation, the more recent IP laws of the country such as the Copyright Proclamation and the
Trademark Registration Proclamation contain a range of provisions on infringement and remedies
such as injunctions, border measures and civil and criminal remedies. The Patent Proclamation was
issued in 1995 at the same time as the TRIPS Agreement entered into force. While as noted the Patent
Proclamation appears to have been informed by the TRIPS Agreement in some areas this does not
appear to be the case when it comes to IP enforcement and remedies for infringement. It is thus

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

191

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

no wonder that most of the IPR-related questions received by Ethiopia from WTO members at the
questions-and-answers stage of the accession process were on IP enforcement.

In terms of enforcement, the Patent Proclamation needs to be revised with additional provisions

including in the following areas:

r administrative procedures in conformity with the principles contained in articles 42–49 of the

TRIPS Agreement;

r allowing judges the authority to adopt provisional measures inaudita altera parte (ex parte) as

required in article 50(2) of the TRIPS Agreement;

r conferring on judges the authority to order infringers to pay right holders’ enforcement costs

(including, e.g. attorney’s fees) as per article 45(2) of the TRIPS Agreement;

r granting judges the authority to order that goods found to be infringing be disposed of outside

the channels of commerce as per article 46 of the TRIPS Agreement;

r requiring the right holder to be notiﬁed within a reasonable time of a decision by the competent
authority regarding acceptance of the right holder’s application for enforcement as per article 52
of the TRIPS Agreement;

r requiring prompt notiﬁcation of the right holder and the importer when a suspension action under

article 51 is taken;

r providing the competent authorities the authority to give the right holders the right to inspect
the detained goods in order to substantiate the right holder’s claims per article 57 of the TRIPS
Agreement; and

r providing the competent authorities with authority to order the destruction or disposal of infring-

ing goods in accordance with the principles set out in article 46 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Some of the above have been included in the more recent IP laws or in the Civil and Criminal

Codes.

For example, under article 33(2) of Copyright and Neighboring Rights Proclamation and article
39(2) of the Trademark Registration Proclamation the court has power to adopt provisional measures
when deemed appropriate, particularly in cases where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to
the applicant or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed. Similarly, articles 154–
159 of the Civil Procedure Code provide detailed conditions when the court may order provisional
measures that could be used by parties to IPR disputes. Provisional measures are also envisaged
under articles 2121–2122 of the Civil Code as well as article 134 of the Commercial Code. Needless
to say, article 34(6) of Copyright and Neighboring Rights Proclamation provides that where copies
and packages that infringe a right are discovered, unless the owner of the right otherwise requires,
the court shall put the copies outside the channels of commerce, order their destruction or other
reasonable disposal, without causing harm to the owner of the right. In the same vein article 42
of the Trademark Registration and Protection deals with measures at customs ports and stations.
Article 42(1) states that the Ethiopian Customs Authority may on the basis of a written application
accompanied with certiﬁcate of trademark registration and other relevant evidence made by the right
holder and upon sufﬁcient guarantee provided by the applicant, seize and detain goods that are subject
to the alleged infringement of the applicant’s right. Paragraph 2 of the same article requires that the
Customs Authority inform forthwith the applicant and the owner of the goods of the measure taken
to seize the said goods. Any further action, however, requires a court injunction, which should be
given within 10 working days, in the absence of which the Customs Authority will release the seized
and detained goods. Article 35 of the Copyright and Neighboring Rights Proclamation provides
similar remedies in cases of copyright infringement. In all these cases cross-references could be made
to these laws rather than replicating the same provisions in a revised patent law.

192

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Conclusion
Ethiopia has put in place a patent law long before its quest for WTO accession began. Even if the
country has stayed away from the international IP treaties, its IPR regime draws much from those
treaties. There is no ofﬁcial explanation why Ethiopia has not joined these treaties, but accession to the
WTO will effectively mean accession to these IP treaties whose main standards have been incorporated
into the TRIPS Agreement. The above examination of the Patent Proclamation has shown that some
of its provisions are fully compatible with the Provisions of the TRIPS Agreement; some others are
clearly in conﬂict with the TRIPS Agreement, while a third category remains controversial. There
may be a need to amend the provisions that are in direct and clear conﬂict with the TRIPS Agreement
while striving to exploit to the maximum the ﬂexibilities of the TRIPS Agreement in those areas that
are important to promote national socioeconomic development. An important issue for Ethiopia as
an acceding country is to identify the existing ﬂexibilities and use them to promote public policy
objectives as stated under articles 7 and 8 of the TRIPS Agreement while at the sometime striving to
make its patent regime compatible with that Agreement.

About the Author
Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu is an Assistant Professor of Law at Addis Ababa University, School
of Law. He is also a member of the National Technical Committee negotiating Ethiopia’s WTO
Accession; e-mail: ﬁkremarkosm@yahoo.co.uk

Notes
I would like to thank Christoph Spennemann of UNCTAD and Melaku Geboye Desta of the University of
Dundee for their insightful comments on the earlier draft of the article. My sincere thanks are also due to the
editors of the JWIP and the reviewer for their valuable comments and suggestions.

1 Proclamation No. 123 of 1995, Proclamation Concerning Inventions, Minor Inventions and Industrial

Designs, Federal Negarit Gazeta, 54th Year, No. 25 (1995).

2 The TRIPS Agreement, article 3.
3 The TRIPS Agreement, article 4.
4 The TRIPS Agreement, article 66.
5 Civil Code of Ethiopia (1960), articles 1647–1674.
6 Civil Code of Ethiopia (1960), articles 2672–2697.
7 The Penal Code of Ethiopia (1957), articles 675–679.
8 Regulation No. 12 of 1997, Inventions, Minor Inventions and Industrial Designs, Federal Negarit Gazeta,

3rd Year No. 27 (1997).

9 The Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Proclamation No.1/1995, Federal

Negarit Gazeta, 1st Year No. 1 (1995).

10 The Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Proclamation No. 1/1995, Federal

Negarit Gazeta, 1st Year No. 1 (1995), article 51.19.

11 The Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Proclamation No. 1/1995, Federal

Negarit Gazeta, 1st Year No. 1 (1995), article 55.2(g).

12 Ethiopia has been a member of the World Intellectual Property Organization since 1998.
13 The TRIPS Agreement, article 27.2.
14 The TRIPS Agreement, article 27.3(a).
15 The TRIPS Agreement, article 27.3(b).

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

193

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

16 The TRIPS Agreement, article 27.3(b).
17 Patent Proclamation, article 4.1(a).
18 Patent Proclamation, article 4.1(b).
19 Patent Proclamation, article 4.1(e).
20 For example, article 32 of the Japanese Patent Act (Act No. 121 of 1959) simply states that inventions liable

to contravene public order or morality or public health shall not be patented.

21 Proclamation No. 481 of 2006, Plant Breeders’ Right Proclamation, Federal Negarit Gazeta, 12th Year No.

12 (February 2006).

22 PBR Proclamation, article 2.7.
23 PBR Proclamation, article 5.
24 PBR Proclamation, article 24. As a civil remedy the breeder could demand cessation of the act of infringe-
ment (injunction) and may also claim compensation (article 25.1). The PBR Proclamation also provides
for a severe criminal penalty for infringement of the rights of the breeder including up to three years
imprisonment.

25 PBR Proclamation, article 28.1(c).
26 See, for example, WTO documents EC, IP/C/M/25, paragraph 74, Japan, IP/C/W/236, Switzerland,

IP/C/M/130, paragraph 166, United States, IP/C/W162.

27 Patent Proclamation, article 2.1.
28 Patent Proclamation, article 3.2. An invention is new “if it is not anticipated by prior art. Prior art shall
consist of everything disclosed to the public, anywhere in the world, by publication in tangible form or by
oral disclosure, by use or in any other way, prior to the ﬁlling or, where appropriate, the priority date, of
the application claiming the invention”.

29 Patent Proclamation, article 3.4. An invention is considered involving an inventive step “if, having regard
to the prior art relevant to the application . . . it would not have been obvious to a person having ordinary
skill in the art”.

30 Patent Proclamation, article 3.5. An invention is deemed industrially applicable “where it can be made or

used in handicraft, agriculture, ﬁshery, social services and any other sector”.

31 The Patent Proclamation does not deﬁne the term “discovery”.
32 Patent Proclamation, article 9.4(c).
33 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000).

34 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.20.

35 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,
2000), paragraph 7.30. The panel noted that since the agreement uses the term “limited exception”, “the
word “limited” must be given a meaning separate from the limitation implicit in the word “exception”
itself, and concluded that to determine whether the exception is limited, the extent to which the patent
owner’s rights have been curtailed must be measured (paragraph 7.32).

36 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.92.

37 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.42.

38 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.34.

39 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.54.

194

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

40 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.55.

41 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.69.

42 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.71.

43 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), paragraph 7.26.

44 Doha Declaration

on

the TRIPS Agreement

and

Public Health, WTO document

WT/MIN/(01)/DEC/W/2 of 14 November 2001.

45 See Madey v Duke, 64 U.S.P.Q.2D (BNA) 1737 (2002). In the case the Court of Appeal of the Federal
Circuit held the “ . . . [S]o long as the act . . . is not solely for amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for
strict philosophical inquiry, the act does not qualify for the very narrow and strictly limited experimental
use defense . . . the proﬁt or non-proﬁt status of the of the user is not determinative”.

46 Japanese Patent Law, section 69.1.
47 This is the case in Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Korea and Uruguay.
48 Doha Declaration, paragraph 5(d).
49 The TRIPS Agreement, article 31.
50 Patent Proclamation, article 22(a).
51 Actually article 31 uses the phrase “Other Use Without the Authorization of the Rights Holder” which
and the term “other use” is explained in footnote 7 of TRIPS Agreement to mean use other than that
allowed under article 30.

52 This does not however mean that the government cannot authorize a commercial entity to exploit the

patented invention, it is just that it should not be used for commercial ends.

53 Under article 31.b, the requirement for prior negotiation with the patent holder could be waived in case

public noncommercial use of the invention.

54 Patent Proclamation, article 25.2. This is in addition to nonexclusive license that is separately dealt with

the law as “CL” under section 7 (articles 29–33).

55 TRIPS Agreement, article 31(l): where such use is authorized to permit the exploitation of a patent (the
second patent), which cannot be exploited without infringing another patent (the ﬁrst patent), the following
additional conditions shall apply:
(1) the invention claimed in the second patent shall involve an important technical advance of considerable
economic signiﬁcance in relation to the invention claimed in the ﬁrst patent;
(2) the owner of the ﬁrst patent shall be entitled to a cross-licence on reasonable terms to use the invention
claimed in the second patent; and
(3) the use authorized in respect of the ﬁrst patent shall be nonassignable except with the assignment of
the second patent.

56 Patent Proclamation, article 27.
57 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), article 2.9.

58 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), article 31.

59 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), article 30.1.

60 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), article 32.1.

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

195

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

61 Panel Report in Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products (WT/DS114/R of 14 March,

2000), article 33.

62 For example, South Africa, Brazil, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Zimbabwe and Ghana have issued
CLs in the last few years either to locally produce drugs or to import generic drugs from other countries,
particularly from India (see Khor, 2007).

63 TRIPS Agreement, article 66.1.
64 Doha Declaration, paragraph 7.
65 Decision of the TRIPS Agreement Council on “Extension of the Transition Period under article 66.1 of
the TRIPS Agreement for Least-Developed Country Members for Certain Obligations with respect to
Pharmaceutical Products”, WTO document IP/C/25, 27 June 2002.

66 TRIPS Agreement, article 65.5.
67 Paragraph III 5 of the decision states: “Least-developed country Members will ensure that any changes in
their laws, regulations and practice made during the additional transitional period do not result in a lesser
degree of consistency with the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement”.

References
Abbott, F. (2004) ‘WTO Dispute Settlement Practices Relating to the Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual
Property Rights’, in F. Orito and E. U. Petersmann (eds), The WTO Dispute Settlement System 1995–2003
18 Studies in Transnational Economic Law. Kluwer International, The Hague, pp. 421–53.

Bodenhausen, G. H. (1999) Paris Convention for Protection of Industrial Designs as Revised at Stockholm in

1967, WIPO, Geneva.

Carvalho, N. P. (2010) The TRIPS Regime of Patent Rights, 3rd edition. Waltors Kluwer, The Netherlands.
Chang, H. J. (2002) Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in Historical Perspective, Anthem Press,

London.

Commission on Intellectual Property (2002) ‘Integrating Intellectual Property Rights and Development Policy’,

Report of the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, London.

Cornish, W. R. (1998) ‘Experimental Use of Patented Inventions in European Community States’, International

Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law, 29, 735–53.

Correa, C. M. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights, the WTO and Developing Countries. Zed Books Ltd., London.
Correa, C. M. (2007) Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: A Commentary of the TRIPS

Agreement. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Correa, C. M. and Yusuf, A. (2008) Intellectual Property and International Trade: The TRIPS Agreement.

Kluwer Law International, The Netherlands.

Eaton, D. J. and Tongeren, F. W. (2004) ‘Patents versus Plant Varietal protection’, Paper presented at the 8th
Annual Conference of the International Consortium on Agricultural Biotechnology Research, July 8–11,
2004, Ravello, Italy. Available at <http://www.eco nomia.uni roma2.it> [Accessed March 2011].

Endeshaw, A. (1996) Intellectual Property for Non-Industrial Countries. Dartmouth, Aldershot, England.
Fink, C. and Maskus, E. K. (eds) (2005) Intellectual Property and Development; Lessons From Recent Economic

Research. WB and Oxford University Press, Washington, DC.

Garrison, G. (2006) Exceptions to Patent Rights in Developing Countries. UNCTAD-ICTSD Issue Paper No.

17, Geneva.

Gervais, D. (2008) The TRIPS Agreement: Drafting History and Analysis, 3rd edition. Sweet and Maxwell,

London.

Gold, E. R., Joly, Y. and Caulﬁeld, T. (2005) ‘Genetic Research Tools, the Research Exception and Open Science’,

GenEdit, III (2).

196

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Grubb, W. P. (2004) Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology. Oxford University Press.
Grynberg, R. and Joy, R. M. (2004) ‘The Accession of Vanuatu to the WTO—Lessons for the Multilateral

Trading System’, Journal of World Trade, 34, 159–73.

Halewood, H. (1997) ‘Regulating Patent Holders: Local Working Requirements and Compulsory License at

International Law’, Osgoode Hall Law Journal, 35(2), 243–87.

International Seed Federation (2003) ‘ISF View on Intellectual Property’, Bangalore, June 2003.
Johnson, J. A. (2003) ‘Comment, the Experimental Use Exception in Japan: A Model for US Patent Law?’,

Paciﬁc Rim. Law and Policy Journal, 12, 491–507.

Katsuya, T. (2006) ‘The Experimental Use Exception: A Japanese Perspective’. Unpublished. Available
at <http://www.law.washington.edu/CASRIP/Symposium/Number7/1-Tamai.pdf> [Accessed March
2011].

Khor, M. (2007) Patents, Compulsory Licences and Access to Medicines: Some Recent Experiences. TWN Third

World Network, Malaysia.

Kim, L. (2003) ‘Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property Rights: The Experience of Korea’, Issue Paper

No. 2. UNCTAD-ICTSD Project on Intellectual Property and Sustainable Development.

Lall, S. (2003) ‘Indicators of the Relative Importance of Intellectual Property Rights in Developing Countries’,

Research Policy, 32(9), 1657–80.

Leskien, D. and Flitner, M. (1997) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Plant Genetic Resources: Options for sui

generis system’, Issue in Genetic Resources No. 6, IPIGRI.

Lesser, W. (2000) ‘An Economic Approach to Identifying an “Effective Sui Generis” System for Plant Variety

Protection’, Agribusiness, 16 (1), 96–114.

Mengiste G. (2006) Intellectual Property Assessment in Ethiopia. EIPO, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Mengistie G. (2009) ‘The Impact of the International Patent System on Developing Countries’, Journal of

Ethiopian Law, XXIII (1), 19–26.

Miller, J. (2003) ‘Sealing the Cofﬁn on Experimental Use Exception’, Duke Law & Technology Review, 0012,

6–32.

MoFED (2007) ‘Ethiopia: Building on Progress; A Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End
Poverty (PASDEP)’, Annual Progress Report 2005/06, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
(MoFED), Addis Ababa, June 2007.

Musungu, S. and Oh, C. (2006) The Use of Flexibilities in TRIPS by Developing Countries: Can they Promote

Access to Medicines? South Centre, Geneva.

Odagiri, H., Goto, A., Sunami, A. and Nelson, R. (2010) Intellectual Property Rights, Development, and Catch-

up: An International Comparative Study. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Reichman, J. (2008) ‘Universal Minimum Standards of Intellectual Property Protection under TRIPS Com-
ponent of the WTO Agreement’, in Carrlos M. C. and Abdulqawi, A. Y. (eds), Intellectual Property and
International Trade: The TRIPS Agreement. Wolters Kluwer, The Netherlands.

Science and Technology Commission (1993) National Science and Technology Policy of Ethiopia. Addis Ababa,

Ethiopia.

Science and Technology Commission (2010) Science, Technology and Innovation Policy of Ethiopia. Addis Ababa,

Ethiopia.

Sell, S. (2003) Private Power, Public Law: The Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge.

TradingEconomics (2011) <http://www.tradingEconomics.com> [Accessed 11 May 2011].
UNCTAD-ICTSD (2005) Resource Book on TRIPS and Development. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
UPOV (2002) ‘Submission to the TRIPS Council on the Review of Article 27.3(b)’, IP/C/W/347/Add.3,

11 June 2002.

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3

197

Fikremarkos Merso Birhanu

Ethiopia’s World Trade Organization Accession and Maintaining Policy Space

Wata, J. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights in the WTO and Developing Countries. Kluwer International, The

Hague.

WTO (2001) ‘TRIPS and Public Health’. WTO Doc. IP/C/W/296. Available at <http://www.wto.org/english/

tratop_e/trips_e/paper_develop_w296_e.htm> [Accessed 7 May 2011].

WTO (2003) ‘Report of the Working Party on the Accession of the Kingdom of Nepal to the World Trade

Organization’, WTO Doc WT/ACC/NPL/16, 28 August 2003.

WTO (2006) ‘Review of the Provisions of Article 27.3(B): Summary of the Issues Raised and Points Made, Note

by Secretariat’, WTO Doc IP/C/W/369/Rev.1, 9 March 2006.

WTO (2007) ’Report of the Working Party on the Accession of Cape Verde to the World Trade Organization’,

WTO Doc WT/ACC/CPV/30, 6 December 2007.

WTO (2011)

‘Ethiopia: Status of Accession’. Available at <http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/

acc_e/a1_ethiopia_e.htm> [Accessed March 2011].

Yuhe, W. and Yanfeng, X. (2008) ‘Comparison of Bolar Exception in China and the United States’, China

Patents and Trademarks (3).

198

C(cid:2) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2012) Vol. 15, no. 3


