The Pharmaceutical Industry in India 

Adapting  to  Taps 

Robert  S. TANCER* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION:  THE CURRENT STATE OF  THE  PHARMACEUTICAL 

INDUSTRY 

In&a  continues  to  debate the  enactment  of  a  new  patent  law  to  comply  with 
her  obligations  under  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual 
Property Rights  (TRIPS), an integral part  of the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO). 
This  debate  reflects  the  ambivalence that  exists  in  India  about  modifjing  a  patent 
regime  that  has  served  the  Indian  pharmaceutical  industry  well  since  1970.  This 
sector has  developed without benefit of product patent protection, and delivers drugs 
at prices that consumers can  afford. A new patent law in compliance with  the TRIPS 
would  create uncertainties and certain disruptions to  a  statlrs  quo that  Inlans believe 
is  workmg  to  their  advantage.  Yet  India's  participation  in  the  WTO makes  the 
enactment of a new patent law inevitable. 

The In&an pharmaceutical industry has  achieved  considerable growth in  recent 
years.  A presentation  made  to  the  Expert  Committee  Government of  India  in June 
1988 by  the  Organisation  of  Pharmaceutical  Producers  of  India  (OPPI), compares 
this  growth from  1965-6  to  1997 (see Table  1). This growth is  reflected  in  a retail 
pharmaceutical market of over US$  2.25 bdlion, 20  percent of which  is  supplied by 
the  top  five  companies in  India:  Glaxo Wellcome, Cipla, Ranbaxy, Hoechst Marion 
Roussel, and Torrent. 

The industry's growth rate is  estimated at  over  15 percent per  year,  58 percent 
originating from new products,  12 percent from price increases, and 30 percent from 
increases  in  the  sales  volume.'  The  Inlan  pharmaceutical  industry  is  hghly 
fragmented, consisting of over twenty-three thousand firms, many of which are small 

Management, Glendale, AZ, U.S.A. 

is  a  professor  at  Thunderbird,  The  American  Graduate  School  of  International 

*  The  author 
Professor  Tancer  visited  India  in  October  1998  as  a  result  of  a  research  grant  from  Thunderbird.  In 
Bombay and Aurangabad  he was hosted by  Ajanta Pharma  Limited, an  India pharmaceutical firm, that arranged 
senunar-style meetings with  industry  leaders  and  intellectual property  authorities.  In  Delhi,  Mr Tej Pal  Singh 
arranged  meetings  with  prominent  intellectual property  attorneys  and  other  business  leaden.  It  was  through 
these  sessions  that  materials  for  this  article were  obtained.  The analysis  presented  in  this  artlcle is  purely  the 
author's own work  and he assumes full responsibility  for any errors. 

S.P. Jain Institute (1998), p. 4.13. 

172 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PKOPEKTY 

TABLE 1: AN OVERVIEW  OF  THE  INDIAN  PHAKMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY 

(IN KUPEES) 

Area 
Capital investment 
Production: 

Formulations 
Bulk drugs 

Exports 
R&D expenditures 
Employment-people 
(direct  and indirect) 
Note:  Table converted to rupees by  the author. 

1965/66 
1.4 million 

1.5 million 
180,000 
30,000 
30,000 

280,000 

1997 
16 billion 

91.25 billion 
18.22 billion 
40.90 billion 
185 billion 
6 milhon 

US$  1 = 41  rupees  at the current exchange rate. 
The industry has the doubling of its 1997 production by  the year 2000 as its growth target. 
Source:  Organisation  of Pharmaceutical Producers of  India  (OPPI), Intellectual  Property  Rightr, 

Presentation to  the Expert  Committee  Government of 

India, Murnbai, 8 June 1998, p.  5. 

family-owned  operations. Two hundred and fifty firms comprise the organized sector 
and account for 70 percent  of production.2 

No one firm, whether  Inrllan or a multinational corporation  (MNc), dominates 
the  market  (see Figure  1). Of these  two  hundred  and fifty firms, little distinction is 
made  between  In&an  firms  and  MNCS. The  British  firm,  Glaxo  Wellcome,  is  the 
largest,  enjoying 6.74  percent  of  the  market,  followed  closely  by  the  In&an  firms, 
Cipla with  4.24  percent  and  Ranbaxy  with  3.48  percent.  There  are  several reasons 
why the MNCS do not stand out in the current Indian environment.  These include: 
- the  neutrality  “posture”  articulated by  the  Indmn  government  during  much 

of the Cold War,  creating a difficult situation for U.S. MNCS; 
- the public sector emphasis favoured by the Indian government; 
- the  absence of meaningful patent protection;  and 
- the restriction  of the percentage of foreign ownership required by  the  Inhan 

government. 

Thus,  the MNCS that  are active in Inha limited  their  activities to manufacturing and 
marketing ready avdable or,  as  they  would  be  characterized in  the  United  States, 
generic  or  over-the-counter  products.  The  environment  &d  not  lend  itself  to 
innovative research or to marketing patent-protected  products. 

Since  1991,  with  the  liberalizing  of  the  economy,  the  increase  in  foreign 
investment fi-om the United  States, and India’s agreement to participate in the WTO, 
the  industry  is  considering  how  these  changes wdl  affect  them.  Out  of  this  soul- 
searching, a growing  distinction is  emerging  between  Indian firms and MNCS. This 

Owr  (1998). p. 6. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY  IN INDIA 

173 

Figure  1 

INDIAN PHARMA MARKET: MARKET SHARE OF  COMPANIES 

distinction  is  reflected  by  the  existence  of  two  trade  associations representing the 
pharmaceutical industry. The  first  is  OPPI, whose  membership includes the  MNCS, 
although  a  number  of  Indian  firms  are  members.  OPPI advocates  strong  patent 
protection. The second is the Inlan Drug Manufacturers’ Association (IDMA), which 
prefers  the  status  quo  but  is  beginning to  recognize  that  acceptance of the  TRIPS is 
inevitable.  IDMA advocates  minimum  compliance.  Comparisons  between  the  two 
Indian organizations can be made with  the Pharmaceutical Research Manufacturers’ 
Association (PhRMA) and one of the generic industry trade associations, the Generic 
Pharmaceutical Industry Association in the United States. The former advocates strong 
patent protection, both domestically and internationally, while the latter recognizes the 
existence  of  the  patent  system  but  is  dedxated  to  controlling  its  extension  and  is 
committed to furthering the lower prices offered by generic products. 

Supporters  and  critics  of  the  current  system  in  Inla,  whether  domestic  or 
foreign,  attribute  the  considerable  growth  of  the  pharmaceutical industry  to  the 
impact of the Patents Act,  1970 (39 of 1970).3 An  Inlan author, N.  Gopalsamy, has 
stated: 

“The Act strikes a balance between the interests of the inventor and the consumer. The 
Act  has  been  skillfully drafted  to  protect  Indian  drugs,  pharmaceuticals  and  chemical 
industry and also Indian agriculture, from foreign ~ompetition.”~ 

’ Government of India  (1981). 
Gopalsamy (1998), p.  185. 

174 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PKOPERTY 

The  British  author,  Heinz  Redwood,  a  well-known  proponent  of  strong 

pharmaceutical patent regimes, has noted 

“The Patents Act,  1970 was  the  instrument  that  made it possible  for the Indian-owned 
drug  industry  to  expand  rapidly,  because  the  Act  legalised  ‘copying’ of  drugs  that  are 
patentable as products throughout  the industrialised world but unprotectable in India. 
Well-equipped  with  chemical  skills  and  technological  expertise,  Inman  scientists  and 
industrialists  seized  their  chance  to  copy  therapeutically  innovative  drugs  discovered 
elsewhere,  and  launched  them  on  the  domestic  market  as  well  as  exporting  them  to 
other countries with simdar gaps in patent cover.”  (emphasis added).’ 
Obviously,  there  is  more  to  the  success  of  the  Indian  pharmaceutical  industry 
than  the  Patents  Act,  1970.  One  important  factor  is  the  high  level  of  education 
available 
the  sciences  and  engineering,  enabling 
pharmaceutical firms to develop and exploit sophisticated manufacturing operations. 

Inda,  particularly 

in 

in 

11.  THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 

Although  the  Patents  Act  is  a  comprehensive law  encompassing all  aspects  of 
patent  regulation,  this  analysis  is  limited  to  those  provisions  which  affect  the 
pharmaceutical  industry.  Chapter  I  of  the  Act  begms  with  a  short  Preliminary 
followed by  an extensive list  of definitions. Chapter  11,  “Inventions Not  Patentable”, 
provides: 

“5.  In the case of inventions: 

medicine or drug; or 

(a)  claiming  substances  intended  for  use,  or  capable  of  being  used,  as  food  or  as 

(b)  relating  to  substances  prepared  or  produced  by  chemical  processes  (including 

alloys, optical glass, semi-conductors and inter-metallic  compounds); 

no  patent  shall  be  granted  in  respect  of  claims  for  the  substances  themselves, but 
claims for the methods or processes of manufacture shall be patentable.” 

Thus,  the  Patents  Act  permits  process  patents  for  pharmaceutical  products  but 
denies product patent protection. Medcine or drug patents are subject to the further 
condition that,  despite the  existence of the  patent,  the  government may  import  the 
product  for  “...  its  own  use  or  for  the  distribution  in  any  dispensary,  hospital  or 
other  medical institution maintained  ... ” by  the government.6 

For  patents  covering food,  medicines  or  drugs, the  Patents Act  provides  for  a 
term  of five years  from the  date of the  grant  (called “sealing” in  the  Act),  or  seven 
years  from the  date of filing (called “the date  of the  patent”  in  the  Act), whchever 
period is  shorter. Patents in  categories other than food, medcines  or drugs are issued 
for fourteen years from the date of filing.7 

‘ The Patents Act,  1970, Article  47(4). 
Redwood (1994). p.  1. 
’ Ibid., Article 53(l)(a) and  @). 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY IN INDIA 

175 

The rationale underlying the  issuance of any patent  in  Inda is  clearly stated in 

Article 83 of the Act: 

“(a) ... patents are  granted to encourage  inventions and  to  secure  that  the  inventions are 
worked  in  India  on  a  commercial  scale  and  to  the  fullest  extent  that  is  reasonably 
practicable without undue delay; and 

(b) __. they  are  not  granted  merely  to  enable  patentees  to  enjoy a  monopoly  for  the 

importation of the patented  article.” 

These  goals  are  to  be  achieved  by  the  inclusion  in  the  Act  of  a  series  of 
provisions  dealing with  compulsory  licensing that  can  be  effective any  time  three 
years  after the  grant  of the  patent.  At  such  time,  anyone  can request a  compulsory 
licence from the  Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks by alleging 
that  “ ...  the  reasonable  requirements  of  the  public  with  respect  to  the  patented 
invention  are  not  satisfied  or  that  the  patented  invention  is  not  available  to  the 
public  at  a reasonable price  ...”*  The Controller  is  empowered to review the matter 
and  take  into  consideration the  applicant’s ab&ty to work  the patent  effectively and 
offer the product  to  the public at a fair price.  The Controller is  then  authorized  to 
issue the compulsory licence under terms he may decide. 

In  addition to the  compulsory licensing requirements, the Act provides another 
feature to  ensure that  patents  are worked  effectively. Any  patent  “ ... used  as  food or 
as  medicine  or  drug” shall  be  deemed  to  be  endorsed  with  the  “licences of  right” 
three  years  after  they  are  issued.’  This  permits  the  government  to  argue  to  the 
Controller  that  the patent  is  not  available to the public in  a reasonable manner  or at 
a  reasonable price.”  If  the  Controller  agrees  and  endorses a patent  with  a  “licence 
of  right,” any  member  of the public may  request  a  licence to work  the patent  from 
the original patentee. In cases involving food, medicine  or drugs, a maximum royalty 
of 4  percent  is  established for  the  original patentee.”  This  addition  of “licences  of 
right”  makes  compulsory  licences  available not  only  at  the  initiative of  a  potential 
competitor of the patentee, but at the initiative of the government. 

111.  INDIA AND THE  TRIPS 

India was  among the  foundmg Members  of the  General Agreement  on Tariffs 
and  Trade  (GATT) and  was  among  the  twenty-three  nations  participating  in  its 
adoption  on  1 January  1948.12 India  is  also  one  of  the  founding  Members  of  the 
WTO, which superseded GATT on 1 January  1995.13 Yet  throughout  the negotiations 
of the Uruguay  Round, In&a was  opposed to  the expanded agenda, particularly the 
agreement favouring strong intellectual property  protection  advocated by  the United 

*  Ibid.,  Article 84(1). 
Ibid., Article  87. 
Ibid., Article  86. 
Ibid., Article  88(1)(4). 
Gopalsamy (1998), p. 67. 
Ibid., p.  117. 

10 
11 
12 
13 

176 

THE JOUKNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

States and other developed countries. This opposition was  strongly felt in  the patent 
area,  especially as  changes could  affect  pharmaceutical patents  and  the  entire  drug 
industry. Shri A.  V.  Ganesan, Special Secretary, Ministry of Commerce, submitted a 
paper  at  a  meeting  of  a  Negotiating  Committee  of  the  Uruguay  Round  on 
28  July  1989.  This  paper  presented  the  view  of  the  Government  of  In&a  on 
Intellectual  Property  Rights-Standard 
and  Principle  Concerning  its  Availability,  Scope  and 
Use. At the outset, the paper questioned the scope of TRIPS and noted: 

“ ...  Inda is  of the  view  that  it  is  only  the  restrictive  and  anti-competitive  practices of 
the  owners  of  intellectual  property  right  that  can  be  considered  to  be  trade-related 
because they alone distort or  impede international trade.”’4 

Therefore, the paper argues that international agreements should provide: 

17 

“ ...  the  freedom  of  the  Member  States to  attune  their  intellectual property  protection 
system to their own needs and c~n&tions.”’~ 
Notwithstanding these considerable reservations, India reversed her position and 
accepted the  TRIPS. Many  Indian observers believe this  change was  due to  pressure 
from  the  United  States  and  the  MNCS.’~ India’s  membership in  the  WTO and  her 
agreement to  accept  the  terms  of the  TRIPS left  open  only  the  question  of when 
and under what terms and conditions. The TRIPS itself offers some alternatives as  to 
“when”. Part  VI  of the  Agreement  covers Transitional Arrangements, and  allows  a 
period  of  one  year,  fiom  1 January  1995,  for  developed  countries  to  apply  its 
terms.  Developing  countries  are  granted  an  addtional  four  years,  or  up  until 
1 January 2000,18 and least-developed country Members are granted ten years, or up 
until  1 January 2005, to  do 
Developing countries that  are required  to  provide 
product  patent  protection  in  areas  not  currently  covered  by  product  patents  are 
granted an  additional five years, or up  until  1 January 2005. Thus, India could defer 
applying the  terms of the TRIPS until that  time.  The Government of  India  has  not 
yet  announced when  it  will  apply  the  TRIPS. Compliance is  dfficult  because  India 
will need at the least substantial modfications to the Patents Act,  1970, or possibly  a 
new patent law.  It  is  generally believed that  India is  in  or  near compliance in  other 
areas  of  intellectual  property  law.  It  is  only  with  patents,  and  particularly 
pharmaceutical patents, that difficulties exist. 

The  TRIPS was  not  prepared  in  a  vacuum.  It  builds  upon  a  series  of 
international  conventions  seeking  to  protect  intellectual  property  rights  beyond 
national  frontiers.  The  most  important  of  these  are  the  Paris  Convention for  the 
Protection  of Industrial Property, originally enacted in  1883 and revised periodically 
thereafter, and the Berne Convention of Copyrights and Neighboring Rights, 1886. 

Extracts from the letter  may be found in  Appendix  1 of Zaveri  (1998), pp.  129-144,  at 129. 

14 
I s   Ibid., p.  130. 
Ih 
17 
in 
19 

Zaveri  (1998), p. 3. 
TRIPS Agreement,  Article 65.1. 
Ibid., Article 65.2. 
Ibid., Article 66.1. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY IN INDIA 

177 

TRIPS signatories  are  obliged  to  accept  the  substantive  provisions  of  these 
Conventions, and adherence to them is  a prerequisite to the TRIPS.” Article I  of the 
Paris  Convention,  “Establishment  of  the  Union;  Scope  of  Industrial  Property”, 
defines the scope of industrial property, including patents as follows: 

“(3) Industrial property  shall  be  understood  in  the  broadest  sense  and  shall  apply  not 
only  to  industry  and  commerce  proper,  but  likewise  to  agricultural  and  extractive 
industries  and  to  all  manufactured  or  natural  products,  for  example,  wines,  grain, 
tobacco leaf, fruit, cattle, mineral, mineral waters, beer, flowers, and flour.” 
Although  not  mentioned  by  name,  pharmaceutical  product  patents  would 
clearly  be  included  within  the  scope  of  patent  protection  authorized  by  the  Paris 
Convention.  In  light  of the  Patents Act,  1970, it  is  clear  why  Inda did  not  adhere 
to the Paris Convention, although she has been a Member of the Berne  Convention 
since 1948, there being no comparable incompatibilities in the copyright area. 

Indian  authorities are  concerned  about meeting the  patent  requirements  of the 
TRIPS in  a  timely  fashion.  Because  of  the  political  nature  of  condtions  of 
compliance, deliberations are not  made available to  the international press  on a  daily 
basis.  Thus,  it  was  something  of  a  surprise when  the  World  Intellectual  Property 
Organization ( W I P O ) ~ ~  
announced,  on  8  September 1998, that  Inda had  deposited 
its  documents  to  adhere  to  the  Paris  Convention  and  the  Patent  Co-operation 
Treaty  (PcT).  “WIPO Update”  noted  that  India’s  “ ... welcome  was  echoed  by  the 
international intellectual property community, particularly trade and industrial circles, 
and  the  other  countries  which  are  already  bound  by  those  treaties.”22 The  PCT 
provides  a  simplified,  less  costly  system  for  patent  owners  seeking  protection  in 
multiple  countries.  PCT membership,  although  not  required  by  the  TKIPS, is  yet 
another example of India’s  participation  in world-wide  intellectual property accords. 
Observers could not  help  but believe that with  this initiative, India was  a  step closer 
to compliance with  the TRIPS. 

IV.  PHARMACEUTICAL PATENTS: ADAPTING TO THE TRIPS 

India’s  delay  in  adhering to  the  Paris  Convention  and  her  strong commitment 
to  the  Patents  Act,  1970  are  the  results  of  an  ideological  orientation  that  persists. 
Essentially,  maintenance  of  the  status  quo 
is  rationalized  as  keeping  prices  of 
pharmaceutical  products  down,  preventing  massive  imports  &om  MNCS, and 
protecting local industry. Yet  change  is  on  the  way,  in  part  fuelled by  the  growing 
criticism  from  the  international  community  and  increasing  awareness  within  India 
that full compliance with the WTO is  ultimately in India’s best interests. 

20 
21 

Ibid.,  Article  2.2. 
WIPO  is  a  specialized  agency  of  the  United  Nations  which  serves  as  Secretariat  to  administer 
intellectual  property  matters  of  the  UN  Members.  It  has  a  1995  Agreement  with  the  WTO to  be  the 
’’ WIPO (1998), p.  1. 
depository of documents. 

178 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  government  is  preparing  a  new  patent  law,  but  drafts  are  not  readily 
available.  Anticipation of  a  new  patent  law  dates from  the  unsuccessful attempts to 
amend  the  Patents, Act  with  the  Patents  (Amendment)  Ordinance  issued  by  the 
President  of  India  on  31  December  1994.  The  Ordinance  became  effective  on 
1 January  1995,  the  date,  coincidentally,  when  the  WTO  Agreement  became 
effective.  The Ordmance was  issued  under  special authority granted the President to 
“legislate” when  Parliament was  not  in  session. Such  “legislation”  lapses  six  weeks 
after the Parliament reconvenes-in 
the  case  of the Ordinance on 26 March  1995. A 
permanent Patents (Amendment) Bdl  1995 was  introduced in March and was  passed 
in  the  Lower  House  (Lox! Sabhu), but  failed  to  win  approval  of  the  Upper  House 
(Rujyu Sabhu) and lapsed with the dissolution of the session on 10 May  1996.23 

This  abortive  effort  grew  out  of  India’s  efforts  to  comply  with  the  so-called 
“mailbox  provisions”  of  the  TRIPS. Article  70.8  requires  countries  that  do  not 
currently provide TRIPS-mandated  patent protection for pharmaceutical, chemical or 
agricultural products to  establish  a  filing system to  establish  a  priority  date for  these 
applications for such future review when  patent protection  becomes available in that 
h n d   of pipeline  protection.  In  addition,  exclusive marketing rights  are 
country-a 
available  to  the  applicant for  a  period  of five  years  following marketing  approval or 
the  issuance  of  a  product  patent,  whichever  period  is  shorter.24 The  lapse  of  the 
Ordinance and  India’s  failure to  enact  a  new  patent law in  full  compliance with  the 
TRIPS left India in violation  of  at least  the requirements of Article 70.8, and  delayed 
even  further  the  inevitable enactment of a  new  patent law.  Indla’s failure to  provide 
adequate mailbox  protection was  decided by  a  WTO Panel  in  an  action  brought  by 
the  United  States.  Compliance  with  the  mailbox  provisions  and  the  effective 
establishment of  exclusive marketing rights  must  be  in  place  by  19 April  1999 per 
the WTO De~ision.‘~ 

The  scope  of  the  Ordinance  and  efforts  to  enact  a  new  patent  law,  however, 
went  beyond  the  narrow  purview  of  implementing  Article  70.8  and  70.9  of  the 
TRIPS and  raises  the  more  fundamental question: the  timing of the  amendments to 
the  Patents  Act,  1970  to  comply  with  all  the  requirements  of  TRIPS. No  one  in 
India  knows  when  the  new  patent  law  will  be  enacted.  Opinion  is  divided;  some 
argue  that  a  new  patent  law  wdl  be  in  place  by  April  1999, believing that  further 
delay  will  result  in  “backdoor”  product  patents  claimed  by  firms  filing  under  the 
mailbox  provisions.  Others  argue  for  1  January  2000,  as  India  is  a  “developing 
country”,  while  others  look  forward  to  1 January  2005,  at  least  for  agricultural, 
chemical  and  pharmaceutical  product  patents.  Although  an  effective  date  remains 
pure  conjecture,  what  the  new  patent  law  wdl  provide  substantively  can  be 

23 

This account is  based on the  summary contained in World  Trade Organization  (1997), pp.  1 and 2. 
TIUPS Agreement, Article  70.9. 

24 ’’ Zaveri  (1998), p. 48. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY  IN INDIA 

179 

anticipated, although the  TRIPS provides suficient  flexibility to  allow speculation as 
to specific details. 

The enactment of  a  new  patent law will  not  be  an  easy  matter.  Most  recently, 
on  23  December  1998,  chscussion  of  the  Patents  (Amendment)  Bdl,  1998  was 
delayed due  to  the  adjournment  of  the  Lok  Sabha.  It  will  surface again  during the 
Budget Session,  ordinarily convened on 23 February  1999. There is  some indication 
that this Session will begin earlier so that  India can meet the April deadhne.26 

Changes in  the  current  law  to  meet  the  minimum  requirements  of  the  TRIPS 

must include the areas of patentability, patent  term,  burden of proof and compulsory 
licensing. The TRIPS defines patent availability broadly,  to include: 

“ ... any  inventions, whether  products or  processes,  in  all fields  of technology, provided 
that they are new,  involve an inventive step and are capable of industrial application.”” 

Yet,  the  sweeping scope of  “any invention”  is  narrowed  in  the  ensuing paragraphs, 
whereby  Members  may  exclude  from  patentability  inventions  contrary  to  public 
policy,  prejudxial  to  human  health  or  to  the  environment.28 Members  may  also 
exclude  fiom  patentability  medical  processes  and  biote~hnology.~~ However, 
Members  are  required  to  “ ... provide  for  the  protection  of plant  varieties  either by 
patents or by  an  effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof.“30 

for  pharmaceutical  product  patents.  Since  product  patents 

The  all-embracing  inclusion  of  product  patents  in  the  TRIPS conflicts  with 
Chapter  11,  “Inventions Not  Patentable”, of the  Indian law,  which prohibits product 
patents in  a  variety of areas  in  addition  to  pharmaceuticals. India  has  also  expressed 
concern with  the  patenting of seeds but  has  solved it with  stri generis legislation, the 
Plant  Variety  Act,  1993.  Ths  Act  protects  the  rights  of  breeders,  but  recognizes 
“overriding  priority”  of  the  public  for  seeds.31 There  is  no  comparable  option 
available 
for 
pharmaceuticals cannot  be  avoided,  India  will  have  to  draft  and  interpret  her  new 
law  so  that  product  patents  are  granted  only  in  accordance with  the  provisions  of 
Article  27.1  of  the  TRIPS; that  applications for  frivolous patents  are  rejected;  and 
when  patents  are  granted  they  be  narrowly  defined  and  issued  for  only  a  single 
product.32 The subject of fi-ivolous patents is  one  of major  concern  to  Incha,  based 
on the  increasingly common practice in strong patent-protection countries of issuing 
new  patents  or  extending  existing  patent  terms  for  nominal  improvements,  thus 
further delaying the introduction of generic products. 

In  the  United  States,  the  European  Union,  and Japan,  patent-term  extension 
has  already  been  provided  to  compensate  the  patent  owner  for  the  period  lost 
seelung marketing authorization, and  Food  and Drug Adrmnistration (FDA) approval 

26  I d a  Express Service (1998). 
’*  Ibid., Article 27.2. 
TRIPS Agreement,  Article 27.1. 
27 
29  Ibid., Article 27.3(a) and  (b). 
3o  Ibid.. Article 27.3b). 
31  Gopalsamy  (1998): p. 227. 
Zaveri  (1998), pp. 99-101. 
32 

180 

T H E  J O U R N A L   O F  W O R L D  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

in  the United  States.33 PhKMA  is  seeking to  extend  the  patent  term  even  further to 
include  the  period  “lost”  &om  the  date  of  filing  until  the  patent  is  issued.  This 
appears  significant  to  many  firms  in  the  United  States,  where  patent  terms  were 
previously calculated as  seventeen years  from  the  date  of  the  patent  grant, but  now 
under the TKIPS, only twenty years  from the  date of filing. U.S. law was  modfied in 
1996 to  adhere  to  the  TRIPS requirement.  If  the  patent-approval  process  were  to 
exceed three years  under  this proposed patent-extension  legislation, some U.S.  firms 
would  obtain  longer  terms  than  permitted  under  the  pre-TRIPS  rule  of  seventeen 
years  fiom the date of grant, or under the current twenty-year filing period. 

More  subtle  and  dlfficult  to  monitor 

than  these  narrowly  defined  legal 
extensions are  those  sought because  the  technology  involved  has  been  perfected  to 
warrant  the  granting  of  a  new  patent.  As  major  blockbuster  drugs  face  patent 
expiration, patent  owners are vigorously  trying to  extend  their  terms because of the 
substantial loss  of  revenue  that  will  occur  when  generic  products  are  introduced. 
Even in the United  States, the bastion  of pharmaceutical patent protection, questions 
are  being  asked  by  Congress,  consumer groups  and  the  generic  industry  about  the 
propriety  of  companies with  major  patent-protected  drugs  seeking  to  extend  their 
terms.  A  Business  Week  article  of  November  1998  discusses  Schering-Plough’s 
(Schering) efforts  to  extend  its  lucrative  Claritin  patent  beyond  the  current  expiry 
date  of  2002  by  utilizing  a  second  patent  on  “a  molecule  formed  as  the  body  is 
breaking down the drug, called  a m e t a b ~ l i t e l ’ ~ ~  The second patent would not  expire 
until 2004, thus providmg Schering with  an additional two years  if it can  effectively 
assert  the  second  patent  against  generic  entrants. On a  similar level,  the  patent  for 
Eli  Lilly  &  COS (Ldy)  lucrative  antidepressant,  Prozac,  will  expire  in  2004.  If 
successful,  Lilly  will  be  able  to  achieve  patent  extension  until  2015  through  the 
operation of  a  new  patent  currently  undergoing  FDA trials.  This  extension  will  be 
based  on  a  licensing agreement with  Sepracor,  Inc.,  a  company  that  specializes  in 
developing  “improved  chemical  entities.”35 These  efforts  are  followed  closely  in 
India,  and  further  the  argument  that  pharmaceutical  product  patents  are  but 
exploitative monopolies. 

Just as  product patents are inevitable under the TRIPS, so too is  the patent term. 

Article 33 provides: 

“The  term  of  protection  available  shall  not  end  before  the  expiration  of  a  period  of 
twenty years counted kom the filing date.” 
This  is  a  substantial  departure from  the  current  Indian  patent  term  of  five  or 
seven  years  for  food,  medicines  or  drugs,  or  fourteen  years  for  other  categories. 
Indians are  concerned  about this  extension especially in  the  area  of pharmaceuticals, 
believing that the longer term will increase the cost of drugs, but perhaps even more 

33  Tancer  (1995), pp.  152-4. 
34 
35 The Wall  Streetlournal (1998), p.  1. 

Business Week  (1998), p.  92 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY  IN INDIA 

181 

importantly, will deny access to new drugs and discoveries to India for a twenty-year 
period.36 Despite  these  concerns,  there  is  little  likelihood  that  I d a  wdl  enact  a 
shorter term than permitted under  the TRIPS. There is  no discretion provided for  in 
the  TRIPS requirements.  Moreover,  on  a  unilateral  basis,  the  United  States  does 
police patent  terms and threaten  countries with  Special $301 sanctions and increased 
tariffs  on  goods  entering  the  United  States  if  their  patent  laws  fail  to  meet  the 
twenty-year  period provided for in the TRIPS. 

Traditionally,  in  patent  infringement  suits,  it  is  the  plaintiff  who  bears  the 
burden  of  proof  of  establishing  that  the  defendant’s  actions  have  violated  his 
exclusive rights  “ ... 06  making,  using,  offering for  sale,  selling, or  importing  ...”37 
the  patented  product  or  process  without  his  permission.  Article  34  of  the  TRIPS 
shifts this burden  to the defendant: 

“ ... if  the  subject-matter  of  a  patent  is  a  process  for  obtaining  a  product, the judicial 
authorities  shall have  the authority to  order  the  defendant  to  prove  that  the process  to 
obtain an identical product  is  different from the patented  process.”3R 
This  change in burden  of proof  may occur when  the product  produced  by  the 
process is  new  or  the  owner  of the patent  has  been  unable  to  determine the  nature 
of the process.39 Some Inman observers believe that  this shft of the burden of proof 
gives the  plaintiff a built-in  advantage, as  the  holding  of a process patent  implies its 
valid~ty.~’ In  infringement  litigation,  if  the  product  were  new  and  the  defendant 
unable  or u n d i n g  to reveal the process, the plaintiff would  automatically prevail in 
an infringement suit under  these new rules.41 

It  is  in  the  area  of  compulsory  licensing that  In&a  will  be  more  effective in 
protecting  her  perceived  interests. This  is  because  both  the  TRIPS, and  the  earlier 
Paris  Convention,  provide  signatories  with  flexibility  in  establishing  terms  and 
conditions. Article 5 of the Paris Convention provides: 

“(2)  Each  country  of  the  Union  shall  have  the  right  to  take  legislative  measures 
providing for the grant of compulsory licences  to prevent the abuses which might  result 
fiom the exercise of the  exclusive rights  conferred by  the patent, for example, failure to 
work.” 

It  further  provides  that  compulsory  licences  based  on  failure  to  work  cannot  be 
requested until  four  years  from  the  date  of filing for  the  patent  or  three  years from 
the  grant.42 Article 31  of the  TRIPS recognizes compulsory licensing, but  under  the 
title  “Other  Use  Without  Authorization  of  the  Right  Holder”.  The  TRIPS 
procedures  for  obtaining  a  compulsory  licence  are  very  specific  and  seek  to  assure 

’‘ Zaveri (1998), p. 40. 
TRIPS Agreement,  Article 28. 
Ibid., Article 34. 

37 
38 
39  Ibid., Article 34.l(a) and (b). 
40 
41 
42  Park  Convention,  Article  S(4). 

Zaveri  (1998), p.  102. 
Wad (1997), p. 2463. 

182 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

that  payment be  made  to  the  original patentee.43 Nevertheless, Members  are  given 
the  ability to  establish  compulsory licensing and  the  flexibility allowed by  the  Paris 
Convention is  incorporated into the TRIPS. 

Current Indian law is  somewhat more permissive in the granting of compulsory 
licences; and  through  the  existence of  “licences of right,”  unknown  under  the  Paris 
Convention and the TRIPS, the government does play  a  more  active role.  Moreover, 
in  the  case  of  food,  medcine  or  drugs,  a  maximum  royalty  rate  of  4  percent  is 
established  by  the government. In adapting her compulsory licensing practices to the 
TRIPS, India  wdl  no  doubt  take  refuge  in  some  of  the  general  provisions  of  the 
Agreement  to  maintain her own values.  These include the broad,  escape-clause  type 
language found in Article 8.1, where  “Members may ... adopt measures necessary  to 
protect public health  and nutrition, and  to promote  the  public  interest  in  sectors of 
vital importance to  their socio-economic  and technological development . ..”  Clearly, 
drugs and medicines fall within the purview of this  clause. 

Since  an  underlying  issue  in  the  granting  of  compulsory  licensing  is  that  of 
patent  use,  the  notion  of what  constitutes  “use”  emerges as  a  major  issue  in  India, 
particularly  the  question  of  whether  the  requirement  can  be  met  by  importing  a 
product. For example, an  MNC pharmaceutical company obtains a product patent in 
India  but  decides  not  to  manufacture  the  product  there,  but  to  import  it  from 
abroad. One could say  that the  Indian consumer benefits from the  availability  of the 
new product and this availability constitutes “use”. Indian opinion is  opposed to this 
argument and  maintains that  the  “use” requirement is  satisfied  only if  the product is 
manufactured  in  India.  Manufacturing  in  India  enhances  technology  transfer,  saves 
much-needed  foreign  exchange, and  prevents patent  protection  from  creating  “.. . a 
mere  monopoly  for  the  importation  of  the  patented  article  into  the  country  ...’744 
No  distinction  is  made  in  the  TRIPS between  manufacturing  and  importing  a 
patented product. In&a fears its significant manufacturing capacity wdl  be  eroded by 
the importation of new patented drugs &om abroad. This fear  is  shared by  many  of 
the developing nations which are now manufacturing sophisticated products, not just 
pharmaceuticals. 

V.  TRIPS AND  THE  INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL 

INDUSTRY 

Implementation  of  any  trade  agreement  results  in  some  disequilibrium.  In 
anticipating the  effects  in  the  United  States  of  the  pending  North  American  Free 
Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA), the  then  President,  George  Bush,  responded  to 
American  concerns  in  the  now  apocryphal  phrase  “that  there  would  be  some 
winners and some losers.”  The results  of compliance with  the TRIPS in  India w d  be 
sirmlar.  Assuming a  new  patent  law  in  I d a  meets  the  requirements of  the  TRIPS, 

43 
44 

TRIPS Agreement, Article 32(b). 
Zaveri  (1998), Appendix I ,   p.  133. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY  IN INDIA 

183 

Figure 2 

INDIAN PHARMA MARKET: MARKET SHAKE OF  FOREIGN COMPANIES 

whether  it  becomes  effective in  2000  or  2005,  who  will  be  the  winners  and  who 
the losers? The MNCS and larger Indian firms will clearly  be the winners. At present, 
MNCS play  a  minimal role  in  India  for  a  variety of reasons;  patent protection  is  but 
one  of  these.  Foreign  companies  enjoy  only  a  32  percent  market  share;  the 
remaining 68 percent belongs to In&an producers (see  Figure 2). 

With  strong patent  protection  existing, MNCS in  India will  expand  and  others 
wdl  enter or  re-enter  the  market.  This phenomenon  has  been  seen in both  Mexico 
and  Canada  following  the  adoption  of  strong  patent  laws,  which  both  nations 
enacted prior  to  the  creation  of NAFTA.4s  Entry or,  as  the  case  may  be,  re-entry  of 
the  MNCS in  India  can  occur  at  a  variety of  dfferent  levels:  export,  licensing, and 
manufacturing,  coupled  with  direct  foreign  investment.  India  can  control  the 
direction of MNC participation and need not be the victim of MNC exports. Foreign 
investment laws can require joint-ventures with Indian firms, where MNCS introduce 
research  capability and  Indian  firms  offer  manufacturing abdity,  so  that  both  parties 
benefit.  Foreign  investment  may  also  be  in  the  form  of  university-sponsored 
research.  Canadian  universities  were  supporters  of  strong  patent  protection  as  a 
means of acquiring research grants Corn MNCS doing business in Canada.46 

The  larger,  more  research-oriented  Indan  firms  will  also  be  among  the 
winners.  The  Patents  Act,  1970 provided  the  mechanism  for  Indian  companies to 
manufacture  pharmaceutical  products  without  the  research  factor.  It  achieved  its 
goal, but leaves  open to sceptics the question of whether  Indian firms will be  able  to 
develop  the  research and  development  capabihty to  compete with  the  MNCS. They 

Tancer (1997),  pp. 283 and 295-6. 

45 
4h  Ibid., p.  295. 

184 

T H E  JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PKOPEKTY 

argue  that  innovative  research  is  not  part  of  their  corporate  culture  and  that  it  wdl 
take  years  to  create  a  research-oriented  environment.  This  argument  overlooks  the 
reality  that  many  Indian  firms  have  already  channelled  their  energies  into  research 
activities  as  a  means  to  compete  in  the  global  arena.  Ranbaxy,  a  leadmg  Indian 
company,  has  as 
International 
Pharmaceutical  C~rnpany”.~’ 

its  mission:  “To  become  a  Research-Based 

Dr.  Reddy’s  Group,  another  important  Indlan  firm  with  subsidaries  in  the 
United  States,  France,  Singapore  and  Russia,  established a  Research  Foundation  in 
1991, emphasizing research in the areas of cancer and  diabetes. The Group operates, 
in  part,  through  strategic  alliances abroad  and  has  already  obtained  patents  in  India 
and  other  foreign  countries.48 Ajanta Pharma  Limited,  a medmm-sized  Indian  firm, 
projects the  goal in its Annual  Report,  Future  Milestonesfor  2005, “to be  amongst  the 
Top Pharma  Companies  of the ~ o r l d . ” ~ ’  It is  clear that  Indian  companies with  such 
aspirations  are  aware  of  the  global  environment  in  which  they  already  participate, 
both  as  to  competitiveness  and  patent  protection.  There is  significant  evidence  that 
the  availabhty  of  patent  protection  stimulates  research  and  innovation.  A  PhKMA 
policy paper  notes: 

“Pharmaceutical R&D increased  by  more  than  600  percent  in  the  decade  after  Italy’s 
weak  patent law was  strengthened. And, after  Canada improved its patent  laws  in  1987, 
pharmaceutical R&D rose from 6 percent to  10.6 percent of sales in four  year^."^" 

O n   the  downside,  it  d be  the  small,  inefficient  Indian  firms  who  wdl  be  the 
losers. 

Looking beyond  the pharmaceutical  industry  to the Indan consumer, what  will 
be the  effects of a new patent  law on the price  of medicine? Given  the income level 
in  India  and  the  current  availability of medicine  in  India,  this  question  is  of  major 
concern.  Critics  of a new patent  law  claim that  the  introduction  of product  patents 
wdl  result  in  escalating prices  that  would  limit  the  availabdity  of  new  drugs  and 
make  them largely unavailable,  since  “copying”  would  no longer  be permitted.  This 
sentiment can best be summarized: 

“In  general,  the  pressures  emanating  from  the  new  trading  arrangement would  work 
against the  objective  of  establishing the right  to  health  as  a  basic  right  and  of  assuring 
access  for  the  mass  of  the  population  to  essential  drugs of  good  quality  at  affordable 
prices, while  discouraging their unethical promotion and use.”51 
Even  without  product  patents,  India  has  utilized  a  licensing  and  price-control 
system  to  ensure  that  consumers  will  be  protected.  Adoption  of  the  World  Health 
Organization’s  essential  drug  list  (EDL), most  of  which  are  not  under  patent 
protection,  is  suggested as  a means to standardze  production  and bulk  purchasing  to 

Ranbaxy  (undated), Mission. 
Dr. Reddy’s Group (undated), p.  15. 

47 
4x 
’” PhRMA  (1998), p.  1. 
4y  Ajanta  Pharma Limited (1998), inside cover. 
51  Gopalsainy  (1998), p.  216. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY  IN INDIA 

185 

maintain  socially  acceptable price  levels.  Utihzation  of the  EDL has  apparently been 
successful  in  such  diverse  countries  as  the  Phdippines,  Mexico  and  Norway. 
Interestingly  enough,  price  control,  which  has  been  liberalized in  India  in  recent 
years,  may  become an even more important factor with  the introduction of a strong 
patent law.52 Patent protection  and price  control can  coexist as  is  the  norm in  most 
European  countries.  After  all,  the  patent  owner  is  better  off  receiving  less  than 
receiving  nothing.  The  question  of  the  effect  of  strong pharmaceutical  patents  on 
the  price  of pharmaceutical products  remains  an  emotional one. A  recent  study on 
the subject concludes: 

“Our  empirical  analysis  of  pharmaceutical  prices  for  products  fiom  six  therapeutic 
categories in nine  developing countries  suggest that  improving  IPP  (intellectual property 
protection)  does  not  have  a  measurable  impact  on  real  or  nominal  prices  of  existing 
drugs (those marketed before the implementation of IPP) .1753 
Patented drugs face competition from similar generic drugs, which generally are 
available  at  a  lower  cost,  and  from  “me  too”  patented  drugs  that  provide  simdar 
results.  It  is  only when  a  new  drug  achieves  a  significant therapeutic advance  that 
the  consumer may  be  unable  to purchase  it.  Governments can protect the  public in 
these  few  instances through  effective price  control  or flexible  compulsory licensing 
standards-both 

alternatives that are available under  the TRIPS. 

The  Indian  pharmaceutical  industry  need  not  fear  the  enactment  of  a  new 
patent  law  consistent with  the  TRIPS. Larger  Indan  firms  have  already  positioned 
themselves  to be world-class  players.  A strong patent law d permit them to expand 
their  markets  even  hrther. As  they  begin  to  deal with  patented  products,  they d 
develop  alone  or  through joint-ventures  with  MNCS and  opportunities for  growth 
wdl  continue. The TRIPS provides sufficient flexibhty so  that  Indian legislation  can 
protect  Indian  firms  from  being  inundated  by  foreign  exports.  In  addition  to  the 
flexibdlty in  the  TRIPS, Inha has  sufficient resources through  her  legislative process 
to protect both  the pharmaceutical industry and the Indian consumer. 

Looking beyond  the  relatively narrow area  of pharmaceutical patents,  India  has 
much to gain by  becoming a full, participating Member of the WTO. These include 
the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  expanding world  trade  where  a  more  liberalized 
environment  would  facilitate  Indian  exports.  The  alternative, withdrawal  from  the 
WTO, would  deny  Inda  the  advantages  of trade  liberalization that  are  inevitable in 
the  foreseeable  future.  More  serious,  perhaps,  would  be  re-entry.  As  Chma  and 
Russia  have  seen,  new  or  returning  applicants  for  membership  in  the  WTO face 
stringent  entry  requirements,  considerations  presently  inapplicable  to  India.  Even 
without  membership in the WTO, no nation can play  it alone, solely according to its 
own rules. An  I d a  without  the benefit of the WTO would have  to face the United 
States  on a  one-to-one  basis  and face the  consequences of tariff increases permitted 

52  Ibid., p. 217. 
53  Rozek and Berkowitz (1998), p. 215 

186 

T H E   

under  the  trade  laws.  China  experienced  this  wrath  in  1992, w h c h   resulted  in  a 
Memorandum of Understanding covering  copyright piracy far  more  stringent in  its 
requirements  than  the  TRIPS would  have  been.  For  Indla,  withdrawal  fiom  the 
WTO could only be perceived  as  taking one step backwards in its move to become a 
global power. 

References 

Ajanta Pharma Limited, 1998: 19th Annual  Report  1997-98,  Port Louis, Mauritius. 
Business  Week,  1998: New  Teeth f.r  Old  Patents:  Brand  Companies j n d   New  Ways  to  Keep 
Generics at Bay, 30 November, pp. 92-95. 
Dr. Reddy’s Group, undated: Genesis of  Success. 
Gopalsamy, N.,  1998: GATTIWTO: TRIPS, TRIMS and  Trade  in  Sewices, first edition, Wheeler 

Publisher, New Delhi. 

Government of India, 1981: The Patents Act,  1970 (39 of  1970), Ministry of Law, Justice and 

Company Affairs, Government of India Press, Simla, Delhi. 

India Express Service, 1998: IRA,  Patents Bill  in Limbo, 24 December, Bombay, fiont page. 
Organisation of  Pharmaceutical Producers  of  India  (OPPI), 1998: Intellectual Property  Rights, 

Presentation to  the Expert  Committee  Government of India,  Mumbai, 8 June. 

is  Essential,  PhRMA  Policy  Papers,  <http:// 

PhRMA,  1998:  Strong  Patent  Protection 
www.phrma.org/issues/protect. htm). 

Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited, 1998: Annual Report  1997-98,  New Delhi. 
Idem, undated  Mission. 
Redwood,  Heinz,  1994:  New  Horizons  in  India:  The  Consequences of  Pharmaceutical  Patent 

Protection, Oldwicks Press Limited, Suffolk, England. 

Rozek, Richard P.,  and  Ruth Berkowitz,  1998:  The Efect  ofpatent  Protection  on  the  Prices  of 
Intellectual Property  Protection  Raising  the  Drug  Bill  in  Developing 

Pharmaceutical Products-Is 
Countries? 1 J.W.I.P. 2, March, pp.  179-243. 
S.P. Jain  Institute of Management & Research,  1998: Final  Report  on  the  Impact  of IPR on  the 
Indian  Pharmaceutical  Industry:  A  Study  Commissioned  by  the  Organisation 4 Pharmaceutical 
Producers  of India, Mumbai. 
Tancer,  Robert  S.,  1995:  Trends  in  Worldwide  Intellectual  Property  Protection:  The  Case  of  the 

Pharmaceutical Patent, The International Executive, Vol. 37  (2), pp.  147-166. 

Idem,  1997: Foreign Investment  in  North  Ameriia  and  the  Pharmaceutical Industry  in  Canada,  The 
The  Wall  Street Journal,  1998: Son  of  Prozac: A  Netq  Purer  Wrsion 4 Top Antidepressant is  in 
Watal,  Jayashree,  1997:  Implementing  the  TRIPS Agreement:  Policy  Options  Open  to  India, 

International Executive, Vol.  38 (2), pp.  283-297. 
Eli Lilly’r Sightr, 7 December, pp. A1 and A8. 

Economic and Political Weekly, September 27, pp. 2461-2468. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY IN INDIA 

187 

Idem,  1996: Introducing  Product  Patent in the Indian Pharmaceutical Sector: Implications for Prices  and 

Werare, World Competition, Vol. 20 (2), pp.  5-17. 

WIPO, 1996: Agreement on  Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TRIPS Agreement) 
Idem,  1996:  Provisions  of  the  Paris  Convention for  the  Protection  of  Industrial  Property  (1967) 

(19941, World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva. 

mentioned in the  TRIPS Agreement. 

Update,  September 8. 

Idem,  1998:  India  Accedes  to  the  Paris  Convention  and  the  Patent  Co-operation  Treaty,  WIPO 

World  Trade  Organization,  1997:  India-Patent 

Protection for  Pharmaceutical  and  Agricultural 

Chemical Products, Report .f the Panel, WT/DS50/R,  5  September. 

Zaveri, N.B.,  1998: Patents for Medicine, first  edition,  Indian Drug Manufacturers Association, 

Mumbai. 


