The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 311–334

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12042

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in
Asia—From Rhetoric to Consensus

Naazima Kamardeen
University of Colombo

This paper deals with community rights to intellectual property, in light of the individual-style ownership
envisaged by the TRIPS Agreement. Community rights could either be the right held by traditional
communities to their indigenous knowledge, or the right held by the community at large, to demand access to
innovations that are protected by the intellectual property regime. This paper proposes to deal with the latter
aspect of community rights. It will argue that the community at large has a stake in innovation, as it provides
the foundation from which all innovation springs. The innovator should be given the requisite incentives to
continue the good work, without which development cannot take place. However, no innovation can be justiﬁed
if it does not serve the needs of society. Examining the developments in the pharmaceutical and agro-chemical
industries, this paper will advocate that access should be facilitated through a system guaranteeing that
vulnerable segments within the community are not disadvantaged due to the delays in the current system, which
effectively denies them the opportunity to share in the beneﬁts of innovation. The study will compare various
jurisdictions in the Asian region to demonstrate how the lack of community rights negatively impacts on all
these communities.

Keywords community rights; intellectual property; Asia; access and beneﬁt-sharing

The TRIPS agreement has been operative for almost two decades now.1 One of the stated objectives of
its “parent”—the WTO, was the increase in access through the bringing down of barriers to trade.2 Yet,
in terms of access to patented items—including essentials such as food and medicines, the level of
access has not increased at all. Rather, we may surmise that access is slowly but surely being curtailed.3
If this is true, then what beneﬁt has the TRIPS brought to the people whose lives it was supposed to
beneﬁt? How will people who are in dire need of essentials, have access to them? Do they have a right
to access these essentials, or should the state intervene in such a case? Does the public/private divide
matter when lives are at stake? Is the current system promoting the private appropriation of public
wealth? Through a critical analysis of each of these questions, this paper will attempt to shed light on
one of the fundamental questions that plagues intellectual property law: where does one draw the line of
ownership?

The paper addresses these issues by examining IP rights through an ownership model. It considers
private and public (or collective) models from a geographical perspective, arguing that the “Western”
model promotes the individual right, while the “Eastern” model promotes the collective right. It then
analyses how adherence to the Western model (which inﬂuenced the contemporary rules on IP) has
resulted in a lacuna in the legal framework to support the rights of those who hold traditional knowledge,
whether as a traditional community, or as the “community at large”, (both found in the developing nations
of Asia), and how this has led to unhealthy outcomes such as biopiracy and lack of access. It goes on to
analyse two case studies from Asia to consider how the region could overcome these difﬁculties and secure
collective rights to IP. It concludes by examining new initiatives such as beneﬁt sharing agreements that
might help to harmonise these divergent systems by providing a solution that is equitable by all
stakeholders.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

311

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Intellectual Property Rights: Individual Vs. Collective: Whose Right Is It Anyway?
As intellectual property fundamentally belongs in the realm of private rights, (since it is seen as an
extension of property), we regard it as something that can be held against the world at large. Ownership of
this nature presupposes the exclusion of others from the realm of ownership. This section will deal with the
notion of “property” and the evolution of the right, from absolute to relative. It will also analyse the nature
of IP rights, and examine whether, apart from individual ownership, such property could be the subject of
collective ownership as well.

Property Rights: Absolute or Relative?
The notion of “property” and “rights” is something that has fascinated mankind from time immemorial.
We would like to think of both in absolute terms, because then it is easy to own and to exclude others from
the realm of ownership. However, in the modern world, we ﬁnd that such an absolutist deﬁnition hampers a
proper understanding of the role of property and the functions to which it may be put. Boyle argues that
“instead of an absolute, unchanging and universal shield against the world, property is now merely a
bundle of assorted entitlements that changes from moment to moment as the balance of utilities
changes”(Boyle, 1996, p.49).

Intellectual Property Rights and the Public/Private Debate
If the notion of tangible property has seen such a paradigm shift, then it becomes even harder to explain
the concept of intellectual property in absolute terms, as intellectual property is much less tangible than
real property. Intellectual property is understood to be the product of the intellectual and creative labour
of individuals that attracts protection under the legal regime governing intellectual property rights.
Since it has been seen as an extension of property, it has received the same treatment as traditional
property rights, and been safeguarded as a private right, to be exercised in rem against the world at
large.

However, as much as the role of property has changed, and been viewed as a “bundle of rights” from
which certain aspects may be removed, thus modifying the level of ownership, in intellectual property too,
we see that the absolute right of the individual to the fruits of his intellectual labour is also being challenged
and modiﬁed. One of the primary reasons for this is the public/private debate. A person may invent a new
machine that solves a scientiﬁc problem. According to the patent laws, he is entitled to a monopoly, both to
reward his innovation, as well as to allow him to beneﬁt ﬁnancially before the competition is allowed to
come in. However, the monopoly is for a limited period, and this is so that society may also access and
beneﬁt from the invention.

There is also an underlying assumption that the individual may have obtained certain ideas and
concepts from information available in society (knowledge and ideas cannot be formed in a vacuum) and
that society thus has a right to expect some sort of beneﬁt from the invention. Therefore, it would be wrong
for the individual to beneﬁt from freely available common goods and give nothing in return. This is why
the Statute of Limitations was introduced in England, to put an end to absolute monopoly of individuals.
Garret Hardin’s seminal masterpiece, “Tragedy of the Commons” though it is originally thought to be a
warning against overpopulation, raises, through an interesting analogy, the idea of what would happen if
indiscriminate abuse is made of public property. He theorizes that if one farmer were to put an extra cow on
to the public grassland, he would increase his output with no cost to the grassland (one extra cow would not
put the grassland at risk of being overgrazed) but that if all the farmers were to think this way, the grassland
would be overgrazed. He points out that there is really no one to police the commons and to prevent their
abuse. He surmises that “freedom in a commons brings ruin to all.” Hardin’s theory is beneﬁcial to
understand why it is dangerous to allow individuals to reap the beneﬁts of common goods without giving
anything in return (Hardin, 1968).

312

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

The Changing Notion of “Rights”
When we analyse the concept of “rights” we ﬁnd that in the modern world, what is meant by a “right” is
also changing in scope. While it was commonly regarded that in order to confer a right on someone, it
was important to impose a duty on another, writers like Hohfeld criticised this view. According to
Hohfeld, we should not feel bound to impose a duty on others every time we confer a right on someone.
Hohfeld argues that “the rational lawmaker must use policy considerations to decide whether to confer
such duties in the particular case”, and “whether there should be such concomitant rights (or claims) is
ultimately a question of justice and policy; and it should be considered, as such, on its merits”(Singer,
1982). Thus we are faced with an interesting proposition: must we necessarily curtail the rights of
society if we want to confer rights on the innovator? If Hohfeld’s theory is valid, is it not possible to
grant privileges to the innovator while at the same time not curtailing the privileges accorded to
society?

Boyle furthers this argument as follows:

If it is to protect the legitimacy and intellectual suasion of the liberal world view, intellectual
property law . . . must accomplish a number of tasks simultaneously. It must provide a
conceptual apparatus which appears to mediate the various tensions associated with the role of
information in liberal society. Thus, for example, it must give some convincing explanation as
to why a person who recombines informational material from the public sphere is not merely
engaging in the private appropriation of public wealth. It must explain how it is that we can
motivate individuals – who are sometimes postulated to be essentially self-serving, and
sometimes to be noble, idealistic souls – to produce information. If the answer is, “by giving
them property rights,” it must also explain why this will not diminish the common pool, or
public domain, so greatly that a net decrease in the production of information will result
(Boyle, 1996, pp. 49–50).

Therefore it may be argued that it is possible to grant rights to the innovator, without taking away
rights from the community. However, it remains to be seen whether the current regime that governs
intellectual property rights would allow for such a situation.

IP Rights as Group Rights
The issue of collective rights has not received much jurisprudential attention. One writer who attempts to
analyse collective rights to a fair extent is Marlies Galenkamp, in her work “Individualism Versus
Collectivism: The Concept of Collective Rights” (Galenkamp, 1998). However, Galenkamp appears to
have problems with according legal rights to collectives, and this causes her to take a negative attitude
toward collective rights altogether. This can be seen particularly in her observations in Chapter 10 of this
work. It is submitted that one should ﬁrst consider the possibility of according moral rights to collectives,
which could be then ﬁtted into a legal framework. Abandoning the idea of collective rights altogether
would be detrimental to those communities whose survival is being threatened due to a lack of recognition.
Other writers have stressed the need to pay more attention to the topic of group rights. They include
Misdevic (2001, p. 278) and Waldron (2002, p. 206).

The limited literature on the topic seems to approach it from a human rights perspective, regarding
groups as minorities those whose rights have been violated and who need to be compensated for this. See,
for example, the work of Will Kymlicka, who discusses the idea of a “group-differentiated right” as a right
that a particular group might enjoy, due to its special status, or vulnerability, that is not accorded to the rest
of society at large (Kymlicka, 1995, pp. 45–48). Noting that this is actually detrimental to the proper
understanding of group rights, Galenkamp writes,

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

313

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Both by the advocates and the critics of collective rights the concept of ‘rights’ is generally
equated often implicitly with the concept of ‘human rights’. Defenders view collective rights
not only as rights, but as human rights as well. Mostly however, they do not provide any
argument in support of their case for viewing collective rights as human rights. On the other
hand critics reject the idea of collective human rights, but in the process commit the fallacy of
refuting the idea of collective rights as such (Galenkamp, 1993, p. 68).

However, the existing theories could be useful for us to gain a better understanding of what collective
rights should entail. An excellent starting point is provided by John Finnis, who speaks of the sharing of
aims as an important pre-requisite for the existence of a community (Finnis, 1982, pp 134–160). Finnis
uses the concept of “the common good” as a viable factor that causes the members of a community to
collaborate together (Finnis, 1982, pp 134–160). Raz takes a slightly different view. He espouses the cause
of a society coming together because of a collective right to certain kinds of goods. In describing collective
rights, Raz states that one of the conditions of a collective right is that “the interests in question are the
interests of individuals as members of a group in a public good and the right is a right to that public good
because it serves their interest as members of the group” (Raz, 1986, p. 208). Analysing what is meant by a
“good” Raz takes the view that there are certain inherent public goods that cannot be owned individually,
and must be owned collectively (Raz, 1986, p. 199). In fact, he argues against individual ownership of
these inherent public goods (Raz, 1986, 208). Working from the premise that if individuals have rights,
then collectives must have rights too, Raz maintains that

If individual rights depend on objects in which a collectivity has a primary interest, then if we
are to maintain the existence of these individual rights, we must also say that the collective
interest is sufﬁcient to amount to a right to those objects. To say that the collective interest
itself is sufﬁcient to ground duties is no mystery. It is the collectivity’s interest that serves as an
intermediary between individuals and non-individualizable goods. The collective interest
grounds the duty, somewhat as an ofﬁcial’s interests qua ofﬁcial ground rights from whose
existence individuals beneﬁt indirectly (Raz, 1986, p. 179; Raz, 1995, p. 42).

Therefore, according to Raz’ theory, a collective will have rights whenever its interests are sufﬁciently
signiﬁcant to create duties for others (Raz, 1986, p. 166). Taking this argument a step further and arguing
for the recognition of the collective interest, Newman maintains that “The collective interest must also be
sufﬁcient to ground a duty if we are to recognize the individual interest in question as a right” (Newman,
2004, p. 161) Newman further argues that collective rights need to be recognized at least to a certain extent,
as many individual rights are contingent upon such recognition. He makes the salient point that,

Even recognizing a contingency of collectivities, we can nonetheless conclude that some
collectivity necessarily has to have a collective right if we are to make sense of certain
individual rights. Contrary to the claims of some theorists, then, and ﬂeshing out the often
overlooked aspect within other rights theorists, unless we are prepared to abandon many
individual moral rights, collective moral rights exist (Newman, 2004, p. 163).

There have been many criticisms of group rights. Scholars have surmised that what are argued as
rights of groups are not rights at all, or that they dissolve into individual rights (Grifﬁn, 2003, pp. 161–182;
Lagerspetz, 1998, pp. 181–199). This is untenable when we consider community rights to traditional
knowledge, which can very well form the basis of rights to patent. Further, such rights cannot be held by
individuals in the group, as no group member would dream of appropriating the knowledge of centuries as
his/her own. Therefore, those arguments do not hold water in this situation. The real reason for the denial of

314

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

group rights appears to be skepticism over the claim that groups can hold rights, or the fear of the
implications or consequences of ascribing rights to groups. Another possible reason is the fear that making
the group too powerful would allow it to dominate its members, depriving them of their rights (Macdonald,
1989, pp. 117–136; Offe, 1998, pp. 113–14; Waldron, 1993). However, in traditional communities,
members see themselves as part of the group, and not superior or subservient to it. The furtherance of the
group right is the only way in which they can be assured of their rights, as they do not look beyond the
group for justice.

Western and Eastern Notions of Property: A Primary Source of Conflict
A possible explanation for why there is a conﬂict between the recognition of individual versus
collective rights in intellectual property may be offered by reference to Western and Eastern notions of
property. That they are each very different from each other is proposed by Lea (2008, p. 38), who
analyses the work of de Soto (2000) and Christman (1994a, pp. 225–250) for this purpose. According to
Lea, de Soto identiﬁes that property consists of several substrates, and comments that developing
nations tend to concentrate only on the material substrate, and fail to appreciate the economic or
the “latter” – meaning the economic or
transactional aspects of property. Lea points out
transactional aspects - are said to be the intellectual qualities of property interests associated with
commercial potential. In other words, these would be the intellectual property aspects. This, according
to him, is the success story of the West –they can “unbundle” the rights and divide them, and extract
commercial value from each of them (Lea, 2008, p. 38).

that

However, it is to Christman that we must turn for a clearer understanding of each of these rights. While
de Soto does not deﬁne the distinction between the material substrate – “control rights” and the economic
substrate – “income rights”, Christman deﬁnes the control rights to mean the rights to use, possess,
manage, alienate, consume (destroy), and modify the owned asset. The income right refers to the rights to
transfer and gain income from goods (Christman, 1994b, p. 13). In what way are they different? Christman
argues that control rights may be exercised unilaterally, but that income rights may not.

Lea explains the position as follows,

Control rights are related to the capacity for autonomous existence. . ... They function to
protect interests that agents have in protecting their environment. The exercise of these rights
is not contingently conditional upon the preferences and cooperation of others. If one is the
legitimate owner, one can, within the limits of the law, freely exercise one’s option to use,
modify, manage etc. In contrast, rights to income from trade or rent of an asset cannot be
exercised unilaterally. The right to income is dependent on the cooperation of others and so the
capacity to exercise this right is contingent upon the other’s preferences. Others may refuse to
trade, for example, or offer unfavorable terms so that no agreement is reached. This right is a
contingent right and the content of the right, its value, is always indeterminate. Ultimately
these rights have a distributive function because they create entitlements that determine the
distribution of goods and services in society (Lea, 2008, p. 38).

The last point highlighted above—that of income rights creating entitlements—is of vital importance
if we are to understand the modern intellectual property system. It has been built upon the Western model,
designed to break down the economic rights into small tradable commodities, so as to bring proﬁts to
their owners.4 The modern international instruments on Intellectual Property –such as the Paris and
Berne Conventions, are built on the “Western” model. None of these instruments make provision for the
recognition, or enforcement of, collective rights. The Eastern model is not favoured, as it does not have the
features to generate income.5

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

315

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Lea then goes on to make the point that if developing nations (as well as indigenous communities)
wish to share in the proﬁts of global capitalism, they must model their ownership style on the Western
model. But this proposition is contentious,6 and even Lea acknowledges that it should be proceeded along,
with caution. One of the main reasons why it would not be wise for developing countries to do this is that
the enforcement of IP rights is a costly legal exercise, which many developing countries cannot afford.7
Another reason is that the Western model is not what communities in developing nations are used to,8 and
to force them to change for monetary incentives might erode their sense of identity.9

It is possible that this dichotomy has resulted in differential standards of treatment of property.
Further, the broadening of the scope of IP rights, which provides the foundation for the application of
income rights, is ultimately working to the disadvantage of the third world countries that are struggling to
join and beneﬁt from the global economy (Lea, 2008, p. 48). Therefore, while the products of formal
knowledge systems have been protected as “property”, those of informal, traditional systems have been
tagged the freely available “common heritage of humanity” (Roht-Arriaza, 1995–1996, p. 929). Thus, the
playing ﬁeld is unequal, even before the game has begun. How can traditional groups hope to compete, or
even survive, given this anomaly?

Community Rights and the TRIPS Regime
With the establishment of the WTO, we stepped into a new world order. An order where membership
brought on responsibilities that could not be opted out of,10 where accountability of states for their
actions (as well as the actions of those within their jurisdiction) was taken to a very high level, and
where failure to act on those responsibilities would result in swift and often harsh, retribution. The
WTO system also harmonized local laws on certain subjects, albeit at the level of a low common
denominator, and took away the variety and divergence that existed among different jurisdictions. One
of the key areas in which this happened was in relation to IP laws. Indeed, in certain instances, some
countries enacted IP laws for the ﬁrst time, due to their membership in the WTO. Hence, the WTO has
been instrumental in creating laws on IP in these nations that did not have them in the ﬁrst place.11
While the merits or otherwise of having an IP regime in place should be questioned (should every state
have an IP law, even if it has no IP activity or innovation?), it is submitted that that question is beyond
the ambit of this paper, and in any case, it is not a question that can be revisited by those states that are
currently members of the WTO.

This section will analyse what type of obligations were put forward by the WTO’s TRIPS agreement,
and comment on whether the “rights” regime as promoted by TRIPS is one that could accommodate the
differing views on the ownership of intellectual property.

The WTO’s Stance on Property Rights: Favouring the Individual Over the Collective
The creation of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and its agreement on trade-related intellectual
property rights (TRIPS) has added a new dimension to this dilemma. It has mandated that members of the
WTO put in place an intellectual property rights regime, so that innovation that takes place anywhere in
the world can be registered in any member country, provided it meets the requirements of the local law.
The substantive requirements of the law are not by any means earth-shattering: in some instances they are
not as stringent as those laid down in some of the other conventions that deal with intellectual property.12
What is noteworthy about TRIPS is that members mandatorily accede to TRIPS by virtue of membership
in the WTO, and may not modify or reserve any of its provisions. The main criticism of TRIPS is that it
forces members to “open the space” so that foreign innovation could be registered, even where local
innovation is non-existent.13 Hence, it promotes aggressively, the idea of private ownership at the cost of
society’s interests.

316

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

Another criticism of TRIPS is that it focuses on individual-style ownership, thereby ignoring those
types of intellectual property that are incapable of being owned individually. This probably comes down
from a western-oriented culture that views ownership as being an essentially individualized concept. It
could be argued that TRIPS was inﬂuenced from the very outset by the “Western” model, given that the
principal promoters of the Agreement were the developed nations of the West. In fact, it has been noted that
it was the developed nations who wanted IPR issues to be moved from the WIPO to the GATT, where they
believed that high standards of IPR protection and a strong multilateral enforcement mechanism would
prevail.14

However, in many parts of the developing world, and certainly with regard to indigenous communities
in the Asian region, intellectual property rights are often held by the community as a whole. Hence, they
are not capable of being subjected to private ownership (Greaves, 1994). TRIPS has not been able to
capture the essence of community rights (even with regard to indigenous communities, where such a right
can be clearly established), and therefore it is submitted that the regime is too restrictive to recognize the
right of the community at large to intellectual property that has sprung from its collective wisdom, heritage
and culture.

However, it should be noted that this is not entirely the fault of the WTO or TRIPS. From the very
inception, IP rights have suffered from a Western interpretation, and have thus tended to focus on the
individual. Koutouki makes a very salient observation that:

Collective rights do not really exist in patent law either; instead, there is a stark preference for
individualism. In other words, a community as a whole could not apply for a patent based on its
collective knowledge and use of a particular plant (Koutouki and von Beiberstein, 2012, p.
534).

Feeding Off the Creative Commons: Public Knowledge Used for the Creation of Private Wealth?
There are certain aspects of creativity and invention that have been recognized and practised for
generations by groups, collectives and communities, which do not claim exclusive rights for their
creativity and inventions.15 Some of these form the basis on which individuals build their innovations.
TRIPS does not provide a suitable mechanism for the recognition of such creativity and innovation. This
has led, in certain instances, to such knowledge being the subject of theft and piracy, often with no
redress.16

It should be admitted that the contemporary intellectual property regime tries to protect private rights,
while ensuring that the rights of society are preserved as well.17 That the current system has failed is
apparent in the numerous instances of bio-piracy that have been reported,18 and the remarkable inability of
nations to respond to public health crises.19

The Need to Recognize and Enforce Community Rights: Implications for Asia
It has been noted that “public health or salus publica lies at the very heart of state sovereignty, as the basic
duty of government is maintaining and enhancing the well-being of its people.”20 If we look for a
corresponding right of the community in this regard, we need look no further than the socio-economic right
to health that is accepted by many states as a fundamental right,21 and by others as a directive principle that
guides state policy.22 This section will focus on Asia, primarily due to the fact that it is this region that has
the largest concentration of traditional communities. Though the other continents also do have
communities with rich traditions and ancient cultures, it is Asia that has the potential to be affected the
most by the lack of the recognition and enforcement of community rights. The status of community rights

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

317

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

as they relate to indigenous or traditional communities in Asia will be analysed, with a view to expanding
this right to include the community at large.

Demographics of the Region
Asia is home to the largest number of people per continent,23 and has the greatest diversity in relation to
environment, culture, religion, ethnicity, and language.24 In addition, it is home to the largest numbers of
indigenous peoples and tribes.25 Nearly every country in the Asian region has at least one indigenous tribe,
which conducts its own practices regarding farming, healthcare, education,
language, and social
interaction. The basic food in Asia is rice26 and the region’s rice production amounts to 91% of the world
rice production.27Though healthcare is generally available in the cities, rural areas follow traditional
medicinal practices.28

Level of Indigenous Knowledge and Use of Same
Apart from identiﬁable indigenous communities, there are many other village communities that have
integrated into the modern world in many ways, but follow traditional practices with regard to many
important aspects of their daily lives.29 These practices and knowledge have come down to them from their
ancestors, and are being used by them and passed down from generation to generation. In fact, some of
these practices have been found to be so successful that modern communities are also following them,
abandoning the ones they have learnt.30Hence, we can surmise that the use of indigenous knowledge in the
day-to-day life of the people in this region is very high. Therefore, the protection of indigenous knowledge
becomes less a matter of academic or cultural interest and more a basic, practical necessity for the survival
and well-being of the people of this region.

Level of Bio-Piracy of Knowledge Owned by Traditional Communities
It may be expected that based on the foregoing discussion, we can arrive at the proposition that in a regime
where property has value, it is given protection. Similarly, if it is given protection, it acquires value as well.
This is essentially true with regard to intellectual property rights. Therefore, even the traditional
knowledge held by indigenous and traditional communities, has value.31 The next proposition that we can
arrive at is that in an area where there are many types of rights, and only a few are legally protected, the
others are at risk of theft. Hence, with regard to IP rights, we ﬁnd that individual rights are protected very
aggressively, while community rights are not protected at all. This naturally leaves them vulnerable to
theft, which we commonly refer to as bio-piracy.32

In the short time in which the WTO and TRIPS became operational, we ﬁnd that literature on this
subject is rife with accounts of blatant acts of bio-piracy, often without any remuneration to the
society from which it was taken.33 While several initiatives have been taken to remunerate indigenous
societies through means such as access and beneﬁt-sharing,34 some of these have ignored a
fundamental question, namely, whether these societies are amenable to sharing their secrets, even for
money. Some of the traditional communities believe that their knowledge is sacred, and to be
conﬁned to the members of the community, and believe that the knowledge becomes contaminated
when accessed by outsiders. Sadly, our modern society is so materialistic that it cannot understand
this, and presumes that everyone can be bought over with money. It operates on the basis that theft
can be legitimized by subsequent payment. It ignores the fundamental right of the community to
exclusivity of its sacred knowledge, which is comparable in the modern legal system with the
protection accorded to trade secrets. However, when it comes to providing access to patented
innovations, these are highly regulated and can be done only within very strict parameters, which are
constantly being challenged by the right holders.35 Hence we see that there is a complete turnaround
in position when it comes to demanding access, (for the purpose of making proﬁt) and having to give
access (for the purpose of saving lives).

318

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

Need to Access Essential Drugs and Medicines
While it may be true that traditional communities are essentially self-contained and look for their basic
needs within their own communities, this is not the case in other communities.36 Successive years of
gloriﬁcation of western medicine,37 combined with the gradual westernization of society, have weaned
many societies away from traditional home remedies. Nowadays it is not even practical for urban dwellers
to think of accessing home remedies as the herbs and leaves required for their preparation are not readily
available where they live. Also it may take time and be cumbersome. Therefore, even for minor ailments
and health issues, they need to access western drugs.

Changes in the environment have also necessitated the turn to western medicine. In the Asian region,
where technology is only now turning “green”, large amounts of pollution have caused an increase in
respiratory diseases among urban city dwellers; more often than not, the remedies for these are all western.
In addition, urban poverty has contributed its fair share to sickness. Garbage, water pollution, and
congested living conditions have caused illnesses that seem to require western intervention.

In addition, deadly diseases such as HIV-AIDS that are not found within traditional communities
(unless they are introduced from outside the community) have to be treated with western drugs. This led to
the dilemma faced by South Africa when it tried to invoke the compulsory licensing provision in its
Medicines Act.38 Therefore, it is a given fact that society needs access to western drugs. The problem with
western medicine is that many of the drugs are patented.

Patents as Restricting Access and the Pharmaceutical Patent “Mafia”
It has been noted that the main problem with access to western drugs is the fact that these are usually
patented, and are thus available only at premium prices.39 Even when the patent runs out, and generic drugs
can be manufactured, it appears to be the case that they are not made available to the public.40 In effect,
therefore, generic drugs seem to be subjected to a “maﬁa” that controls them, upto the point of distribution.
If generic drugs are not popularized, then the demand for them will cease, shutting out the industry
altogether. This has happened due to the fact that patents have enhanced the economic value of drugs to
such an extent that their protection has become imperative, seemingly at any cost.

Concluding Remarks
The foregoing discussion has highlighted the fact that, in the Asian region at least, community rights to
intellectual property form the basis of a very valid and relevant debate. Indeed, much of the intellectual
property owned in the region, seems to belong to communities. Since TRIPS does not recognize these
rights, it effectively denies or negates much of the intellectual property rights of the Asian region. If we do
admit that community rights exist where the community has contributed in some measure towards the
creation, preservation or promotion of the product or process to which the right is attached, then by analogy
it becomes apparent that a community right to intellectual property must exist in any society from which
innovation springs, because it is the conditions in that particular society and no other, that led to the
creation taking place there and not in some other place. If it were not the case, then why was that particular
innovation created within that particular society and not in some other place?

The next argument to be forwarded in favor of the community rights argument is the controversy
surrounding bio-piracy. We need to ask ourselves the question—“why would bio-piracy become an issue,
if the place of creation was not relevant?” What makes a country claim its knowledge as its own, and for
whose beneﬁt is that knowledge claimed by a particular nation? Why did India ﬁght for the revocation of
the neem patent? Was it not because of a sense that it belonged to its own people—its community? Even if a
traditional or indigenous community cannot be found to be claiming the knowledge as its own, there is
traditional knowledge that belongs to an entire nation as a whole, which cannot and should not be
apportioned to individuals.41 This is the most compelling factor in the community rights argument that

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

319

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

favours extending a right to intellectual property to the entire community at large. However, the
community rights argument is by no means watertight, and it is to the limiting factors that we must now
turn.

Limiting Factors: The Definition of Community
Even if we were to extrapolate the proposition that a community right to intellectual property exists
(based on the duty of states to maintain the well-being of its people, and a right of the people to access
healthcare), the question remains as to how the term “community” is to be deﬁned. If both the innovator
and the innovation are native to the geographical location where the innovation is registered, then it
becomes fairly easy to state that there would be a nexus between the innovation and the society, as these
are homogenous. We might go as far as to say that in such a situation, the innovator has links to the
today’s
society, and therefore, society has the right
intellectual property regime is structured in such a manner that an innovation may be registered in a
nation far removed from its conception, and in such a situation, how could we argue that the society in
which it was registered should be given the right of access, when it is apparent that it never contributed
in any way to the creation?

to beneﬁt from the innovation. However,

Also, if the innovator comes from outside, and uses knowledge available within a particular society,
who will have priority to claim access to the patented innovation—the society from which the innovator
hails, or the society within which he worked and produced the innovation? Or should both have equal
rights of access? Consider the case of the Indian scientists Suma Das and Harihar Choly, who worked in an
American university. In 1995 they received a US patent for a method of using turmeric to treat wounds. In
response to a challenge ﬁled by an Indian research organisation, the USPTO overturned the patent in
1997.42 This case can be taken as an example of successfully reversing a biopiracy patent by the society
from which the knowledge is extruded. However, are we to deny Das and Choly a right to use knowledge
from the land of their birth for the promotion of their careers? If so, on what basis are we to do so? Is it
because they are no longer “nationals”, or are employed by a foreign entity?

One could argue that it is because the traditional knowledge belongs to the state, and not to any
individual or collective—a view that seems to have been promoted by the modern instruments on
ABS such as the Nagoya Protocol. However, this proposition is denied by traditional communities
who believe that their traditional knowledge belongs to them. These are the problematic areas in the
discussion on community rights, and it is frustrating to note that this topic has not been the subject of
much academic discourse. It is submitted by this author that TRIPS has been the root cause of this; by
the failure to recognize collective rights, even with regard to indigenous communities, it has
prevented the recognition and promotion of society’s right to share meaningfully in the fruits of
innovation.

Some Basic Models for the Preservation of Community Rights: Asian Perspectives
As the Asian region is home to much of the world’s indigenous knowledge, it is extremely useful to
consider how other jurisdictions have dealt with this issue. This section will compare and contrast the
treatment of community rights in two selected jurisdictions, in order to assess to what extent they have
been provided for, and whether a suitable model for the region could be extrapolated from these isolated
examples. It must be borne in mind that the basis of the formal IP laws in these two countries is
the Western, individual-oriented model. The initiatives that have been taken subsequently reﬂect the
inadequacy of such a model and the effort taken to supplement it by reference to systems that recognize
collective ownership.

320

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

India
India, a land of rich culture and heritage, is home to many traditional communities. The Constitution
appears to recognize customs and customary practices,43 while Article 39 (b) enjoins a duty upon the state
to direct its policy towards ensuring that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
community are so distributed as best to serve the common good.44

In India, traditional knowledge has been primarily held by local communities or groups, and practiced

by them without being registered as a proprietary right. Bijoy points out that,

The symbiotic relationship between the Adivasis with their ancestral domain led to their
distinct and sound understanding of their surroundings developing a knowledge system often
referred to as ‘indigenous knowledge’ (IK) which has been transmitted over generations. This
manifests in their culture, customs and beliefs with biodiversity facilitating the evolution of a
complex ecological map of knowledge (Bijoy, 2007, p. 8).

However, despite the traditional ownership of these people, and despite the many assurances offered

by the law, it has been noted that,

Matters such as natural resource management, which used to be a community domain were a
prime casualty with the colonial imperatives for appropriation. . .. . ..Their (The Adivasis)
concept of a common heritage facilitating the development of knowledge had very little space
in the modern legal system. However, they continued in social practice and started to decline,
with the body of state laws systematically eroding and destroying such social practices using
the precedence of state made laws over customary law. This is in spite of the Constitution of
India recognising customary law, which, in reality, subjected them to a requirement of being in
consonance with state-made law. Laws were progressively enacted without due consideration
towards existing customary laws (Bijoy, 2007, p. 8).

Bijoy points out that custom, which is an essential part of law when it comes to the recognition of the
rights of traditional communities, was ignored by the advent of the formative legal system, and that the
rights of these communities were also swept away with the creation of laws that devalued these rights.

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is one of the earliest legislation that formally recognised
customs to establish matters related to rights through the examination of practices recorded in
village administration or settlement records. These records invariably do not exist or are
grossly incorrect and incomplete and hence were ignored by the state. The judiciary, relying on
such ofﬁcial records, too often denies customary rights. The Indian Easements Act, 1882
provides for securing private rights, public rights and rights to certain classes of persons or
sections of the public based on examination of customary rights. The forests, essentially a
community domain, under the state forest laws since 1865 further replaced by the 1927 Indian
Forest Act, transformed customary rights of communities into privileges and concessions
sanctioned by the state and enjoyed at the will of the state and its forest ofﬁcials despite scope
for their recognition in law. This rapidly eroded IK and practices (Bijoy, 2007, p. 8).

India has no direct law that protects community rights, and in an effort to protect traditional
knowledge from bio-piracy, it recently set up a traditional knowledge digital library (TKDL).45 This
library lists out the traditional knowledge available in India, and integrates the diverse knowledge systems
that are available in that country. It is available for search and examination purposed for patent examiners
and could be used to defeat a patent application that is made on the basis of bio-piracy.46 Gupta notes that

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

321

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

the TKDL has considerably shortened the time taken to defeat a bogus application, and that this is a very
good defensive protection mechanism.47

While it is true that the TKDL prevents bio-piracy, it is also a fact that listing traditional knowledge on the
database effectively puts it into the public domain, thereby preventing it from having any commercial beneﬁt
thereafter. Given that traditional knowledge is the knowledge of the future, it does not make sense to store it in
such a manner that prevents anyone from exploiting it commercially. Also, taken from the point of view of the
traditional communities, there may come a day when they too need access to wealth, income and material
goods. If the knowledge that they could use to get them these things is to become economically worthless, how
are they to compete in the real world? Also, have these communities been consulted to ﬁnd out whether they are
willing to have their secrets put up in the public domain? The TKDL is the only option where we cannot
safeguard TK; at least it prevents bio-piracy and unjust enrichment. However, it cannot be taken to be the best
option, as it signiﬁes a failure on the part of society to prevent bio-piracy, and instead, proposes the option of the
public domain, which in turn, takes away the novelty aspect from the owners themselves.

The Philippines
The Philippines enacted the Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act (IPRA) in 1997. This legislation afﬁrms the
rights of indigenous peoples over their land and resources. More importantly, the Act acknowledges the
full ownership and control of the indigenous peoples over their cultural and intellectual rights, over their
sciences and technologies, and over derivatives.48 It has been noted that the IPRA implies that prior
informed consent of the indigenous people should be obtained where IP rights are granted to third parties
based on elements of indigenous culture, knowledge and activity.

In addition, the Philippines has also enacted the Wildlife Resources Conservation and Protection Act
of 2001. This deals extensively with the topic of bio-prospecting. The Act deﬁnes bio-prospecting to mean
“research, collection and utilization of biological and genetic resources solely for commercial purposes
and deems such activities as legal once the interested party formally declares (through the means of a Bio-
Diversity undertaking) its willingness to abide by the terms and conditions outlined for the protection of
bio-diversity. Parties are required to obtain the prior informed consent of the indigenous communities
concerned, and if the applicant is a foreign entity, then a local institution must become involved in the
agreement (Smagadi, 2005, p. 63).

All this has been put in place to ensure that the local communities that are repositories of traditional
knowledge are included and respected in the bio-prospecting activity, and that their role as the repositories
of such knowledge is acknowledged. In the subsequent Guidelines that were drafted to aid the
administration of this Act,49 detailed provisions on beneﬁt-sharing have been introduced. However, it has
not been possible to come to any conclusions as to whether these measures have protected and improved
community rights, due to the unavailability of data at the present time.

The Treatment of Community Rights in Other International Agreements/Conventions
Since the TRIPS agreement, which is regarded as the most important international document on
intellectual property, has nothing to offer by way of community rights, it becomes necessary to consider
what the other treaties and conventions have to say on the subject. This section proposes to analyse the
relevant articles of some selected conventions, in order to determine whether community rights are
recognized, and to what extent.

The Nagoya Protocol to the Convention on Biological Diversity
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) was hailed as one of the ﬁrst international instruments to
mention community rights, access and beneﬁt-sharing. The Nagoya Protocol also does not disappoint.

322

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

This instrument will be discussed under three heads—namely, the recognition of community rights, access
and beneﬁt-sharing, and special consideration.

Recognition of Community Rights
The preamble itself contains several statements that afﬁrm and acknowledge the existence of community
rights, as can be seen below:

“Noting the interrelationship between genetic resources and traditional knowledge, their inseparable
nature for indigenous and local communities, the importance of the traditional knowledge for the
conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components, and for the sustainable
livelihoods of these communities,

Recognizing the diversity of circumstances in which traditional knowledge associated with genetic

resources is held or owned by indigenous and local communities,

Mindful that it is the right of indigenous and local communities to identify the rightful holders of their

traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, within their communities,

Further recognizing the unique circumstances where traditional knowledge associated with genetic
resources is held in countries, which may be oral, documented or in other forms, reﬂecting a rich cultural
heritage relevant for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity,

Afﬁrming that nothing in this Protocol shall be construed as diminishing or extinguishing the existing

rights of indigenous and local communities,. . .”

This is probably the ﬁrst time such a comprehensive avowal of community rights has been made, in
any international document. It reﬂects the growing need to give value to community rights, and make
amends for the lapses in TRIPS.

Access and Benefit-Sharing (ABS)
Article 5 of the Protocol deals with fair and equitable beneﬁt-sharing. 5(2) provides that:

Each Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, with the
aim of ensuring that beneﬁts arising from the utilization of genetic resources that are held by
indigenous and local communities, in accordance with domestic legislation regarding the
established rights of these indigenous and local communities over these genetic resources, are
shared in a fair and equitable way with the communities concerned, based on mutually agreed
terms.

It has been agreed that beneﬁt-sharing mechanisms could constitute one of the most meaningful ways
in which community rights to intellectual property could be recognized and rewarded. In fact, there have
been several
instances where bio-prospectors have entered into beneﬁt-sharing agreements with
indigenous groups. Bio-prospecting agreements have been on the rise in recent years, as they seem to
present the best mode of conducting access and beneﬁt-sharing initiatives. However, commentators have
noted that bio-prospecting can have serious and negative effects such as environmental degradation, as
well as the exploitation of indigenous communities (Kam, 2005–2006, pp. 384–400). Nevertheless, it
should be noted that it is too late to reverse the trend of bio-prospecting, and that in any case, if biological
and genetic resources from traditional communities are to be used in scientiﬁc research, then it is
preferable to use the bio-prospecting model, rather than leave those resources open to biopiracy.

Commentators like Reid et al., take an optimistic view of bio-prospecting, as they believe that beneﬁt
sharing can bring about a ‘win-win’ scenario. They also subscribe to the view that bio-prospecting can
create respect for indigenous or traditional knowledge, while helping humanity to beneﬁt through
scientiﬁc research. The authors do note that there have been past instances where resource exploitation has
had negligible or harmful effects on biodiversity conservation and local communities. Therefore they

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

323

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

premise theirsuggestions on the need for appropriate policies and institutions ’to ensure that the
commercial value obtained from genetic and biochemical resources is a positiveforce for development and
conservation (Reid et al., 1993, pp. 2–3).

However, bio-prospecting will work only if certain conditions are met. For example, if the legal and
institutional regime operative in a particular country does not regulate access in a proper manner, foreign
researchers might be able to spirit away resources that they were not authorised to be taken in the ﬁrst
place. Further, if beneﬁt-sharing mechanisms are not effectively outlined and supervised, then the
potential beneﬁts might not accrue to the intended recipients. Under these circumstances, bio-prospecting
would become nothing but biopiracy in disguise. In fact, it would be worse. The reason for this is that
biopiracy is always regarded as a wrongful activity, but bio-prospecting takes place with consent. So,
unless the systems regulating it are effective, we would be legalising theft, and there would be no redress at
that point.

Kim advances this argument using the powerful example of the patent-based beneﬁt-sharing
agreement between the indigenous group called the Aguaruna50 and Washington University in St. Louis
(which was collaborating with the Monsanto Company and the US government). According to the terms of
the agreement, the Aguaruna allowed the university’s researchers to bio-prospect on their lands and to
access their traditional knowledge for a generous 25% royalty fee. However, the university had not
speciﬁed what the royalty was to be. It turned out that the University was going to be entitled to a measly
1% royalty from the proﬁts that Monsanto would earn from products patented using the Aguaruna’s
genetic resources and traditional knowledge. The Aguaruna, who were promised 25% of that royalty, were
thereby entitled to a mere 0.25% of the entire proﬁts. Such blatant examples of cheating have led that
author to conclude that despite the presence of legal mechanisms that try to address the undesirable aspect
of bio-prospecting, “biopiracy continues in more insidious ways under the faScade of beneﬁt-sharing”
(Kim, 2010-2011, p. 71).

Another example of the negative aspects of the ABS system can be seen in the Hoodia case. This plant
has been used by the San Bushmen for centuries, to stave off hunger and thirst on hunting trips. The
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research (CSIR–South Africa) investigated this as part of a project on
traditional uses of local species, isolated and patented the active ingredient and sold the rights to
PhytoPharma, aBritish herbal manufacturer. PhytoPharma in turn sold the rights to Pﬁzer for $21 million,
which planned to introduce the new drug into the $6 billion diet market . By agreement, milestone and
royalty payments were promised to the CSIR, and they had already begun to receive certain beneﬁts, but
the San people were neither informed about this nor compensated for their knowledge. Subsequently, the
San people found out about this project and sued the South African government, winning an agreement in
2002 that acknowledged the work the government did in isolating the active ingredient and also provided
for beneﬁt- sharing with the San people.

At that time, this case was viewed as a success story where the government would act as the guardian
of the traditional communities when contracts were made and ensure that they were compensated for their
traditional knowledge (Folkins, 2003, pp. 345–346). However, in July 2003, Pﬁzer withdrew from the
project and the San are now unlikely to see any beneﬁt sharing. Though there are many companies selling
Hoodia products on the internet51 none of them has any agreement with the San people (Kohls, 2006–2007,
p. 127). The ultimate result is that the secret of the San people is out in the open, and while various people
other beneﬁt from this knowledge the San people themselves have not been rewarded in any way.52 They
are more likely to be threatened by the potential loss of raw material, as proﬁt-hungry companies will try
aggressively to access the Hoodia plant to make their preparations.

Another reason for the failure of beneﬁt-sharing mechanisms seems to be that many of these have
interpreted “beneﬁt” to mean a monetary beneﬁt, which is not true for all communities, especially
traditional ones. In many cases, there is no prior informed consent, and no community participation in

324

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

decision-making. This is particularly true in the case of the Jeevani plant, which involved the Kani people,
tribesmen of India. It was alleged that in the beneﬁt-sharing agreement that was made for the extraction of
this plant, the community was not even asked for their views, nor involved in the beneﬁt-sharing
agreement, except as passive receivers of monetary beneﬁts. Some tribesmen were opposed to the idea of
“selling” sacred secrets. However, these views were not respected by either the government or the bio-
prospectors (Schuklenk and Kleinsmidt, 2006, pp 126–128).

Special Considerations
An interesting feature of the Protocol, in terms of the current debate, is the section titled “special
considerations”. This section creates the obligation on States Parties to the Convention to:

(a) Create conditions to promote and encourage research which contributes to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, particularly in developing countries, including through
simpliﬁed measures on access for non-commercial research purposes, taking into account the need to
address a change of intent for such research;

(b) Pay due regard to cases of present or imminent emergencies that threaten or damage human, animal or
plant health, as determined nationally or internationally. Parties may take into consideration the need
for expeditious access to genetic resources and expeditious fair and equitable sharing of beneﬁts
arising out of the use of such genetic resources, including access to affordable treatments by those
in need, especially in developing countries;53

(c) Consider the importance of genetic resources for food and agriculture and their special role for food

security.”

The highlighted section seems to imply that granting access to those who could convert that
information into something useful, could in turn be used to alleviate the suffering of those in developing
countries. Further, while expeditious access is presumably unconditional, expeditious beneﬁt sharing is
conditional on the requirement of fairness and equity, which is an extremely vague term.54 Are we to imply
that beneﬁts need not be shared if the entity gaining access deems that it is neither fair nor equitable for the
community granting access to demand a share of the beneﬁts?

Whereas the CBD deﬁned genetic resources as “genetic material of actual or potential value”, (Article 2)
the term “utilization of genetic resources” has not been deﬁned before. This has led to different interpretations
by both experts and national legislations on the types of activities covered by the term. It is observed that the
new deﬁnition aims to create more legal certainty by including biochemical compositions under the scope of
ABS. According to Kamau et al, this is of high importance because, for example, drugs based on the extraction
of chemicals from biological resources are now subject to beneﬁt-sharing (Kamau, Fedder and Winter, 2010).
However, the Nagoya Protocol is not without its fair share of deﬁciencies. One criticism of the CBD was
that it afﬁrmed state sovereignty over all natural resources, ignoring rights over the natural resources
maintained and developed by traditional communities. The Nagoya Protocol continues in this same vein, and
this has been critics by several commentators working for the development of traditional communities. For
example, the North American Indigenous Organisations, in their statement on the Protocol, observed that
“state sovereignty clearly overrules the rights of indigenous peoples throughout the whole Protocol”.55

Another weakness of the Protocol is that it requires Parties to support compliance by monitoring and
enhancing transparency about the utilization of genetic resources (Article 17), but does not provide a
corresponding provision relating to the utilisation of TK. Koutouki observes that this is a drawback for TK
holders, as it does not then require parties to monitor or enhance transparency with regard to TK. Since
most of the genetic resources of developing nations are in the form of TK, this could have negative impacts
on the genetic resources held by traditional communities (Koutouki and von Beiberstein, 2012, p. 530).

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

325

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

A serious deﬁciency of the Protocol, and one that strikes at the very heart of the beneﬁt-sharing system
it promotes, is that the enforcement of Mutually Agreed Terms (MAT), and thus beneﬁt-sharing, ﬁnally
boils down to a simple issue of contract enforcement. Article 18(1) states, “In the implementation of
Article 6, paragraph 3 (g) (i) and Article 7, each Party shall encourage providers and users of genetic
resources and/or traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources to include provisions in mutually
agreed terms to cover, where appropriate, dispute resolution including:

(a) The jurisdiction to which they will subject any dispute resolution processes;
(b) The applicable law; and/or
(c) Options for alternative dispute resolution, such as mediation or arbitration.

This leads Kamau et al to their conclusion about the main problem and material issue:

There is no speciﬁed obligation of user states to ensure beneﬁt sharing. As before, the
enforcement of beneﬁt sharing duties is left to contractual means, with all the difﬁculties of
forum, litigation costs, and prosecution of titles. The fact that the Protocol does not go further
in that direction constitutes a major disappointment for the provider side (Kamau et al., 2010).

Koutouki, while acknowledging that the Nagoya Protocol has positive features in relation to its
improvement on the CBD in the areas of access and beneﬁt-sharing, is of the opinion that “when it comes to
ensuring protection for indigenous peoples’ traditional knowledge and control of the genetic resources
found in their territories, the Nagoya Protocol disappoints” (Koutouki and von Beiberstein, 2012, p. 535).
The Protocol has not entered into force yet, and it appears that it has a long way to go.Only 19 countries had
ratiﬁed or acceded to it by 6th September 2013, and it will enter into force 90 days after the 50th instrument
of ratiﬁcations.56 It is interesting to note that not a single developed country has ratiﬁed the Protocol,
though many, including Japan, the EU, Switzerland and Australia have signed it. The US has not even
signed the protocol.

It is interesting to see that opinions on the potential efﬁcacy of this instrument are divided. Several
commentators – mostly from the West, believe that it would stiﬂe research through the limitations on
sharing of resources.57 In the short-term, this may very well happen, as countries try to put a stop to illegal
access of biological and genetic material. In the long-term, however, it is hoped that the protocol will
actually increase access to resources, by providing for effective mechanisms to block biopiracy, thereby
ensuring that a restrictive patent regime does not place unnecessary limitations on farmers and breeders
(Folkins, 2003, p. 353).

The ASEAN Framework Agreement
The ASEAN Framework Agreement on access to biological and genetic resources58 has been signed by
about ten member states.59This Agreement contains some interesting principles. Article 1 posits:

“That the Member States regard biological and genetic resources as a sacred heritage for all

humankind and reject the application of the patent system.”60

There seems to be an idea that the patent system, as it is currently operative, is inimical to the proper
and decent use of biological and genetic resources. An extension of this view would be that something that
is a sacred heritage of all humankind should be allowed free access by all humankind, and that the interests
of humanity should override even an established patent system, where it exists. However, the rest of the
document is less explosive and contains the usual provisions on access and beneﬁt sharing,61 community
rights,62 and the grant of prior informed consent.63 It has been noted that even though this Convention is
available as a guiding instrument, “there is great uncertainty in some countries on how to formulate

326

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

contracts”(Thornstrom and Bjork, 2007, p. 1476) The Philippines is one of the few countries that has taken
the initiative and built on the foundations provided by this Convention.

Conclusions and Recommendations
It is apparent from the discussion above that community rights to intellectual property have existed long
before the advent of the modern, Western IP system. It is also apparent that both the TRIPS agreement and
the modern legal system have combined to undermine and devalue community rights to intellectual
property. While some efforts have been taken to rectify this situation, they are inadequate to say the least.
The greatest efforts taken to recognize community rights (both of indigenous communities and the
community at large) have been through UN or regional instruments. As we know from experience, these
are nowhere near the WTO agreements in terms of scope and effect. The ASEAN Convention has garnered
a measly ten signatures; in contrast, TRIPS has near-universal coverage, and no one will be entering
reservations to any of its provisions.64 The Nagoya Protocol too, though it has the requisite outlook, does
not have the institutional framework required to make it really effective in promoting community rights.
The writer has striven to make the argument that community rights to intellectual property must exist if
there is to be equity in a world where the innovator may use knowledge without the consent of the holder of the
knowledge, but the holder cannot claim the beneﬁts of that knowledge once a patent has been granted. Much of
the inequalities that exist in the modern world have arisen from this lop-sided realization of rights. The
curtailment of the rights of one section, coupled with the inﬂation of rights of the other, will lead to the widening
of the gap between the rich and poor, even within the same society, and lay the foundation for social unrest.
It is admitted that exceptions and limitations placed on the rights of IP owners work in such a manner
as to enable governments to provide patented items to the community at large, through the recognition of
the compulsory licensing and parallel imports system. These allow the government of a country having
those systems legally provided for, to issue licenses to have essential items manufactured within the
country itself, or if that is not possible, to import them from another country. However, this is not to say that
a community right to IP can be inferred from such provisions. In any case, the problems associated with the
compulsory licensing system are too well-known now, and even the ﬂexibilities suggested at Doha have
not really solved the problem of access. As for parallel imports, these are not practical at all for small
countries, which have to depend on another country’s willingness to violate IP laws in order to export
patented drugs made under license.

It is also admitted that a suitable deﬁnition must be sought for the word “community”, if a community
right to intellectual property under patent is to be granted. This deﬁnition should be broad enough to
encompass all those who have a legitimate right to share in the results of an innovation, and narrow enough
to exclude all those who do not. This involves going back and trying to understand how groups and
societies assimilate knowledge and demonstrate innovation. It involves taking a holistic view of the
manner in which society develops and produces creators and innovators, rather than a narrow view that
looks at the creation and the creator in isolation of the society. If we are unable to take such a bold step, we
might consider artiﬁcially tightening the deﬁnition further by ensuring that only those who desperately
need the innovation will be able to access it freely, while others who could afford it would have to pay. This
may make the community rights argument more palatable to critics who feel that it would open the
ﬂoodgates and kill innovation altogether, by drying up the ﬁnancial rewards attached to it.

It is disheartening to note that the countries that have rich cultures and traditional knowledge, as well
as large numbers of indigenous people, have not taken the initiative to recognize community rights within
their jurisdictions.65 Well more than a decade since this discussion began, Asia has made little or no
progress towards safeguarding the majority of its people. Since even the rights of deﬁned communities
(such as indigenous communities) have not been recognized, how could we work on recognizing the rights

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

327

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

of the community at large? Reform must be initiated, either by way of amendments to existing laws, or
through the enactment of new laws, that recognize and provide for better access and beneﬁt-sharing for the
entire community. Only then will the intellectual property law regime truly achieve what it set out to do–to
promote and champion innovation for the meaningful and holistic development of society.

About the Author
Naazima Kamardeen, LL.B. (Hons) (Colombo), LL.M. (Georgetown), Attorney-at-Law, Lecturer,
Department
e-mail:
naazima.kamardeen@gmail.com

of Commercial Law,

of Law, University

of Colombo;

Faculty

Notes

1. The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (or the TRIPS Agreement) was agreed
upon at the ministerial meeting in Marrakesh, Morocco in April 1994 and came into force as part of the WTO
Agreement on January 1, 1995.

2. The WTO Agreement in its preamble states among its other objectives that “. . .the reciprocal and mutually
advantageous arrangements (be) directed to the substantial reduction of tariffs and other barriers to trade. . ..”
3. The ongoing debate is that the IPR regimes have curtailed the right to access to essential medicine and food,
especially in relation to the developing world where diseases, hunger and poverty are common threats to human
living. The developing world has very little access to essential medicines for diseases like HIV/AIDS, malaria and
typhoid. The little money they have is hardly enough to battle death and stave off starvation. Most of the
innovations come from the developed world and the high prices and other prohibitions are the result of strong IPR
regimes; See, ’T Hoen (2003).

4. This point is resonated by commentators like Shiva, who argues that bioprospecting, for example “takes the
biodiversity and intellectual heritage of indigenous communities and converts it into commodities protected by
IPR’s.” See, Shiva (2001, p. 64).

5. Lea maintains that “Non-western systems are far less developed in terms of income rights and emphasize simple
control rights. The subject of the control right is the tangible physical substrate. Income rights are the designated
intellectual qualities of property as opposed to the tangible physical characteristics that are the subject of control
rights.” Lea (2008, p. 39). This means that Eastern systems are still languishing in the “property” mode, while
Western systems have moved on to the “intellectual property” mode.

6. Tully, for example, argues that indigenous communities must maintain their traditional practices and systems if
they are to maintain their identity. Tully (1996). Further, many international instruments dealing with the rights of
indigenous communities afﬁrm their rights to live their lives in their traditional manner, thus maintaining their
unique identity. The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People in one of its preambular
paragraphs recognizes “the urgent need to respect and promote the inherent rights of indigenous peoples which
derive from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures, spiritual traditions, histories
and philosophies, especially their rights to their lands, territories and resources.”

7. Lea notes that “To put the case bluntly the instruments of IP are legal instruments. Enforcement necessitates the
participation of legal experts and lawyers. This necessitates a signiﬁcant expense which a putative IP right holder
must be prepared to assume if he is to beneﬁt from the system.” Lea (2008, p. 41).

8. See, UNDP Consultation on the Protection and Conservation of Indigenous Knowledge, Sabah, East Malaysia,
24-27 February 1995 (“For the indigenous peoples of Asia, the intellectual property rights system is not only a
very new concept but it is also very Western.”).

9. Lea points out that (in the East) “Discoveries, inventions, texts, works of art and music, designs etc., belonged to

the community and could usually be replicated freely”. Lea (2008, p. 51).

328

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

10. The WTO Agreement in its Article XVI:5 states that members cannot make reservations into this Agreement.
11. For some developing countries, TRIPS covers new subject matter, among them product patents for food,

pharmaceuticals, and microorganisms. For a fuller discussion, see Watal (2001, p. 4).

12. Such as the Paris and Berne Conventions.
13. Article 70.8 of the TRIPS agreement (referred to as the “mailbox” rule) required that, where the requisite expertise
for the examination of patent applications was not available, a system should be set up for the receipt of such
applications. This would automatically give the prior applications an earlier ﬁling date, and hence, priority.

14. Resource Book on TRIPS and Development, UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005 Cambridge, at p. 3
15. Many of the ancient systems of ayurvedic medicine, for example, are handed down from generation to generation,
often by word of mouth. The people who are repositories of such information have not sought to gain economic
beneﬁts by claiming exclusivity of such knowledge.

16. See the discussion on bio-piracy in De Geer (2002, p. 179).
17. Many domestic intellectual property laws have provisions on the curtailment of unfair competition, and provide
for compulsory licensing and parallel imports. These help the state to control the monopolistic nature of the
private right granted to the applicant.

18. The patenting of traditional herbs such as neem, kava, and products such as Basmati rice are a few such examples.
19. The South Africa AIDS experience is just one such example.
20. Vadi (2009, p.802) referring M. Loughlin (2003) The Idea of Public Law, p. 7.
21. For example, the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa in Article 27 of its Bill of Rights contains the right

to have access to health care services.

22. For example, part IV of the Indian Constitution which contains the Directive Principles of State Policy states that it
is the “duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.”
23. The Asian continent carries 4,216 million population according to 2011 demographic data available at Nations
Online Project. Available at<http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/world_population.htm>, [Accessed on
March 2013].

24. Ibid., The continent speaks 2,322 languages, believes in many religions like Buddhism, Christianity,
Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Shamanism, Shinto and Zoroastrianism and is home to ethnicities like
Mongol, Russian, Korean, Han, Yamato, Tibetan, Kazakh, Manchu and many more.

25. Statistics show that about 70% of world indigenous people live in Asia. Rural Poverty Portal. Available at <http://

www.ruralpovertyportal.org/topic/statistics/tags/indigenous_peoples> [Accessed on March 2013].

26. Rice is the staple food of nearly 3.7 billion of the Asian population. See, Asia’s rice culture threatened, Global Research.

Available at<http://www.globalresearch.ca/asia-s-rice-culture-threatened/16199> [Accessed March 2013].

27. Ibid., According to 2007 data Asia supplied 91% of the world rice production of 651.7 million tonnes of rice

paddy, making itthe world’s largest rice producer.

28. Even in Sri Lanka, which is the only country in the region to offer free public healthcare, it is found that only
people in cities and towns avail themselves of this beneﬁt. In the rural areas, patients either use home remedies
(often centred around locally available herbs) or go to the village physician, or vedamahattaya, who treats them
using indigenous knowledge, practices and herbs.

29. In Sri Lanka, for example, some members of the farming community (who have access to modern pesticides) still
prefer to use a pesticide that is made from the neem tree. It has now been revealed that this pesticide, apart from
being organic and environmental friendly, is actually more effective in the long run, as pests do not build
resistance to it. These ﬁndings are based on a personal interview with Mr. Jagath Gunawardena, Environmental
Lawyer and Expert on Bio-diversity, Sri Lanka, March 2013.

30. In fact, companies that have turned to organic farming in order to harness the demand by foreign countries, have
gone back to using the traditional methods, as they cannot otherwise obtain the requisite organic certiﬁcation for
their products. These ﬁndings are based on a personal interview with Mr. SujeewaJayasinghe, Plant Scientist who
has helped set up an organic farming project in Sri Lanka, January 2013.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

329

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

31. Take for example, the hoodia plant, the jeevani pills and the kothalahimbutu, all based on traditional knowledge,
and all harnessed to solve problems of modern society. These plants and herbs have been used by the indigenous
communities for so long as appetite suppressant, energizer and immune-enhancer and as a medicine for diabetes
at<http://www.ipngos.org/NGO%20Brieﬁngs/Hoodia%20case%20of%
respectively. See, 32. Available
20beneﬁt%20sharing.pdf> [Accessed on June 2013] and also, Bijoy (2007, p.8).

32. Biopiracy can be deﬁned as “the illegal appropriation of life - micro-organisms, plants, and animals (including
humans) - and the traditional cultural knowledge that accompanies it.” De Geer (2002, p. 179). Also see, 33
<http://www.globalexchange.org/campaigns/mexico/biopiracyReport.html> [Accessed on March 2013].

33. See, Shiva (1997) and also, see Ramani (2001).
34. See supra note 31, Recognising the Traditional Knowledge of the San People: the Hoodia Case of Beneﬁt-
Sharing, which discusses the important case in which the San People demand recognition of their rights in the
usage of Hoodia plant and is considered one of the ﬁrst beneﬁt-sharing agreements.

35. Such as compulsory licenses. The opposition to the compulsory licensing scheme led to extensive debate in Doha,
and the subsequent ﬂexibilities that were adopted were due in large part to the outrage felt by people towards the
selﬁsh stance taken by the drug companies in trying to deny access of poor people to life-saving anti retro-virals in
South Africa.

36. Even traditional communities are feeling the loss of the natural habitats required to access the herbs they need at
their full potency, because when these naturally grown herbs are cultivated (to stop their illegal collection at
forests as well as to ensure their regular supply to meet the demand) that has an impact on their medicinal qualities.
See, Bijoy’s discussion of the “commercialization of Jeevani,”; Bijoy (2007, p. 5).

37. Note that the term “Western” is used to refer to conventional medical interventions, while all others would be
referred to as “alternative” medical interventions. It should be admitted that the mainstream method of treatment
in all Asian countries is now the Western model.

38. South Africa Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act No.90 of 1997. Article 15 c permitted

the Compulsory Licensing regime as provided for by TRIPS. But the drug companies objected to this.

39. An observational study of brand and generic supply based on a dataset of 2,162 orders of AIDS drugs for Sub-
Saharan Africa reported to the Global Price Reporting Mechanism at the World Health Organization from
January 2004-March 2006 that generic companies supplied 63% of the drugs studied, at prices that were on
average about a third of the prices charged by brand companies. See, Chien (2007, p. 1).

40. The author was subject to this experience, where the branded version of a prescribed anti-biotic was offered by the
pharmacist. Upon inquiry as to whether a generic was available, two other were offered, at half the price of the
original. Upon objection, that the price was too high, the pharmacist then offered a generic brand that was 1/4th the
price of the one offered originally. While at the pharmacy, the author witnessed several people being offered the
highest-priced drugs, along with the advice that they were the best. Many of these people were ordinary wage
earners, who could barely afford the generic drugs. Yet, when they felt their health (or that of a loved one) was at
stake, they ungrudgingly paid the high prices and purchased the branded versions.

41. As in the case of the “kothalahimbutu” – a diabetes cure endemic to Sri Lanka, that is currently under a Japanese
patent. This is not claimed by any group in Sri Lanka, but rather, forms part of the local traditional medical
knowledge - a classic case of property owned in general by the entire Sri Lankan community.

42. See, Schuler, Biopiracy and Commercialization of Ethnobotanical Knowledge (2004, pp. 166–167).
43. The term ‘law’ in Article 13 includes ‘customs’ and ‘usages’ having the force of law but not infringing any of the

fundamental rights conferred by part III of the Constitution.

44. Constitution of India. However, it should be noted that these directives should be promoted through legislation.
45. See, Gupta, ‘Protecting Indian Traditional Knowledge from Biopiracy’. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/

meetings/en/2011/wipo_tkdl_del_11/pdf/tkdl_gupta.pdf> [Accessed on February 2013].

46. India decided to build this database because of the patent on the use of neem extract in Europe and another patent
on the use of tumeric as a healing agent. Since, then over 1000 cases of biopiracy have been identiﬁed and over 105

330

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

claims withdrawn or cancelled by patent ofﬁces. Available at <http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/
2012-10-16/news/34498963_1_traditional-knowledge-digital-library-patent-examiners-patent-ofﬁces>
[Ac-
cessed on March 2013].

47. Gupta, supra note 45.
48. IPRA, section 34. For a more detailed discussion on the provisions of this Act, see, Smagadi (2005, p.63).
49. Draft Guidelines for Bio-Prospecting Activities in the Philippines. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/

en/text.jsp?ﬁle_id=224704&tab=2> [Accessed on March 2013].

50. An indigenous community living in the Peruvian Amazon.
51. There are many companies selling forms of Hoodia products, citing the historical use of Hoodia by the San,
without compensating the San people for any of it. For a fuller discussion of this point, see Laird and ten Tate
(2004, pp. 145–155).

52. In fact, Crookshanks and Phillips criticize the entire exercise as a poor example of participation and decision making,
asserting that the San people were not consulted adequately during negotiations, not made aware of possible
consequences and not capable in most instances of dealing with many of the outcomes of the negotiations, such as
handling accounts and ﬁnances. They are also concerned that the effects on the San of the commercialization of
Hoodia has not been fully appreciated or understood. See, Crookshanks and Phillips (2012, pp. 79–82).

53. Emphasis added.
54. “fair and equitable treatment is a legal standard. . ..the tribunal in ADF v US pointed out that the requirement to
accord fair equitable treatment does not allow a tribunal to adopt its own idiosyncratic standard but must be
disciplined by being based upon state practice and judicial or arbitral case law or other sources of customary or
general international law.” However, there is no precise standard that is followed by courts or tribunals. See,
Schreuer, ‘Fair and Equitable Treatment’.

55. Joint Statement of North American Indigenous Organizations on the Nagoya ABS Protocol of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Ellen Gabriel, Native Women of Quebec (Dec. 14, 2010), available at http://www.faq-qnw.
org/old/documents/pressrelease-14dec accessed 7th September 2013. However it is ironic to note that some
commentators actually think that the placing of natural resources under the ownership of the state is a positive
move. Hayden notes that “The Convention on Biological Diversity has redrawn jurisdiction over “genetic
resources“ and “traditional knowledge“ by taking them out of the global commons and placing them squarely
within the sovereignty of nation-states - a victory, of sorts, for Southern nation-states.”; Hayden (2003, p. 362).
This shows us that the thinking of most Western commentators is limited to the belief that genetic resources and
traditional knowledge actually do not belong to anyone in particular, and that they can be freely appropriated in the
search for innovation.

56. Information pertaining to this is available at <http://www.cbd.int/abs/nagoya-protocol/signatories/default.

shtml> [Accessed on September 2013].

57. Long (2013, p. 119) comments on this and also cites Jinnah and Jungcurt (2009) ‘Global Biological Resources:

Could Access Stiﬂe Your Research?’, SCI, 323, 464, 464-465.

58. Available at <http://ictsd.org/i/ip/legal-instruments/3598/> [Accessed on March 2013].
59. Namely, Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and

Vietnam. For a fuller discussion on this, see Thornstrom and Bjork (2007).

60. ASEAN Framework Agreement on Access to Genetic Resources (adopted on December 15, 1995), Article 1 (e),

note 93.

61. Ibid. Article 2 (a).
62. Ibid. Article 2 (b).
63. Ibid. Article 2 (h).
64. Thanks to Article 72 of the TRIPS Agreement, which prevents reservations from being entered into. The Article
reads thus: “Reservations may not be entered in respect of any of the provisions of the Agreement without the
consent of the other members.”

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

331

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

65. Sri Lanka’s Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003, for example, was enacted to fulﬁll the obligations
undertaken by TRIPS. However, the state did not see ﬁt to include any provisions on the protection of indigenous
knowledge, with the exception of expressions of folklore, which are protected, in section 24, under copyright
provisions.

References

Bijoy, C.R. (2007) ‘Access and Beneﬁt Sharing from the Indigenous Peoples’ Perspective: The TBGRI-Kani ‘Model’,
Environment and Development Journal, 3/1 Law. Available at <http://www.lead-journal.org/content/07001.
pdf> [accessed on May 2013].

Biopiracy: A New Threat to Indigenous Rights and Culture in Mexico (2012). Available at <http://www.

globalexchange.org/campaigns/mexico/biopiracyReport.html> [Accessed on January 2013].

Boyle, J. (1996), Shaman Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society. Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press.

Chien, C.V. (2007) ‘HIV/AIDS Drugs for Sub_Saharan Africa: How Do Brand and Generic Supply Compare?’, PLoS
ONE, 2 (3). Available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1805689/pdf/pone.0000278.pdf>
[Accessed on May 2013].

Christman, J. (1994a) ‘Distributive Justice and the Complex Structure of Ownership’, Philos Public Aff 23(3),

225–250.

Christman, J. (1994b) The Myth of Property: Toward an Egalitarian Theory of Ownership. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Crookshanks, R. and Phillips, P.W.B. (2012) ‘A Comparative Analysis of Access and Beneﬁts-Sharing Systems’ in T.
Bubela and E.R. Gold (eds.) Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge, Case Studies and Conﬂicting
Interests, Edward Elgar, Glos, pp. 63–92.

De Geer, M.E. (2002) ‘Biopiracy: The Appropriation of Indigenous Peoples’ Cultural Knowledge’, New Eng J

Int’l&CompL 9(1), 179–208.

de Soto, H. (2000) The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. Sydney:

Random House.

Finnis, J. (1982) Natural Law and Natural Rights. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Folkins, P.E. (2003) ‘Has the Lab Coat Become the Modern Day Eye Patch? Thwarting Biopiracy of Indigenous
Resources by Modifying International Patenting Systems, Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems’,
Transnat’l L & Contemp Probs 13(339), 339–367.

Galenkamp, M. (1998) Individualism Versus Collectivism: The Concept of Collective Rights. 2nd edition. Rotterdam:

Gouda Quint.

Galenkamp, M. (1993) Individualism and Collectivism: the Concept of Collective Rights. Rotterdam: Rotterdamse

Filosoﬁsche Studies.

Greaves, T. (ed.) (1994) Intellectual Property Rights for Indigenous People–A Sourcebook. Oklahoma, OK: Society

for Applied Anthropology.

Grifﬁn, J. (2003) ‘Group Rights’, Rights, Culture and the Law: Themes from the Legal and Political Philosophy of
Joseph Raz. in Meyer LH, Paulson SL and Pogge TW (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 161–182.
Gupta, V.K. ‘Protecting Indian Traditional Knowledge from Biopiracy’ Available at <http://www.wipo.int/meetings/

en/2011/wipo_tkdl_del_11/pdf/tkdl_gupta.pdf> [Accessed on February 2013].

Hardin, G.

(1968) Tragedy of

the Commons, Available at <http://www.garretthardinsociety.org/articles/

art_tragedy_of_the_commons.html> [Accessed on January 2013].

Hayden, C. (2003) ‘From Market to Market: Bioprospecting’s Idioms of Inclusion’ American Ethnologist, 30 (3),

359–371.

332

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Naazima Kamardeen

Jinnah, S. and Jungcurt, S. and(2009) ‘‘Global Biological Resources: Could Access Stiﬂe Your Research?’’, SCI 323,

464–65.

Kam, S.K., 2005-2006) ‘Biopiracy in Paradise?: Fulﬁlling the Legal Duty to Regulate Bioprospecting in Hawai’I’, U.

Haw. L Rev. 28; 387–428.

Kamau, E.C., Fedder, B. and Winter, G. ‘The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt Sharing:
What Is New and What Are the Implications for Provider and User Countries and the Scientiﬁc Community?’
Env’t & Dev J. 2010; 6/3 Law, 246.

Kim, T.K. (2010–2011) ‘Expanding the Arsenal Against Biopiracy: Application of the Concession Agreement

Framework to Prevent Misappropriation of Biodiversity’, SMU Sci. & Tech. L. Rev., 14, 69-126.

Koutouki, K. and von Beiberstein, K.R. (2012) ‘The Nagoya Protocol: Sustainable Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing for

Indigenous and Local Communities’, Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 13.

Kymlicka, W. (1995) Multicultural Citizenship. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lagerspetz, E. (1998) ‘‘On Language Rights’’, Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 1(2), 181–199.
Laird, S.A. and ten Tate, K. (2004) ‘Bioprospecting Agreements and Beneﬁt Sharing with Local Communities’ in J.

Finger and P. Schuler (eds.) Poor People’s Knowledge, 145–155.

Lea, D. (2008) ‘The Expansion and Restructuring of Intellectual Property and Its Implications for the Developing

World’, Ethical Theory and Moral Practice, 11(1), 37–60.

Long, J. (2013) ‘Global Food Security and Intellectual Property Rights’ Mich. St. Coll. L. Int'l L. Rev., 21, 115-123.
Macdonald, I (1989) ‘Group Rights’, Philosophical Papers 18(2), 117–136.
Misdevic, N. (2001) Nationalism and Beyond: Introducing Moral Debate About Values, Central European University

Press, Budapest.

Newman, D.G. (2004) ‘Collective Interests and Collective Rights’, American Journal of Jurisprudence 49, 127–164.
Offe, C. (1998) ‘Homogeneity and Constitutional Democracy: Coping with Identity Conﬂicts through Group Rights’,

Journal of Political Philosophy 6(2), 113–14.

Ramani, R. (2001) ‘Market Realities v Indigenous Equities’, BrookJ Int’l L 26, 1147.
Raz, J. (1995) ‘Rights and Politics’, Indiana Law Journal, 71 (1), 27-44. Available at <http://www.repository.law.

indiana.edu/ilj/vol71/iss1/2,>[Accessed on September 2013].

Raz, J. (1986) The Morality of Freedom, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Recognising the Traditional Knowledge of the San People: the Hoodia Case of Beneﬁt-Sharing. Available at <http://www.

ipngos.org/NGO%20Brieﬁngs/Hoodia%20case%20of%20beneﬁt%20sharing.pdf> [Accessed on June 2013].

Reid, W.V. et al. (1993) Biodiversity Prospecting: Using Genetic Resources for Sustainable Development World

Resources Institute, Washington, DC.

Roht-Arriaza, N. (1995–1996) ‘Of Seeds and Shamans: The Appropriation of The Scientiﬁc And Technical

Knowledge of Indigenous and Local Communities’ Mich. J. Int'l L., 17, 919–965.

Schreuer, C., Fair and Equitable Treatment. Available at <http://www.univie.ac.at/intlaw/wordpress/pdf/

99_fair_equit_treatm_zuerich.pdf> [Accessed on September 2013].

Schuklenk, U. and Kleinsmidt, A. (2006) ‘North-South Beneﬁt Sharing Agreements in Bioprospecting and Genetic

Research: A Critical Ethical and Legal Analysis’, Developing Bioethics 6(3), 122–134.

Schuler, P. (2004) ‘Biopiracy and Commercialization of Ethnobotanical Knowledge’ in J. Finger and P. Schuler (eds.),
Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual Property in Developing Countries, The World Bank,
Washington, WA.

Shiva, V. (1997) Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature & Knowledge, South End Press, Cambridge, MA.
Shiva, V. (2001) Protect or Plunder? Understanding Intellectual Property Rights, Zed Books, London.
Singer, J.W. (1982) ‘The Legal Rights Debate in Analytical Jurisprudence from Bentham to Hohfeld’, Wisconsin L.
at <http://duncankennedy.net/documents/Legal%20History%20Other%
Rev., 6, 975–1059. Available
20Articles/The%20Legal%20Rights%20Debate%20in%20Analytical%20Jurisprudence.pdf> [Accessed on
June 2013].

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6

333

Naazima Kamardeen

Community Rights to Intellectual Property in Asia

Smagadi, A. (2005) ‘National Measures on Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt-Sharing – The case of the
Philippines’, Environment and Development Journal, 1/1 Law. Available at <http://www.lead-journal.org/
content/05050.pdf> [Accessed on May 2013].

'T Hoen, E.F.M. 2003; ‘TRIPS, Pharmaceutical Patents, and Access to Essential Medicine: Seattle, Doha and
Beyond’, Economics of AIDS and Access to HIV/AIDS care, 11(8), 39-67. Available at <http://www.who.int/
intellectualproperty/topics/ip/tHoen.pdf> [Accessed on March 2013].

Thornstrom and Bjork (2007) ‘Access and Beneﬁt Sharing: Illustrated Procedures for the Collection and Importation
of Biological Materials’ in A. Krattiger, R.T. Mahoney, L. Nelson, et al. (eds.) A Handbook on Best Practices,
MIHR, Oxford & PIPRA, Davis, CA.

Tully, J. (1996) Strange Multiplicity: Constitutionalism in the Age of Diversity, Cambridge University Press, New

York.

Vadi, S.V. (2009) ‘Trade Mark Protection, Public Health and International Investment Law: Strains and Paradoxes’,

EJIL, 20(3), 773–803.

Waldron, J. (1993) Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Waldron, J. (2002) ‘Taking Group Rights Carefully’ in G. Huscroft and P. Rishworth (eds.), Litigating Rights:

Perspectives from Domestic and International Law, Hart Publishing, Oxford.

Watal, J. (2001) Intellectual Property Rights in the WTO and Developing Countries, Kluwer Law International,

Hague.

334

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 6


