The  (2010) Vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 660–673

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2010.00403.x

It’s Easily Done: The China-Intellectual Property
Rights Enforcement Dispute and the Freedom of
Expression

Tomer Broude
Minerva Centre for Human Rights, Hebrew University of Jerusalem

This article examines the implications of the World Trade Organization (WTO) China-Intellectual Property
Rights Enforcement case for the relationship between human rights law and trade-related intellectual property
law. It shows that, despite the theory whereby international trade law can spontaneously support the freedom
of expression and possibly other human rights, the parties and the panel were, in practice, oblivious to the
human rights context of the dispute. In the WTO, human rights considerations will be integrated with
international trade law (and intellectual property law within it) only if a party makes explicit arguments to this
effect, and a panel opts to consider such arguments on their merits, not through issue avoidance.

Keywords freedom of expression; cultural life; public morals; censorship

And if anybody asks me, ‘‘Is it easy to forget?’’

I’ll say, ‘‘It’s easily done,

You just pick anyone,

And pretend that you never have met!’’ Bob Dylan1

The China–Measures Affecting the Protection and Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights2
dispute (the China-IPR Case) was a World Trade Organization (WTO) ﬁrst in more than one
respect. Most obviously, it produced the ﬁrst panel report relating to the enforcement of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) commitments.3 It
marked the ﬁrst time that China had successfully defended elements of its legal regime against a
WTO complaint.4 It was also, less obviously, the ﬁrst time that a WTO complaint included a direct
challenge to a national measure whose non-trade-related aim was to restrict an international
human right: the freedom of expression.5 The focus of this article is on the latter aspect of the case.
A lot has been written in recent years about the intersections, on the international plane,
between international trade law (including IPR protected by TRIPS) and human rights law (Lang,
2007). Much of this discourse has dealt with the potential for conﬂict between these areas of
international law, such as the clash between patent protection and the right to health (Hestermeyer,
2007). Another strand of the literature has focused on the capacity of trade interests to promote
human rights indirectly, when trade beneﬁts and concessions are made contingent on human rights
performance (Alston, 1982; Bartels, 2005). A separate, more theoretical debate has covered the
controversial claim that trade law and liberalization are in themselves ‘‘constitutional’’ protections
of human rights (Alston, 2002; Howse, 2002; Petersmann, 2002a; 2002b). Yet, only rarely has it
been posited that WTO law and its robust dispute-settlement system can actually have the practical
effect of directly promoting a human right as a legal matter. This might conceivably happen in
instances where a human rights violation is concurrently trade restrictive or is otherwise incon-
sistent with WTO law. In cases such as these, in which there are overlapping violations, one might

660

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

anticipate a conﬂuence of remedies as well, that is, that the removal of the trade restriction or WTO
inconsistency would lead to a removal of the human rights restrictions. Trade law would then be
vindicated as a veritable handmaiden for human rights, instead of an obstacle thereto.

Within these relatively narrow parameters, academics and advocates have put forth the general
proposition that trade law might serve speciﬁcally to promote and protect the freedom of
expression, especially with respect to internet communications (Panizzon, 2008; Rundle, 2005;
Wu, 2006). Picking up the academic lead, a non-governmental organization called the California
First Amendment Coalition (CFAC)6 has lobbied in favour of ﬁling a complaint in the WTO
against China’s internet-ﬁltering laws, touting this potential case as ‘‘the biggest access-to-
information and free speech case in history’’.7 To this end, the CFAC has even retained
international trade law counsel, which has presented a legal case against Chinese media control,
based entirely on WTO law, to the ofﬁce of the US Trade Representative (USTR) and to the
US–China Economic and Security Review Commission.8

In short, there exists a claim that, at least when it comes to the freedom of expression,
international trade law (which includes signiﬁcant elements of intellectual property law ever since
the entry into force of TRIPS) and human rights are in spontaneous conﬂuence rather than in
conﬂict, that they ‘‘point in the same direction’’, to borrow a phrase from the International Law
Commission’s study group fragmentation report.9

On this background, the China-IPR Case provided a rare concrete opportunity to see how this
potential conﬂuence between international trade law and human rights law can play out in
practice, in the hands of the WTO dispute-settlement system. The ﬁnal (and unappealed) Report of
the Panel devoted approximately 30 pages to the legal relationship between censorship and TRIPS
copyright enforcement obligations, in a case in which no less a formidable censor than China, with
its tenuous regard to political freedoms, acted as respondent. These could be the makings of a
landmark case in international law. How did the panel handle the human rights aspects of the trade
and intellectual property case? And what are the real implications of the report on the freedom of
expression in China? Has the human right been advanced?

This article argues and demonstrates that contrary to any prior expectations of spontaneous
conﬂuence between trade, intellectual property and human rights, the reasoning of the China-IPR
Report is entirely oblivious to the human rights implications of the dispute, and that it could even
have negative effects on the legal framework of the freedom of expression in China.

It is in a way telling that throughout the report, the panel much preferred to use the somewhat
euphemistic term ‘‘content review’’, which was used literally 100 times in the report in comparison
with only nine times that the ‘‘explicit name’’ of censorship was used—the latter usually on the
basis of the submissions made by the Chinese government itself. The legal conﬁnes of the narrow
international copyright law question posed to the panel, combined with the structure of the parties’
arguments, allowed the panel easily to avoid any discussion of the human rights implications of the
dispute, which were potentially signiﬁcant. If this dispute can be treated as a representative case
study, international trade and trade-related intellectual property law in the WTO cannot be
expected to promote human rights spontaneously. Rather, this could happen only when parties
make explicit human rights-based claims and argue that WTO law must be interpreted in their
light, and, in this respect, China-IPR is also instructive. Clearly, all parties and third parties
preferred to steer clear of such claims.

In the next section, I will discuss China’s relevant censorship-related measure and its
substantive relationships with international intellectual property law as protected in the WTO,
and with international human rights law relating to the freedom of expression. Subsequently, I will
critique the arguments of the parties and the panel’s analysis in the China-IPR Case, followed by

r 661

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

brief conclusions on the potential for human rights promotion through WTO intellectual property
law.

China’s Measure, TRIPS, the Berne Convention and Human Rights

In China-IPR, the United States challenged three separate features of China’s intellectual property
law: its thresholds for criminal prosecution of certain counterfeiting and piracy constituting IPR
infringements;10 its measures for disposing of conﬁscated goods infringing intellectual property
rights;11 and the denial of copyright and related rights protection and enforcement to works not yet
authorized for publication or distribution within China.12 It is this last claim that is of interest to us
in the present context.

The measure at issue in this claim was the ﬁrst sentence of article 4 of China’s copyright law,
which provided (as per the translation agreed between the parties for the purpose of the dispute
proceedings) that ‘‘Works the publication and/or dissemination of which are prohibited by law
shall not be protected by this Law’’.13 The United States argued that this provision constituted a
violation of article 5(1) of the Berne Convention14 as incorporated by article 9.1 of TRIPS and of
article 41.1 of TRIPS.15 The United States had also made tentative arguments relating to article
2(6) of the Berne Convention, but these were found by the panel to be outside its terms of reference
for procedural reasons.16 The United States arguments alleging that China’s content review
constituted a ‘‘formality’’, on which copyright is made contingent being inconsistent with article
5(2) of the Berne Convention, were found by the panel not to ‘‘contribute further to a positive
in light of its ﬁndings with respect to article 5(1) of the Berne
solution to this dispute’’,
Convention.17 The United States claim was, therefore,
in sum, that by depriving copyright
protection from works that could not legally be published in China under China’s censorship
laws, China was in violation of its TRIPS and Berne obligations.

Notably, the United States claims in the dispute were of an ‘‘as such’’ rather than an ‘‘as
applied’’ nature. In other words, the claim was not that there were necessarily speciﬁc violations of
TRIPS obligations in China, with respect to particular works and authors, but rather that the
relevant provisions of China’s legislation, in abstracto, were inconsistent with TRIPS obligations
(and in the case of copyright, of Berne requirements). Indeed, much of the outcome of the entire
dispute, well beyond the copyright enforcement claim, should be understood as a derivative of the
‘‘as such’’ construction of the complaint. Whereas an ‘‘as applied’’ complaint would have required
detailed factual evidence on violations of IPR in China—evidence that the United States was
evidently not prepared to provide—an ‘‘as such’’ complaint would seemingly require less onerous
evidence pertaining primarily to the way in which China’s laws were to be properly interpreted.
Thus, with respect to the non-enforcement of copyright claim, the report includes extensive
analysis of China’s laws and practice, in order to deduce what should rightfully be considered
works ‘‘prohibited by law’’ in the terminology of article 4 of China’s copyright law.18

Certainly, this question evolved as a key issue and ultimately as a signiﬁcant limitation on the
scope of the United States’ success in its claims. While China essentially acknowledged19 that
copyright protection20 was denied from works whose content was substantively illegal under a
series of Chinese laws and regulations (whose content we will return to in the next section), the
United States contended that this denial covered not only works that had actually failed to pass
censors’ muster but also a broader range of works at different procedural stages of content review,
namely (a) works never submitted for content review; (b) works submitted and awaiting the results
of China’s content review; (c) the unauthorized versions of works edited for authorized distribution
in China;21 and (d) works that have failed content review.22 Crucially, in terms of the dispute’s

662

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

outcome, the panel ruled that the United States had failed to make a prima facie case with respect
to the ﬁrst three of these categories of works, having failed to provide sufﬁcient evidence that
would have substantiated that Chinese law and practice considered them to be ‘‘prohibited by law’’
for the purposes of article 4 of China’s copyright law.23 This is somewhat ironic; to the extent that
the ‘‘as such’’ complaint had been designed to circumvent evidentiary mineﬁelds, its failure was not
in matters of legal interpretation but in questions of evidence.24 In contrast, the panel found that
copyright protection was indeed being denied by law to works that had failed content review (and
by extension, to deleted portions of works edited for content review). This is the United States’
main claim to success in the entire dispute.

Now, as the panel unequivocally (and correctly) found,25 to the extent that China’s copyright
law explicitly denied its protection from certain classes of works, it is clearly inconsistent with the
international obligations set out in article 5(1) of the Berne Convention as incorporated by article
9.1 of TRIPS. This ﬁnding, however, would be limited to those classes of works in which it had
been demonstrated that the law did not extend its protection, and would be potentially subject to
exceptional defences, speciﬁcally article 17 of the Berne public order exception, discussed below.
The additional question to be considered in the present context—a question neither addressed
to the panel nor addressed by it—is whether the denial of copyright to certain works on the basis of
their content constituted a restriction of the freedom of expression, concurrent with its violation of
the Berne and TRIPS IPR obligations? The freedom of expression is broadly construed as a basic
international human right. The preamble of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights
(UDHR)26 lists it as one of those freedoms that are among the ‘‘highest aspirations of the common
people’’; article 19 of the UDHR provides that everyone has ‘‘the right to freedom of opinion and
expression’’, including the freedom ‘‘to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers’’. The freedom of expression was further concretized in article
19(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),27 whereby:

Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers,
either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his
choice.

China has signed the ICCPR but not ratiﬁed it; it would nonetheless be bound by international

customary law.

In the copyright context, of particular additional interest is the right to participate in cultural
life enshrined in article 27(2) of the UDHR and article 15 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),28 which includes the rights of authors to beneﬁt
from the moral and material interests resulting from their works,29 and is strongly related to the
freedom of expression. Although core obligations incumbent upon states for the purpose of
fulﬁlling this right are ultimately very similar to international copyright commitments, in its
General Comment on the subject, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has
emphasized that authors’ rights to beneﬁt from the moral and material interests in their work are
an expression of ‘‘the inherent dignity and worth of all persons’’, and therefore are distinct from
IPR and have a separate legal existence.30 Notably, China has ratiﬁed the ICESCR.

International human rights law therefore establishes a separate normative framework for
assessing the international legality of the denial of copyright from unauthorized works. Has this
framework been violated? The denial of copyright protection is undeniably part of China’s overall
system of censorship; it directly refers to the rules and regulations that establish which expressions
are considered illegal in China and defers to the governmental system of approval. It is, of course,

r 663

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

these primary content bans and ‘‘content review’’ mechanisms that constitute the ﬁrst instruments
of repressing expression. However,
the non-enforcement of copyright augments them by
additionally delegitimizing unauthorized content. It denies it the moral and material beneﬁts
of copyright protection and private enforcement, directly in conﬂict with article 15(1)(c) of
the ICESCR. From a human rights perspective, copyright protection serves the purpose of
providing authors with the potential to enjoy an adequate standard of living;31 copyright
denial prevents this. The freedom of expression includes the freedom of imparting information.
Authors and holders of exclusive information might not be deterred by the criminal wrath of
the censors, but the denial of copyright might deter them from disseminating works and
information, if they fear that their economic interest will not be upheld. Indeed, this might even
cause a chilling effect, deterring potential authors from creating works due to the material
uncertainty involved.

That article 4 of China’s copyright law was in fact aimed at reinforcing the repressive effect of
Chinese censorship is made abundantly clear by China’s claim that the denial of copyright from
unauthorized works is covered by the defense provided by article 17 of the Berne Convention,
which states that the Convention:

cannot in any way affect the right of governments to permit, to control, or to prohibit
the circulation, presentation or exhibition of any work or production in regard to which
the competent authority may ﬁnd it necessary to exercise that right.

This is accepted as including the prerogative of states to apply censorship for reasons of public
order, as acknowledged by the panel.32 Moreover, through this claim, China acknowledged that it
viewed the denial of copyright as an element of its legal system of censorship. The United States
and the panel agreed that article 17 of the Berne Convention has the effect of interfering with
certain rights with respect to protected works, but, in the words of the panel, ‘‘there is no reason to
suppose that censorship will eliminate those rights entirely with respect to a particular work’’.33 In
other words, in the copyright context, whether a government chooses to ban the circulation of
certain works is not relevant to the question of whether those works are eligible for copyright
protection, and vice versa.

When one turns to the human rights assessment of the denial of copyright, the question of
public order exceptions also arises, but it is noteworthy that article 15 of the ICESCR—the
protection of authors’ moral and material rights—is not subject to any exception. Under the
ICCPR, the exercise of the rights found in article 19(2) ‘‘carries with it special duties and
responsibilities’’ and may be subject to restrictions that conform to article 19(3), that is, restrictions
provided by law and necessary for ‘‘respect of the rights and reputations of others’’ or ‘‘for the
protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of public health or morals’’.
However, as the Human Rights Committee stated in its General Comment 10, ‘‘when a State party
imposes certain restrictions on the exercise of freedom of expression, these may not put in jeopardy
the right itself’’.34 It is not necessary, in the limited scope of this article, to explore the boundaries
of these exceptions. The following two observations should sufﬁce. First, in contrast with article 17
of the Berne Convention, the human rights exceptions to the freedom of expression are not self-
judging; in order to comply with obligations of the freedom of expression (to the extent provided
for by customary international law), China’s substantive content rules would have to be positively
found to conform to the substance of these exceptions, even on an ‘‘as such’’ basis. Second, the
denial of copyright—not the content ban—would have to be shown to be ‘‘necessary’’ for the
protection of the interests enumerated in article 19(3). As the panel did not ﬁnd that the prerogative
to ban content can interfere with the obligation to protect and enforce the negative rights protected

664

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

by copyright, it might be said that copyright denial is a fortiori not ‘‘necessary’’ for the protection
of public order and so on in the human rights context either.

Hence, it would appear that article 4 of China’s copyright law is certainly a case of parallel
violation, of both an IPR covered by TRIPS and the bundle of human rights that constitute the
freedom of expression (although, certainly, the exact extent of the violation of human rights and
hence the degree of overlap would vary according to different factual variables).

To demonstrate further this overlap—and to escape momentarily the limitations of the WTO’s
somewhat insular jurisdiction—let us consider a hypothetical author of a work who decides to
make a private claim in a domestic court against a denial of copyright caused by a national statute
similar to China’s copyright law. Assume that all the relevant international law—WTO, Berne
Convention, ICCPR, ICESCR, customary law—applies in the domestic courts one way or
another. The author-claimant’s copyright is not eligible for protection because her work has not
received content approval. This can occur under differing circumstances, in accordance with the
different stages of content authorization. The work, in whole or in part, might have failed to
receive the approval of the censors, and the author would like to challenge the outcome of their
decision, at least insofar as it affects her copyright. The work might have been submitted for
approval, and not yet received it, and the author is anxious to have the work reach the public (not
least for material reasons), and, at the same time, to prevent the dissemination of infringing works.
Perhaps the author has not yet submitted the work for approval, but is concerned that after
submission the approval process will simply take too long or even result in a prohibition. Indeed,
the work might not even exist yet in a form that can be approved or disapproved, and the
prospective author feels constrained in her creativity by the possibility that her opus will languish
in the bureaus of the censors or, in the end, not be approved and be denied copyright. The author-
claimant might choose between a number of routes of attack in domestic litigation (or a
combination thereof).

First, because her ultimate interest is to receive content approval (so that she may distribute
her work legally and prevent its copyright infringements by others), she might launch a direct
challenge under human rights law against the censors or the censorship criteria, claiming that her
work, in substance, must receive content approval. Depending on the circumstances, this could be
a direct complaint against a censorship decision to ban a work (or against a non-decision), or a
broader challenge to the censorship’s content criteria, but it would not challenge the derivative
deprivation of copyright. Here, the domestic court would have to grapple directly with the
application of the human right and its exceptions, examining the decision (or lack thereof) of
the censors, and the criteria that guide them. Should the challenge succeed, the work will be
authorized and the copyright protected therein.

Second, the author-claimant could make a less direct claim, still under human rights law, not
against the censors, but against non-enforcement of her copyright, as a self-standing restriction of
her freedom of expression, for the reasons explained above. Here, the court would ﬁrst have to
establish that deprivation of copyright is a restriction of the freedom of expression (including the
right to participate in cultural life), but, subsequently, it would also have to decide whether the
restriction was justiﬁed under exceptions from human rights law—again requiring it to look into
the substance of the decision or the criteria not approving the content, and the necessity of
copyright denial. If the author-claimant were to prevail, the immediate result would be the
protection of copyright in an unauthorized work, but the rationale of the decision would indirectly
relate to the human rights compatibility of the censorship regime as a whole.

Third and ﬁnally, the author-claimant could make a claim not under human rights law, but
under copyright law, along the lines of the United States’ claim in the China-IPR Case. The

r 665

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

government respondent would of course raise its prerogative to censor as based on article 17 of the
Berne Convention. The author-claimant could then be in a position to raise two distinct
arguments. One argument would be that the censor’s Berne-based prerogative is broad and self-
judging, but it is nevertheless limited by human rights law. The authority to preclude copyright is,
at the very most, applicable to works that human rights law would sanction their prohibition under
the various exceptions to the freedom of expression. The second argument would be that, in any
case, regardless of the work’s content and the status of its approval, copyright protection cannot be
denied because of the authority to censor. There is no reason to think that a private claimant would
forego either of these arguments, which are cumulative and mutually reinforcing. Here too, we see
that a domestic court, even if charged with a copyright law-based petition, would be faced with a
human rights claim.

Indeed, in this hypothetical domestic, normatively integrated setting, there appears to be a
general conﬂuence between copyright law and the human right, who would meet one way or
another within the same judicial proceeding. Let us now turn to the panel report in China-IPR to
examine whether trade-related intellectual property law and human rights law had a similar
meeting in Geneva.

Unpacking the China-IPR Report and Its Effect on the Freedom of Expression

It should come as no surprise that the China-IPR panel did not rely on or refer to any international
human rights instruments in its report. This could be attributed to the fact that the United States,
unlike the hypothetical private claimant presented above, did not raise any human rights
arguments in its complaint or in its written and oral submissions nor, evidently, did any third
parties. Clearly, China could not have been expected to justify its censorship-based denial of
copyright on the basis of human rights exceptions. This silence does not mean, however, that the
dispute did not involve human rights-related issues and that the report does not have human rights
implications.

Consider the panel’s decision, whereby article 17 of the Berne Convention does not justify the
denial of copyright. Some academic writing has suggested the opposite, either generally (Derclaye,
2008; Ricketson, 1987; Ricketson and Ginsburg, 2006) or with partisan reference to the speciﬁc
dispute (Qingjiang, 2008), but overall, the panel’s approach seems to be doctrinally sound.
Ostensibly, this part of the decision is also pro-free speech. By removing the violation of Berne/
TRIPS and ensuring that copyright is enforceable, all the negative effects of copyright denial on the
freedom of expression and the right to participate in cultural life described above might also be
cured. However, even if this were the case—and the discussion below shows that it is not—the
analytical disengagement from the human rights context of censorship and the denial of copyright
would make this a partial, even pyrrhic victory for freedom of speech. On the one hand, the ruling
means that the vilest of pornographic material or hate speech—indeed, even content whose
censorship would have been justiﬁed by the human rights exceptions of article 19(3) of the
ICCPR—can still enjoy copyright, even if the state (China, in this case) determines that it is illegal
to publish and disseminate it. On the other hand, however—and here there is rub—even the most
pedestrian educational content, or the most elevated and universally accepted moral content can be
absolutely banned, as far as the narrow Berne/TRIPS framework is concerned, so long as its
copyright is protected—even if the ban were not justiﬁable under human rights law.

Taking this construction a step forward—and to labour the point, it is quite deﬁnitely a correct
construction in strict and exclusive intellectual property terms—it means that in China-IPR (a)
China did not need to justify its substantive criteria for non-authorization of works in any way,

666

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

certainly not in a way that relates to human rights; (b) the United States as complainant did not
need to challenge these criteria on any basis, least of all on a human rights basis; and (c),
consequently, the panel did not need to rule on the criteria. In short, the structure of the arguments
on all sides, and the structure of the panel’s analysis, made it entirely unnecessary to acknowledge
the existence (and ethereal and ephemeral presence in the vicinity of the case) of human rights law
relating to ‘‘content review’’.

This is not to say that the parties were not actively concerned with China’s criteria for content
approval, and that these criteria were not plainly before the Panel. Quite the contrary: China’s
criteria for banning content were translated into English and quoted in parties’ submissions and in
the report itself and vigorously debated by the parties.35 However, these criteria were discussed by the
parties and the panel only with the object of determining the scope of the term ‘‘the publication and/
or dissemination of which are prohibited by law’’ in Chinese legislation,36 not for the purpose of
reviewing the legality of China’s policy on what it prohibits or allows. This might be understandable,
given the seemingly self-judging nature of article 17 of the Berne Convention, taken on its own.
Such an approach, however, would not have been possible if human rights were introduced into the
arena. And they were not, because although the United States and third parties argued that the
article 17 of the Berne public order exception cannot justify blanket denial of copyright protection,
no one raised the logically prior yet alternative and cumulative argument that some or all of China’s
substantive criteria for banning content were not at all justiﬁed by any sort of public order exception,
whether under article 17 of the Berne Convention or under human rights law. This is in contrast to
even the least assertive strategy of argumentation that a private petition would have followed, as
explained in the previous section. In China-IPR, the criteria for censorship (and hence, for the
denial of copyright) were taken as a black box, impervious to external review. The parties, and the
panel following their lead, seem to have accepted China’s censorship criteria as something akin to
legal fact.37

To put things in the broader, substantive human rights (and political) context—without
presuming to undertake any detailed analysis of the international legality of China’s content
criteria—let us recall what these criteria actually are, as evident from the panel report. In its ﬁrst
written submission, China stated that ‘‘as a matter of law, article 4.1 of the Copyright Law only
denies protection to works whose contents are completely unconstitutional or immoral’’.38 In itself,
this does not provide much guidance—it is essentially the same as saying that China applies its
censorship to matters of public order and public morals. Another source, a statement by the
National Copyright Administration of China (NCAC), limited the censors’ cut to works including
‘‘reactionary, pornographic, or superstitious contents’’.39 Finally, at the most particular level openly
available, speciﬁc regulations relating to ﬁlms and audiovisual publications singled out publica-
tions that:

(1) are against the fundamental principles established in the Constitution;

(2) jeopardize the uniﬁcation, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the state;

(3) divulge state secrets, jeopardize security of the state, or impair the prestige and

interests of the state;

(4) incite hatred and discrimination among ethnic groups, harm their unity, or violate
their customs and habits;

(5) propagate cults and superstition;

(6) disrupt public order and undermine social stability;

r 667

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

(7) propagate obscenity, gambling, or violence, or abet to commit crimes;

(8) insult or slander others, or infringe upon legitimate rights and interests of others;

(9) jeopardize social ethics or ﬁne national cultural traditions;

(10) other contents banned by laws, administrative regulations and provisions of the

State.40

This is clearly a very wide and highly discretionary range of content that can be banned under
Chinese law, some of it very sensitive to domestic and international political perspectives. Does
‘‘reactionary’’ include any disagreement with the Communist part of China? Does ‘‘superstition’’
and ‘‘cults’’ include Falun Gong? Is China’s presence in Tibet considered an issue of territorial
integrity? Does Moslem unrest due to repression constitute harmful hatred among ethnic groups?
What are ‘‘social ethics’’? These are only the most obviously evident questions. It is not difﬁcult to
understand why both the parties and the panel were quite happy to sidestep the review of
censorship criteria entirely, a review that might have been the core question in a human rights
context. Indeed, in the narrowly construed TRIPS/Berne framework, it was not even necessary for
the panel to invoke judicial economy to avoid the human rights issue.41 The parties and the panel
acquiesced in their issue avoidance by structuring their arguments and analysis so that freedom of
expression was not a legal issue.

It should therefore be clear that, absent any claims to human rights effect, the China-IPR panel
could not address the hardcore question of the human rights conformity of China’s content
approval rules without facing the charge of unnecessary judicial activism. It is less clear how the
panel would have conducted itself had the United States made an explicit human rights claim in the
case. But this did not happen. At the very most, under these circumstances, the panel might have
considered taking the relatively bold step of acknowledging, as an obiter dictum, the human rights
context of the dispute. At the very end of the report, the panel was careful to add this ‘‘concluding
remark’’:

In this dispute, the Panel’s task was not to ascertain the existence or the level of
trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy in China in general nor to review
the desirability of strict IPR enforcement. The United States challenged three
speciﬁc alleged deﬁciencies in China’s IPR legal system in relation to certain speciﬁc
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement. The Panel’s mandate was limited to a review of
whether those alleged deﬁciencies, based upon an objective assessment of the facts
presented by the parties, are inconsistent with those speciﬁc provisions of the TRIPS
Agreement.42

One could imagine a similar disclaimer relating to the freedom of expression aspects of China’s

‘‘content review’’, which the panel’s ‘‘task was not to ascertain’’.

Now, let us take a step back and consider the actual effects of the China-IPR report on the

freedom of expression in China.

First of all, the direct impact on freedom of speech within China is of course nil. Article 5(1)
of the Berne Convention as incorporated by TRIPS only relates to the rights of authors ‘‘in
countries . . . other than their country of origin’’, and hence the decision applies only to China’s
treatment of non-Chinese rights holders. In other words, with all the importance of the report’s
requirement that copyright in unauthorized works must be protected, technically, this would
apply only to non-Chinese authors and their works. A banned Chinese work can still be denied
copyright on the basis of its content, with all the derivative, negative effects on the freedom

668

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

of expression and ostensible violations of human rights such as the right to participation in
cultural life.

Second, the direct impact on the freedom of speech of foreign authors, the freedom of access to
information and the right to participate in cultural life in China is nil or even negative. Indeed,
China is now bound by a WTO panel report that requires it to respect its commitment to prevent
copyright-infringing dissemination of unauthorized content. The full weight of copyright enforce-
ment—criminal and administrative—should now be brought to bear on unauthorized ‘‘uncon-
stitutional and immoral works’’, as determined by the Chinese censors. In other words, copyright
can—indeed, must—now be used to stiﬂe expressions and their dissemination.

This adverse conﬂuence between copyright and restrictions on the freedom of expression is not
something that can be noted only in hindsight. In its responses to questions during the panel
proceedings, China assured the panel that it would enforce copyright where a work was edited to
comply with content review against infringing unedited versions, and that, where no authorized
edited version had been created, it would enforce copyright against copies of an unauthorized
edited version, because of the authorized portion of the work.43 But now, China also has the
direction of an international tribunal to enforce copyright against unedited prohibited copies of an
unedited, prohibited work that failed content review. That is, copyright protection is required to
become the handmaiden of censorship, not of the freedom of expression.

Indeed, some of China’s statements to the panel indicate that the proceedings had helped it
better understand and appreciate the mutually reinforcing effect of copyright protection and
censorship. At one point, China argued that a content ban is itself an effective protection against
violation of copyright and is ‘‘in a sense, an alternative form of enforcement against infringe-
ment’’,44 as if to say, we are not in this for the political control, this is exactly what you asked for.45
And in another context,
it referred to the negative rights of copyright holders as ‘‘private
censorship’’46—a kind of Freudian slip, perhaps, but one that captures the paradoxical power of
copyright enforcement to restrict the freedom of speech.

Third, it is important to emphasize that the complainant and several of the third parties
appeared to have embraced not only China’s authority to censor content but also its scope, treating
it as virtually unassailable as a public order or public morals exception to the freedom of speech.
One can make-believe that this has no implications for human rights, but with the parties’ positions
and consequently this report on the record, it will now be more difﬁcult to criticize China’s respect
of political and civil rights and much more difﬁcult to challenge Chinese (or any other state’s
censorship), whether under trade law or human rights law.

Conclusions

In China-IPR, the freedom of expression and trade-related IPR might have shared the same
circumstantial space, but they did not make legal eye contact, let alone conduct a civilized juridical
exchange. If there was such a meeting, it is not apparent from the panel report and it is effortlessly
denied. The panel did not consider the human rights implications of its decision, either explicitly or
implicitly. Indeed, it was not requested to do so by the United States as complainant, nor was it
encouraged to do so by any of the third parties. This is reﬂective of the reluctance of the WTO’s
membership’s to integrate with non-WTO law and the dispute-settlement system’s consequent
constraints in engaging with it. In this article, I have not set out either to present or advocate an
alternative approach; what is striking and noteworthy, however, is the ease with which this
indifference to human rights law can be enacted by parties and panels. Certainly, this is not
necessarily a bad thing, and this exposition is not a judgemental one. Trade disputes do not exist in

r 669

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

a political vacuum, and the WTO does have to consider its effectiveness in the area of trade law and
the continued legitimacy of its dispute-settlement process among members. However, the analysis
shows that this indifference is not necessarily benign in its real implications for human rights.

This dispute—as potentially echoed by other disputes related to censorship’s effects on
trade47—demonstrates that while trade and human rights are not necessarily in conﬂict, they are
not in conﬂuence. They can pass each other like ships in the night, without acknowledging each
other’s existence. Human rights will be considered in trade disputes—perhaps—only if a party
makes explicit claims to that effect. The United States could have, but refrained from, claiming that
article 17 of the Berne Convention should be interpreted in light of article 15(3)(c) of the ICESCR
and article 19 of the ICCPR. Indeed, as we have seen, the United States and its stakeholders, for
reasons known only to them, lacked the determination to make a detailed ‘‘as applied’’ complaint,
and to provide sufﬁcient evidence for making the most of the ‘‘as such’’ complaint actually ﬁled. It
would have been naı¨ ve to expect the United States to couch its business-based complaint in human
rights terms. This particular dispute might not have been the ideal platform for a freedom of speech
case, but the above analysis should serve as a cautionary note to any human rights advocates who
genuinely believe that a trade dispute can spontaneously promote an international human right
such as the freedom of expression. Human rights and trade-related intellectual property can indeed
pretend that they never have met: it’s easily done.

About the Author

Tomer Broude, Senior Lecture, Faculty of Law and Department of International Relations,
Academic Director, Minerva Centre for Human Rights, Hebrew University of Jerusalem; e-mail:
tomerbroude@gmail.com

Notes

1 Bob Dylan, I Don’t Believe You (She Acts Like We Never Have Met), r 1964, renewed 1992, Special

Rider Music.

2 China—Measures Affecting the Protection and Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights, WT/DS362/

R, 26 January 2009.

3 As distinct from WTO disputes relating to other violations of TRIPS. Previous disputes relating to

TRIPS enforcement concluded with mutually agreed solutions (see WT/DS83 Denmark—Measures
Affecting the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights; WT/DS86 Sweden—Measures Affecting the
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights; WT/DS124 European Communities—Enforcement of
Intellectual Property Rights for Motion Pictures and Television Programs; and WT/DS125 Greece—
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights for Motion Pictures and Television Programmes.

4 Earlier complaints against China had not reached judicial settlement or, in the case of WT/DS339, 340,
342/AB/R China—Measures Affecting Imports of Automobile Parts, Report of the Appellate Body, 15
December 2008, had resulted in a resounding defeat for China.

5 This is not to say that previous WTO disputes did not have indirect implications for human rights. For

example, all cases relating to food safety could be said to have an indirect connection to the right to
health. India’s original complaint in WT/DS246/4 European Communities—Conditions for the Granting of
Tariff Preferences to Developing Countries—Request for the Establishment of a Panel by India (9
December 2002) included reference to labour rights, but this claim was abandoned during the dispute.
6 Recently renamed the First Amendment Coalition; see hhttp://www.ﬁrstamendmentcoalition.orgi.

[Accessed July 2010]

7 See Lemon (2007) and Sheer (2009).

670

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

8 See ‘‘Access to Information and Media Control in the People’s Republic of China’’, Testimony of Gilbert

Kaplan, Partner, King & Spalding LLP, 18 June 2008. Available at hhttp://www.uscc.gov/hearings/
2008hearings/written_testimonies/08_06_18_wrts/08_06_18_kaplan_statement.phpi.

9 The Report of the International Law Commission’s Study Group, ‘‘Fragmentation of International Law:
Difﬁculties Arising from the Diversiﬁcation and Expansion of International Law’’ (as ﬁnalized by Martti
Koskenniemi), A/CN.4/L.682, 13 April 2006, noted that in some cases, norms that hold a lex
generalis–lex specialis relationship do not conﬂict with each other but rather ‘‘point in the same
direction’’ (see p. 52 of the report). However, distinct international rules can have an equivalent effect
and ‘‘point in the same direction’’ beyond the framework of lex specialis; see Broude and Shany (2010).
10 See China-IPR, paragraphs 7.396–7.682; the panel rejected this challenge. See the contribution by Xuan

Li elsewhere in this volume for detailed analysis of this claim.

11 See China-IPR, paragraphs 7.193–7.395; the panel rejected most of this challenge, but the United States

prevailed on one aspect, relating to China’s custom authorities’ auctioning of counterfeit goods after
merely removing the unlawful trademark. On these ‘‘border measures’’, see the contribution by Henning
Grosse Ruse-Khan elsewhere in this volume.

12 See China-IPR, paragraphs 7.1–7.192; China—Measure Affecting the Protection and Enforcement of

Intellectual Property Rights, First Submission of the United States of America, WT/DS362.

13 See China-IPR, paragraph 7.1.
14 Article 5(1) of the Berne Convention establishes a national treatment obligation and an obligation to
respect author’s minimum rights ‘‘specially granted’’ by the Convention, which include the substantive
rights of copyright.

15 Article 41.1 of TRIPS requires members to ensure that effective private enforcement procedures are made

available to authors.

16 See China-IPR, paragraphs 7.3–7.15.
17 Ibid., paragraph 7.153.
18 See the panel’s explanation, Ibid., paragraph 7.28.
19 See, for example, China-IPR, paragraphs 7.30 and 7.169.
20 China had raised a rather inane argument according to which copyright can somehow be respected while
copyright protection is denied (ibid., paragraphs 7.32 and 7.61). The argument was unfortunate not only
on its merits (as the panel put it, ‘‘the protection of the law is copyright’’ (paragraph 7.63 [original
emphasis]) but also because it served as an effective admission by China that copyright protection was
indeed being denied from unauthorized works. However, in the criminal threshold claim, the panel had
made a structurally similar and equally unfortunate distinction, restricting its ﬁndings to acts of
infringement that must be criminalized, ‘‘not those which must be prosecuted’’ (paragraph 7.596), but
this distinction can at least be logically justiﬁed by the ‘‘as such’’ nature of the claim.

21 With respect to this category, China expressed a distinction between the ‘‘illegal’’ content portions of a
work that are unauthorized and the ‘‘legal’’ content portions that are authorized (see ibid., paragraphs
7.87–7.88).

22 See China-IPR, United States’ ﬁrst written submission, paragraph 198.
23 See ibid., paragraph 7.103.
24 A similar situation arose in the United States’ failed claim regarding thresholds for criminal enforcement

of intellectual property rights; see ibid., paragraphs 7.632, 7.652 and 7.668.

25 ibid., paragraph 7.11.
26 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. Res. 217 A (III), article 7, U.N. Doc. A/810, at 71 (10
December 1948); for the view that the UDHR forms part of customary international law, see McDougal
et al. (1980) and Humphrey (1976).

27 6 ILM 368 (1966).

r 671

Tomer Broude

It’s Easily Done

28 6 ILM 360 (1966).
29 Article 15(1)(c) of the ICESCR.
30 See Economic and Social Council, Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General
Comment 17 (2005), The Right of Everyone to Beneﬁt from the Protection of the Moral and Material
Interests Resulting from any Scientiﬁc, Literary or Artistic Production of Which He or She is the Author
(article 15, paragraph 1(c), of the Covenant, E/C.12/GC/17, 12 January 2006). The core obligations,
including legislative steps for effective protection, and access to enforcement procedures, are in
paragraph 39 of the General Comment. The distinction between the human right and equivalent
intellectual property rights is in paragraphs 1–3.

31 See ibid., paragraph 2.
32 See China-IPR, paragraph 7.126.
33 Ibid., paragraph 7.132.
34 Human Rights Committee, General Comment 10, article 19 (nineteenth session, 1983), Compilation of

General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N.
Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1, at 11 (1994), paragraph 4.

35 See China-IPR, paragraphs 7.72–7.103.
36 See ibid., paragraph 7.72.
37 See, for example, ibid., paragraph 7.82:

[T]he Panel accepts that prohibited works for the purposes of Article 4(1) of the Copyright
Law include works that contain content considered illegal under the criteria set out in the
law and regulations listed at paragraph above, including the content review regulations.

38 See ibid., paragraph 7.78 (emphasis added).
39 See ibid., paragraph 7.77.
40 See ibid., paragraph 7.79.
41 On the use of judicial economy as an issue avoidance technique in the WTO, see Busch and Pelc (2010).
42 See China-IPR, paragraph 8.5.
43 Ibid., paragraph 7.20.
44 Ibid., paragraph 7.180.
45 See also ibid., paragraph 7.164.
46 See ibid., paragraph 7.61.
47 With speciﬁc reference to WT/DS363 China—Measures Affecting Trading Rights and Distribution

Services for Certain Publications and Audiovisual Entertainment Products, a dispute bearing traits
similar to China-IPR in its relationship and treatment of censorship issues, under appeal at the time of
this writing.

References

Alston, P. (1982) ‘International Trade as an Instrument of Positive Human Rights Policy’, Human Rights

Quarterly, 4(2), 155–83.

Alston, P. (2002) ‘Resisting the Merger and Acquisition of Human Rights by Trade Law: A Reply to

Petersmann’, European Journal of International Law, 13(4), 489–523.

Bartels, L. (2005) Human Rights Conditionality in the EU’s International Agreements. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Broude, T. and Shany, Y. (eds) (2010) The International Law and Policy of Multi-Sourced Equivalent Norms,

Hart Publishing, Oxford.

672

r It’s Easily Done

Tomer Broude

Busch, M. L. and Pelc, K. (2010) The Politics of Judicial Economy at the World Trade Organization’,

International Organization 64 (Spring), 257–79.

Derclaye, E. (2008) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Global Warming’, Marquette Intellectual Property Law

Review, 12(2), 263–97.

Hestermeyer, H. P. (2007) Human Rights and the WTO: The Case of Patents and Access to Medicines. Oxford

University Press, Oxford.

Howse, R. (2002) ‘Human Rights in the WTO: Whose Rights, What Humanity? Comment on Petersmann’,

European Journal of International Law, 13(3), 651–9.

Humphrey, J. H. (1976) ‘The International Bill of Rights: Scope and Implementation’, William and Mary Law

Review, 17, 527–41.

Lang, A. (2007) ‘The Role of the Human Rights Movement in Trade-Policy Making: Human Rights as a

Trigger for Policy Learning’, New Zealand Journal of Public and International Law, 5, 77–102.
Lemon, S. (2007) ‘Group Seeks WTO Suit Against China’, PC World [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.pcworld.com/article/140466/group_seeks_wto_suit_against_china.htmli.

McDougal, M. S., Lasswell, H. D. and Chen, L.-C. (1980) Human Rights and World Public Order: The Basic

Policies of an International Law of Human Dignity. Yale University Press, New Haven, NJ.

Panizzon, M. (2008) ‘How Human Rights Violations Nullify and Impair GATS Commitments’, in M.

Panizzon, N. Pohl and P. Sauv ´e (eds), GATS and the Regulation of International Trade in Services: World
Trade Forum. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p. 534–60.

Petersmann, E.-U. (2002a) ‘Time for a United Nations ‘Global Compact’ for Integrating Human Rights into

the Law of Worldwide Organizations: Lessons from European Integration’, European Journal of
International Law, 13(3), 621–50.

Petersmann, E.-U. (2002b) ‘Petersmann, Taking Human Dignity, Poverty and Empowerment of Individuals

More Seriously: A Rejoinder to Alston’, European Journal of International Law, 13(4) 845–51.

Qingjiang, K. (2008) ‘The Doctrine of Ordre Public and the Sino-US Copyright Dispute’, Society of
International Law Inaugural Conference 2008 [online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1147137i. [Accessed July 2010]

Ricketson, S. (1987) The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Centre for

Commercial Law Studies, Queen Mary College, London.

Ricketson, S. and Ginsburg, J. (2006) International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights, The Berne Convention

and Beyond, 2nd edition, Oxford University Press, New York.

Rundle, M. C. (2005) ‘Beyond Internet Governance: The Emerging International Framework for Governing
the Networked World’, Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2002-16 [online]. Available at hhttp://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=870059i [Accessed July 2010].

Sheer, P. (2009) ‘Acting Globally and Locally: From Internet Censorship in China to a TRO Against Atherton,

CA, 2 June (originally posted 20 January 2008). First Amendment Coalition. Available at hhttp://
www.ﬁrstamendmentcoalition.org/2009/06/report/i.

Wu, T. (2006) ‘The World Trade Law of Censorship and Internet Filtering’, Chicago Journal of International

Law, 7, 263–87.

r 673


