Common Heritage to Common Concern 

Preserving  a Heritage and  Sharing Knowledge 

Zahr THOMAS* 

INTRODUCTION 

Fuelled  by  such  well  known  causes  as  deforestation,  overpopulation  and 
consequent pressures on land for development, large numbers of the world’s plant and 
animal species are becoming  extinct at an  alarming rate.  Scientists from all over the 
world have identified the need to intensift field studies in tropical biodiversity and to 
make its protection a high priority for this century.1 

Historically, plant genetic resources (PGRS) used to move freely between countries 
as  “common  heritage”  of mankind. The developments of the latter part  of the  20th 
century saw changes in the “common heritage” regime governing PGRS. Part I  of this 
paper  traces  these  developments and  takes  a  look  at  the  international legal  regime 
governing PGRS. These changes culrmnated in 1992 in the United Nations Convention 
on Biological Diversity (CBD). The CBD treats PGRS as subject to the sovereign rights of 
nations and  suggests  the  sharing of benefits  arising out  of  the  use  of  the  intangible 
knowledge associated with  these resources held by  the  tradtional  communities. The 
genetic resources and the knowledge associated with them have been made subject to a 
kind of property right which enables restricting access to these resources. Part 11 of this 
article presents a survey of some of the legslations implementing this concept. 

Reports  from  around  the  world  show  that  there  have  been  some  unintended 
consequences of these legislations. At least in some cases, they have had the  effect of 
impedmg scientific research. Scientists are concerned about the dfficulties encountered 
in obtaining access to genetic resources. These concerns are detailed in Part III. 

Scientific research into rapidly depleting biodiversity is  an imperative recognized 
by the CBD. Sharing of the benefits of commercialization with tradtional communities 
who are preservers of biodiversity will be possible only if upstream scientific research 
*  The author is  an Indian government official who has  been the Registrar of Copyright of India, but the 
He did his Masters in Intellectual Property at Franklin Pierce Law Center, Concord, New Hampshire in 
2004. He would like to thank Professors William Hennessey and Thomas Field, Frankhn Pierce Law Center; and 
Professor Charles McManis, Washington University  School of Law,  St. Louis, Missouri for their guidance and 
insighthl comments while preparing this article. 

views expressed herein are his own. 

The author may be contacted at: czthomas@piercelaw.edu,. 

1  Armro G6mez-Pompa, The Role ofBiodiversity Scientists in a Troubled World ofBioscience, Bioscience, Vol. 54, 

No. 3, March 2004, pp. 217-225. 

242 

THE  

leads to downstream comerciahation. This article argues that if the objectives of the 
CBD are to be met  and scientific research into rapidly  depleting biodversity  is  to be 
encouraged, we need to build in adequate safeguards to facilitate scientific research. 

Intellectual  property  (IP) laws  whch  govern  access  to  knowledge  assets  have 
adequate safeguards  to  ensure scientific progress  through  research. Drawing parallels 
from “fair use” and the compulsory licensing mechanism of IP laws, this article suggests 
building provisions into the CBD and the implementing legislations to enable researchers 
to work on disappearing biodiversity. The Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food 
and Agriculture, adrmnistered by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAo)  is also examined as a possible alternative. In addition to an appropriate 
legal environment, trust and mutual understanding has to be fostered among trahtional 
communities, researchers and industry for a mutually beneficial partnership. These issues 
are dealt with in Part IV. 

I.  DEVELOPMENT 
GENETIC RESOURCES 

OF THE INTERNATIONAL LEGAL REGIME GOVERNING PLANT 

A.  THE ALARMING NEED FOR  SClENTIFlC  STUDY 

Human survival over millennia is a saga of continuous interaction with nature. This 
interaction remained at a sustainable level for the major part of our existence on this 
planet, maintaining a balance between various components of the environment. Earth 
has its own ability to regenerate and, like a skillful juggler, it managed its components 
with dexterity. Species loss has been occurring through most of geological time, due to 
natural causes,  at  the  rate  of  one  species every  one  milhon  years,2  and  new  species 
evolved  at  the  same rate,  maintaining a  rough  equilibrium.3 At  present, the  rate  of 
species extinction is  estimated to be 100 to  1,000 times as much as before the coming 
of  humanity,  tilting the  equilibrium  of  nature.4  At  this  rate,  our  planet’s  ability to 
regenerate is expected to diminish, threatening its survival.5 

The rate of loss of species is a serious cause for concern. Globally, more than 10,000 
species become  extinct every year.6 Scientists estimate that  roughly 5-10  percent of 
tropical forest species face extinction, possibly  resulting in the extinction of 60,000 of 
the world’s plant species and perhaps even higher proportions of vertebrate and insect 
species, within the next thrty years.7 We are passing through such a crucial period that 

2  Edward 0. Wilson, Vanishing Bejbre our Eyes, Time Magazine, Earthday 2000 issue. 
3  Ibid. 
4  Ibid. The soaring rate of extinction and declining rate of replacement are attributed to destruction of the 

natural environment. 

5  Eugene Lindel, Condition Critical, Time Magazine, Earthday 2000 issue, quoting a report commissioned by 
The World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) and the World Resources Institute, the Pilot Analysis of Global Ecosystems. 
Conservation, Ecology L.Q., Vol. 24, 1997, p. 243, at pp. 248-249. 
Policies to  Conserve Raw Medicinal Materials, 25 B.C. Envt’l M. Law Rev. 129. 

6  Neil  Gunningham and  Mike  D.  Young,  Toward  Optimal  Environmental  Policy:  D i e   Cace  o j  Biodiversity 
7  Christopher J. Hunter, Sustainable Bioprospecting: Using Private  Contracts and  lntemational Legal Principles and 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

243 

some estimates point out that 25 percent of the world’s species present in the mid-1980s 
may be extinct by the year 2015.8 

One of the serious concerns about depleting biodiversity is that  a wide range of 
biodiversity is yet to be studied. Many species are yet to be examined. So far, biologsts 
have described a total of about 1.75 million ~pecies.~ However, the estimated number 
of total living species varies, according to the method employed, from 3.6 d o n  to 
more than 100 million.10 Of the 250,000 plant species on earth, only one in 10 has been 
examined.”  Of the smallest of living organisms, such as insects, worms and fungi, it is 
estimated that only 10 per cent have been discovered.12 

The loss  of biodiversity concerns not  only unknown resources in tropical forests 
but  also plant resources for food and agriculture. China, for example, had more  than 
10,000 wheat varieties in 1945, of which fewer than 1,000 are available today.13 Indian 
farmers work with fewer than twenty rice varieties today, though  there existed more 
than 30,000 at the beginning of the twentieth century.14 At this rate of loss of diversity 
related to agriculture, there is an urgent need to study the existing varieties. 

The rate of extinction as well as the lack of specific knowledge of numerous species 
is believed to have  produced such a  “dangerous situation”15 that some scientists who 
study biodiversity call it a scientlfic discipline with a deadhne.16 Biologists who explore 
biodwersity see  it vanishing in  front of their  eyes.”  To understand and preserve  the 
species that remain, scientists need to conduct stuhes on the biodiversity that exists today, 
perform more field research and look for better ways to protect nature and local culture.’* 

Closely  associated  with biological diversity  is  the  knowledge base  whch the local 
communities have developed on the genetic resources. The extinction of knowledge is as 
important a cause for concern as biological extinction. More than 50 per cent of the world’s 
languages  have  disappeared  in  the  last  century  and  ninety  of  those  remaining d be 
moribund in t h s  century. With languages die the local traditions, culture and knowledge 
associated with the language. It is in the interests of posterity that researchers and scientists 
study and document such knowledge which would otherwise be lost forever. 

8  David E. Bell, The  1992 Convention on Biological Diversity:  The Continuing Signijcance .f U.S. Objections at 
the Earth  Summit, Geo. Wash. J. Int’l L. & Econ., Vol. 26, 1993, p. 479, at pp. 487-490, citing the  1992 report of 
the UNEP Ad HOG Worhng Group of Experts on Biological Diversity. 

9  Sustaining  Lije  on  Earth;  available  on  the  Website  of the  CBD, at: cwww.biodiv.org/doc/publications/ 

guide.asp?id=web) (accessed 4 May 2004). 

10  Wilson, supra, footnote 2. 
‘ 1   Ajay K. Sharma, The Global Loss $Biodiversity:  A  Perspective in the  Context ofthe Controversy over Intellectual 
Property Righis, referring to Kenton R. Miller et al., Issues on the Preservation ofBiological Diversity, in Robert Repetto (ed.), 
The Global Impossible, 1985, p. 337, at p. 338. 

Kluwer Law International, The Hague, 2004, pp. 151-220,  at p. 154. 

12  Wilson, supra, footnote 2. 
13  Michael Hassemer, Genetic Resources,  in S .  von Lewenski (ed.), Indigenous Heritage  and Intellectual  Property, 
l 4   Id. 
15  Hunter, supra, footnote 7. 
l 6   Wilson, supra, footnote 2. 
17  Ibid; the title of the article itselfspeaks volumes about the loss ofbiodiversity. Lindel, supra, footnote 5, also 

reflects the concern of scientists. 

18  G6mez-Pompa, supra, footnote 1. 

244 

THE  

B.  B I O P R O S P E C T I N G  

Humankind  has  always  been  studying  plants.  The  recorded  history  of 
international  plant  collecting  missions  goes  back  3,500  years  to  when  Egyptian 
military expeditions began bringing plants home after their campaigns.19 The spread 
of crops away from the  so-called  “Vavilov centres”20  shows that  traditionally PGRS 
used to move freely across borders. 

Scientific search for commercially valuable biochemical and genetic resources in 
plants, animals and microorganisms is referred to as bio-prospecting.21 In recent times, 
bio-prospecting refers to activities carried out by pharmaceutical companies to research 
biodwersity by  screening various biological resources, often in search of new chemical 
compounds with  useful characteristics. The multi-billion-dollar  global pharmaceutical 
industry has brought bio-prospecting to the centre of heated international debate. 

Many  drugs  which  have  proven  immensely  useful  to  manlund  have  been 
developed from  PGRS. The pharmaceutical literature  is  filled with  examples.22  One 
such  example  is  the  discovery  of  a  treatment  for  juvenile  leukemia  from  “rosy 
periwinkle”,  a  plant found in Madagascar, which  improved  the survival rate for that 
disease to a once unimaginable 90 per cent.23 However, there are concerns that while 
Eli Lilly,  the corporate producer of the drugs developed from periwinkle, made huge 
profits, Madagascar, the place of origin of the plant and the source of the knowledge 
of its  properties, does not  get any share of those  same profits.24  As  awareness of the 
potential of biological resources grew, developing nations, where most of the world’s 
biodiversity is located, began to protest against what they perceived as exploitation of 
their  resources  without  adequate  compensation.  The  uncompensated  taking  of 
biological resources, without the consent of the people in whose locality it is found, is 
commonly referred to as biopiracy.25 

19  Michael A. Gokn, Biopiracy,  The Legal Perspective,  citing Calestous Juma, Gene Hunters: Biotechnology  and the 
Scramble for Seeds, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1989; avadable at: cwww.actionbioscience.org/ 
biodiversity/gollin.htmh  (accessed 27 April 2005). 
2O  Named for Nikolai Vavilov, whose work The Origin,  Variation, Immunity and Breeding  of Cultivated Plants, 
Chronica Botanica, Vol. 13, Nos.  I-6,1949,  pp.  1-364,  established the concept that the world’s agricultural crops 
had eight centres of origin from which they spread worldwide. 

21  See the Website of the National History Museum, London, at: cwww.nhm.ac.uk/science/rco/sysresource/ 

bioprospecting. htmi). 

22  Shayana Kadilal, Plants, Poverty and Phamaceutical Patents, Yale L.J., Vol.  103, 1993, p. 223, at footnote 3, 

citing morphine  (1806). quinine (1823) and atropine (1833) as  early examples of plant-derived  medicines. 

23  Ibid., at p.  223. The rosy periwinkle has been used for centuries by Malagasy healers in treating diabetes. 
French explorers introduced this plant to the outside world in the late  18th century, and it was used for curing 
diseases such as sore throats, pleurisy, dysentery and diabetes. Scientists from Eli Lay, a U S .  pharmaceutical firm, 
produced  two compounds from the leaves of rosy periwinkle-vincristine 
turned  out to 
be powerful anti-cancer drugs. Vincristine is effective in treating leukemia, while vinblastine is effective in treating 
testicular cancer. See also Hassemer, supra, footnote 13. 
24  Ibid., at 224, referring to Norman Mayers, Draining  the  Gene Pool:  The Causes, Course and  Consequences of 
Genetic Erosion,  in Jack R. Kloppenberg, Jr.  (ed.), Seeds  and  Sovereignty,  Duke University Press, Durham, North 
Carolina, 1998, p. 90, at p. 96. 
25  See generally Shiva Vandana,  Biopiracy:  Plunder  of Nature  and  Knowledge,  South End  Press,  Cambridge, 

and vinblastine-which 

Massachusetts, 1997. 

REGULATING ACCESS T O  PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

245 

Bio-prospecting  activities  are  not  restricted  to  developing  countries.  The 
Hardangervidda  Mountains  of  Norway  contributed  to  the  development  of  a 
blockbuster drug by  Novartis without  Norway  gaining anything from it.26  The bio- 
prospecting policy of Yellowstone National Park in the United States shows that the 
owners  of rare biological  resources claim  returns from  the  commercial use  of such 
resources.27 

Access  to  germplasm  alone  does  not  guarantee  a  marketable  biotechnological 
product. It is estimated that about 10,000 samples have to be screened to create one lead 
that  may  develop  into  a  marketable  product  after  extensive  research  and  testing.28 
Accordmg to the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, the average 
total cost of bringing a drug to the market is about US$  500 dli0n.29  It takes about 
twelve to fifteen years to develop and bring a drug to the market.30 This is  where the 
knowledge of traditional communities who have learned about the medicinal properties 
of plants becomes highly valuable. 

The huge expenses involved in drug development make the issues  involving the 
ownership and utdization of genetic materials very complex. Allegations of biopiracy 
have  made  countries  close  their  borders  to  further  research  by  pharmaceutical 
companies.31 

26  See L.P. Christoffersen and  S.C. Fish,  Standing  up  to  Biopiracy:  Fostering  Sustainable  Development  through 
Bioprospecfing; available at: m.wfed.org/resources/reports/articlel  .htm). The soil samples horn the Hardangervidda 
Mountains collected  in  1969 by  Sandoz  resulted  in  the  discovery of  a  biochemical  called  “Cyclosporin  A” 
contained in that soil and which later became an ingredlent of the blockbuster drug “Sandimunn Neoral” used by 
patients who have  undergone organ transplant operations.  In  1996, Sandoz  merged with  Ciba  Geigy  to  form 
Novartis, and in the following year medicines produced from the Norwegian fungus reportedly earned Novartis 
US$  1.2 billion  in gross revenue  without  Norway gaining anything from it as there  were  no  Norwegian laws 
dealing with access and benefit-sharing. 
*’  See  Themophiles,  at  the  Yellowstone  National Park  Official Website, at:  cwww.nps.gov/yell/nature/ 
thermophiles/biopro.html) (accessed 26 April 2005). For a long time, biologists had believed  that life could not 
tolerate temperatures  near  or  above 80  degrees Celsius. In  1967, while studying bacteria in  the  Yellowstone 
Nanonal Park, Dr. Thomas Brock discovered bacteria in the hot springs of the Park that could live and reproduce 
near the temperature of boiling water-100  degrees Celsius-which  he named Themus Aquaticus Yellowstone Type 1 
(TAQ YT-1). These heat-stable bacteria were not thought to be of any use until the 1980s, when polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) for performing enzymatic amplification of DNA was discovered. In order to copy DNA and amplify 
it, a heat-stable enzyme was needed and themus aquaticus answered this need. A key constituent OfPcR is  TAQ DNA 
polymerase, derived €-om  themus aquaticus. PCR has become an important medical tool, and the TAQpolymerase-based 
industry is said to have become a US$500 million per year industry. None of this revenue benefited the Park where 
the  bacteria  was  discovered. As  a  result  of increasing use  of thermophylic  organisms available in  the  Park,  its 
managers began discussing the need for a new policy on commercial use  of publicly owned resources. The Park 
now allows access after entering into benefit-sharing agreements. 

28  Charles R. McManis, Intellectual Property, Generic Resources and  Traditional Knowkdge Protection: ninkirrg Globally, 

Acting Locally, 11 Cardozo J. Int’l81 Comp. L.  547, at note 12, quoting UN Doc. uNEP/cBD/cOP/4/Id. 25, 1998. 

29  Pharmaceutical  Research and  Manuhcturers  of  America,  Why  D o   Dnrgs  Cost so  Much!;  avadable at: 
cwww.phrma.org/publications/publications/brochure/questions/questions.p~ (accessed  11  April  2004).  This 
high fixed cost in developing a new drug, coupled with the enormous risks involved, is one of the reasons why the 
pharmaceutical industry needs strong IP protection. 

30  Ibid. 
31  Kal Raustiala and David G. Victor, The Regime  Complexfor Plant  Genetic Resources, University of Cahfomia, 
Los Angeles School of Law Research  Paper Series, Research Paper No.  03-19,  pp. 2&21,  The Social Science 
Research Network Electronic Paper Collection; available at: cssm.com/abstract=441463~. 

246 
c.  THE “COMMON HERITAGE” 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Historically, biological resources and PGRS were  considered to be  the  common 
heritage of mankind.33 This concept meant that PGRS were a gift of nature which were 
to be enjoyed by everyone. Concomitant with the common heritage principle was the 
principle of free avadability, which meant free access and unlimited exchange of plant 
gerrnplasm, the only cost associated being in collecting.34 Under this defacto principle, 
PGRS used  to move freely across national borders except for certain phytosanitary and 
quarantine restrictions.35 

Biological resources were  treated  according to the  common  heritage principle 
because  they  are  the  product  of  collective  invention.36  The  common  heritage 
principle  recognizes  the  collective  ownership  of  knowledge  where  the  invention 
occurs  in  an  incremental  way  without  identifiable  contributors.  The  logcal 
foundation  of the  application of the common heritage principle lies in the nature of 
crop  genetic  resources,  the  universal  process  of  dispersal  and  diffusion,  and  the 
historical practices of reciprocity.37 This is particularly so in crop genetic resources, as 
they  evolve  through  a  process  of  mutation,  exchange  and  natural  selection.  This 
tangled history of diffusion and dispersal not  only obscures the points  of origin but 
suggests, at least in the case of agricultural crops, that all farmers benefit from the fluid 
movement of seeds.38 

Open access is another key characteristic of the common heritage principle. Open 
access also implied reciprocity between  the  collector of the genetic resources and the 
provider to let the benefit of the collective knowledge flow in both directions.39 Thus, 
under the common heritage regime, genetic resources were regarded as an international 
public good used by scientists to produce other public goods.40 

32  There was no formal legal recognition for the common heritage principle in any international agreements 
concerning PGRS until the 1980s. However, this principle was invoked within the United Nations framework in 
the 1960s in the dlscussions relating to outer space. In that context, the concept was first used by the Ambassador 
of Argentina in July 1967. A few months later, the Maltese Ambassador to the United Nations  used this concept 
to  assert  that  the  seabed  was  the  common  heritage  of mankind.  This  concept  was  first  formalized  in  the 
international  legal  regime  in  the  1979  Moon  Agreement  and  subsequently  in  the  1982  Law  of  the  Sea 
Convention. See Major Robert A. Ramey, Armed  Conflict on the Final  Frontier,  Law of  War in Space, 48 Air Force 
Law Review 1, 2000, at note 428. 
33  Jessica Scott Jerome, Intellectual Property  Rights  and  Indigenous  Peoples:  A History  ofthe Topic as  an  Object of 
34  Ibid. 
35  Matters concerning Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources,  Traditional Knowledge  and FolkloreAn Overview, 
36  Stephan B. Brush,  The Demise of  ‘Common Heritage’  and  Protection of Traditional Knowledge, 2003; available 
37  Ibid. 
3*  Ibid. Particularly in genetic resources relating to agriculture, the spread of crops from  Vavilov  centres is 

at: claw.wustl.edu/centeris/Confpapers/PDFWrdDoc/StLouisl .html#-ftn2)  (accessed 28 Apnl2005). 

Study; available at: cregionalworlds.uchicago.edu/IntellPropJerome.p&) (accessed 28 Apnl2005). 

WIPO DOC. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/1/3,  p.  12. 

seen as an illustration of this; see also supra, footnote 20. 

39  Ibid. Brush asserts that the f m e n  who openly provide seed expect to receive it in the same manner. This 
principle, according to Brush, is followed by plant breeders who exchange the material they have gathered from 
farming communities as well as free avdability of genetic resources from genebanks. The wide diffusion of modem 
crop  varieties  from international  breeding  programmes  is  an  indication  of the  extent of reciprocity  under  the 
common heritage principle. 

40  Ibid. 

REGULATING  ACCESS  TO PLANT  GENETIC  RESOURCES 

247 

The common heritage principle is a key component of the normative structure of 
science.41 It refers to the ethos that substantive findings of science are a product of social 
collaboration and are assigned to humanity as a whole.42 The tradition of science asserts 
that its findings cannot be exclusively possessed and that property interests of scientists 
are limited to prestige and recognition.43 Abstract ideas and discoveries in the field of 
science  cannot  be  monopolized,  while  the  technical  applications of  these  ideas  are 
treated as inventions capable of IP protection. 

Common  heritage  principles  differ  fundamentally  from  the  philosophical 
underpinnings of IP laws.  Common heritage property is  not  susceptible to exclusive 
ownershp.  IP rights are based  on the principles of private ownership and exclusivity, 
while  common heritage implies common property  regimes.  From  an  IP  standpoint, 
common heritage property is considered to be in the public domain and other creators 
and innovators could freely use the elements of this heritage.44 

The  period  of  common  heritage  management  proved  beneficial  to  the 
international  community  by  malung  crop  resources  available  outside  their  original 
habitat, thus ensuring availability of food resources for humanity.45 

D.  THE CHANGE IN APPROACH 

Since  the  start  of  the  “Green  Revolution”  in  the  1960s, the  importance  of 
international exchange of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture (PGRFA) has 
been recognized. The first international document dealing with exchange of PGRFA was 
the  International Undertaking on Plant  Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 
(hereinafter, the Undertalung), a legally non-binding agreement adopted by the FAO in 
1983 to facilitate access to PGRFA.46 The changes it underwent in the 1980s reflect the 
shift in international approach to the common heritage principle. 

The original Undertaking, as adopted in 1983, stated the “universally accepted principle 
that  PGRS are  common heritage  of mankind  and  consequently  should  be  made  avadable 
without restriction”.47  It  considered  that  PGRFA, both  new breeders’ lines  and  traditional 
farmers’ varieties, should be available without restriction for scientific and breeding purposes, 
fkee of charge and on the basis of mutual exchange or mutually agreed terms. 

The  inclusion  of  breeders’  lines,  intended  to  subject  elite  cultivars  to  the 
common heritage principle, drew protests from the seed industry, which felt that such 

principle. 

41  Ibid. Brush refers to  R.K. Merton, Sociology of  Science,  University of Chcago  Press,  1979 to discuss this 
42  Brush, ibid. 
43  Ibid. 
44 WIPO, supra, footnote 35, at p. 4. 

46  The  text  of the  Undertaking and its Annexes is  available at:  www.fao.org/ag/c@rfa/IU.htm  (accessed 

26 April 2005). The original Undertaking was adopted as Resolution 8/83 of the FAO Conference in 1983. 

47  See the Undertalung, ibid., Article  1, “Objective”. 

Id. 

248 

TKE  

inclusion diluted  the  IP  protection  available  to  them.48  The  seed  companies who 
wanted  to  access  genetic  materials  under  the  common  heritage  regime  were  not 
willing to share their improved varieties under the principles underlying that regime. 
The developing countries which are rich in biodiversity protested that they felt t h s  to 
be  uncompensated talung.49  The result  of this  tussle  was  that  the  Undertaking was 
subjected to  a  series  of agreed interpretations, in  the  form of three  FAO Conference 
Resolutions which are now annexed to it. The purpose of these agreed interpretations 
was  to achieve a balance between  the rights of the  commercial breeders, on the  one 
hand, and those of the farmers who are the informal breeders, on the other.50 

The Annexes reflect the changes in the common heritage approach in the area of 
PGRFA. Annex 151 recognized plant breeders’ rights, acknowledging the legitimacy of IP 
protection  for  elite  cultivars.  Simultaneously, a  second Annex52 was  adopted which 
recognized  farmers’  rights.  It  recognized  the  efforts  of  farmers  over  millennia  to 
conserve, nurture and improve PGRS and called for compensation to farmers. However, 
it also admitted that “plant and genetic resources have been insufficiently explored and 
are in danger of erosion and loss”. The third Annex,53 adopted in 1991, possibly reflects 
the shift in international understanding of the common heritage concept with reference 
to PGRS. It clearly states that the concept of PGRs as manlund’s heritage is subject to the 
sovereign rights of the States. 

The above change in approach closely parallels the development of biotechnology, 
the demand for higher IP protection for biotechnology inventions by the industry and 
the demand of developing nations for rights over their genetic resources. These led to 
the adoption of the CBD, which is the first legally binding agreement recognizing the 
sovereign rights of the nations over their PGRS. The CBD also led to adoption of some 
more international norms on sharing of PGRs which are dmussed below. 

E.  THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 

The prospect of high returns from bio-prospecting by pharmaceutical companies 
made developing countries perceive their PGRS as a source of wealth and to demand that 
they be compensated for nurturing those resources. The CBD54 is one of a matched pair 
of conventions that were  opened for signature at the  Earth  Summit  1992, the  other 
being the Framework Convention on Climate Change, whch required the industrially 
developed countries to limit their  net  emissions of greenhouse gases  and to facilitate 

a  David S .  Tilford, Saving  the  Blueprints: The International Legal Regimefor  Plant Resources,  30  Case W. Res. 

J. Int’l L. 373, at pp. 412-413. 

49  Id. 
50  See the Undertaking, supra, footnote 46. 
51  Resolution 4/89 of the 25th Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 1989. 
52  Resolution 5/89 of the 25th Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 1989. 
53  Resolution 3/91 of the 26th Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 1991. 
54 The full text of the CBD is  available at: .www.biodiv.org/convention/articles.asp). So far,  188 countries 

have ratified the CBD. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

249 

transfer of environmental technology to the developing world.55 The CBD affirms that 
States have sovereign rights over their biological resources. At the same time, it obligates 
the countries rich in biodiversity (primarily developing nations) to conserve, sustainably 
use and guarantee access to genetic resources in return for a fair and equitable sharing of 
benefits arising out of utdization of these resources.56 A detailed discussion of the CBD 
is beyond the scope of this article, and the dlscussion here is limited to those provisions 
that regulate access. 

The  CBD recognizes  the  knowledge  associated with  genetic  resources held  by 
traditional communities and encourages the equitable sharing of benefits arising fi-om 
utilization of such knowledge. Article S(j) CBD mandates the  Contracting Parties to 
respect, promote and maintain knowledge of traditional communities associated with 
biodiversity and to promote their wider application, encouraging equitable sharing of 
benefits arising fi-om the utilization of such knowledge. 

Article  15 CBD, entitled ”Access to Genetic Resources”, recognizes that genetic 
resources  are  withm  the  sovereign rights  of  the  States  and  are  subject  to  national 
legislation.57  It  also  obligates  parties  to  “facihtate  access  to  genetic  resources  for 
environmentally sound uses”.5* Article 15 also stipulates that access to genetic resources 
shall be subject to prior informed consent of the contracting party and calls for fair and 
equitable sharing of the benefits arising from utdization of resources. 

With the transfer of genetic resources from the public domain to the sovereign 
right  of  the  nations,  the  country  of  origin  can  now  control  access to  its  genetic 
resources, which  gves them the juridical  means to receive compensation for such 
access.59 One of the important consequences of the access control regime is that the 
host countries have a stronger position in negotiating bio-prospecting contracts and 
material  transfer  agreements  (MTAS) 
.60  Diverting  from  the  hitherto  established 
principles  of  common  heritage,  the  CBD establishes  the  principle  of  national 
sovereignty over genetic resources now  codified in international law.  There is  no 
mention of the phrase “common heritage”, but the Preamble recognizes biodiversity 
conservation as  the  common  concern of humankind. This phrase was  deliberately 
substituted  to  dilute  the  collective  ownership  implied  by  the  term  common 

Biodiversity and Biotethnology, Wash. U.L. Quarterly, Vol. 76,  1998, p. 255, at p. 260. 

55  Charles R. McManis,  The Inferfbce Befween lnternafional Intellectual  Property  and  Environmental Protection: 
56  Id. See also the “Objectives” clause of the CBD. 
57  Article  15(1) CBD reads:  “Recognizing the  sovereign rights  of States over  their  natural  resources, the 
authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the national governments and is subject to national 
legislation.” 

58 Article  15(2) states: ”Each  Contracting party  shall  endeavor to create  conditions to  facilitate access to 
genetic resources for environmentally sound uses by other Contracting Parties and not to  impose restrictions that 
run counter to the objectives of [the] Convention.” 

59  Hassemer, supra, footnote 13. 
60  The gened principle  of access  and  benefit-sharing  enunciated by  the  CBD is  that  access should be on 
mutually agreed terms with prior informed consent of  the party  providing the resources. The drawing up  of a 
contract or agreement is  one way of expressing mutually agreed terms and may  also be  the condition for prior 
informed consent. In general, the  agreement relating to access to genetic resources and defining the terms and 
conditions of use of the accessed material is called a material transfer agreement. 

250 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

heritage.61  From  the  concept  of  common  ownership,  the  focus  thus  shifts  to 
biodiversity and its conservation as a common concern of the entirety of humanity. 

F.  THE BONN GUIDELINES ON ACCESS TO GENETIC R E S O U R C E S  AND FAIR AND 
EQUITABLE S H A R I N G  OF  T H E  BENEFITS ARISING O U T  OF  T H E I R  U T I L I Z A T I O N  
To review the implementation of the  CBD, the  Conference of the Parties (COP) 
meets  biennially. Realizing the  importance  of  and  the  need  to  streamhne access  to 
genetic  resources,  the  COP adopted  the  Bonn  Guidelines  on  Access  to  Genetic 
Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization 
(hereinafter, the Guidelines).62 These were intended to serve as guidelines for countries 
in developing or drafting legislative, administrative or policy measures on access  and 
benefit-sharing  and  contracts  under  mutually  agreed  terms  of  benefit-sharing.  The 
Guidelines intended to provide parties and stakeholders with  a transparent framework 
to  ensure  access  to  genetic  resources  and  equitable  sharing  of  the  benefits.  The 
Contracting Parties are required to designate one national focal point to facditate access 
and benefit-sharing. The Guidelines provide broad guidance on the elements of access, 
prior  informed consent  and  on the  terms  of MTAS. The national  focal point  should 
inform applicants of procedures for access to genetic resources. Although compliance 
with  the  Guidelines is  voluntary, they  provide  the  first  widely  accepted  criteria for 
licensing of access to genetic resources. 

G.  THE FAO  INTERNATIONAL TREATY ON PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD 

A N D  AGRICULTURE 

The problems in ensuring access to genetic resources were pronounced in the area 
of PGRFA. The CBD had restricted access to these resources. The FAO realized that the 
bilateral contractual approach of the CBD does not provide an adequate solution to the 
special  needs  of  agriculture.63 Ensuring  access  to  PGRFA was  required  to  meet  the 
pressing concerns of food security. 

Considering  the  special  characteristics  of  PGRFA, the  FAO  adopted  a  new 
international instrument called the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for 
Food and Agriculture (hereinafter the FAO Treaty) in 2001 .64 It recognizes the sovereign 
rights  of  the  States  over  PGRFA and  their  authority  to  determine  access  to  these 

~~ 

6'  TiEord, supra,  footnote  48,  at  p.  415,  refemng  to  Maria  Clara  Maffei,  Evolving  Trends  in  International 

~ 

Protecfion ofSpecies, German Y.B.  of Int'l L., Vol. 36, 1993, p. 131, at p. 163. 

62  Adopted 

in  2002  as  Decision  VI/24  of  COP  VI;  available  at:  www.biodiv.org/decisions/ 

defaulc.aspx?m=cop-O6&d=24) (accessed 26 April 2005). 

World Intellectual Propeq Organization, Genetic Resources: Dr.ft Intellectual Property Guidelinesfor Access and 
Benefit  Sharing  Contracts, WrPO  Doc. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/6/5,  2004, p.  13. The special feature of PGRFA is  due to 
three distinct features of these resources: (i) PGRFA and their fiee flow are fundamental preconditions to global food 
security; (ii) because of the diffusion of agriculture and its major crops, it is difficult to trace the country of origin; 
(iii) there is strong interdependence among countries with respect to PGRFA. 

h4  The text of the Treaty is available at: www.fao.org/ag/cgrfa/itpgr.htm##text)  (accessed 5 September 2004). 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

251 

resources.65 In exercise of these sovereign rights, the Treaty established a multilateral 
system (MLs) for access to PGRFA and to equitably share the benefits arising from their 
utilization.66 Access is provided to the MLS, comprised of sixty-four crops and forages, 
in  accordance with  the  condtions  set  out  in  Article  12 of the  Treaty67  through  a 
standard MTA. If a recipient commercializes the product, the benefits are to be equitably 
shared with the M~s.68 The Treaty envisages that the benefits arising from the use  of 
PGRFA that  are  shared  under  the  MLS should  flow  primarily  to  the  farmers  in  all 
countries, especially developing countries. 

The FAO Treaty was  necessitated by the restrictive impulses of the CBD and the 
problems it created in accessing the PGRFA which are necessary to ensure food security. 
In so far as the crops mentioned in the MLS are concerned, this Treaty’s provisions will 
be the international law, while the CBD will cover the legal regime for most PGRS. 

11.  NATIONAL AND REGIONAL REGIMES  CONCERNING ACCESS TO GENETIC 

h S O L J R C E S  

In  accordance with  the  CBD, the  implementing national legislations follow the 
principle of national sovereignty over  genetic  resources and  restrict  access  to  them. 
Some regional inter-governmental organizations have framed model laws to guide their 
member countries in implementing the  CBD provisions. Since many  of the regional 
model law provisions find a place in the national legulations, these are here dwussed 
first, followed by discussion of the national legislations. The purpose of a survey of these 
legislations as  outlined in the following paragraphs is  to look at the issues relating to 
access to genetic resources in the current international scenario. 

A.  INTER-GOVERNMENTAL 

INITIATIVES 

1.  THE ANDEAN COMMUNITY 

Decision 391 of the Andean Community relates to the implementation of the CBD 
and is  entitled “Common Regime on Access to Genetic Resources”.69 The Decision 
asserts  the  sovereign rights  of the  Member  States over  their genetic resources, their 

65  Article 10.1 of the Treaty. 
66  See Article 10 of the Treaty. 
67  See  Article  12.3  of the  Treaty for  detailed  conditions.  The conditions  include:  (i)  access  is  provided 
expeditiously fiee of charge for the purpose of utilization, conservation or research, breeding and training for food 
and agriculture;  (ii) the recipient  shall not claim any IP right that  limits the facilitated access to  PGRFA or their 
genetic parts or components in the form received from the MLS; (ii) access to PCRFA protected by intellectual and 
other property rights shall be consistent with international agreements and with relevant national laws; (iv) access 
to PGRFA found in in siru conAtions wJ1 be provided according to national resources or, in the absence of national 
laws, in accordance with standards set by the governing body of the Treaty. 

68  See Aaicle 13.2.d(ii) of the Treaty. However, there are no obligations to share the benefits if the product 
is  available  without  restriction  to  others  for further  research and  breeding,  in  which  case  the  recipient  who 
commerciahzes the product shall only be encouraged to make such payment. 
is available at: ~www.sice.oas.org/trade/JUNAC/decisiones/DEC391e.asp~ (accessed 6 September 2004). 

69  Passed in 1996, this regime was one of the first access regimes put into place under the CBD. The full text 

252 

THE  

by-products  and their intangible components. Access restrictions are put into place on 
both in sit# and ex sit# utilization. The detailed access procedures include presentation, 
ahttance, publication and approval of an application for access before the designated 
competent national authority.  In  order  to  have an access  contract with  a  competent 
national authority, an access contract has to be first entered into with the provider of the 
indgenous  component,  whether  the  indigenous  community  or  not.  Hence,  the 
communities' right over the genetic resources is asserted. 

2.  THE ASEAN FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT  ON ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL  AND  GENETIC 

RESOURCES 
This Framework Agreement sets out a set of guiding principles with  regard  to  the 
implementation  of  the  CBD to  ensure  that  Member  States  have  uniform  access 
regulations.70 It pledges to maintain the biological diversity  of the ASEAN  region and  to 
ensure fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of its genetic 
resources. Each Member State has to designate a competent national authority which shall 
be responsible for implementing the national legislation on access. Prior informed consent 
of the  Member State  is  necessary before  access can take  place.  The competent national 
authority shall establish legally bindmg procedures for the determination of prior informed 
consent  up  to  the  local  level,  which  should  provide  for  the  active  involvement  of 
indgenous peoples and local communities and respect their traditional and customary laws. 

3.  THE CENTRAL AMERICAN PROTOCOL 

The Central American Protocol on Access to Genetic and Biochemical Resources 
has  been  adopted  by  the  Member  States  of  the  Central  American  Commission  on 
Environment  and Development.71 The regime  provides for  access  control  and  prior 
written consent measures. The regime functions through contracts concluded between 
companies conducting research and the local communities. 

4.  THE MODEL LAW FOR THE PACIFIC 

The Secretariat of the Pacific Forum has developed a model law that provides for 
an  access  and  benefit-sharing  regime establishing protection  of trad~tional biological 
knowledge,  innovation  and  practi~es.7~ The  protection  of  traditional  knowledge 

70  The text of the Framework Agreement is available at: ~www.grain.org/brl/?docid=785&1awid=1261~. 
'1  See Carlos M. Correa, Protecting Traditional Knowledge: Lerronsjom National  Eqeriences, 2003, available at: 
crO.unctad.org/uade-env/testl /meetings/tk2/correa.draft.doc)  (accessed 6 September 2004), quoting Jorge Cabrera 
Medagha, The Central American Regional Protocol on Access to Genetic and Biochemical Resources, in Chnstophe Bellmann, 
Graham Dutfield and Ricardo Melhdez-Ortiz  (eds.), Trading in Knowkdge, Earthscan, London, 2003, pp. 246-247. 
The Protocol counmes are Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. 

' 2   Correa, ibid.  The Pacific  Island  Forum  represents Heads  of Government of  the  independent and  self- 
governing Pacific Island counties: Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, 
Papua New Guinea, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Australia 
and New Zealand. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

253 

extends to all knowledge in the public domain. The model law contemplates a regional 
agreement between the Member States on reciprocal recognition of the rights. 

5.  THE AFRICAN  UNION’S MODEL REGIME 

The AU Model Legislation for the Protection of Local Communities, Farmers and 
Breeders and for Regulation of Access to their Biological Resources73 declares that the 
Member States and their peoples exercise sovereign rights over their natural resources. 
The community rights over biodlversity are held as natural, inalienable and pre-existing 
rights.  The  legislation  applies  to  biological  resources  in  both  in  situ  and  ex  situ 
condtions, their derivatives and knowledge associated with  them,  as well as  to plant 
breeders.  Any  access  to  biological  resources,  knowledge  or  technologies  of  local 
communities is  subject to written  prior  informed consent of the  designated national 
authority  as  well as  of the  local communities. Community-based knowledge WIU  be 
identified by the local communities under their customary laws. 

6.  THE EU COMMUNICATION 

The  European  Union  has  adopted  a  Communication  on  access  and  benefit- 
sharing in accordance with the CBD and the Bonn Guidelines.’4  The Communication 
encourages EU companies and research institutions to use  standard agreements when 
seeking  access  to  genetic  resources.  These  agreements  should  set  out  terms  and 
conditions under which access is granted and how benefits of the use should be shared. 
AU users of genetic resources are also encouraged to develop their own code of conduct 
as  a  means  of  respecting  the  CBD. This  has  significant  relevance,  as  many  EU 
companies  use  such  exotic  plants  as  aloe  Vera,  ginseng, jojoba  oil  and  the  like, 
particularly in cosmetics. 

The  European  Commission  envisages  steps  to  raise  users’  awareness  of  their 
obligations under the CBD. These include creation of a European network to provide 
immediate  access  to  information  on  existing  laws  at  European,  international  and 
national levels on access and benefit-sharing.  The Communication  has  also  opened a 
debate on introduction into the EU law of a requirement for patent applicants to reveal 
the  source  of  genetic  materials.  The  Communication  also  stresses  the  need  for 
coordinated action within the international fora to arrive at a  consistent international 
regime governing access and benefit-sharing. 

6 September 2004). 

73  The full text of the Model Legislation is available at: cwww.grain.org/brl/oau-model-law-en.ch (accessed 
74  This section is based on the EU press release, Commission  Encourages International Solidarity  when Utilizing 
Exotic Plants, IP/04/21,  7 January 2004; available at: ceuropa.eu.int/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/ 
04/21 &format=HTML&aged=O&language=en&guiLanguage=en>  (accessed 5 September 2004). 

254 

THE  

B.  NATIONAL &GISLATZONS75 

1.  AUSTRALIA 

The  Environment  Protection  and  Biodiversity  Conservation  Act,  1999 
implements the  CBD in  Austraha.76  It  aims  at  promoting  conservation  of biological 
resources,  protecting  indigenous  ecologcal  knowledge  and  facilitating  access.  The 
access regime established under the Act is set out in the draft Environment  Protection 
and  Biodiversity  Conservation  Amendment  Regulations  2001.77  It  provides  that  a 
person will be able to access and use biological resources with a valid permit issued by 
the  competent  authority,  Environment  Austraha.  Recognizing  that  the  access 
restrictions have the potential to impede non-commercial basic research, there are less 
onerous restrictions on such applicants as distinct from commercial scientlfic research. 
Commercial researchers have to seek a permit fiom Environment  Australia  and enter 
into a benefit-sharing agreement with access providers. Scientific researchers also have 
to seek an access permit fiom Environment Australia with the evidence that they have: 
(i) obtained the permission of the access provider; (ii) undertaken to share the outcome 
of the research with the access provider; (iii) undertaken to offer a voucher specimen of 
each species collected to an appropriate taxonomic institution; and  (iv) undertaken to 
negotiate a commercial sharing agreement in the event of commercialization.78 

2.  BRAZIL 

Provisional Measure No. 2.186-16  of 2001,  “Regulating Access  to the  Genetic 
Heritage, Protection of and Access to Associated Tradtional Knowledge”, implements 
the  CBD provisions relating to  access to genetic resources and the  sharing of benefits 
from their  use  as  well  as  associated traditional knowledge.79 The legislation  imposes 
conditions for  access  to  the  genetic heritage and associated  traditional knowledge. It 
defines access to associated tradtional knowledge as the: 

“. . . acquisition of information pertaining to knowledge or individual or collective practices, 
associated with the genetic heritage, of an indigenous or local community for purposes of 
scientific research, technological development or biological prospecting, with a view to its 
application in industry or elsewhere.”*O 

75  The information presented here has been gathered from existing literature and &om various Websites. Many 
authors have discussed the biodiversity legislation of Bangladesh and Pakistan. However, the idormation available 
on  the  Internet  shows that the proposed legislations have not been  enacted yet, so they  are not  discussed here. 
Similarly, Thailand’s legislation is also left out, as it deals with plant variety protection  rather than with the CBD. 
76  The details of the Act and the links to it are available at: www.deh.gov.au/epbc/about/index.html).  See 
also Brad Sherman, Regulating Access and Use of Genetic Resources: Intellectual R o p y  Law and Biodisrovery, EIPR, Issue 7 ,  
2003, p. 301, at note 9, on p. 302. 

77  Sherman, ibid. The draft Regulations are available at: www.deh.gov.au/epbc/about/amendments/pubs/ 

draftbiologicalreg.pdf, (accessed 26 April 2005). The access regime f d s  under Section 301 ofthe 1999 Environment 
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act. 

78  Ibid. 
79  The full text  of the  Provisional Measure  (in an  unofficial English-language translation) is  available at: 
so  WIPO, Comparative Summary of Existing National sui generis Measures  and Lawsfor the Protection of Traditional 

~www.grain.org/brl/brazil-tk-2OOl-en.cfm) (accessed 26 April 2005). 

Knowledge, WlPO Doc. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/INF/4. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

255 

The  Measure  provides,  in  its  Article  11(1v)(b), that  a  designated  Council  can 
deliberate on “authorization of access to associated [traditional knowledge], subject to 
the  prior  consent  of  the  owner”.  A  special  authorization  of  access  to  associated 
traditional knowledge for national research institutions and for a national university, for 
research and development activities in biological and related fields, has been provided 
in the legislation. 

3.  BOLIVIA 

Supreme Decree No.  24676 of Bolivia implements Decision 391 of the Andean 
Community relating to implementation of the C B D . ~ ~  
It establishes an obligation to sign 
a  contract  of access  between  the  applicant and the  Bolivian State to  acquire genetic 
resources, and  that contract determines the rights and obligations. Such a  contract is 
stipulated  to  include  participation  of  a  “National  Institution  of  Support”  in  any 
investigation or research carried out by the applicant and the just and equitable sharing 
of any economic, technological or other benefits that derive from access to the genetic 
resources with the Bolivian State. The decision for permitting access by  a national or 
foreign entity is taken by a designated authority. 

4.  COSTARICA 

The Biodiversity Law  of  Costa  Rica,  adopted  in  1998,82 implements  the  CBD 
provisions.  The  law  regulates  access  to  biochemical  and  genetic  components  of 
biodwersity, in  in  situ  or ex  ritu  condtions, and  the  associated  traditional knowledge 
when  such  access  has  the  aim  of  research,  bio-prospecting  or  commercial  use.  It 
provides that the  State d authorize the  exploration, bio-prospecting  for and use  of 
components of biological diversity. The law expressly provides that its provisions do not 
affect the autonomy of universities in the matter of teaching and research in the field of 
biodwersity, except in cases where the research has commercial purposes. Accordingly, 
public  universities  are  required  to  put  into  place  internal  regulations  applicable 
exclusively to academic activity and research for non-profit purposes. 

5. 

INDIA 

The Biodiversity Act of 2002 implements the provisions of the cBD.83 It regulates 
access to biolopcal resources and associated knowledge. It also prohibits the transmittal 
of results of research relating to any biological resource occurring in or obtained from 
Indla to any foreign person or entity. However,  such ban  on transmittal of research 
results  does  not  affect  collaborative  research  projects  between  In&an  and  foreign 

81  The Decree is available at: www.lclark.edu/org/ielp/boliviaeng.htmb  (accessed 6 September 2004). 
82 The Biodiversity Law is available at: ceelink.net/-asilwildlife/costa.pdf, (accessed 25 November 2004). 
a The Act is available at:  ~www.grain.org/brl/india-biodiversityact~ (accessed 6 September 2004). 

256 

THE  

institutions, provided such projects are approved by the Government. Any person who 
applies for an IP right on any invention based on any research or information based on 
a  biological  resource  obtained  from  India  has  to  obtain  the  prior  approval  of  the 
National Biodiversity Authority. Indian citizens and corporations have to intimate the 
State  Biodwersity  Board  when  obtaining  any  biological  resource  for  commercial 
utilization or bio-survey; however, the local people and communities are exempt from 
t h s  condition. 

6.  PERU 

Decision  391  of  the  Andean  Community  on  implementation  of  the  CBD has 
become  the  law  governing access  to  biohversity  in  Peru  since  1997.84 Hence,  the 
provisions of the Andean Community Directive described in Section II.A.I  of this article 
are applicable. In addtion, Peru has a law governing “Protection Regime for Collective 
Knowledge  of  Indigenous  Peoples  Derived  from  Biological  Resources”85  which 
establishes a protection regime for the collective knowledge of indigenous peoples that 
is  connected  with  biological  resources.  Those  interested  in  having  access  to  such 
collective knowledge for the purpose of scientific, commercial or industrial application 
have to apply for prior informed consent. The information so supplied shall be confined 
to the biological material to whch the collective knowledge pertains. The law stipulates 
completion  of  a  written,  signed  licensing  agreement  which  ensures  equitable 
distribution of benefits. 

7.  THE PHILIPPINES 

Executive  Order  247  implements  the  CBD provisions  in  the  Philippines  and 
prescribes  guidelines for  establishing  a  regulatory  framework for  the  prospecting  of 
biological  and  genetic resources, their  by-products  and  derivatives for  scientific and 
commercial  purposes.86  Prospecting  of  biological  resources  within  the  inhgenous 
communities shall only be with the prior informed consent of the community, obtained 
as per their customary laws. In other cases, the access is restricted by the prior informed 
consent of the local communities. 

8.  PORTUGAL 

Portuguese Decree-Law  No.  118/2002, published in the Journal of the Republic 
on 20 April 2002, establishes the legal regime for registration, conservation, legal custody 
and transfer ofplant endogenous material with an actual or potential value for agriculture, 

84  Biological Diversity in Peru, National Report by Peru to the CBD, p. 142; available at: www.biodiv.org/doc/ 

world/pe/pe-nr-01-empdf,  ( accessed 6 September 2004). 

85  Available at: ~www.grain.org/brl/peru-tk-2002-en.cfin,  (accessed 6 September 2004). 
86  The Executive order is available at: cwww.chmbio.org.ph/eo247.html) (accessed 26 April 2005). 

REGULATING ACCESS T O  PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

257 

agro-forestry  and  landscape-related  activities, including local varieties and  knowledge 
associated thereto.*’ The Decree provides that the tradtional knowledge associated with 
local varieties shall be protected against reproduction and industrial use, provided that it 
is identified, described and registered in the Registry of Plant Genetic Resources.** 

111.  SOME CONSEQUENCES: LACK OF ACCESS AND  STIFLING OF RESEARCH 

The  national  legislations which  have  been  put  into  place  restricting  access  to 
biological resources have had some unintended  consequences. In the short time these 
legislations have been in  existence, scientists have reported that the access  regulations 
create impediments for genuine scientific inquiry. 

In Brazil,  scientists complained  that  they  needed  more  fi-eedom to  collect  and 
analyse  biological  material  for  research  purposes.  The  Brazilian  Society  for  the 
Advancement of Science (SBPC) passed  a resolution in July 2003 stating that the laws 
intended to stop wildlife trafficking and illegal export of genetic material were stifling 
research  on  Brazilian  biodiversity.89  Scientists  argued  that  the  existing  regulations 
hindered their abdity to conduct research with animals, plants and microorganisms. The 
resolution called for the  Government  to grant “permanent licences” to  scientists and 
students to  allow them to  investigate biodiversity. There  were  also  suggestions for a 
two-tier system of biopiracy controls allowing greater freedom to scientists and putting 
restrictions on commercial projects.90 

Following such  complaints, the  Brazilian  government  eased  the  restrictions on 
scientific researchers by exempting them from tough condtions imposed on collecting 
genetic  materials.91  Stating  that  advancement  of  knowledge  and  scientific research 
supporting  the  conservation  and  the  sustainable  use  of  national  biodwersity  are  of 
strategic interest to the country, the new rules stipulate that such research should not be 
used for commercial purposes. Under the new law, biodiversity research projects carried 
out  by  scientists linked to Brazilian universities and  research  centres do  not  require 
approval by  a competent authority. The regulation defines three types of biodiversity 
studies: scientific research; bio-prospecting;  and technological development. The first 
category is exempt from authorization. While the restrictions on the second category 
are reduced, the third category requires specific authorization and signing of a contract. 
There  have  been  reports that  researchers studying inhgenous  plant  varieties  in 
Mexico  have been  forced  to  stop their  work  in  southern Mexico, despite efforts to 

appendix to McManis, supra, footnote 28. 

87  See Article 1 of the Decree, entitled  “Object”. A translation of the Decree into Enghsh is available as an 
88  See Article 3 of the Decree. 
89  Luisia  Massarani,  Brazil’s  Biopirucy  Laws  are  StiJing  Research,  SciDev.net, 21  July  2003;  available  at: 
90  Ibid., quoting Regina Markus, General-Secretary of SBPc and a researcher at SaB Paulo University. 
91  Wagner de  Oliveira, Brazil Eases  Restn’ctions  on  Biodiversity  Researchers,  SciDev.Net,l2  November 2003; 
available  at:  ~www.scidev.net/News/index.cfm!fuseaction~readNews&ite~d~lO99&lan~age~l~ 
(accessed 
28 April 2005). 

~www.scidev.net/News/index.cfm?fuseaction~readnews8iitemid~92O&lan~age~ 

1) (accessed 10 Apnl2004). 

258 

THE  

involve the  indigenous community  in  understanding the  scientific and  conservation 
goals of the research.92 In Venezuela, the collection of biological materials by inchidual 
researchers and scientific institutions is subject to the same procedures of authorization 
as those made by entities with commercial purposes. This is reported to have created the 
risk of impeding or discouraging academic research.93 

Similarly, in the Philippines, where prior informed consent is required for access to 
all types of natural resources under the  1997 Indigenous Peoples Rights Act, scientists 
have  complained  about  the  delays  and  expenditures  involved  in  seelung  the  prior 
informed consent.94 Such expenditures are not covered under their research grants. In 
developing countries, where  research  grants are limited, this  is  a  serious concern for 
scientists. Moreover, the access restrictions are seen as cumbersome and prone to abuse, 
thus discouraging researchers.95 As  a consequence of this legislation, it is  apprehended 
that  an  academic  research  project  could  effectively  be  held  hostage  by  local 
communities, and  this is  specially  so  in  the  Philippines where  single-interest  groups 
object to any form of bio-prospecting for ideological or political reasons.96 

Also, there  appears to be  a  faulty appreciation of the  value  of genetic resources 
among some  biodiverse  countries and  groups  to  the  extent  that  some  call  it  “bio- 
paranoia”-a 
belief that  scientists and  researchers want  to  steal genetic  resources  to 
create  drugs  and  other  valuable  products  without  sharing  benefits.97  Some 
commentators  point  to  the  erroneous  but  established  dogma  that  pharmaceutical 
companies pay huge amounts of money to access biodiversity and that by holding back 
the permission, access fees can be increased.98 This is not the reality, as bio-prosecting 
is a hgh-cost,  high-risk venture with no guarantee of financial returns. 

Pharmaceutical  companies  who  had  sought  access  to  genetic  resources  in 
accordance with  the  Treaty provisions, by  entering into  benefit-sharing  agreements 
with governments and local communities in Central and South America, have not had 
favourable results.99 In 1991, Merck negotiated a benefit-sharing agreement with Costa 
Rica’s  National  Institute  of Biodiversity,  giving US$  1 million  to  the  Institute  and 
offering a share of revenues derived from Costa &can  plants and insects. Merck ended 
the agreement in 1999 having failed to produce  a single commercially viable drug.100 

en  Venezuela, CENDES, Caracas, Venezuela, 2000. 

available  at:  ~www.scidev.net/Featres/index.c~?~seaction~readFea~res&ite~d~l43&lan~age=l~ 
26 April 2005); citing Nature, No. 414, 2001, p. 685 as the source. 

92  Rex  Dalton,  Bioprospecting  Charges  Take  their  Toll  on  Mexican  Research,  SciDev.Net, 22 January  2003, 
(accessed 
93  See Cornea, supra, footnote 71, quoting Maria Elisa Febres, La Regulaci6n  del Acceso a los Recursos GenCticos 
94  See Cornea, ibid. 
95  Ibid. 
96  Ibid. 
97 Ted Agres,  When  Sharing Means  Lessfor  All: New Rules  on  Biodiversity  Prompt  Fnrstration with the  Treaty, 
The Scientist, Vol.  17, Issue 20,ZO October 2003, p. 48, quoting Douglas Daly, Curator ofAmazonian Botany at 
the New York Botanical Garden; available at: ~www.the-scientist.com/yr2003/oct/prof4~031020.htd~ 
(accessed 
6 May 2004). 
y8  E.A. Evans-Illidge  and P.T. Murphy, A New Approach in Benefit Sharing and  Bio-Prospecting; available at the 
y9  Agres, supra, footnote 97. 

CBD Website, at: www.biodiv.org/doc/case-studies/abs/cs-abs-au.pd6  (accessed 28 April 2005). 

Ibid. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

259 

A  similar  agreement  to  commercialize resources  of  the  Amazon  was  executed  by 
Novartis Pharma with Bioamazonia, a Brazilian government undertaking, involving an 
upfront payment of US$ 4 million and a  1 per cent royalty on sales.101 Although any 
resulting patents would have been owned by Brazil, local environmentalists criticized 
the agreement as a form of biopiracy and it was hssolved. 

A survey of access agreements made under the access control provisions of the CBD 
implementing legislations in Andean Group nations shows that the results are meager.102 
Venezuela  has  signed  twenty  applications  and  five  contracts,  all  from  individual 
researchers; Bolivia has  signed three applications and one contract; whde Colombia is 
yet  to  approve  a  single  contract.  Most  of  these  applications were  from  individual 
researchers from Andean Group nations and not from outside companies.*03 

Another instance of populist protest stifling agricultural research has been reported 
from India.  Indira Gandhi Krishi Viswavidyalaya (IGKV) is  an agricultural university 
based  in  Central  India  which  has  one  of  the  world's  largest  collections  of  rice 
germplasm, comprising a collection of over 22,972 varieties. This collection was made 
from the farmers with a reported promise of return of improved varieties. However, the 
project, initiated in 1971, stopped with the collection of the rice germplasm, with no 
research taking place on the collection.104 

IGKV  and  the  Swiss  multinational  Syngenta  signed  a  memorandum  of 
understanding (MoU) to conduct combined research and develop hybrid and drought- 
resistant varieties using the country's  largest and the world's  second-biggest collection 
of rice germplasm. New varieties were to be developed under collaborative research and 
marketed by Syngenta after paying a fixed royalty to the IGKV. However, some IGKV 
scientists objected to the draft MoU, which they felt was detrimental to the university. 
Local community activists started a stir against the project, and it has now been dropped. 
Furthermore, there is no promise of any serious research on this collection of rare rice 
germplasm in the near future.105 

According  to  the  well-known  farm  scientist,  Dr.  M.S.  Swaminathan,  the 
Syngenta-IGKV  controversy has  come about because of the failure to put into place a 
structure for the implementation of the C B D . ~ ~ ~  
Distinguishing research for public good 

by Agres, ibid. 

101  Ibid. 
Io2  The survey was conducted by Carlos Cornea, a law professor at the University of Buenos Aires, as quoted 
103  Ibid. 

Asha  Krishnakumar, Rice  and  Rights, Frontline, Vol.  21, Issue  11, 22 M a y 4  June  2004; available at: 
cwww.flonnet.com/fl2111/stories/20040604001808700.hhn, (accessed  6 July 2004). IGKV is  located  in Raipur 
in Central India, in the  Chattisgarh area, whch is  the origin  of the  Indica  variety of rice.  Some 19,000 of the 
22,972 varieties  in  the  collection  are  local  to  Chattisgarh.  This collection  was  made  by  a  scientist  of  IGKV, 
Dr. R.H. Richaria, reportedly on the promise of return of improved varieties. However, the collection remained 
in the possession  of the University without any further research, as  Dr. Richaria moved out of office before he 
could make good on his promise. 

'05  Asha Krishnakumar, A Deal Blocked, Frontline, Vol. 20, Issue 2, 31 January 2003. 
106  Ibid.  The  report  suggested  that  the  Syngenta-IGKV  controversy  brings  out  the  urgent  need  for  an 
appropriate regulatory mechanism and clear procedures for public awareness. Ths controversy points to the need 
for more transparency in matters relating to research collaboration and the need to involve local communities in 
the decision making. 

260 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

and  research  for  commercial  gain,  Dr.  Swaminathan suggested  that  in  the  case  of 
research partnerships for  commercial gain, the  benefit-sharing  norms, the  conditions 
and rules  of use  of genetic material, etc., should be clearly laid down under the CBD. 
However,  it may  be  noted  that  this  controversy involved rice  germplasm which has 
been identified for “facilitated access” under the FAO Treaty, though the Treaty &d not 
come into force until June 2004. 

Scientists have also complained about the negative impact of the access restrictions 
on agricultural research,107 saying that they are finding it harder to collect materials for 
some  centres  included  in  the  Consultative  Group  on  International  Agricultural 
Research ( C G I A R ) . ~ ~ ~  
The collection of samples has dropped from 30,000 per year to 
fewer  than  5,  000 per  year  as  a result  of the  CBD.lo9 The CGIAR holds  one  of the 
world’s largest ex  situ collections of PGRS~~O 
under  the auspices of the FAO “in trust” 
for  humanity.  The  CGIAR makes  available  the  germplasm  within  the  collection 
without restriction to researchers around the world. Even such organizations as CGIAR 
are facing difficulties in collecting plant germplasm as  countries routinely deny access 
to  plant-collecting  missions  organized  to  rescue  unique  species  from  the  threat  of 
extinction.ll* Efforts to  collect and conserve wild relatives of peanuts in Bolivia and 
papaya in Colombia have reportedly been turned back. 

From the legislations that have been put into place, there appears to be emerging a 
situation where  researchers  are  being  denied  access  to  genetic material  for  research 
purposes. This, in fact, is contrary to the objectives of the CBD, which include access to 
genetic resources.112  It  also recognizes the  importance of biodiversity in  meeting the 
world’s growing food, health and other needs. 

Many  agricultural  scientists had  warned  about  the  impediments  that  could  be 
created by access control regimes in the field of agriculture.113 The FAO realized that the 
special characteristics of PGRFA required provision of facilitated access and drew up the 
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture.114 

Access to genetic resources is as important to the health security of the world as to 
its food security. Four-fifths  of all drugs have their basis in natural plant resources, and 

107  Ted Agres, Biodiversity  Treaty Calied Disastrous: Sffenfists Complain that Restrictions  on Access Hinder Research, 
Undercut Development Goalr; available at: rwww.biomedcentral.com/news/20030910/03~ (accessed 6 September 2004). 
108  The CGIAR, established in  1971, is  an organization co-sponsored by the World Bank,  the  FAO and the 
United Nations Development Programme. It is set up as an informal association of fifty-seven private- and public- 
sector research organizations that  support  a  network  of sixteen international  agricultural research centres. The 
mission  of  CGIAR is  to  contribute through its research to  sustainable food  security in  developing  countries.  Its 
principal objective is to Contribute to the preservation ofbiodiversity by establishing ex situ collections of PGRS. For 
more information, see the CGIAR Website, at: nvww.cgiar.org>. 

109  According to Cary Fowler, Senior Adviser to the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, one of 

the consortium of sixteen agricultural research institutes of the CGIAR, as quoted by Agres, supra, footnote 107. 

11”  CGIAR has over 500,000 accessions of more than 3,000 crop, forage and ago-forestry species. 
‘ I 1   Cary Fowler, Sharing Agriculture’s  Genetic Bounty, Science, Vol. 297, Issue 5579, 12 July 2002, p.  157. 
112  See Article 1 of the CBD, entitled “Objectives”. 
and Crop Evolution, Vol. 51, 2004, p. 609, at p. 612. 

Cary Fowler, Accessing Genetic Resources: International  Law Establishes  Multilateral System, Genetic Resources 

‘ I 4   See supra, footnote 64. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

261 

hundreds  of important  drugs have been  developed  from plants found  in  developing 
c0untries.~~5 The issue of drug research is as important to developing countries as it is to 
transnational pharmaceutical companies. Research institutions located in the developing 
countries,  such  as  the  Council  of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research  of  India,  do 
extensive  research  and  patenting  of  processes  or  products  with  pharmaceutical 
properties  developed  from  genetic  resources.  Conmtions  burdening  access  by 
researchers  are  likely  to  contribute  to  the  scientific isolation  and  backwardness  of 
developing nations.116 

The  suspicions  about  bio-prospecting,  overarching access  control  regimes  and 
activist  non-governmental  organizations  have  created  a  situation  where  genuine 
scientific  research  is  stifled.  Though  the  implementing  legislations  do  not  impose 
restrictions which run  counter to the  objectives of the  CBD, in  essence, the practical 
result is that researchers do not have easy access to study biodiversity. Misunderstandmgs 
behind complex laws and regulations that are being enforced not only restrict foreigners 
from doing research on tropical biodversity but also the local researchers and scientists 
working  in  systematics,  ecology,  conservation  biology,  evolution  biology  and 
ethno-biology .I17 

Some say this has led to criminalization of biological research, with the result that 
fewer people are doing graduate work or research in these areas.118 This clearly is not 
the purpose of the CBD. On the contrary, it requires the Parties to the Convention to 
provide facilitated access to genetic resources for environmentally sound uses.119  Since 
a legal regime has brought on this unintended consequence, it is preferable that adequate 
corrective steps are taken to facditate the scientific research intended by the CBD itself. 

IV.  TOWARDS A  RESEARCH  EXCEPTION 

The IP laws which  grant property rights over intangible property do have some 
exceptions, particularly  to  facditate  genuine  scientific research.120  This  approach  is 
reflected in the Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects  of Intellectual Property Rights 
(the TRIPS Agreement).l2l Article 30 TRIPS deals with research exceptions. It authorizes 

115  Paul J. Heald,  The Rhetoric OfBiopiracy, Cardozo J. Int'l  & Comp. L., Vol. 11, Summer 2003, p. 519. 
116  Correa, supra, footnote 71, refemng to Jose Maria Ochave, The Anticommons  in Bioprospecting Regulation  .f 
Access  to  Genetic  and  Biological  Materials  in  the  Philippines,  World  Bulletin, January/December,  1999,  quoted  in 
C.  Heath  and  S .   Weidhch,  Intellectual  Property:  Suitable for  Protecting  Traditional  Medicine,  Intellectual  Property 
Quarterly, No. 1, 2003. 

cidbiotech/comments/commentsl22.htm, (accessed 11 April 2004). 

117  Arturo G6mez-Pornpa, Tropical Biodiversity Research: A n  Endangered Activity! avadable at: m.cid.harvard.edu/ 
118  According to Douglas Daly, as quoted by Agres, supra, footnote 97. 
119  See Article 15 CBD. 
120  National laws may differ on ths matter.  For example, in the United  States, up until the Decision of the 
Federal Circuit Court in M a d q  v. Duke  University (307 F.3d  1351 (Fed. Cir. 2002)), it was presumed that a research 
exception is  available for academic research. However,  after the  Madey Decision,  this  position  appears  to  have 
changed. A number of articles have appeared in leading research journals after this Decision advocating the need 
for a research exemption, however. 

the  TRIPS Agreement 

is  available  at:  cwww.wto.org/en&sh/docs-e/legal-e/ 

121  The  Text  of 

legal-e.htm#TRIPs)  (accessed 28 April 2005). 

262 

THE  

provision of exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided that such 
exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of the patent and 
do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner. In addtion, 
Article 31 TRIPS provides for compulsory licensing of a patent if the conditions set forth 
therein are met. 

This approach is more pronounced in copyright law, which deals with access to 
information  and  cultural  products  required  by  the  public  at  large.  The  “fair  use” 
principle in copyright law is the result of the balance struck between the interests of the 
author and the interest of the public in gaining access to the work. This principle is one 
of the cornerstones of all copyright laws. Article 13 TRIPS deals with exceptions to the 
rights conferred under copyright laws which are to be limited to certain special cases 
which do not conflict with normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably 
prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder. In addtion, there are compulsory 
licensing mechanisms that are provided in the copyright statutes which ensure that the 
public at large is not deprived of access to a copyrighted work which forms a part of the 
cultural heritage of humanity. 

Such a research exception exists in the International Convention for the Protection 
of New Varieties of Plants (the UPOV Convention),lZ2 in the field of PGRs.  Though its 
Article  14 grants  exclusive rights  to  plant  breeders, the  following Article  15 grants 
exceptions to the breeder’s right for: 

i)  acts done privately and for non-commercial purposes; 
ii)  acts done for experimental purposes; and 
iii)  breeding of other varieties. 
The exceptions to  the exclusive rights are provided under the  IP laws  with the 
purpose of facilitating research and promoting knowledge for the benefit of humanity. 

We are at a critical time, when we are losing biodiversity at a rapid pace but also 
when the advances in technology have facilitated faster analysis of genetic materials. It 
would be in the interests of the onward progress of science to work  out appropriate 
mechanisms whch would ensure access to genetic resources and associated tradtional 
knowledge for researchers. At the same time, the owners of the genetic resources and 
the associated knowledge must be  compensated as  provided in the framework of the 
CBD. However, the commercial potential of the knowledge should not act as a barrier 
for carrying out research in a vital area where humanity may benefit in terms of health 
and food security. Overall, we need to amve at a delicate balance between the interests 
of research and the need to provide compensation. 

‘z2  The text of the Convention is available at: cwww.upov.int/en/publications/conventions/l99l/content.h~~. 
Known by the acronym UPOV, from the French title, Union Internationale pour la  Protection des  Obtentions Vigltales, 
the Convention was originally adopted on 2 December 1961 and was last modified in Geneva, Switzerland in 1991. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES 

263 

Sharing of the benefits of commercialization with traditional communities that are 
preservers of biodiversity will be possible only if upstream scientific research leads to 
downstream commercialization. For  the  purpose  of arriving at  a  workable  benefit- 
sharing regime, we may  categorize PGR research into two  types:  upstream research 
which  focuses  on  scientific  discovery  of  the  genetic  material  or  the  associated 
traditional knowledge; and  downstream research which  focuses on the  commercial 
exploitation  of  the  knowledge  gained  fiom  such  scientific  enquiry.  Due  to  the 
commercial exploitation potential of the downstream uses and the economic interest 
involved for the community and the State, the downstream uses should be subject to 
rigorous  formalities of  prior  informed  consent  for  the  access  and  benefit-sharing 
mechanisms. 

This  can  be  dustrated  in  the  case  of  pharmaceuticals. Drug  research  can  be 
categorized into  two  types: drug lead  research; and  drug production  research.  The 
ultimate objective of drug lead research is undoubtedly commercial, but the majority 
of the research produces science without immediate commercial potential.123 Hence, 
the drug discovery process, defined as the production of drug leads, may be considered 
non-commercial upstream  research. The primary  objective of drug  discovery is  to 
discover leads to compounds which may become drugs through drug development, the 
reason  for  the  interest in  bio-prospecting.  However,  less  than  0.1  per  cent  of the 
original samples studed for drug development enter the drug development phase, a 
process which itself has a high attrition rate.124 The drug development undertaken by 
the industry on these leads which is aimed at taking the product to the market, on the 
other hand, should be regarded as commercial research (downstream research), where 
the strict norms of benefit-sharing must apply.’25 The drug leads are mostly patented 
products  before  entering  the  commercial  stage  and,  hence,  the  transition  to 
commercial product is well defined. 

As far as upstream uses of genetic material which deal with pure scientific research 
are concerned, there could be put into place adequate mechanisms to facilitate access for 
scientific inquiry. To facihtate easy access by scientists, it is worthwhile to build into the 
CBD exceptions permitting such uses.  There  are  two  models possible, based  on the 
existing IP principles: 

i) 

a “fair use” provision within the framework of the CBD; or 
a compulsory licensing mechanism within the framework of the CBD. 

ii) 
A third model based on the FAO Treaty is also discussed here. 

123  Evans-Illidge and Murphy, supra, footnote 98, at p. 10. 
124  Ibid., at p. 8. 
125  The transformation of a natural product into a clinically useful drug will cost upwards of USf350 million, 

and the cost and risk d be borne by the industry; ibid., at p. 10. 

264 

THE  

Tradtionally, within the IP system, the fair use concept is limited to copyright law 
and, to a limited extent, to trademark laws. Fair use does not grant any rights to the user 
over the  work.  It  is  only  a  defense  against  inhngement, and  the  rights retain their 
character in the hands of the right holder. The permitted uses under the fair use doctrine 
are also limited in character. Internationally, such fair use exceptions are provided only 
in special  cases  which  do not  affect  the  normal exploitation of the work  and do  not 
adversely affect the interests of the right holder.126 

As the CBD has granted property rights over PGRS, a fair use provision may be built 
in to allow researchers to study the biological knowledge base.127 Such fair use should 
strictly be limited to upstream research. Conditions could be laid out to determine who 
are permitted to carry out the research and who should have ownership over it. 

An  example of t h s  approach may be seen in the Biodiversity Law of Costa k c a ,  
under  which  national  universities have been  gwen  permission to  carry  out  research 
upon  certain  con&tions.128  A  similar  approach  has  been  adopted  by  Brazil,  after 
complaints from scientists, by  granting blanket permission to certain national research 
institutions and universities to carry out biodwersity-related research.129 

Another approach is  that of the biodversity legislation of India, which  does not 
require researchers who are Indan nationals or national research institutions to get prior 
approval,130  though  there  are  restraints  on transferring the  results  of the  research  to 
foreign nationals.131 There are also restrictions on obtaining IP rights over the results of 
such research without the approval of the Biohversity Authority set up under the Act. 
In  the  United  States, Title  36  of the  Code of Federal  Regulations132 controls 
access to bio-resources in parks, forests and other public property. These Regulations 
prohibit  the  collection  of plants,  fish,  wildlife, rocks  or  minerals.  However,  there 
exists  an  exception  which  allows  a  specimen  collection  permit.  Such  permits  are 
issued to an official representative of a reputed scientific or educational institution or 
a government agency for the purpose of research, scientific study or museum display. 
One of the conditions of the permit  is that the specimens and data derived from the 
research will be made available to the public. The issue of such permits is almost like 
a fair use provision. 

‘26  See Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works and Article 13 

of the TRIPS Agreement. 

127  The term “fair use” is used in a broad sense here to indicate a set of exceptions provided in IP laws to enable 

non-right  holders to use a protected IP without payment of royalty or seeking permission. 

128  Supra, footnote 82. 

See Oliveira, supra, footnote 91. 

130  See Section 3 of the Indian Biodiversity Act, supra, footnote 83. 
13‘  Section 4 of the Act, ibid. 
132  36  C.F.R  92.5 deals with  Regulations  of the National  Park  Service of the Department of the  Interior 

relating  to  parks,  forests,  and  public  property.  The  Regulations  are  available  at:  www.lclark.edu/org/ielp/ 
usageneticregs.html) (accessed 21 September 2004). 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

265 

The  national  experiences  show  that  it  is  possible  to  implement  within  the 
biodiversity legislation a provision to allow educational and research institutions to carry 
out legitimate research on biodiversity. In order to achieve uniformity, it is desirable to 
introduce such provisions internationally into the framework of the CBD, expandmg the 
exemption  to  all  genuine  research  efforts,  whether  carried  out  by  universities  or 
independent research institutions. 

Evans-Illidge  and  Murphy  of  the  Australian  Institute  of  Marine  Science  have 
suggested an alternate approach  of delaying the final negotiations  on benefit-sharing 
until the product reaches patent protection and the transition to commercial research.133 
At  the  point  of  initial  granting  of  access,  the  benefit-sharing  agreement would  be 
replaced by an agreement which commits the access seeker to negotiate benefit-sharing 
if the  research leads to  a  commercial product.  The benefit of this approach is  that as 
negotiations are carried out after investing considerable resources, the industry will have 
more incentive to conclude a deal and, as the value of the product can be assessed, the 
returns to the providers of genetic resources will be correspondmgly high. If the initial 
access restrictions are removed, greater biodiversity will be available for drug screening 
and more potential income-earning drugs may emerge. 

The working of this concept would require a fair use  type of mechanism within 
the  law  to  enable  non-commercial  research.  The  law  may  have  to  stipulate  the 
conmtions upon  which  transition to  commercial research  takes  place.  This approach 
reiterates the benefit of segregating the research into downstreain and upstream types. 

B.  FAIR U S E  SAFEGUARDS 

While providmg a  fair  use  type of exception, certain safeguards may  have to be 
built in to protect the interests of the owners of the genetic resource. It should be made 
mandatory that benefits should be shared with the holders of knowledge and genetic 
resources on any patent or technology or industrially applicable un&sclosed information 
that may arise from such research. 

An  area  of  concern  is  ensuring  that  the  holders  of  the  genetic  resource  and 
trahtional  knowledge get to  share the  benefits upon  commercialization. At  present, 
there are no international regulations which require the owners of the genetic resource 
or  the  associated  knowledge  to  be  mentioned  in  the  patent  application.  Various 
approaches  are  being  dscussed  in  international  fora.  One proposal  is  to  make  the 
disclosure of the source of the genetic resource mandatory in the patent application.*34 
The European Union has suggested includmg the owners of the genetic resource in the 

n3 Evans-Midge and Murphy, supra, footnote 98. 
134 See, Nuno Pires de Carvalho, From the Shaman's Hut to the Patent  Ofice: A Road under Construction: available 
at: d a w . w u s t l . e d u / c e n t e r i s / C o n f p a p e r s / P D F W r . d o c ) ,   p. 27. Also see generally Graeme B. Dinwoodie, 
Towards  an  International  Framework for  Protection  of  TK;  available  at:  crO.unctad.org/trade-env/testl/meetings/ 
tk2/UCNTAD%20Paper(O129).pdf,. 

266 

THE  

patent  application.135  If the  obligations of Articles  S(j) and  15 of the  CBD are to be 
balanced with  a h r  use  exception under  that  Convention, increasing the burden  of 
disclosure in  patent  applications will  have  to  be  done  to  ascertain  with  reasonable 
certainty  that  any  given  invention  has  been  made  possible  by  accessing  a  genetic 
resource and/or the associated knowledge. This proposal would protect the interests of 
the owners of genetic resources as well as promote scientific research. 

Another  key  issue  to  be  determined may  pertain to  publication of the  research 
results. In most  countries, such publication wdl affect  the  novelty component  of the 
patent law. The result is that such publication may deprive the local communities who 
are  the  holders  of  the  knowledge  of  the  financial  benefits  arising  out  of 
commercialization of the research results through patenting. The first impulse wdl be to 
prevent  all  patent-defeating  publications.  Keeping  the  research  results  from  being 
published may conflict with the nature of academic research, which is carried out in the 
first instance for advancement and dissemination of knowledge. An  appropriate balance 
has  to  be  worked  out  to  resolve  this  issue.  None  of  the  existing legislations have 
addressed this issue. 

c.  COMPULSORY LICENCES WITHiN THE C B D  

Another alternative that could be drawn fiom IP law is the provision of compulsory 
licensing.  In  most  countries,  both  the  patent  law  and  the  copyright  law  contain 
provisions for compulsory licensing.136 Such compulsory licensing is  resorted to when 
there  is  an  overwhelming public  interest involved. Article 31  TRIPS epitomizes this 
principle. It lays down the condtions under which the use of a patent can be authorized 
without the authorization of the right holder. The exclusivity granted to the IP holder 
is  diluted  by  grant  of  non-exclusive  licences  based  on  public  interest.  In  all  such 
compulsory licensing provisions, the grant of compulsory licence is decided by a judicial 
or a quasi-judicial body after determining the public interest involved. 

Grant of compulsory licences by a statutory authority will enable identification of 
the intended researcher so that issues of access regulations and prior informed consent 
matters can be resolved. One way in which this can be made operational is to authorize 
the national biodiversity authorities set up by the States under the Bonn Guidelines to 
issue compulsory licences upon receipt of an application fiom the intended researcher. 
The concerned authority may impose such conditions as it deems fit, after hearing the 
representatives of the community and the researcher. 

135  See supra, footnote 74 and accompanying text. 
136  The U.S. Patent Law does not have a compulsory licensing provision, but the US. Copyright Law contains 
such provisions at 17 U.S.C.§§lll(d), 115, 116 and 119@). However, 9308 ofthe U.S. Clean Air Act  (42 U.S.C. 
s1857f-1)  provides for compulsory licensing under certain conditions. For a &scussion on this, see, McManis, supra, 
footnote 55, at p. 265. Also, within the U S .  patent system, the common-law  COUN  do not grant an injunction on 
the use of a patented product or process if there is significant public interest involved in such use; see, for example, 
Continental Paper Bag  C o .  u. Eastern Paper Bag  Co., 210 U.S. 405 (1908). 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

267 

A  variation  on  this  approach  is  seen  in  the  Australian  legislation.  The  draft 
Environment  Protection  and  Biodiversity  Conservation  Amendment  Regulations 
enable non-commercial  researchers to have access by seelung permission of a national 
body,  Environment  Australia.137  The  law  stipulates  conditions  to  be  met  by  the 
researchers to quali6 for this. They need to get the permission of the access provider, 
to provide the access provider with an undertaking to share the results or to publish the 
results  of  the  research,  to  offer  a  voucher  specimen  to  an  appropriate  taxonomic 
institution and to share the benefits with the provider in case of commercialization.138 
This approach probably takes care of many issues relating to sharing benefits arising 
out  of scientific research,  includmg the  patent-defeating publication  issue.  However, 
considering  the  fact  that  some  holders  of  traditional  knowledge  may  not  want  to 
commercialize any resulting product, the compulsory licensing will have to be limited to 
conducting upstream scientific research. Appropriate conmtions will have to be laid on 
the compulsory licensees with the consent of the holders. This is a precaution that needs 
be built into any regime if such an approach is adopted at a national or international level. 
Though it cannot strictly be termed a compulsory licence, a variation of this approach 
may be seen in the FAO Treaty, where it deals with PGRFA found in in situ conditions. In 
the absence of national legislation, access to such resources will be provided in accordance 
with the standards set by the governing body of the Treaty.'39  So there already exists a 
parallel approach in an existing treaty that expresses a clear understandmg on the modahties 
of provimng access to PGRS, though in the context of ensuring food security. 

D.  A  THIRD ALTERNATIVE 

The FAO'S International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 
was drawn up to overcome the problems caused by access restrictions of the CBD. Though 
the scope of the FAO Treaty is limited to plant genetic materials for food and agriculture,"+O 
it provides an alternative example for benefit-sharing  for PGRS in  general. In order to 
fachtate  access  to  PGRFA and  to  ensure  fair  sharing  of  benefits  arising  out  of  their 
uthzation, the Treaty established the MLS. The list of plant varieties that form a part of the 
MLS was negotiated and is listed in Annex 1 of the Treaty. 

The Treaty obligates a recipient who commerciahzes a product using the material 
accessed  fiom 
the  MLS  to  share  equitably  the  benefits  arising  fiom  such 
commercialnation with the M L S . ' ~ ~  To receive and utihze the financial resources arising 

licence; otherwise it would have been categorized as a fair use provision. 

I37  See supra, footnotes 76-78  and accompanying text. 
'38  Since there is an obligation to pay royalties, this provision in the legislation is  classified under compulsory 
139  Article 1 2 . 3 0  of the FAO Treaty; see supra, footnote 64. 
140  Ibid., Article 3. 
141  Ibid., Article  13.2(d). Such benefit-sharing is not mandatory where the product that is commerciahzed is 
available without restriction to others for further research and breeding: Article 13.2(d)(ii). Scholars believe that this 
means that only plant patents which do not have experimental use  exceptions, such as those in the United States 
and Japan, will be hit by this provision. On the other hand, incorporation into a new variety protected by plant 
breeders'  right  will not  be  aEected, as  such vanehes are available for further research and for further breeding 
programs. See Fowler, supra, footnote 113. 

268 

THE  

out of such benefit-sharing, the Treaty proposes to  create an  appropriate mechanism, 
such as a Trust Account.142 The benefits accrued to the Trust Account shall be applied 
to  conservation and  sustainable use  of  PGRFA in  national  and  regional  programs  in 
developing countries, countries with  economies in  transition, especially  in  centres of 
diversity, and least developed countries. Thus,  an international financial mechanism is 
created for benefit-sharing  and its uthzation  of PGRFA. 

The genetic resources of crops that are not included in the MLS shall continue to 
be  accessed  as  before  under  the  framework of  the  CBD. In  the  context  of PGRS in 
general, scholars have suggested another global mechanism. For example, Drahos has 
suggested  setting up  a  Global Bio-Collecting  Society  (GBs).143 Talung  a  cue  from 
collecting societies in the area of copyright, Drahos advocates setting up such a GBS as 
a private organization where both industry and trahtional groups are members.144 The 
GBS would provide the following services: 

- 
- 
- 

- 

act as repository for community registers of trahtional knowledge; 
provide assistance to contractual negotiations; 

provide monitoring  assistance on the  use  of traditional knowledge and thus 
help enforcement; and 
provide  dispute settlement functions and  develop standards for biodiversity 
prospecting contracts.145 

Such a GBS is expected to provide industry with the fieedom of contract, low search 
and transaction costs, and certainty of use,  whde for the traditional groups it provides 
expertise in negotiation of licences and contract framing and absorbs monitoring costs. 
Moving beyond the suggestion of a GBS as a private body, Drahos has in a more recent 
article  suggested  that  key  organizations  such  as  the  World  Intellectual  Property 
Organization, the FAO and the CBD might be able to establish a GBS as a joint initiative.146 
It would probably be in the interests of all stakeholders if we could club the features 
of the MLS and those of the GBS. The FAO Treaty has opted for an MLS whch is now 

the more inclusive term traditional knowledge is used. 

Answer? European Intellectual Property Review, 2000, p. 245. 

142  See Article 19.3(f) of the FAO Treaty. 
143  Peter  Drahos,  Indigenow  Knowledge,  Intellectual  Property  and  Biopiracy: Is a  Global Bio-Collecting  Society  the 
144  Ibid., at p. 248. 
145  Ibid., at pp. 248-249.  Drahos uses the term indigenous knowledge in the above article, but in this article 
146  Peter  Drahos,  Towards an  International  Framework for  Protection  of TraditionaI  Group Knowledge  and  Prdce, 
discussion  paper  presented  at  the  UNCTAD-Commonwealth Secretariat Workshop,  “Elements  of  National  Sui 
Genetis  Systems for  the  Preservation,  Protection  and  Promotion  of  Traditional  Knowledge,  Innovations  and 
Practices and Options for an  International  Framework”, Geneva,  Switzerland, 4-6  February 2004; available at: 
cr0.unctad.org/trade_env/testl/meetings/tk2.htm~ (accessed 27 A p d  2005). At footnote 100, on page 37, referring 
to UNCTAU, Outcome ofthe Expert Meeting, Doc. T D / B / C O M . ~ / E M . ~ ~ / L . ~ ,  
9 November 2000, p. 5, Drahos states 
that  the  UNCTAD Expert Meeting on Systems and Natlonal  Experiences for Protecting Traditional Knowledge, 
Innovations and Practices observed that a “possible role for the Global Bio-Collecting  Society in monitoring access 
to TK could be explored”. Support for considering the idea was also expressed in Report ofthe International  Seminar 
on Systemsfor  the Protection and  Commercialization of Traditional Knowledge, New Delhi, 3-5  April 2002. 

REGULATING ACCESS TO PLANT  GENETIC RESOURCES 

269 

a working model. If an MLS is set up as a part of the CBD, which would carry out the 
hnctions of the GBS, many issues facing enforcement of the rights of the communities 
that are holders of traditional knowledge could be sorted out. As under the FAO Treaty, 
access and benefit-sharing can be made operational through an MTA.  Even the issue of 
patent-defeating  publication of research results may  be addressed by  the providers of 
access through the MTA. It would also help industry and researchers gain access to PGRS 
as well as enabling the tramtional groups to effectively monitor the use of their genetic 
resources and trahtional knowledge. Such a mechanism could also deal with the high 
cost of enforcement of the rights and monitoring of patents. 

E .  CONFIDENCE 

BurDrivG 

In  addition  to  providing  an  enabling  legal  environment,  an  enabling  social 
environment  in  which  scientific  research  can  take  place  must  be  ficilitated.  The 
rationale behnd the grant of IP rights is to reward creators. Drawing a parallel, the grant 
of  national  sovereignty  over  genetic  resources  and  protection  of  the  associated 
knowledge should lead to providing a sustainable livelihood for the preservers of such 
resources  and  holders  of the  knowledge that  enables wealth  creation. To meet  the 
obligations of the CBD and to give incentives to those that are the nearest to guard it, 
the value of biodiversity should be captured and realized at the local leve1.147 If this has 
to  be  reahzed,  the  researchers  and  the  traditional  communities should have  a  more 
collaborative approach. 

Due to the history of biopiracy, traditional communities are likely to view bio- 
prospecting activities with scepticism. In order to change this perception, industry may 
have to engage in confidence-building measures. Industry must appreciate the relevance 
and importance of traditional  communities to  the preservation of biological diversity 
and the value of their associated knowledge. Any industry which relies on laws against 
misappropriation to protect their own assets should ensure that the knowledge held by 
traditional communities is not misappropriated without adequate compensation and that 
the preservers of biodiversity are compensated. The traditional communities have to be 
educated about the need to conduct scientific research into the disappearing biodiversity 
as well as about the risks involved in drug research and the huge investments required. 
The  scientific  community  also  has  to  have  an  adequate  appreciation  of  the 
apprehensions of the holders of traditional knowledge. Successful cases of co-operation 
between the scientific community and holders of traditional knowledge that have been 
documented show that proper planning and understanding of issues at the ground level 
and careful liaison with local communities can result in successful collaboration.148 

news-sd-suplement-en.pd6 ( accessed 5 September 2004). 

147  Peter J.  Schei,  The  Ecosystem  Approach,  CBD News;  available  at:  (www.biodiv.org/doc/newsletters/ 
148  Walter  H.  Lewis  and  Veena  Ramani,  Ethics  and  Practice  in  Ethnobiology:  Analysis  of the  International 

Cooperative  Biodiversity  Group  Project  in  Peru;  available  at:  claw.wustl.edu/centeris/Confpapen/lewisramani.html~ 
(accessed 25 September 2004). Also see McManis, supra, footnote 28. 

270 

THE  

Much of the  debate on protection  of trahtional  knowledge that has  taken place 
between  the  advocates  of  transnational  corporations  and  the  non-governmental 
organization activists  claiming to represent the interests of tramtional communities has 
been based on dogmatic positions and has consisted more of rhetoric than of a genuine 
attempt  to  find  a  solution  in  the  interests  of  the  progress  of  humanity.  Mutual 
understanding and appreciation of each others’ concerns might lead us out of the current 
blind alley whch has led to almost a  stagnation of research in this field. International 
organizations such as  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization  and  the  United 
Nations Environment Programme have a role to play in this regard. l49 

CONCLUSION 

It  is  important  that  scientists carry  on research  into  rapidly  depleting biological 
resources,  as  these  resources must  be  studied  and  preserved  for  posterity.  Scientific 
progress has provided us with  tools of analysis which &d not  exist a few decades ago. 
We  are  currently facing species loss  at  a  rapid  rate.  If  we  fail  to use  the  benefits  of 
technology to study the genetic materials, we wdl be missing our only chance to know 
about some of these disappearing genetic resources. This is probably a responsibility that 
we owe to future generations. 

The restrictive legal environment put into place as a consequence of the CBD and as 
a result of activism has resulted in impedmg the scientific research whch is necessary for 
the  preservation of biodiversity. At  the  same  time, the  contribution of the  traditional 
communities, who  are  the  preservers  of  the  local  biodwersity  and  their  knowledge 
associated with these genetic resources, has to be respected. It is possible  to work out a 
solution whch would benefit the communities as well as address the researchers’ concerns. 
To ensure that research is not impeded, scientlfic research into biodlversity may be 
categorized into  upstream  scientific research  and  downstream  commercial research. 
While benefit-sharing may be ensured for downstream commercial research, facilitating 
upstream  scientific  research  is  important  for  the  preservation  of  biodiversity.  The 
international community  may  have  to  think  about building safeguards  into the  CBD 
provisions  to  enable scientists to study biological dwersity. The countries which  are 
framing  national  laws  implementing  the  CBD provisions  should  keep  the  national 
experiences in mind and build in adequate safeguards to facilitate scientific research. The 
international organizations may  also  have to initiate confidence-building measures  so 
that  the  traditional  communities, scientists  and  researchers, and  industry will  all  be 
confident of engaging in mutually beneficial partnerships. 

149  It is  heartening to note some initiatives in this regard.  The non-governmental  organization Afiica First, in 
collaboration with WIPO and others, w d  hold a Conference in Accra, Ghana on 16-18  March 2006 with the objective 
of educating indigenous healers,  conventional medical practitioners and  corporate institutions on the  benefits  of 
co-operation  for  the  benefit  of  the  global  village;  see  the  Website  of  Afiica  First,  at:  iwww.afiica-first.com/ 
iktm2005/objective~.htm, (accessed 27 April 2005). 


