The  (2010) Vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 503–539

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00394.x

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in
Canada: In Pursuit of ‘‘Prescriptive Parallelism’’

Carys J. Craig
Osgoode Hall Law School, York University

The enactment of anti-circumvention laws in Canada appears imminent and all but inevitable. This article
considers the threats posed by technical protection measures and anti-circumvention laws to fair dealing and
other lawful uses of protected works, and so to the copyright system more generally. The argument adopts, as
its normative starting point, the principle of ‘‘prescriptive parallelism’’ according to which the traditional
copyright balance of rights and exceptions should be preserved in the digital environment. Looking to the
experiences of other nations, the article explores potential routes towards reconciling technical protection
measures with copyright limits, and maintaining a substantive continuity in Canada’s copyright balance.

Keywords anti-circumvention; public domain; copyright balance; Canada

Digital technologies have dramatically changed the dynamics of cultural exchange in Canada.
Content and information resources can be accessed, shared, reproduced and re-used with more
ease and efﬁciency than ever before. Consumption and creation intertwine and merge in the
cultural space that the internet offers up. At the same time, content providers faced with the new
realities of networked society have an unprecedented capacity to control the access to and use of
cultural materials beyond the moment of their distribution, by employing technical protection
measures (TPMs) or so-called ‘‘digital locks’’. Within this new cultural space, efforts to retain
control over the products of creative expression have taken on a renewed urgency for owners and a
heightened practical signiﬁcance for the general public.

A TPM is ‘‘a technological method intended to promote the authorized use of digital works’’
(Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 13). As Kerr et al. (2002–3) explain in their excellent report on TPM
protection:

This is accomplished by controlling access to such works or various uses of such works,
including copying, distribution, performance and display. TPMs can operate as safeguard
or ‘‘virtual fences’’ around digitized content, whether or not the content enjoys copyright
protection. Two common examples of TPMs are passwords and cryptography (p. 13).

As this description suggests, TPMs can be classiﬁed by their function, which may be to control
access or to control use.1 In the former case, a TPM operates as a ‘‘virtual lock’’ that excludes
outsiders from the digital content; in the latter case, the TPM controls the uses that can be made of
that content even once accessed—most commonly, although not necessarily, preventing the
making of copies (Kerr et al., 2002–3, pp. 19–20).

The use and legal protection of TPMs may appear at ﬁrst glance to be a peripheral issue at
the margins of copyright policy, of interest to a limited number of technophiles—or indeed
hackers—with a working knowledge of circumvention technologies, and a few intellectual
property (IP) lawyers and academics. The issue, however, is far more sweeping. In our networked
society, our culture is digitized; our information, news, research and educational resources and

r 503

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

entertainment all come to us in digital packets. Increasingly, the way in which consumers access,
use and consume digital content is the way in which we, as citizens, explore, experience and engage
with our cultural environment. When it comes to technical and legal controls over intellectual works,
the ability of the public to actively and meaningfully participate in our culture is at stake.

This article considers the impact of TPMs on content users and the wider public interest. In
particular, it is concerned with the tension between the impending legal protection of TPMs and
the user rights that are part of Canada’s copyright system. TPMs, and the laws that prevent their
circumvention, have the capacity to undermine the exceptions and limitations found in traditional
copyright law, and thereby disrupt the ‘‘copyright balance’’ that the law is expected to strike. As a
signatory to the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Internet Treaties, it seems all
but inevitable that Canada will enact anti-circumvention provisions in the near future. Canadians
have already seen two failed efforts in this regard, in the course of an ongoing and increasingly
hard fought digital copyright reform process. While we anticipate the next iteration of an
amendment to the Copyright Act intended to ‘‘respond to the challenges and opportunities of
the digital age’’ (Government of Canada, 2008b), we have a ﬂeeting opportunity to critically assess
the values and vulnerabilities at play in the legal protection of TPMs.

My argument adopts, as its normative starting point, the principle of ‘‘prescriptive paralle-
lism’’ according to which ‘‘the traditional copyright balance of rights and exceptions should be
preserved in the digital environment’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1042). I suggest that the anti-
circumvention provisions of the earlier reform bills did not meet the demands of prescriptive
parallelism because they failed to protect the role of fair dealing and copyright exceptions that the
Supreme Court of Canada has recognized as integral to the copyright system. Accepting (albeit
reluctantly) the likelihood of new protections for digital locks in Canada’s revised Copyright Act,
this article considers whether and how a substantive continuity in the existing ‘‘copyright balance’’
can be achieved. It may still be possible to construct this new layer of legal protection around the
existing corner-stones of copyright policy, limiting the impact of digital locks on our cultural
environment, and saving fair dealing from its impending fate—but Canada risks passing up the
opportunity.

The article begins by providing some brief background on the role of TPMs in the
distribution of digital content, and how they came to be entwined with copyright policy. It
goes on to describe the ways in which TPMs and anti-circumvention laws threaten to upset the
copyright balance by supplanting the traditional boundaries of the copyright interest and
undermining the central role of fair dealing and the public domain within the Canadian
copyright system. It then explores the interaction of anti-circumvention laws and copyright
limitations in various international and foreign domestic laws, as well as speciﬁc measures that
have been taken in other jurisdictions in the attempt to vindicate user rights and preserve the
traditional balance of interests. The discussion then turns to the Canadian context, assessing
Canada’s two ‘‘false starts’’ in the race to implement anti-circumvention laws, identifying best
practices and proposing some preferred solutions for Canada. The article concludes with a
general cautionary note about the potential impact of TPMs and their protection on the
Canadian cultural landscape.

The Background: TPMs and Copyright Law

The Promise and Threat of Digital Technologies
If it is generally agreed that the copyright system is aimed (at least in part)2 at maximizing creative
opportunities, furthering the exchange of knowledge and preserving a vibrant public domain, then

504

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

the potential of networked technologies to further the objectives of copyright is undeniable. These
technologies have created previously unimagined opportunities for easy and affordable creative
play, the potential for virtually unlimited and instantaneous communication across cultural and
geographic boundaries, and an unparalleled space for discursive engagement. Viewed in this light,
it seems almost surprising, and certainly disappointing, that the recent focus of IP policymakers
has been predominantly on the threats rather than the promises of digital technology. This focus is
born of fear. The emergence of the digital world has rapidly generated a new public idea of
discourse, participation and production—one that values networking over singularity, and
relationships over individuation. Most importantly, however, this new public idea favours a
collaborative model of shared and cumulative cultural dialogue over a proprietary model of
cultural production. In the very same way, and for the very same reasons, that digital technologies
promise to advance the overarching aims of copyright policy, they threaten to undermine or unseat
the underlying methods and mechanisms of the copyright system.

At a more practical level, this paradox translates into a digital dilemma for IP owners and
traditional content providers, which is manifested in their often reluctant or ambivalent forays into
the online environment. While they may indeed stand to beneﬁt from more efﬁcient production and
distribution of information products, rightholders and industry actors are typically more con-
cerned that any such beneﬁts will be undercut by the increased threat of reproduction and
unauthorized dissemination that new technologies entail. Of course, much has been made of the
threat posed by the internet to traditional content industries and their intellectual properties. As
individual consumers acquire the ability to circulate perfect, costless copies, the anxiety is well-
founded: conventional business models are jeopardized, existing markets evaporate and long-time
industry actors are effectively supplanted. Loss of control over distribution can translate into lost
sales, and potentially the loss of a viable market for digital content.

Many rightholders and industry actors therefore opt to resist the full implications of the digital
shift, strongly asserting their proprietary interests and employing TPMs to control the digital
distribution and use of content. By providing a practical means to ensure excludability and control,
TPMs are viewed by many as the key to ensuring a viable market for digital products and services
in the online environment. Just as the promises of digital technologies for rightholders are
tempered by the threat of uncontrolled reproduction, the promises of digital technologies for
content users are thus tempered by the threat of increased control made possible by TPMs. While
owners develop and employ TPMs to protect content, however, users develop new technologies to
circumvent them, resulting in what has been described as a technical ‘‘arms race’’ that is destined
never to be won. Turning to the law, demands are made for more regulation to support owners’
efforts to maintain control in the face of the ‘‘Internet Threat’’. The assumption is that the moving
target of perfect control can be struck only through the perfect interplay of technical architecture
and legal force.3

It is understandable that certain copyright owners welcome TPMs to assist them in the
proﬁtable distribution of digital content—but it is less clear what TPMs have to do with the law of
copyright as such. Of course, TPMs can be added to the copyright owner’s arsenal against
unauthorized users, complementing the rights granted by law. But arguably, technology and IP are
best viewed as separate and distinct sources of empowerment, just as traditional property and IP
law have always been. The scarcity of the physical embodiment of a work (a painting, say) may
contribute to a rightholder’s capacity to control the work’s distribution, but copyright is not
concerned with the ownership of the physical thing; if that painting is stolen, for example,
copyright law is simply not implicated. Similarly, the application of TPMs to a digital embodiment
of a work may practically aid in limiting distribution of that work—but traditional copyright law

r 505

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

has no necessary stake in whether or how that TPM is applied or respected. Technical controls
enable owners to side-step some of the costs and practicalities associated with the enforcement of
legal rights (providing an effective second layer of protection), but it does not naturally follow that
legal rights should be expanded to protect the application of TPMs (thereby effectively establishing
a third layer of protection).

The Emergence of Anti-Circumvention Laws
It may require a logical leap to assume TPMs within the copyright system, but it is a leap that has
been taken at the international level, and consequently, by domestic legislatures around the world.
This development traces back to a 1995 US government White Paper (1995), which recommended
outlawing technologies whose primary purpose or effect is to bypass TPMs. The White Paper
explained that, in the digital environment, copyright owners would increasingly turn to technology
to protect their rights, but that technology would be found wanting in the absence of new laws to
protect it.4 The suggested prohibition on TPM-circumventing devices was thus ‘‘intended to assist
copyright owners in the protection of their works’’ (White Paper, 1995, p. 231) and, rationalized in
these terms, it was proposed as an amendment to the US Copyright Act. While the White Paper
recommendations stalled in the face of domestic opposition (see Litman, 2001, pp. 122–9), a draft
treaty mirroring its proposals was distributed for consideration at the WIPO international
diplomatic conference in Geneva in 1996.

WIPO negotiations culminated in the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT).5 The adopted treaty texts rejected or diluted
some of the most highly protectionist provisions of the White Paper (Litman, 2001, pp. 129–30),6
including the proposed prohibitions relating to circumvention devices or services. But key
provisions introduced new protection for digital works in the form of legal protection against
the circumvention of TPMs.7 The ﬁnal text of the anti-circumvention provision in the WCT—
which is paralleled in article 18 of the WPPT8—diverges signiﬁcantly from the original US
proposal, however, and instead reﬂects an international compromise:

Contracting Parties shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are used by authors
in connection with the exercise of their rights under this Treaty or the Berne
Convention and that restrict acts, in respect of their works, which are not authorized
by the authors concerned or permitted by law (WCT, article 11).

legal remedies,

Article 11 of the WCT leaves member states with signiﬁcant latitude when it comes to
implementing the treaty obligation in domestic law. First, the Treaty requires only ‘‘adequate’’
legal protection and ‘‘effective’’
leaving room for domestic legislatures to
determine what is required of their laws in order to meet this subjective standard. Indeed, the
treaty does not require anti-circumvention provisions to be included in copyright legislation at all;
if ‘‘adequate’’ protection and remedies are available through other legal routes, then article 11 will
be satisﬁed (Samuelson, 1996).9 As Michael Geist explains, ‘‘any national legislation will be
measured against an adequacy criterion such that the legal protections must provide some
measure of protection that a reasonable person would perceive as evidencing effectiveness’’
(Geist, 2005, p. 223). In this way, the language of article 11 reﬂects the ambivalence or uncertainty
that surrounded the creation of legal protection for TPMs in the international arena, and
evidences the level of generality that was necessary to garner sufﬁcient support for its inclusion
in the Internet Treaties.

506

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Furthermore, as Kerr and his co-authors explain, pursuant to this section, ‘‘the only TPMs
subject to legal protection against circumvention are those that: (1) are effective; (2) are used by
authors to exercise copyrights; and (3) restrict acts not authorized by authors or permitted by law’’
(Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 34; citing Koelman and Helberger, 2000, p. 171). The meaning of ‘‘effective’’
in this context is unclear. It is widely understood to mean that ineffective TPMs (presumably those
that can be easily and cheaply circumvented) may not demand the beneﬁt of the legal protections
guaranteed by the Treaty. What this means in practice is murkier still, as most if not all TPMs can
be circumvented—indeed this is the assumption behind the creation of additional legal protection.
The only clear conclusion is that ‘‘not every TPM is subject to legal protection’’ under the WCT
(Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 35).

More important for our purposes, however, are restrictions (2) and (3), which, taken together,
appear to mean that member states are obligated to provide protection only in respect of TPMs
that are used by authors in connection with the exercise of their copyright—and only to the extent
that a TPM is used to restrict unauthorized acts that the law does not permit in relation to their
protected works. Simply put, the protection afforded to TPMs under the treaties seem to coincide
with the scope of copyright proper (Koelman, 2000); the treaties are concerned speciﬁcally with
circumvention activities that facilitate copyright infringements (Wiese, 2002, p. 150). If TPMs must
restrict acts protected by copyright law in order to beneﬁt from protection pursuant to article 11,
then it would seem to follow that there is no obligation, under the WCT, for a member state to
prohibit circumvention activities that do not result in copyright infringement. According to this
reading of article 11, circumvention of TPMs for lawfully permitted purposes such as fair dealing is
beyond the scope of the protection that the Treaty requires.10

With the WIPO Internet Treaties, TPM protection became part of an international strategy for
tackling the challenges to copyright law presented by digital technologies. Consequently, anti-
circumvention legislation has emerged as a prominent component of the domestic copyright reform
agenda. As a signatory to the WIPO internet Treaties, Canada is now faced with the prospect of
ratifying the treaties and bringing its laws into compliance with them. It is important to stress,
however, that Canada has not yet assumed any international legal obligation by virtue of signing
the treaties. As Howard Knopf has evocatively explained, signing a treaty is to ratiﬁcation about
the same as what dating is to marriage (Knopf, 2008).11 Whether or not Canada ought to ratify the
treaties is primarily a political question, which puts into play a myriad of practical and pragmatic
considerations that reach far beyond Canadian copyright policy. But it is clear enough at this time
that all political indicators are pointing in the direction of ratiﬁcation, with the government actively
working towards amendments to the Copyright Act that ‘‘would implement the rights and
protections found in the treaties’’.12

Before we consider preferred approaches to the legal protection of TPMs in Canada, the
potential signiﬁcance of anti-circumvention provisions should be situated against the backdrop
of Canadian copyright policy in general, and our fair dealing defence in particular. The
following section aims to articulate the problems posed by TPMs, and the potential of anti-
circumvention laws to tip Canada’s copyright balance in favour of owners at the expense of users
and the public.

The Problem with TPMs: Tipping the Copyright Balance

The Copyright Balance in Canada
Copyright law is continuously challenged by its own ‘‘paradox’’: the interminable challenge is to
construct a system that uses exclusivity to stimulate the creation and dissemination of works for the

r 507

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

beneﬁt of the public without unduly harming the public interest by restricting the ability to access
and use the works that are thus created. Fundamentally, the incentive-based approach to copyright
policy assumes that the restriction of the public’s use of works through the creation of private
rights can further the public’s interest in the widespread creation and distribution of works. The
limits to these private rights, deﬁned by fair dealing and other exceptions—and circumscribed by
the boundaries of the public domain—are therefore essential to ensure that the copyright system
does not inadvertently undermine its own ends.

In recent years, the Supreme Court of Canada has articulated the purposes of Canadian
copyright law, and has acknowledged the inherent tensions that these purposes present. It has also
explained the vital role that fair dealing and the public domain play in alleviating these tensions. In
Th ´eberge v Galerie D’Art du Petit Champlain Inc. (Th ´eberge), the Supreme Court identiﬁed
copyright’s purpose as ‘‘a balance between promoting the public interest in the encouragement
and dissemination of works of the arts and intellect and obtaining a just reward for the creator’’.
The Court went on to explain, ‘‘[t]he proper balance among these and other public policy objectives
lies not only in recognizing the creator’s rights but in giving due weight to their limited nature. In
crassly economic terms it would be as inefﬁcient to overcompensate artists and authors for the
right of reproduction as it would be self-defeating to undercompensate them’’ (Th ´eberge, per
Binnie J, paragraphs 30–1).

As copyright law struggles to adjust to the proliferation of digital technologies, owners
demand ever-increasing protection, and legislative reform looms large, these important pronounce-
ments on the nature of the Canadian copyright system have come at a critical time. The Th ´eberge
decision represented a crucial moment in Canadian copyright policy, cementing a vision of
copyright as a system intended not only to protect the rights of authors and their assignees, but
also (and equally) to further the wider public interest. In describing how the metaphorical balance
might be struck, it brought into the equation and attributed ‘‘due weight’’ to the limits of the rights
that the system protects. Regarded in this way, the boundaries and limitations of the copyright
interest are not external to copyright policy; they are a central part of how the system works.

With this in mind, the overarching problem associated with the widespread use of TPMs in the
dissemination of digital content is simple enough to state: TPMs do not—and generally cannot—
distinguish between lawful and unlawful uses and users. There is no necessary (and, typically, no
practical) correlation between the limits imposed on would-be users by TPMs and the rights
granted to copyright owners under the law; the scope of protection afforded by technology just
does not map onto the protection afforded by law. While the law attempts to achieve balance
between owners and users through careful circumscription of the copyright interest that it creates,
technology effectively supplants the law’s solution, usurping its power to effectuate this delicate
balance. The mismatch between technical control and the boundaries of the copyright interest is
easily discerned with regard to both the kinds of activities that owners can prevent or control, and
the extent of the protected work that can be subject to such control.

The Power to Control Access
First, simply by blocking access to content, TPMs provide protection beyond that granted to
copyright owners by law. Activities such as reading, listening and viewing have always been
perfectly lawful—and of course desirable from a cultural policy perspective—in the analogue
world. Nothing in the law of copyright would prohibit someone from ﬂipping through a magazine
in the doctor’s ofﬁce, borrowing a novel from a friend, listening to a roommate’s music collection,
or watching a movie on a home video machine. With the application of TPMs to the digital

508

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

embodiments of such works, however, the ability to read, listen to or view them can be made
subject to the possession of a ‘‘digital key’’.

In the Th ´eberge decision, the Supreme Court stated that ‘‘once an authorized copy of a work is
sold to a member of the public, it is generally for the purchaser, not the author, to determine what
happens to it’’ (paragraph 31). TPMs thoroughly disrupt this premise (deBeer and Geist, 2008, p.
173). In the analogue world, a person can re-read a favourite novel until it is in tatters, listen
obsessively to a favourite record, devotedly watch and re-watch a favourite movie, and then sell or
give away the novels, records and videos with which they ﬁnally grow bored. In the world of
technical controls, reading, listening or viewing can be limited by the number of plays, the number
(or even brand) of machines on which content can be played, the time during which the content is
available and/or the identity of the would-be listener or viewer. This new reality, largely made
possible by the operation of TPMs, has raised concerns about the social implications of eroding
free use in the shift to a ‘‘pay-per-use’’ culture (see Secor, 1997).13

By affording owners the power to control pure access to works, TPMs go further than
copyright protection ever has. And to the extent that access controls are themselves protected by
anti-circumvention laws, these laws effectively establish a legal right to control access (an ‘‘access
right’’ if you will; see Ginsburg, 1999, pp. 140–3, 147–8; Koelman, 2000) heretofore alien to
copyright law. The implications of such control for copyright policy are incredibly signiﬁcant. As
Jane Ginsburg explains, ‘‘[e]very act of perception or of materialization of a digital copy requires a
prior act of access. And if the copyright owner can control access, she can condition how a user
apprehends the work . . . ’’ (2001, p. 41).

Ginsburg (2001) has famously argued that, with the arrival of the digital age, the exploitation
of works has shifted from possessing copies to ‘‘experiencing’’ a work’s content—and this new
end-user reality calls for a new balancing of rights, which may entail an access-right for authors
(p. 42).14 Certainly, Ginsburg is right to remind us that the very metaphor of balance signiﬁes the
need for constant monitoring and adjustment to maintain normative consistency in changing
circumstances. I would suggest, however, that a new right against unauthorized access does not
regain copyright’s equilibrium, but rather tips the balance in favour of owners, to the detriment of
users and the public; access to cultural resources and freedom to engage in basic consumptive
activities may be radically restricted by such a right.

TPMs create the power to control access far beyond that which has been offered by copyright.
Anti-circumvention laws therefore establish a ‘‘new rights structure’’, legally restricting public uses
that have long been viewed as both acceptable and desirable (Heide, 2001, p. 14). As access control
mechanisms come to regulate the use of creative works, this puts at stake the integrity of the
copyright system (Heide, 2001, p. 18).

Power over the Public Domain
The mismatch between copyright’s boundaries and the constraints imposed by TPMs is further
exempliﬁed in the case of public domain materials kept behind digital locks. In addition to the
legal, economic and transactional obstacles of traditional copyright law, the value of the public
domain is now subject to technological barriers that can prevent access to even IP-free information
resources. An obvious concern here is the technical protection of works for which copyright
protection has lapsed. While the copyright interest in a work exists for a limited (if long) period of
time, TPMs can continue to erect a barrier around works after their legal entrance to the public
domain, thereby undermining a crucial aspect of copyright policy: the limited duration of private
rights has been a fundamental characteristic of copyright from its inception, and reﬂects the ‘‘deal’’
that copyright strikes between the public and the author. To grant legal protection over TPMs that

r 509

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

protect public domain content is to supplant copyright’s time-limited protection with a conceivably
perpetual legal right to control access and restrict use of cultural resources.

One response, consistent with WIPO treaty obligations, may be to limit the protection of
TPMs to those that control copyright-protected content, but this offers no solution where the
content behind the digital lock includes both protected and public domain works. And while it may
be argued that many or most public domain works will also be available from other TPM-free
sources, to require members of the public to ﬁnd and use unencrypted versions may deprive them
of the beneﬁts (including accessibility, quality and manipulability) of digitized or technologically
superior versions. Not only does this argument accept an impoverished public domain, but it may
also prove short-sighted as more and more of our culture is recorded, stored and archived in digital
form.

The public domain objection to TPMs is even more signiﬁcant when we recall that the divide in
copyright law between public and private traverses the protected work; while copyright vests in the
overall work, the ideas, information, systems, methods, mergers and unoriginal elements within it
continue to reside in the public domain (Samuelson, 2003, p. 151). As explained by the Supreme
Court of Canada, such limits on the author’s right leave room for the production of ‘‘new works by
building on the ideas and information contained in the works of others’’ (CCH Canadian Ltd. v
Law Society of Upper Canada [CCH], paragraph 23),15 which in turn allows ‘‘the public domain to
ﬂourish’’ (CCH, paragraph 23). Or, as Jessica Litman famously described it: ‘‘The public domain
should be understood not as the realm of materials that is undeserving of protection, but as a
device that permits the rest of the system to work by leaving the raw material of authorship
available for authors to use’’ (Litman, 1990, p. 967). The copyright balance thus demands that
public domain elements of the protected work remain free for lawful and unauthorized public use.
TPMs can make these public domain elements practically unavailable, while anti-circumvention
laws can make access to and use of these public domain elements unlawful. We would do well to
heed Binnie’s J warning in this regard: ‘‘Excessive control by holders of copyrights and other forms
of IP may unduly limit the ability of the public domain to incorporate and embellish creative
innovation in the long-term interests of society as a whole, or create practical obstacles to proper
utilization’’ (Th ´eberge, paragraph 32).

In order to occupy its central role in cultural practices, the public domain must be accessible to
creative actors; but rather than protecting the rights of the public to access and use resources in the
public domain, anti-circumvention laws protect the right to lock-up these resources. Technological
protection erects a fence around the entirety of a work without discriminating between protectable
and unprotectable elements; to electrify these fences with the force of the law is essentially to
reinforce privately drawn boundaries around public resources.

Displacing Fair Dealing
Finally, the clash between copyright policy and TPMs reveals itself in the predicament of fair
dealing and other copyright exceptions.16 The fair dealing defence permits fair dealings with
copyright protected works for the purposes of research or private study, criticism or review, or
news reporting (Copyright Act, sections 29–29.2).17 Acts undertaken for these purposes that would
prima facie constitute infringement are nonetheless lawful if found to be fair, and if—in the case of
criticism, review or news reporting—there is sufﬁcient acknowledgement of the source and author
of the protected work.18 Further speciﬁc exceptions are found in the act, for example, educational
institutions, libraries, archives and museums (sections 29.3–30.9).

In order to appreciate the signiﬁcance of the clash between digital locks and fair dealing, it is
important to understand the role that fair dealing and other exceptions play in the copyright

510

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

system. In CCH, the Supreme Court reafﬁrmed the concept of a copyright balance,19 and its
signiﬁcance in relation to copyright exceptions:

interests,

[T]he fair dealing exception, like other exceptions in the Copyright Act, is a user’s right.
In order to maintain the proper balance between the rights of a copyright owner and
users’
it must not be interpreted restrictively. As Professor Vaver has
explained, ‘‘User rights are not just loopholes. Both owner rights and user rights
should therefore be given the fair and balanced reading that beﬁts remedial legislation’’
(CCH, paragraph 48).

In the name of balance, the court generously interpreted the fair dealing provisions in order
‘‘to ensure that users’ rights are not unduly constrained’’ (CCH, paragraph 51).20 Against the
backdrop of copyright’s public purpose, fair dealing was recognized to be integral—not excep-
tional—to the system. McLachlin CJ wrote: ‘‘the fair dealing exception is perhaps more properly
understood as an integral part of the Copyright Act than simply a defence. Any act falling within
the fair dealing exception will not be an infringement of copyright’’ (CCH, paragraph 48). Put
otherwise, fair dealing does not merely excuse infringement, but rather deﬁnes it; the owner’s rights
end where the user’s rights begin. Following the CCH decision, it should be clear that, rather than a
marginal exception to the norms of Canadian copyright law, the fair dealing defence is an
instantiation of the public–author balance; one that is necessary to support the normative claims
so often made on behalf on the system. As Drassinower (2005) explains: ‘‘the defence of fair
dealing . . . is to be understood and deployed not negatively, as a mere exception, but rather
positively, as a user right integral to copyright law’’ (p. 467).

It is also important to underscore, at this juncture, the potential signiﬁcance of the term ‘‘users’
rights’’ employed by the Supreme Court. Much has been made of this terminology and the equality
it brings to the balancing of authorial and public claims (see Craig, 2005, pp. 454–5). For the
purposes of my argument, however, its importance lies primarily in the positive nature of a ‘‘user
right’’, in contrast to the negative nature of mere defences, justiﬁcations, exemptions or even
privileges. A basic Hohfeldian analysis (Hohfeld, 1946) reveals that, when conceptualized as a
privilege, fair dealing establishes only the liberty or freedom to act: the owner has no right to
prevent the privileged activity, and the user owes no duty to refrain from the activity. But
conceptualized as a right, fair dealing establishes a corresponding duty on behalf of the owner to
honour the user’s right: in this analysis, the user has a positive claim-right against the copyright
owner to be permitted to deal fairly with the work. Where fair dealing is recognized as a ‘‘user
right’’, it can be argued that copyright owners have a correlative obligation to permit users’ fair
dealings with their works, TPMs notwithstanding.

It is also signiﬁcant that the scope of a user’s right cannot be clearly delineated or universally
applied. The legal analysis necessary to determine whether a particular use can be considered fair
dealing in a particular instance is a complex one that involves a contextual examination of the use
and user, and the balancing of multiple factors from the economic impact of the use to the
alternatives available to the user.21 TPMs are not capable of performing such an analysis, and as
such, are not capable of permitting individual access for fair dealing purposes or permitting fair
dealings per se (even in the unlikely event that such a result were sought).

The effect of a TPM is thus to prevent the kinds of activities that are recognized, in the realm of
copyright policy, to be deserving of protection from private owner interests, and to be central to
the balance that copyright must strike. Simply put, TPMs deny users the ability to exercise their
rights and thereby tip the balance away from users and the public interest. Here, again, it may be
argued that a TPM-free version of a protected work will typically be available for anyone who

r 511

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

wishes to deal fairly with it. And so it is worth re-emphasizing that, from a policy perspective, it is
not satisfactory to restrict fair dealings to technologically inferior versions of copyright works
(Bechtold, 2004, p. 363). Beneﬁciaries of copyright exceptions, like rightholders, should be able to
enjoy the opportunities presented by digital technologies, and should be free to engage with
cultural resources in the technological environment in which they are encountered.

While IP policymakers, courts and commentators struggle to deﬁne and defend the fair dealing
doctrine, their efforts are increasingly undercut by technological capabilities that leave such
deliberations all but moot. Acts permitted in relation to owned content—users’ rights to read,
listen, research, study, criticize, transform—can be prevented by the use of TPMs, and would be
effectively rendered unlawful by proposed anti-circumvention provisions. To extend legal protec-
tion to TPMs in a manner that fails to guard the contours of fair dealing from technological
encroachment is thus to undermine the social goals of the copyright system and to relinquish the
policy-balancing act performed in their name.

In Pursuit of Prescriptive Parallelism

Preserving the Copyright Balance
The principle of ‘‘prescriptive parallelism’’ was articulated in a 2007 article by US commentators
Jerome Reichman, Graeme Dinwoodie and Pamela Samuelson, to ‘‘convey the notion that the
traditional copyright balance of rights and exceptions should be preserved in the digital environ-
ment’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1042). The principle captures the general normative position that
‘‘a technological adaptation, namely, the application of TPMs, should not alter the balance that
existed under default rules of copyright law with respect to the enjoyment of exceptions and
limitations’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, pp. 1041–2). The intuitive appeal of this position is quite
evident, and nicely captured in the following words of Henning Wiese (2002):

[W]hilst on the one hand copyright holders will have a justiﬁed interest in regaining
control over the publication/dissemination of their works, users will have an equal
interest in retaining in the digital environment roughly the same fair use defences. In
essence, society as a whole—including copyright owners and copyright work users—
will wish to retain roughly the same copyright balance in virtual reality that has served
all parties involved so well in the past, the ‘‘real reality’’ (p. 147).

The problem, of course, is that the principle of prescriptive parallelism presents us with a
challenge that, while conceptually clear, will be exceptionally hard to meet on a practical level. As
Kerr and his co-authors rightly warn, ‘‘[t]he ensuing policy issue is not merely a question of
copyright’s ability to balance but also one of technology’s power to control’’ (Kerr et al., 2002–3,
p. 38). This is the challenge that now presents itself to policymakers and the Canadian copyright
system: how can copyright’s complicated balancing act continue to be performed in any mean-
ingful way when the technological environment is increasingly one of absolutes—absolute freedom
versus absolute control? More fundamentally, how can the law maintain its role as the guardian of
this metaphorical balance when its prescriptions are increasingly extraneous to the actions and
actors that it purports to inﬂuence?

Admittedly, a commitment to the principle of prescriptive parallelism presents at least as many
questions as answers. Nonetheless, in the context of digital copyright reform, the principle could
prove exceptionally useful: it offers a jumping-off point (a normative claim), it provides a sense of
direction (a guidepost by which to chart progress), and it establishes an ideal (a goal against which
to measure purported success). It is also difﬁcult to refute, unless one is willing to openly take issue

512

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

with the foundational principles that underlie our existing institutional structures. In this sense, the
principle wields some political clout. It may be that genuine prescriptive parallelism is an
unattainable aspiration, but to admit as much is not to undermine its normative signiﬁcance; it
is a goal at which we should aim, and one that we should be determined to achieve to the greatest
extent possible.

Retaining the Balance through Inaction?
One route towards maintaining copyright’s traditional balance may be to simply leave the law as it
is, for now at least; we can continue to apply and enforce traditional copyright norms while
technology and the marketplace evolve on their own terms. In this way, the law will perform its
traditional balancing act within its shrinking domain of inﬂuence. There are many commentators
and stakeholders who adhere to this vision, and I am tempted to count myself among them. When
it comes to the law, after all, there are worse things than irrelevance. As Jessica Litman has argued,
there is simply no reason for us to assume that copyright laws should determine the most basic
‘‘rules of the game’’ in cyberspace (Litman, 2001, p. 28). Indeed, their complexity, inaccessibility
and limited focus make them quite inapposite to the task:

Copyright law has a narrow focus. It has never paid attention to a whole host of
important interests that have traditionally informed our information policy, and
copyright analysis turns out to have very little room in it to do so.

In addition to free speech concerns, information policy takes account of issues related
to equity, competition, ensuring a diversity of viewpoints, securing ready and
affordable access to important sources of information privacy—all issues that are at
best tangential to copyright law and in some cases wholly alien (Litman, 2001, p. 30).

As Litman argues, the signiﬁcance of these limitations is far greater in a context where
copyright law is expected to govern, not just the activities of commercial and institutional entities
as it has traditionally done, but the everyday behaviour and interactions of members of the general
public.

Litman further cautions that the structure and involvement of the copyright community in the
copyright reform process make it ‘‘difﬁcult to prevent foolish approaches to new technology’’
(Litman, 2001, p. 22). Reforms in response to technological advances are typically fought out by
industry stakeholders determined to regain old beneﬁts enjoyed before the technological advance,
while retaining any new beneﬁts that the technology may afford (Litman, 2001, p. 22). Notably,
among such ‘‘foolish’’ approaches, Litman appears to include the enactment of anti-circumvention
laws in the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).22

In a similar vein, Laura Murray has observed ‘‘the near-perfect match between the rhetoric of
wonder and panic at digital technologies and the hyperbole and hysteria that greeted the telegraph,
the telephone, the television, and the photocopier’’ (Murray, 2005b, p. 26). Citing Litman, Murray
agrees that such historical precedents sound a cautionary note about the swift implementation of
new laws in response to new technologies. History reveals that rapid legal responses risk becoming
dated and ‘‘loophole-ridden’’ legal regimes, failing to reﬂect our evolving understanding of the new
technology and the role that it will come to occupy in our market place and society (Murray,
2005b, p. 26). Kerr and his co-authors issue a similar exhortation, urging:

[U]ntil the market for digital content and the norms surrounding the use and
circumvention of TPMs (and their implications for that market) become better
known, it is simply premature to try to ascertain what the appropriate practical legal

r 513

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

response should be . . . [M]aking policy decisions without such knowledge could result
in great harm to the public interest (Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 76).23

This position is consistent with the general principle of technological neutrality, which stands
against the implementation of technology-speciﬁc norms that are unlikely to maintain their
relevance and applicability as technologies inevitably evolve (Kerr et al., 2002–03, p. 81).24 Indeed,
some argue that the evolution of technology has already rendered the TPM-protection debate out-
dated. As consumers become increasingly cognizant of, and resistant to, the limitations imposed by
digital locks and other rights management technologies, the argument goes, market forces should
gradually increase demand for free as opposed to controlled content, with content providers
necessarily reacting to such market dictates. Apple’s decision to sell Digital Rights Management
(DRM)-free music through the iTunes store is commonly cited in support of this thesis (see Apple
Inc., 2009). The problem is that it assumes a well-functioning competitive market for DRM-
protected and DRM-free content, and minimizes the impact of network and lock-in effects,
information asymmetries and other causes of market failure (Bechtold, 2004, p. 362). Whatever
degree of faith we are willing to place in such market forces over time, we can likely agree that
TPMs and DRM technologies look set to stay with us for a while.

While inaction may preserve the internal coherence and ‘‘balance’’ of the copyright system, its
capacity to achieve an actual balance in our overall information system is undermined when its
prescriptions become divorced from common practice. Inaction could thus result in the margin-
alization of copyright and its normative signiﬁcance as technology and technological self-help
establish the norms of behaviour online.

Regaining the Balance through Legislative Reform
If we assume that copyright should play a signiﬁcant role in regulating cultural practices in the
digital environment—and we accept that this is good policy as opposed to an act of hubris on the
part of copyright lawyers (compare with Litman, 2001, p. 30)—then it seems reasonable to assert
that some degree of legal reform is necessary. Technological changes have undoubtedly rendered
certain traditional copyright assumptions outmoded. This suggests an alternative route towards
maintaining copyright’s balance while also striving to preserve its relevance: namely, amending
existing laws to better regulate the use of technology and the digital marketplace for creative
content in a way that can achieve prescriptive parallelism in practice.

When anti-circumvention laws are rationalized as ‘‘enhanced legal protection for copyright
owners in light of enhanced copying capacity’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1042), the implicit
assumption is that a further layer of protection is necessary to reinstate copyright’s balance in the
face of new technologies.25 In pursuit of this balance, however, adjustments may also be needed to
the legal rights of copyright users in light of the availability, application and legal protection of
TPMs (Wiese, 2002, p. 147). If, as a matter of substantive principle, ‘‘the application of TPMs
should not alter the balance of rights between copyright owners and users’’, then it ought to follow
that ‘‘all uses privileged under traditional copyright principles should continue to be privileged in
an era of digital rights management’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1045). This assertion is consistent
with (and arguably mandated by) the recognition of exceptions to authors’ rights as integral to the
copyright system. As such, any new digital copyright regime that is rationalized in terms of
reinstating copyright’s balance in the digital era should offer a comprehensive regulatory
approach—one that establishes a ‘‘symmetric’’ environment in which the legitimate interests of
both rightholders and users are protected (Bechtold, 2004, p. 363).

514

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Reichman and his co-authors argue that, if the principle of prescriptive parallelism is to be
respected in the face of TPM protections, ‘‘users need a mechanism by which to vindicate their
rights and to secure the certainty required to engage in creative activity privileged under traditional
copyright principles’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1045). In pursuit of prescriptive parallelism in
Canada,
it is suggested that any new anti-circumvention provisions must also establish a
mechanism by which users can vindicate their rights, exercise their privileges, and feel safe in
the knowledge that they will not incur liability for doing so. Admittedly, such a mechanism could
prove complex and costly to implement, but we must be willing to assume these costs and tackle
these complexities if we go down the path of prohibiting circumvention while maintaining a
genuine commitment to copyright’s balance. (And if such mechanisms seem too complex or costly,
we should reconsider the wisdom of taking that path.)

Legislative Measures and Mechanisms to Vindicate User Rights
With a view to identifying the possibilities, promises and potential pitfalls of a new Canadian TPM
protection regime, this section will canvas some approaches taken in other jurisdictions towards
the reconciliation of TPM protection and copyright limitations, and the extent to which these
approaches have been able to meet the principled demands of prescriptive parallelism. This will
provide the comparative perspective necessary for us to proceed, in the next section, towards
recommendations for Canadian reform.

Looking to the United States: The DMCA
Perhaps the weakest approach to safeguarding the traditional privileges of users and the public in
the face of TPM protection is found in the now infamous US DMCA.26 The controversial anti-
circumvention provisions in this act offer a level of protection for TPMs signiﬁcantly beyond that
required by the WIPO treaties. The DMCA prohibits the circumvention of TPMs that control
access to a protected work (regardless of whether such access results in copyright infringement)
(section 1201 (a)(1)(A)), and forbids the manufacture, distribution, and importation of circumven-
tion tools (including tools that circumvent both ‘‘access-contol’’ measures and use- or ‘‘rights-
control’’ measures) (section 1201 (a)(2) and section 1201 (b)).27 Because protection does not attach
to use-control measures, it has been suggested that fair use is not per se affected by the anti-
circumvention measures. Indeed, section 1201(c)(1) explicitly states that, ‘‘[n]othing in this section
shall affect rights, remedies, limitations, or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use,
in this title’’. Of course, the reality is that access to a work is a prerequisite of fair use, and access to
a circumvention tool may be a prerequisite of access to a TPM-protected work. The effect of the
access-control circumvention prohibition and circumvention device prohibitions is the practical
restriction of otherwise lawful fair use activities in relation to TPM-protected content.

The DMCA anti-circumvention rules are subject to a set of seven narrow and hard-fought
exceptions28 that shield circumvention activities from liability in speciﬁc circumstances, including,
for example: non-proﬁt libraries making acquisition decisions (section 1201 (d)); governmental
actors conducting national security activities (section 1201 (e)); and encryption researchers
identifying vulnerabilities in encryption technologies (section 1201 (g)).29 Litman has rightly
accused these exceptions of being ‘‘cast in prose so crabbed and so encumbered with conditions
as to be of little use to anyone who doesn’t have a copyright lawyer around to explain which hoops
to jump through’’ (Litman, 2001, p. 31).

In addition to the speciﬁed exemptions, the DMCA authorizes the Librarian of Congress, in
consultation with the Register of Copyright, to assess the impact of the circumvention ban on

r 515

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

traditional fair use practices and, if necessary, to issue rules exempting certain users of certain
categories of works from the ban (section 1201 (a)(1)(B)-(D)). The 2006 round of this triennial rule-
making proceeding yielded temporary exemptions for six narrowly deﬁned classes of works.30
However, such exemptions are not permitted to extend to the prohibition on circumvention
technologies (device controls), with the consequence that,
. . . any
exemptions ultimately declared will have very limited utility; self-evidently, most users will be
unable to exercise their circumvention rights unless they are provided with the tools to do so’’
(Burk and Cohen, 2001, pp. 49–50). Moreover, by granting such power to an administrative
agency, this procedure has the clear and apparently intended effect of reducing the role of the
courts and the relevance of fair use in the digital age (see Herman and Gandy Jr., 2006).31 The
prospective creation of exemptions based on ‘‘classes of works’’ turns on its head the traditionally
purposive, use-based and post hoc application of fair use by the courts (Herman and Gandy Jr.,
2006, pp. 143–4). The clear impoverishment of fair use effectuated by the DMCA led David
Nimmer to suggest that the act was ‘‘a conscious contraction of user rights’’ (Nimmer, 2000, p. 675;
cited in Herman and Gandy Jr., 2006, p. 187).

‘‘[a]s a practical matter,

Since the enactment of the DMCA, a number of incidents and cases have revealed that this
apparent threat to fair use activities is more than hypothetical.32 Perhaps most notable is the
case of Universal City Studios v Remeirdes,33 which concerned a software program, DeCSS,
posted online by the defendant, which could be used to crack the Content Scramble System
(CSS) on commercial DVDs, allowing users to copy and manipulate a DVD’s content. In an
amicus brief, Professors Benkler and Lessig described CSS as ‘‘a device that makes fair and
otherwise privileged uses of digitized materials practically impossible’’ (Benkler and Lessig,
2001). The defendant challenged the constitutionality of the DMCA, arguing inter alia that it
unduly obstructs the ‘‘fair use’’ of copyright materials. The US District Court held that fair use
was not a defence to violations of the DMCA and issued injunctions. Upholding this decision,
the US Court of Appeals dismissed the appellant’s constitutional claim as ‘‘extravagant’’.34
The appellant was not personally engaged in any fair use of copyright materials, and the court
was unimpressed by the argument that the devices were necessary for others to make fair uses
of CSS protected content. Indeed, the Court was not persuaded that CSS prevents fair uses,
not least because ‘‘[f]air use has never been held to be a guarantee of access to copyrighted
material in order to copy it by the fair user’s preferred technique or in the format of the
original’’.35

Notably, the CSS has proved to be ‘‘the single most controversial TPM scheme considered in
the triennial rulemaking proceedings’’ under the regulatory powers granted to the Librarian of
Congress (Herman and Gandy Jr., 2006, pp. 187–8.). Despite hundreds of calls for exemptions and
many documented harms to fair use, ‘‘it remains illegal to circumvent the access controls on a
legally purchased DVD, even for purposes such as playing it on one’s home machine or using
ﬁfteen seconds of footage for scholarly commentary’’ (Herman and Gandy Jr., 2006, p. 188). An
exemption added after the 2006 rulemaking proceeding was limited to:

audiovisual works included in the educational library of a college or university’s ﬁlm or
media studies department, when circumvention is accomplished for the purpose of
making compilations of portions of those works for educational use in the classroom by
media studies or ﬁlm professors.36

Such a limited exemption serves only to underscore the inadequacies of the rulemaking
procedure, and to reveal the virtually insurmountable burden imposed on those who seek
exemptions from the circumvention prohibitions under the DMCA.

516

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Looking to Europe: The EU Copyright Directive
The European Union followed the United States’ lead when it issued its Copyright Directive of
2001, requiring member states to enact broad anti-circumvention prohibitions against all acts of
circumvention and the trafﬁcking of circumvention devices and services, and thereby far exceeding
the scope of TPM protection demanded by the WIPO treaties.37 The directive does not contain
built-in exceptions such as those in the DMCA, but instead addresses the interaction between TPM
protection and user exceptions in article 6(4), which states: ‘‘in the absence of voluntary measures
taken by right holders . . . Member States shall take appropriate measures to ensure that right
holders make available to the beneﬁciary of an exception or limitation provided for in national law
. . . the means of beneﬁting from that exception or limitation’’.

Article 6(4) is signiﬁcant—perhaps even ‘‘rather revolutionary’’ (Dusollier, 2003a, p. 52)—to
the extent that it attributes a positive dimension to copyright exceptions, recognizing the need to
facilitate (as opposed to merely permit) the exercise of exceptions to owners’ rights. Reichman and
his co-authors identify, within this provision, an important ‘‘normative commitment to ensuring
that certain public interest uses can be made of technically protected works’’ (Reichman et al.,
2007, p. 984). As an apparent attempt to maintain the balance of copyright in the face of TPM
protection, article 6(4) seems premised to some degree on the principle of prescriptive parallelism
(Reichman et al., 2007, p. 1042).38 However, as these authors and many others have noted, its
actual prescriptions fall well short of realizing this ostensible principle (see Dusollier, 2003a;
Hugenholtz, 2000; Reichman et al., 2007, pp. 1041–4).

The provision employs a ‘‘fair use by mandate’’ approach39 by leaving it to copyright owners,
in the ﬁrst instance, to ﬁnd a solution to the tension between TPMs and copyright exceptions. Only
in the absence of ‘‘voluntary measures’’ (the nature and scope of which is left undeﬁned) does the
State’s obligation arise.40 This approach actually reinforces the primacy of the private ordering
model supported by TPMs, which is further evidenced by the decision to exclude from the
application of article 6(4) ‘‘works made available to the public on agreed contractual terms in such
a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen
by them’’.41 This effectively exempts on-demand services from the obligation to safeguard user
exceptions; rightholders who make their works available online on agreed contractual terms
(obviously an important and growing digital distribution model) can presumably continue to
prevent users from beneﬁting from copyright exceptions (Akester, 2009, p. 17).42

The impact of article 6(4) is further lessened by its restriction to beneﬁciaries with ‘‘legal access
to the protected work’’. Only users with prior lawful access to the work are empowered to exercise
exceptions, but there is apparently no obligation for owners to grant access to such users.
Consequently, the safeguard provision does not appear to shield lawful uses from the effects of
access-control TPMs.

Finally, but crucially, article 6(4) applies only to seven speciﬁed (and seemingly arbitrary)
exceptions out of the 23 permitted exceptions listed in article 5 of the directive.43 Notably excluded
from the application of article 6(4) are exceptions for parody and news reporting—both activities
that we may typically associate with fair use rights, and both exceptions that are widely understood
to reﬂect a concern with fundamental freedoms of speech and the press (Dusollier, 2003a, p. 53).
Indeed, even with regard to the seven exceptions that are listed, article 6(4) operates only to safeguard
the beneﬁt of exceptions that are ‘‘provided for in national law’’. Member states are permitted, but
not required, to enact the enumerated exceptions, with the result that article 6(4) ‘‘make[s] mandatory
the safeguarding of exceptions but not their enactment’’ (Dusollier, 2003a, p. 53).44

While, conceptually speaking, article 6(4) of the EU Copyright Directive was both novel and
laudable, its potential to achieve prescriptive parallelism has been signiﬁcantly undermined by

r 517

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

these various textual and practical limitations. To the extent that it purports to protect the public
values embraced by copyright limitations, it is a ‘‘toothless tiger’’ (Bechtold, 2004, p. 379). Beneath
the apparent promise of balance, the EU copyright regime supports private ordering by right-
holders through the use of TPMs that restrict otherwise lawful uses of digital content.45
Predictably, then, national implementations of the directive have produced a wide variety of
different approaches to the problem of TPM protection and copyright exceptions, which have
largely failed to adequately safeguard public uses of TPM-protected content or to achieve a parallel
balance of interests in the digital realm (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 984).

The directive permits member states to pursue a ‘‘wait-and-see’’ strategy, taking no immediate
steps to ensure that the beneﬁciaries of exceptions can actually enjoy them (Gasser, 2006, p. 77).
Austria, for example, has enacted no exceptions to its broad anti-circumvention provisions, opting
instead to assume that voluntary and market-driven measures will adequately enable the exercise of
existing exceptions, and empowering the Minister of Justice and a government department to
report to Parliament recommending legislative measures if such proves not to be the case. The
Czech Republic and the Netherlands have similarly left it to the executive power to take
appropriate measures to safeguard user exceptions only if and when necessary (Commission of
the European Community, 2007; see also Gasser, 2006, p. 77). Other member states (including
Finland, Denmark, Estonia, Greece, Lithuania, Slovenia and Hungary) have opted to introduce
mediation or arbitration proceedings for the beneﬁciaries of exceptions where private negotiations
fail to facilitate permitted uses. A third approach, taken by Germany, Ireland, Spain, Luxembourg
and Belgium, has been to establish a right of recourse to the courts for would-be users denied the
means of beneﬁting from exceptions.46 Finally, a few member states have established an admin-
istrative complaints procedure.

In the United Kingdom, the new section 296ZE47 allows persons who are prevented by TPMs
from performing an otherwise permitted act to ﬁle a complaint with the Secretary of State. The
Secretary of State, acting through the Patent Ofﬁce, will investigate whether any voluntary measure
or agreement exists in relation to the work and, in the absence of such, may issue a written direction
requiring the copyright owner to ensure that the complainant can beneﬁt from the permitted act.
Failure to comply is an actionable breach of statutory duty.

In France, the slow transposition process ultimately saw the establishment, in 2007, of an
entirely new administrative body, the Autorit ´e de r ´egulation des mesures techniques de protection,
or ARMTP.48 This independent regulatory agency represents a novel governance structure
speciﬁcally designed to address the challenges of TPMs in the information economy (Winn and
Jondet, 2009). In the absence of voluntary measures, cases may be submitted to the ARMPTP by
consumers, the beneﬁciaries of exceptions, or their representatives. The agency will decide the
legality of the use of a TPM in the speciﬁc case, subject to appeal, and may order rightholders to
take necessary steps to allow the exception to be exercised and impose ﬁnancial penalties for failure
to comply.

On the basis of this brief summary, it is evident that the directive has failed to produce
signiﬁcant harmonization in this area, but also that it has thus far failed to achieve prescriptive
parallelism to any signiﬁcant degree. Even in those member states that did opt to enact legislative
safeguards for user exceptions, the execution of the exception regime is typically cumbersome and
impractical for the would-be beneﬁciaries (Wang, 2006, p. 243; citing Midgley, 2002). Where
beneﬁciaries are empowered to seek injunctive relief from the courts, or even to initiate mediation,
they are invited to embark upon a potentially costly, prolonged and onerous course of action that
is unlikely to make sense for the average user. Mediation solutions reduce the exercise of permitted
acts to a matter for negotiation or rightholder authorization not dissimilar to that required in

518

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

respect of restricted acts (Dusollier, 2003b, p. 73). Administrative solutions may be even more
burdensome: in the United Kingdom, for example, rightholders have no pre-existing obligation to
facilitate the exercise of permitted acts; the Secretary of State has no obligation to order the
rightholder to do so; the complainant has no right to appeal the Secretary’s decision; and failure to
comply with an order merely establishes a right of action, making the pre-requisite complaint
process little more than an additional administrative hurdle for the would-be beneﬁciary. While the
enforcement powers of the French ARMPTP, together with the right to appeal its decisions, make
it perhaps the most interesting initiative, the administrative burden imposed on users may
nonetheless represent a signiﬁcant barrier to the exercise of permitted acts. In the absence of
efﬁcient, effective and readily accessible enforcement structures throughout the EU member states,
the apparent promise of article 6(4) is far from being fulﬁlled.

Beyond Europe: New Zealand’s Example
Beyond Europe, New Zealand offers an interesting example of a novel solution to the problematic
interaction of TPM-protection and copyright exceptions. The Copyright (New Technologies)
Amendment Act 200849 prohibits the distribution of circumvention devices, services and informa-
tion where it is known that such will, or is likely to, be used to infringe copyright (section 226A).
Notably, the prohibitions do not extend to acts of circumvention per se, and nor do they protect
pure access-control TPMs. In addition to the careful circumscription of anti-circumvention rights,
the act includes positive measures to protect beneﬁciaries of copyright exceptions. First, it explicitly
states that the rights granted to the issuer of a TPM work ‘‘do not prevent or restrict the exercise of
a permitted act’’ (section 226D(1)) and that ‘‘[n]othing in this Act prevents any person from using a
TPM circumvention device to exercise a permitted act’’ (section 226E(1)). Secondly, it introduces
new provisions enabling a person who wishes to carry out a permitted act to seek assistance from
the copyright owner and/or a qualiﬁed person in order to circumvent a TPM (section 226E(2)).50 A
‘‘qualiﬁed person’’ means a librarian of a prescribed library, an archivist of an archive, an
educational establishment, or any person speciﬁed by the Governor-General by Order in Council
under a new regulation-making power (section 226D(3)). By empowering certain people to offer
circumvention services, and by enabling these people to be lawfully supplied with circumvention
devices, the approach taken by New Zealand goes some way towards ensuring that non-infringing
activities in respect of TPM-protected works are not merely permitted, but also practicable.51 How
the system will work in practice remains to be seen.

Anti-Circumvention and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada: Problems and Proposals

As countries around the world develop and implement new legislative and regulatory schemes for
protecting TPMs, the practical and political implications of TPM protection, and the challenges of
integrating user and public interest exceptions into these protective schemes, become increasingly
clear. The good news, however, is that Canada is now in an excellent position to beneﬁt from the
lessons that have been learned elsewhere, and to choose its path into the digital future with the
beneﬁt of other nations’ hindsight. In this section, I will provide a brief overview of the two ‘‘false
starts’’ that Canada has made in the race to introduce anti-circumvention protection. I will go on
to suggest possible solutions to the current impasse—which will also serve as a critique of Canada’s
previous attempts to introduce TPM protection—and canvas some available means by which we
may yet achieve prescriptive parallelism, to a greater or lesser degree.

r 519

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Two False Starts
In a law reform process that began back in 2001, Canadian Heritage and Industry Canada are
currently formulating what will be the third iteration of proposed anti-circumvention legislation,
which will follow on the heels of two previous Bills—and two starkly different approaches to the
protection of TPMs. Bill C-60, which represented the ﬁrst attempt to introduce anti-circumvention
provisions, was developed under and swept aside with Canada’s Liberal government. Section
34.02(1) of Bill C-60 sought to establish legal protection for TPMs:52

34.02 (1) An owner of copyright in a work, a performer’s performance ﬁxed in a sound
recording or a sound recording . . . are, subject to this Act, entitled to all remedies . . .
that are or may be conferred by law for the infringement of a right against a person
who, without the consent of the copyright owner . . ., circumvents, removes or in any
way renders ineffective a technological measure protecting any material form of the
work, the performer’s performance or the sound recording for the purpose of an act that
is an infringement of the copyright in it or the moral rights in respect of it or for the
purpose of making a copy referred to in subsection 80(1) [Emphasis added].

The effect of this provision would have been to make it an infringement to circumvent a TPM,
but only if this were done for the purpose of an act constituting infringement of the copyright in the
underlying work.53 This suggests that circumvention for the purposes of fair dealing would have
remained lawful (Geist, 2005, p. 242). Section 34.02 also contained, in subsection (2), a provision
establishing the same remedies against a person who ‘‘offers or provides a service to circumvent,
remove or render ineffective a technological measure protecting a material form of the work’’,
where that person ‘‘knows or ought to know that providing the service will result in an
infringement of the copyright or moral rights’’. Although this section would have left some
uncertainty with regard to the degree of knowledge required,54 the legislative intent was clearly to
tie liability for the provision of circumvention services to actual acts of copyright infringement.
Moreover, the bill established no legal limitation on circumvention devices or technologies (Geist,
2005, p. 242).

Bill C-60 was thus compliant with the WCT, but in a way that recognized—and generally took
advantage of—the limits and ﬂexibility of article 11 to minimize the potential impact of anti-
circumvention laws beyond that of existing copyright norms. By linking circumvention liability to
copyright infringement liability, it proposed an additional level of protection for rightholders
without substantially widening the net of liability to catch activities that would have been lawful in
the absence of these additional protections. In doing so, the bill was apparently intended to
maintain the balance between owners and users struck by traditional copyright norms, and to
avoid increasing the scope of rights connected to copyright ownership.

It should be noted that Bill C-60 was nonetheless vulnerable to the criticism that traditional
copyright limits and exceptions were not explicitly protected or positively safe-guarded against the
operation of the anti-circumvention provisions, never mind the operation of TPMs themselves. To
the existing fears of copyright infringement suits and the curtailments effected by the proliferation
of TPMs, Bill C-60 would have added the risk of liability for TPM circumvention—a further threat
with which to chill uses of protected content. Bill C-60 did not offer to protect users and the public
from the effects of TPMs and anti-circumvention liability (Geist, 2005, pp. 248–9).55 In this sense,
the bill offered nothing to proactively maintain the copyright balance against the disruptive impact
of the widespread use of TPMs.

While the fate of C-60 was sealed with the fall of the Liberal government, the drive towards
new legislation continued under the new Conservative government. Whereas Bill C-60 tread a

520

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

moderate path with regard to new anti-circumvention provisions, Bill C-61, tabled in 2008, was
designed to offer ‘‘stronger legal protection for T[P]Ms or digital locks applied by rights owners to
digital works’’ (Government of Canada, 2008a). While this bill was also destined to die on the
order paper when a federal election was called in September 2008, it may be a harbinger of what we
can expect in any future copyright reform bill brought under the re-instated Conservative minority
government, which continues to proclaim its commitment to new legislation ‘‘to modernize
Canada’s copyright laws and ensure stronger protection for intellectual property’’ (Government
of Canada, 2008c).

In contrast to the relatively succinct TPM provisions of Bill C-60 (which amounted to one
section with three subsections), C-61 contained 13 complex sections with innumerable subsections
prescribing the broad protection of TPMs and the narrow limits thereto. Notably, Bill C-61 offered
pure access-control TPMs the same protection as TPMs that restrict protected uses of underlying
works.56 The bill crossed another important line by prohibiting, in addition to circumvention
activities and services, devices or technologies that permit the circumvention of TPMs.57 Whether a
particular technology would be caught by this prohibition was to be determined in light of its
primary purpose,58 commercial signiﬁcance59 or the manner in which it is marketed.60

Bill C-61 set out speciﬁc exceptions to circumvention liability—as well as numerous exceptions
to these exceptions—relating to law enforcement or national security (section 41.11), computer
program interoperability (section 41.12), encryption research (section 41.13), the collection/
communication of personal information (section 41.14), the security of computer systems/net-
works (section 41.15), persons with perceptual disabilities (section 41.16), and ephemeral record-
ings by broadcast undertakings (section 41.17). Thus, for example, a person circumventing a TPM
for the purpose of encryption research would escape liability only if: it would not have been
practical to carry out the research without circumventing the TPM; s/he lawfully obtained the
protected work; s/he informed the copyright owner who applied the TPM (presumably, that s/he
would be circumventing the TPM for research purposes); and s/he did nothing in relation to the
underlying work that would constitute an infringement of copyright (section 41.13).

The bill sought to establish the power for the Governor in Council to make additional
regulations to create further speciﬁc exceptions where technological measures ‘‘would unduly
restrict competition in the aftermarket sector in which the technological measure is used’’ (section
41.2(1)). It envisaged the possibility of further regulations restricting liability for acts of
circumvention (but, notably, not for liability relating to circumvention services or technologies)
to be made in consideration of an open list of factors, including: whether the prohibition against
acts of circumvention could adversely affect authorized uses; whether it would adversely affect
criticism, review, news reporting, commentary, teaching, scholarship or research that could be
made or done in respect of the work; whether it could adversely affect the market for the
underlying work; and the work’s commercial availability (section 41.2(2)(a)). An interesting
provision contemplated the possibility of a positive claim against copyright owners, empowering
the Governor in Council to make regulations requiring owners to provide access to a protected
work to persons entitled to beneﬁt from any limitations established in light of these factors (section
41.2(2)(b)).61

Overall, Bill C-61 failed to reﬂect the lessons readily drawn from the experiences of the United
States and Europe: it sought to establish broad anti-circumvention rights covering devices and
services, access- and use-control measures, and to do so without tying these rights to copyright
infringement; it set out numerous complex exceptions with no general ‘‘fair circumvention’’
exception; it neglected even to offer lip-service to the preservation of fair dealing rights comparable
to statements found in article 6(4) of the EU Directive or section 1201(a) of the DMCA; it

r 521

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

ofﬂoaded the responsibility for carving out any more exceptions on the Governor in Council,
without making clear on what basis such exceptions would be regulated, on whose request, and
subject to what evidentiary burden;62 and it established no positive obligations for content
providers, leaving any such obligations to be created through regulation, and only in respect of
any new exceptions made under this regulatory power. It is also signiﬁcant that ‘‘new’’ exceptions
that were included in the bill—exceptions for format and time shifting, for example—were made
subject to non-circumvention provisos that would render them redundant in the face of TPMs,63
thereby privileging TPMs over the public policy goals that the exceptions were ostensibly designed
to serve.

Bills C-60 and C-61 thus took practically polemic approaches to the enactment of anti-
circumvention provisions. While the former bill would have established a new level of protection
for copyright owners and thereby more than satisﬁed the requirements of the WIPO Treaties, it
would have done so at a relatively minimalist level, essentially duplicating the scope (if not the
basis) of liability under existing copyright norms. In contrast, Bill C-61 went signiﬁcantly beyond
the protections required by the treaties. While C-61 included limitations not articulated in C-60,
these did not amount to a broad or principled restriction of the scope of anti-circumvention rights;
rather, the complexity and rigidity of these narrowly constructed exceptions suggested only a
grudging willingness to make minimal carve-outs to far-reaching prohibitions. In this way, Bill C-
61 failed to reﬂect the centrality of fair dealing and the public domain in copyright policy, treating
them instead as marginal elements of the existing system that could be reduced or eliminated to
better protect owner interests in the digital environment. In doing so, it threatened to signiﬁcantly
upset the copyright balance established in Canada and articulated by our Supreme Court.

In choosing its approach to the legal regulation of TPMs, Parliament is not constitutionally
bound to follow the conclusions of the Supreme Court or to pursue the goals of the copyright
system as deﬁned by the Court—but one might expect that Parliament would be duly inﬂuenced by
the reasoning of the highest court of the land, and would share its commitment to achieving a
balanced copyright system (Murray, 2005a, p. 652). As Geist explains, ‘‘[b]y sending a clear
message about its support for a fair copyright balance [in Th ´eberge], the Supreme Court has
indirectly provided the most important submission on the current digital copyright reform
consultations’’ (Geist, 2002; cited in Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 41). Since 2002, the Court has
reiterated, expanded on and applied its vision of balance—making further indirect submissions
to a consultation process that continues today.64 And, indeed, the government claims to have been
guided, in the copyright reform process, by the principle that ‘‘the rights of those who hold
copyright must be balanced with the needs of users to access copyright works’’ (Government of
Canada, 2008b). But Bill C-61 did not reﬂect this principle in any meaningful way: to take the
principle of balance seriously would be to embrace the goal of prescriptive parallelism, and to
ensure that fair and lawful dealings are permitted, encouraged and actively facilitated under any
digital amendments to the copyright regime.

Proposals for Canada: In Pursuit of Prescriptive Parallelism
In designing Canada’s digital copyright policy, the ﬁrst and fundamental question to ask is whether
prescriptive parallelism is an appropriate substantive goal of reform: is the overarching aim of
copyright reform to achieve roughly the same balance of interests in the digital realm as copyright
has traditionally maintained in the analogue world? The digital shift alters the practical and
pragmatic considerations at play, but does it alter the normative objectives of our copyright
system, or the social values that inform it? If we can agree on the validity of prescriptive parallelism

522

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

as a goal, we can approach speciﬁc reforms with a view to achieving this goal to the greatest
possible extent.

The simplest solution—and in my opinion, the best solution, at least for now—would be to
resist the pressure to enact anti-circumvention legislation. As Kerr and his co-authors advised in
2002, the ‘‘[b]est strategy for maintaining a balanced copyright law is to take an approach that best
preserves the status quo . . . ’’ (Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 82). While owners and distributors would
continue to use TPMs to erect fences around content, these fences would not be actively
encouraged—or ‘‘electriﬁed’’ (Dusollier, 1999)—by the creation of legal prohibitions.

In those jurisdictions that have already enacted anti-circumvention laws, the swift and frequent
calls for further amendments to correct these new regimes give credence to the claim that such laws
may still be premature and rife with unintended consequences. The United States has seen several
attempts to amend the DMCA to better reﬂect the limits of control consistent with traditional
copyright policy and the Constitution.65 Recent reports in Europe have identiﬁed serious concerns
with the EU Copyright Directive and its implementation by member states (Akester, 2009; Gowers,
2006; Guibault et al., 2007). As other legislatures come under increasing pressure to correct
perceived mistakes in their digital copyright laws, Canadians should take some comfort in the
possibility that inaction may yet be proved to have been the best course of action. In Israel, which,
like Canada, has signed but not ratiﬁed the WIPO Treaties, a ‘‘wait-and-see’’ approach has
apparently found favour; recent amendments to the copyright legislation simply did not include the
introduction of anticipated TPM protection measures (see deBeer, 2009, p. 6).66 An ofﬁcial
statement by the Government of Israel explained this inaction with reference to the widespread
criticism of TPMs and doubts as to their continued commercial relevance (The State of Israel,
2009; cited in deBeer, 2009, p. 7, n. 22). The Government of Israel was correct to assert that, absent
an international obligation to enact legal protections for TPM, other nations have no legitimate
basis for complaint against a nation that opts to ‘‘wait and see’’ (The State of Israel, 2009, pp. 8–9).
Even this approach, however, leaves unanswered the question of how to actively accommodate
fair and lawful uses of protected works to ensure the appropriate balance between owners’ rights
and the public interest. The protection of TPMs may be unnecessary, but it may still be that the
public needs legal protection from TPMs (Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 79). In this sense, the absence of
anti-circumvention laws is not a genuine ‘‘solution’’ to the problem of reconciling TPMs and user
rights; a balanced copyright system may require appropriate steps to be taken to protect permitted
acts. But from a political perspective, the government is less likely to face pressure to create a
system to safeguard lawful uses of protected content if it simply declines to enter the fray. Rather
than buttressing the interests of either owners or users, the use and abuse of technological measures
would be left to run their course subject to existing legal norms. Particularly in light of the costs
and complexities of the alternatives canvassed below, this approach surely has much to recommend
it.

If the Canadian government chooses to include anti-circumvention provisions in the next
reform bill, the foregoing discussion suggests some insights into the shape that these provisions
should take. Most fundamentally, TPM protection should be carefully circumscribed to ensure
minimum disruption to the existing copyright balance. Particularly if motivated by a primarily
political desire to ratify the WIPO treaties, this means that Parliament should proceed in a way that
minimally satisﬁes these treaties’ requirements (Kerr et al., 2002–3, p. 77; Murray and Trosow,
2007, p. 205).

One option that has received little consideration is the possibility of making the legal
protection of TPMs subject to certain formalities. By establishing a new TPM registry at the
Canadian Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (CIPO), for example, it would be possible to subject TPM

r 523

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

protection to appropriate requirements, which could relate to the effectiveness and/or restrictive-
ness of the TPM for which protection is sought, and/or condition protection on the deposit of a
TPM-free digital copy, or a ‘‘digital key’’ or decryption code (or even a guarantee that such will be
made available to facilitate lawful uses on request). CIPO or the registrar would then be well placed
to act as an independent intermediary in the resolution of access disputes.67

If Parliament prefers to proceed with automatic protection for TPMs, the original bill C-60
provides a decent example of what a minimalist approach might look like. In application, this
approach would produce TPM protections that closely align with the existing rights of copyright
owners, essentially reinforcing copyright proper by limiting unlawful circumvention to acts
undertaken for purposes of copyright infringement. Consistent with this minimalist approach,
protection would be afforded only to use-control TPMs. This could be achieved by deﬁning
technical measures in terms of their ability to inhibit or prevent infringing acts, as was done in Bill
C-60, and ideally with the explicit exclusion of measures that control access to works for non-
infringing purposes, as seen in the New Zealand legislation.68

Furthermore, a minimalist approach to TPM protection would not include device prohibi-
tions. While a prohibition on the manufacturing and distribution of circumvention technologies
would increase the ease and efﬁciency with which content providers could prevent circumventions,
such technologies must be available to those who wish to access and use protected works in non-
infringing ways. In CCH, the Supreme Court denied the plaintiff copyright owners the easiest route
towards preventing a widespread, potentially infringing activity because the result would have been
to shift the copyright balance too far in favour of owners’ rights, and to interfere with ‘‘the proper
use of copyrighted works for the good of society as a whole’’ (CCH, paragraph 41). The same
considerations and commitment to balance ought to warn us away from the enactment of
circumvention device prohibitions as a shortcut to restricting circumvention activities. Where a
distributor of circumvention technologies ought to be liable for subsequent infringement by third
parties, that person will incur liability for ‘‘authorizing infringement’’ under existing copyright
norms.69

Should Parliament choose to take the alternative route of restricting circumvention devices, a
reasonably balanced system would require a restrictive deﬁnition of technologies caught by the
prohibition, which would not unduly impede the development and availability of dual-use
technologies or technologies with substantial non-infringing uses. Certainly, any anti-device
provision must apply only to those devices designed primarily for the purpose of circumventing
TPMs, or those with no (or limited) commercial purpose beyond the circumvention of TPMs. It
should also be stressed that device prohibitions would make even more pressing the need for an
adequate mechanism or infrastructure to facilitate fair uses by making available to the public the
means by which such uses could be carried out.70

Finally, any anti-circumvention provisions in Canada should operate ‘‘without prejudice’’ to
the exceptions contained in the Copyright Act. Tying circumvention liability to copyright
infringement goes part way to achieving this goal by implicitly permitting the lawful circumvention
of TPMs for the purposes of fair dealing and other permitted acts. However, it would be preferable
to see an explicit statement that circumvention is not prohibited when undertaken for lawful
purposes including fair dealings.

In order to ensure that fair dealings and other permitted acts are not only lawful on the books
but also possible in practice, a revised Copyright Act should establish positive obligations for
rightholders to facilitate fair and lawful dealings with TPM-protected works.71 This could take the
form of a basic requirement—similar to that found in the German law72—that owners facilitate
lawful acts in relation to TPM-protected works. Reichman and his co-authors suggest a ‘‘reverse

524

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

notice-and-takedown’’ regime which operates on a similar premise: ‘‘users would be able to give
copyright owners notice of their desire to make public interest uses of technically protected
copyrighted works, and right holders would have the responsibility to take down the TPMs or
otherwise enable these lawful uses’’ (Reichman et al., 2007, p. 985).73 Such a system must make
provision for situations where owners do not take adequate steps to make the work available
within a reasonable time, or where users have privacy or other concerns that make it unreasonable
to expect them to request assistance from the copyright owner. There are various options at this
stage, none of which is, admittedly, ideal. It may not be sufﬁcient to permit a would-be user to
initiate a legal action before the court, or to instigate formal arbitration or mediation proceedings,
particularly if relief is limited to the speciﬁc party seeking it. A less onerous or costly route should
be found if the goal is to prevent TPMs from unduly inhibiting lawful uses.

An appropriate mechanism for the enforcement of exceptions may require the identiﬁcation of
an intermediary body or bodies to facilitate fair dealings and permitted acts. One approach would
be simply to require unencrypted copies of works to be lodged at certain public institutions
(libraries, educational institutions, etc.) either on request or by legal mandate. Under such a
scheme, notice requirements on protected copies could indicate the sources of TPM-free versions.74
Alternatively, an intermediary could be entrusted with providing circumvention services or devices
on request, which would yield traceable copies of protected works. In one version of this model, the
assigned body would perform a gatekeeper role with the responsibility of making initial
determinations as to the merit of applicants’ claims; another version would reduce this role to a
merely ministerial one whereby circumvention services and devices would be automatically
distributed in response to recorded requests (Besek, 2004, pp. 494–5). In this vein, Dan Burk
and Julie Cohen have proposed a ‘‘key escrow’’ system in which an independent third party
institution would be responsible for providing digital keys to beneﬁciaries of copyright limitations
(Burk and Cohen, 2001). In order to best replicate traditional fair use practices, Burk and Cohen
envisage a simple online application procedure, with keys being provided on request without
assessment of the lawfulness of dealings, and with any records being subject to strict privacy
conditions. A middle road could see the intermediary charged with responsibility for obtaining
declarations of lawful use from applicants, and ensuring only that such declarations meet
applicable statutory requirements. The declaration could be required to contain, for example,
the applicant’s identity, a statement of qualiﬁed status, and the speciﬁc exemptions of which the
applicant intends to take advantage (Besek, 2004, pp. 495–6).75

The development of an appropriate lawful use infrastructure is a complicated proposition
fraught with problems of both practicality and principle. Difﬁcult questions would surround the
identiﬁcation of appropriate intermediaries or ‘‘qualiﬁed’’ persons or institutions to take on the
‘‘gatekeeper’’ function. To encumber existing public institutions such as libraries, archives or
educational establishments with this additional responsibility may not be appropriate or viable,
particularly if the intermediary function is to demand some degree of legal and/or technical
expertise. It may require the creation of a new administrative agency, such as that recently
constituted in France, or the assignation of new powers and responsibilities to an existing body
such as the Copyright Board, for example. In any case, the initial and ongoing operational costs
could be substantial. There is also the very real risk that such infrastructural costs could prove
unwarranted, either because the system fails to adequately stem the ﬂow of unauthorized copies, or
because changes in market practices quickly render it redundant.

From a principled perspective, the identiﬁcation of too few or the wrong intermediaries could
result in a ‘‘centralization of copyright limitations where only a few actors determine who beneﬁts
from such limitations, and for what purpose’’ (Bechtold, 2004, p. 376). In addition, a system that

r 525

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

requires users to identify themselves and their intended activities in order to beneﬁt from
exceptions inevitably raises signiﬁcant privacy concerns that would have to be overcome (Burk
and Cohen, 2001, pp. 63–5). Perhaps most fundamentally, however, it is all but impossible to
conceive of a lawful use mechanism that does not have a chilling effect on fair dealing practices by
increasing user transaction costs and inhibiting spontaneous uses. Traditionally, users have been
able to ‘‘use now, litigate later’’; TPM protection offers pre-emptive control to owners, forcing
would-be users to ‘‘stop now, establish the right-to-use later’’. The prior restraints imposed by
technical barriers undercut the agency and autonomy of users (Gillepsie, 2007, pp. 255–61),
ensuring that even the best examples of anti-circumvention legislation fail to give effect to the
subtleties and ﬂuidities of creative practices.

In light of these concerns, any new anti-circumvention regime must incorporate tools to permit
continuous monitoring of its application and effects on user practices. Procedures should be put in
place to ensure the systematic identiﬁcation and assessment of the impact of TPM protection
(Gasser, 2006, pp. 104–5). These should include, in addition to periodic and frequent adminis-
trative review, a simple, accessible and affordable mechanism for members of the public to raise
concerns about restrictions on lawful uses. Particularly if the anti-circumvention regime operates
with a system of enumerated narrow exemptions, it will be crucial to offer an efﬁcient and impartial
process to allow the prompt regulation of new exceptions in response to public concerns.

Digital Locks and the Limits of Prescriptive Parallelism
Whatever legal framework emerges from the digital copyright reform process, the problems and
implications of TPMs are likely to be more far-reaching and intractable than these proposed
legislative ‘‘solutions’’ may intimate. After all, simply to accept the logic of additional legal
protection for TPMs is to accept that the use of TPMs should be supported (both encouraged and
strengthened), and so to concede a role for digital locks in our copyright system. And so it would be
remiss to conclude without highlighting a few ‘‘bigger picture’’ considerations that underscore the
risks and potential impact of such a concession.

First, we should be aware of the risk that legal protection for TPMs will shore up the rights of
existing owners and generally maintain the status quo for many of the powerful industry actors
presently pushing for legislative reform. The creation of anti-circumvention rights responds to the
perceived threats posed by networked technologies, with stronger entitlements intended to
guarantee a foothold for existing stakeholders in emergent markets (Ganley, 2004, p. 331; citing
Samuelson, 2003, p. 169). Anti-circumvention laws may therefore have an entrenchment effect,
with the possible consequence of prematurely foreclosing the emergence of new industry actors and
the evolution of new models or avenues of dissemination.76 While it is obvious that existing
industry stakeholders would hope to achieve such entrenchment, it is by no means clear that
policymakers should share this goal. To the extent that policymakers adopt the defensive posture
of rightholders and established industry actors, they risk circumscribing the creative, democratic
and participatory opportunities that these technologies present for society at large.

And if TPM protection appears necessary to strengthen the control offered by existing
copyright law, we should consider the further risk that the creation of new rights will only
obfuscate the more fundamental failings of copyright in our networked society. Proponents of anti-
circumvention legislation frequently point to the massive increase and pervasiveness of copyright
infringing activities among members of the general public as a reason to support TPM protection.
We must, however, take care not to bandage over wounds that are in need of proper attention. The
pervasiveness of end-user infringements points to a growing disconnect between social norms (old
and emerging) and legal norms (traditional and proposed). This increasingly chasmic divide

526

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

suggests an even greater cause for concern: namely, the changing role and relevance of copyright
law in everyday cultural exchange and creative play, and the way in which this challenges the
normative foundations of the copyright system. Strengthening existing laws and enacting new ones
is a quick but probably ﬂeeting ﬁx to a larger socio-normative quandary. Where established and
emerging user practices challenge the coherence of social and legal norms, the latter become
increasingly costly and difﬁcult to enforce. The imposition of legal norms that are not sufﬁciently
internalized by many or most citizens could threaten the perceived legitimacy of the copyright
system, and compromise the rule of law more generally (Gervais, 2005, pp. 48–53).77

We should also appreciate the extent to which TPMs and their protection threaten to change the
established rules of the game. Leaks, limits and the tough practicalities of enforcement have always
been an important part of the architecture of the copyright system and the way that it achieves its so-
called balance. To the extent that TPMs are lauded as practical means by which to ameliorate these
problems, we should ask whether they are problems that need solving. If copyright were to operate in
practice in perfect harmony with copyright law as it exists on the book, the system would be far from
perfect: perfect control is a fallacious ideal because copyright as a system works better when it
‘‘leaks’’.78 Similarly, the ambiguity of legal doctrines such as fair dealing is not a ﬂaw but a vital
feature of the system. The boundaries of fair dealing are ﬂuid, its application context-speciﬁc, and its
scope subject to interpretation: as a result, many uses will be routinely undertaken and remain un-
litigated because they belong in the penumbra of doubt that makes them possibly fair—and possibly
infringing (see Gillepsie, 2007, p. 59). Broad TPM protections will permit the indeterminacy of legal
doctrine—which has been so central to the preservation of breathing space for fair dealing practices—
to be supplanted by the determinacy of technology.

Although better control does not necessarily make a better system, the quest for perfect
control ﬁnds legitimation in the proprietary rhetoric of IP. Thus, for example, protected content is
cast as private property, and the circumvention of TPMs is equated with breaking and entering: it
is no more permissible, according to some proponents of anti-circumvention law, to circumvent a
TPM to exercise a permitted act, than it is to break into a car to make fair use of a manuscript left
inside. With every such analogy, a counter-analogy can be found: it is no more permissible, one
might say, to employ TPMs to prohibit access to lawful users than it is to erect fences around
public land. The inappropriate extension and use of such metaphors can obscure questionable
assumptions and unsubstantiated claims, as can reliance on purported parallels without drawing
adequate distinctions.79 And so, ﬁnally, there is the risk that added protection for TPMs will
further entrench the misleading proprietary rhetoric that has pervaded the TPM debate, and lend
weight to the perception of IP as absolute dominion (see Ganley, 2004, pp. 331–2). It is crucial
that we identify and challenge the expansion (and frequent misapplication) of property-based
rhetoric that has and will accompany new claims to right, and avoid the muddied moralistic
reasoning that such rhetoric is intended to evoke. The validity of claims and their policy rationales
should be assessed on their own terms and with the public policy goals of the copyright system
clearly in view.

Conclusion

Canadian policymakers continue to contemplate the appropriate design for a new layer of rights
that will afford greater protection to owners in the digital environment. In my opinion, the clearest
route towards retaining roughly the same balance between copyright owners and users in this new
environment would be, ﬁrst, to refrain from creating anti-circumvention rights, and second, to
establish an effective system to facilitate lawful acts in relation to TPM-protected works. The latter

r 527

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

would require the enactment of a positive obligation for rightholders to provide the necessary
means for users to take advantage of recognized exceptions, and would beneﬁt from the creation of
an intermediary body to receive user requests and distribute circumvention devices or services or
TPM-free copies. Under such a model, owners would continue to enjoy the advantages of technical
measures to reinforce their control over legally protected works, while users would be both
practically able and legally entitled to make lawful uses of these works.

If anti-circumvention rights are to be created, however, I have suggested that it may be possible
to substantially meet the principled demands of prescriptive parallelism by carefully constructing
such rights around the existing corner-stones of Canadian copyright policy. These rights could and
should be made contingent on certain formalities or guarantees; directly tied to copyright
infringing activities so that circumvention for non-infringing purposes remains lawful; restricted
to circumvention activities so that circumvention technologies are not per se restricted; made
subject to broad and explicit fair and lawful use exceptions; and conditional on accessible
mechanisms to ensure the practical availability of these exceptions. To the extent that such
proposals sound unwieldy, this should be heard as a cautionary note not against the requirements
and limits described, but rather against any legislative intervention to reinforce TPMs through the
copyright system.

While an ideal solution to the challenge of preserving the copyright balance remains elusive,
canvassing these possibilities reveals one thing with certainty: the anti-circumvention provisions of
Bill C-61 were far from an ideal solution. Canada’s copyright balance of rights and exceptions will
be preserved in the digital environment only by resisting external pressures, by identifying and
learning from best and worst practices in other jurisdictions, and most importantly, by taking
seriously the centrality of fair dealing and the public domain within copyright law.

Whatever broad principles and policies may ultimately inform the shape of anti-circumvention
regulations, it should be borne in mind that, fundamentally, TPMs confer primacy to private
ordering. While proponents of anti-circumvention laws have ‘‘taken cover under the umbrella of
copyright rhetoric’’ (Gillepsie, 2007, p. 274), the legal protection of TPMs will privilege private
efforts to control access, distribution, use and consumption of digital content, marginalizing the
public interest and social welfare considerations that have informed the development of the
copyright system and its delicate balance. The proliferation of TPMs is altering the way in which
we experience and engage with cultural resources in our networked society—but a new layer of
legal entitlement attached to TPMs would alter the role that copyright plays in regulating our
cultural life.

From a socio-cultural perspective, the larger threat so readily obscured by practical pleas and
political arguments is that, through a combination of technical pragmatism and misguided policy,
we fail to realize the full beneﬁts and potential (fulﬁll the promise, if you will) of the digital era. In
Robertson v Thomson Corp.,80 Abella J considered copyright’s capacity to ‘‘keep pace with
technological developments to foster intellectual, artistic and cultural creativity’’, and stated that,
when considering how to regulate the internet and new technologies, ‘‘the public beneﬁts of this
digital universe should be kept prominently in view’’.81 Citing Geist (2006, p. 9), the minority
judgement continues: ‘‘The Internet and new technologies have unleashed a remarkable array of
new creativity, empowering millions of individuals to do more than just consume our culture,
instead enabling them to actively and meaningfully participate in it’’.82 Such statements seem to
hold promise of a copyright system that respects and reﬂects the transformative possibilities of new
technologies rather than resisting and constraining the emerging cultural practices that these
technologies permit.83 As we consider reforming our copyright laws in response to the digital shift,
we should be committed to realizing this promise.

528

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

About the Author

Carys J. Craig, LL.B.(Hons), LL.M., S.J.D., is an Associate Professor of law at Osgoode Hall Law
School, York University, in Toronto, Canada, where she teaches in the ﬁeld of IP; e-mail:
ccraig@osgoode.yorku.ca

Notes

The author wishes to thank the organizers of the University of Toronto 2009 Copyright Symposium (part of
the Centre for Innovation Law & Policy’s Microsoft Information Society Project). In particular, thanks go to
Abraham Drassinower and Andrea Slane for the opportunity to participate, and to Richard Owens for his
challenging counter-arguments. A debt of gratitude is also owed to Tamsin Thomas for her research and
editorial assistance.

1 This is an important conceptual distinction, if not always a practical one. As Kerr et al. (2002–3, p. 13)

explain, in reality, TPMs often display use control and access control characteristics, making the
distinction difﬁcult to maintain, and complicating any effort to legislate activities in relation to one kind
of TPM and not the other.

2 Notably, the Canadian copyright balance, as articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in Th ´eberge v

Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain Inc. 2002 SCC 34 (Th ´eberge), preserves, as an equal and distinct
objective, providing a just reward for authors. I have argued elsewhere that the provision of individual
reward can and should be subsumed within the general public goal of encouraging the creation and
dissemination of intellectual works (see Craig, 2002), but such a conclusion is not necessary to support
the argument advanced here.

3 The teleological argument that underlies the demands for stronger legal rights is neatly articulated by
James Boyle (2008): ‘‘[T]he strength of intellectual property rights must vary inversely with the cost of
copying’’, from which it appears to follow that ‘‘as copying costs approach zero, intellectual property
rights must approach perfect control’’ (pp. 60–1).

4 The Working Group reasoned:

[L]egal protection alone will not be adequate to provide incentive to authors to create and
to disseminate works to the public. Similarly, technological protection likely will not be
effective unless the law also provides some protection for the technological processes
and systems used to prevent or restrict unauthorized uses of copyrighted works. The
Working Group ﬁnds that prohibition of devices, products, components and services that
defeat technological methods of preventing unauthorized use is in the public interest and
furthers the Constitutional purpose of copyright laws (White Paper, 1995, p. 230, emphasis
added).

5 The WCT and WPPT are known together as the WIPO Internet Treaties.
6 A striking example is the elimination of a draft article that would have recognized a right of copyright

owners to control temporary reproductions of their work in a computer’s RAM.

7 For a detailed account of the US agenda at WIPO and its impact on the resulting treaties, see Samuelson
(1997). With regard to the regulation of circumvention technologies speciﬁcally, see Litman (2001, pp.
129–33).

8 Article 18 of the WPPT, supra n. 5, reads:

Contracting Parties shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are used by performers
or producers of phonograms in connection with the exercise of their rights under this Treaty

r 529

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

and that restrict acts, in respect of their performances or phonograms, which are not
authorized by the performers or the producers of phonograms concerned or permitted by law.

9 Samuelson argues that US law would have satisﬁed article 11 obligations without the enactment of the

Digital Millenium Copyright Act.

10 This interpretation of the text of article 11 is not without its critics. As Kerr et al. (2002–3) acknowledge,

the article could be read to mean that protected TPMs include those which restrict acts in relation to
works that are not authorized by authors (i.e. as well as those restricting acts that are not permitted by
law) (p. 36).

11 Howard Knopf (2008) cites in support J. Craig Barker:

The effect of signature is not, as one might expect, to bind a state to the terms of a treaty.
. . . A state that has signed, but not yet ratiﬁed, a treaty is bound not to do anything
contrary to the objects and purposes of that treaty before ratiﬁcation or withdrawal of
signature. However, a state is not bound to follow the terms of a treaty in their entirety
until ratiﬁcation (2002).

12 The text continues: ‘‘the ratiﬁcation process would only be considered after further work has been

completed’’. See Government of Canada (2008a).

13 However, not everyone is a critic of such a development. See, e.g. Bell (1998).
14 See Ginsburg (2001):

The ‘‘copyright balance’’ is hardly immutable . . . It is far from apparent why the ‘‘balance’’ in
force from the advent of [mass market copying] devices should be more normative and less
contingent that the prior ‘‘balance’’, or than the now emerging balance (p. 46).

Notably, Ginsburg does not present the access-right as a wholly new creation of the digital era, but rather
suggests that it was implicit in the reproduction and distribution rights in the days before mass copying
devices. See also Heide (2001) and Olswang (1995).

15 2004 SCC 13 (2004) 1 S.C.R. 339 (CCH, cited to S.C.R.).
16 I should note that fair dealing is best understood as part of the public domain, and has been recognized
by the Supreme Court of Canada as such. In Th ´eberge, supra n. 2, Binnie J opined that the exceptions to
copyright infringement enumerated in the Copyright Act ‘‘seek to protect the public domain in
traditional ways such as fair dealing for the purpose of criticism or review and to add new protections to
reﬂect new technology, such as limited computer program reproduction and ‘‘ephemeral recordings’’ in
connection with live performances’’ (paragraph 32).

17 Copyright Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42 [online]. Available at hhttp://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/C-42/i [Accessed

October 2009].

18 There are therefore three hurdles to be met by a defendant who claims to have dealt fairly with a work:

ﬁrst, the purpose must be one of those listed in the act; second, the dealing must be fair; and ﬁnally,
sufﬁcient acknowledgement must have been given where statutorily required.

19 ‘‘[T]he purpose of copyright law was to balance the public interest in promoting the encouragement and
dissemination of works of the arts and intellect and obtaining a just reward for the creator’’ (CCH, supra
n. 15, paragraph 23).

20 The Court allowed the defendant Library to claim a ‘‘research’’ purpose in the provision of copying
services to its patrons. In recognition of the public purposes of the Copyright Act, the Court opined that a
more inclusive approach to applying the fair dealing defence was necessary.

21 In order to be fair, a dealing must be for the purpose of research, private study, news reporting, criticism

or review; and it must be ‘‘fair’’, which is ‘‘a question of fact and depends on the facts of each case’’

530

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

(CCH, supra n. 15, paragraph 52). Although there is no ‘‘set test’’, determinations of fairness involve
consideration of several factors, which may include (1) the purpose of the dealing, (2) the character of the
dealing, (3) the amount of the dealing, (4) alternatives to the dealing, (5) the nature of the work, and (6)
the effect of the dealing on the work (ibid., paragraph 53).

22 Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Pub.L. No. 105–304, Title I, 112 Sta. 2860 (1998), codiﬁed at 17
U.S.C. section 1201(a)-(b) (1999) (DMCA) [online]. Available at hhttp://www.copyright.gov/legislation/
dmca.pdfi [Accessed October 2009]. Litman (2001) comments:

Copyright owners who want to ensure that they control—and can charge money for—any
appearance of their works in any computer anywhere . . . were able to persuade Congress to
pass the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which encourages the use of technological
protections to facilitate a pay-per-view, pay-per-use system (p. 27).

23 Ultimately, in recognition of all that is currently unknown and unforeseeable, Kerr and colleagues’ report
advised against the implementation of any new legal measures in Canada to protect TPMs for the time
being.

24 Kerr et al. (2002–3) note that legal protection for TPMs is inherently contrary to the principle of media or

technology neutrality.

25 In its Copyright Reform ‘‘Backgrounder’’, the Government of Canada (2008b) states:

The Internet has threatened the ability of rights holders to prevent the unauthorized use of
works and other protected subject matter. People around the world have taken advantage
of the Internet to access content that is available in user-friendly forms. This access is often
made through new legitimate services and platforms, and also via free alternatives, both
legitimate and illegitimate, to the traditional channels of distribution of copyright material.

See also Barry B. Sookman (2005): ‘‘TPMs are essential to limiting the ease of carrying out copyright
infringement in the digital environment. Without adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of TPMs, [the] goals [of Canadian copyright policy] will be undermined’’ (p. 26).

26 See, e.g., Pamela Samuelson (1999):

Clinton Administration ofﬁcials, bowing to the wishes of Hollywood and its allies, opted
. . . to support an unpredictable, overbroad, and maximalist set of anti-circumvention
regulations . . . . It was, in short, not the needs of the digital economy that drove adoption
of the anti-circumvention provisions in the DMCA. Rather, what drove the debate was
high rhetoric, exaggerated claims, and power politics from representatives of certain
established but frightened copyright industries (p. 533).

27 While 1201(a)(2) prohibits trafﬁcking in devices that circumvent access controls, 1201(b) prohibits
trafﬁcking in circumvention devices designed or produced to circumvent TPMs that protect the exclusive
rights of copyright holders in the Copyright Act (e.g. those measures that copyright owners employ to
prevent unauthorized reproduction of the work).

28 Samuelson (1999) argues that ‘‘the enumerated exceptions in the act-of-circumvention ban are unduly

narrow and inconsistent with framework principles’’ (pp. 537–46).

29 The list also includes: circumvention to achieve interoperability of computer programs (section 1201(f));
circumvention to prevent minors from accessing material on the internet (section 1201(h)); circumvention
when either the technical measure or the work collect or disseminate personally identifying information
about the user’s online activities (section 1201(i)); circumvention to test the security of a computer,
computer system or network (section 1201(j)). Note that only three of these exceptions apply to one or
both of the anti-device rules: the exception for reverse engineering may, subject to limitations, permit a

r 531

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

person to develop and make available the means of circumventing both access- and rights-control TPMs
to achieve interoperability; encryption research and security testing exceptions are, subject to limitations,
available for the development and distribution of devices necessary to circumvent access-control
measures only.

30 For example, an exemption exists for ‘‘[c]omputer programs in the form of ﬁrmware that enable wireless
telephone handsets to connect to a wireless telephone communication network, when circumvention is
accomplished for the sole purpose of lawfully connecting to a wireless telephone communication
network’’. All six exemptions can be found online. Available online at hhttp://www.copyright.gov/1201/
2006/index.htmli [Accessed November 2009]. The fourth anti-circumvention rulemaking proceeding
(2009) is in progress at the time of this writing.

31 Herman and Gandy Jr. (2006) provide a fascinating account of the emergence and implementation of this
procedure, criticizing the scheme for ‘‘taking the responsibility for ensuring fair use away from the courts
and giving it to an obscure, relatively toothless rulemaking process’’, and ‘‘leaving wider fair use concerns
without a venue’’ (p. 188).

32 For a number of illustrative examples of restrictions imposed by the DMCA, see Kerr et al. (2002–3, pp.
69–74). A full list of DMCA cases that have presented fair use, free speech and privacy concerns can be
found online. Available at hhttp://www.eff.org/issues/dmcai [Accessed November 2009].

33 111 F. Supp. 2d 294 (Southern District of New York 2000).
34 Sub. nom. Universal City Studios, Inc. v Eric Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2nd Cir. 2001) (Corley).
35 Ibid., p. 429.
36 71 Fed. Reg. 68472, 68473 (27 November 2006).
37 Directive 2001/29/EC on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related Rights in the
Information Society, art.6 2001 O.J. (L 167) 10 (Copyright Directive) [online]. Available at hhttp://eur-lex.
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:167:0010:0019:EN:PDFi [Accessed October 2009].
In accordance with article 6(3), the protection encompasses the act of circumvention and trafﬁcking in
devices and services in relation to both copyright control measures and access control measures.

38 Reichman et al. identify article 6(4) as ‘‘one dimension of parallelism in the EU Directive’’. Reichman
cites Hugenholtz (2000): ‘‘[Article 6(4)] is presumably intended to reconcile the interests of right owners
employing technical protection measures with the interests of users wishing to beneﬁt from copyright
limitations’’ (p. 501).

39 ‘‘‘Fair use by mandate’ describes circumstances in which rightholders are directed to enable non-infringing
uses but not necessarily given speciﬁc instructions as to how that should be done’’ (Besek, 2004, p. 492).
40 See Dusollier (2003a): ‘‘Would any measure, even a minimal one, free the State from its legislative duty to
safeguard the public interest? If it did, too much unrestrained power would go to authors and other rights
holder of copyrighted works’’ (p. 53).

41 Article 6(4), Copyright Directive, supra n. 38.
42 The intended scope of this carve-out is not entirely clear. For example, does an online music store qualify

as an interactive on-demand service? See Gasser and Girsberger (2004, p. 25) and Brown and Bohm
(2003) (describing this as ‘‘a dramatic reduction of copyright users’ rights that needs urgent revision in the
review of the Directive’’ [p. 21]); and Dusollier (2003a, p. 54).

43 Included are exceptions concerning: speciﬁc reproductive acts by libraries, educational establishments,

museums or archives without commercial advantage; certain acts in respect of ephemeral recordings;
reproductions of broadcasts by social institutions for non-commercial purposes; certain illustrative uses
in teaching or scientiﬁc research; certain uses for the beneﬁt of persons with a disability; and certain uses
for the purpose of public security. On the apparently arbitrary nature of this selection (see Guibault et al.,
2007, p. 110; cited in Reichman et al., 2007, at n. 312; see also Dusollier, 2003a, p. 53).

532

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

44 See also Reichman et al. (2007): ‘‘[T]he failure to mandate the adoption of a wide range of exceptions

undermines the effectiveness of Article 6(4) in achieving its general goal of prescriptive parallelism’’
(p. 1043).

45 Compare with Dusollier (2003a): ‘‘Behind a balanced, publicly oriented exterior . . . lies a private-
orderings model in which author interests are privileged and preserved’’ (p. 55). See also Wiese (2002):

[T]he Directive permits a scenario where there is virtually nothing left of the traditional
copyright balance: a world where fair use rights are dead since most circumvention acts and
all circumvention devices are prohibited; a world where copyright law would be replaced by
technological monopolies and electronic contracts (p. 151).

46 Pursuant to Section 374 of the Irish Copyright and Related Rights Act (2000) beneﬁciaries of exceptions
‘‘may apply to the High Court for an order requiring a person to do or to refrain from doing anything the
doing or refraining from doing of which is necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section’’ (Gasser, 2006, p. 79). The act is available online at hhttp://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/
pub/0028/index.htmli [Accessed November 2009]. Section 95b(2) of the German Law for the Regulation
of Copyright in the Information Society similarly provides right to claim from rightholders the necessary
means to beneﬁt from exceptions [online]. Available at hhttp://www.urheberrecht.org/topic/Info-RiLi/
ent/Bundesrat_Drucksache_271_03.pdfi [Accessed November 2009]. Section 71 quinquies(2) of
Luxemburg’s revised Law on Copyright, Neighbouring Rights and Databases entitles beneﬁciaries to
take injunction proceedings [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/clea/en/
text_pdf.jsp?lang=FR&id=2933i [Accessed November 2009].

47 Added to the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 by the Copyright and Related Rights Regulations

2003, S.I. 2003/2498 (UK). For further information see Shah (2004).

48 Created by the Loi sur le Droit d’Auteur et les Droits Voisins dans la Soci ´et ´e de l’Information
(DADVSI). The body consists of six members appointed for a six-year term after designation by their
respective bodies: see Decree of 4 April 2008 concerning the Regulatory Authority on technical protective
devices created by article L. 331–17 of the Intellectual Property Code, published in the Journal Ofﬁciel of
5 April 2008; see also Berbinau (2007) and Blocman (2007).

49 Copyright

(New Technologies) Amendment Act 2008 No. 27 [online]. Available at

www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2008/0027/latest/whole.html#dlm1122502i [Accessed February
2010].

50 Pursuant to subsection 226E(2)(b), the user may engage a qualiﬁed person to exercise the permitted act
on his or her behalf only if the copyright owner or the exclusive licensee has refused the user’s request for
assistance or has failed to respond to it within a reasonable time.

51 In its original enactment of anti-circumvention laws, Australia also included means by which lawful users
could obtain circumvention devices or services from ‘‘qualiﬁed persons’’ to enable or facilitate permitted
uses: Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act 2000 No. 110, 2000 (Cth), section 116A(3). However,
following the coming into force of the Australia–United States Free Trade Agreement 2005 (AUSFTA),
available at hwww.dfat.gov.au/trade/negotiations/us_fta/ﬁnal-text/i [Accessed November 2009],
Australia has enacted revised anti-circumvention provisions that more closely align with the approach
taken in the DMCA. Revised Copyright Act 1968 available online at hhttp://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/
cth/consol_act/ca1968133.txti [Accessed November 2009]. See also, Weatherall (2004–5).

52 Technological measures were deﬁned in the bill as ‘‘any technology, device or component that, in the
ordinary course of its operation, restricts the doing 1/4 of any act that is mentioned in section 3, 15, or 18
or that could constitute an infringement of any applicable moral rights’’. In other words, a protected
TPM is one that ordinarily restricts infringing activities. Bill C-60, An Act to Amend the Copyright

r 533

hhttp://

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Act, section 1(2) [online]. Available at hhttp://www2.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?
pub=bill&doc=c-60&parl=38&ses=1&language=Ei [Accessed November 2009].

53 Subsection 80(1) provides that, subject to certain limitations, it does not infringe copyright to make an

audio-recording of a musical work for private use. As such, section 32.02 of the bill did extend
circumvention liability beyond existing copyright liability with regard to private copies of sound
recordings that would have beneﬁted from subsection 80(1) but for the use of TPMs to protect the
material embodiment of the musical work.

54 Geist asks whether, for example, distributing software that is frequently used for infringing purposes
might be caught (i.e. knowledge that the service is likely to be used to infringe copyright), or whether the
section would require direct knowledge of a speciﬁc infringing purpose (Geist, 2005, p. 242).

55 See also Kerr (2005): ‘‘[T]he proposed anti-circumvention laws protect these [DRM] technologies without

protecting people from excessive or illegitimate uses of them’’ (p. 210).

56 ‘‘Technological measures’’ were deﬁned to include ‘‘any effective’’ technology that ‘‘in the ordinary
course of its operation’’ either ‘‘controls access’’ to a work or ‘‘restricts the doing’’ of any infringing acts.
Bill C-61 (An Act to Amend the Copyright Act), section 41 [online]. Available at hhttp://
www2.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=3570473&Mode=1&Language=Ei
[Accessed November 2009].

57 Pursuant to section 41.1(1)(c), no person shall ‘‘manufacture, import, provide—including by selling or

renting—offer for sale or rental or distribute’’ circumvention technologies, devices or components.

58 Under section 41.1(1)(c)(i), the prohibition applies if ‘‘the technology, device or component is designed or

produced primarily for the purposes of circumventing a technological measure’’.

59 Under section 41.1(1)(c)(ii), the prohibition applies if ‘‘the uses or purposes of the technology, device or
component are not commercially signiﬁcant other than when it is used for the purposes of circumventing
a technological measure’’.

60 Section 41.1(1)(c)(iii): the prohibition applies if ‘‘the person markets the technology, device or component
as being for the purposes of circumventing a technological measure or acts in concert with another person
in order to market the technology, device or component as being for those purposes’’. The same factors
are applied to determine whether services are caught by the prohibition in section 41.1(1)(b).

61 Section 41.2(2)(b) states: ‘‘The regulations may prescribe the manner in which, and the time within
which, access is to be provided, as well as any conditions that the owner of the copyright is to comply
with’’.

62 As Geist (2008) observed on his blogsite, ‘‘Bill C-61 establishes the criteria for the introduction of new

circumvention rights but fails to implement an administrative structure to conduct the reviews’’.

63 Section 29.21 creates an exception for ‘‘an individual to reproduce a work or other subject-matter that is a
photograph or is contained in a book, newspaper, periodical or videocassette, or any substantial part of
such a work or other subject-matter, onto another medium or device’’ but subject to certain conditions,
which include ‘‘(c) the individual, in order to make the reproduction, did not circumvent a technological
measure or cause one to be circumvented’’. This exception is an illustrative example of the narrow precision
with which the bill sought to carve out permitted acts. See also sections 29.22(1)(c) (which similarly limits
the exception for an individual who reproduces ‘‘onto a medium or device a musical work embodied in a
sound recording), and section 29.23(1)(b) (which similarly limits the exception created for the ﬁxing of
communication signals to record a program for the purpose of listening to or watching it later)’’.

64 See especially CCH supra n. 16. Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers v Canadian

Association of Internet Providers, 2004 SCC 45 [SOCAN].

65 The Digital Media Consumers’ Rights Act bill was introduced to the US House of Representatives

in January 2003 (H.R. 107) and reintroduced in March 2005 (H.R. 1201). The ‘‘Freedom and

534

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Innovation Revitalizing U.S. Entrepreneurship’’ (or FAIR USE) Act was introduced in February 2007
(H.R. 1201).

66 Copyright Act 2007 (Israel) (unofﬁcial translation by Israeli Ministry of Justice) [online]. Available at

hhttp://www.tau.ac.il/law/members/birnhack/IsraeliCopyrightAct2007.pdfi [Accessed October 2009].

67 See Ganley (2004, p. 330) discussing the potential advantages of conditioning anti-circumvention

provisions on a set of positive steps taken by rightholders.

68 New Zealand’s Copyright (New Technologies) Amendment Act 2008, section 226,

includes in its

deﬁnition of TPM the following clariﬁcation:

(b) for the avoidance of doubt, [TPM] does not include a process, treatment, mechanism,
device, or system to the extent that, in the normal course of operation, it only controls any
access to a work for non-infringing purposes (for example, it does not include a process,
treatment, mechanism, device, or system to the extent that it controls geographic market
segmentation by preventing the playback in New Zealand of a non-infringing copy of a
work).

69 The Copyright Act makes it unlawful to authorize an infringing act: ss. 3, 27(1). The Supreme Court

explained in SOCAN at paragraph 127:

The knowledge that someone might be using neutral technology to violate copyright (as
with the photocopier in the CCH case) is not necessarily sufﬁcient
to constitute
authorization, which requires a demonstration that the defendant did ‘‘(g)ive approval
to; sanction, permit; favour, encourage’’ the infringing conduct (citing CCH, supra n. 15,
paragraph 38).

70 For further discussion, see infra.
71 Compare with Kerr et al. (2002–3) where they propose a possible ‘‘access-to-works right’’ that could

impose upon copyright owners a ‘‘positive obligation to provide access-to-a-work when persons or
institutions fall within an exception or limitation set out in the Copyright Act’’ (p. 78).

72 Section 95b(1) of the German Copyright Act (UrhG), added by the Law for the Regulation of Copyright

in the Information Society 2003, requires rightholders to provide necessary means for users to beneﬁt
from recognized exemptions.

73 For a detailed description of how such a system may be effectively implemented through judicial or

administrative measures, see Reichman et al. (2007, pp. 1045–60).

74 If lawful users are not to be unduly disadvantaged, these versions should be digital and not merely

‘‘analogue’’ or hard copies. However, such a system is likely to raise objections on the basis that the
availability of TPM-free digital copies could quickly render the use of technical protections redundant.
Perhaps a combination of record keeping and digital marking (together with strict privacy controls) could
minimize such objections.

75 Compare with Australia’s Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act 2000, section 116A(3), discussed

supra n. 52, under which the supplier of circumvention devices and services performed this limited
intermediary role. The declaration required could be similar in type to the declaration of lawful purpose
obtained by the Great Library from its patrons under the access policy approved by the Supreme Court
in CCH. See CCH, supra n. 15 at paragraph 61.

76 But compare with Sookman (2005) arguing that protection for TPMs will stimulate investment in
innovative business models, support the development of e-commerce, and thereby serve the public interest.
77 Gervais (2005) warns: ‘‘If policy makers insist on making illegal socially-acceptable conduct, technology
will adapt to the legal environment either by circumventing the legal norm or by making enforcement
either impossible or too costly’’(p. 52).

r 535

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

78 Much of what strikes the layperson or law student as counter-intuitive or even nonsensical about
copyright law is also largely irrelevant in light of market realities and basic practicalities. Many common
user practices may not be legal, but are overlooked by owners because they are not readily identiﬁed, they
are recognized as potentially beneﬁcial, or the ﬁnancial or public relation costs of pursuing them are not
worth assuming (see Gillepsie, 2007, pp. 59–60).

79 For an interesting discussion of metaphor in the context of the TPM debate, see Herman (2008).
80 2006 SCC 43, 2 S.C.R. 363, paragraph 79 (Robertson).
81 Ibid.
82 Ibid.
83 Tempering this optimism somewhat, it should be noted that these statements were made by Abella J in the
context of a minority judgement. The majority appeared less concerned with ensuring that copyright not
interfere with the advantages offered by new technologies: ‘‘Media neutrality is not a licence to override
the rights of authors—it exists to protect the rights of authors and others as technology evolves’’ (Ibid.,
paragraph 49).

References

Akester, P. (2009) Technological Accommodation of Conﬂicts between Freedom of Expression and DRM: The

First Empirical Assessment. The Selected Works of Patricia Akester [online]. The Berkeley Electronic
Press. Available at hhttp://www.law.cam.ac.uk/faculty-resources/download/technological-
accommodation-of-conﬂicts-between-freedom-of-expression-and-drm-the-ﬁrst-empirical-assessment/
6286/pdfi [Accessed October 2009].

Apple Inc. (2009) Changes Coming to the iTunes Store [online]. Apple Inc. Available at hhttp://

www.apple.com/pr/library/2009/01/06itunes.htmli [Accessed October 2009].

Barker, J. C. (2002) ‘Mechanisms to Create and Support Treaties, Conventions and other Responses’,

UNESCO Encyclopaedia of Life-Support Systems [online]. EoLss Publishers, Paris. Available at
hhttp://www.eolss.net/EolssSampleChapters/C14/E1-44-01/E1-44-01-TXT-02.aspxi [Accessed October
2009].

Bechtold, S. (2004) ‘Digital Rights Management in the United States and Europe’, American Journal of

Comparative Law, 52, 323–82.

Bell, T. W. (1998) ‘Fair Use vs. Fared Use: The Impact of Automated Rights Management on Copyright’s

Fair Use Doctrine’, North Carolina Law Review, 76(2), 557–620.

Benkler, Y. and Lessig, L. (2001) ‘Profs. Benkler and Lessig Amici Brief in ‘‘MPAA v. 2600’’ Case’ [online].

Available at hhttp://w2.eff.org/IP/Video/MPAA_DVD_cases/20010126_ny_2profs_amicus.htmli
[Accessed October 2009].

Berbinau, J. (2007) ‘Copyright in Cyberspace: Towards a Workable Balance: Setting up a Regulatory

Authority’ [online]. Available at hhttp://www.armt.fr/IMG/doc/IPO2007.doci [Accessed October 2009].
Besek, J. M. (2004) ‘Anti-Circumvention Laws and Copyright: A Report from the Kernochan Center for Law,

Media and the Arts’, Columbia Journal of Law and the Arts, 27, 385–517.

Blocman, A. (2007) ‘Setting up of the Regulatory Authority on Technical Protection Measures’, IRIS 2007-
5:9/13 [online]. Available at hhttp://merlin.obs.coe.int/iris/2007/5/article13.en.htmli [Accessed October
2009].

Boyle, J. (2008) The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind. Yale University Press, New Haven,

CT.

Brown, I. and Bohm, N. (2003) Implementing the EU Copyright Directive [online]. Foundation for

Information Policy Research. Available at hhttp://www.ﬁpr.org/copyright/guide/eucd-guide.pdfi
[Accessed October 2009].

536

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Burk, D. L. and Cohen, J. E. (2001) ‘Fair Use Infrastructure for Rights Management Systems’, Harvard

Journal of Law and Technology, 15(1), 41–83.

Commission of the European Community (2007) Report to the Council, the European Parliament and the
Economic and Social Committee on the Application of Directive 2001/29/EC on the Harmonisation of
Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related Rights in the Information Society, Commission Staff Working
Document, SEC(2007) 1556, 30 November 2007 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.ipex.eu/ipex/webdav/
site/myjahiasite/groups/CentralSupport/public/2007/SEC_2007_1556/COM_SEC(2007)1556_EN.doci
[Accessed October 2009].

Craig, C. (2002) ‘Locke, Labour and Limiting the Author’s Right: A Warning Against a Lockean Approach

to Copyright Law’, Queen’s Law Journal, 28(1), 1–60.

Craig, C. (2005) ‘The Changing Face of Fair Dealing in Canadian Copyright Law: A Proposal for Legislative

Reform’, in M. Geist (ed.), In the Public Interest: The Future of Canadian Copyright Law. Irwin Law,
Toronto, pp. 437–61.

deBeer, J. (2009) Copyright and Innovation in the Networked Information Economy, Working Paper, Social
Science Research Network [online]. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=1410158i [Accessed October
2009].

deBeer, J. and Geist, M. (2008) ‘Developing Canada’s IP Agenda’, in J. Daudelin and Daniel Schwanen (eds),
Canada Among Nations 2007: What Room for Manoeuvre? McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal,
pp. 157–80.

Drassinower, A. (2005) ‘Taking User Rights Seriously’, in M. Geist (ed.), In the Public Interest: The Future of

Canadian Copyright Law. Irwin Law, Toronto, pp. 462–79.

Dusollier, S. (1999) ‘Electrifying the Fence: The Legal Protection of Technological Measures for Protecting

Copyright’, European Intellectual Property Review, 21(6), 285–97.

Dusollier, S. (2003a) ‘Fair Use by Design in the European Copyright Directive of 2001’, Communications of

the ACM, 46(4), 51–5.

Dusollier, S. (2003b) ‘Exceptions and Technological Measures in the European Copyright Directive of 2001 –

An Empty Promise’, International Review of Industrial Property & Copyright Law, 34(1), 62–75.

Ganley, P. (2004) ‘Digital Copyright and the New Creative Dynamics’, International Journal of Literature of

Law and Information Technology, 12(3), 282–332.

Gasser, U. (2006) ‘Legal Frameworks and Technological Protection of Digital Content: Moving Forward

towards a Best Practice Model’, Fordham Intellectual Property, Media and Entertainment Law Journal,
17(1), 39–113.

Gasser, U. and Girsberger, M. (2004) Transposing the Copyright Directive: Legal Protection of Technological

Measures in EU-Member States, A Genie Stuck in a Bottle?, Berkman Publication Series, No. 2004-10
(November) [online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=628007i
[Accessed October 2009].

Geist, M. (2002) ‘Key Case Restores Copyright Balance, The Globe and Mail, 18 April, p. B16.
Geist, M. (2005) ‘Anti-circumvention Legislation and Competition Policy: Deﬁning a Canadian Way?’, in M.
Geist (ed.), In the Public Interest: The Future of Canadian Copyright Law. Irwin Law, Toronto, pp. 211–50.

Geist, M. (2006) Our Own Creative Land: Cultural Monopoly & The Trouble With Copyright. Hart House

Lecture Committee, University of Toronto, 30 March.

Geist, M. (2008) 61 Reforms to C-61, Day 40: TPMs—No Regular Review Process [online]. Available at

hhttp://www.michaelgeist.ca/content/view/3297/99999/i[Accessed October 2009].

Gervais, D. (2005) ‘The Price of Social Norms: Towards a Liability Regime for File-Sharing’, Journal of

Intellectual Property Law, 12(1), 39–74. [online]. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=525083i
[Accessed October 2009].

r 537

Carys J. Craig

Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Gillepsie, T. (2007) Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ginsburg, J. C. (1999) ‘Copyright Legislation for the ‘‘Digital Millenium’’’, Columbia Journal of Law and the

Arts, 23(2), 137–79.

Ginsburg, J. C. (2001) ‘From Having Copies to Experiencing Works: The Development of an Access Right in

U.S. Copyright Law’, in H. Hansen (ed.), U.S. Intellectual Property Law and Policy. Edward Elgar,
Northampton, MA, pp. 39–58 [online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/
paper.taf?ABSTRACT_ID=222493i [Accessed October 2009].

Government of Canada (2008a) Canada’s Bill C-61: Questions and Answers [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/crp-prda.nsf/eng/h_rp01153.htmli [Accessed October 2009].

Government of Canada (2008b) Reforming the Copyright Act—Backgrounder [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/crp-prda.nsf/eng/h_rp01151.htmli [Accessed October 2009].

Government of Canada (2008c) Speech from the Throne 2008: Protecting Canada’s Future [online]. Available

at hhttp://www.sft-ddt.gc.ca/eng/media.asp?id=1383i [Accessed October 2009].

Gowers, A. (2006) Gowers Review of Intellectual Property [online]. HM Treasury. Available at hhttp://

ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/links/gowers_report_en.pdfi [Accessed November 2009].
Guibault, L., Westcamp, G., Rieber-Mohn, T., Hugenholtz, B., van Eechoud, M., Helberger, N., Steijger, L.,
Rossini, M., Dufft, N. and Bohn, P. (2007) Study on the Implementation and Effect in Member States’
Laws of Directive 2001/29/EC on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related Rights in
the Information Society, Final Report [online]. Institute for Information Law. Available at hhttp://
www.ivir.nl/publications/guibault/Infosoc_report_2007.pdfi [Accessed October 2009].

Heide, T. (2001) ‘Copyright in the EU and U.S.: What Access Right?’, Journal of the Copyright Society of the
USA, 48(3), 363–82 [online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=270861i
[Accessed October 2009].

Herman, B. D. and Gandy Jr., O. H. (2006) ‘Catch 1201: A Legislative History and Content Analysis of the

DMCA Exemption Proceedings’, Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, 24(1), 121–90.

Herman, B. H. (2008) ‘Breaking and Entering My Own Computer: The Contest of Copyright Metaphors’,

Communication Law and Policy, 13(2), 231–74.

Hohfeld, W. N. (1946) Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning. Yale University Press,

New Haven, CT.

Hugenholtz, P. B. (2000) ‘Why the Copyright Directive is Unimportant, and Possibly Invalid’, European

Intellectual Property Review, 22(11), 501–2.

Kerr, I. R. (2005) ‘If Left to Their Own Devices: How DRM and Anti-Circumvention Laws Can Be Used to

Hack Privacy’, in M. Geist (ed.), In the Public Interest: The Future of Canadian Copyright Law. Irwin
Law, Toronto, pp. 167–210.

Kerr, I. R., Maurushat, A. and Tacit, C. S. (2002–3) ‘Technical Protection Measures: Tilting at Copyright’s

Windmill’, Ottawa Law Review, 34(1), 7–82.

Knopf, H. (2008) ‘Canada, WIPO, and certain ‘‘obligations’’’ [online]. Available at hhttp://excesscopy
right.blogspot.com/2008/02/canada-wipo-and-certian-obligations.htmli [Accessed October 2009].

Koelman, K. (2000) ‘A Hard Nut to Crack: The Protection of Technological Measures’, European Intellectual

Property Review, 22(6), 272–88.

Koelman, K. and Helberger, N. (2000) ‘Protection of Technological Measures’, in P. Bernt Hugenholtz (ed.),

Copyright and Electronic Commerce: Legal Aspects of Electronic Copyright Management. Kluwer Law
International, The Hague, pp. 165–227.

Litman, J. (1990) ‘The Public Domain’, Emory Law Journal, 39(4), 965–1023.
Litman, J. (2001) Digital Copyright. Prometheus Books, New York.
Midgley, J. (2002) Critique of the Proposed UK Implementation of the EU Copyright Directive [online]. Available

at hhttp://www.cfdr.eu.org/issues/eucd/ukimpl/critique_uk_impl.pdfi [Accessed November 2009].

538

r Digital Locks and the Fate of Fair Dealing in Canada

Carys J. Craig

Murray, L. (2005a) ‘Bill C-60 and Copyright in Canada: Opportunities Lost and Found’, Canadian Journal of

Communication, 30(4), 649–54.

Murray, L. (2005b) ‘Copyright Talk: Patterns and Pitfalls in Canadian Policy Discourses’, in M. Geist (ed.), In

the Public Interest: The Future of Canadian Copyright Law. Irwin Law, Toronto, pp. 15–40.

Murray, L. and Trosow, S. E. (2007) Canadian Copyright: A Citizen’s Guide. Between the Lines Press, Toronto.
Nimmer, D. (2000) ‘A Riff on Fair Use in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’, University of Pennsylvania

Law Review, 148(3), 673–742.

Olswang, S. (1995) ‘Accessright: An Evolutionary Path for Copyright into the Digital Era?’, European

Intellectual Property Review, 17(5), 215–8.

Reichman, J. H., Dinwoodie, G. B. and Samuelson, P. (2007) ‘A Reverse Notice and Takedown Regime to

Enable Public Interest Uses of Technically Protected Copyrighted Works’, Berkeley Technology Law
Journal, 22(3), 981–1060.

Samuelson, P. (1996) ‘Regulating Technologies to Protect Copyrighted Works’, Communications of the ACM,

39(7), 17–22.

Samuelson, P. (1997) ‘The U.S. Digital Agenda at WIPO’, Virginia Journal of International Law, 37(2),

369–439.

Samuelson, P. (1999) ‘Intellectual Property and the Digital Economy: Why the Anti-Circumvention

Regulations Need to be Revised’, Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 14(2), 519–66.

Samuelson, P. (2003) ‘Mapping the Digital Public Domain: Threats and Opportunities’, Law and

Contemporary Problems, 66(1 & 2), 147–71.

Secor, G. (1997) ‘Fair Use in a Pay-Per-Use World’, Practice and Theory, 21(1), 53–9.
Shah, A. (2004) ‘UK’s Implementation of the Anti-Circumvention Provisions of the EU Copyright Direction:

An Analysis’, Duke Law and Technology Review, 3 (January) [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.law.duke.edu/journals/dltr/articles/2004dltr0003.htmli [Accessed November 2009].

Sookman, B. B. (2005) ‘‘‘TPMs’’: A Perfect Storm for Consumers: Replies to Professor Geist’, Canadian

Journal of Law and Technology, 4(1), 23–43.

The State of Israel—Ministry of Justice (2009) Intellectual Property Law Submission of the Government of

Israel to the United States Free Trade Representative with Respect to the 2009 ‘‘Special 301 Review’’
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.justice.gov.il/NR/rdonlyres/BD753811-E87A-4AB2-8ADD-
DC9423DFC794/13684/2009special301submission.pdfi [Accessed October 2009].

Wang, R. L. (2006) ‘DMCA Anti-Circumvention Provisions in a Different Light: Perspectives from

Transnational Observation of Five Jurisdictions’, AIPLA Quarterly Journal, 34(2), 217–50.

Weatherall, K. (2004–5) ‘Locked In: Australia Gets a Bad Intellectual Property Deal’, Policy: A Journal of

Public Policy and Ideas, 20(4), 18–24.

White Paper: Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure (1995) The Report of the

Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights [online]. Available at hhttp://www.uspto.gov/web/ofﬁces/
com/doc/ipnii/ipnii.pdfi [Accessed October 2009].

Wiese, H. (2002) ‘Anti-Circumvention Laws: A ‘Circumvention’ of the Copyright Balance in the Digital Age?’,

Tolley’s Communications Law, 7(5), 146–54.

Winn, J. K. and Jondet, N. A. (2009) ‘A ‘‘New Deal’’ for End Users? Lessons from a French Innovation in the

Regulation of Interoperability’, William and Mary Law Review, 51(2), 547–76 [online]. Available at
hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=1419750i [Accessed October 2009].

WIPO Copyright Treaty (adopted in Geneva on 20 December 1996) [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/wct/trtdocs_wo033.htmli [Accessed February 2010].

WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (adopted in Geneva on 20 December 1996) [online]. Available

at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/wppt/trtdocs_wo034.htmli [Accessed February 2010].

r 539


