Rhetoric, Realism and Benefit-Sharing 

Use of Traditional Knowledge of H o o l a  Species in the 

Development of an Appetite Suppressant 

Rachel WYNBERG* 

“This is  the real ghaap ofthe natives, who use it as a substitute forfaod and water.  The sweet sap 
reminds one oflicorice and when on one occasion thirst compelled me to follow the example ofmy 
Hottentot guide, it saved further sufering and removed the pangs of hunger so e f i e n t l y  that I 

could not eat anything for a day after having reached the camp.” 

Marloth (1855-193 1) 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

One of the first agreements ever to give holders of traditional knowledge a share 
of royalties from drug and product sales was recently concluded between the Council 
for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), a  South &can  State research institute, 
and the San, indigenous peoples of Southern Africa, The case concerns the development 
of an appetite suppressant derived fiom species of Hoodia, succulent plants indigenous to 
Southem Ahca and long used by the San to stave off hunger and thirst.1 Use of active 
constituents of the plant responsible for suppressing appetite has been patented by the 
CSIR, which represents one of the largest research organizations in Africa, accounting 
for  about  10 percent  of  the  entire  African research  and  development budget.2  The 
appetite  suppressant is  likely  to  be  commerciahzed  into  a  food  supplement and/or 
prescription  medicine,  with  considerable  financial  potential.  The  current  market 
potential for the dietary control of obesity is over US$3 billion per annum in the United 
States al0ne.3 Up until 2001, the San remained oblivious to the fact that their knowledge 

*  Graduate School of Environmental Studies, University of Strathclyde, Scotland. 

~ 

This  article  forms  part  of a  doctoral research  conducted  by  the  author  on  the  commercialization of 
biodiversity  in  Southern Africa.  Many people  assisted  with  this  research  but  I  wish  to  thank  the  following in 
particular for the open manner in which they have shared knowledge and opinions: Roger Chennells (San Institute 
of South Afixa-SAsl);  Perms Vaalbooi (South African San Council); Axel Thoma (Worlung Group of Indigenous 
Minorities in Southern Africa-WIMSA);  Dr Petro Terblanche and Dr Marthinus Horak (Council for Scientific and 
Industrial  Research4srR);  and  Elsabe  Powell  (Northern Cape  Nature  Conservation). Ben  Bennett,  Roger 
Chennells,  Professor  Carlos  Correa,  Pierre  du  Plessis,  Dr  Graham  Dutfield,  Dr  Marthinus  Horak  and 
Dr  Gfian Maggs-Kolling  provided useful  comments on earlier  drafts,  which  I  thankfidly  acknowledge. I  am 
grateful to the National Research Foundation, Annell Trust and Smartt Memorial Trust for providing scholarships 
to support this study. 

The author may be contacted at: cRachel@iafnca.com,. 

1  A. Whte and B.L.  Sloane, The Stupelieae, Vol111, second edition, Pasadena, California,  1937. 
2  See: www.csir.co.za). Updated 4 September 2002. 
3  Phytopharm plc, Annual Report and Accountsfor the  Year Ended  3 1 August  2003,2003. 

852 

THE  

of Hoodia  had  commercial application, and  that  this  knowledge had  led  to  research, 
scientific validation, and  the fhng  of international patents by  the  CSIR. They were, 
moreover, excluded from lucrative deals being struck to  develop the  drug.  In 2003, 
however, following intense negotiations, an agreement was reached between the CSIR 
and the San, to give the San a share of royalties from potential drug sales. 

Issues raised by the Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights  (TRIPS) of  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO) and  the  Convention  on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) are central to  the  case.  Under  TRIPS, a  global regime has 
been created for intellectual property rights (IPRS) over biological resources. This has 
significant  implications  for  Member  States,  which  are  now  obliged  to  implement 
minimum IPR standards, and to allow patents and other forms of IPRs to enter the realm 
of  agnculture,  food  production  and  health  care.  The  interface  between  IPRS and 
biological resources is also addressed by the CBD, which recognizes the sovereign right 
of countries over their biological resources and their right to determine access to these 
resources.4The CBD notes that access to genetic resources should be on the basis ofprior 
informed consent from providers of resources and knowledge, and on mutually agreed 
terms that provide fair and equitable sharing of the results of research and development 
and  the benefits of commercialization and use.  It  also  calls for the  fair  and equitable 
sharing of benefits derived from the use of traditional knowledge. 

These  principles  are  encapsulated  in  the  Bonn  Guidelines  on  Access  to  Genetic 
Resources,5  adopted  by  parties  to  the  CBD, and  are  likely  to  form  the  basis  of  the 
international “access  and  benefit-sharing”  (ABs) regme  to  be  negotiated under  the 
auspices of the CBD as  mandated by  the World Summit on Sustainable Development 
(WSSD).6 In  contrast, TRIPS contains no  provisions requiring prior informed consent 
and benefit-sharing. 

Intellectual  property  rights  are  often  considered  incompatible  with  traditional 
knowledge systems because they are privately held and monopolistic by nature, and are 
based  on  “innovations”  or  “dlscoveries”,  while  traditional  knowledge  is  typically 
collective and based  on prior use.7  IPRS have also  often worked  against  effective and 
equitable benefit-sharing with local communities for their traditional knowledge, and 
have  provided  poor  protection  of  community  resource  rights.  For  example,  the 

Article 15(1). 
The Bonn  Guidelines to  the  Convention  on Biological Divenity,  Conference  of  the  Parties, Decision 

VI/24(2002). 

6  Report  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable Development,  A/CONF. 199/20,  4  September  2002, 

Resolution 2, Annex, para. 44(0). See also, Decision V11/19 of the 7th Conference of the Parties to the CBD. 

For further discussion see, for example, Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, Integrating  Intellectual 
Property Rights  and  Development Policy, 2002; C.M. Correa, Traditional Knowledge  and  Intellectual  Property:  Issues and 
Options surrounding the Protection of Traditional Knowledge,  Quaker United Nations Ofice, Geneva, 2001 ; Crucible II 
Group, Seeding Solutions, Vol. 2, 2001; Optionsfor National Laws Governing Control over Genetic Resources and  Biological 
Innovations,  IDRC/IPGRI/Dag  Hammarskjold  Foundation;  G.  Dutfield,  Intellectual  Property  Rights, Trade  and 
Biodiversity: Seeds and Plant Varieties, Earthscan, London, 2000; World Intellectual Property Organization, Intellectual 
Property  Needs  and  Expectations  .f Traditional  Knowledge  Holders:  WrrJo Report  on  Fact-Finding  Mission  on  Intellectual 
Property  and  Traditional Knowledge  (1 598-1955),  Geneva, 2001. 

HOODLA SPECIES 

853 

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office granted a patent to a U.S. researcher on the South 
American  vine  Ayahuasca,  Bunisteriopsis  cuupi, which  is  used  widely  in  traditional 
religious  and  heahng  ceremonies  in  South  America.8 The  Co-ordinating  Body  of 
Indigenous  Organizations  of  the  Amazon  Basin  (COICA) and  the  Centre  for 
International Environmental Law  (CIEL) have  worked  for  many  years  to  annul  the 
patent.9 Patents  have  also  been  granted, and  successfully  challenged for their lack  of 
novelty, based  on tradtional knowledge of Azadiruchtu  indica, the neem tree.10 Patents 
can also  impact negatively  on communities that  traditionally use  certain species and 
varieties. For example, the granting of a patent by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
to Colorado University based on the food crop quinoa, lapsed after it was revealed that 
the Bolivian origins of the biological material were not disclosed and enabled the scope 
of the patent to be so broad as potentially to intrude on the exportation to the United 
States of traditional quinoa varieties and quinoa products exported from Bolivia and its 
neighbouring  countries.ll  Numerous  other  examples  exist  of  the  illegitimate use  of 
traditional knowledge in the granting of patents, without the consent of holders of such 
knowledge, or their involvement in any benefits derived from the patent.12 

The Hoodia  case described in this article tells a similar story, but is unique in that 
the holders of the patent (the CSIR) and the holders of traditional knowledge (the San) 
have reached a mutually acceptable agreement to share benefits. On face value, the case 
presents  a  good  argument  both  for  the  utility  of  patents  in  benefiting  holders  of 
traditional  knowledge,  and  for  the  potential  benefits  that  holders  of  traditional 
knowledge can glean tiom bioprospecting. But what does this development really mean 
for the San and holders of traditional knowledge worldwide: business  as  usual with  a 
politically correct  face,  or a  hndamentally  new  way  of introducing  equity into  the 
market place? Through the lens of the Hoodia  case three distinct but related questions 
are asked, in an attempt to enhance understanding of these intractable issues. 

First, what can we learn from the negotiating process to develop a benefit-sharing 
agreement that  can  usefully  be  applied in  similar situations? Second, is  the  benefit- 
sharing agreement one that secures fair and equitable benefits for holders of traditional 
knowledge,  and  for  countries  of  origin,  and  if  not,  which  aspects  require  further 
attention?  Third,  the  role  played  by  IPRs  as  a  tool  to  promote  benefit-sharing  is 
explored, and both  the legitimacy of the patent and alternative options for protecting 
indigenous knowledge, includmg co-ownership  of the  patent,  sui  generis  systems  of 
protection, and compulsory disclosure of the source of genetic resources and traditional 

8  See,  for  example,  M.D.  de  Rios, Amazon  Healer,  Prism  Books,  1992; R.  Metzner  (ed.), Ayahuasca, 
Thunder’s Mouth Press, New York,  1999; T. Shah,  Trail  of  Feathers: In  Search  of the  Birdmen  of Peru, Phoenix, 
London, 2001. 
9  G. Wiser, The Ayahuasca  Patent  Case: Indigenous People’s Stand  against Misappropriation, in S.A. Laird (ed.), 
10  Dutfield, supra, footnote 7. 
11  Id. 
12  See, for example, GRAIN, Biodiversityfor Sale: Dismantling  the Hype about Benefit-Sharing, Global Trade and 

Biodiversity and  Traditional Knowledge: Equitable Partnerships in Practice, Earthscan, London, 2002, pp.  182-184. 

Biodiversity in Conflict, Issue No. 4, 2000, available at: cwww.grain.org/publications/). 

854 

THE  

knowledge  in  patent  applications  are  dlscussed.  These  questions  are  explored 
sequentially below, after providing an overview of the ecology and use of Hoodia species 
(Section [I),  and a history of commercial development (Section HI).  In Section IV,  the 
process  by  which  the  CSIR and  the  San  negotiated  a  benefit-sharing  agreement  is 
analysed, and the content of that Agreement is  described. Section v provides a critical 
review of the Benefit-Sharing Agreement developed between the CSIR and the San, and 
Section VI  analyses intellectual property considerations arising from the case. The final 
Section of the article draws these issues together with some concluding remarks. 

11.  THE ECOLOGY AND USE OF HOODIA SPECIES 

Species  of  the  genera  Hoodia  and  Trichocaulon  have  long  been  used  as  thirst- 
quenchers  and  appetite  suppressants. 13  Both  genera  are  succulent  perennials,  and 
members of the Apocynaceae family, adept at storing moisture during long dry spells in 
their native habitats.14  More than  twenty species have been  recorded from Southern 
Africa, although the species of most interest for their appetite-suppressing properties are 
Hoodia gordonii, Hoodia  currorii, Hoodia Java,  Hoodia  lugardii (now Hoodia  currori  subsp. 
lugardi),  Trichocaulon pilijerum  (now Hoodia  pilijerum), and  Trichocaulon  oficinale  (now 
Hoodia  0Jin'nale).l5 Vernacular  names  for  the  plants  include  Ghaap,  and  !Khobab, 
I Khowa.b,  I Goai- I , I  Khoba,  I Kh0ba.b I s,  I Khowab,  I Goab,  Otjinove, 
I Goa.- 1, 
!Nawa#Kharab, Sekopane, Seboka.16 

Increasing interest in the commercial application of Hoodia species, and concomitant 
concerns about the threats posed to plant populations through unregulated collection, 
have led to the  tabling-and 
a  proposal to the 
Convention  on International Trade in  Endangered  Species  of Wild  Fauna  and  Flora 
(CITES) to include Hoodia species in Appendix 11 of C1TES.l'  A standardized international 
trading framework and monitoring regime for Hoodia wlll now be established, to ensure 
that trade in  the  species is  properly regulated, and that  States within the plants'  range 
capture the economic benefits that acrue from its commerciahation. 

recent adoption in October 2004-of 

The first recorded use of Hoodia was in all likelihood by the botanist Francis Masson 
(1741-1805),  who  visited  the  Cape  in  South  Africa  (1772-1774  and  1786-1795), 

13  White and Sloane, supra, footnote 1. 
'4  Convention  on International  Trade in Endangered  Species of Wild  Fauna  and  Flora,  Amendments  to 
Appendices I  and 11  of CITES, Proposal to  the  Thirteenth Meeting of the  Conference of the Parties, Bangkok, 
Thailand, 2-1  4 October 2004. 

15  B. van Wyk and N. Gericke, People's Plants: A Guide to the Usehl Plants ofSouthem Ahca, Briza, South Africa, 
2000, p.  70; White and Sloane, supra, footnote  1; Patent  W09846243: Pharmaceutical compositions having an 
appetite-suppressant activity. 

' 6   See White and Sloane, supra, footnote 1; van Wyk and Gericke, id; C.A.  Smith, Common Names  ojSuuth 
Afriatt iJhzts, Botanical Survey Memoir No. 35, Department ofAgricultural Technical Services, Republic of South 
Ahca, 1966, p. 35; CITES, supra, footnote 14; B.J. Hargreaves and Q. Turner, Uses and Misuses ofHoodia, Asklepios 
86,  2002,  pp.11-16;  J.S.  Malan  and  G.L.  Owen-Smith,  The  Ethnobotany  o j  Kaokoland,  Cimbebasia, Series  B, 
Vol. 2(5), 1974, p.  151. 

17  CITES, supra, footnote 14. 

HOODIA SPECIES 

855 

recorded finding “Stapelia gordoni”l8  and wrote  that  the stems of  Trichocaulon pilijerum 
were eaten by the “Hottentots”. It was this knowledge, recorded in the literature19 and 
combined  with  field studies, that  provided  the  motivation  for  the  CSIR to  include 
Trichocaulon species in a research programme aimed at determining the nutritional and 
possible toxic properties of “foods from the veld”. 

Who are the Hottentots, and what claim do they now have to knowledge about 
properties of the plant? Strictly speakmg, the Hottentots, or Khoe peoples,were herders 
who arose from the San, but this dstinction is not recognized in the colonial botanical 
accounts, which cluster all groups as Hottentots,  including the San. We do, however, 
know that the  San are the oldest human inhabitants in Southern Africa, who lived in 
small nomadic groups as hunters and gatherers for thousands of years and were the sole 
occupants  of  the  regon.20  Use  of Hoodia  by  these  groups was  likely for  d e n n i a ,  
although the ways in which the plant were used are open to interpretation. A popular 
but perhaps simplistic version alludes to the San’s use of the plant for hunting purposes 
to  give  “strength”, and  anecdotal accounts even suggest  that hunters may  have been 
given Hoodia  to prevent  their eating of the  kill. But  San  informants suggest  that this 
would have been insulting to the hunter, whose slulls and integnty would have negated 
the need for any external appetite suppressants. What is undisputed, however, is use by 
the San of Hoodia and related species as a food and, especially, as a drink substitute and 
appetite suppressant, as well as for a variety of other purposes.21 

Some of these uses can undoubtedly be attributed exclusively and originally to the 
San, but the wide mstribution of certain Hoodia species suggests extensive use by many 
other indigenous peoples in the region, includmg the Nama, Damara and Topnaar, both 
as a medicinal remedy and as a food and water substitute. These Khoi-speaking peoples 
emerged  in  Southern  Africa  many  millennia  after  the  San,  occupymg  similar 
geographical regions and no doubt  acquiring San knowledge of plants and their uses, 
and evolving others.22 

Contemporary  San, of course, are quite  different to  the  rather  romantic picture 
painted by the medla, which depicts the San persisting as hunters and gatherers, living 
in harmony with nature in and around the Kalahari Desert and subsisting on wild food. 
Whle  in  the  past  groups  moved  about  the  landscape,  aggregating and  dispersing 
according to  season  and  resource-availability,  today  the  reality  is  very  dlfferent and 

obtained by the CSIR &om a volume by White and Sloane, supra, footnote  1. 

‘8  F. Masson, Stapelia Novae:  Or a  Collection ofseveral Nnu Species $That  Genus, London,  1796. 
19  While  Marloth  was  the  fiat to record  the  use  of Hoodia,  knowledge about  properties of the plant was 
20  R.B.  Lee, R. Hitchcock  and  M.  Biesele,  Foragen  to  First  Peoples:  The  Kalahari  San,  Cultural  Survival 
21  Gert Dick, John Cloete, Stephanus Cloete, Sophie Basson and Andries Kotze, quoted in van Wyk and 

Quarterly, 26(1), 2002, pp. 9-12. 

Gericke, supra, footnote  15, p. 70. 

22  E.  von  Koenen,  Medicinal,  Poisonous  and  Edible  Plants  in  Namibia,  edition  4,  Klaus  Hess  Publishers, 
Gbttingen, Germany, 2001, p. 131; H.P. Steyn and E. du Pisani, Grass-Seeds, Game and  Coats: An Overview ofDama 
Subsistence, Wissenschaftliche Gesellschafi, Windhoek, SWA, Journal XXXIX; V.  Van den Eynden, P. Vernemmen 
and 0. van Damme, The Ethnobotany ofthe Topnaar, Univeniteit Gent, 1992. 

856 

THE  

many, if not most, San live in small settlements in the more remote regions of Southern 
Afiica,  earning their  living  through  a  combination  of  agriculture, livestock  raising, 
small-scale industries, veld (or non-timber forest) product harvesting and wage labour.23 
A long history of dispossession and relocation has  accompanied the San, commencing 
with their persecution and displacement upon colonisation of the region in 1652, their 
discrimination  along  with  other  people  of  colour  during  South  Africa’s  apartheid 
regime, their invidious use by the South &can  Defence Force in Namibia and Angola 
for  counter-insurgency  operations,  and  continuing  today  through  evictions  and 
continued political marg~nalization.~~ Many San live below the poverty datum line and 
face  extreme hardship in terms of access  to  social services, employment and income- 
generating opportunities. At  present, the  San number  between  85,000 and 90,000 in 
Southern M i c a ,  the overwhelming majority of whom live in the Kalahari Desert and 
its surroundmg regions in Namibia, Botswana and, to a lesser extent, in South Africa.25 

111.  THE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF HOODU  SPECIES 

The documented use of Hoodia as a food and water substitute in colonial botanical 
accounts is signlficant because it led drectly to the CSIR including the plant for further 
investigation in a  1963 project on e&ble wild plants of the region,26 which  aimed to 
inform the South African Defence Force about the toxic and nutritional properties of 
wild foods, and so ascertain their suitability for the army. Existing literature, combined 
with  laboratory  tests  on  mice  which  were  fed  Hoodia,  led  scientists to  identift  the 
potential of Hoodia  as  a non-toxic  appetite suppressant, although insufficient evidence 
existed  to  file  for  a  patent.  The  lack  of  technology  to  isolate  and  identift  active 
ingredients halted progress of the research, which commenced again in the early 1980s. 
In  1986,  acquisition  by  the  CSIR of  high-field  nuclear  magnetic  resonance 
spectroscopy made it possible to elucidate relevant molecular structures of Hoodia,27 and 
in 1995, following nine years of confidential development, a patent application was filed 
in South Africa by the CSIR for use  of the active components of the plant which were 
responsible for suppressing appetite.28 In  1998, the CSIR signed a licensing agreement 
with  Phytopharm,29  a  small  British  company  specializing  in  the  development  of 

in Southern AJnca, available at: cwww.kalaharipeoples.org/documents/San-term.htm), 22 November 2001. 

23  R.K.  Hitchcock and M. Biesele, Sun,  Khwe, Basawa, or Bushmen? Terminology, Identity, and Empowerment 
24  S. Gall,  The  Bushmen  of Southern Africa.  Slaughter ofthe Innocent,  Pimlico,  London, 2001; J.  Suzman, A n  
Introduction to the Regional Assessment ofthe Status ofthe San in Southern Ajica: Regional Assessment ofthe Status ofthe 
San in Southern AJnca, Report Series, Report No. 1 of 5, Legal Assistance Centre, Windhoek, 2001. 

25  Id. 
2b  An alternative interpretation is that Hoodia species were first collected in Namibia and other range States as 
part of a  CSIR project  to determine  the  cause of so-called  “turkey disease”. While this was later revealed to be 
aflatoxicosis, caused by a fungal secretion, initial research was targeted at investigating plants, and asking indigenous 
people about the properties of different plants: B. Bennett, personal comment, 30 August 2004. 

Innovation,  available at: www.csir.co.za),  2001. 

27  CSIR Bio/Chemtek,  Adding  Value  to  South Africa’s  Biodiversity and  Indigenous  Knowledge through  Scient$c 
28  South African Patent No. 983170. 
zy  The CSIR and Phytopharm plc,  The  CSrR Licence, 21 August 1998. 

HOODIA  SPECIES 

857 

phytomedicines,30  and  this  was  followed  in  the  same  year  by  the  granting  of 
international patents  in  some  countries.31  The  Agreement  granted  Phytopharm  an 
exclusive worldwide licence to manufacture and market Hoodia-related  products and to 
exploit any other part of CSrR’s IPRS relating to Hoodiu. Through a programme dubbed 
“P57”, Phytopharm progressed this drug lead to a more  advanced stage, leading to a 
licence and royalty agreement in 1998 with Pfizer, the U.S.-based pharmaceutical giant, 
for further development and commercialization. 

In December 2001, Phase IIa/third-stage  “proof of principle” clinical trials were 
reported  to  be successfully  completed,32  and in July 2002, Phytopharm announced a 
future development programme for P57 whereby Pfizer would take responsibility for 
development of the programme. During July 2003, Pfizer merged with Pharmacia and 
closed its Natureceuticals group, responsible for the development of P57. The company 
announced it was to discontinue clinical development of the drug and was returning the 
licensing  rights  to  Phytopharm,  leaving  Phytopharm  free  to  license  P57  to  other 
parties.33  Some critics saw  this as  the  death knell for the  development of Hoodia  as  a 
block-buster drug, but Phytopharm and the CSIR remained confident of the possibility 
of finding other partners to take forward the project. Currently, Phytopharm is seelung 
partners to manufacture P57 as a food supplement, and recent developments include its 
raising of A6.5  million through  a  new  share-placement in preparation for the  future 
licensing of Hoodia formulations to manufacturers of med  replacement^.^^ However, the 
possibility of another partner taking P57 along a pharmaceutical route  s t d  remains.35 
The Table sets out the chronology of the development of Hoodia. 

TABLE: CHRONOLOGY OF THE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT  OF  HOODIA 

Date 

Circa 25 000 BP to Present 
1796 

1936 

1963 

1968 

Event 

Use of wild plants by the San in a hunting and gathering economy. 
Use of Hoodia species by the “Hottentots” is first recorded by the 
botanist Francis Masson. 
First recorded use of Hoodia species for suppressing appetite, based on San 
knowledge. 
The CSIR includes Hoodia species in a project on edible wild plants, 
based on ethnobotany of the San. 
Death of leading scientist on the project and technical problems lead to 
mothballing of the project. 

5 December 2001, available at: www.phytopham.com. 

at: nwvw.phytopha~.com/News/PressReleases197/press010-19970623.shtml,. 

30  Phytopharm, Phytophamt  to Develop Natural Anti-Obesity Treatment, Press Release, 23 June 1997, available 
31  GB2338235 and W09846243: Pharmaceutical compositions having an appetite-suppressant activity. 
32  Phytopharm, Succeszful  Completion  of Proof  of Principle  Clinical  Study  of P57 for  Obesity,  Press  Release, 
33  Phytopharm, @zer  Returns Rights 4P.57, Press Release, 30 July 2003, available at: cwww.phytopharm.com/ 
34  Phytopharm seeks Food  Partnersfor  Weight Control  Plant Extract,  1 March 2004, see: cwww.nutraingredient. 
35  Id. 

press/Re1%2080fin~in~.htm,. 

com/news/). 

858 

1983-1986 

1986-1995 
1995 

August 1998 

1998 

1999 

2001 

June 2001 

1 February 2002 

February 2002 to 

March 2003 

March 2003 

July 2003 
200 1-2004 

2004 

May 2004 

June 2004 
August 2004 
September 2004 

October 2004 

THE JOURNAL  O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Aquisition of high-field  nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy allows 
for the relevant molecular structures of Hoodia to be elucidated. 
Confidential work continues on the development of Hoodia species. 
A patent application is fded in South A6ica by the CSIR for use of active 
components of Hoodia species responsible for suppressing appetite. 
A licence agreement is signed between the CSIR and Phytopharm for 
further development and commercialization of “P57”. 
International patents are granted to the CSIR in some territories. 
Phytopharm sub-licenses Pfizer to complete clinical development, 
obtain regulatory approval, and commercialize. The CSIR publishes its 
Bioprospecting Policy, declaring its commitment to sharing benefits 
with holders of traditional knowledge. However, in practice, this 
commitment is not implemented in the P57 project until 2003. 
The CSIR signs a Memorandum of Understanding with a group of 
South Afiican tramtional healers and begns implementing a system to 
document the use of traditional knowledge based on biodiversity. 
Phase IIa/third stage “proof of principle” clinical trials for P57 reported 
to be successfuly completed. 
The Observer reports commercial development of Hoodia without 
involvement of the San. The San establish that a patent has been 
registered based on Hoodia  use and that the CSIR has granted 
Phytopharm a licence to exploit the patent. Negotiations between the 
CSIR and the San commence in the same month. 
Memorandum of Understanding signed between the CSIR and the South 
Afiican San Council, recogruzing the San as originators of knowledge 
about Hoodia and including a commitment to benefit-sharing. 
Negotiations continue between the CSIR and the South African San 
Council. 
The CSIR and the South African San Council sign a benefit-sharing 
agreement. 
Pfizer withdraws from the commercial development of P57. 
In parallel to the CsrR/Phytopharm  initiative, a growing herbal market 
develops for Hoodia, using knowledge of the San to promote products. 
Some products are later revealed to be fakes, with no Hoodia content. 
Phytopharm announces its intention to develop P57 as a food 
supplement. 
Proposal is tabled to list Hoodia as a CITES Appendix 11  plant, to allow 
for controlled commercial trade. 
Namibia announces its intentions to commercialize Hoodia. 
San apply for registration of the San Hoodia Benefit-Sharing Trust. 
Biodiversity Act 10 of 2004 is enacted in South Africa, requiring a 
benefit-sharing agreement to be developed with holders of tramtional 
knowledge where their knowledge is used for bioprospecting. 
Proposal to list Hoodia as a CITES Appendix 11 plant is adopted by the 
13th Conference of the Parties to CITES. The CSIR announces the 
initiation of a broader bioprospecting project with the San. 

Note:  CSIR = Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. 

CITES = Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. 

Source: Compiled by the author. 

HOODIA SPECIES 

859 

Iv.  NEGOTIATING 

A BENEFIT-SHARING AGREEMENT 

A. 

Initiating  Talks 

What did these developments mean for the San, the original holders of knowledge 
about the properties of Hoodia?  Up until 2001, agreements for the hrther development 
and  commercialization  of  the  Hoodia  drug  lead  had  proceeded  apace  without 
acknowledgement of the contribution of the San, let alone their prior informed consent. 
Indeed, a newspaper report quotes the CSIR having told their international collaborators 
that  the  90,000-strong  San  “no longer  existed”.36 In  defence of its  position, the  CSIR 
linked its initial reluctance to engage with the San to a concern that “expectations would 
be  raised  with  promises  that  could not  be  met”,37  and insisted  that  the  organizational 
policy on bioprospecting was to eventually share benefits of research based on indlgenous 
knowledge.  But  clearly  the  realities  of  implementing  this  policy  were  complex  and 
difficult. How, it was  argued by  the  CSIR and Phytopharm,  could the  real  owners of 
traditional knowledge be  identified, and what  if  one group had  historically  stolen the 
knowledge from another group? The potential complexities and scenarios seemed endless. 
While  such  concerns were  undoubtedly valid  and  are  common  in  simdar  cases 
throughout the world, they were also obfuscatory and to some extent provided a useful 
defence for the  CSIR and Phytopham. In point  of fact, such sentiments were also  in 
flagrant disregard of the International Labour Organisation (ILo)  Convention 169-an 
international agreement for the protection of indigenous peoples’ rights-the 
letter and 
spirit of the CBD, the African Union’s Model Law on Access and Benefit-Sharing38 and 
the  Bonn  Guidelines,  as  well  as  numerous  indigenous  peoples’  declarations  and 
statements which explicitly refer to the importance of obtaining prior informed consent 
from holders of traditional knowledge before commercialization of this knowledge, and 
ensuring that benefits derived from commercialization are equitably shared with original 
holders of the knowledge.39 

In June  2001, the  situation changed dramatically. Ongoing vigilance by  a  South 
African-based  non-governmental  organization  (NGo),  Biowatch  South  Africa, 
combined with  assistance from the international NGO Action Aid, alerted the foreign 
media to the potentially exploitive nature of the CsWPhytopharm Agreement, and a 
leading story in a British newspaper, The Observer, was published about the ~ase.~o This 
was not the first time that news about the patent was made public,41 but action on the 

36  A.  Barnett, In  Afn’ca  the Hoodia  Cactus  keeps  Men Alive.  Now  itr  Secret  is  “Stolen”  to  Make  us  Thin, The 

Observer,  17 June 2001. 

37  Id. 
38  J.A. Ekpere,  The OAU’s Model  Law-TFze  Protection ofthe Rights oflocal Communities, Farmers and  Breeders, 
andfor the Regulation ofAccess to Biological Resources: A n  Explanatory  Booklet, Organization ofAfrican Unity, Scientific, 
Technical and Research Commission, Lagos, Nigeria, 2001. 

39  For a review of such statements see G. Dutfield, Indigenous Peoples’ Declarations  and Statements and Equitable 

Research Relationships, Laird (ed.), supra, footnote 9, pp. 228-232. 

40  Supra, footnote 36. 
41  See, for example, Plant helps in Fighting  Oberity, Cape Times, 26 June 1997; CSIR, Annual Report,  1999; and 

ongoing correspondence between the author and NGOS involved in work with the San. 

860 

THE  

case was  catalysed  by  the international news coverage, heightened interest in linkages 
between patents, traditional knowledge and benefit-sharing, and associated pressures for 
a rapid response on the part of both the San and the CSIR. Ironically, the negligence of 
the  CSIR to  consult with  the  San  in the  early  stages  of the  Agreement considerably 
strengthened the bargaining arm and political leverage of the San who, in securing the 
moral high ground, now had a high-profile case being followed keenly throughout the 
world.  In  contrasting images  of emaciated San and obese Americans, and reinforcing 
popular notions of “bio-piracy” by large pharmaceutical companies, the media captured 
the public’s imagination, embarrassed the CSIR and Phytopharm, and this in turn led the 
CSIR to enter into high-level negotiations with the San. 

On the part of the San, this was effected largely through three organizations: 
-  the Working Group  of Indigenous Minorities in  Southern Africa  (WIMSA), 

established in 1996 at the request of San groups in the region to advocate and 
lobby for San rights; 
the  South  African  San  Council,  a  voluntary  association  established by  the 
=Khomani, !Xun and Khwe communities of South Africa; and 
the Cape-Town based San Institute of South Africa (SASI), an NGO facilitating 
access of San-based  organizations to funding and expertise. 

- 

- 

As a South African State institution, the CSIR was reluctant to negotiate with parties 
outside the country, and through WIMSA, the South African San Council was formally 
mandated to represent San groups in Namibia and Botswana as well as South Africa in 
all  benefit-sharing  negotiations  about  Hoodia.  With  this  arrangement  in  place, 
recognition was  given  to  the  fact  that  knowledge  about  the  plant  crossed  country 
borders,  and  that  the  details  of  sharing benefits  between  San  in  different  countries 
needed hrther consideration. WIMSA and SASI instructed their lawyer to negotiate with 
the CSIR on behalf of the San, and discussions between the two parties began in earnest. 

B.  Reaching  a Memorandum of  Understanding 

Three months later, in February 2002, a Memorandum  of Understanding (Mou) 
was reached between the CSIR and the South African San Council. Key aspects of this 
agreement included recognition by  the  CSIR of the  San  as originators of the body of 
traditional  knowledge  associated  with  human  uses  of  the  Hoodia  succulent;42  an 
acknowledgement by  the  San  of the  “context” in which the  CSIR first registered the 
P57 patent without having first engaged the San in negotiations; and a commitment, on 
the part of both the CSIR and the San, to a process of negotiating with one another in 
good faith, in order to arrive at a comprehensive benefit-sharing agreement.43 

42  Clause 6. MOU 
43  Ibid., Clause 7. 

HOODIA SPECIES 

86 1 

An  additional understanding considered the  San and the C S I R , ~ ~  

be the primary 
parties with regard to benefit-sharing.44  This latter point is especially significant because 
it effectively excluded other groups-genuine 
claiming benefits 
through prior knowledge about Hoodia. While this  helped to address earlier concerns 
expressed by  the  CSIR and  Phytopharm  of the  need  to  identifjr genuine  holders  of 
traditional knowledge  about  the  plant,  it  also  raised  new  concerns  about  excluding 
non-San  groups,  such  as  the  Nama,  Damara  and  Topnaar,  who  had  historically 
occupied-and 
still occupy-areas  where Hoodia grows, and had undoubtedly used the 
plant as a medicinal remedy and as a food and water substitute. How were these groups 
to benefit from use of their knowledge? 

or opportunist-from 

C.  Developing Positions  and Identifying  Key Issues .f Concern 

While  the  MOU represented  an  important  first  step, negotiation  of a  concrete 
benefit-sharing  agreement  was  still  some  way  OK  At  a  series  of  CsIR-funded 
workshops and meetings, representatives of the San, the CSIR, and in some cases certain 
government  departments  and  NGOS, were  brought  together  to  further  articulate 
concerns and positions.45  Key issues  arising from these  discussions focused on three 
main themes: 

1.  building trust between parties; 
2. 

identifjring  genuine  holders  of  traditional  knowledge  about  Hoodia  and 
potential beneficiaries; and 

3.  ensuring  the  broader  protection  and  promotion  of  San  cultures  and 

knowledge. 

1 .   Building  trust 

The development of trust between  the  CSIR and  the  San  emerged initially as  a 
major concem,46 more especially given the CSIR’S history as an institution shaped by the 
apartheid regime and serving the interests of a repressive government for nearly forty 
years.  While transformation of this State institution is now well under way, its initial 
inertia in drawing the  San into the project created mistrust  and negative impressions 
amongst the  San. How could the San be assured  that they would receive appropriate 
royalties and other benefits? And how could they trust that they would have access to 
all the necessary information? 

44  Ibid., Clause 8. 
45  See C .  Spies, Report  on  Workshop on Benefit-Shating between  the South Ajkcan San  Council and  the CSIR on the 
46  Id. 

Hoodia P57 Project,  13-14 June 2002, Molopo Lodge, Kalahan, South Africa. 

862 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

2. 

Identijying benejciaries 

An anxiety foremost in people’s minds was the potential conflict that could arise if 
financial benefits arose-both  within  the San, and between  the San and other groups 
such as the Nama and Damara. Because both the plant and traditional knowledge about 
its use  extend  across Namibia,  South Africa  and Botswana,  this matter was  especially 
complex and fraught. How could a post-modern  system be created that ensured fairness 
and  equity  across  the  three  countries,  and  within  the  relatively  new  organizational 
structures  set  up  by  different  San  groups  in  different  countries?  The  restricted 
distribution of Hoodia species suggested that almost certainly, not all groups of the San 
had  historically utilized  the  plant.  But  identifying those  groups  that  did  have  a clear 
record  of  use  was  nearly  impossible,  given  the  San’s  history  of  resettlement  and 
dislocation. Moreover,  thousands of people in Southern Africa claim San descent, and 
have a recent history of use of Hoodia. 

Resolving  these  uncertainties  presented  difficult  challenges,  but  there  was 
agreement  amongst  WIMSA affiliated  organizations  that  a  nit-piclung  exercise to link 
benefit-sharing  to specific communities using Hoodia was &tile and potentially divisive. 
In addition, WIMSA had taken a decision, bindmg on all its members, to the effect that 
heritage is indivisible, and that benefits resulting from shared heritage, such as  Hoodia, 
must  thus  be  shared  equally  amongst  all  San  peoples.  Of  course,  if  money  actually 
materializes in the future, new tensions and understandings  may well be created. 

3 .   Protecting San culture and  knowledge 

More generally, the  San wanted  clarity about  how they  could  effectively protect 
their  cultural  heritage,  including  unique  rock  art,  as  well  as  rich  ethnobotanical  and 
environmental  knowledge.  Increasingly,  steps  had  been  taken  by  San-affiliated 
organizations such as  SASI and WIMSA to establish a code of conduct  for research and 
researchers and  to ensure  the control and protection  of all  San intellectual  property.47 
There was growing sensitization and awareness amongst the San about the appropriation 
of their knowledge,  without  acknowledgement  or compensation.  How, it was asked, 
had the CSIR obtained local knowledge  of Hoodia without  the San knowing, and how 
could such knowledge  be protected  from future exploitation? Although  legislation to 
protect  and promote  indigenous knowledge  systems was under development  in South 
Afnca  (and had been for at least five years48), there  had been no consultation with the 
San about its content and scope. The absence of legislation presented a major stumbling 
block.  No  legislation  existed  to  protect  holders  of  traditional  and/or  indigenous 

47  See, for example, the Media and Research Contract of the San of Southem Africa, approved by the WIMSA 
Annual General Meeting on 28 November 2001, which sets out a procedure  requiring written consent from the 
San to carry out any media or research project.  See also, WIMSA, The San of Southern Africa: Heritaxe  G Intellectual 
Property, 2003. 
48  See, for example, R. Wynberg, Indigenous Knowledge Under Threat, Mail &Guardian, 18-23  December 1998. 

HOODLA SPECIES 

863 

knowledge, and neither was there any legal requirement for benefit-sharing agreements 
to  be  developed with  owners of knowledge and/or  biological res0urces.4~ A  similar 
situation pertained in other countries of orign, such as Namibia and Botswana. 

On  the  part  of  the  CSIR and  government,  the  absence  of  legislation  created 
uncertainties as  to who should be party to the benefit-sharing agreement, and exactly 
how traditional or indigenous knowledge should be obtained or used. The CSIR stepped 
gingerly, unsure  (and undoubtedly reluctant) about  “shedding their white coats” and 
entering into protracted negotiations, but  obliged politically to do so. Their intention 
was to ensure that the San leadership they engaged with was genuine and representative, 
and  that  their  agreement  with  the  San  would  not  lead  to  a  flurry  of  claims  to  the 
knowledge from third parties. In March 2003, less than two years after the first meeting 
between  these  groups,  negotiations  were  concluded  on  the  specifics  of  a  mutually 
acceptable benefit-sharing agreement. Announcing the deal, the South Ahcan Minister 
of Arts,  Culture,  Science and  Technology,  referred  to  its  enormous significance  in 
“symbolizing the restoration of the dignity of indigenous societies”, and in unleashing 
benefits by joining together owners of traditional knowledge and local scientists to add 
value to the biodiversity and indigenous knowledge systems of Southern Africa.  It was 
simply the “right thing” to do, he said.50 

D.  The CSZR-San  Benejit-Sharing Agreement 

In the  terms of the Agreement,  the  San would  receive 6 percent of all royalties 
received by  the  CSIR from Phytopharm  as  a  result  of the  successful  exploitation of 
products, and  this  for  the  duration  of the  royalty  period  or for  as long  as  the  CSIR 
received financial benefits from commercial sales of the products.51 The San would also 
receive  8 percent  of the  milestone  income  received by  the  CSIR from Phytopharm 
when  certain  performance  targets  were  reached  during  the  product  development 
period. In the  event of successful commercialnation, these monies would be  payable 
into a trust set up jointly by the CSIR and the South African San Council to raise  the 
standard of living and well-being  of the  San peoples of Southern Africa.52  Clear and 
transparent accounting procedures would need to be  in place on the part of both the 
CSIR and the San Trust with regard to financial benefits paid by the CSIR and used by 
the San Trust. 

4’,  Note that this has since been addressed by the promulgation of South Africa’s Biodiversity Act  (10 of 2004). 
One of the main objectives of the Act is “to provide for the fiir and equitable sharing among stakeholders of benefits 
arising fiom bioprespecting involving indigenous biological resources.’’ The Act also includes broad provisions requiring 
prior  informed  consent  to  be  obtained  fiom  holders  of  traditional  howledge  for  use  of  such  knowledge  for 
bioprospecting (Provision  82(3a)), and  for  benefit-sharing  agreements  to  be  developed with  knowledge  holders 
(Provision 82(3b)). 

5”  Address by  Dr  Ben  Ngubane, Ministcr  of Arts,  Culture, Science and  Technology, at  the  signing of a 
Benefit-Sharing  Agreement  between  the  CSIR and  the  San,  on  24  March  2003,  Molopo  Lodge,  Kalahari, 
South Africa; see: (www.dst.gov.za/news/speeches/minister/benefit-sharing-san.htm), 

5’  Provisions 1.5 and 2, Benefit-Sharing Agreement between the C ~ I R  and the South African San Council, 

March 2003. 

52  Deed of Trust of the San Hoodia Benefit-Sharing Trust. 

864 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  Benefit-Sharing  Agreement  also  committed  the  parties  to  conserve 
biodiversity and to undertake best-practice procedures for plant collection,53 required 
the CSIR to grant the San access to existing study bursaries54 and, significantly, laid the 
ground for further collaboration in bioprospecting.55 This has recently taken fruit in the 
development of a joint bioprospecting project between the CSIR and the San. 

In  addition  to  spelling  out  the  details  with  respect  to  benefit-sharing  and 
administrative  aspects  such  as  accounting,  the  Agreement  also  broadly  covered 
intellectual property issues and, importantly, set out comprehensive measures to protect 
and indemnify the  CSIR. Provision 4 of the Agreement specifies that any intellectual 
property arising from traditional indigenous knowledge of use of Hoodia and related to 
the CSIR patents for P57 remains vested exclusively with the CSIR. The San Council has 
no right to claim any co-ownership of the patents or products derived from the patents. 
Provision 6, Warranties and Indemnity, includes an undertaking and warranty by 
the San that, inter a h ,  it is the legal custodian of traditional indigenous knowledge on 
the use  of Hoodia; that it will not assist or enter into an agreement with any third party 
for the development, research and exploitation of any competing products or patents; 
and  that it wdl  not  contest the enforceability or validity of the  CSIR’S right, title and 
interest in the P57 patent and related products. 

A  further provision on thrd-party  clairnsS6 sets out various measures to protect the 
CSIR agdlnst claims by any thrd party for intellectual property ihngement, and stipulates 
that a successfd hrd-party  claim against the CSIR may lead to a review of the Agreement 
to  accommodate claimants  in  the  shanng of financial benefits. It  also  requires the  San 
Council to share financial benefits with a h r d  party ifthey are successfd in proving a claim. 
In August 2004,  the  San  Trust, formally named  the  San  Hoodia  Benefit-Sharing 
Trust,  was  registered.  The  content  of  this  Agreement  was  discussed  over  several 
meetings,  during  which  San  delegates  from  South  Africa,  Namibia  and  Botswana 
debated  issues  relating  to  benefit-sharing,  and  agreed  upon  principles  to  guide  the 
sharing ofbenefits. There was unanimous agreement that 75 percent ofall Trust income 
would be equally distributed to the constituted San Councils of Namibia, Botswana and 
South  Africa;  that  10  percent  would  be  retained  by  the  Trust  for  internal  and 
administration purposes; that 10 percent would be allocated to WIMSA as an emergency 
reserve fund; and that 5 percent would be allocated to WIMSA to cover administration 
of  the  San  networks.  Priorities  within  the  region,  such  as  education,  leadership 
empowerment and land security, were agreed upon  as non-binding  recommendations 
to  the  Councils.  Principles  for  benefit-sharing  that  would  bind  the  Trust  were 
unanimously endorsed by the WIMSA Annual General Meeting in December 2003.57 

53  Provision 3.6. 
54  Provision 3.7. 
55  Provision 3.8. 
56  Provision 9. 
5’  WIMSA Annual Report, period April 2003 to March 2004. 

865 
v.  RHETORIC AND REALISM: AN ANALYSIS OF THE CSIR-SAN  BENEFIT-SHARING 

HOODIA SPECIES 

AGREEMENT 

On the face of it, the Agreement represents a historic breakthrough, and is one of 
the first of its kind ever to be negotiated in the world. However, it is clearly important 
to scrutinize the Agreement beyond the veneer of political declarations and the rhetoric 
of the popular press. Two matters warrant further dscussion. First, the extent to which 
this Agreement can be considered to meet best-practice and be fair and equitable; and 
second, the approach used  through  intellectual property protection to secure benefits 
for the San. These are discussed in turn in this and the next Section. 

Closer examination of the Benefit-Sharing Agreement reveals certain concerns that 
impede a wholehearted endorsement. Most notably, although the San could receive a 
considerable amount  of money,  this  will be  only  a fraction  of a  percent-between 
0.03 percent and 1.2 percent-of 
net sales of the product.58 Monies received by the San 
will be extracted from royalty and milestone payments obtained by  the CSIR, whereas 
profits  received by  Phytopharm  and  its  partners will,  after  deduction  of the  licence 
royalties, remain unchanged.  Moreover, the Agreement explicitly protects Pfizer and 
Phytopharm from any further financial demands by the San. 

Whether such benefits will be realised is, of course, a moot point,  given Pfizer’s 
recent withdrawal as a partner in the development of the drug. Perhaps a more serious 
matter concerns the Agreement’s overt prevention of the South African San from using 
their knowledge of Hoodia in any other commercial applications. What this means in 
practice is  that the San are unable to independently pursue less lucrative but  perhaps 
more  viable  commercialization options based  on non-patented  herbal medicines  (as 
opposed to patented pharmaceutical drugs or other products). They are also unable to 
claim any benefits from the  dozens of new Hoodia-based  products that have  recently 
emerged in the  market, which  blatantly use  San traditional knowledge of Hoodia  in 
their promotion. 

For example, a recent advertisement by the US.-based  BioMed Pharmaceuticals 
promotes  T ~ ~ ~ ~ e ~ a ~ i ~ e  
as  the  “first  commercially available product  containing  the 
revolutionary Hoodiagordonii cactus plant”, based on a standardized natural extract of the 
plant; and another U.S.-based  company, Hi-Tech  Pharmaceuticals, markets a similar 
Hoodia-based  product, Lipodrene, citing use  of Hoodia as an appetite suppressant by  the 
San. A rather bare-faced advertisement for Hoodoba, “Hoodia gordonii diet pill”, describes 
the “push by Western drug companies” to “sideline the indigenous people and turn this 
remarkable plant into a synthetic prescription drug”, and then goes on to do the same, 

5*  The proportion  of royalties that  will  be  received  by  the  CSIR &om Phytopharm remains  undisclosed. 
However, for the purposes of this calculation I  have assumed that the CSIR will receive between 10 and 20 percent 
of royalties firom Phytopharm. This assumption is based on an understanding of the industry standards for royalties, 
and of the substantial value-adding that took place by  the CSIR prior to it granting a licence to Phytopharm for the 
further development of P57. 

866 

THE  

but  through  using the  image  and  knowledge of the  San  to  market the  product  as  a 
natural extract.59 An  Internet  advertisement for Aloe  Hoodia  describes how  Pfizer has 
decided to invest “millions” to research the benefits of the plant  as a new anti-obesity 
drug.6” An  advertisement  for  Pure  Hoodia  refers  to  the  success  of  clinical  trials  for 
Hoodia.61  These and related products raise  important ethical issues, more especially in 
their neglect of the Sad2 and countries of origin as beneficiaries of commercialization, 
and also  in the extent to which they free-ride  on the research done by  the  CSIR and 
Phytopharm to demonstrate safety and efficacy. They point also to the need for range 
States  to  prevent  the  export  of  Hoodia  species  without  suitable  benefit-sharing 
arrangements in place, an  aproach now endorsed by  CITES. While these concerns are 
addressed to some extent by the recent decision by Phytopharm to pursue P57 as a food 
supplement, there  is  surprisingly  little  in  the  Benefit-Sharing  Agreement  requiring 
CsrR/Phytopharm  to  prevent  other  products  from  emerging on  the  market  which 
infringe the patent and thus potentially limit the benefits received by  the San. Indeed, 
companies s e h g  Hoodia overtly recognize the difficulties the CSIR has in policing the 
patent,  laying  open  the  question  as  to  the  efficaciousness of  the  patent  system  in 
situations such as  these, where the large number  of small operators make the  costs of 
enforcement prohibitively high. 

There  are  also  other  concerns.  Chief  amongst  them  is  that  the  Agreement  is 
confined almost exclusively to monetary benefits which hinge upon product sales and 
successful  commercialization. Yet  commercialization is  far  from certain, highlighting 
the need for a more comprehensive and holistic approach to benefit-sharing that is not 
exclusively financial, is  not  contingent  on successfid  drug  development,  and  which 
provides immediate and tangible benefits to the San. The importance of non-monetary 
benefits has increasingly been recognized over the past  decade, more  especially in the 
likely absence of substantial financial rewards from bioprospecting. While the CSIR has 
received funds related to P57, there is no indlcation that this money will be used to assist 
the San with training in cultivation, harvesting of material for clinical trials, education, 
conservation or capacity-buildmg.  Although there is a nominal agreement to provide 
bursaries to assist with education, in practice, it has been acknowledged that in the haste 
to finalise  the Benefit-Sharing Agreement, the alternative benefits took a back seat to 
the  negotiation  of  royalty  shares.63  An  additional  interpretation  is  that  the  San 
considered non-monetary benefits foisted upon  them by  others to be patronising, and 
preferred to obtain the maximum amount of financial benefit so that they could decide 
upon and implement their own development priorities.@ 

j9 See: www.hoodia-dietpills.com). Accessed 9 December 2003. 
6”  See: <http://secure.host-matrix.com/aloe/hoodiapage.asp). 
h1  See: cwww.purehoodia.com). 

However, there have been attempts by some companies to gain approval by the San through donations, in 

order to claim a beneficial association. 

63  R. Chennells, Ethics and  Practice in Ethnobiology, and  Prior Informed  Consent with Indigenotrs Peoples Regarding 
Genetic Resources, Paper presented at a conference on Biodiversity, Biotechnology and the Protection of Traditional 
Knowledge, St Louis, 4 to 6 April 2003. 

64  Roger Chennells, personal comment, 27 August 2004. 

HOODIA  SPECIES 

867 

At the national level, the CSIR has purportedly benefited substantially from Hoodia. 
Through  licensing  the  technology,  the  CSIR is  likely  to  earn  significant milestone 
payments, linked to success of the drug during different stages of the clinical trials.65 The 
specific royalty percentage has not been divulged publicly but is considered by the CSIR 
to  “be substantial” compared to international nomm66 Typically, royalty percentages 
for  pharmaceuticals  range  from  0.5  to  8  percent  of  total  sales.67  If  successful, 
commerciibzation of P57 is likely to amount to tens of d i o n s  of U.S. dollars per annum 
for the lifetime of the patent. In this regard, many consider South Africa to have reached 
an important turning point in bioprospecting. Patent rights to the active constituents of 
Hoodia  responsible  for  suppressing appetite have  been  successhlly retained  by  South 
Africa through the CSIR (although notably, other Hoodia-related patents remain foreign- 
owned) with  foreign  drug firms obtaining licences  for  the  further development and 
commercialization of the drug. Despite these benefits, some experts have argued that far 
more could have been done by the CSIR at a national level in assuming some of the roles 
of Phytopharm and Pfizer in drug development, and thus realising a  greater share of 
national benefits. 

Projected  benefits  to  Phytopharm  and  other  possible  partners  are  difficult  to 
determine  due  to  reluctance  from  these  parties  to  divulge  financial  details  of  the 
Agreement, the variable costs of research and development (estimated to be in the range 
of US$400 million to US$800 d o n ) ,  and the unpredictability of success, and indeed 
commerciahzation. However,  press statements issued  before the withdrawal of Pfizer 
indicate  that  from  the  pharmaceutical  drug  alone,  Phytopharm  wdl  receive  up  to 
US$32 million in milestone payments from Pfizer (or other pharmaceutical companies), 
royalties on sales of P57, and an additional US$ 2.8 million.68 

In  terms  of  non-monetary  benefits,  some  of  the  more  significant  benefits  to 
emanate from  the Agreement have been  the  construction of a  U.S.  Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approvable mehcinal plant extraction facility at the CSIR for the 
manufacture of material for use in clinical trials on P57, as well as the establishment of 
a Botanical Supplies Unit-both 
the first of their kind in the world. South Africa is also 
considered a preferential site for the cultivation and production of the material, although 
through  the  licensing agreement with  the  CSIR, Phytopharm  does  have  the  right, 
presuming permission is granted for the export of Haodia  genetic material, to establish 
plantations  outside  South  Africa.  Phytopharm  has  recently  reported  initiating  a 
“substantial increase  in  its  agronomy  programme”  for  cultivating  the  raw  material, 
following the successful raising of hnds through the issuing of new shares, enabling the 

65  While  the  CSIR and  Phytopharm  have  been  reimbursed  for  their  continuing  roles  in  research  and 
development, these funds have been allocated largely to cover such costs and are not considered by the CSIR as income. 
66  M. Horak, CSIR, personal comment, April 2002. 
6’  K. ten Kate and S.A.  Laird, The Commercial  Use $Biodiversity,  Earthscan, London,  1999. See  also  supra, 
68  Phytophann, Future development ofP57, Press Release, 30 July 2002, available at: www.phytopharm.com/ 

footnote 58, and www.eptech.org/ip/health/royalties>  for an overview of royalties on patents. 

press/New%20arrangements%2Ofinal.htm~. 

868 

THE  

company  to  produce  an  estimated  200  million  product  units  in  2007.69  Further 
cultivation  represents  an  obvious  development  opportunity  for  the  San  and  other 
marginahzed communities, although the technical challenges of growing the plant are 
reportedly considerable, and many question the imposition of cultivation projects upon 
the  San, who  are  not  agnculturalists by  nature.  The scarce availability of water also 
constrains cultivation in the parched areas of the Kalahari where many of the San reside. 
A number of options are, however, currently being investigated by the CSIR to enable 
the  San  to  engage  in  ago-processing  through  development  of  a  range  of  natural 
products and essential oils, some related to Hoodia culti~ation.7~ Synthesis of the active 
components  of  the  plant  provides  another  option  for  drug  manufacture,  and  the 
development  of  semi-synthetic  versions  of  active  molecules  discovered  in  the  P57 
programme is currently under investigation by Phytopharm.71 

While the technology-transfer components of the Csm-Phytopharm  Agreement 
are strong, its conservation benefits are acknowledged by the CSIR to be  ‘‘thin”72 and 
focused  mainly  on  Hoodia.  To  some  extent  this  is  strengthened  in  the  San-CsrR 
Agreement, which  commits parties  to  conserve biodiversity and  to  undertake best- 
practice procedures  for  plant  collection, but  nonetheless is  clearly  a  critical area  for 
policy  guidance,  especially  if  practical meaning  is  to  be  given  to  the  oft-expressed 
statement that biodwersity must “pay its way”. This applies not only to the Hoodia case, 
but  also  to  many  other  bioprospecting initiatives underway-both 
in  the  CSIR and 
elsewhere in the region.73 For example, any money generated by the CSIR gets invested 
back into the organization or partner organizations, or into providing scientific services, 
with no proportion of projected royalties specifically earmarked for conservation, or for 
benefit-sharing  with  holders  of  traditional  knowledge.  These  deficiencies could  be 
addressed  through policy changes within  the  CSIR, and/or  through  channelling funds 
into  a  National  Bioprospecting Trust  Fund,  as  proposed  in  South  Africa’s  newly 
promulgated  Biodiversity 
Either  way,  their  redress  requires  urgent  attention, 
given the reported and increasing depletion of Hoodia species from their natural habitat. 
Although  benefits  for  the  CSIR, and  indirectly  for  South  Africa,  are  high,  the 
Agreement has the potential to bypass other countries of origin of Hoodia species, such as 
Namibia and Botswana. While there are some bilateral bioprospecting agreements under 
development between the CSIR and countries that neighbour South ffica, many have 
commented that the role of South Africa  in this case simply perpetuates the country’s 
economic dominance in the region, and that the CSIR patent inhnges the rights of other 

www.phytopharm.co.uk>. 

69  Phytopharm, Interim  resultsfor  the period  to  29  February  2004, Press  Release, 5 May  2004,  available at: 
70  M. Horak, CSIR, personal comment, April 2002. 
71  See supra, footnote 68. 
72  M. Horak, CSIR, personal comment, April 2002. 
73  See, for example, R. Wynberg, Bioprospecting Delivers Limited Benefits in South Afica, European Intellectual 
74  Act  10 of 2004, Section 85. 

Property Review, 26(6), June 2004, pp. 239-243. 

H O O D I A  SPECIES 

869 

range States to benefit from national sovereign ownership of Hoodiu genetic resources.75 
Although the South Ahcan San Council has independently determined to share benefits 
across  regional boundaries, based  on an acknowledgment of the shared knowledge  of * 
Hoodia, there is clearly a need for benefit-sharing strateges to be developed at a regional 
level in cases where genetic resources are shared across boundaries. 

Addtional  worries  include the  fraught  questions of administering the  funds,  of 
determining  beneficiaries  and  specific  benefits  across  geographical boundaries  and 
within hfferent communities, and of minimizing the social and economic impacts and 
conflicts  that  could  arise  with  the  introduction  of  large  sums  of  money  into  poor 
communities. Limited international and local experience exists in the administration and 
implementation of such agreements and few, if any, cases address the sharing of benefits 
within  communities. As  Barrett  and  Lybbert76  point  out,  thus  far,  benefit-sharing 
questions have remained issues of distribution between the community in aggregate and 
outsiders,  and  at  a  local  and  intra-community  level  there  has  been  little  practical 
experience. Early  experiences, however,  suggest  the  potentially  dwisive  impact  that 
natural product trade can have in indigenous communities. In India, for example, the 
commercialization  of Jeevuni,  or  Trychopus  zeylanicus,  a  wild  plant  with  anti-fatigue 
properties, has led to divisions among a  tribal community, the Kanis,  as  to how their 
knowledge  should  be  used.77  In  Peru,  a  1996  Agreement  of  the  International 
Co-operative  Biodiversity  Group  also 
led  to  conflict  between  organizations 
representing Aguarana communities, as well as at a national leve1.78 

In the case of the San, intra-community issues are especially complex. Many of the 
organizations set up to politically represent the San are very new, and the introduction 
of  Western  values  and  economies into  supposedly  traditional  communities, already 
fractured  and  hybridised, presents  a suite of difficult social and  economic problems. 
Robins79  describes the  social  complexities of contemporary San identity, knowledge 
and  practice,  and  charts  the  intra-community  divisions  and  conflict  that  emerged 
between  self-designated  “traditionalists”  and  “Western  bushmen”  when  San 
land-claims were lodged in the Northern  Cape province of South Africa.  While these 
claims  resulted  in  significant  benefits  for  the  San,  they  also  had  unintended 

75  See,  for  example,  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Water  and  Rural  Development,  2000,  Indigenous  Plant 

Development Strategy  Review, National Agricultural Support Services Programme, Namibia, 2003. 

76  C.B. Barrett and T.L. Lybbert, Is Bioprospecting a Viable Strategyfor  Conserving Tropical Ecosystems!  Ecologcal 

Economics 34,  pp. 293-300. 

77  B. Tobin, Biodioersity Prospecting Contracts: T h e  Searchfor Equitable Ageemem, in Laird (ed.), supra, footnote 9, 
pp. 287-309;  A.K. Gupta, The Role $Intellectual  Property Rghts in the Sharing ofBenejfs arisingjom the Use $Biological 
Resources and  Traditional Knowledge, World Intellectual Property  Organization  and United Nations  Environment 
Programme, Geneva, 2004. 

Phamucertticaf  Bioprospectittg, Current Anthropology 45(2), 2004, pp. 21 1-237. 

78  See  Tobin,  id.;  S.  Greene,  Indigenous  People  Incotporated!  Culture  as  Politics,  Culture  as  Property 
in 
79  S.  Robins, NCOS, “Bushmen”,  and Double  Vision:  The Khomani  San Land  Claim and  the  Cultural  Politics  of 
“Community”  and  “Development”  in  the  Kalahari,  in  T.A.  Benjaminsen,  B.  Cousins  and  L.  Thompson  (eds.), 
Contested Resources: Challenges to the Governance $Natural  Resources in South Af.ca, Programme for Land and Agrarian 
Studies, School of Government, University of the Western Cape, 2002, pp. 208-227. 

870 

THE JOURNAL  O F  W O U D  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

consequences in terms of generating conflict. Robinsso points  out  the  contradictions 
between San “cultural survival” and the promotion of the values of “civil society” and 
“liberal inlvidualism”, a conclusion that holds particular resonance for the Hoodia case, 
contextualized as it is within the international discourse of inlgenous peoples, a vigdant 
NGO community alert to bio-piracy cases, and a new policy framework that requires fair 
and equitable benefit-sharing for use of traltional knowledge. 

VI.  APPROACHES ADOPTED TOWARDS IPR PROTECTION 
A.  A n  “Expensive Principle ”? 

Intellectual  property  considerations  are  central  to  the  case  because,  through  a 
broader programme to investigate the nutritional and toxic properties of edible plants 
used  by  indigenous people, traditional knowledge was  used  directly by  the  CSIR to 
support their research and development about Hoodia  species and ultimate registration 
of an international family of patents. Several patents have been granted based on Hoodia 
use,  but  Patent W09846243, filed  in  1997 and  concerning the  appetite-suppressant 
properties  of  Hoodia,  is  the  focus  of  this  case.81  The  patent  is  described  as  “a 
pharmaceutical composition [that] contains an  extract obtainable from a  plant  of the 
genus  Trichocaulon  or  Hoodia  containing  an  appetite-suppressant  agent  having  the 
formula described.” Other aspects of the patent relate to procedures for obtaining the 
extract and synthesizing the compound. 

Early on in the negotiations, the San were faced with a difficult choice. Should they 
oppose or even challenge the patent, based on ethical considerations and lack of novelty, 
or  should  they  adopt  a  more  practical  approach  and  become  active  partners  in 
negotiating a share of royalties from the patent? This was  a critical moral dilemma. In 
communities such as the San, the sharing of knowledge is a culture and is basic to their 
way of life. Traditional knowledge of plants is  viewed as  a  collective and the idea of 
“owning” life abhorrent. The patenting of active compounds of Hoodia by the CSIR, ran 
counter to this belief, yet brought with it lucrative opportunities for financial benefits. 
As Roger Chennells, the lawyer representing the San retorts, ultimately, the principle 
of “no patents  on life” was  “too expensive”82 and the poverty-stricken  San  opted to 
obtain a share of royalties. Writing to the CSIR President in 2001, Chennells informed 
the Organization that a legal challenge of any nature did “not form part of our clients’ 
plans”, but  emphasized that  the  San looked  on their traditional knowledge  regarding 
Hoodia, as  well  as  other  plant  uses,  as  being  collective  San  intellectual property  that 
should not morally be able to be owned by any individual or entity.83 

80  Id. 
81  Patent GB233355657 (EP1099444), filed in 2001, is also based upon use of extracts of Hoodia species and 
relates to “the reduction of gastric acid secretion in animals, including humans.” Patent EP1166792, filed in 2002, 
relates to the use of Hoodia and  Trichocaulon extracts for anti-diabetic  activity, and to the use of such extracts and 
related compounds and analogues for the manufacture of anti-diabetic  drugs. 

*z  See supra, footnote 63. 
*3  Letter from Roger Chennells to the Executive  President of the CSIR, 5 July 2001. 

HOODU  SPECIES 

87 1 

The resulting MOU and the Benefit-Sharing Agreement acknowledge the San  as 
the ‘‘custodlans of an ancient body of traditional knowledge and cultural values, related 
inter  alia  to  human  uses  of  the  Hoodia  plant”,  and  recognize  that  such  knowledge 
predated Western scientific knowledge. However, the Agreement clearly specifies that 
any intellectual property arising from the traditional use  of Hoodia  and  related to the 
CSIR patents for P57 remains vested exclusively with the CSIR. The San Council has no 
right to claim any co-ownership of the patents or products derived from the patents. 

The decision of the San not to challenge the patent must, of course, be respected, 
but the granting of the patent to the CSIR on the basis of its novelty deserves greater 
scrutiny and  raises  wider  questions  about  the  efficacy, rationale  and  fairness of the 
patent  system.  Why,  for  example,  does  the  patent  system  disqualify  indigenous 
communities from patenting particular, useful, characteristics of a plant known to them 
on the basis of “lack of novelty”, but allow Western scientists to do so in the language 
of chemistry? 

Dutfields4 suggests that a case, albeit ambiguous, exists for the San to challenge the 
legitimacy of the patent on the basis of its lack of novelty and of simply being a variant 
of  the  well-documented  traditional  use  of  Hoodia.  He  describes  some  of  these 
ambiguities in a cogent analysis of the role of the patent system in benefit-sharing. One 
interpretation  is  that  the  patent  specifically  describes  methods  for  extracting  the 
principal active substance and therefore has the required characteristics of novelty and 
non-obviousness.s5 According to the European Parent Office, “if a substance found in 
nature  has  first  to  be  isolated from  its  surrounding  and  a  process for  obtaining it  is 
developed, that process is patentable.”86 Certainly the CSIR would support this view, 
having spent twenty years, and many millions of Rands on research and development 
of  the  plant.  But  Dutfields7  also  offers  alternative  interpretations,  highlighting  in 
particular  the  cross-cultural  nuances  of  understanding  “novelty”,  and  a  related 
judgment  in  a  1995 patent  appeal  case  in  the  British  House  of  Lords.  This  case 
concerned the formation of secondary metabolites from use of the anti-histamine drug 
Terfeenadine, and the patentability of these compounds. The point of the appeal, which 
led to a successful dismissal of the case, was to argue that the British 1977 Patents Act 
did  “not confine the state of the  art about products to knowledge of their  chemical 
composition”.** In  other  words,  it  is  not  necessary  for  a  chemical  to  have  been 
described or known about for it to be part of the state of the art. In this particular case, 

84  G. Dutfield, Sharing the Benefits 4Biodiversity: Is there a Rolefor the Patent System!  5 J.W.I.P.  6, November 
2002, pp. 899-932. 
85  See also, D.J. Stephenson (ed.), Case Study  ofthe Patenting of P57 afid Related Benejit-Shating  arzd  Liceming 
Agreemenfs with regard  to the Intellectual  Property Rights offhe San Peoples of Southern Afica, First Peoples Worldwide, 
Fredericksburg, Virgnia, 2003. 
$6  European  Patent  Office,  Guidelinesfor Examination  in  the European  Patent  Ofie, cited in Dutfield,  supra, 

footnote 84. 

87  Supra, footnote 84. 

Merrell Dow u. H N  Norton,  cited in Dutfield, id. 

872 

THE  

a secondary metabolite produced by the human body breaking down a pharmaceutical 
could not be considered new just because its chemical structure had been  elucidated 
for the first time. On the basis of this judgment, and supportive rulings of the European 
Patent Ofice Technical Board of Appeal, Dutfield cautiously suggests that the CSIR’S 
U.K. and European Hoodia patents could be vulnerable to a challenge on the basis  of 
lack  of  novelty,  although  achieving the  hoped-for  outcomes  in  each  of  the  main 
jurisdictions would be difficult. 

B.  Options for Protecting San Knowledge 

An important question to ask is how things could have been done better, through 
improved  recognition  of holders of traditional  knowledge and  enhanced benefits. A 
number  of  scenarios  present  themselves,  some  compatible  and  others  mutually 
exclusive. These include: 

- 

- 

- 

- 

co-ownership of the patent by the San and/or  other groups and the CSIR; 
mi generi1 systems of protection for traditional knowledge; 
defensive  protection  through  the  compulsory  dsclosure  of  the  source  of 
genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge in patent applications, 
and the establishment of traditional knowledge databases; and 
a principled  “no patents on life” option and/or  pursuit of alternative models 
for commerciahzing Hoodia. 

The first two options, dubbed by  the World  Intellectual Property  Organization 
(WIPO) as  “positive  protection”,  refer  to  the  acquisition  by  traditional  knowledge 
holders themselves of an  IPR,  such as  a  patent,  or an  alternative right  provided  in  a 
sui generis system. In the first option it could be argued that had the CSIR requested the 
prior informed  consent  of the  San  before lodging the  P57 patent,  then  negotiations 
could almost certainly have included the option of the San becoming co-owners on the 
patent, with entitlement to a far greater share ofprojected royalties. For its part, the CSIR 
could have contributed knowledge of the chemistry, technical knowledge and assistance 
in  preparing  the  patent  specifications,  and  capital  to  prepare  and  prosecute  the 
application. This would have been a far more revolutionary and equitable approach to 
benefit-sharing, according the San equal status on the patent, rather than poor-cousin 
status as  a  tertiary beneficiary. Through  assistance  with  technical, legal and  financial 
aspects  of  the  patent  application,  it  would  also  have  overcome  some  of  the  most 
important limitations of the patent system for many developing countries and holders of 
traditional knowledge.89 

89  See, for example, R.A. Mashelkar, The Role  of Intellectual  Propmy  in  Building-Capacity jur Innovation  and 
Development: A Developing  World Perspective, in C.A. Odora Hoppers (ed.), Indigenous Knowledge  and the Integration of 
Knowledge  Systems. Towards  Q  Philosophy ofhiculation, New Afiica Books, South Africa, 2002, pp.  188-199. 

HOODOl SPECIES 

873 

But  even  if  this  model  had  been  adopted,  concerns  would  remain  about  the 
commodification of San knowledge, and consequent violation of cultural precepts. In 
this context, the second option, which would see the introduction of suigeneris forms 
of protection  for traditional knowledge,  would be  a far more fitting solution to the 
problem.  Many  scholars  have  identified  the  serious  need  for  innovation  in  the 
intellectual property  regime itself,90 and this  topic  is  also  under  consideration by  a 
large  number  of international  bodies,  including  the  W I P O , ~ ~  
the  CBD, the  United 
Nations  Conference  on Trade  and Development  (UNCTAD), and the  w~0.92 It is 
beyond the scope of this article to explore in depth the alternative options available 
to protect  traditional knowledge;  suffice it  to  say  that  the  Hoodia  case  supports the 
need for sui generis  systems of protection that not only give communities rights over 
their traditional knowledge, but also enable the wider preservation and promotion  of 
such knowledge systems. Some countries, such as the Philippines93 and Peru,94 have 
enacted  legislation  giving  indigenous  communities  rights  over  their  traditional 
knowledge,  but in Southern Africa such laws are still under development.  In South 
Africa, more than five years  have elapsed since the first tabling of a draft Indigenous 
Knowledge Bill, a reality that illustrates the political and legal complexities of working 
out what  aspects of indigenous  knowledge  can be  made  the  subject of intellectual 
property laws, and under what circumstances. 

The Hoodia case demonstrates not only the value of having an integrated system to 
protect  and  promote  traditional  knowledge,  but  also  the  importance  of  so-called 
“defensive protection”, to prevent the misappropriation of tradtional knowledge. This 
third  option  could include, for  example, the  compulsory disclosure of the  source  of 
genetic resources and associated  traditional knowledge in patent applications, and the 
establishment of traditional knowledge databases. 

Mechanisms for disclosure of origin of genetic materials or traditional knowledge are 
a matter of intense dalogue and negotiation at the international leve1,95 and are one of the 

90 See, for example, Mashelkar, id. 
9l  For example, the WIPO Intergovernmental  Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, 
Traditional Knowledge and Folklore is considering intellectual property issues that arise in the context of: access to 
genetic resources and benefit-sharing; the protection of traditional knowledge; innovations and creativity; and the 
protection  of expressions of folklore. Proposals examining ways to use patents to protect traditional knowledge for 
its holders include  definitions of “prior art”, the scope of  atents and  the  test  of  “inventive  step”, procedural 
requirements such as disclosure of country of origin and proo!ofprior 
informed consent in patent applications. See: 
cwww.wipo.org/globalissues/igc/index.htmb. 
92  See, for example, Commission  on Intellectual Property Rights, Integrating  InteZlertual  Property  Rights  and 
Development Policy: Report oftbe Commission on Intellecfual Property Rights, UN Quaker Office, Geneva, 2002; ICTSD 
and  UNCTAD, Inteflectual  Property  Rights: Implications for  Development,  Policy  discussion  paper  prepared  for  the 
UNCTAD-ICTSD project on IPRS and sustainable development, 2003; Crucible II  Group, supra, footnote 7. 
93  The Indigenous Peoples Rights Act  of 1997, Republican Act  No.  8371, available at: www.grain.org/ 
docs/philippines-ipra-1999-en.pdf,; and  the  Community  Intellectual  Rights  Protection  Act  1994, Senate  Bill 
No. 1841, available at: cwww.grain.org/docs/philippines-cirpa-1994-en.pdf,. 
94  “Law introducing a protection regime for the collective knowledge  of indigenous peoples derived fiom 
biological resources”, Law 2781 1 of 10 August 2002, available at: cwww.grain.org/brl/!docid=8l&lawid=2041~. 
95  See,  for  example,  submissions  to  the  WTO by  Switzerland  (IP/C/W/400,  13  pages)  available  at: 
chttp://docsonline.wto.org/DDFDocuments/t/IP/C/W40O.doc~, Afiican Group, and India on behalf of Brazil, 
Bolivia,  Cuba,  Dominican Republic,  Ecuador,  Thailand,  Peru  and  Venezuela  (IP/C/W/403),  available  at: 
cwww.ictsd.org/ipnonline/ictsd/docs/wto-IPCW403.pdf,. 

874 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

major areas of overlap between the CBD and TRIPS. Many developing countries argue that 
any protection of genetic resources and traditional knowledge wdl not be effective unless 
and until international mechanisms are found and established within the framework of the 
TRIPS Agreement.96 They suggest that other means, such as access contracts and databases 
for patent  examinations, can  only be  supplementary to such international mechanisms, 
which must contain an obligation on members collectively and individually to prohibit, 
and to take measures to prevent, the misappropriation of genetic resources and traditional 
knowledge. Proposals  are for Article  29  of TRIPS to  be  modified to  include a  strong 
disclosure-of-origin  mechanism whch would require patent holders to disclose not only 
detailed information about who provided the materials or the knowledge used, but also 
positive proof of benefit-sharing and of prior informed consent. 

A number of countries have adopted such proposals in various forms, and in South 
Africa  the Hoodia  case  has  directly catalysed a commitment from the  government to 
investigate more fully the basis  upon which patents are granted, including a database 
for knowledge about South African biodiversity, and a proposal to amend the Patents 
Act  to  empower  the  Registrar to  refuse  a  patent  if there  is  not  adequate disclosure 
about  the use  of genetic resources and traditional knowledge.97 Whether  or not  the 
existence of such mechanisms would  have prevented  the  Hoodia  patent  from being 
granted is, however, debatable; the different “languages” of knowledge and the cultural 
bias  of the patent system, suggest inherent limitations to this approach. Moreover,  an 
agreement on disclosure of origin could well lead to  an  increase in  the  patenting of 
plant and animal inventions.98 

Even in the absence of positive or defensive protection, the San and other groups 
could have  asserted their rights to knowledge of Hoodia and adopted a “no patents on 
life” position. This need not have entailed a rejection of commercialization of Hoodia, 
but instead the development of non-patented botanical medicines in collaboration with 
suitable  partners.  In  India,  for  example,  the  Kani  tribe  receives  50  percent  of  the 
2 percent licence fee and royalty from commercialization ofjeevani, a herbal drug which 
rejuvenates  and  builds  strength.99 While  the  no-patent  option  would  bring  lower 
financial returns than  that  of a  patented pharmaceutical drug, so  too  would  it bring 
lower levels  of risk. The rapid  growth  of herbal products based  on Hoodia  described 
earlier, testifies to  the  opportunities afforded by  this  option,  but  also  points  to  the 
importance of setting up clear mechanisms to prevent the export of genetic resources 
without suitable benefit-sharing arrangements in place. 

96  Id. 
y7  Republic of South Africa, Department of Trade and Industry Patents Amendment Bill 2004, Government 

Gazette, 11 February 2004, Notice 227 of 2004, Volume 464, No.  26017. 

98  GRAIN, llre TRrPs Review at a  Ttrrraing Point? 2003, available at: cwww.grain.org/publications/trips-july- 

99  R.V.  Anuradha, Sharing with  the Kanis: A  Care Studyfrom  Kerala,  India, in Cue Studies  012  Benejt-Sharing 
Arrangements,  Submitted  to  the  Conference of the  Parties  to  the  Convention  on Biological Diversity,  Fourth 
Meeting, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4-15  May  1998. 

2003-en.cfin). 

HOODIA SPECIES 

875 

VII. CONCLUSIONS 

The case of Hoodia tells a complex story with many strands, and from it a number 
of important lessons and conclusions can be drawn that are important to integrate into 
ongoing debates about ways  in which benefit-sharing for  communities can be made 
more equitable. One of the most crucial lessons to emerge from the case is the need to 
get it right from the start. Obtaining the prior informed consent of communities holding 
knowledge about biodiversity from the very outset of a project-and 
engaging them as 
active partners-is 
an absolutely fundamental principle of benefit-sharing. The San case 
illustrates what can go wrong when this principle is ignored. If prior informed consent 
had been obtained from the outset then some of the more expedient provisions in the 
Agreement, such as the exclusion of the San from other commercialization options, may 
well have been dealt with more fairly. Benefits through, for example, options involving 
co-ownership of the patent may also have been greater. 

The  negotiating process  between  the  CSIR and  the  San  has  demonstrated the 
importance of building trust  between  role-players  and  of having in  place  a  political 
climate conducive to fair deliberations. It has also reaffirmed the importance of having 
community-based institutions through which holders of traditional knowledge can be 
represented in negotiations, and benefits channelled. The process has  hghlighted  the 
prominent  role played  by  NGOS, legal representatives, and intermediaries in  benefit- 
sharing-in 
this case not only in assisting the San to attain their rights, but also in shaping 
San politics and economic development. 

One of the major impacts of the case has been the interest it has aroused about the 
importance  of  protecting  traditional  knowledge  and  ensuring  that  holders  of  such 
knowledge receive fair compensation. Amongst the San, the Hoodia case is considered 
an important empowering tool to  enable more informed decisions to be made about 
their intellectual property and ways to protect it. At government level, the case has led 
directly to an increased focus and prominence for biodiversity and its potential value, 
and in South Africa, the inclusion of prior informed consent and benefit-sharing within 
new biodiversity legislation and a proposal to require disclosure of origin prior to the 
granting of  patents.  At  the  international level,  the  case  is  widely  considered  to  set 
precedents  about  the  ways  in  which  holders  of  trahtional  knowledge  should  be 
compensated for this knowledge. 

There is clearly an urgent need to introduce new forms of protection for traditional 
knowledge that not only give communities rights over their knowledge but also enable 
the wider preservation and promotion  of these knowledge systems.  The Hoodia  case 
demonstrates not only the value of having an integrated system to protect and promote 
traditional knowledge, but also the importance of so-called “defensive protection”,  to 
prevent the misappropriation of traditional knowledge. 

876 

THE  

Some of the lessons are probably only beginning. If monies are eventually received 
by the San there w d  be extremely mfficult issues to deal with in terms of determining 
who benefits and how the benefits are spread across geographical boundaries and within 
communities, and  of minimizing the  social and economic impacts and  conflicts that 
could  arise  with  the  introduction  of  large  sums  of  money  into  impoverished 
communities. The due compensation of other communities such as the Nama, Damara 
and Topnaar will also require careful consideration. What is clear is the need for regional 
collaboration in cases where resources and knowledge are shared. 

Two principal models of Hoodia commercialization have been described. The first 
model,  that  of  a  State  research  institution  forging  partnerships  with  large,  foreign 
pharmaceutical  or  nutraceutical  companies  is  one  that  is  replicated  throughout  the 
world-and 
although  yields  research  and  development  benefits  for  the  research 
institution,  also  demonstrates  some  very  real  concerns, when  holders  of  traditional 
knowledge are involved. A major criticism of this model is  that it simply perpetuates 
imbalances  of  the  past  through  a  very  disempowering,  patronising  and  unequal 
relationship. 

The second model-that 

of a largely unregulated trade and a plethora  of mostly 
fly-by-night  operators, free-riding on the publicity and patent of the first-is 
also highly 
problematic  because  it  completely  bypasses  holders  of  traditional  knowledge  and 
countries of origin and also will likely lead to over-exploitation of the wild resource. 

A  feature common to  both  of these models  is  the  limited State involvement in 
developing appropriate forms of Hoodia commercialization, hindered to some extent by 
the legislative vacuum that has  existed for bioprospecting in Southern Africa.  Clearly, 
there  is  a  need  for  a  more  holistic, innovative and  ethical approach  to  biodiversity 
commercialization beyond the models currently touted. While State intervention may 
be  frowned  upon  in  today’s  globalized  world,  it  does  seem  that  strict  oversight, 
combined  with  the  support  and  partnership  of  ethical  trading  partners  and  service 
organizations, is an essential formula for more equitable benefit-sharing. 


