Biotechnology, lntellectual Property Rights and the 

Rights of Farmers in Developing Countries 

The  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity  (CBD) defines  biotechnology  as  “any 
technological application  that  uses  biological  systems, living organisms, or  derivatives 
thereof, to make or mod@ products or processes for specific use”. Biotechnology in food 
and agriculture is one of the most promising new technologies of the modem age. Some 
hail  genetic  engineering,  for  example,  as  essential  to  addressing food  security  and 
malnutrition  in  developing  countries.’  In  the  United  States,  the  growing  use  of 
agricultural biotechnology is resulting in reduced use of pesticides and increased adoption 
of environmentally fnendly farming practices such as  “no-tdl”  farming, which reduces 
soil erosion and fertilizer run-off.  It has fbrther been pointed out that the United States 
is not the only country that is reaping the benefit of biotechnology. New crops derived 
from biotechnology are being used  in  developing countries such as  Argentina, South 
ffica,  China,  the  Philippines  and  Inda.2  The  West  African  Rice  Development 
Association (WARDA), a public international agncultural research centre in CBte d’Ivoire, 
has used  “embryo rescue” to enable African and Asian  varieties of rice to cross-breed. 
This  innovation  in  rice  production  promises  several  advantages  over  conventional 
African  varieties,  includmg  earlier  maturity,  improved  pest  resistance,  tolerance  to 
drought and acid soils, and great height, making it easier to harvest by hand.3 

The Director  of the United  Nations Food  and Agricultural Organisation (FAo), 
Jacques Diouf, has supported biotechnology as a technology that would be beneficial to 
developing countries if  more  investment is  drected towards it.  He  argued that  new 
genetic  technologies  for  the  so-called  “orphan  crops”  such  as  cowpea,  millet  and 
sorghum are  critical  for  food  supply  and  livelihoods of  the  world’s poorest  people. 
However,  there are a  number of barriers preventing the poor from accessing fully the 
benefits  of  modem  technology  including  inadequate regulatory  procedures,  poorly 

*  Ph.D. LLM (University of London, SOAS); McrArb.  (Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, U.K.); Member of 
the  International  Law  of Biotechnology  Committee  of  thc  ILA;  Senior  Programme  Oficer,  Commonwealth 
Secretariat, Legal and Constitutional Affairs Division. The views expressed in the article are those of the author and 
do not necessarily represent the views ofthe Commonwealth Secretariat. The fact ofthe author’s employment with 
the Commonwealth Secretariat does not imply any endorsement of his views by the Secretariat. The author can be 
reached at: cEOAwuku@aol.com). 
*  Dominic  Glover,  2003,  Biotechnology f o r   Africa?  Democratizing  Biotechnology:  Genetically  Modijed  Crops 
in  Developing  Countries,  Briefing  Series,  Briefing  10,  Brighton,  U.K.,  Institute  of  Development  Studes, 
ISBN 1 85864 487 9, available at: cwww.ids.ac.uk/biotech). 
*  Alan  Larson, Trade and  Development  Dimension  .f U.S. International  Biotechnology Policy,  September 2003, 
3  See supra, footnote 1. 

Economic Perspectives, An Electronic Journal of the U.S. Department  of State, Vol. 8, No. 3, Washington. 

76 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

functioning markets and seed delivery systems, weak domestic plant breeding capacity, 
inadequate research capacities, and  complex intellectual property  issues.4 This  article 
will  focus on intellectual property rights  (IPR) issues  as  relating to access  to  genetic 
resources and the rights of farmers in developing countries. 

Western  biotechnological, pharmaceutical and  human  health  care  industries  have 
increased their interest in natural products as sources of new biochemical compounds for 
drug,  chemical  and  ago-products  development.  Although  the  interest  in  traditional 
knowledge and medicines &om developing countries has increased in the past few decades, 
few, if any, benefits have accrued to the source countries and the traditional communities. 
Their contributions to plant breeding, genetic enhancement, biodwersity conservation and 
global drug development are not recognized, compensated or even protected.5 

Let us consider the situation oflocal farmers in developing countries in more detail. 
Over a long period of time farming communities in developing countries have bred and 
developed their crop varieties, improved on the varieties through selective breeding and 
sold them locally under names which have found widespread local acceptance. Over the 
last  few  decades,  some  of  these  local  varieties  have  also  been  exported.  Intellectual 
property protection in developing countries, however, is poor and, in many cases, the 
government is opposed to granting monopoly rights in agricultural crops. 

In  such  a  situation,  an  apcultural  biotechnology  company  from  a  developed 
country  can  acquire samples  of  the  crop.  As  these  varieties  are  not  produced  using 
biotechnology,  the  company  can  make  use  of the  exemption for plants  and  animals 
allowed  under  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO) Agreement  on  Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) by claiming that these are natural varieties 
where no inventor can be identified. This is correct because  most developing countries 
do not provide intellectual property protection for their plant varieties. The agricultural 
biotechnology company can then genetically engineer a close substitute for the natural 
variety, which maintains its desirable consumer characteristics. This genetically modified 
variety can be patented and its name copyrighted, which makes it eligible for intellectual 
property protection under TRIPS. This means that the biotechnology firm can license the 
production  of  the  crop  in  any  climatically friendly  country,  export  the  product  in 
competition with  natural varieties and prevent the natural varieties from being sold in 
importers’ markets using their natural names.’  Examples are Jasmine rice from Thailand 

Biotech and Developing  Countries, Bridges, I.C.T.S.D.  Year 8, No. 5, Geneva, May 2004. 

j  J. .Mugabe, Intellectual Property  Protection and  Traditional Knowledge, in Intellectual Property and Human Rights, 
a Panel Discussion to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Geneva, 
9 November 1998; WIPO, Geneva, 1999, pp. 97-122. 

6  Annex 1C of the Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The TRIPS 

Agreement  provides for  a common  set  of rules  to  protect  and enforce  intellectual property  rights  (IPKs).  The 
purpose  of the  TRIPS Agreement  is  to  reduce  distortions  and  impediments  to  international  trade,  to  promote 
effective  and  adequate  IPR  protection,  and  to  ensure  that  measures  and  procedures  to  enforce  IPRS do  not 
themselves become barriers to legitimate trade. 
7  William A.  Kerr, Jill  E.  Hobbs, and  Revadee Yampoin, Intellectual  Property  Protection,  Biotechnology  and 
Developing  Countries:  Will the  TRIPS be EJectiue!  AgBioForum, Volume 2, Numbers 3 and 4,  1999, pp. 203-21  1. 

THE RIGHTS OF FARMERS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

77 

and  Basmati  rice  from  India:  variants  of  these  two  crops  have  been  patented  and 
copyrighted by U.S. firms.8 

Some  view  this  system  as  biopiracy,  arguing that  if  a  patent  system  which  is 
supposed to reward inventiveness and creativity systematically rewards piracy and fails 
to  honestly apply criteria of novelty  and non-obviousness  in  the  granting of patents 
related to indigenous knowledge, then this system is flawed and needs to be changed. It 
cannot be the basis for granting patents or establishing exclusive marketing rights.9 The 
difficulty with protecting plants or crops under patent laws is that they confer property 
rights which  are private  in  nature.  This means  that  under  the  law, once  a  patent is 
granted, the owner enjoys exclusive rights to his invention. 

Issues of inlgenous and local peoples’ rights feature strongly in the discussions on 
global  environmental  processes.  The  World  Commission  on  Environment  and 
Development stressed the importance of their knowledge in the sustainable development 
process, and observed that “tribal and inhgenous people will need special attention as the 
forces  of  economic  development  dsrupt  their  traltional  lifestyles”.’O  Agenda  2 1 
recommends that governments should adopt policies and/or  legal instruments that will 
protect intellectual and cultural property of inhgenous peoples.”  In other words, local 
communities should have control of, and access to, agricultural biodwersity, so that they 
can continue to develop their farming systems further and sustainably. Farmers must have 
the right to benefit from biological resources and related knowledge. 

The  CBD is  the  main  international instrument  addressing biodiversity issues.  It 
provides  a  comprehensive  and  holistic  approach  to  the  conservation  of  biological 
diversity, the sustainable use  of natural resources and the fair and equitable sharing of 
benefits deriving from the  use  of genetic resources and aims  to  protect  the  rights  of 
indigenous people and local farming communities. 

The  CBD explicitly  recognizes  the  rights  of  indigenous  and  local  peoples  in 
traditional knowledge and innovations. Article 8( j) provides that each Contracting Party 
shall, as far  as  possible  and  as  appropriate, “subject to its national legislation, respect, 
preserve, and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local 
communities  embodying  traltional  lifestyles  relevant  to  the  conservation  and 
sustainabler use  of biological diversity and promote  their wider  application with  the 
approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices 
and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of such 
knowledge,  innovations  and  practices.”l2  However,  the  Convention  leaves  the 

8  Ibid. 

Vaiidana  Shiva, Biopiracy:  Need  to  Change  Western IPR  Systems,  The Hindu  (New Delhi),  28 July  1999, 

available at: cwww.hinduonline.com/today/stories/05281349.htm~. 

‘0  World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future,  Oxford University Press, 
1‘  Agenda 21, Chapter 26.4(b), in N. A. Robinson (ed.): Agenda 21: Earth’s Action Plan, Oceana Publications, 

1987, p. 12. 
New York, 1993, p. 509. 

Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992. 

78 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

protection of traditional knowledge to the discretion of parties. Also, it does not talk of 
protection  of  the  knowledge  but  merely  calls  on  parties  to  respect,  preserve  and 
maintain that knowledge. 13 

Article 15 of the CBD recognises “the sovereign rights of States over their natural 
resources”, and points out that  “the authority to determine  access to genetic resources 
rests  with  the  national  governments  and  is  subject  to national  legislation.”  Access to 
genetic  resources  by  other  Contracting  Parties,  where  granted,  shall be  on mutually 
agreed  terms  and  subject  to  the provisions  of Article  15. It  shall be  subject  to  prior 
informed consent of the Contracting Party providing such resources, unless otherwise 
determined  by  that  party. Each  Member  State shall take legislative, administrative  or 
policy measures with the aim of sharing in a fair and equitable way the results of research 
and development  and the benefits arising from the commercial and other utilization of 
genetic  resources with the  Contracting  Party  providing  such  resources.  Such  sharing 
shall be upon mutually agreed terms. 

Likewise, the 2001 FAO International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food 
and Apculture ( P G R F A ) ~ ~  
seeks to facilitate and regulate access to genetic resources for 
food  and  agriculture.  Contracting  Parties  agree  to  take  the  necessary  legal  or  other 
appropriate  measures  to  provide  access  to  other  Contracting  Parties  or  to  legal and 
natural persons under the jurisdiction of any Contracting Party in accordance with a set 
of conditions. These include that “recipients shall not claim any intellectual property or 
other  rights  that  limit  the  facilitated  access  to  plant  genetic  resources  €or  food and 
agriculture,  or  their  genetic  parts  or  components,  in  the  form  received  from  the 
Multilateral System”, and that “access to plant genetic resources for food and agriculture 
protected  by  intellectual  and  other  property  rights  shall  be  consistent  with  relevant 
international  agreements, and with relevant national laws” (Article 12.3). 

The FAO Treaty recognises under Article 9 the  “ ... enormous contribution that the 
local and indigenous conmunities and farmers of all  regions of the world, particularly 
those in the centres of origin and crop diversity, have made and will continue to make 
for the conservation and development of plant genetic resources.” The responsibility for 
realizing farmers’ rights rests with national  governments,  and in accordance  with  their 
needs and priorities,  each  Contracting Party  should, subject  to its national  legislation, 
take  measures  to  protect  and  promote  farmers’  rights,  including:  (a)  protection  of 
traditional  knowledge  relevant  to  plant  genetic  resources  for  food  and  agnculture; 
(b) the  right  to  equitably  participate  in  sharing benefits  arising from the  utilisation  of 
plant  genetic  resources  for  food  and  agriculture;  and  (c) the  right  to  participate  in 
making  decisions,  at  the  national  level,  on  matters  related  to  the  conservation  and 
sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. 

’3  See supra, footnote 5. 

The 2001  FAO International  Treaty  on  Plant  Genetic  Resources for Food  and Agriculture defines plant 
genetic resources for food and agriculture  to mean any genetic material of plant  origin of actual or potential value 
for food and agriculture. Genetic material means any material of plant origin, including reproductive and vegetative 
propagating material, containing functional  units of heredity. 

THE RIGHTS  OF FARMERS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

79 

The TRIPS Agreement establishes minimum standards on patents, industrial designs, 
trade  secrets,  copyrights,  trademarks  and  geographical  indications.  It  is  the  most 
comprehensive body of international law on IPRS. However, it has been recognised that 
the TRIPS Agreement does not adequately cover or protect  traditional knowledge  and 
innovations  of indigenous and local peoples.15 Issues of indigenous and local peoples’ 
rights are a major concern of many developing countries. Local communities there have 
accumulated a broad technological knowledge base to conserve and sustainably use plant 
genetic resources. Article 27(3)(b)’6 of TRIPS speaks of the protection  of plant varieties 
through  an  “effective sui generic- system”.  This  term  has,  however,  not  been  defined 
sufficiently. It is very difficult to determine what an effective sui generis system for plant 
varieties would entail. 

The International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants17 was 
introduced in 1978, and developing countries have been urged to adopt it as a suigeneris 
plant  variety  protection  system.  However,  only  a  few  developing  countries  have 
become  members  of the  International  Union for  the  Protection  of New Varieties of 
Plants  (UPOV). The  1978  version  of  the  Convention  allows  farmers  to  re-use 
propagating  material from the previous seasons harvest and to freely exchange seeds of 
protected varieties with farmers, The 1991 version of the Convention is more stringent, 
and  a  farmer  who  produces  a  protected  variety  from  the  farm  seeds  is  guilty  of 
infringement unless the national law provides otherwise. It has also been argued that the 
Convention is inadequate in protecting  traditional knowledge  of indigenous and local 
peoples.  The  Convention  does  not  contain  any  provisions  for  recognizing  the 
knowledge  and  other  contributions  the  indigenous  and  local  peoples  make  to  plant 
breedmg programmes.18 

‘5  A general distinction is made between the knowledge systems of the formal sector, that of both private and 
public institutions, and  the knowledge systems of the  informal sector, that of communities and  individuals. The 
formal sector knowledge systems are codified, recorded in writing and defended through national and international 
law, e.g. the TRIPS Agreement and multilateral treaties, such as the Patent Co-operation  Treaty and the Beme and 
Pans Conventions.  The knowledge systems of the informal sector are not protected  through  IPR$. They are often 
oral,  built  on  trust,  and  defended  through  the  nomis and practices of traditional  institutions.  These  informal 
knowledge  systems, which include for example knowledge  about specific plant varieties that can be used to cure 
diseases or supply food, arc transferred from one generation to the next. However, over the years, rapid deforestation 
and environmental degradation in developing countries has wiped out a lot of this knowledge. Another problem i5 
the  lack  of  documentation  for  the  informal  sector  knowledge  systems.  P.  Mulvany   TRIP^,  Biodii~rrsity and 
Commonwealth  Countries:  Capacity  Building  Prioritiesfor  the  1999 Review of  TRZB Article  27.3(b), Discussion Paper, 
Cornmonwcalth Secretariat, 1998, p. 9. 
l h   Article 27(3)(b) of TRIPS  states that: “Members may also exclude for patentability ... (b) plants and animals 
other than micro-organisms, and essentially biologically processes for the production  of plants or animals other than 
non-biological and microbiological processes. However, Members shall provide for the protection  of plant varieties 
either by patents or by an effective suigeneris system or by any combination therof.” 

’7  The Convention for the Protection of New varieties of Plants ensures that Member States acknowledge the 
achievements of breeders ofplant varieties by making available to them exclusive property rights on the basis of a set 
ofuniform and clearly defined principles. To be eligible for the protection, varieties have to be: distinct &om existing 
commonly known varieties; sufficiently homogenous; stable; and new in  the sense that they must not have been 
commercialized. Like all IPRS,  the rights of plant breeders are granted for limited periods oftime, at the end ofwhich 
the varieties protected by them pass into the public domain. Authorization from the holder ofthe right is not required 
for the use of the protected variety in research, including its use in breeding further new varieties. 
‘8  J. Mugabe, P. Kameri-Mbote  and D. Mutta, Traditional Knowledge,  Genetic Resources and  Intellectual Property 
Protection:  Towards  a  NEW International  Rexime,  2001,  Working  Paper  of  the  International  Environmental  Law 
Research Centre, 2001-5, Geneva, available at: ~www.ielrc.org/content/w0105.pd6. 

80 

THE  

The TRIPS Agreement  could  offer protection  to  traditional  knowledge  through 
Article 22(1) on geographical indications, which  “ ... identify a good as  originating in a 
territory  of a WTO Member, or a  region  or locahty  in that  territory,  where  a given 
quality, reputation  or other  characteristic of the  good  is  essentially attributable  to its 
geographic  origin”. Like trademarks,  they  allow producers to  differentiate themselves 
and segment the market, thus achieving higher returns if consumers are wdhng to pay 
a  price  premium  for  their  hstinct  product.  Geographical  indications  have  certain 
characteristics that  are more  in line with ways  in  which  traditional  communities  use 
their  knowledge.  They  are  based  on  collective  trahtions  and  a  collective  decision- 
malung  process;  they  protect  and  reward  traditions  while  allowing  evolution;  they 
emphasize the relationships between culture, land, resources and environment; they are 
not  freely transferable from  one  owner to  another;  are  not  subject  to  unconditional 
control by a private owner; and can be maintained as long as the collective tradition  is 
maintained.  Collective  marks  or  certification  marks,  which  are  usually  owned  by 
associations  of  producers,  could  also  be  used  to  protect  goods  based  on traditional 
knowledge.  For  example  in  the  United  States,  the  Intertribal  Agriculture  Council 
licenses  use  of  its  annually-renewable  “Made  by  American  Indians”  mark  for  the 
promotion  of  agricultural  or  other  Indian-made  products  that  have  been  produced 
and/or processed by enrolled members of recognized  tribes.19 

O n  the  whole,  non-patent  forms  of IPRS,  such  as  trademarks  and  geographical 
indications,  offer  flexibihty  for  protecting  traditional  knowledge  and  innovations. 
However,  indigenous and local peoples do not have strong institutional arrangements 
to  safeguard  their  property  rights  and  enforce  these  forms  of  intellectual  property 
protection.  Alternatively,  in  order  to  accommodate  the  protection  of  traditional 
knowledge,  countries could  invest  in the creation  of sui generis legislation suitable to 
their  cultural  and  political  conditions.  Such  legal  systems  should  protect  traditional 
knowledge as intellectual property  of indigenous and local peoples and ensure that any 
benefits from that knowledge flow to the holders of that knowledge.20 

The  Organization  of  African  Unity  (OAU) (now Afiican  Union)21 offers  some 
suggestions through its draft “African Model Legislation for the Protection  of the Rights 
of Local  Communities,  Farmers  and  Breeders,  and  for  the  Regulation  of Access  to 
Biological Resources”.  It provides  that a written  contract shall be entered into by the 
State and the  collector, but with the full participation  and approval of the concerned 
local community  or  communities.  It further suggests an institutional arrangement  for 
developing a system of registration of items protected by community IPRS and farmers’ 
rights according to their  customary practices and law.  Other provisions pertain  to the 

‘9  United  Nations  Conference on  Trade and  Development, System  and  National  Experiences &r  Protecting 

7raditional Knowledge,  Innovations and Practices, T~/B/coM.l/EM.13/2, 

22 August 2000, p. 12. 

20  See supra, footnote 5. 
African Union, AU Model Lawfor the  Protection  Dfthe Rights $Local  Commnnilies, Famers and Breeders,  and 
the  Regulation  of  Access  to  Biological  Resources,  Algeria,  2000;  available online  at:  ~www.grain.org/brl_files/ 

f.r 
oau-model-law-en.pd6 . 

THE RIGHTS OF  FARMERS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

81 

development of national information systems to compile and document information on 
local knowledge and innovation practices of communities and guidelines for collectors 
of resources.22 With such Iegislation in place, the jurisprudence  could be established in 
defence of traditional knowledge and farmers’ rights. For example, medicinal plants may 
require  a  combination  of  patent-like  systems  such  as  copyright  and  trade  secrets 
combined  with the  Convention  on Biological Diversity’s sui generis system that  caters 
for mutual agreed terms, prior informed consent, access and benefitf-sharing. 

Similarly, the  Cotonou  Ageement  through  Article  46  offers  the  scope  for  the 
African,  Carribbean  and  Pacific  (AcP)  States  to  link  the  protection  of  intellectual 
property rights with the traditional knowledge concept contained in the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. It suggests suigeneris systems that cater for mutual agreed terms and 
co-operation  among E.U./Acp  States to ensure respect, preservation  and maintenance 
of the knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities. 

At  the  national  level,  some  developing  countries  have  enacted  legislation  to 
regulate and protect  their plant varieties, and most  of these countries have ratified the 
TRIPS Agreement, thus giving effect to sub-paragraph  3 of Article 27 in Part II  relating 
to the protection  of plant  vaneties.  The Kenya  Seeds and  Plant  Varieties Act,  1972, 
amended  in  2002,  confers  power  to  the  Minister  to  regulate  transactions  in  seeds, 
including provisions for the testing and certification of seeds; for the establishment of an 
index  of names  of plant  varieties; to impose  restrictions  on the  introduction  of new 
varieties; to control the importation of seeds; to authorize measures to prevent injurious 
cross-pollination; to provide for the granting of propriety rights to persons breeding or 
discovering new varieties; to establish a tribunal to hear appeals and other proceeding+. 
In a similar way, the Belize Protection of New Plant Varieties Bill, 2000, gives effect to 
breeders’ rights.24 

Both the Kenya and the Belize legislations recognize breeder’s rights and provide for 
the  protection  of  new  plant  varieties.  The  India  Protection  of  Plant  Varieties  and 
Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001, goes further by recognizing not only the rights of breeders 
but also the rights of farmers. The legislation also stresses the importance of recognizing 
and protecting the rights of the farmers in respect of their contribution made at any time 
in  conserving,  improving  and  malung  available  plant  genetic  resources  for  the 
development of new plant varieties. In this respect, a farmer is also defined as any person 
who “conserves and preserves ... any wdd species or traditional varieties or adds value to 
such  wdd  species or traditional  varieties through  selection  and  identification  of their 
usell properties”.  The legislation further provides that  “the farmer who is  engaged in 
the conservation of genetic resources of land races and wild relatives of economic plants 
and  their  improvement  through  selection  and  preservation  shall  be  entitled  in  the 

22  See supra, footnote 19, p. 14. 
23  The Seeds and Plant Varieties Act, 1972, as last amended on 7 June 2002, in Official Gazette, Supplement 
24  Protection  of New Plant Varieties Bill, 2000, Belize, OfEclal Gazette, 18 March 2000. 

No. 49. 

82 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

prescribed manner for recognition and reward from the National Gene Fund; provided 
that material so  selected and preserved has  been  used  as  donors of genes in  varieties 
registrable under this Act”  (Chapter VI,  Section 39(l)(iii)). The Indian legislation also 
provides for and regulates benefit sharing with  respect to any variety registered under 
the Act  (Chapter IV,  Section 26) and provides for claims being made on behalf of any 
village or local community as regards their contribution in the evolution of any variety 
(Chapter VI,  Section 41).25 

In conclusion, many developing countries argue that trahtional knowledge held by 
indigenous and local communities now forms part of the product discovery process  of 
the  industrialized world,  but  that  this  knowledge  is  not  recognized  and  adequately 
protected by  conventional IPR  systems.26 Therefore, sui generis legislation systems need 
to  be  developed  that  would  name  the  sources  of  genetic  material  and  traditional 
knowledge used in new products and allow for the sharing of benefits arising from the 
use  of such genetic  material  and knowledge. This would  be in accordance with  the 
requirements  of  the  Convention  on  Biological Diversity  and  the  FAO International 
Treaty on Plant  Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. First  efforts have  been 
made with the OAU African Model Legislation for the Protection of the Rights of Local 
Communities, Farmers and Breeders, and for the  Regulation  of Access  to Biological 
Resources and the Cotonou Agreement as well as some national legislation. 

25  Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Act (PPVFR) 2001, Act 53 of 2001 
26  See supra, footnote 18. 


