The Relationshp between Trade and Development, 

with Particular Reference to the Service Trade 
How the  WTO may Benejit from Experience under the GATT 

Aly K. ABU-AKEEL* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  relationship  between  developing  countries  and  the  GATT system  has 
continuously been the subject of research and analysis.1 If it is  possible to capture the 
legal nature of this relationship in  a brief statement, it would be that the  course and 
dynamics of the  relationship centred on how  to formulate exceptions for developing 
countries from what is presumably considered as the proper discipline of the GATT,~ and 
also  to  provide  them  with  non-reciprocal  preferences,  again  in  deviation  from  the 
GATT’s basic principles (particularly its most-favoured-nation  (MFN) standard) ,3  so as to 
enable  them  to  become  more  active  and  effective participants in  the  international 

legal adviser to the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. 

* Of the Legal Department of the World Bank; former counsellor at the Egyptian Council of State; former 
The views expressed here are solely those of the author and may not be attributed to the World Bank or to 

any other institution with which the author is or has been associated. 

For &scussions and analysis of the history of GATT’s relationship to development, see generally, Kenneth W. 
Dam,  The  GATT: Law  and  the  International  Economic Oganization, University  of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970; 
Robert E. Hudec, Developing Countries in the  GATT Legal System, publication of the Trade Policy Research Centre, 
London,  1987;  Pradip  K.  Ghosh  (ed.),  International  Trade  and  Third- World  Development,  Greenwood  Press, 
Connecticut, 1984; Anne  0. Krueger,  Trade Policies and Developing Nations, Brookings Institution, Washington, 
D.C., 1995; Stephan Haggard, Developing Nations and  the Politirs  Of Global  Integration, the Brookings Institution, 
Washington, D.C.,  1995; Will Martin and L. Man Winter (eds.), The Uruguay Round and the Developing Economies, 
World Bank Discussion Paper 307, World Bank, Washington, D.C.,  1995; T.N.  Srinivasan, Developing  Countries 
and  the  Multilateral  Trading System, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, 1998; Jag&sh Bhagwati and Robert E. 
Hudec  (eds.), Fair  Trade  and  Harmonization,  MIT Press,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  1996; Jagdish  Bhagwati, 
Splintering and Disernbodiment OfServicer and Developing Nations, The World Economy, 7,1984, pp. 133-144;  Jagdish 
Bhagwati, Trade in Services and Developing Countries, in 0. Giarini (ed.), The Emerging Service Economy, Praeger, New 
York, 1987; John H. Jackson,  The  World  Trading System: Law and Policy ofInternational Economic Relations, second 
edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997. 

The  original  GATT--Altide 

XVIII  entitled  Governmental  Assistance  to  Economic  Development-generally 

recognized the right of developing countries, subject to certain requirements, to m o w  or withdraw concessions 
included in their Schedules with the GATT, if needed to protect d i n t  industries. It also enabled them to restrict 
imports, presumably under more lenient conditions than is  generally available to all GATT Members, in order to 
address balance-of-payments  difficulties. See discussion of GATT’s relevant provisions in Dam, s u p ,  footnote 1, 
pp. 227-233. 

The principles that: (a) developing countries need not reciprocate for tariff(or other trade barrier) reductions 
granted to them by developed countries; and (b) developed countries may not invoke, vis-d-vis  each other, the MFN 
treatment with respect to preferences granted by  any  of them to  developing countries, were confiied under 
Article XXXVI  or Part IV of the GATT, whch was added thereto in 1964, and in the Contracting Parties decision in 
1979, customarily referred to as “The Enabling Clause” (see in&, 

footnote 45). 

384 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

merchandise  trade.4  The  legal  instruments  to  enable  this  special  and  preferential 
treatment  were  introduced  into  the  body  of  the  GATT,5  together  with  the  related 
institutional arrangements6 The effectiveness of this approach of promoting the cause 
of development through special and preferential trade measures was  critically analysed 
in numerous literary writing;, either in relation to its underlying principles or in relation 
to  its  practical,  quantifiable  impact  in  enhancing  the  advancement  of  developing 
countries.7 

The debate preceding and during negotiations of the first multilateral instrument 

for  regulation  of the  service  trade  (the General  Agreement  on  Trade  in  Services- 
GATS), was  greatly influenced by  the  same concerns and  demands that  governed the 
relationship  between  developed  and  developing  countries  throughout  earlier  trade 
negotiation rounds on goods.* And the formal legal outcome was basically similar, as the 
GATS did recognize the particular status of developing countries and broadly confirmed 
that their needs were deserving of special treatment.9 The debate over liberalization of 
the international service trade, however, was  markedly different.10  In addition to the 
fact  that  services can be  traded  through  modes  other than  the  cross-border  mode  of 

Earlier thoughts held that import-substitution  economic policies, entailing protective trade measures, were 
an acceptable response by developing countries to their acute “exchange gap” problems (i.e. the inadequacy of their 
export  earnings to meet the imports needed  to sustain  their  economic growth targets). The theory  was that  an 
appropriate period of protectionist trade policies would eventually lead to a higher growth and more efficient and 
competitive  economies,  and  thus  to  a  greater  participation  by  developing  countries  in  world  trade.  For  an 
evaluation of the validity ofthis approach, see Krueger, supra, footnote 1, pp. 33-36. 

Part IV  ofthe GATT was introduced in 1964, specifically to address the particular trade situation ofdeveloping 
countries. This w3s followed by  the installation in the Tokyo Round of multilateral tradc negotiations of the so- 
called  Generalized  System  of  Preferences  (GsP), where  developed  countries  individually  apply  a  system  of 
preferences tailored, as they see fit, to the developing countries: see Srinivasan, supm, footnote 1, at 24. 

Formation  within  the  GATT of  the  so-called  Committee  III  (GATT, Basic  Instruments  and  Selected 
Documents (hereafter referred to as BISD), 7th Supplement,  1959) to work on initiatives to increase the exports of 
developing countries was the first  attempt  at institutionalizing GATT’s response to developing country  demands. 
This was followed in 1964 by the establishment of UNCTAD as a forum focusing entirely on the trade needs of these 
countries. For the UN instruments on the creation and functions of UNCTAD, see United Nations Conference on Trade 
and  Development-Basic  Documents on its Establishment and Activities  (hereinafter UNCTAD-Basic  Documents), U N  
Publications, Sales No. 66.1.14, 1966. 

It  is  generally recognized  that  the  instruments  under  which  preferences  were  allowed  for  developing 
countries did not entail specific and binding legal commitments on the part of developed countries to provide these 
preferences:  see  Hudec, supra,  footnote  1,  at  133. Further,  as  shown later  in  this  article,  developed  countries 
maintained,  individually, full authority  to  determine  the  eligibility  criteria  under  their  respective  systems  of 
preferences and  to  deny such eligibility to  countries  deemed to have succeeded in  exporting to the markets  of 
developing countries. 

During the  negotiations  of the  GATS, representatives of developing  countries  made  specific proposals  to 
entitle them to special treatment, such as &ording  them a flexibility in opening fewer market sectors, determining 
a priority for liberalization of service sectors of export interest to them, allowing the establishment of preferential 
service trade arrangements among developing countries and providmg them with technical assistance on matters 
to be covered by the prospective framework agreement on the service trade: see Terence P. Stewart (ed.), The GATT 
Uruguay  Round: A Negotiating  History  (hereafter referred  as  the  Uruguay  Round  History), Vol.  11,  Commentary, 
Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers, Deventer, 1993, at 2380. 

The GATS, Article IV,  calls for the negotiations of specific commitments to ensure increased participation by 
developing countries  in the world  service trade.  For the full texts of Agreements  emanating from the Uruguay 
Round of multhteral trade negotiations, including the text  of the GATS, see Final  Texts of the  Uruguay Round  of 
Multilateral  Trade  Negotiations  (hereinafter  the  Final  Texts),  publication  of  the  Office  of  the  U.S.  Trade 
Representative, Washmgton, D.C.,  1994. 

l o   Remarkably,  the  GATS does not  include  an  explicit  statement  as  to  the  need  of providing  preferential, 

financial treatment to developing countries in the conduct of the international service trade. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

385 

goods trade,”  the international service trade would more acutely raise issues of cultural 
and political differences that may  militate against  a freer and more  open exchange of 
services.12  Further,  issues  of  foreign  investments,  which  have  been  traditionally 
separated from the issues of trade in goods under the GATT, are of vital significance in 
the context of trade in services, and are recognized as such in the GATS.13 Also, the areas 
of the  service trade  where  developing countries may  possibly  enjoy  a  comparative 
advantage (e.g. the  construction and  tourism  industries, and  labour and  professional 
services)’4  may  appear  to  give  developing  countries  a  significant  advantage  in 
negotiations, absent  from  the  negotiations on  goods  trade,  as  the  realization of this 
advantage in the markets of developed countries would simply require the latter to open 
their  markets  rather  than  to  provide  any  particular  preferences  to  developing 
countries.15 

The focal point of this  article is to evaluate, from a legal/institutional  standpoint, 
how,  in  handling issues  of trade  and  development, with  particular  reference  to  the 
service trade, the World Trade Organization may benefit from the experience gained so 
far in that area under the GATT. The article is divided as follows: first, an examination 
will be undertaken of the GATT’s approach, analysing the rationale of relating trade to 
development, dscussing the response/measures adopted under the GATT in fulfikng its 
developmental role, and evaluating how this response was suited to achieve the desired 
objectives. This will be followed by a discussion of the formal approach of the GATS in 
delineating its developmental functions.16 Thereafter, an attempt will be made to draw 
from experience under the GATT in the area, lessons that could be relevant to WTO’S 
handling of issues  of trade and  development, with  particular emphasis  on the  service 
trade. Lastly, there is a conclusion. 

For a classification of international transactions in services based on the proximity  of service supplier and 
service consumer,  see  Gary Sampson and Richard  Snape, Identfiing  the  Issues  in  Trade  in  Services,  The World 
Economy, 8, June  1985, pp.  172-175. 

l2  This is particularly evident in the area of audio visual services ( f h s ,  radio, video and television and their 
industrial spin-offs,  such as  cable and satellite). During the GATS negotiations, many countries, including the EC 
countries,  In&a,  Canada and  Egypt,  maintained  that  these  service sectors  should be  either  excluded  from  the 
negotiations  or  treated  differently, as  they  are an  important factor in  the  promotion  of  indigenous  languages, 
national  histories and  cultural  heritages: see  the  Uruguay  Round  History,  supra,  footnote  8 ,  at  2390.  Also,  see 
Jeffrey J. Schott and Jacqueline  Mazza,  Trade  in  Services and  Developing  Countries,  20 J.W.T. 3, May/June  1986, 
at 254. 

l 3   For an early  discussion  of the  significance of direct foreign investment for  the  supply of services in the 
international market, see H. Peter Gray, A Negotiafing Strafrgyfor  Trade in Services, 17 J.W.T. 5 ,  September/October 
1983, at 381-384.  The GATS, Article 1(2), recognizes commercial establishment as one of the modes for service 
supply covered by  the Agreement. 

l4  For a discussion of the interest shown by developing countries during the Uruguay Round negotiations in 
labour mobility as a factor that may ensure for them a significant comparative advantage in certain service secton, 
see the Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8 ,  at 2373-2374. 

i5 For analysis ofthe possible benefits for developing countries under an expanded system for the service trade, 

see Bhagwati (1984), supra, footnote 1. 
I h   These functions  are  to  be  exercised through  the  Council for Trade in  Services, established  within  the 
structure of the World Trade Organization according to Article IV, paragraph 5, of the Agreement Establishing the 
WTO (hereafter WTO Agreement). For the text of the WTO Agreement see the Final  Texts, supra, footnote 9. 

386 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

11.  BASIC ASPECTS OF THE -LATIONSHIP 

UNDER  THE  GATT 

BETWEEN  TRADE AND  DEVELOPMENT 

The fact that  the GATT, as  the first multilateral  institutional mechanism  for trade 
relations, should have a developmental role was never in doubt. The GATT is predlcated 
on the principle  that international trade relations should be conducted with a view not 
only  to  expanding  the  exchange  of goods,  but  also  “to  raising  standards  of  living, 
ensuring  full  employment  and  a  large  steadily  growing  volume  of real  income  and 
effective demand.”17 Therefore,  the issue was never whether the  GATT should have a 
developmental  role,  but  rather  what  this  role  should  be  and  how  it  might  be 
implemented.’S 

Naturally, the GATT, as a framework for the conduct of international  trade, is  not 
mandated to take actions to directly address the basic causes of underdevelopment  (e.g. 
the lack of investments  in the productive  sectors, insufficient  development  of human 
resources, inefficient economic management, inadequate infrastructure facilities). Thus, 
the GATT was limited by capacity and functional relevancy to addressing the symptoms 
of underdevelopment  as  they  are manifested in  the field of trade.  By and large, these 
symptoms are frequently referred to as: 

that  while  the 
inadequacy  of the  trade  of developing  countries-meaning 
import  requirements  for  implementation  by  developing  countries  of  their 
developmental projects  are large, revenues from their  exports are not nearly 
sufficient to finance such requirements;” 
unsatisfactory,  or  unfair,  terms  of  trade-meaning, 
generally,  that  the 
international price levels of the traditional export commochties of developing 
countries, such as raw materials and agricultural produce, are subject to greater 
fluctuations  and are  not generally keeping pace  with the  international price 
levels of the commochties they need to import;20 and 
unsustainable structure of trade relations-meaning 
that exports of developing 
countries are composed mainly of primary products, with inadequate share in 
these exports for processed and manufactured products.21 

It  has  always been  an  open  question  whether  the GATT, as  a framework  for the 
conduct and orderly expansion of world trade,  should have  a dlrect role in the field of 

‘7  Preamble to the GATT. 
18  See Dam, supra, footnote 1, Chapter 14. 
‘9  Deficits in the  trade  accounts  of  developing  countries  are  at  the  root  of  their  continuous balance-of- 
payments difficulties. For  example,  the  value  of merchandise  imports  for  Africa  for the  period  1980-96  was 
estimated at  $127 bilhon, while  the value  of its  merchandise  exports  during the same  period  was  estimated at 
$116 billion: see WTO, Annual Repotf, Volume 11,  1997, at 22. 

2‘’  For example, prices of agricultural raw materials are estimated to have declined by 4 percent in 1996 and by 
a further 3 percent in 1997. Prices of cereals declined by 26 percent in 1997, after gaining 20 pcrcent in 1996. The 
same with the prices of coffee which increased in 1997 by  39 percent after declining by 24 percent in 1996: Wro, 
Annual Report, Volume I ,   1997, at 12. 
21  For example, the share ofAfrica in the world exports of agricultural products in the year 1996 was estimated 
at 3.7 percent, while its share of world exports of manufactures in that year was estimated at  0.8 percent. Wro, 
AnntralReport, Volume 11,  1997, at 51. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

387 

development. Other international agencies-such 
as the World Bank, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and 
others-provide 
assistance  to  developing  countries  to  maintain  a  viable  balance  of 
payments, industrialize, establish  export  infrastructure, promote  the  establishment of 
export  industries,  etc.,  which  are  designed  to  address  the  above  symptoms  of 
underdevelopment as they manifest themselves in the area of international trade.22 It was 
not presumed, of course, that the developmental activities of the GATT should duplicate 
the  activities of  these  other  international agencies,  as  the  GATT is  not  mandated  to 
finance investments by  developing countries to  directly improve their trade situation 
and is not equipped, as an institution, to do so. Therefore, the preliminary question to 
be faced in determining the GATT’s developmental role was to articulate a rationale for 
its intervention that was  consistent with the limitations of its function as a framework 
for the conduct of international trade. This rationale seems to have been found in two 
general  considerations that  appear to  have  determined  the  nature  and  scope  of  the 
GATT’s intervention in the development field. 

The first is the adrmssion that the rules of international trade may apply differently 
to  developing  countries.  These  rules,  as  reflected  in  the  comparative  advantage 
economic theory, would generally imply that the reduction of barriers to international 
trade would benefit all economies as it would ensure universal welfare gains  due to a 
more  efficient  allocation  of  resources  on  a  world-wide  basis.23  It  was  conceded, 
however, that while the foundmg principles for freer international trade are valid for all 
countries  in  the  long  run,  exceptions  from  these  principles  should  be  granted  to 
developing countries, in line with their particular stage of development, to the extent 
necessary  to  enable  them  to  build  the  capacity  necessary  to  compete  in  the  world 
markets.24 

The  second  is  the  assumption  that  although  the  institutional mechanism  for 
international trade is not mandated, as indicated above, to address the underlying causes 
for underdevelopment, this institutional mechanism may,  nonetheless, take actions to 
induce improvements in  the  trade  situation of developing countries; actions that  are 
confined  to  the  limitation  of  the  GATT’s role  and  distinct  from  the  roles  of  other 
international  development 
these  considerations, 
intervention by the GATT in the area of development would relate either to the manner 
in  which  the  rules  of international trade  under  the  GATT are  applied to  developing 
countries, or to the ability of the GATT’s mechanism to influence the trade policies of 
both  developed  and  developing countries so as  to  induce  the  adoption  of measures 
favourable to the trade position of the latter. These are discussed in the following two 
Sections. 

institutions.  Thus,  based  on 

22  The World Bank,  World Development Report  (1999-2000), Washington, D.C., Chapter 3. 
23  Jagdish Bhagwati, Writings on International Economics,  Oxford University Press, Delhi, Chapter 2, 1997. 
24  Hudec, supra, footnote 1, pp. 25-32. 

388 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

111.  THE SPECIAL TREATMENT 

OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES UNDER  GATT RULES 

The special treatment  of developing countries, as  discussed below, has  taken two 

A.  exempting developing countries from certain aspects of the GATT’s discipline; 

forms: 

and 

B.  according them preferential trade treatments. 

A.  EXEMPTIONS FOR DEVELOPING  COUNTRIES FROM  THE  RULES OF  THE GATT 

Exemptions for developing countries from the rules of the GATT were introduced 

in the original GATT document whereby a developing country may: 

- 

-  restrict the quantity or volume of its imports if needed to address balance-of- 
payments difficulties. This capacity is allowed under the GATT to all Members, 
developing or developed, albeit under what may appear as  a stricter criterion 
for the latter;25 
modify or withdraw a commitment entered into under the GATT, if necessary 
to promote the establishment of a particular industry (protection of the infant 
industry theory), an option which was  not,  of course, expected to  be made 
available to GATT’s developed country Members;26 
impose quantitative restrictions (or other measures affecting imports), also if 
required to promote the establishment of a particular industry for the purpose 
of raising the general standard of living.” 

- 

The  capacity  to  impose  quantitative  restrictions  for  the  exceptional  purposes 
specified in the GATT was rarely resorted to by developing countries, as the ground of 
“balance-of-payments  difficulties” was  sufficient for  them  to  introduce  any  import 
restrictions  they  felt  necessary.28  It  was  argued  that,  with  the  capacity  granted  to 
developing countries  under  these  exceptions  to  absolve themselves of  commitments 
made by them within the framework of the GATT to eschew non-tariff barriers and to 
lower  and  bind  tariffs,  these  commitments became  relatively  meaningless.  This  also 
reduced  the  leverage  which  developing  countries  might  have  in  any  GATT tariff 
negotiations because  any  reciprocal  concessions they  might  offer would  become  of 
doubtful value.29 

25  While Article XII of the GATT (Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments), which may be invoked 
by  all  Members, permits restrictions on imports to  “forestall the imminent threat  of . . . a serious decline” in the 
Member’s monetary reserves; Article XVII, which is applicable only to developing countries, uses exactly the same 
language, except for the word  “imminent”. Similarly, Article XII which  applies  to  all Members,  perrnits import 
restrictions to  address  a  situation  of  “very  low monetary  reserves”, while  Article  XVII, which  applies  only  to 
developing countries, requires ody the existence of “inadequate monetary reserves”. 

2h  GATT, Article XVIII, para. 7. 
27  GATT, Article XVIII, para. 2. 
2H  See Hudec, supra, footnote 1, at 228. 
2y  Krueger, supra, footnote 1, at 39. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

389 

B.  ACCORDING PREFERENTIAL  TREATMENT TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

Exceptions determined for developing countries from their commitments under 
the GATT would generally enable them to limit their imports, but not to increase their 
exports or to improve the terms of their trade. Thus, if the trade position of developing 
countries is  to be positively changed, affirmative action would be needed to increase 
their exports, not only to enable them to achieve a viable balance-of-payments position, 
but also to effect, with the increases in their export revenues, corresponding increases 
in their imports of capital and other goods required to implement their developmental 
pIans.30 Developing countries intensified their demands for greater market access and for 
the  removal  of barriers  to  their  exports to  developing country  markets.  Inducing a 
significant  move  in  this  hrection  required  the  creation  of  appropriate  political 
incentives to motivate developed countries to take action. This would also be aided by 
a credible demonstration that the difficulties of developing countries in the area of trade 
is  attributed,  at least  in  part,  to  the  commercial practices  of developed countries. A 
turning point in the relations between developed and developing countries under the 
GATT occurred with the publication of the “Panel of Experts Report”, or the “Haberler 
Report”.31  This  Report  provided  strong  evidence  not  only  on  the  &re  need  of 
developing countries to increase revenues from exports if they are to make significant 
economic progress, but also reported to the effect that the trade policies of developed 
countries were to blame to a large measure for the failure of developing countries to 
increase  their  export  revenues  or  to  proceed  faster  with  industnalization.32  This 
prompted the GATT to adopt an action programme of measures to increase the exports 
of  developing  countries  and  to  create  an  institutional  mechanism  (Committee  111, 
hereafter called the  Committee  on Trade and Development-C~D)~~ to focus on the 
developmental aspects of trade and to investigate ways  and means to expand the trade 
relations of developing countries. 

The developing countries continued their pressure through  organs of the United 
Nations for the adoption of a new international instrument and the creation of a new 
international mechanism to  deal with  their  concerns in  the  trade area. Their  efforts 
culminated in  1964 in the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade 

1958. 

3”  The need for affirmative action to effect expansion of the trade of developing countries is the main theme 
of Part IV of the GATT. Thus, it calls on developed countries, in a language that does not imply any specific legal 
commitment, to reduce barriers in their markets to products of export interest to developing countnes. 
31  Gottfiied  Haberler et al.,  Trends in International Trade: Report by a Panel ofExperts,  GATT Secretariat, Geneva. 

32  The most significant findings of the Report, which were subsequently elaborated by the GATT Committee 
III,  were the high tariff rates on primary commodities of high export value to developing countries, such as coffee, 
tea and cotton products. Also, operating as a significant msincentive for industriahation by developing countries, 
was  the discrimination in t a d  rates in many  developed countries on the basis  of the degree of processing. For 
example, calculation based on the differential between the rates for shelled groundnuts and for crude oil and cake 
made  therefiom yielded  effective rates  of protection for  the processing industries of 80 percent in  the  United 
Kingdom,  and  140 percent  in  the  European  Community.  Of course,  this  operated  as  a  strong  incentive  for 
developed countries to export these products in their primary form and a  disincentive for them to take the first 
stages ofprocessing before exporting: see Dam, supra, footnote 1, at 231. 

33  BISD, 7th Supplement, 1959. 

390 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

and Development (uNCTAD)34 as a permanent forum, with a governing board, to work 
principally  for  the  promotion  of  international  trade  with  a  view  to  accelerating 
economic development, and  to be  responsible for  the  formulation of principles and 
policies on international trade and related problems of economic development.35 

Simultaneously, developed countries became more concerned with the prospects 
of further alienating developing countries away from the GATT system and felt the need 
to appease them through additional concessions. It followed that the GATT proceeded 
with  its  own  initiative  to  strengthen  the  legal  and  institutional  basis  for  enabling 
Contracting Parties to  discharge their responsibilities in connection with the work of 
expanding the trade of less-developing countries.36 This resulted in expanding the GATT 
through the addtion of Part IV,  entitled “Trade and Development”. The consensus is 
that under the new Part IV,  developing countries “obtained a great deal of verbiage and 
very few precise commitments”37 and that the main significance of Part IV was its force 
as an agreed statement of ~rinciples.3~ 
In sum, Part IV confirms the need for affirmative 
action to enlarge the share of developing countries in international trade, improve and 
stabilize the terms  of their exports of primary products, and enable &versification of 
their exports through increased market access under favourable conhtions for processed 
and  manufactured  products  of  current  or  potential  export  interest  to  developing 
countries.39 

Perhaps, the  legally  most  important  statement  in  Part  IV  was  that  “developed 
Contracting Parties do not expect reciprocity for commitments made by them in trade 
negotiations to reduce or remove tariff and other barriers to the trade of less-developed 
Contracting Parties.”40 This formally paved the way for the next landmark in the history 
of  GATT’s management  of  its  developmental  role,  namely  the  adoption  of  the 
Generalized System of Preferences (GsP) .4l 

Under  the  GSP, developed  countries  agreed  to  provide  trade  preferences  to 
developing countries without  requiring a  measure  of reciprocity. Many preferential 

34  See U N C 7 A F F i n a l  Act, UN Document E/CoNF.46/141,  1964. 
35  General Assembly Resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, Part 11.  For the texts of all decisions by the 

Economic and Social Council and of the General Assembly related to the establishment and functions O f  UNCTAD, 
see U N c r A P B a s i c  Documents,  supra, footnote 6. 

36  Dam, supra, footnote 1, at 237. 
37  Id. 
38  Hudec,  supra,  footnote  1, at  58.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  Part  IV  failed  to  discuss  the  legal 
implications of action taken by a developed country in the spirit of the principle contained in the said Part on that 
country’s legal obligations under  the  GATT. Specifically,  how measures taken  by  a developed  country for  the 
reduction ofbarrien to exports to its markets by developing countnes should not be made also applicable to exports 
to that market by  developed country by  virtue  of the GATT’s MFN clause. True, Part IV  indicates that developed 
countries do not expect reciprocity for such measures. However, the reciprocity meant here is the quid pro quo that 
the beneficiary developing countries are normally expected to provide, and is not related to the sphere of the MFN 
clause. In fact, the MFN clause of GATT remained intact as Part 1v made no reference to preferences: see Dam, supra, 
footnote 1, at 241. This matter was explicitly addressed under the decision of the GATT’s Contracting Parties of 
28 November  1979 (see the Enabling Clause, infr, foomote 45) which  speclfrcally excludes the applicability  of 
the MFN clausc within the sphere of trade preferences determined for developing countries. 

jY Part IV  of GATT, Article Xxxvl, paras. 2 though 6. 

Ibid.,  para. 8. 

I’  Decision by the GATT’s Contracting Parties on 25 June 1972, relating to “the establishment of generalized, 
non-reciprocal  and  non-discriminatory  preferences  beneficial  to  the  developing  countries”,  BED,  18th 
Supplement, 1972, pp. 24-26. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND  DEVELOPMENT 

39 1 

arrangements  existed  prior  to  the  sanction  of  preferential  treatment  for  developing 
countries under the GSP. To be legitimate under the rules of the GATT (i.e. not to trigger 
a claim for MFN treatment by other GATT Members for whom the preferences did not 
apply), the  arrangements under which  the preferences were provided would  need to 
meet the  GATT criterion for regional economic integration. This basically meant that 
the arrangements should satisfy the requirements for the creation of a customs union or 
a free-zone  area  entailing a  substantial reduction of trade barriers among Members of 
the  arrangement.42 Of  course,  none  of  these  preferential  measures  met  the  GATT 
criterion, and the GATT preferred not to rule on their legality or otherwise to determine 
if they should be extended to all other Members by virtue of the GATT’s MFN clause.43 
The GSP came  to  legitimize these  preferences, as  well  as any  other  preferences that 
developed countries subsequently granted to the trade of developing countries (as well 
as any preferences granted by a developing country to another developing country), as 
it granted a ten-year waiver of the GATT’s MFN commitment to the extent necessary to 
determine and apply such preferences.44 In a certain sense, the decision of the GATT’s 
Contracting Parties approving the GSP put legal substance in the statement in Part IV as 
to the non-applicability of the principle of reciprocity and non-&scrimination  (i.e. MFN 
standard) to the reduction or removal of barriers to the trade of developing countries. 
The GSP was given permanence within the GATT system under a 1979 decision of 
the  Contracting  Parties  of  GATT, known  as  the  “Enabling Clause”.45  The Enabling 
Clause  confirmed  the  principle  that  the  GATT’s Contracting  Parties  might  accord 
preferential tariff and non-tariff treatment to developing countries, notwithstanding the 
MFN clause of the  GATT.46 It also  introduced  a  process whereby, in  takmg action to 
grant,  modify  or  withdraw  a  preferential  treatment  to  a  developing  country,  the 
developed country in question would have to notify the other  Contracting Parties of 
the action taken and allow a process of consultation if desired by any other party.47 It is 
important  to  note,  however,  that  the  preference-granting  developed countries have 
maintained the  authority to  determine and to  modify, as  they see fit, the  criteria for 

42  GATT, Article XXIV. 
43  Prior to adoption of the GSP, the GATT authorized some of the preferential arrangements as an exception. 
For example, in  1966, it permitted Australia  to  provide  preferences to developing countries. Also, it allowed a 
system of preferences among developing countries when it permitted a preference agreement among the United 
Arab Republic, India and Yugoslavia that was open to participation by  other developing countries: GATT, BISD, 
16th Supplement, 1969, at 17. 

44  The GSP was, in the legaJ sense, a derogation of the GATT’S basic foundation of an open, multilateral trading 

system, grounded on unconditional MFN treatment: Krueger, supra, footnote 1, at 40. 

45  Decision  of 28  November  1979 by  GATT’s Contracting Parties, entitled D@erential  and  More  Favourable 
Treatment, Reciprocity and  Fuller  Participation  O J  Developing  Countries (the Enabling Clause), BlSD,  26th Supplement, 
pp. 203-5. 

Ibid., paras.  1 and 2. 

47  Ibid., para. 4. 

392 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

eligibility to  preferences granted by  them.48 Also  there  is  no binding of preferential 
tariffi granted under the GSP, and the granting developed countries are free to reduce 
or remove the preferences in relation to any developing country determined by  them 
to have succeeded in increasing its exports into the markets of developed countries. 

While the GSP applied to all developing countries,49 in general, the beneficiaries of 
preferences were  the  most  advanced developing countries, as  they were the  ones to 
possess  the  production  capacity and  export  market  structures necessary to  take  full 
advantage of  the  system. Thus,  it  was  estimated that  three  countries-Hong  Kong, 
South Korea  and Taiwan-received  44 percent of the total gains from the  GSP tariff 
reductions.50 Therefore, in a definite sense, the GSP resulted in benefiting more those 
which were less deserving of its benefits. 

IV.  INFLUENCING THE TRADE POLICIES AND PRACTICES OF THE GATT 

CONTRACTING PARTIES 
INFLUENCING THE POLICIES  AND PRACTICES OF DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 

A. 

Beyond the above exceptions and preferences, for the GATT to succeed in effecting 
further  improvements  in  the  trade  situation  of  developing  countries, it  needed  to 
succeed in influencing the economic policies and commercial practices of developed 
countries so  as  to induce them to adopt positions or take actions more favourable to 
developing countries. To have a maximum impact in this regard, the GATT needed to 
be in position to: 

-  set  targets for  the  expansion  of  the  trade/exports  of developing countries, 
collectively and also possibly indwidually, which should be at higher rates than 
the  expansion  rates  perceived  for  the  trade  of  developed  countries, if  the 
development  gap  between  these  two  categories  of  countries  were  to  be 
progressively closed; 
formulate a plan to achieve these targets, including specific commitments on 
the part of both developed and developing countries; and 
assume the authority to monitor implementation of these commitments and 
also to censor non-performance. 

- 

- 

All these werc beyond the capacity of GATT, which is, as an instrument, a set of 

48  The United States, for example, revised its regulations pertaining to the GSP to comply with the US. Tariff 
and Trade Act of 1984. During the consultation process about the revision with the GATT’s Committee on Trade 
and Development, inany countries voiced their concern with the inclusion in the Act of non-trade  considerations 
in determining developing countries’ eligibility for preferences, such as the extent to which these countries have 
taken  action  to  afford its  workers  internationally  recognized  workers  rights.  The U.S.  government, however, 
disregarded these concerns and notified the GATT ofthc revision in June 1986: BED, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, 
at  120. 

4y  The EnabLng Clause, supra,  footnote 45, would, by  its para.  1, apply the preferences to  all  developing 
countries,  including  developing  territories that  have  not yet  acquired  political independence or status as  GATT 
Contracting Parties. 

5u  Krueger,  supra,  footnote  1, at  41; and  for  an  evaluation of the  system  of preferences  see  Hudec,  supra, 

footnote 1, Chapter 11. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

393 

principles for the conduct of international trade, and, as an institution, a forum for the 
conduct  of  trade  negotiations,  a  depository  of  trade  agreements  reached  by  the 
Contracting Parties and, to a certain extent, a forum for enforcement of the principles 
of the GATT and of agreements concluded by the Contracting Parties in furtherance of 
these  principles.51  Thus,  it  is  an  important  yardstick  for  measuring  the  GATT’s 
achievements in the development field to examine how trade negotiations conducted 
within its framework were successful in influencing the trade practices of its developed 
country Members or, in other words, how the principles recognized in Part IV of the 
GATT have  found  expression  in  the  positions  of  these  countries  in  actual  trade 
negotiations as well as in the outcome of the negotiations. This may best be illustrated 
by examining the following key elements of the negotiation process. 

1.  Preparation for the Multilateral  Negotiations  and Determination oftheir Agenda 

It is reasonable to assume that, with their dominant share in world trade, developed 
countries  would  assume  the  principal  role  in  preparing  the  multilateral  trade 
negotiations and in determining their Agenda.52 In reality, it was not only that the role 
of developing countries in shaping these matters was very limited, but equally minimal 
was  their  influence in  determining  how  issues  of  trade  and  development  might  be 
addressed and what kind  of commitments might be  made to increase the  exports of 
developing countries and improve the terms of their trade. For example, the main focus 
of the  Kennedy Round  was  on trade  liberalization through  tariff reductions.53 The 
interests of developing countries were considered purely in this  context, and without 
having a plan on the Agenda devoted to issues of trade and development. Thus, special 
procedures were established in the Kennedy Round whereby participating developing 
countries were invited to table their demands for tariff reductions on products of export 
interest to them, and developed countries were required to consider these demands in 
formulating  their  tariff  proposals.  These  demands  were  considered  by  developed 
countries in a unilateral fashion and without  a requirement of reciprocity.54 However, 
while developed countries were required to give consideration to such tariff demands, 
they were not required to respond to them in any particular fashion, such as to take joint 
positions in their response or to co-ordinate their action with respect to these demands 
in any particular manner or to ensure a minimum favourable response to them. 

The Tokyo Round followed the same procedures for addressing the concerns and 

5’  The GATT lacked an  institutional mechanism and,  up until the establishment of the WTO, was managed 
through decisions by the Contracting Parties, assisted by a Secretariat operating under a Director-General: see Dam, 
supra, footnote 1, Chapter 19. 

52  For example, prior to the start of the Uruguay Round, thirteen  national studies were undertaken  of issues 
concerning  the international  trade in  services, all prepared by developed countries. While these studies focused 
naturally on the service trade &om the standpoint  of these countries’ interests, their findings and  analysis were 
subsequently to define the issues to be addressed in the negotiations of the GATS: the Uruguay Round History, supra, 
footnote 8, at 2347. 
53  See, generally, Ernest H .  Preeg, Traders and Diplomats--An  Analysis ofthe Kennedy Round $Negotiations  under 

the General Agreement on  Tarii and  Trade, Brooking Institution, Washington, D.C., 1970. 

54  Hudec, supra, footnote 1, at 61. 

394 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

demands  of  developing  countries in  the  tariff  area.55  In  sum,  conceding  any  tariff 
demands  made  by  developing  countries  was  a  voluntary  matter  which  developed 
countries would either agree to or not, based on appraisal by each of the consequences 
for  its  own  domestic  commercial  concerns,  the  reciprocity  demonstrated by  other 
developed  countries  in  granting  equivalent  concessions  to  developing  countries, 
relationships  with  the  developing  countries  which  would  benefit  from  the  tariff 
concessions, overall balance  of benefits under  the  negotiating round,  and  any  other 
relevant factors from the country’s standpoint.56 

In  addition to  tariff matters,  the  Tokyo  Round witnessed increased interest by 
developed countries in the use of the special Code instrument. These Codes, such as the 
Codes on the rules of origin, subsidies, or antidumping, were self-standing agreements, 
designed  to  dscipline  and  unify  national  practices  in  certain  trade  areas,  and  were 
enforceable only amongst their signatories.57 The Code approach was clearly beneficial 
since it enabled parties to the Code to amplify the general rules of the GATT in certain 
areas without having to go through the cumbersome process of amending it. Increased 
interest in this approach by  developing countries, however, was  attributed to the fact 
that the code could be negotiated and agreed among a select group of countries which 
had serious, concrete interests in the expansion of trade (i.e. the developed countries), 
without  having to invite developing countries to participate and then  suffer through 
their protestations.58  So, in a certain sense, the process of formulating and adopting the 
Codes was not a participatory process, but an assertion by developed countries of their 
capacity to lay down the law and invite developing countries to adhere to it whenever 
they considered it in their own interest to do so. 

The same general observation is true with respect to the Agenda for the Uruguay 
Round of multilateral trade negotiations. The Agenda, which was particularly broad,59 
included new trade fields where the creation of international hsciplines became of vital 
commercial interest to developed countries, such as the areas of trade in services, trade- 
related aspects  of intellectual property  rights,  and trade-related  investment measures. 

55  Ibid., at 75. 
s6  During the Tokyo Round, the GATT Committee on Trade and Development played an active role in the 
discussion and examination of issues of interest to developing countries in relation to trade in agricultural products, 
tropical products, tariffs, non-reciprocity  and quantitative restrictions and other non-tariff barriers. However, as a 
report of that Committee emphasized “it was generally understood  and agreed that in W i n g  this role, the CTD 
should  not  assume  or  undertake  review  and  oversight  functions  which  would  overlap  with  the  work  and 
responsibilities  of the Trade Negotiations Committee [i.e. the committee representing the Contracting Parties].” 
BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, pp. 124-5. 

57  However, it should be  noted that  when the Code  goes beyond procedural  matters and includes certain 
reciprocal treatments to be conferred by each signatory on the others, the MFN clause of the GATT may be invoked 
by a GATT Contracting Party which is a non-signatory of the Code to request equal treatment. 

58  Hudec, s u p ,  footnote 1, at 84. The question ofwhether negotiations of a new multilateral kamework for 
the service trade would be more beneficial if they were limited to developed countries was given consideration in 
literary writings preceeding negotiation of the GATS: see Gray, rupru, footnote 13, pp. 383-386. 

5y  Ministerial Declaration on the Uruguay Round, GATT Doc. No. MIN.DEC, 20 September  1986, at 5-8. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND  DEVELOPMENT 

395 

These matters were included in the Agenda for the Uruguay Round in spite of strong 
initial objections from leadlng developing countries.60 

Similarly, in the  latest Round in  Seattle, it  is  plausible to  argue that  it was  not 
chiefly the strong opposition of developing countries to the introduction of labour and 
environmental standards onto the Agenda which is principally to blame for dooming the 
talks,61 but  rather the apprehension of the EU and Japan about U.S.-proposed  drastic 
measures for  ending agricultural subsidies (measures which  would  also  be  consistent 
with  developing countries'  demands),62 and  the  reluctance  of  the  United  States  to 
tighten  its  antidumping  regime  which  is  considered  by  Japan  and  some  newly 
industrialized developing countries as  a  misuse  of the antidumping concept to  shield 
American industries against low-cost, legitimate competition.63 

2. 

The Outcome ofthe Multilateral  Trade Negotiations 

It seems only natural that negotiations on the reduction and binding of tariffs be 
conducted  in a  business-like manner, with  participating countries weighing carefblly 
their commercial costs and benefits and considering the impact of proposed measures 
for trade liberahation on their domestic importers and exporters. Tariff bargains in any 
trade  area  would  normally involve  countries with  significant commercial interests at 
stake, i.e.  the  major  importers and  exporters  of  the  commodities in  question.  The 
inability  of  developing  countries  to  provide  the  quid  y o  quo  necessary  to  prompt 
developed countries to take serious measures to open their markets to the products of 
developing countries, accounts for  the  long  delay for  actions to  ease  restrictions on 
products with export interest to developing countries (processed agricultural products, 
tropical  products  and  textiles).64  This  also  partly  explains  why  tariff  demands  of 
developing countries in  multilateral negotiations were  treated in  a  unilateral fashion, 
since developing countries were not in a position to table credlble tariff reductions on 
their part, adequate to provide the negotiating leverage for corresponding demands.65 
Quantification of tariff measures agreed under multilateral trade negotiations basically 
confirm  that  the  measures  agreed  under  these  negotiations  have  resulted  in  more 
liberalization  of  the  trade  among  developed  countries  than  of  trade  involving 
developing countries. For  example, UNCTAD estimated that  under  tariff  agreements 

hn  India and Brazil took the leadmg role in developing countries' initial opposition to expansion of the Agenda 
for the Uruguay Round so as to include a fiamework agreement on the service trade: Uruguay Round History, supra, ~. 
footnote 8, pp. 2354-2355. 
6'  It should be noted in this context, if precedents under earlier trade negotiations are any indication, that the 
strong opposition  of developing  countries  to  the  expanded Agenda of the Uruguay  Round did not ultimately 
succeed in reducing the scope 07 the Agenda. 

See analysis of contrasting positions of countries in the Washington Post, 5 December 1999, p. A47. 

63  See the Washington Post, 4 December 1999, p. A15. 
64 Sigdcant agricultural liberalization occurred only under the Uruguay Round Agreements. For an analysis 

of the impact of these Agreements, see Martin and Winter (eds.), supra, footnote 1, Chapter I. 

65  As  the focus of developing  countries  during negotiations was  on securing commitments on preferential 
market access, these countries did not actudy participate in the core business of negotiations, namely the granting 
of mutual market-access  concessions: ibid., at V. 

- 

-

.

 

396 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

reached during the Kennedy Round, the average tariff reduction on products of interest 
to developed countries was 36 percent, while that average stood at 26 percent in respect 
of  products  of  interest  to  developing  countries.66  A  similar  outcome  of  more 
liberalization of developed countries' trade was also estimated to result from the Tokyo 
Round.67 Also,  the  welfare  effect  of phasing  out  the  Multi-Fibre  Arrangement and 
reducing agricultural tariffs  under  the Uruguay  Round was  estimated to be of much 
larger  magnitude  in  respect  of  the  trade  of  developed  countries  than  in  that  of 
developing countries.68 

3. 

The Legal  Capacity $Developed  Countries to Neutralize  Tantand other PreJerences 

It was noted earlier that preferential treatment for developing countries in relation 
to  tariffs  and  other trade  matters are  mostly  expressed in the  form  of broad,  general 
commitments  that  confirm  the  principle  of  entitlement  to  the  special  preferential 
treatment but  fall far short of translating the  entitlement into specific legal  rights and 
obligations.69  And  even  when  the  preferences  are  expressed  in  the  most  concrete 
manner  possible,  as  was  the  case  under  the  GSP and  the  provisions of the  Enabling 
Clause, the entitlement may still be limited or qualified or altogether denied because of 
certain reasons, including: 

(i)  The fact that the determination of the preferences, and the eligibility criteria 
to receive them, are matters which have largely been kept at the discretion of 
the preference-granting country.70 

(ii)  The  maintenance  by  developed  countries  of  the  authority  to  apply  the 
preferences not  solely  on the basis  of a developmental criterion, such as the 
level of economic growth or the per capita income of the beneficiary countries, 
but  also on the basis  of other  factors derived from the policies and national 
interest considerations of the preference-granting  developed country. This, in 
effect, alters the multilateral character of trade preferences and transforms them 
into another form of bilateral assistance provided in furtherance of the national 
interest of the granting country. There is no case known to this author where 
a  developing country formally challenged the manner in which  a  system  of 
trade preferences was  administered by a given developed country, or alleged 
that  its  export  was  denied  a  preference  in  the  market  of  any  developed 

TD/h/Rev.  1, Geneva, UNCTAD Secretariat, 1968. 

hh  T h e  Kennrdy  Round  Estimated  Eject  on  Tatiff  Barriers,  Report  by  the  Secretary-General,  UN Doc. 
67  Hudec, supra, footnote 1, at 75. 
h*  See Glenn W. Hamson et al.,  Quantgying the  Uruguay Round, paper presented at "Uruguay  Round and the 

Developing Economies",  a World Bank Conference, January, 1995. 

h9  See Section 111  above. 
7"  AU that developed countries were required  to do under the Enabling Clause was to notify the GATT CTU 
of  action  taken  by  them  towards  the  implementation  of  preferences,  includmg  import  items  covered,  tariff 
preferential rates,  eligibility requirements,  etc. For an example of how the United  States notified  its action, see, 
BISD, 36th Supplement, July 1990, at 58; and on how New Zealand notified its action, see BED, 33rd Supplement, 
June 1987, at 121. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND  DEVELOPMENT 

397 

(iii) 

(iv) 

countries in violation  of a  multilaterally  sanctioned  criterion  for preference 
extension.71 
There  is  no  binding  of  preferential  tariffs,72  and  the  preference-granting 
country may  terminate  the privilege whenever  considered  unjustified  in  its 
view,  on  the  basis  of  the  export  record  of  the  beneficiary  developing 
country.73 
In  addition  to  limitations  inherent  in  the application  and  administration  of 
preferences,  the  GATT itself  empowers  all  of  its  Members,  developed  or 
developing, 
to  qualitir  or  withdraw 
commitments  undertaken  by them under the GATT. These include measures 
to address balance-of-payments  difficulties, and  to impose  safeguard or anti- 
dumping measures74 in addition to measures related to customs requirements 
or to safety or health  considerations.75 

take  exceptional  measures 

to 

All these may easily constitute, whenever needed, appropriate legal grounds for any 
developed country to modie, qualie or withdraw a trade  preference  granted by it to 
developing countries. 

4.  Limitation on Prgerences Inherent in the Operation Ofa Market Economy 

Reference, in the context of the GATT, to developed countries basically means the 
countries of North America  (the United States and Canada), Western Europe and the 
rest  of the  industrialized  countries,  such  as Japan  and  Australia, which  adopt  a free- 
market economic system. Thus, it follows that commitments  made by these countries 
to increase access to their markets by products  of developing countries are necessarily 
limited to measures that are within the domains of their governments, e.g.  eliminating 
or lowering the  tariffs on these products  or, when  applicable, increasing their quotas 
under  a  quantitative  restrictions  system. Whether producers  in  developing  countries 
take  advantage  of and  actually benefit  from  these  preferential  measures and  translate 
them  into  a  higher  volume  of  export  to  the  markets  of developed  countries,  will 
principally  depend  on the success of these  producers  in  creating  a  demand  for  their 
products in these markets. Needless to say, such success is determined by other factors 
that could be as  important as the advantage of possibly selling in these markets at lower 
prices due to lower  or no tariffs, such as  the  quality  of products,  adequate  marketing 

" Protestations were made by  developing  countries  concerning the  scope or  manner  of administration by 
developed  countries  of  their  GSP programmes.  I d a ,  for  example, objected  strongly to  the  introduction by  a 
developed country of an  eligibility criterion  for its GSP system, whch is  contrary to the  nature  of the GSP as  a 
generalized,  non-discriminatory  and  non-reciprocal  system  of  preferences.  These,  however,  were  sheer 
protestations made in meetings of the  GATT Committee on Trade and Development, and were not followed by 
formal claims before the GATT dispute settlement mechanism: B~sD, Supplement No. 38, July 1992, at 25. 

72  Krueger, supra, footnote 1, at 42. 
7 3   Australia, for example, modified  its GSP system so as to limit tariffpreferences with respect to certain products 
to the least-developed  of developing countries: see Report dated 9 December  1994 by the  GATT Committee on 
Trade and Development to the Contracting Parties, B~sD, Supplement No. 41, December  1997, at 97. 

74  GATT, Articles VI and XII. 
75  GATT, Articles VII and XX. 

398 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

infrastructure, back-up  services, availability of export finance facilities, etc.  This may 
help  explain why  newly  industrialized developing  countries,  such as  Taiwan, Korea, 
Thailand and Singapore, obtained most of the benefits of the  GSP. In fact, it may be 
argued that, with or without tariff preferences, these countries would have succeeded 
in  their  export  march,  as  they  have  already  developed  the  requisite production  and 
marketing infrastructure needed to succeed.76 

B. 

INFLUENCING  THE TRADE  POLICIES  OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

It may be said that the GATT is formally neutral as far as  the economic policies of 
its Members are concerned. However, by being predicated on the assumption that the 
processes of production, pricing and exchange of goods are determined competitively 
and chiefly through the interaction of market forces, membership in the GATT by  the 
Socialist, centrally  planned  economies  of  the  former  Soviet  Bloc  became  virtually 
impossible,77 except under detailed arrangements negotiated with the GATT to work out 
remedial measures for the lack of competitiveness in these economies and to establish a 
fratncwork to ensure fairness and transparency in trading with them.78 

The main deviation in the GATT from its underlying free-market, free-trade theory 
is the explicit admission that developing countries may restrict trade and adopt import- 
substitution trade policies to the extent needed to accelerate the industrialization of their 
economies.7‘ This  admission,  coupled  with  the  incorporation  into  the  GATT of  the 
principle of non-reciprocal  preferential treatment to developing countries, though far 
from inducing significant tangible trade benefits for developing countries, have created 
a  culture of entitlement that cast its shadow on the proceedings of all trade negotiation 
rounds.  Thus,  much  energy  was  spent  by  developing  countries  during  these 

The export  successes  of  these  countries  are  generally attributed  to  their  adoption of outward-oriented 
economic  policies, and  there is  no  analysis known  to  this  author demonstrating  that  the  Gsr  led  not  only  to 
increasing the margin of profits of exporters &om these countries as a result of imposing lower tariff rates on their 
exports, but also to actual increases in the volume of such exports. In fact, available estimates point to the opposite, 
namely that the GSP was not a determining factor in the growth of exports of the East-Asian countries. For example, 
the  percentage  of the  manufacturing  exports of Hang Kong,  Korea  and  Singapore of  the  total  manufacturing 
exports of developing countries were, in 1980, when they still enjoyed the benefits of the GSP, 17.1 percent,  14.9 
percent and 7.9 percent, respectively.  All these percentages increased in 1990 (after graduation of these countries 
from the Gw) to 19.8 perccnt, 15.8 percent and 9.8 percent respectively: sec UNCTAD, Trade arrdDeurlopment Reporr 
(1993), at 17. 

77  The most  important  obstacle to  accession  by  the  Socialist  countries  of Eastern Europe to  the  GATT, of 
course, was the difficulty of determining the cost of production of goods in their economies. This factor is essential 
for  examining  if  wbsidies  were  granted,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  goods  exported  &om these  countries  or 
determining the extent to which products are sold at less than their “normal valuc”, a matter which would justify, 
under the GATT, the imposition of antidumping or countervailing duties: GATT, Article vi. 

7 8   These arrangements included agreements with these countries on increased import commitments, periodic 
review of their trade practices, provision of country-specific safeguards against discriminatory or unfair practices and 
possible suspcnsion of thc benefits of the Protocol of Accession to the GATT. In  return, the GATT’s Contracting 
Parties would grant these countnes MFN status and agree to gradually phase out the quantitative restnctions on thcir 
exports  that  were  inconsistent with  Article  XIII  of the  GATT, the  Article  that  requires  uniform  application  of 
restrictions to all  Members: see United Stares General Accotlniing  OJfice (1990): Fact  Sheetfor the Chairman, Committee 
ori  Finance,  U.S. Senate,  International  Trade:  GATT Treatment  of  Non-market  Economy  Countries,  U.S. Accounting 
Office Publication, Washington, D.C., August 1990. 

GATT, Article XVIII. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

399 

negotiations, not on the discussion of concrete trade plans entailing the setting of targets 
and actions to achieve them, but on the securing of symbolic political statements devoid 
of substance, such as the confirmation in the Kennedy Round that developed countries 
should not expect to receive reciprocity for reduction by them of tariff and other trade 
barriers  to  imports  from  developing  countriesso-a 
principle  that  was  also  to  be 
confirmed in Part IV of the GATT. The GATT continued its attempts to demonstrate its 
relevance to developing country interests by confirming to them that their continuous 
membership in the GATT would guarantee them MFN status in the markets of developed 
countries, while  permitting  them,  at  the  same  time,  to  maintain  a  large  degree  of 
flexibility to determine, in light of their development needs, the levels of their tariff.81 
The  creation  of  UNCTAD was  a  continuation  of  the  same  process  of  seeking 
sympathetic political statements rather than concrete commercial results for developing 
countries. The work of UNCTAD continues to be helpful in illuminating and focusing 
attention on changes in  the  trade situation of developing countries, individually and 
collectively, indicating shifts in the terms of their trade and analysing the  connection 
between  the  economic policies  adopted by  developing countries, and movement  in 
their trade position.82 However, UNCTAD is not alone in studying the various aspects of 
trade and development.83 And there is no evidence that UNCTAD has been particularly 
effective in performing the specific responsibilities derived from its complete focus on 
the  relationship  between  trade  and  development  which  call  on  it  “to  formulate 
principles  and  policies  on  international  trade  and  related  problems  of  economic 
development”, or “to make proposals for putting the said principles and policies into 
effect”, or “to initiate action . . . for the negotiations and adoption of multilateral legal 
instruments in the field of trade.”84 

The culture of entitlement encouraged by  the GATT and institutionalized within 
the  GATT and through  the  creation of UNCTAD, resulted in focusing the  multilateral 
trade  negotiations,  as  far  as  the  relationship  between  trade  and  development  is 
concerned, on exploring possible action by developed countries to enable greater access 
to  their  markets  on  improved  terms  to  the  products  of  developing countries.  The 
willingness of developed countries to  agree was  limited, as  mentioned  earlier, to  the 
extent that no effective restrictions were placed on their freedom of action and that, in 
the final analysis, translation of accepted principles into  any concrete measures rested 
within the discretion of the developed countries concerned. Absent from the Agenda of 
negotiation  rounds  were  any  particular  proposals  as  to  what  developing  countries 
themselves should do in terms of adjusting their economic policies and practices in order 

8O  BISD, 12th Supplement, 1964, at 36. 
8’  See Hudec, supra,  footnote 1, at 61. 
RZ  See, for example, UNCTAD, Trade and  Development  Report,  1996 (hereafter UNCTAD Trade and Development 

Report), UNCTAD/TDR/I~, U N  Publication, Sales No. E.96.IT.D.6. 

83  See, for example, the World Bank, World Drveloppment Report, Entering  the 2 lit Centwry, Oxford University 

84  Paragraphs  (b), (c) and  (e)  of General Assembly Resolution  1995  (XIX)  of 30  December  1964, creating 

UNCTAD, referred to in footnote 35 above. 

Press, 1999. 

400 

THE  

to improve their trade situation and increase their relevancy to the international trading 
system. 

In fact, the transformation of the trade policies of developing countries is attributed, 
for  the  most  part,  to  developments whch  took  place  outside the  operation  of  the 
international trading system. The international debt  crisis in  the  early  1980s led to  a 
sharp decrease in  the  commercial financing available for  developing countries. This 
increased their reliance on official sources of finance and on funding from multilateral 
institutions, particularly the IMF and the World Bank. The debt crisis signalled the failure 
of the inward-looking, import-substitution economic policies followed by the majority 
of developing countries, and reduced their resistance to  pressure by  the  IMF and the 
World  Bank  to  undertake  policy  reform  measures  under  economic  restructuring 
programmes  as  the  quid  pro  quo  for  financial  assistance.85  The  desperate  needs  of 
developing countries for external assistance operated as a negative incentive, motivating 
them  to  implement  the  policy  reforms  requested  by  the  international  development 
institutions. On the other hand, the economic success stories of the newly industrialized 
countries in Eastern Asia, which achieved dramatic economic and export growth rates 
as a result of their adoption of outward, export-oriented policies, operated as a positive 
incentive, motivating the rest of the developing countries to follow suit and adopt new, 
market-oriented economic policies.86 Many developed countries also used their bilateral 
assistance for  economic  development as  a  leverage to  induce  the  implementation of 
policy reform measures (including measures for reform of trade policies) by the recipient 
developing countries. 

Reference has already been made to the U.S. legislation condtioning the extension 
of trade preferences to developing countries on a satisfactory review of many aspects of 
their economic policies and regulations, including those concerning import and export 
practices, treatment of foreign investments and of trade in ~ervices.8~ The EC, in the late 
1980s, also started to allocate a share of its economic assistance to developing countries 
to support implementation by the latter of programmes for the structural adjustment of 
various sectors of their  economies, including the  trade sector.88 Developed countries 
now  generally  tend  to  participate  in,  and  co-ordinate  their  development  assistance 
through, country-specific donors meetings which are organized by the World Bank for 
the purpose of reviewing the  economic situation/performance  of a  given  developing 
country, estimating that  country’s funding needs  over  a  certain period,  and  agreeing 
with  its  authorities  on  an  investment  programme  for  the  period,  together  with  a 
framework of policy reforms needed  to  ensure the  successfbl  implementation of the 
programme.89 These reforms regularly include measures towards liberalization of the 

x5  Haggard, supra, footnote 1, at 22. 
a6  Ibid., Chapter 3; also see Krueger, supra, footnote 1, at 66. For an analysis of the lessons of the East-Asian 

experience see the  UNCTAD Trade and Development Report, supra, footnote 82, Part Two. 

x7  BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, at 120. 
x*  Haggard, supm, footnote 1, at 24. 
x9  Relevant  donor  (developed)  countries  and  regional  development  institutions  are  normally  invited  to 
participate in these meetings and to indicate the expected level of their support as well as the areas where they prefer 
to apply their assistance. This author has had the opportunity to participate in several of these meeting.;. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE  AND DEVELOPMENT 

401 

country’s trade  policies,  includmg  the  setting of  maximum  tariff  levels  for  various 
import items, eschewing of quantitative restrictions as  a  method  of import control  as 
well as measures to assist in building export infiastructure and facilities.90 
v.  GENERAL EVALUATION OF GATT’s DEVELOPMENTAL 

EXPERIENCE 

The  manner  in  which  the  GATT’s developmental  role  was  formulated  and 

performed calls for the following general remarks. 

A.  LACK OF CLARITY OF THE GATT’S FORMAL DEVELOPMENTAL ROLE 

Apart from general statements confirming that the conduct of international trade 
should take the requirements of economic development into account,91 the GATT, as an 
instrument and as an institutional mechanism, was never clear as to the nature or scope 
of its developmental role. Further definition and clarification of GATT’s ground rules 
and principles in the area through the addtion of Part IV to the GATT and adoption of 
the GSP and the Enabling Clause to  confirm the non-applicability of the principle of 
reciprocity with  respect to trade concessions granted to developing countries, did not 
make the developmental role of the GATT any clearer. In the final analysis, respondmg 
to  the  trade  demands  of  developing  countries  continued  to  be  determined  under 
negotiating processes  entirely  controlled  by  developed  countries  and  in  which  the 
GATT, as  an institution, acted merely as  a forum.92  Further, there is  no evidence that 
UNCTAD, again as  an instrument or as  an institution, has  acted as  a  counterweight to 
the GATT or that it has succeeded in injecting a moderating element into the pragmatic 
attitude of multilateral trade negotiations.93 

B.  WEAKNESS OF THE POLICY  CO-ORDINATION  ROLE 

As indicated earlier, while the GATT requires that international trade be conducted 
according to  certain principles,  it  is  neutral  as  far  as  the  trade  and  other  economic 
policies of its Members are concerned. Of course, application of these principles meant 

_I 

~ 

~ 

~~~ 

yo  For examples of the numerous structural adjustment and policy reform programmes financed under World 
Bank loans, alone or in conjunction with financing &om other donors and regional development institutions, see 
the Loan Agreement  between  the  World Bank  and Romaniafor an Agricultural Adjustment  Operation, dated 1 July 1997, 
and the Loan Agreement the between  the  World Bank and  Ukrainefor an Enterprise  Sector Adjustment  Operation, dated 27 
Tune 1996. 

y1  Preamble to the GATT. 
92  With the GATT’s lack of an institutional mechanism, the GATT Secretariat acted as the forum for meetings 
of the Contracting Parties and for the conduct of the multilateral trade negotiations. See Dam, supra,  footnote 7, 
Part 5. 
93 As an organ of the UN General Assembly, UNCTAD’S most visible contribution has been its preparation and 
submission to the U N  Secretary-General of an annual Trade and Development Report, devoted to an analysis of 
development  in the trade situation of developing countries in the context of world-wide  economic trends. The 
UNCTAD has had no role m setting the Agenda for the multilateral trade negotiations. There is no evidence even 
that UNCTAD’S 
programmes for technical assistance to developing countries were linked or adequately co-ordinated 
with the similar programmes of the GATT Secretariat: see BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, at 127. 

402 

THE  

that the countries whose economic systems were inherently incompatible with them, 
e.g.  the former Soviet Bloc, were effectively excluded from the  GATT.94 The GATT, 
however, has always functioned as a forum for trade expansion through the reduction 
of tariff and other barriers, and for harmonisation of national regulations affecting trade 
(e.g. harmonisation of rules or origin, customs requirements or antidumping practices), 
but  not  as  a  forum for harmonisation of the  trade policies of Members. Ths has  its 
implications  on  the  GATT’s functions  in  the  development  field.  Concessions  to 
developing countries were agreed, not to conform to any particular policy imperatives 
of the multilateral trade institution but to the extent agreeable to developed countries, 
and as  h r  as they were not anticipated to cause significant disruption in trade patterns 
and  overall  trade  balance.95  Where  a  heretofore  developing  country  achieved  a 
significant success  in  exporting to  the  markets  of developed countries, it  would be 
“graduated” from any system of preferences by  a  decision of the preference-granting 
developed countries, acting individually, rather than according to criteria adopted by the 
multilateral  institution.96 Extension  of  the  MFN treatment  to  developing  countries 
would be tolerated, even though they offered little tariff concessions in return, only to 
the extent that they remained insignificant participants in the world trade. Once they 
significantly succeeded in exporting, they would be called upon to open their markets 
and provide equivalent trade concessions and be held to tougher standards with respect 
to their trade practices.97 With this pragmatic process for the conduct of business within 
the  GATT, the  impact of the  GATT on the  trade policies of Members was  even less 
significant, and  developments in  the  trade  policy  area  were  generally accomplished 
outside the framework of the GATT. 

C.  OVERLAPPING OF INSTITUTIONAL FUNCTIONS 

It is difficult to conclude that the Committee on Trade and Development of the 
GATT is entrusted with, or has performed, functions that are different in nature or scope 
&om those of UNCTAD. In designing the roles of these two organs, it would have been 
reasonable to assume that UNCTAD, in line with its mandate,98 would be the body where 
political  pressure  might  be  exerted  to  secure  consensus on  trade  policy  initiatives 
favourable to developing countries.99 On the other hand, the CTD, as an organ of GATT 
where concrete trade actions are taken, would be  the instrument to propose specific 

94 See supra, footnote 77. 
9s See Krueger, supra, footnote 1; and the text at footnote 72 in this article. 
96  BISD, Supplement No. 38, July 1992, at 25. 
97 One of the main tools utilized by  developed countries to limit exports to  their territories by  particularly 
successful developing was  the  use  of antidumping measures.  This continues to  be  a  matter  of contention,  as 
developing countries normally believe that these measures are intended to limit their exports and are not founded 
on a proper application of GATT’s policies on antidumping. For a review of the views of Hong Kong, Singapore 
and Korea, together with Japan, ofthe EC’s antidumping practices, see GATT Document A ~ ~ / M / 2 2 , 1 5  September 
1988. 

98  See UNCTAD, Basic Documents, supra, footnote 6; also supra, footnote 35. 
yy  The UNCTAD is  established as an organ  of the  UN  General Assembly where  political  pressure  may  be 

brought to bear on industrial countries to adopt trade policies favourable to developing countries. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE AND  DEVELOPMENT 

403 

measures  for  realizing these  initiatives. This  does  not  seem  to  have  materialized in 
practice. In fact, there does not appear to be any difference in orientation and general 
objective between  the  developmental role  assumed  by  these  two  bodes.  The CTD 
mainly operates as  a debating body, reviewing developments in world trade from the 
perspectives of developing countries, monitoring implementation of Part IV of the GATT 
and of the Enabling Clause,100 and adopting for presentation to the Contracting Parties 
periohc reports that are mainly a record of the proceedings of the CTD’S meetings101 
The  reports  of  the  CTD make  no  recommendations to  the  Contracting  Parties for 
specific trade  measures in favour  of developing countries, nor  do  these  reports  take 
positions on points of contention between developed and developing countries.102 

D.  EROSION OF THE RATIONALE  OF THE GATT’s  DIFFERENTIAL TRADE TREATMENT 

OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

Developing countries are now moving unilaterally and outside the bargains of the 
multilateral  trade  negotiations  towards  outwardly  oriented  policies,  entailing sharp 
reductions  in  tariffi  and  other  trade  barriers  and  greater  integration into  the  world 
economy.103  This  integration,  which  is  being  accelerated  by  rapid  technological 
developments as  well as by a world-wide policy liberalization trend, is  clearly  at odds 
with  the  rationale  at  the  roots  of  GATT’s development policies.  These  policies  are 
predicated on the premises that developing countries may, and thus it is in their interests: 
to somewhat insulate their economies from international competition through 
tariffs and other trade barriers; and 
to  receive preferential,  non-reciprocal  trade  treatment  in  order  to  increase 
their exports. 

- 

- 

Neither  of these premises continues to be valid, as developing countries are now 
moving unilaterally, away from the import-substitution policies and towards freer trade 
regimes,104 and as yet there is no evidence to suggest that the system of preferences has 

IW  Supra, footnote 45. 
lo1  For example, see the CTD Report adopted on 24 November 1986, BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, pp. 
116129; CTD Report adopted on 4 December  1989, BISD, 36th  Supplement, 1990, pp. 49-61; and the  CTD 
Report adopted 9 December 1994, BED, Supplement No. 41, December 1997, pp. 97-112. 
lo2  A recurrent example of ckfferences of views between developed and developing countries related to  the 
manner of application of the GSP. Developing countries, particularly India, argued strongly against any introduction 
by  developed  countries, particularly the United  States, of requirements in their administration  of the GSP which 
would contradict its character as a genedzed, non-discriminatory  and non-reciprocal system. Reports of the CTD 
simply recited the views on this matter of developing and developed countries, without taking any position on the 
issue or making reconimendations as to how it may be resolved  BISD, Supplement No. 38, July  1992, at 25; and 
BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, at 120. 
103  See Preface  to  the  Brooking  Institution Stuckes  on  Integrating National Economies in  F.M.  Scherer, 
‘04  For illustration of the developing countries’ move towards trade liberalization, see the World Bank, supra, 

Competition Polinesfor  an Integrated World Economy, Brooking Institution, Washington, D.C., 1994. 

footnote 83. at 56. 

404 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

produced  a  significant shift in trade  in  favour of developing countries.105  Therefore, 
there  is  clearly a need now to articulate a new rationale for the  GATT’s  development 
role, based on emerging realities and trends; a role on which different policies and legal 
commitments by Members in the field of development  could be founded.  The basic 
elements of the new policy should be: 

- 

-  discarding  the  concept  of  preferences  as  the  foundation  for  GATT’s 
developmental  role  and  the  focal  point  in  defining  relations  between 
developed and developing countries; 
restoring the integnty of the MFN standard and its application to all nations, 
developed and developing;106 and 
the serious consideration of developing countries’ interests in the setting of the 
multilateral negotiations Agenda. 

- 

VI.  THE SERVICE TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

UNDER THE GATS 

The principle that the particular interests of developing countries should be taken 
into  account in  the preparation  of the  General Agreement  on Trade in Services was 
confirmed in the Ministerial Declaration launching the Uruguay Round.107 It said that: 
“. . . negotiations in this area [service trade] shall aim to establish a multilateral framework of 
principles and rules for trade in services, including an elaboration of possible disciplines for 
individual sectors, with a  view to the expansion of such trade  . . . and the development of 
developing countries.”*O* 
The preparatory work for the GATS witnessed sharp differences between developed 
and developing countries on various aspects of the proposed framework agreement, and 
the  GATS came  to  accommodate  the  varying positions in  a  manner  that  is  markedly 
different from that of the GATT. The following deals with these points. 

‘“5  For example, Africa’s share in world merchandise exports was estimated at 4.2  percent in 1985, but at the 
much lower percentage of 2.3 percent  in  1996: see WTO, Annual Report, Volume  11,  1997, Table 11.2, at page 9. 
Also, it is plausible, with the lion’s share of preferences under the GSP going to the newly industrialized developing 
countries (see text at footnote 50, supra) to argue that these countries would have succeeded in exporting, with or 
without preferences, and that  the application of lower tarif5  to their  exports resulted mainly in increasing their 
margin of export profit but not necessarily in increasing the volume ofsuch export: see Krueger, supra, footnote 1; 
and Hudec, supra, footnote 1. 

106  A credible argument is made that the system of preferences and the exemption of treatment  accorded to 
developing countries &om the sphere of the MFN standard was actually harming rather than benefiting developing 
countries, as this has ied developed countries to treat developing countries as ifthey were outside the international 
trading system and thus to maintain practices (such as  quantitative  restrictions) whch were untenable under the 
rules of the GATT and which were particularly h a d  to developing country trade interests: see the analysis in the 
concluding chapter in Hudec, supra, footnote 1. 

‘“7  Supra, footnote 59. 
108  Ibid., at 10. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE  AND DEVELOPMENT 

405 

A.  CONTRASTING 
VIEWS 

Differences  in  the  positions  of  developing  and  developed  countries  in  the 

consideration of the GATS were noticeable on the following issues.IO9 

1.  Sheer Necessity of the GATS 

As  developed countries, under the strong leadership of the United  States, pushed 
forward for the formulation of a multilateral framework agreement for the service trade, 
the developing countries, under the leadership of India and Brazil, became instinctively 
opposed to  the  idea.110  The  drfferences between  the  two  categories of  nations was 
rooted  in  their traditional conflict within  the  GATT system. Thus,  the  perception  of 
developing countries was that further liberalization of the service sectors is a  synonym 
of enabling larger access to their markets to service suppliers from developed countries 
without being  in  a  position  to  secure for  their  own  service suppliers corresponding 
access  in  the  markets  of developed  countries.111  Realizing the  determination  of the 
United States to include the service trade on the Uruguay Round Agenda, developing 
countries put in their best efforts to delay such inclusion, on the ground that there was 
no adequate basis to proceed with the negotiations and that the process of consultation 
among countries had yet to run its course.112 The United  States increased its pressure 
and threatened to withdraw from the  GATT negotiations altogether and to pursue its 
own trade programme through  regional and bilateral arrangements.ll3 In the end, the 
position of the United States, supported by  the major industrial countries, carried the 
day  and the  preparation and negotiations of a multilateral framework agreement for 
international service trade was included as an Agenda item for the Uruguay Round.114 

2.  Coverage of 

the GATS 

Determining what service sectors were to be covered by the GATS and how these 
sectors might be covered was a matter of contention between developing and developed 

109  In examining the contrasting positions o f  developing and developed countries during negotiations of the 
GATS, the author relies heavily on the Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8 ,  and on various supplements of the 
GATT's Basic Instruments and Selected Documents, referred to in the text. 

Apprehension  of developing  countries  was  understandable, given  that  the  strong  pressure  of  the  U.S. 
government for more liberalization of the international service trade was attributed to pressure on the government 
from American insurance and financial service providers and other information-based service sectors: see Bernard 
Ascher, Multilateral  Negotiations  on  Trade  in  Services:  Concepts,  GoaLc  and  Issues,  19 Ga. J. of Int'l  and  Comp.  L., 
pp. 292-295.  Also, it was the United States that carried out the first national study on the international service trade 
which concluded that such trade is impeded by excessive national regulations and that great benefits would accrue 
to American service providers from further liberalization of the service trade. 

111  Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8 ,  at 2345. 
112  Ibid., at 2352. 
"3  Ibid., at 2355. 
'14  Ministerial Declaration on the Uruguay Round, supra, footnote 59, at  10. 

406 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

countries during the preparatory work for the GATS negotiations,115 though the reasons 
and rationales for their  different positions were  not  entirely clear. At  the  beginning, 
developing countries, influenced by the perception that the exclusion of agriculture and 
textiles from the  GATT was  damaging their commercial interests, argued that the new 
framework agreement for the service trade should have a comprehensive coverage.116 
In contrast, there was  the sectoral approach where parties to the agreement would be 
allowed to determine from time to time the sectors to be covered by the agreement.117 
Given that the GATS was  always thought of as a framework agreement and that actual 
commitments for liberalization of the service sectors would need to flow not from the 
agreement  itself, but  from  the  Members’ Schedules, as  these Schedules progressively 
evolve through  successive negotiating  rounds,  adoption  of either the  comprehensive 
coverage or the sectoral coverage approach would not give, by itself, any indication of 
service liberalization favourable to developing countries. 

The GATS ended  up  incorporating  both  approaches, as  it includes  two  sets  of 
obligations. The first includes obligations of a general nature  (e.g.  the  unconditional 
MFN treatment)1’8 which apply to all measures by Members affecting trade in services. 
The  second  includes  the  specific  commitments  of  market  access  and  national 
treatment,119 which apply only where  scheduled commitments are undertaken  by the 
Members, subject to the terms and limitations stated in the Schedules. Thus, it is indeed 
the  terms  and  limitations under  which  foreign  service suppliers are  enabled market 
access,  and  not  only  the  scope  of  sectoral  coverage  of  a  Member’s  Schedule  of 
Commitments, which are a truer indication of the scope of liberalization. It follows that 
a developed country may undertake  to liberalize access to service sectors of particular 
interest  to  developing  countries,  but  make  the  access  subject  to  conditions  that 
neutralize the comparative advantage of service suppliers from developing countries in 
these  sectors.  This  was  amply  demonstrated  during  negotiations  of  the  GATS, as 
Members  debated  the  so-called  “cross-border  movement  of  labour”  as  a  measure 
necessary for the liberalization of the service sectors requiring such movement, e.g. the 
construction and tourism sectors. Of this issue, developed countries were interested in 
deregulation at the domestic level so as to enable movement of capital, technology and 
managerial  skills, but  not  the  movement  of  labour  as  it  would  require  significant 
revisions to their immigration laws.120 Naturally, developing countries took the opposite 
view, and demanded that clear commitments on the cross-border movement of labour 
be made whenever required by the nature of service supply in the sector.121 

1’5  It may be interesting to note that the CTD of the GATT  did not take particular interest in the inclusion of 
the preparation/negotiations of a framework agreement on the service trade in the Agenda of the Uruguay Round 
of Multilateral Trade Negotiations. The CTD &d not debate ths matter and its first report (BISD, 33rd Supplement, 
June 1987, pp.  123-125)  following the launching of the Round did not indicate any consideration of the matter. 

‘16  Upruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8 ,  at 2363. 

Ibid., at 2364. 
‘18 GAT), Part 11. 
119  GATS, Part 111. 
l2(’  The Urupay Round History, ruppra, footnote 8 ,  at 2373. 
121  Id. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

407 

3.  Treatment of Developing  Countries 

The expression of the special status of developing countries in the context of trade 
in goods in the form of preferential, non-reciprocal  trade treatment to be accorded to 
these countries, &d not seem relevant to the service trade for two general reasons. First, 
preferences  in  trade  in  goods  are  normally  expressed  in  terms  of  special  financial 
treatment (i.e. lower tariff rates), a matter which does not seem relevant to the nature 
of trade in services.122 In contrast to the supply of goods where crossing the border when 
tariffs are assessed and charged is the main critical point in trade, the supply of services 
is a continuous process that will be subject, in most cases, to several regulatory aspects 
in the local market where the service supply is taking place, such as licensing, quality 
controls,  accreditation  and  re-accreditation  by  local  bodies,  labour  regulations  and 
taxation. Thus, the factors in determining the costs of the service supply in the foreign 
markets are numerous and far more complicated than they are in the case  of trade in 
goods.123 Further, even if these factors could be identified, their magnitude is likely to 
differ from the case  of one service supplier to another, even if operating in the same 
sector. This will hinge, for example, on the size of the suppliers or of their operation, 
the  duration of their permits,  the manner in which local labour regulations apply to 
them,  their  particular  tax  situation  and  many  other  things.  The  multiplicity  and 
complexity of the factors involved in determining the costs of the service supply in the 
foreign markets and the fact that these factors would apply mfferently to service suppliers 
according to their particular situations, make it very difficult not  only to determine a 
preferential financial treatment for a  particular group of suppliers, but  also to predict 
how the target group for the preferences would actually end up benefiting from them. 
This may partly explain why demands by developing countries for differential treatment 
during  negotiations  of  the  GATS focused  mainly  on  enabling them  to  reduce  their 
market-access commitments and providing them with appropriate technical assistance, 
rather than on granting specific financial preferences to their service suppliers.l24 The 
second  reason  is  the  perception  that  developing countries may  have  a  comparative 
advantage in significant service sectors.125 

B.  THE  FORMAL TREATMENT UNDER  THE GATS OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE 

SERVICE TRADE  TO DEVELOPMENT 
As  a framework agreement, the GATS, similarly to the  GATT, requires that action 

122  It is theoretically possible, of course, to accord preferential treatment to service suppliers from developing 
countries, such as to charge them licensing fees at lower rates. However, there were no proposals by developing 
countries during the debate of GATS for dnect financial preferential treatment to their service suppliers, though they 
made initial demands for financial assistance generally to help  in the  development  of the ihastructure  of their 
service sectors: see Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8, at 2380. 
l23  For an analysis of this matter see: the US. Trade Representative,  U.S. National Study on  Trade in Services, 

December 1983. 

124  Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8, at 2380. 
'25  See the Uruguay  Round History, supra, footnote 8; and the text at footnote 14 in this article. 

408 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

within its parameters should aim not  only to generally promote  the economic growth 
of its Members, but  also to assist in the  development of developing countries.126 The 
dfferential,  and  possibly  preferential,  treatment  of  developing  countries  is  to  be 
determined in line with the  overall approach of the GATS of progressively liberalizing 
the service sectors through successive negotiating rounds.127 Also similar to the GATT, 
the differential treatment of developing countries under the GATS may take two forms. 
The first deals with the yardstick by whch developing countries' commitments under 
the GATS may be measured. Accordingly, developing countries may be held to a lower 
standard of liberalization, allowing them to open fewer sectors to international service 
suppliers, or to liberalize fewer types of transactions, or to progressively extend market 
access in line with  the  requirements of their developmental situations.128 The second 
deals  with  the  affirmative  action  that  GATS Members,  particularly  the  developed 
countries, should take in order to effect increasing participation by developing countries 
in the world service trade. Thus, Members are called upon under the GATS to undertake 
specific  commitments  towards  strengthening  the  domestic  service  capacity  of 
developing countries through  access to technology on a commercial basis,  improving 
their access to distribution channels and information networks, and liberalizing market 
access in the sectors and modes of the service supply of export interest to developing 
countries.lZ9 

VII. LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE GATT's HANDLING OF ITS DEVELOPMENTAL ROLE 

The WTO is  likely to  face,  as  far  as  the  handling of  its  developmental role  is 
concerned, a stronger challenge in the area of the service trade. Trade in goods has been 
significantly liberalized  under  the  various  Agreements  resulting  from  the  Uruguay 
Round,130  and  the  ground  rules  for  further  negotiations  have  been  adequately 
established.131  Thus,  a  major  test  of  the  WTO's handling  of  issues  of  trade  and 
development would relate to the focusing of the Agenda for upcoming negotiations on 
the liberalization of the service sectors. In addition, there are general institutional issues 
relevant to international trade, whether in goods or services, concerning the division of 
responsibilities  for  issues  of  trade  and  development  within  the  trade  multilateral 
institutional arrangements (i.e. within  the WTO structure and between  the WTO and 

Preamble to the GATS. 

'27  GATS, Article XIX, para. 2. 
' 2 8   Id. 

GATS, Article IV. 

I3O  The Uruguay Round produced Agreements on tariff reduction  on manufactured products, tanffication of 
non-tariff barriers in agriculture, binding commitments to reduce the level of agricultural subsidies, elimination of 
voluntary export restraints, and the phasing out of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement. For the texts of these Agreements, 
see the Final  Texts, supra, footnote 9. 

13'  The Uruguay  Round  also  produced  Agreements  on  rules  of  origin,  safeguards and  antidumping  and 
countervailing measures so as to discipline national practices in these areas and establish stronger grounds for future 
multilateral negotiations on goods. It seems that the main concern of developing countries in the area ofgoods tradc 
is likely to become the forcing by developed countries of issues related to the environment and labour rights onto 
the Agenda of future negotiations. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE  AND DEVELOPMENT 

409 

UNCTAD), and  also  between  the  WTO and  other  multilateral/regional  development 
institutions. These three points are discussed successively below. 

A.  THE FOCUS OF THE AGENDA  FOR  NEGOTIATIONS ON THE SERVICE TRADE 

The establishment of the multilateral discipline for the service trade under the GATS 
is a work in progress. In approaching negotiations for further liberalization of the service 
sectors, developing countries wdl essentially have two options. The first is to continue 
with  the  time-honoured  tradition  under  the  GATT of  seelung  formal  conciliatory 
statements  or  broadly  worded  legal  provisions,  confirming  their  entitlement  to 
preferential, non-reciprocal  treatment, regardless  of the  actual trade benefits accruing 
therefrom. This, as evidenced under the GATT, may achieve short-term political benefits 
for  representatives of  developing countries, as  they  may  use  these  kinds  of  formal 
statements to  demonstrate to  their  constituencies their  capacity to  stand firm in  the 
international arena and to squeeze concessions from developed countries. However, this 
approach, far  from  being  successful  in  trade  in  goods  under  the  GATT, is  likely to 
produce  even fewer tangible results  in  the  context  of trade in  services; the  reason is 
that  the  GATS does  not  talk  about  preferences  in  the  sense  of preferential  financial 
treatment. As  indcated  earlier, concessions to  developing countries would  either be 
through allowing them not to reciprocate fully as far as commitments on market access 
are concerned, or through providing them,  on a commercial basis, with the assistance 
needed to strengthen their service sector, or through giving special consideration to the 
liberalizing of the service sectors or modes of service supply of export interest to them. 
As  evidenced during the negotiations of the GATS, the securing of concessions to 
developing countries in the area where they are thought to possibly enjoy a comparative 
advantage (the liberalization of labour movement  as  a mode  of service supply) is  not 
likely  to  occur,  as  developed  countries  have  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  their 
acceptance  of the  liberalization of  the  mode  of  delivery through  labour movement 
should not be in any manner that may  contradict their immigration regulations.132  In 
other words, it is  the immigration/labour policies of developed countries that  would 
drive their action of the liberalization of labour movement and not vice versa. Available 
data from the Schedules of Commitments of developed country Members of the GATS 
clearly bear out this  conclusion.133 And even if an explicit commitment is made in this 
regard,  it  can  be  easily  negated  by  the  qualifications and  accreditation  requirements 
applicable in developing countries, which would presumably be harder to satisfy with 
labour from developing countries.134  Developing countries may  still push  for  action 

of  Multilateral Negoh'ations-Selected 
at 95. 

132  Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8 ,  pp. 2373-2374. 
133  See analysis ofrelevant data from Members' Schedules in Neela Mukherjee, GATS and the Millennium Round 
lssuesfrom  the  Perspective of the Developing  Countries, 33 J.W.T. 4, August 1999, 
134  The GATS, Article VII, calls on Members only to harmonise their requirements for licensing, accreditation 
or recognition of service suppliers, but does not imply, of course, that they should lower their standards on these 
matters in respect of service suppliers from developing countries. 

41 0 

THE  

along the familiar GATT practices and demand that a system be established for providing 
financial preferences to their service suppliers, regardless  of the fact that such a system is 
not specifically  called for under the GATS. This would be very difficult to establish, as 
there is no service classification that may at present be used  to perform functions that 
equal the functions of the customs classification of goods which served as the basis for 
applying the G~p.135 A system of preferences in the context of trade in goods consists 
mainly of tariff exemption or preferential rates  applicable to goods that can be clearly 
identified in  the  customs  classification. Thus,  eligibdity under  the  system  would  be 
verified, confirmed and applied as the goods cross the border. No similar classification 
system can yet be formulated for the supply of services.136 

This will  leave developing countries with two possible courses of action that are 
permissible under the GATS to utilize the international mechanism for the service trade 
for enhancing the growth and competitiveness of their service sectors. They relate to 
the manner in which  they may  formulate, under  their  Schedules, the  conditions for 
access to their service markets by foreign suppliers, and to their capacity to obtain any 
technical assistance  needed to approach the  liberalization of the  service sectors in  an 
informed manner. Developing countries should make market-access commitments not 
simply as a tool to protect high-profile national service suppliers, but rather to promote 
policy goals with  respect to foreign direct investment inflow, technology acquisition, 
employment creation, and training and upgrachng of the national labour force. Many 
developing countries have acceded to the GATS with very few specific commitments on 
market access under their Schedules.137 This lack of active participation may  result, as 
occurred under the GATT, in reducing their relevancy to the international system for the 
service trade. However, to participate effectively, they will need assistance in evaluating 
the  impact of possible market-access  commitments they  may  make.  This  is  an  area 
where  developing countries are  a  dlstinct  dlsadvantage vis-d-vix developed  countries. 
The high  level  of political awareness in  the  latter would  normally  ensure adequate 
consideration and efficient representation of all relevant national commercial interests 
that  may  be  affected by  trade  liberalization measures.  Prior  to  comprehensive trade 
negotiations,  governmental  and  other  relevant  local  institutions  in  these  countries 
would embark on examining the issues involved, evaluating &om the perspective of the 
national economy the costs/benefits of any possible trade liberalization in a given sector, 

135  Attempts were made in the context ofnegotiating the GATS to formulate service classifications for purposes 
of the negotiations of liberalization commitments  under  the Schedules of Members.  The classfication is  mainly 
divided by  sectors and modes of supply, and  could  not, of course, cover all determinants of service supply in a 
manner that could be relied upon for purposes of applying a system of preferences; see the Uruguay Round History, 
supra, footnote 8 ,  at 2397. 

If implementation of the GSP in the context of trade in goods is any indication (see the text at footnote 50 
in this article) most of the benefits from any system for financial preferences for service suppliers from developing 
countries, assuming formulation of such a system becomes feasible, are likely to accrue to suppliers from the more 
advanced developing countries. In fact, a system of preferences would not become possible  unless  cross-country 
assessment of service sectors can be made. This would allow comparison and valuation of any particular treatment 
accorded  to  the  developing  countries.  This  assessment is  still unattainable  due  to  the  lack  of reliable statistical 
information on the service sectors: see WTO, Annual Report,  1999, at 67. 

Bernard Hoekman, Assessing the General Agreement on Trade in Servicer, in Martin and Winter, supra, footnote 1, 

Chapter 10, at 328. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE  AND DEVELOPMENT 

41 1 

and delineating the range of policy options to be considered by national negotiators in 
the  bargaining process. l3*  Developing  countries  clearly  lack  this  advantage and  are 
generally  limited  to  reacting  to  negotiating  agenda  put  forward  before  them  by 
developed countries. Therefore, to participate effectively in  service trade negotiations, 
developing countries will need the support of an activist WTO. 

An area where developing countries would critically need the support of the WTO 
is that concerning the collection and analysis of information on the service trade. The 
lack of such information was one of the arguments put forward by developing countries 
in objecting to the inclusion of the GATS on the Uruguay Round Agenda; an argument 
that was rejected on the ground that the GATS would be mainly a framework agreement 
and not an actual negotiation of commitments.139 However, more than five years after 
the negotiation of the GATS and as the negotiation of actual commitments is well under 
way,  the lack of statistical information is still cited by the WTO’S Council for Trade in 
Services as  an impediment to  its  completion of a  quantitative assessment  of trade in 
services.l40  This means that, as  they are being persuaded to  actively participate in the 
negotiation of sectoral commitments, developing countries are in no position to assess 
the  quid pro quo of market-access commitments they may enter into. The Council for 
Trade in Services is specifically mandated to establish guidelines and procedures for each 
round  of negotiations.  This is  to  be  made on the basis  of “an assessment  of trade in 
services in overall terms and on a sectoral basis with reference to the objectives of this 
Agreement [the GATS],  including those set out in paragraph 1 ofArticle Iv.”141  Thus, it 
does not seem to be beyond the mandate of the Council for Trade in Services of the 
WTO, in  overseeing the  implementation  of  the  GATS, to  demand  the  information 
necessary to undertake an assessment  of the service trade,142 and to present developing 
countries  with  a  reliable  basis  to  estimate  the  cosdbenefits  of  market-access 
commitments they may enter into in future service trade negotiations. 

B.  CLARITY OF DEVELOPMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES  WITHIN THE MULTILATERAL 

TRADING SYSTEM 

The  Agreement  Establishing  the  WTO maintains  the  existence  of  the  GATT’s 
Committee  on  Trade  and  Development  as  a  permanent  organ  within  the  WTO 
structure.143 No specific functions are assigned  to the Committee,  either in the WTO 

For example, only the United States and a number of other industrial countries conducted comprehensive 
studies oftheir service sectors in preparation for the negotiations ofthe GATS: see supra, footnote 52. No developing 
country undertook the same kind of preparation. 

139 The Uruguay Round History, supra, footnote 8, pp. 2362-2397. 
I4O  WTO, Annual Report, 1999, at 67. 

The GATS, Article XIX, para. 3. It should be noted that para. 1 ofArticle IV refers to promoting the increased 

participation by developing countries in the world service trade. 

142  Members  of the GATS are required:  (a) generally, to publish, or otherwise make publicly available, any 
information which affects or relates to the service trade (GATS, Article III,  para. 2); and @) specifically to inform the 
Council for Trade in Services, at least annually, of regulatory changes affecting trade in services in areas covered by 
the Member’s Schedule of Commitments (GATS, Article 111,  para. 3). 

WTO Agreement, Article IV, para. 7. 

412 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Agreement  or  in  the  trade  area  Agreements  (the  GATT, GATS, Trade-Related 
Investment Measures (TRIMS) or Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS)). So  far,  the  Committee is  continuing  to  exercise  the  same functions  it  has 
performed as a component  of the GATT’s institutional  set up. These consist of keeping 
under review the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system 
and the implementation of special provisions in favour of developing countries, such as 
the Enabling Clause, and in defining the guidelines for the technical assistance activities 
of the  W~0.144 These  are  exactly  the  same functions  performed  by  the  Committee 
when it constituted a part of the GATT mechanisrn.’45 In addition to the CTD, the WTO 
Agreement has established, within the WTO structure,  a special council for each trade 
area  covered  by  a  Multilateral  Agreement  (goods,  services, trade-related  intellectual 
property rights, and trade-related  investment measures).146 And lastly there is UNCTAD, 
with  its broad focus on issues of trade  and development.  Thus, if we take  the service 
trade  as  an  example, there  are  three  bodies  with jurisdiction  over issues of trade  and 
development: 

the Committee on Trade and Development  of the WTO, focusing on these 
issues from the perspective of the multilateral arrangements in all areas (goods, 
services, intellectual property, investment measures); 
the  Service  Council  of  the  WTO which  is  required,  in  the  context  of 
implementing the GATS and arranging for further multilateral negotiations,  to 
assess  the  service  trade,  in  general  and  from  the  perspective  of  developing 
countries; and 
the  UNCTAD, an  independent  organization  focusing  mainly  on  the  trade 
interests of developing countries. 

All  these bodies perform  very similar functions in debate  and policy  analysis, but 
none has the power to make decisions on matters dn-ectly affecting the trade interests of 
countries.147 There is clearly a need to harmonise the activities of these bodies so as to 
eliminate duplication, ensure compatibility and increase efficiency. 

It should primarily be noted in this context that the creation of UNCTAD in  1964 
as an independent multilateral trade body, was a result of the alliance at the time at the 
UN,  between  leading  developing  countries  which  were  leaning  towards  socialist 
economic  policies, and Members of the Soviet Bloc which  were not Members of the 
GATT. The former wanted  to exert  more  pressure on Western  countries  through  the 
establishment of a  new multilateral body  that  might  evolve as  a  substitute for, or as  a 
counterweight  to, the GATT mechanism. This coincided with the interests of Members 

144  WTO, Annual  Report, 1997, at  139. 
‘45  BISD, 33rd Supplement, June 1987, at  116. 
146  Wro Agreement, Article IV, para. 5. 
‘47  In fact, the WTO itselfhas decision-making authority only when its General Council acts in its capacity as 
the  Dispute  Settlement  Body  established  under  the  Dispute  Settlement  Understanding,  which  is  one  of the 
Agreements resulting from the Uruguay Round. Other than this, the WTO is generally mandated to “facilitate” the 
implementation  of  the  Multilateral  Trade  Agreements  and  to  provide  a  “forum”  for  the  multilateral  trade 
negotiations: the WTO Agreement, Articles 111  and IV. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

413 

of the Soviet Bloc  which also  desired to  create a new multilateral trade organization 
where the economic policies would be recognized and where they would be included 
as major participants.148 

Clearly, the UNCTAD did not evolve into a multilateral body where concrete trade 
actions/negotiations could be  undertaken.  Further, the  Soviet Bloc  has  disintegrated 
and all its Members are now striving to adopt market-based economic policies. Even at 
the formal and organizational level where the structure of UNCTAD is predcated on the 
division of nations into  three blocs-developed 
(but free-marketers); developed (but 
Socialists); and  developing-UNCTAD 
no  longer corresponds to  world  realities.149  In 
other words, the conditions and particular considerations which gave UNCTAT) a distinct 
character as  a  multilateral trade  organization have  disappeared from the  international 
scene.  From  the  standpoint of  developing countries, the  main  beneficial impact  of 
UNCTAD was to add the weight of the Soviet Bloc on their side in any political debate 
on trade issues within the U N  system. This is no longer true. Thus, it is now legitimate 
to question if the independent existence of UNCTAD is stdl warranted, or to argue that 
it would be more beneficial for developing countries if UNCTAD, with the richness of 
its  knowledge  and  institutional  experience  in  matters  concerning  the  relationship 
between trade and development, were to be merged into the structure of the WTO. If 
this  proves  rather  impractical,  given  the  near  impossibility  of  disestablishing  an 
international institution, then  attention should be given to  ensuring co-ordination  of 
the  developmental activities  of the  WTO and  UNCTAD. One possibility is  to  have’a 
Protocol signed between these to institutions to co-ordinate the scope of their research, 
policy  analysis  and  technical assistance  activities, and  to  give  UNCTAD a  role  in  the 
preparatory work for future multilateral trade negotiations. 

The same question of streamlining, harmonising and strengthening responsibilities 
for issues of trade and development would arise in relation to the structure of the WTO 
itself which,  as  mentioned  above, includes a  separate council for  each trade  area  in 
addtion to the Committee on Trade and Development.150 Whle it may be argued that 
the CTD should be the forum for consideration of all issues of trade and development, 
these  separate  councils  are  entrusted  with  the  administration  of  their  respective 
Multilateral Agreements including, of course, the developmental aspects related to the 
Agreement.lsl With the current complexity ofissues for trade negotiations, as they now 

14*  A major motivation behind the creation Of  UNCTAD was to integrate Socialist States into the international 
trading system. Thus, one of UNCTAD’S explicit objectives, stated in the General Assembly Resolution  creating it, 
referenced supra, footnote 6, was to establish conditions for trade expansion between countries at dlfferent stages of 
development “or having different system of social and economic organization.” 

149  The permanent organ of UNCTAD, the Trade and Development Board, is composed of representatives of 
different groups of nations, including one group  comprising Members  of the  former  Soviet  Bloc: see  General 
Assembly Resolution No. 1995 (XIX) establishing UNCTAD, supra, footnote 6. 

I50 WTO Agreement, Article IV, para. 5. 
151  The Council for Trade in Services, for example, is regularly considering issues concerning the position of 
developing countries in the context of prospective multilateral negotiations on trade in services and has invited the 
UNCTAD Secretariat to make a presentation to it on the matter: WTO, Annual Report,  1999, at 67. 

414 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

increasingly  include  issues  of  “deeper  integration”152  where  developing  countries, 
without being adequately informed or prepared, will be called upon to introduce major 
reform/adjustment of their local regulations bearing on trade and investment, the WTO 
can no longer afford to be only a forum for debate of these issues. A more structured 
approach for assistance to developing countries should be introduced by the WTO. This 
may appropriately include, at the institutional level, a more vigorous role for the CTD, 
in conjunction with the UNCTAD, in research, policy analysis and country-specific trade 
policy issues, and a more direct role for the trade area councils of the WTO in shaping 
the Agenda of multilateral negotiations in their respective areas. 

The  WTO is  perhaps  destined,  in  the  near  future,  to  become  the  most  vital 
multilateral economic institution.153  Major  world  economic  powers  (particularly the 
United  States and the EU) would likely want to see the WTO continue as a  debating 
forum with a mffused decision-making process, where they try to find common interest 
zones and also to test  their economic muscles  from time to time in search of a larger 
share of the world market, further margmalizing in the process the role of developing 
countries in the multilateral tradlng system. This was perhaps tolerable when that system 
was only concerned with cross-border trade in goods, where harmonisation of national 
practices was limited to such areas as tariff levels, rules of origin, customs procedures, 
antidumping, etc. Thus, the failure of developing countries to adhere to the rules meant 
simply their exclusion from the system. There was no “spdlover” from t h s  failure that 
would adversely affect the major tradmg powers.154 Now, under the new instruments 
for  international trade,  developing countries will  soon be  called upon  to  adopt and 
enforce  “internationally acceptable  standards” for  environmental  protection,  labour 
rights,  supervision  of  the  financial  market,  transparency  of  business  practices, 
harmonisation of tax treatment and many others.155 It should go without saying that the 
increased complexity of issues  of trade and development should entail a more activist 
role  for the WTO in addressing these issues,  and in  assisting  developing countries to 
address these issues. 

‘52  This increasingly used  term refers  to the growing trend in  international  economic negotiations to  deal 
with behind-the-border  issues, mainly to ensure a level playing field in international competition. This is at the root 
of the  introduction in  the  latest  negotiating  Round  in Seattle of issues  concerning the  environment and  the 
conditions /treatment of labour: see the Preface to the Brooking Institution Studies, supra, footnote 103. 

153  For a favourable and interesting analysis as to the abihty of the present institutional mechanism of the WTO 
to  deal with the  increasing complexity  of trade issues,  see Miles Kahler, International  Institutions  and  the  Political 
Economy oflntegration, Brookmgs Institution, Washington, D.C., 1995. 

ls4  As  exemplified in the Preface to the Brooking  Institution  Studtes on Integrating National  Economies, 
(supra, footnote 103), given the impact of modem technology  in creating interconnected banking and securities 
markets, lax banking rules in one nation erode the ability of all other nations to enforce banking and securities rules 
and to deal with fraudulent transactions. 

Is5  See supra, footnote 152. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

415 

C.  COLLABORATION WITH OTHER INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTIONS 

Trade successes are  a  sure inhcation  of developmental achievements.156  Hence, 
trade is a concern, in one form or another, to all international development institutions. 
This demonstrates the need for close co-operation and co-ordination between the WTO 
and other multilateral or regonal development institutions. Interestingly, as the GATT 
was  concerned  mainly  with  the  rules  for  the  orderly  expansion  of  world  trade,  it 
included detailed provisions for co-operation with  the  IMF  on monetary matters that 
might  constitute impehments  to  or  lead  to  restrictions on trade,  such as  exchange 
arrangements, balance  of payments  and  monetary  reserves.157  No  similar provisions 
were included in the GATT for co-operation with the IMF sister institution the World 
Bank, as the area of investment, for long the main concern of the latter,*58 was outside 
the  scope of interest of the  GATT. This has  dramatically changed at both  ends, as  the 
World  Bank,  followed  by  other  financial  development  institutions,  expanded  its 
mandate to include policy-based lending operations whereby the quid pro quo for making 
resources available  to developing countries are  the  commitments to be made by  the 
latter to undertake reform measures of their economic policies, including trade policies, 
and as  the  WTO now  oversees the  implementation of multilateral trade  agreements 
involving foreign direct investments and the movement of factors of production. This 
is nowhere more manifest than in the area of the service trade. 

To illustrate: the World Bank, while not a hrect participant in the multilateral trade 
negotiations,  may  not  only  finance  investments in  a  service  sector  of a  developing 
country, but may also require in its lending instruments certain policy changes in that 
sector, or in the trade policies of that country in general. The implications of this trend 
are very important in the realignment of the responsibilities of multilateral institutions 
in the trade area. The contrast is that the WTO, the main multilateral trade institution, 
may,  according to  its  mandate, act  only  as  a forum  for  trade  negotiations  and  as  a 
facilitator in the implementation of multilateral trade agreements. On the other hand, 
the multilateral (or regional) development institutions, although not  dn-ectly involved 
in the multdateral trade negotiations and given the leverage of their lending capacity, are 
now assuming a hrect role in restructuring the trade policies of developing countries 
through specific legal covenants included in lending instruments. Generally, their trend 
is to require these countries to implement more liberalization measures. As far as trade 
in  goods  is  concerned,  these  measures  are  relatively  simple  and  their  impact  is 
quantifiable, as they consist mainly of requiring developing countries to lower tariffs and 

156  It seems accurate to  say that  the higher the per capita level of intemationd  trade of a given country, the 
higher  the  per  capita  income  of  that  country; thus  the  higher  the  level  of  its  economic development.  For  a 
confirmation of this corollary, see lists of major importing/exporthg  countries in the WTO, Annual Repot?, 1997, 
Volume 11,  pp. 4 and 5. 

157  GATT, Article xv. 
158  The main  purpose  of the  International  Bank for Reconstruction and Development is  to  assist  in  the 
development process through  facilitating the investment of  capital for productive purposes:  IBRD’S Articles of 
Agreement, Article I. 

416 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

eliminate/reduce non-tariff  barriers.159  They  are, however,  far  more  complex in  the 
context of the service trade, covering a wide area of domestic regulations relating either 
directly to the liberalization of a gwen service sector, or generally to the streamlining of 
the  investment environment  so  as  to  facilitate direct investments by  foreign  service 
suppliers. These include such measures as the streamlining of the process of enterprise 
licensing, harmonisation of the tax code, simplification of the structure of supervisory 
authorities over commercial establishments, elimination of labour restrictions deemed 
to  be  a  deterrent  to foreign investments, or  elimination of the  requirement  of local 
majority-ownership of enterprises.160 

In a practical sense, it may be said that the international development institutions, 
by  extracting trade liberalization measures from developing countries, are paving the 
way for these countries to include the sectors (or transactions) subject to liberalization 
in their Schedules with the GATS.'~~ While this may sound appropriate, the point to be 
emphasized, nonetheless, is  that  the  WTO plays  no  role  in  the  formulation of trade 
liberalization  measures  agreed  between  developing  countries  and  the  international 
development  institutions  under  lending  agreements;  hence  the  need  for  ensuring 
harmonisation of the functions of the WTO and these institutions in respect of the trade 
policies of developing countries.162 The following points should be highlighted in this 
context: 
(9 

The  trade  liberalization  measures  agreed  by  developing  countries  under 
lending agreements with  multilateral/regional development institutions are 
unilateral commitments. They  are  formulated and  entered into  outside the 
bargaining  process  involved  in  multilateral  trade  negotiations  in  the 
framework of the WTO. 
The multilateral/regional development institutions have no leverage over the 
trade policies of developed countries. Therefore,  they are in no position to 
make  assurances  to  developing  countries  as  to  the  continuation  of  these 
policies, or  to  make  assessments to  developing countries as  to  the  market- 
access benefits to accrue to them as a result of liberahation commitments they 
make.  Again,  the  WTO,  where  the  trade  interests  of  all  countries  are 
represented  and  where  the  ultimate  goal  of  negotiations is  to  achieve  an 
overall  balance  of  rights  and  obligations,  would  appear  to  be  the  only 
appropriate multilateral forum for reaching agreements on trade liberalization 
measures. 
As indicated earlier, the lack of statistical information continues to be citcd by 

(ii) 

(iii) 

159  As  an example of comprehensive structural adjustment measures, dealing with macro-economic  policies 
and with the policies of numerous sectors, including the trade sector, see the Loan Agreement No. 3353 (Structural 
Adjustment Loan), dated 22 November 1991 between the World Bank and Egypt. 

'6"  Id., for examples of most of these measures. 
l h '   Or to include agreed tariff reduction measures in their Schedules with the GATT. 

The WTO and the World Bank signed a broad co-operation  agreement on 28 April 1997, calling on both 
parties to consult/co-ordinate  their  activities and  exchange views on policy issues. This Agreement  is  yet  to  be 
translated into specific operational measures. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

417 

that 

follow 

their  service  sectors.  It  should 

the WTO as a major obstacle to the completion of an assessment of the service 
trade.163 The assessment  is  a prerequisite for the  establishment of guidelines 
and procedures for each negotiating round, as it would assist participants in the 
negotiations  in  formulating  negotiating  positions  designed  to  achieve  an 
appropriate balance of benefits for all parties.164  As  a result, the  Council for 
Trade in Services is stdl unable to offer developing countries a reliable analysis 
for determining how their commercial interests may be served through further 
liberalization  of 
the 
multilateral/regional  development  institutions  should  act  compatibly  and 
refrain  from  requiring  developing  countries  to  implement  liberalization 
measures in their service sectors until such assessment is made, and then only 
accordmg to the established guidelines as to where developing countries can 
expect commensurate benefits from their liberalization measures. 
There is a clear philosophical dfference as to the condrtions and modus operundi 
for trade liberalization by developing countries between the approach of the 
multilateral trade instruments (the GATT, the GATS and the WTO Agreement) 
and the approach of the multilateral/regional development institutions, led by 
the World Bank. The approach of the former reflects clearly  the  view that 
measures for market-access liberalization should be mutual or reciprocal and 
reached  through  negotiations  designed to  ensure  an  outcome  of  balanced 
benefits and obligations.165 This stands in sharp contrast with the approach of 
the  multilateral  development  institutions,  which  seems  to  be  that  even 
unilateral trade liberalization measures taken by  developing countries would 
be  beneficial  to  their  economies, regardless  of  the  degree  to  which  such 
measures  are  reciprocated.  The  apparent  incompatibility  on  this  matter 
between  the  Multilateral  Trade  Agreements  and  the  methods  for  trade 
negotiations  within  the  WTO,  on  one  hand,  and  the  practices  of  the 
multilateral development institutions, led by the World Bank, on the other, is 
an important topic that is worthy of an independent analysis. It is sufficient for 
the purposes of this article only to highlight the need for action to eliminate 
the incompatibility. 
The above possible difference in approach may result in the scope and content 
of market-access  commitments made by  a  given  developing country  in  its 
Schedule with  the  G A T P  being incompatible with  those bindmg  on  that 
country under its agreements with a multilateral institution such as the World 
Bank. This would raise some interesting legal questions. For example, may a 
service supplier assert, vis-d-vis a developing country, entitlement to a certain 
treatment (e.g.  streamlined  enterprise  licensing  process)  to  which  the 

WTO, Annual Report,  1999, at 67. 

164  GATS, Article XIX. 
165  These principles are confirmed in the Preambles of the GATT, the GATS and WTO Agreement. 
166  Or, for this matter, its undertalungs under the GATT. 

418 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

developing country is committed under a lending agreement with the World 
Bank, even though  that treatment  is not included in that country's  Schedule 
of Commitment with the GATS? Of course,  the argument  may be made that 
it is  only the World Bank, as  the lender under the lending agreement, which 
may make any claims thereunder. However, this may raise a broadcr and more 
likely question, namely, whether a broad market-access commitment made by 
a developing country in its Schedule with the GATS may be interpreted  so as 
to include specific liberalization measures to which the developing country in 
question has  committed itself under a loan agreement with  the World Bank. 
It is also an open question if a given developing country should be expected, 
when formulating/negotiating  its Schedule of Commitments  with  the GATS, 
to include  in that Schedule all market-access  commitments previously made 
by it vis-d-vis a multilateral lendng institution, or that that country may deviate 
from  or modie or completely  disregard these  commitments  in light  of the 
bargains involved in negotiations within the framework of the WTO. 

These kinds of question  show the need  not only to ensure compatibility  of trade 
liberalization commitments made by developing countries to multilateral development 
institutions with those made by these countries within  the framework  of the Wto, but 
also to unie the forum for obtaining these commitments. And it is the Wto, where the 
trade  interests  of all  nations,  developed  and  developing,  are  represented  that  should 
constitute such a forum. 

VIII.  CONCLUSIONS 

As  far as the management  within  the GATT of the relationship  between  trade and 
development  Is  concerned, preferential  treatment  for developing  countries  continued 
for decades to be the name of the game. There is no evidence that the formal differential 
and/or  preferential  trade  treatment  of developing countries in the  context of trade in 
goods has advanced the cause of development or has positively altered the trade situation 
of developing  countries.  In  fact,  the  evidence  points  in  the  opposite  direction.  The 
developing countries that have opt for outward, export-oriented  trade policies (e.g. the 
newly  industrialized  countries  in  Eastern  Asia)  have  achieved  faster  economic 
development,  hence  a greater  success in  international  trade.  O n  the  other  hand, the 
developing  countries  which  adhered  to  protective  trade  measures,  which  they  are 
implicitly allowed and rather  encouraged to use under the GATT, have not been nearly 
as successful.167 The lesson then was drawn, and now the dominant theme in the field 
of development  is  trade  liberalization  and  global  integration.  This  is  being  pursued 
vigorously  by  international  development  institutions,  which  act  according  to  the 

'b7  For  example,  the  merchandise  exports  of  India,  a  country  of  close  to  one  billion  people,  which  was 
particularly slow in abandoning protectionist trade policies, was estimated to account in  1996 only for 0.8 percent 
of the total world merchandise exports, while merchandise exports by  Singapore during that year is  estimated  to 
account for 3.2 percent of that total: see WTO, Annual Report, 1997, Volume 11,  at 4. 

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT 

419 

principle that the more developing countries open their markets, the better it is for their 
economies. However, in trade in goods as well as in trade in services, the GATT and the 
GATS are  still  predicated  on  the  principle,  albeit  couched  in  different  terms,  that 
developing countries should be treated differently under the rules of international trade 
as well as under agreements to be negotiated under such rules. In reconciling the trend 
towards  maximum  liberalization  with  the  need  of  developing  countries  for  special 
treatment,  some points need to be emphasized. 

First, the GATT’s experience in the field of development is a classic example of the 
is, the GATT as an instrument and as an institution-not  being adequate to 
means-that 
attain the ends-that 
is, enhancing the development  of developing countries, and thus 
improving their international trade situation. The focus of negotiations within the GATT 
on  the  scope  of  preferential/&fferential  treatments  to  be  accorded  to  developing 
countries was misplaced, as preferences were never elevated to the status of precise legal 
rights emanating from  bindmg international  commitments.  If anything,  the system of 
preferences  did more harm  than  good  to  developing countries.  It  enabled  developed 
countries to pay lip service to the demands of developing countries, while keeping them 
at the margin of serious trade negotiations. The system of preferences is also responsible, 
at least partly, for the delay in the implementation  by developing countries of needed 
economic  policy  reforms.  As  a  consequence,  the  current  trend  towards  trade 
liberalization  and  global  economic  integration  has  been  largely  shaped  outside  the 
international trading system and beyond the influence of its institutions and negotiating 
processes. 

Another point to be emphasized relates to the profound differences in nature and 
reach between liberalization of trade in goods and liberalization of trade in services. The 
former involves measures which are relatively simple, as  they evolve around tariffs and 
other aspects related to the treatment  of imported goods (e.g. rules of origin,  customs 
procedures,  non-tariff  barriers).  Liberalization  of  the  service  trade  is  much  more 
complex,  as  it  involves  adjustment in a wide  array of local regulatory  aspects. Thus, 
allegations  of  inconsistency  of  a  particular  piece  of  local  regulation  with  a  given 
country’s  trade  commitments  are  far  more  likely to  occur in the context  of trade  in 
services than in the context of trade in goods.  Further, commitments for liberalization 
of the service sectors, once made, are much more difficult to reverse, modifj. or qualify, 
even  when  appropriate  grounds  exist under  the  GATS. Restrictions  on the import  of 
goods, because of balance-of-payments  difficulties or as an antidumping measure or for 
any other grounds under the GATT, may be determined and enforced with relative ease 
and with immediate effect. 

In  contrast,  liberalization  of  the  service  sector  is  likely  to  result  in  acts  of 
commercial  establishment where enterprises are created and registered, labour is hired, 
properties are leased, long-term  service-supply contracts are concluded and tax revenues 
are  counted  on. Reversing  or disturbing  all these  local  economic  activities, even  on 
appropriate  grounds  under  the  GATS,’~~ would  create  a  host  of economic  and  legal 

420 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

problems. Hence, the obvious need of developing countries to be adequately prepared 
for further negotiations on services and the need for the WTO to take a more active role 
in preparing  them. 

Lastly,  there  is  the  issue  of  strengthening  and  harmonising  the  international 
responsibilities in  the  area of trade  and  development.  The Agenda  of the multilateral 
trade negotiations within the framework of the WTO will increasingly include issues of 
deeper  integration.  As  shown  in  the  cases of the EU  and  the North American  Free 
Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA), deeper  integration  at  less  than  the  universal  level  has 
involved,  particularly  in the  case  of the  EU, massive harmonisation  (and at  a  certain 
level, centralization)  of policies and of decision-making  authorities. Most importantly, 
deeper integration in this case is a two-way  street: the less-developed regions of Europe 
would  adjust  their  policies,  rules  and  institutions,  and  would  receive,  in  return, 
substantial assistance from the richer  European  regions.  The assistance is  not  only  to 
compensate the less-developed regions for the cost of adjustment but also to accelerate 
their  development  so  as  to  achieve  balanced  economic  growth  and  comparable 
standards of living at the continental level. All this is being implemented through a large 
institutional  mechanism  accountable to European  central  authorities.  This is  in sharp 
contrast with the manner in which developing countries in other regions of the world 
are to adjust their  economic policies under  the pretext  of deeper integration  into the 
world economy. Here, as far as trade is concerned, the adjustment is mostly made in the 
form  of  unilateral  commitments  to  multilateral/regional  development  institutions, 
principally the World Bank, where the quid pro quo are loans on near-commercial  terms 
from these institutions. Most importantly, there is no ultimate multilateral accountability 
for results. 

It is  incumbent  on the major world  economic powers  to concede functions and 
authorities  to the  WTO and  to strengthen  its structure  so  as  to  enable  it, as  the  new 
multilateral  institution  that  is  not  hindered  by  past  practices  and  legacies,  to  bring 
harmony  to  the  currently  fragmented  multilateral  handling  of  issues  of  trade  and 
development. 

'68  It should be noted that the GATS provides for escape clauses similar to those of the GATT, e.g. balance-of- 

payments difficulties, emergency safeguards, safety, health, security or other public interest considerations. 


