The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 203–228

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2008.00343.x

Scope of Process Patents in Farm Animal
Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen
Fridtjof Nansen Institute

The number of process patent applications concerning farm animal breeding is growing
rapidly. Patent law is general in form and is seldom adapted to speciﬁc areas of innovation. It
was initially created for the purpose of granting exclusive rights to technical inventions, and it
was taken for granted that higher animals, food production and pharmaceuticals were too
important for mankind to be included under exclusive private rights. Today, with patent law
increasingly used in the animal sector, the question arises: how will the law apply to this
particular ﬁeld of innovation? The degree of legal uncertainty is particularly high because it is
not clear how the courts of various countries will apply the general law to this particular ﬁeld.
Patent law has the potential to alter the existing legal conditions for competition and
investments in the ﬁeld of animal breeding, and thus merits greater attention among
policy-makers, animal breeders and farmers.

Keywords process patent; animal-breeding methods; indirect product patent protection;
patent law

Research Questions

This article analyses the scope of and exemptions from process patents in the ﬁeld of
farm animal breeding and rights conferred to the owners of such patents. Until
recently, process patents were not actively applied in the farm animal-breeding
sector. This is changing, and currently, several patent applications on inventions
regarding processes in farm animal production are pending at patent ofﬁces around
the world (Rothschild et al., 2004; Tvedt, 2007b). Some of these patent applications
have become the subject of debate and discussion even before there have been any
indications of whether they would be granted or not (Fitzgerald, 2005). The
patentability of inventions in biotechnology is currently on the agenda concerning
implementation of the Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the
council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of biotechnological
inventions
(European Community Directive on Biotechnology) and the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), as well
as in other international bodies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the UN (FAO) and various non-governmental organizations (NGOs) (e.g. Green-
peace and League of Pastoral Peoples). The issue of process patents on breeding
methods, although not an especially hot topic in international patent law forums
(Tvedt, 2007a), has been brought to the agenda in the FAO, which recently noted:

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

203

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Rapid developments in the ﬁeld of biotechnology have increasingly
drawn attention to the issue of intellectual property rights in relation
to AnGR. In the event of the introduction of transgenic technologies
in animals used for agricultural production,
the issue of animal
patenting may become more prominent (Rischkowsky and Pilling, 2007,
p. 279).

Under the heading ‘‘Emerging Legal Issues’’, the FAO further adds:

Animal patenting is emerging as signiﬁcant issue in the livestock sector,
driven in part by technological developments such as cloning and
transgenetics, and the desire to proﬁt
from or promote such
developments. Once again, ethical objections are raised both regarding
patenting as such, and regarding some of the biotechnologies to which it
might be applied. It is, however, also important to note that there are
numerous practical
issues that also need to be addressed—
particularly related to the scope of patent protection (Rischkowsky and
Pilling, 2007, pp. 287–8, emphasis added).

legal

There have been no court cases regarding the scope of process patents in farm
animal breeding, which leaves the legal situation somewhat uncertain. Uncertainty
regarding the scope of protection is not an unexpected result of applying the general
system of patent protection to inventions in an area of technology that differs from
more traditional technologies. The most obvious difference from traditional inven-
tions is the ability of livestock to reproduce; this fact complicates the process of
identifying those animals to which patent rights should apply, if, for example,
patented animals should be bred with non-patented ones (Rischkowsky and Pilling,
2007, p. 288). Furthermore, long production cycles make it difﬁcult to determine
how far in the production cycle the patent protection applies and for how many
generations. Additionally, the signiﬁcance of these issues will depend partly on the
species and production system in question.

The TRIPS Agreement sets the most general international rules about the scope
of patent protection. In Europe, the European Commission (EC) Directive on
Biotechnological Inventions (EC/98/44)1 speciﬁcally addresses the scope of protec-
tion for biotechnological patents. Despite these more concrete rules for biotechno-
logical patents, there are still some uncertainties in the interpretation of the
provisions. By ‘‘scope of a patent’’ is meant the extent of the exclusive right
granted—in other words, to which processes or products produced by those
processes the patent-holder has an exclusive right to prevent others from exploiting
commercially (Paterson, 2001, p. 573). The protection conferred by each patent
ﬂows from an interpretation of the patent claim in each patent, coupling them with
the general rules deﬁning the acts covered by patent protection. To understand the
extent of the process or the method, the patent claims must be interpreted. To
determine whether a third party infringes that patent, his activity must be tested

204

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

against those patent claims and the general acts allowed under the exclusive right by
the grant of that patent (Kolker, 2000, p. 15).

This article discusses the scope of process patents in farm animal breeding by
ﬁrst (the second section) approaching the most general and global rules of the
TRIPS Agreement. The third section takes a closer look at European regional rules
on this topic. In the fourth section we offer a practical approach to how the actions
covered by a process patent in farm animal breeding can be determined. The ﬁfth
section looks at special defences that an accused infringer could apply to avoid
falling under the scope of the exclusive right. The penultimate section offers a look
at one general patent rule, the reversal of burden of proof, speciﬁcally as regards
farm animal breeding. Finally, in the last section we draw some conclusions on
process patents in the ﬁeld of farm animal breeding.

Scope of Protection under the TRIPS Agreement

The TRIPS Agreement speciﬁes detailed requirements for the legislation of the
member states, including effective measures to ensure fulﬁlment. In consequence,
World Trade Organization (WTO) member states are no longer allowed compre-
hensive national discretion in intellectual property rights, or at least not without
sanctions under the trade system. The main rule under TRIPS Agreement, article
27.1 is that countries are obliged to provide for patent protection to inventions in all
ﬁelds of technology, save some important exemptions. The preamble and the title of
the agreement refer to the trade-related aspects of intellectual property, and the aim
is to ensure that measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do
not become barriers to legitimate trade (TRIPS Agreement Preamble). It has,
however, been argued that the negotiations of the TRIPS Agreement were not
about freeing trade, but about changing domestic regulatory and legal regimes, and
that virtually all dimensions of intellectual property rights are encompassed by the
provisions of the agreement (Correa, 2007, pp. 3–7).

For the purpose of analysing the scope of patent protection, TRIPS Agreement,
article 28.1 (b) is of greatest interest. It establishes a minimum scope of protection to
the patented process and the product thereof, which all member countries must
provide for in their legislation. The term ‘‘minimum scope of protection’’ implies
that member states are obliged to ensure at least this level of protection, although
they may also establish a broader scope. The minimum level of protection conferred
through the TRIPS Agreement is fairly high and comprehensive (de Carvalho, 2005,
p. 28). Article 28.1 (b) speciﬁes:

where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third parties
not having the owner’s consent from the act of using the process and
from the acts of: using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these
purposes at
the product obtained directly by that process
least
(emphasis added).

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

205

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

This implies that the patentee has exclusive rights over the process as it is
described and interpreted in the claims. Exclusive rights extend to products that are
a direct result of the patented process. This so-called ‘‘indirect product protection’’
covers products obtained by the patented process. The TRIPS Agreement does not,
however, specify speciﬁc rules regarding the extent of protection in cases where the
material
is capable of self-reproduction. This section interprets the minimum
provision relevant to determine the scope of protection for processes for the
production of farm animals and to offspring from that process.

For patent-holders and third parties alike, it is vital to know as precisely as
possible the extent of the exclusive right. In fact, however, the actual extent of
granted patent claims is not decided until an alleged infringement suit is determined
(Westerlund, 2001, p. 180). This is a challenge to legal certainty. It is of relevance to
discuss the scope of the patent protection required according to the TRIPS
Agreement, because this requirement applies to all members of the WTO. To be
binding among legal persons, the rules of the TRIPS Agreement must be imple-
mented in national law, and hence there will probably be national differences
regarding the scope of patent protection.

The natural point of departure is that the use of the process described in the
patent claims is under the exclusive right of the patentee. At this level, the challenge
for animal breeding patents is that only new and inventive patents are being
granted, and well-known breeding methods are not included under new patent
protection. This is a question of how the patent criteria are practiced and applied,
and thus falls beyond the scope of this article (this issue has been addressed by
Tvedt, 2007b). There are several features in the animal sector that show that existing
but not well-documented breeding methods may be regarded as novel and non-
obvious and thus potentially eligible for inclusion under patent protection (Tvedt,
2007b).

The scope of protection is also extended to cover at least the product obtained
directly by that process. This means that the scope of process patent protection in
the TRIPS Agreement requires countries to provide for indirect product patent
protection that covers the outcome from the use of a patented method. Using a
patented process might therefore give the patentee a legal right to the offspring from
the application of the process.

This extension of the right to indirect protection of the product has long been
accepted in patent law (Bently and Sherman, 2001, p. 493), and is often explained by
reference to the fact that the exclusive right could be undermined if protection were
to extend only to the process itself. This protection is particularly important where
no claim has been made to the related product as such. It is also important where
the process is used outside the country where the patent was granted and the
product from that process is then imported to that country (Bently and Sherman,
2001, p. 493). Because of the principle of territoriality of patents, the patented
method may be utilized in a country where the patent has not been granted. The
indirect product patent protection covers import of that product to the country

206

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

where the patent is valid. Such import would otherwise imply a substantial
deterioration of the value of process patents.

But exactly how far does this indirect protection extend? Which products fall
within the exclusiveness as a consequence of a process patent in farm animal
breeding? This raises further questions of how many future generations are covered
by the exclusiveness and how extensive the alterations of the offspring can be,
through cross-breeding and selection with other animals, and still fall under the
scope of the exclusive right of the process patent.

The point of departure for determining these questions is the ‘‘ordinary
meaning’’ of the terms of the treaty (Vienna Convention, article 31). TRIPS
Agreement, article 28.1 (b), requires countries to provide for protection for the
products ‘‘obtained directly’’ by the patented process. A literal interpretation of the
words ‘‘obtain directly’’ indicates that the protection includes products achieved
through the application of that described process. The term ‘‘directly’’ suggests a
qualiﬁcation of the products protected, and would imply that the process patent
does not extend to further generations. Of course, after the expiry of the patent
(usually 20 years from granting), the patent-holder will no longer have exclusive
rights to the offspring. However, between these two extremes, the wording of article
28.1 (b) does not offer much guidance, although it has been argued that the
protection for process patents is potentially very wide:

In part this is because where a range of different products ﬂow from a
single process, all of the products fall within the remit of the patent. It is
also because the scope of protection not only concludes the products
that ﬂow from the process, but also the products that are based upon the
products that ﬂow from the process: if you like, the derivatives of the
derivative (Bently and Sherman, 2001, p. 493, emphasis added).

The assumption regarding the derivatives of the derivative does not follow
directly from TRIPS Agreement, article 28.1 (b), which confers rights only to the
products that ﬂow from the process. The TRIPS Agreement is a minimum standards
agreement. The protection standard of the TRIPS Agreement is to cover any
invention in all ﬁelds of technology and offer an adequate scope of protection
(TRIPS Agreement Preamble). Applied to process patents to farm animal breeding
this could indicate that the protection also extends to the ‘‘derivatives of the
derivative’’.

The term ‘‘obtained directly by that process’’ would, however, seem to imply
that the patented breeding method must have been used in order for the patent-
holder to acquire exclusiveness over the offspring. To ensure that the scope of
monopoly is kept within justiﬁable limits, there must be a qualiﬁed connection or
relationship between the patented process and the product thereof (Bently and
Sherman, 2001, p. 493). In TRIPS Agreement, article 28.1 (b), this link is ensured
by the words ‘‘the product obtained directly by’’ that process. In Nordic patent
theory, the product must have obtained its substantial qualities through the use

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

207

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

of the patented process. Furthermore, the product must not have lost its character-
istics through further development. This speciﬁcation gives rise to interesting
questions regarding the breeding of farm animals. What if the ‘‘product’’
is
crossbred with a specimen that does not at all possess the characteristics described
in the patent claims, or possesses only some of the relevant characteristics?
The assessment seems to revolve around whether the animal has lost its essential
characteristics due to the alteration—more precisely, the essential characteristics
protected and described in the patent claims. For each individual case of infringe-
ment, there must be a separate and speciﬁc evaluation of how essential the process is
for the product evaluated. This suggests that protection could extend to the
offspring of one indirectly protected ‘‘product’’ and one unrestricted animal only,
if the progeny possesses the essential qualities as these are expressed in the patent
claims as part of the patented process. This might be somewhat difﬁcult for
breeding method patents, because the core of the invention is not necessarily linked
to one particular characteristic, but rather to how to proceed in the activity of
breeding.

The term ‘‘directly obtained’’ implies, however, that the provision does not
protect against identical or similar products produced by other methods (Correa,
2007, p. 298). ‘‘If an infringement is invoked, courts will normally determine
whether the alternative process can be deemed equivalent or not’’ (Correa, 2007,
n. 108).

The use of the term ‘‘at least the product obtained directly’’ in article 28.1(b)
indicates clearly that member states are free to include only the ﬁrst generation
under the indirect process patent protection, but as the TRIPS Agreement is a
minimum standard, countries may extend the protection to products not directly
obtained by that claimed process (Correa, 2007, p. 299). At this point there is room
for national differences under the TRIPS Agreement. The detailed application of
this in practice is not solved by the TRIPS Agreement, and must either be solved in
the implementation of countries or by their courts when infringement cases are
coming up.

TRIPS Agreement, article 27.3 (b) grants countries discretion to exempt
‘‘animals’’ from eligibility of patent protection. If a country chooses to exempt
animals from product patent protection, the scope of indirect process patent
protection might end up granting exclusive rights to animals despite the implemen-
tation of such an exemption. The indirect product patent protection could thus
become a means of circumventing such an exemption for animal product patents.
Applied to the case of a process comprising a method for improving a herd, which is
general in scope and applicable to more than one speciﬁc breed or one ‘‘animal
variety’’, this could imply that the exemption for animals is practically without
consequence (Tvedt, 2007b, p.109 sig). This is another issue for countries to
consider in the implementation process. The next step is to analyse how these
uncertainties have been dealt with in Europe, by the EC Biotech Directive and in the
European Patent Organization (EPO).

208

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Scope of Process Patents under European Patent Law

European Patent Convention (EPC)
The EPC is principally concerned with the granting of patents rather than with the
scope of protection conferred (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 47). When EPC was drafted,
it was decided that questions about the infringement of patents issued by the EPO
were best dealt with by national courts (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 519).
Nonetheless, the close relationship between the validity and infringement has meant
that EPO decisions have had an impact on national law regarding infringement as
the scope of the patent is one relevant topic when a patent is granted. The provisions
and case–law of the EPO could therefore be of relevance for national courts when
they establish the scope of protection of a process patent for animal production in
an infringement proceeding.

Article 64(3) states that ‘‘any infringement of a European patent shall be dealt
with by national law’’. The only guidance given as to the scope of protection is
found in the provisions of articles 64 and 69, and the Protocol on the interpretation
of article 69. According to article 64(2), the protection conferred by a patent whose
subject-matter is a process shall extend to the products obtained directly through
that process. The effect is essentially that the sale and use of products made directly
by utilizing a process that is the subject of a European patent constitutes infringe-
ment of that patent, as well as the use of the process itself; the rights of a European
patent must be construed accordingly (Paterson, 2001, p. 16). For this provision, as
for the similar regulation in article 28.1 (b) of the TRIPS Agreement, extension of
this protection is not speciﬁcally directed towards biotechnological inventions or
their progeny. It is simply stated that protection extends to the products ‘‘directly’’
obtained by the patented process, regardless of whether such products themselves
are patentable (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 48). Furthermore, while the EPC represents
a harmonization of the scope of protection through the wording of the provisions,
actual interpretation and use are a matter for the national courts and might be
practiced dissimilarly.

It has been argued that restricting the scope of protection to products that are
the ‘‘direct’’ result of the patented biotechnological process does not provide fair or
adequate protection for the patent-holder (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 48). Moreover,
there might be uncertainty regarding use of a patented process for the production of
self-replicating material, because the use of the patented process might not be
necessary for self-replication. Whether fair or adequate protection is provided will
depend on how the word ‘‘direct’’ is interpreted. In straightforward cases where the
subject matter of an alleged infringement is the immediate end-product of the
process, few difﬁculties arise (Paterson, 2001, pp. 587–8). ‘‘The product obtained by
the means of the patented process was the product with which the process ended’’
(Paterson, 2001, pp. 587–8). However, if the immediate end product of a patented
process is subject to further processing, the product of such further processing may
also infringe the patented process if there is no ‘‘loss of identity’’. The relevant

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

209

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

interpretation factor in an EPO perspective therefore seems to be the ‘‘loss of
identity’’ test,2 which means whether the product obtained, subject to further
processing, retained or kept its essential characteristics (Paterson, 2001, p. 587).
Regarding processes for the production of farm animal genetic material the
question is whether replicating the invention without using the patented breeding
scheme would imply that the product ‘‘loses’’ its identity. This test was seemingly
construed for traditional technical inventions, and the above-mentioned case-law
concerns inventions of a non-biotechnological character. In this respect, the EPO
rules do not go much further than does the TRIPS Agreement.

The EC Biotech Directive
The directive requires European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA)
member states to protect all but the exempted biotechnological inventions under
national patent law. Basically, the level of protection shall be the same as for other
inventions (Preamble, recital 46). To achieve this, articles 8 and 9 specify the scope
of protection for biotechnological inventions. Further, articles 10 and 11 provide
new defences against infringement of the rights concerning biotechnological inven-
tions (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 546; for more on special defences, see the ﬁnal
section). The EC Biotech Directive does not specify which actions are subject to the
control of the patent-holder, thus making this a matter for national discretion
within the framework of the obligations of the TRIPS Agreement.

With this directive, the EU established certain special regulations regarding
biotechnological inventions. The preamble notes that there was a need for clariﬁca-
tion of the scope of protection regarding biological material due inter alia to the
ability of such material to self-reproduce (Preamble, recital 46). Differences in
national legislation were seen as having the potential to create trade barriers and
impede the functioning of the internal market (Preamble, recital 5). The problem
could grow if the member states adopted new and different legislation and if
national case–law interpreting such legislation developed differently (Preamble,
recital 6). Implementation of the EC Biotech Directive did not, however, according
to the Preamble, necessitate the creation of a separate body of law in place of the
rules of national patent law.

The European Parliament used the room of manoeuvre under the TRIPS
Agreement to further specify the scope of protection for progeny of material
obtained through a patented process. The scope of protection covering the product
obtained directly through the patented process in TRIPS Agreement, article 28.1 (b)
includes in the EC Biotech Directive also ‘‘any other biological material derived
from the directly obtained material’’. This implies that the patent confers a certain
degree of protection on the progeny and other biological material derived from the
obtained material from applying the patented process. The uncertainty about
exclusive rights to future generations of the product of a patented process under
the TRIPS Agreement is thus to some degree speciﬁcally addressed, in favour of
increasing the scope of protection in the directive. The Preamble (recital 12) states

210

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

that the TRIPS Agreement, which has been signed by the European Community
and the member states, provides that patent protection must be guaranteed for
products and processes in all areas of technology. The EC Biotech Directive could
thus be seen as the means by which the EU intended to use the ﬂexibility to grant a
higher level of protection than required by the TRIPS Agreement, by specifying
rules regarding biotechnological inventions.

Indirect Product Patent Protection in the EC Directive

The question is then to interpret the provisions in the Directive relevant for the
scope of protection of process patents on methods for breeding farm animals.
According to the principles of EC law, all member states must apply the level of
protection that the EC Biotech Directive provides. Article 8(2) of the EC Biotech
Directive states:

The protection conferred by a patent on a process that enables a
biological material to be produced possessing speciﬁc characteristics as
a result of the invention shall: extend to biological material directly
obtained through that process and to, any other biological material
derived from the directly obtained biological material
through
propagation or multiplication in an identical or divergent form and
possessing those same characteristics (emphasis added).

Thus, in addition to the process itself, the scope of protection also extends to
material ‘‘directly obtained’’ by the process. According to the ﬁrst alternative in the
wording, the protection is practically identical to that of the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 8(2) establishes the scope of protection for the ﬁrst generation of an applied
breeding method. Article 8(2) states that the scope of protection includes ‘‘any other
biological material’’ obtained through multiplication of this material. This goes
further than the TRIPS Agreement, article 64(2) of the EPC and its national
equivalents, as the protection conferred upon a claim to a process for the produc-
tion of a biological material extends beyond the biological material obtained
directly through the claimed process, and also covers the biological material
‘‘derived from the directly obtained biological material which possesses the same
characteristics’’ (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 49). The EC Biotech Directive thus offers
more extensive protection for process patents.

According to article 8(2), protection extends to any material ‘‘derived’’ from the
biological material. First of all, this seems to imply that it is not only the product of
the process that is protected. For processes in farm animal breeding, the product
would be an animal, as would any material derived from the process. The term
‘‘any’’ thus seems to indicate that the semen and embryos of the animals produced
according to the patented method are also covered by the exclusive right.

It is, however, required that the material has been ‘‘derived from the directly
in a contextual

obtained biological material’’. As noted by Kamstra et al.,

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

211

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

interpretation, ‘‘the term ‘‘derived’’ is given a broad meaning through the use of the
words ‘‘through propagation or multiplication in an identical or divergent form’’’’
(Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 49). Legal certainty seems possible in relation to what is
meant by ‘‘identical form’’, but the directive provides no guidance as to what is
meant by ‘‘divergent form’’. According to one standard dictionary deﬁnition, things
that are ‘‘divergent’’ are ‘‘very different, or opposing, in attitudes or characteristics’’
(Compact Oxford English Dictionary, 2005). For processes in farm animal breeding,
this might appear to be a rational solution as it would allow for natural genetic
variation and still remain under the scope of the patent. On the other hand,
‘‘divergent’’ could imply a protection that would cover almost any animals that had
some connection to the applied process, and holding the core characteristics from
that process, even though the animal beyond those characteristics are fairly
different. This would indicate a very broad scope of protection. It is not certain
whether a court will apply such a broad interpretation of the term in an infringe-
ment case regarding a breeding method patent and future generations. Kamstra et
al. have also noted some possible difﬁculties that the courts will have to address
based on the regulations in article 8 (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 49).3 They conclude
that these questions are unfortunately not answered in the implementing texts so far
seen in the member states. Consequently, the courts of the member states will have
to rely mostly on the wording of the directive in establishing the scope of protection
in infringement cases.

According to the report from the Commission to the Council and the European
Parliament (COM [2005] 312 ﬁnal) the wording of article 8 might be seen as arguing
for a broad scope of protection rather than a restricted one.4 The courts will have to
determine speciﬁcally, for each infringement proceeding, how to apply the term
‘‘divergent’’. Because there is no case-law directly relevant for the assessment, it is
the interpretation of article 8(2) that will, for the most part, be decisive. Both the
choice of terms and the report from the commission (COM [2005] 312 ﬁnal) indicate
a far-reaching scope of protection.

A related question emerges: for how many generations/multiplications the
patent confers exclusive rights to the patent-holder? The wording of article 8(2)
does not specify a number of generations for which the exclusive right will
continue. Clearly, after the expiry date of the patent (normally 20 years) the
patent-holder will not have any exclusive rights to the process nor the products
obtained. The question remains as to how many propagations or multiplications
the exclusiveness covers—and here the exclusiveness seems to extend to all future
multiplications within the period, as long as they possess the characteristics of the
biological material produced by the patented process, whether in identical or
divergent form.

Article 8(2) speciﬁes that the protection offered shall extend to biological
material directly obtained through that process. This refers only to the ﬁrst
generation. For subsequent progeny and material, the speciﬁcation is not repeated,
although it is required that the biological material be derived from the obtained

212

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

material ‘‘through propagation or multiplication’’—which are broader terms. The
words ‘‘propagation or multiplication’’ indicate that subsequent generations are
protected regardless of whether that particular process was applied. The practical
consequences of this are difﬁcult to foresee.

Article 8(2) imposes another qualifying term—‘‘same characteristics’’—which
raises the question of how substantial the differences can be between animals for
them still to be covered by the scope of the patent. If the ‘‘products’’ (the offspring
of using the patented method) are introduced to a herd and then crossbred with
other individuals not possessing the same characteristics with a different breeding
method, the question arises whether the process patent applies to these individuals.
Considering that the patent could cover material in a divergent form, the answers to
these questions seem to depend on how the courts will interpret the term ‘‘posses-
sing those same characteristics’’, and the speciﬁc differences and similarities of the
said animals. The courts will have to determine what the speciﬁc characteristics are
biologically, compare these with the alleged infringing products, and then determine
whether this animal has ‘‘lost’’ its identity5 or still possesses the speciﬁc qualities.
When a breeding process is applied to improve, e.g. certain health traits, the
offspring of this process possessing those improved characteristics would appear to
be under the exclusive right of the patent-holder. If the offspring is crossbred with
an animal not under the indirect product protection but still possessing similar
desirable health traits, the question then becomes how can it be determined whether
those speciﬁc characteristics originate from the patent-protected animal(s). The fact
that natural genetic variation occurs adds difﬁculties to this assessment, from a
biological and legal point of view.

A Closer Look at the Rational for Extending the Scope of Protection

The rationale behind article 8(2) needs to be discussed to better understand the rule.
This rationale must be sought in the value of the patent for the patent-holder. When
the invention has the capability to ‘‘reinvent’’ itself through self-reproduction, third
parties could exploit the value of the invention by freely using the offspring, if the
scope of protection were too limited. The patentee would then not have an exclusive
right for a full 20-year period. This rational is speciﬁed in the Preamble of the EC
Biotech Directive, recital 46:

in view of the fact that the function of a patent is to reward the inventor
for his creative efforts by granting an exclusive but time-bound right
(. . .) the holder of the patent should be entitled to prohibit the use of
patented self-reproducing material in situations analogous to those where
it would be permitted to prohibit the use of the patented, non-self-
reproducing products (emphasis added).

The inventor should, according to the Preamble, be entitled to prohibit the
for

the patented self-reproducing material

to the same extent as

use of

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

213

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

non-self-reproducing products. The objective of this extension of the right is to
establish a scope of analogous protection for living and for non-living inventions
alike. This implies that the protection conferred through the provisions of the
directive should not be more extensive than for other inventions. This, however,
presupposes that the scope of protection for other inventions is of a measurable
standard, and that this standard is comparable to the extent of protection for
biological patents. For non-biotechnical material, protection extends to the product
obtained by that process. Protection in situations analogous to the protection
regarding non-self-reproducing products would directly cover only the ﬁrst ‘‘gen-
eration’’. It is, however, hard to imagine a non-biological product that is self-
reproducing. Thus, the possibilities of circumventing the patent by utilizing the
product obtained seem greater for living material, because the invention itself can
be employed for duplication and in further breeding.

This argument was upheld by the European Court of Justice in the opinion of
Advocate General Jacobs in the Annulment case C-377/98, Kingdom of the
Netherlands v European Parliament and Council of the European Union [2001]
ECR I-07079. In section 122, the court stated that article 8(2) ‘‘adapts a well-
known principle of traditional patent law to the exigencies of biotechnological
inventions’’. The rationale for this conferred right is given in section 121, where the
court stated: ‘‘in the case of patented material capable of reproducing itself, the
value of the patent would clearly be eroded if it did not extend to future generations
of such material’’. And in section 123, the court emphasized that, if the material
obtained through a process ‘‘could be freely propagated by a purchaser, the value of
a process patent would be nulliﬁed’’.

Analogous protection with non-self-reproducing products does not seem easy
to achieve: either the protection is limited to the ﬁrst-generation product (which
provides the possibility of reproducing the invention in future generations) or the
protection is to some degree extended to derivatives of the ﬁrst product (thus
limiting the use of the product beyond what an analogous protection would grant to
non-biological inventions). It thus appears difﬁcult to seek justiﬁcation for this rule
in the regular justiﬁcation of the patent law system.

The Preamble, in recital 3, emphasizes the great importance for the economic
development of the European Community of making conditions favourable for
development in this sector. The economic incentive expected to be created through
the patent system was considered to be of high importance to the European
Community (Preamble, recital 2), necessitating regulations to ensure that such an
incentive would emerge. Economic evidence is, however, hard to come by, and it is
difﬁcult to assess empirically to what degree the potential scope of protection in
either direction would inﬂuence innovation and breeding. A broad scope of patent
protection has the potential to redistribute economic gains, but it is not clear exactly
how this will affect investments in breeding.

The patent system is based on a balance between protection of the inventor’s
commercial interest and the interest of the public freely to exploit technological

214

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

advances (see e.g. Westerlund, 2001, p. 77). This also applies to breeding methods
for farm animals. The paramount objective is to create technical innovation without
unreasonably restricting the use of the invention by others. In the case of
biotechnological inventions involving animal genetic resources, the users might be
industrial-level breeders, and also farmers of varying scales and production
capacities. If the level of the protection applied through the provisions of the EC
Biotech Directive favours the patent-holder to a greater extent, by overly restricting
the use of future generations, the balance might be altered.

Much of the value of process patents on farm animal-breeding methods lies in
the exploitation of future-improved generations. To uphold the balance between
these conﬂicting interests may prove difﬁcult, especially when the protected animals
are part of farmers’ herds, constantly evolving through continuous breeding. How
this balance is reﬂected in the scope of protection is not easy to concretize at the
general and abstract level.

The question of adequate scope of protection could be formulated in terms of
whether it is more valuable to society to allow the patent-holder a broad scope of
protection so that others who build upon this invention must seek a licence, or
whether such patents should be limited in scope so as to allow future uses of this
biological material.6 The Preamble underscores the fundamental importance of
encouraging investments through adequate legal protection for the purpose of
industrial development (Preamble, recital 1–3). The question, however, remains
as to what degree this ‘‘adequate legal protection’’ (as provided through the EC
Biotech Directive) to make investments in the ﬁeld of biotechnology proﬁtable will
restrict the use of animals and subsequent generations.

The commercial value of the result of the process derives from the natural
characteristics of the original organism, and, it can be argued, has less to do with the
invention as such. The invention might involve improving species that have been
developed through crossbreeding and natural selection for hundreds of years. The
patented invention could thus be seen more as merely the latest step in a continuous,
long-established process. The argument of adequate reward might therefore have
less relevance for process patents to breeding methods in farm animal breeding than
for the development of something truly new, like a genetically modiﬁed plant.

The literal interpretation of article 8(2) leaves uncertainty as to the scope of
protection for process patents in farm animal breeding, and there is as yet no
case-law on this issue. If a case is brought before the courts, where these
interpretational questions are raised, the court will probably be very concrete
in determining what
is the adequate protection for the patented breeding
method. The wording of the directive indicates clearly that future generation will
be covered by the scope of the protection, and from the Annulment case, the
European Court of Justice seems to agree that protection of future generations is
necessary to make biotechnological process patents effective, also when the next
generations appear in a divergent form than the ﬁrst generation after the applica-
tion of the patented method. A certain amount of legal uncertainty might have a

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

215

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

chilling effect on investments in breeding, as commercial actors might consider the
potential costs of a lawsuit too high.

A Practical View on the Acts Covered

In this section, the focus shifts to a discussion of which practical activities the
patent-holder can refuse to permit others to perform regarding this process or
products produced by that process. Having examined the scope of the protection
conferred by a patent, it is important to develop our understanding of the activities
that would constitute an infringement.

The TRIPS Agreement lists the various elements that form the right to exclude
others from exploiting the invention (de Carvalho, 2005, p. 247). Article 28.1 (b)
speciﬁes the acts that are subject to the control of the patent-holder regarding a
process patent to be: ‘‘act of using the process’’ and the ‘‘using, offering for sale,
selling or importing’’ at least the products of the process. In other words, article
28.1 (b) holds that a person is infringing a process patent if he uses the patented
process. Furthermore, infringement can occur if a person uses, sells, offers to sell or
imports any product derived from that process. The EC Biotech Directive does not,
as noted, specify which acts are subject to the control of the patent-holder, thus
making this a matter for combining what was said above, subject to how article 28
of the TRIPS Agreement is implemented.

‘‘Act of using the process’’ implies that the patent-holder can prevent third
parties from performing the method described in the claims. If the use falls within
the direct deﬁnition of the patent claims, an identical use has occurred. Assessment
of whether the alleged infringing process implies an identical use of the patented
process is a matter of interpretation of the patent claims and comparing these with
the said activity. If the use does not fall within the direct meaning of the claims, then
one must assess whether it is sufﬁciently similar as to constitute an infringement
(Westerlund, 2001, chapter 5). This is often referred to as ‘‘the doctrine of
equivalence’’. This implies that, if the alleged infringing process cannot be said to
derive directly from the patent claims, such utilization might still be considered as
an equivalent use of the patented process. The doctrine of equivalence thus expands
the patent protection beyond what the patent-holder originally described as his
invention in the patent claims. If the similarity is sufﬁciently qualiﬁed, despite the
replacement or exclusion of one or more elements, an equivalent use can be said to
have occurred, with the legal consequence being that the exclusive right applies
equally. As the courts of different countries apply non-uniform doctrines of
equivalence, these considerations will necessarily vary from country to country,
also within Europe. (There is no international harmonization of the doctrine of
equivalence, although an attempt was made to reach a consensus on this in the draft
Substantive Patent Law Treaty, article 11; see Tvedt, 2005, pp. 337–9.)

One related question is whether the act of crossing with other animals or using
other methods represents an ‘‘equivalent’’ use of the process. This seems to depend

216

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

on how the patented process claims are formulated and how the doctrine of
equivalence is applied to these acts of use. The use of a different animal in the
same breeding process seems to be an equivalent use, at least if the resultant
offspring possesses the same characteristics as the animal obtained by the ﬁrst
employment of the patented process. Whether the use of the animals by means of
other breeding methods should be deemed equivalent would seem to depend on how
different the other method is. Additionally, the question remains as to whether such
other propagation or multiplication could be considered equivalent use of the
product obtained. The existing sources of law do not concretize the speciﬁc details
of these issues. It is therefore likely that the general principles of equivalence will be
applied. The courts must assess whether the alleged infringing process includes only
insigniﬁcant modiﬁcations, whether the alterations were obvious to a person skilled
in the art and ﬁnally, whether the alternative process provides for a certain degree of
technical progress. These general principles might imply difﬁcult assessments
considering the nature of the patented subject matter—e.g. their capability to
reproduce.

Given the territoriality of patent rights, as a general principle, process patents
can be invoked to prevent third parties from using the patented process only in a
country where the patent has been granted. Nor can the patent-holder prevent the
making and sale of breeding material if the patented process was applied in a
different country (Correa, 2007, p. 298). The TRIPS Agreement does confer
‘‘indirect product protection’’, extending the protection process patents to include
products that are produced by application of the patented process, whether the
process was executed in the country that granted the patent or elsewhere. Extension
to at least the products obtained directly by the patented process imported to the
country where the patent was granted thus confers a certain element of extra-
territorial effect to the use of the process in a foreign jurisdiction.

The patent-holder cannot, as a point of departure, prevent the making and sale
of the same product resulting from the patented process if it had been obtained
through a different process. Article 28.1 (b) does not cover cases where the product
is obtainable by the patented process, but where evidence of the use of the patented
process is not supplied. However, the courts may, at their discretion, require the
alleged infringer to provide evidence to show that no infringement hastaken place
(the penultimate section).

Special Defences in Case of Infringement of Biotechnological Process
Patents

Once the claimant has proved that the defendant has performed an activity that falls
within the scope of the patent monopoly, the obligation shifts to the defendant, who
must show that this activity is exempted from liability by one of the available
defences to patent infringement (Bently and Sherman, 2001, p. 505). These defences
could limit the scope of protection conferred to the patent-holder in certain speciﬁc

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

217

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

situations of ‘‘infringing use’’ of the patent. Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement
allows members to:

(. . .) provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a
patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conﬂict with
a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice
the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the
legitimate interest of third parties.

During the preliminary stages of preparing the EC Biotech Directive, one of the
concerns raised was that patent protection of biological inventions would have a
negative impact on farming practices (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 547). Here, the
legitimate interest of third parties was taken into account regarding normal
exploitation and the interests of the holder of such patents. As part of the regime
dealing with biotechnological inventions, new defences were therefore formulated
concerning the infringement of patent or exceptions to the exclusive right for
biotechnological inventions (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 509). Acts that fall
within the exemptions are not to constitute infringement, regardless of whether or
not such acts would be considered infringements under articles 8 or 9 of the EC
Biotech Directive (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 54).

Necessarily Result
Article 8(2) of the directive requires member states to extend the scope of protection
to dealings with materials derived from the patented process (‘‘Indirect Product
Patent Protection in the EC Directive’’). Kamstra et al., however, argue that the
doctrine of exhaustion could limit the effect of this extended scope of indirect
product patent protection. They emphasize that articles 10 and 11 of the EC
Directive speciﬁes limited circumstances in which the extension of scope of
protection provided in articles 8 and 9 will not apply (Kamstra et al., 2002, p.
53).7 According to article 10:

The protection referred to in Articles 8 and 9 shall not extend to
biological material obtained from the propagation or multiplication of
biological material placed on the market in the territory of a Member
State by the holder of the patent or with his consent, where the
multiplication or propagation necessarily results from the application
for which the biological material was marketed, provided that the
material obtained is not subsequently used for other propagation or
multiplication (emphasis added).

For the patent rights to be exhausted under article 10, it is therefore necessary
to establish that the multiplication or propagation that potentially infringes the
patent is an incidence of the ‘‘true purpose’’ of the sale (Bently and Sherman, 2001,
p. 510). With animal breeding, it might be asked to what extent a patented breeding
process sold or licensed in one member state could restrict the further utilization of

218

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

the animals derived from the process. The extent of use of the product derived could
be regulated in the contract between the patent-holder and the user. In such
situations, the exhaustion could thus be contractual; for other situations, article
10 of the directive specify limited circumstances in which the extension of scope of
protection provided for in article 8 is not to apply.

Here, the interpretation of the words ‘‘necessarily results’’ is important. As
noted above, for the patent to be exhausted under article 10, it must be established
that the multiplication or propagation that potentially infringes the patent relates to
the ‘‘true purpose’’ of the sale. An interpretation of the term ‘‘necessarily results’’
would imply that the material obtained is not used for other types of propagation or
multiplication. In the case of a breeding process, for example better meat quality,
the user of the patent could apply the breeding method to his herd in order to
improve the meat quality. The question is to what degree the result of the process
(future generations of animals) can be utilized in the breeding scheme. According to
article 10, the ‘‘product’’ could not be sold as a breeding animal, nor its semen sold
to other farmers, because that is not the true purpose of the sale and such
multiplication does not ‘‘necessarily result’’ from the application for which the
biological material was marketed (the true purpose being to apply the breeding
method to the herd in order to improve the meat quality). Sales for the true purpose
would be either using the bought material mating once at the farm or selling the
meat of the animal on the basis of its high meat quality, but not to use the offspring
in further breeding. Article 10 seems to imply that sales of the offspring as breeding
animals or for other breeding purposes would not ‘‘necessarily’’ result from the
application of the invention, if the purpose of applying the process was to improve
certain traits in the farmer’s herd. Article 10 would allow farmers to use the
patented process, and sell the improved meat, but it would not permit to sell the
animals derived from the process or their semen to other farmers, for the purpose of
propagating new animals. In other words, this defence allows farmers to apply a
patented process, breed the animals and sell the agricultural product, but not to sell
the animals or semen to other farmers so that they in turn could propagate new
animals (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 547). This leaves the application of article 10
very speciﬁc.

The General Doctrine of Exhaustion
Article 10 of the EC Biotech Directive can also be seen as one particular manner to
implement the ‘‘doctrine of exhaustion’’. The essence of the doctrine of exhaustion
is that the exclusive right of the patentee does not reach as far as to further use of
the products placed on the marketed by the patent-holder, domestically or inter-
nationally (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 13). Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement
emphasizes members’ freedom to regulate exhaustion of any intellectual property
rights despite the TRIPS Agreement (Correa, 2007, p. 78).8 The principle of
‘‘exhaustion of rights’’ may be applied at the national, regional or international
level. Under the doctrine of exhaustion, a patent-holder may not invoke the patent

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

219

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

to prevent the further use of a product that has been placed on the market in the
EU/EEA with the patentee’s consent (Bently and Sherman, 2004, p. 524). The
doctrine of exhaustion leaves some uncertainty regarding the use of produced
animals for multiplication through breeding.

Because much of the value of a patent in farm animal breeding lies in
the utilization of future generations of improved animals, the further use of the
produced products could imply different assessments than in the case of traditional
technical inventions. The doctrine of exhaustion does not give the purchaser a right
to produce new specimens of the patent product. Nor does the doctrine, as a general
principle, bestow the right to practice a patented process. This indicates that it is
somewhat difﬁcult to apply a general doctrine of exhaustion to the ﬁeld of animal
breeding.

The practical question arises when the patent-holder sells (or places in the
market) the animal that is the result of a patented process, and thus under indirect
product patent protection; to what extent is then the patent right exhausted? Often
the sales or licensing agreement of the patented process or the said animal thereof
will regulate the issue, no questions arise. The doctrine of exhaustion clearly does
not give the buyer the right to apply the patented process itself; the right to use to
in a breeding scheme other than the process could, however, be
the animal
exhausted in this situation. One difﬁcult question, however,
is whether the
speciﬁc rule in article 10 limits the application of the doctrine of exhaustion. It
is not entirely clear what
the relationship
between the general doctrine and this speciﬁc rule. It is therefore an open question
whether there still is room for a doctrine of exhaustion where the special criteria
in article 10 are not fulﬁlled, which goes further in opening the right to use offspring
in breeding.9

the lawmaker has meant about

Farmers’ Privilege
To what extent the product derived from the process (offspring) may be used for
further breeding within the farmers herd is subject to the regulations of article 11,
the ‘‘Farmers’ Privilege’’. This ‘‘farmers’ privilege’’ provides a limited exception to
the exclusive rights conferred by a patent by allowing the individual farmer a certain
use of the protected subject matter that would not normally be possible without
infringing the protected process. Article 11(2) states that by:

[w]ay of derogation from Articles 8 and 9, the sale or any other form of
commercialisation of breeding stock or other animal reproductive
material to a farmer by the holder of the patent or with his consent
implies authorisation for the farmer to use the protected livestock for an
agricultural purpose. This includes making the animal or other animal
reproductive material available for the purposes of pursuing his
agricultural activity but not sale within the framework or for the
purpose of a commercial reproduction activity (emphasis added).

220

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

In essence, the exemption grants the farmer the right to use the propagating
material for agricultural purposes but not to market it for breeding (commercial
reproduction activity). As noted by Bently and Sherman:

In the debates surrounding the Biotechnological Directive, one of the
fears raised was that patent production over biological inventions would
have a negative impact on traditional farm practices. (. . .) In particular,
it was feared that farmers would not be allowed to use the seeds that they
harvested from their crops to re-sow crops, nor would they be permitted
to breed patented animals (Bently and Sherman, 2001, p. 510).

The problem would appear to be that, in relation to a patent, the breeding

processes carried out on farms might represent an infringement.

Article 11 makes an exemption from the protection conferred in article 8, which
implies that the exclusive right does not extend to plant-propagating material or
breeding stock sold to a farmer by the patent-holder or with his consent, provided that
the farmer uses the biological material or livestock for his own agricultural purposes.
This is intended, inter alia, to prevent an increase in costs in agriculture because of
inventions related to farm animals. The ‘‘farmers’ privilege’’ of article 11 makes an
exemption from the exclusive right when the farmer uses the patented biological
material for breeding livestock for his own agricultural use on the farm, but is limited
regarding sales within the framework of or for the purpose of commercial reproduc-
tion activity. The basis for this exemption seems to lie in the need to provide
consistency and certainty for farmers, who should not face claims from patent-holders
because (perhaps unknown to the former) these have product or process claims
(Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 54). The extent and the condition of the derogation provided
in article 11(2) shall, however, be determined by national laws, regulations and
practises. This in turn means that the consistency and certainty for farmers will
depend on how the exemption is implemented and practiced at the national level.

The extent of this exemption seems to rely on a deﬁnition of the expression
‘‘pursuing his agricultural activity’’. To draw the line between commercial breeding
activity and the purposes of pursuing agricultural activity could be difﬁcult if the
owner of the livestock engages in both types of activities. For example, the question
can be whether a one-off sale of the progeny of an applied breeding method is a
‘‘sale within the framework of or for the purpose of a commercial reproduction
activity’’ (Kamstra et al., 2002, p. 55)? Or does the term imply a more qualiﬁed
activity than one-off sales—say, a breeding business? There are also differences
among animal species that could make this assessment difﬁcult and probably call
for differentiation among species. With some animal species, breeding of hybrids
and raising and keeping livestock are separate activities, while for others the two
intertwine (Tvedt, 2007b). The level of commercialization could also differ, from
sector to sector, from farmer to farmer and from country to country. Further
analytical work is needed to understand and suggest ways of implementing farmers’
privilege in the farm animal sector. It is also interesting to note that developing

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

221

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

countries have not been very active in developing exemptions in the scope of the
patent protection.

Reversal of the Burden of Proof

Generally, the burden of proof is bestowed by law upon those who make an
allegation. Concerning patents for processes, however, it has been argued that it
could be difﬁcult for patent-holders to establish evidence of infringement, and
consequently easy for infringers to conceal or disguise their wrongdoing (de
Carvalho, 2005, p. 383). Because the TRIPS Agreement is a standard agreement
for the protection of intellectual property, and one that includes patents in all ﬁelds
of technology, here, we must ask to what degree these difﬁculties also apply to
process patents for the production of farm animal genetic material. Article 34 of the
TRIPS Agreement obliges the member states to establish in their national laws that
courts shall have the power to reverse the burden of proof (de Carvalho, 2005, p.
383). However, the courts are not obliged to do so: reversal of the burden of proof is
in principle a matter of their discretion, dependent on the circumstances of each
case. Reversing the burden of proof imposes on the alleged infringer the obli-
gation to provide negative proof. The alleged infringer must provide evidence that
he did not use the patented process—which may be sometimes an impossible task
(de Carvalho, 2005, p. 384). To further deﬁne the question raised above, does
the
regarding farm animal genetic
resources warrant a different use of these discretionary powers than for other
inventions?

character of process patents

special

In other ﬁelds of technology, the rationale for the rule of the burden of proof is
perhaps easier to justify. A main difference between biotechnological inventions
regarding processes for producing farm animal genetic resources and other techni-
cal inventions is that the product, or result, is often not ‘‘produced’’ or manufac-
tured in the traditional sense of the word. At present, farmers have the right to make
use of their animals for further breeding. This may occur without the use of
technical equipment and human intervention, as animals can, and do, mate
naturally. For other technical inventions, this is unthinkable. Today the use of
artiﬁcial insemination has become widespread in commercial farming, but this does
not mean it has become impossible to produce the ‘‘matter’’ without recourse to
patented processes. Thus, the question is whether it is at all possible for a breeder or
a farmer to produce evidence of not having applied the patented method in
question. This seems to involve assessments of a biological character, where it must
be determined whether an animal has been produced by the patented breeding
method or whether the animal could have been the result of natural occurrences or
other breeding methods than the patented one. The reversal of the burden of proof
could seem more justiﬁable for technical inventions, as the technical details of the
invention could make it possible to provide evidence of the use of alternative
production methods.

222

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

The discretion conferred upon the national judicial authorities is not absolute.
If at least one of the circumstances described in subparagraphs (a) and (b) occurs,
judges shall apply presumption of infringement, and have no discretionary auth-
ority to reverse the burden of proof (de Carvalho, 2005, p. 385). On the other hand,
it is up to the law to deﬁne which of the circumstances is to be seen as triggering the
presumption. Some WTO members have in fact preferred to establish the presump-
tion in both cases, thereby going further than they were obliged to do. Any identical
product produced without the consent of the patent-owner shall, therefore, in the
absence of proof to the contrary, be deemed to have been obtained by the patented
process. However, this presupposes at least one of the following:

(a) (. . .) the product obtained by the patented process is new;

(b) (. . .) there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product was
made by the process and the owner of the patent has been unable through
reasonable efforts to determine the process actually used10 (emphasis
added).

It must be fairly evident that the product could have been made by the same
process, and the patent-holder must have attempted to prove this. The implications
of article 34 are not easy to foresee for process patents in biotechnology regarding
animal genetic resources. The fact that the products themselves are capable of self-
reproduction might complicate efforts to determine whether the process in question
was used. This might suggest an interpretation that accords some leeway as to the
efforts required of the owner of the patent ‘‘through reasonable efforts’’. However, if
the burden of proof is reversed, it is not obvious that it would be possible to produce
evidence that the product was made by another process. A method for selecting and
breeding for certain desired traits, by identifying these traits in the animals and
combining them with the appropriate genes in other animals, might be repeated by a
different process, or indeed by natural mating. The effect of the reversal of burden of
proof would then seem to rely on how the term ‘‘reasonable efforts’’ is applied by the
courts. Correa emphasizes that the requirement of ‘‘reasonable efforts’’ on the part
of the patent-holder, if appropriately applied, may help to limit possible abuses of
patent holders in demanding the reversal of burden of proof and avoid ‘‘strategic
litigation aimed at blocking legitimate competition’’ (Correa, 2007, p. 346). As to
process patents regarding farm animal production, it has been claimed that genetic
companies in livestock breeding use patent policy to dominate gene markets (Gura,
2007, p. 6). The appropriate application of ‘‘reasonable efforts’’ could at least ensure
that patent-holders are not granted rights to offspring that have been produced by
means of other processes or methods.

According to Spranger (2002), the farmers’ rights exemption is also problematic
in relation to the TRIPS Agreement (Spranger, 2002, p. 246), as article 34 imposes a
reversal of the burden of proof, to the detriment of the farmer. As argued by
Spranger, it is up to the farmer to prove that he did not violate the rights of the

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

223

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

patent-holder—and, taking into account the possibility of self-sowing (or here,
self-breeding), the difﬁculty in proving innocence is obvious. If Spranger’s inter-
pretation of TRIPS Agreement article 34 is accurate, the ‘‘burden’’ of providing
evidence that the ‘‘making of the animal or other animal reproductive material’’ was
done for the ‘‘purpose of pursuing his agricultural activity’’ lies with the alleged
infringing farmer.

Conclusions

Patent protection of process for farm animal production leads to several inter-
pretational questions regarding the scope of protection and the use of ensuing
generations of the applied process. The TRIPS Agreement imposes a basis for
harmonization of patent law by providing minimum standards for protection of
inventions in all ﬁelds of technology. Being technology-neutral, the rules of the
TRIPS Agreement could apply differently when used in areas that diverge from
traditional technologies. For the protection of biotechnological inventions in the
EU/EEA, these differences have been taken into consideration and exclusive rights
to patents in this area further speciﬁed through the provisions of the 1998 EC
Directive on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions—the ‘‘EC Biotech
Directive’’, thereby establishing more detailed rules without solving every inter-
pretational problem.

The wide range of stakeholders and their differing afﬁliations to animal genetic
resources may imply particular challenges when it comes to imposing intellectual
property rights on the resources. The ability to make use of and adjust to patent law
could vary for different stakeholders. Although patent-holders and third parties
may have somewhat contradictory interests, predictability is especially important
when the product obtained by the patented process is a living entity capable of self-
reproduction. From the patent-holder’s perspective, predictability can be important
because of the biological characteristics of the products obtained, as these char-
acteristics imply that the animals may keep on evolving. Because animals may be
subject to constant improvement and crossing, it is vital to know the scope of
protection for determining how far the exclusive right extends regarding such
evolved animals. For commercial breeders and farmers, predictability in legislation
could determine the range of their breeding activities, as patents might end up
restricting the use of offspring for further propagation or sale for breeding
purposes.

From a literal interpretation perspective and the discussion above, it could be
asked whether applying general patent protection through the provisions of the
TRIPS Agreement, speciﬁed in the EC Biotech Directive, goes beyond the level of
protection in other ﬁelds of technology. According to the preamble of the EC
Biotech Directive (recital 46), which especially addresses such issues, the protection
is to be ‘‘analogous’’. However, based on the above interpretation, it seems that the
scope of protection regarding the progeny resulting from an applied process is quite

224

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

wide-ranging. The interpretation could thus imply an extension of the scope of
protection by granting the patent-holder rights to almost anything derived from the
propagation or multiplication. Whether this would be the result of a court case
regarding infringement proceedings is yet to be seen. However, it would not seem to
correspond fully with the general incentives underlying patent law.

A central concern in upholding the legitimacy of the patent system is
the balance between inventors and third parties for the purpose of promoting
technological development for the beneﬁt of society (Westerlund, 2001, p. 77). If
applying general patent protection to biotechnological processes in farm animal
breeding de facto extends the protection further than for other technical processes,
and this extension was an unintended consequence, it could then be held that the
relevant provisions could, to counteract this, be interpreted more narrowly when
applied to biotechnological inventions for the production of animals. This could be
argued in light of the rationale of the patent system, as the converse could reward
the inventor to a greater extent than justiﬁed by the system. In establishing the scope
of protection for biotechnological processes, legislators should have ensured, and
the courts should ensure in the future, that the scope of the patent rights granted is
proportionate to the invention, but such scope should also be ‘‘analogous’’ with the
scope of patent rights provided in other areas of technology. Such assessment might
prove difﬁcult also because of considerable variations within species and the way in
which they are utilized.

In farm animal breeding, the animals that are subject to improvement through
a patented process will normally be owned by breeders or farmers who apply the
patented breeding method on their stock. The difﬁcult question is to what extent the
patent-holder gains rights to the animals that are obtained through the process.
Based on the interpretation of the TRIPS Agreement and the EC Biotech Directive
provided here, one could ask whether patented processes in farm animal breeding
interfere with the farmers’ and breeders’ property. The animals of a breeder’s herd
are part of his property, and in the debates surrounding the directive, one of the
fears raised was that patent protection over biological inventions would have a
negative impact on traditional farm practices (Bently and Sherman, 2001, p. 510).
The Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee has held that granting exclusive
rights that extend not only to the particular organism embodying the invention but
also to all subsequent progeny of that organism could represent an increase in the
scope of rights granted to patent-holders and furthermore, that this represents a
greater transfer of economic interests from the agricultural community to the
biotechnology industry than exists in other ﬁelds of science (Canadian Biotechnol-
ogy Advisory Committee, 2002, p. 12). If, due to the intellectual property rights, the
‘‘acts of use’’ the farmers or breeders are entitled to perform are restricted to a
greater extent than the property rights would indicate, it could thus be argued that
the EC Biotech Directive implies a shift in the balance between intellectual property
and traditional property. Such a shift might be inconsistent with the basic principles
that justify the patent system. Whether this will be the factual consequence remains

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

225

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

to be seen because not many process patents have been granted and none have been
subject to a court case.

It could be argued that the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement and the EC
Biotech Directive should be given an interpretation that both secures the patent-
holder’s right to be rewarded for the invention, and upholds the property rights of
farmers and their possibility to utilize the resources belonging to them. On the other
hand, adequate patent protection is perhaps not possible without including (at least
to a certain extent) the use of future generations produced from the patented process.
Moreover, given the strong ﬁnancial incentives (EC Biotech Directive, Preamble, recital
1–2) and the desire to conquer this frontier technology (EC Biotech Directive,
Preamble, recital 3), a certain reduction in farmers’ property rights may prove to be
a politically acceptable consequence according to the current view of the EU. Members
of the WTO have broader discretion when it comes to determining the scope of patent
protection, exhaustion of the right and exemptions from the patent right. The need for
adapting patent law to farm animal breeding is being recognized only now.

The legal situation regarding these questions has not been fully determined by
implementation of the EC Biotech Directive or through court interpretation of its
provisions. It remains to be seen whether the large number of patent applications
currently pending in this area of technology will be granted, as well as how the
courts of different jurisdictions will interpret the patents and determine the scope of
protection. This is an issue that may well affect large numbers of participants in the
global market of farm animal food production.

About the Authors

Morten Walløe Tvedt, cand. jur. Senior Research Fellow at the Fridtjof Nansen
Institute, Oslo, Fridtjof Nansens Vei 17, Postboks 1326, 1326 Lysaker, Norway;
e-mail: mwt@fni.no

His latest international book is Beyond Access – Exploring Implementation of
the Fair and Equitable Sharing Commitment in the CBD (co-authored with Tomme
R. Young), available at hhttp://www.fni.noi. See also the recent articles: (2008)
‘Norway: The Disclosure Obligation Fair and Equitable Beneﬁt Sharing’, Journal of
Environmental Policy and Law, 38(1–2), 100–7; and (2007) ‘The Path to One
Universal Patent’, Journal of Environmental Policy and Law, 37(4), 297–305.

Magnus Finckenhagen, Research Assistant Master of law, Fridtjof Nansen Institute,
now Associate Lawyer, Wikborg, Rein & Co.; e-mail: mﬁ@wr.no

Notes

The research presented in this article was ﬁnanced by the Nordic Gene Bank for Animals.
The authors wish to thank previous director Erling Fimland of the Nordic Gene Bank for
Animals for his helpful collaboration over the years and for comments on this article. The
authors also wish to thank Nina Sæther at the Norwegian Gen Resource Centre for good

226

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

help in developing understanding of farm animal breeding. The ﬁrst author is indebted to
Irene Hoffman of the UN Agency for Food and Agriculture (FAO), Sipke J. Hiemstra of the
Genetic Resources Centre and Adam Drucker of the International Livestock Research
Institute (ILRI) and the School for Environmental Research, Charles Darwin University,
Australia, for close cooperation in the ﬁeld of AnGR in the last few years, particularly in the
assignment from FAO regarding global analyses of the policy and regulatory options for the
animal sector (see Hiemstra et al., 2006; Tvedt et al., 2007). The authors are also grateful to
Senior Research Fellow Kristin Rosendal and director Peter Johan Schei of the Fridtjof
Nansen Institute for useful comments on the manuscript. The views presented in this article
do not reﬂect those of the persons who have commented on the manuscript or of the Nordic
Gene Bank for Animals.

1 EC Directive on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions 98/44/EC of 6 July
1998; 98/44/EC of 6 July 1998. Hereinafter referred to as the Biotech Directive or the
Directive.

2 The test derived from the relevant German authorities in interpretation of German

patent law. As the relevant Dutch, Swiss, Danish and Austrian authorities have also
adopted the ‘‘loss of identity test’’, it can be taken to represent the test adopted by
European law; see Paterson (2001, p. 588).

3 The questions are raised in regard to article 8(1), but the authors state that the concerns
raised in relation to the scope of the term ‘‘divergent form’’ in article 8(1) apply equally
to article 8.2.

4 Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, COM (2005)
312: 3–4. The report was requested in accordance with article 16b of the Directive, which
requires the Commission to produce reports regarding the implications of
implementation of the Directive.

5 Cf. the ‘‘loss of identity test’’.
6 Supra, n. 4
7 Article 9 applies to protection conferred on a patent on a product and will therefore not

be discussed here.

8 TRIPS, article 6: ‘‘For the purposes of dispute settlement under this Agreement, subject
to the provisions of articles 3 and 4, nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address
the issue of exhaustion of intellectual property rights’’.

9 It would not be in conﬂict with the TRIPS Agreement, article 6 to let article 10 of the

Directive be supplemented with the general doctrine.

10 TRIPS Agreement, article 34.

References

Bently, L. and Sherman, B. (2001) Intellectual Property Law. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Bently, L. and Sherman, B. (2004) Intellectual Property Law, 2nd edition. Oxford University

Press, Oxford.

Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee (2002) Annual Report. CBAC, Ottawa.
Correa, C. M. (2007) Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: A Commentary on

the TRIPS Agreement. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3

227

Morten Walløe Tvedt and Magnus Finckenhagen

Process Patents in Animal Breeding

de Carvalho, N. P. (2005) The TRIPS Regime of Patent Rights, 2nd edition. Kluwer Law

International, The Hague.

Fitzgerald, B. T. (2005) Monsanto Files Patent for New Invention: The Pig. Greenpeace,

Geneva.

Gura, S. (2007) ‘Livestock Genetics Companies. Concentration and Proprietary Strategies of

an Emerging Power in the Global Food Economy’. League for Pastoral Peoples and
Endogenous Livestock Development, Ober-Ramstadt.

Hiemstra, S. J., Drucker, A. G., Tvedt, M. W., Louwaars, N., Oldenbroek, J. K., Awgichew,
K., Abegaz Kebede, S., Bhat, P. N. and da Silva Mariante, A. (2006) Exchange, Use and
Conservation of Animal Genetic Resources: Identiﬁcation of Policy and Regulatory
Options, CGN Report June. Centre for Genetic Resources, Wageningen (NL).

Kamstra, G., D ¨oring, M., Scott-Ram, N., Sheard, A. and Wixon, H. (2002) Patents on

Biotechnological Inventions: The E.C. Directive. Sweet & Maxwell, London.

Kolker, P. L. (2000) TRIPs Agreement: Patent Protection. Agreement on Trade-Related

Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European
Communities, Luxembourg.

Paterson, G. (2001) The European Patent System: The Law and Practice of the European

Patent Convention. Sweet & Maxwell, London.

Rischkowsky, B. and Pilling, D. (eds) (2007) The State of the World’s Animal Genetic

Resources for Food and Agriculture. FAO, Rome.

Rothschild, M. F., Plastow, G. and Newman, S. (2004) ‘Patenting in Animal Breeding and
Genetics’, in A. Rosati (ed.), WAAP Book of the Year 2003. Wageningen Pers, for World
Association for Animal Production (WAAP), Wallingford.

Soanes, C. and Hawker, S. (eds) (2005) Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current

English. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Spranger, T. M. (2002) ‘Europe’s Biotech Patent Landscape: Conditions and Recent

Developments’, Minnesota Intellectual Property Review, 3(2), 235–49.

Tvedt, M. W. (2005) ‘How Will a Substantive Patent Law Treaty Affect the Public Domain
for Genetic Resources and Biological Material?’, Journal of World Intellectual Property,
8(1), 311–44.

Tvedt, M. W. (2007a) ‘The Path to One Universal Patent’, Journal of Environmental Policy

and Law, 37(4), 297–305.

Tvedt, M. W. (2007b) ‘Patent Protection in the Field of Animal Breeding’, Acta Agriculturae

Scand Section A, 57, 105–20.

Tvedt, M. W., Hiemstra, S. J., Drucker, A. G., Louwaars, N. and Oldenbroek, K. (2007)

Legal Aspects of Exchange, Use and Conservation of Farm Animal Genetic Resources, NI
Report January. Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Oslo.

Westerlund, L. (2001) Biotech Patents—Equivalency and Exclusions under European and U.S.

Patent Law, Faculty of Law. Stockholm University, Stockholm.

228

r 2008 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 3


