The AIDS Crisis, Differential Pricing of Drugs, and 

the TRIPS Agreement 

Two Proposals 

Arvind SUBRAMANIAN* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

In response to a spate of articles in the popular press criticizing the Agreement on 
Trade-Related  Aspects  of Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS) for  impeding Afiica’s 
access  to  essential  drugs, the  Director-General  of  the  World  Trade  Organization 
defended the Agreement. Mr Moore’s defence rested in large part on arguing that TRIPS 
allows for differential pricing, which in his view would allow poor countries to secure 
reasonable access to drugs. Thus, no changes in TRIPS are considered necessary to cope 
with the current AIDS crisis in Afiica. 

But differential pricing is a catch-all term encompassing many different situations. 
This article elaborates on differential pricing and explains how it should be applied to 
two  sets  of countries: the poorest countries in  Ati-ica, currently ravaged  by  the AIDS 
crisis; and middle-income  countries that are also vulnerable to public health crises like 
AIDS but  are  arguably  in  a  different  situation  from  the  poorest  countries.  The 
conclusions are twofold 

(i)  achieving  meaningfid  differential pricing,  namely  pricing  that  will  afford 
reasonable access to essential  drugs in the context of the current AIDS crisis, 
will require changes in the TRIPS Agreement; 

(ii)  achieving  fair  differential pricing  in  the  case  of  middle-income  countries 
requires  elaboration  of  the  notion  of  “reasonable  compensation”  when 
compulsory licences are issued by these countries. 

11.  DIFFERENTIAL PRICING 

In  the  context  of  the  international pharmaceutical  market,  differential pricing 
simply refers to a situation whereby different prices prevail in different markets for the 
same  drug.  Suppose there  are  two  markets-rich 

country  and  poor  country-with 

* The author is with the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. 
The views expressed here are those of the author and do not represent those of the International Monetary 
Fund or its Executive Board. He would like to thank Aaditya Mattoo, Je6ey Sachs and Cmten Fink for useful 
discussions. 

324 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

strong patent protection  in  the  rich market. Differential pricing can  then  arise  from 
three &fferent patent regimes in the poor country market. 

Situation A: Strong Patent Protection in the Poor Country Market 

Under  this  configuration, prices  in  the  two  markets will be  different as  long as 
parallel imports are not allowed. Prices will then be higher (lower) in the market with 
the lower (higher) elasticity. It is important to note that typically, prices will be higher 
in the rich country markets. If parallel imports are allowed, prices will tend to rise in the 
poor country market. Hence, poorer countries should want to prevent (or rather want 
their richer trading partners to prevent) parallel imports. Indeed, if trading partners did 
not prevent lower-priced parallel imports from entering their markets, the poor country 
would want to prevent the exports of the same products (“parallel exports”), to prevent 
domestic prices fiom rising towards levels in the rich country. 

If the analysis were  extended to three  markets-rich,  middle-income,  and poor 
country  marketssome  interesting  and  perhaps  more  realistic  policy  conclusions 
follow. One of these is  the possibihty that the medium-income  market would prefer 
uniform  pricing  (i.e.  parallel  imports) to  price  &scrimination, especially if  there  is 
another poorer market where the monopoly price that is charged is lower than in the 
me&um-income market. This explains, for example, South Africa  opting for a regime 
of parallel imports, hoping to find lower  cost sources for drugs. Drugs could also be 
obtained from advanced countries that have enforced price controls, resulting in prices 
that are lower than the free market price in the middle-income countries. In general, 
however, most poor countries would want to simultaneously allow parallel imports and 
&sallow parallel exports. 

The TRIPS Agreement is  neutral with  regard to parallel imports. But should the 
poor  country  seek  to  prevent  parallel  exports, the  TRIPS Agreement  and  the  WTO 
would arguably not allow it. The country could, of course, use WTO-consistent export 
taxes to restrict such exports rather than relying on quantitative restrictions. 

Situation  B: No Patent Regime in the Poor Market 

Essentially, this  is  the pre-TRIPs  situation.  Prices in the poor market will be 
determined by competitive or near-competitive conditions of supply. It follows that there 
will once again be differential pricing, with prices in the poor market much lower than in 
the rich market. Further, prices in the poor market will be lower than under Situation A. 

Situation  C: Compulsory Licensing in the Poor Market 

In  this  case,  prices in the  poor  market will be  somewhere in between prices in 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND  TRIPS 

325 

Situations  A  and  B.  The  exact  level  will  depend  in  large  part  on  the  number  of 
compulsory licensees and, crucially, by the compensation to be paid to the patentee. Of 
course, the lower the compensation, the lower will be the prices in the poor country 
market. The TRIPS Agreement is extremely vague on the minimum compensation that 
will need to be paid, and this is an issue that will probably only be resolved in the dispute 
settlement process. 

Clearly, &om the pharmaceutical companies’ perspective, Situations B and C will 
be anathema as they will dilute the patent protection, and hence the profits, that they 
enjoy. What is interesting is that they increasingly seek to avoid differential pricingas 
in Situation A-in 
favour of more uniform monopoly pricing. That is, despite the fact 
that Situation A yields maximum profits, they would rather avoid large differentials in 
prices across markets because of the pressure &om taxpayers and consumers in their own 
markets who see the price differential as being unfiir to them. Also, in some countries, 
especially where there is public  sector provision and/or  financing of drugs, there is  a 
practice  of  reference  pricing  whereby  prices  are  linked  to  the  cheapest  price  in 
comparison countries. 

Thus,  the  WTO’S advocacy,  and  the  pharmaceutical  companies  embrace,  of 
differential  pricing  is  strictly  confined  to  Situation  A.  The  poor  country  faces  a 
monopoly price, albeit one that is lower than the alternative monopoly price. As such, 
this cannot  by  any means be  considered affordable access,  especially  not  for ffican 
countries in the grip of a human catastrophe. 

111.  AFRICA’S NEEDS 

To facilitate better  access  (that is, better than that  envisaged under  Situation A), 
differential pricing clearly will  have  to  aim  at  Situation C .  The option  of revoking 
patent protection altogether (Situation B) is a non-starter and should not be considered. 
As  will be  explained below,  this  radical option  is  not  only unrealistic in terms of its 
acceptability to pharmaceutical companies and their governments, more importantly it 
will be ineffective. This leaves compulsory licensing as the only realistic option. But for 
Afkica, this option is more difficult to exercise. Let us see why. 

Under  the  TRIPS Agreement,  developing  countries  could  invoke  the  public 
healthhterest exception in the TRIPS Agreement to grant compulsory licences for the 
domestic production of the relevant drugs, as indeed South Afiica has provided for in 
its law  (the law  is  currently being  challenged in  South f i c a ’ s  courts  as  being  too 
permissive and hence inconsistent with  the  TRIPS Agreement). The problem is  that, 
whereas  this  is  a  feasible  option  for  large,  technologically  advanced,  developing 
countries that can  easily produce  the  patented drug, this may  be less  feasible  for the 
smaller African countries, which would have to import the drugs. 

326 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Thus, African countries will have to issue compulsory licences for importing the 
drug. But where would  they find these drugs at  reasonable prices  (i.e. at lower than 
monopoly  prices)  if  the  rest  of  the  world  is  TRIPS-compliant?  There  are  two 
possibilities: 

- 

- 

&om those countries that are outside the TRIPS Agreement; 
from those WTO countries in which a similar compulsory licensing exception 
has been invoked. 

As  the  membership  of  the  WTO is  becoming  universal,  the  first  possibility is 

increasingly ruled out (even China will soon join the WTO). 

The  key  point  here  is  that  African  countries cannot  import  &om other  WTO 
countries unless  the latter also have invoked a similar compulsory licensing exception. 
In other words, a country such as India or Brazil cannot issue compulsory licences to its 
firms  just  to  export  AIDS drugs  to  African  countries.  Article  31(f)  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement rules out this possibility because it requires compulsory licensing to serve 
“predominantly” the  local  market  (i.e. in  the  country  where  the  licence  is  issued). 
Because intellectual property laws are territorial, the right to import does not become a 
right  to  export  unless  laws  in  the  country  where  production  for  export  takes  place 
authorize such production. 

The consequences of this restriction are not theoretical. Take the recent case of the 
Indian company, CIPLA, that offered to sell AIDS drugs to Kenya at US$ 650 per dose. 
This offer was  legal in In&a because  the  drugs in question were  not  covered by  the 
TRIPS Agreement. They were inventions made prior to 1994, which is the cut-off date 
for  protection  around  the  world.  But  in  a  year  or  two,  when  new  AIDS drugs  are 
covered by the TRIPS Agreement, the Indian company d not be able to make such an 
offer. To do so, they will have to  obtain a  compulsory licence to  service the  In&an 
market;  once  such  a  licence  is  obtained,  they  can  then  export  some  of  their  total 
production (much less than 50 percent given Article 31 (4 of the TRIPS Agreement) to 
Ahca.1 

If providing affordable access  to Afiica  is  indeed a serious imperative, even this 
possibility that is left open under the TRIPS Agreement is a very slim one. For example, 
a country like Zimbabwe can obtain drugs under  competitive condition only if other 
countries have successfdly cleared the hurdles for compulsory licensing. These include: 
the potential compulsory licensees must have attempted to obtain a voluntary 
licence &om the patentee on reasonable commercial terms and been rehsed 
within a reasonable period of time; 

- 

1  As long as the number of AIDS sufferers in Africa exceeds those in the countries which could potentially be 

sources of supply for cheap drugs, Article 31(0 of TRIPS will always be restrictive. 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND TRIPS 

327 

-  the  patentee  should be  paid  reasonable  compensation for  the  compulsory 

- 

licence; and 
decisions by a government to grant compulsory licences must be  subject to 
judicial review. 

Even if these hurdles could be cleared, the delays involved could be enormous and 
militate against swift  responses to  what  is  a  serious  crisis.  What  is  needed  is  a  legal 
situation  that  clearly  allows  and  legitimizes  third-country  governments  to  grant 
compulsory licences for export so that firms such as CIPLA in India can sell AIDS drugs 
to Afiican countries in crisis. This would require a change in TRIPS rules. 

It is important to note that a change in the legal situation is necessary but may still 
not be sufficient, if extra-legal pressures are exerted to prevent realizing the outcomes 
that the legal changes aim at. For example, if an Indian company is willing to sell AIDS 
drugs  to  African  countries at  close to marginal  cost,  it  is  easy  to  imagme both  the 
company and/or the Indian government coming under pressure, say (under some kind 
of implicit or explicit threat) fiom the United States, not to grant compulsory licences 
for  export.  If  India  or  the  Indian pharmaceutical  company  succumbs  (as  happened 
recently to  CIPLA when  it offered to sell drugs to  Ghana), the loser will be the AIDS 
victim in Mrica.2 

The  need  for  legal  clarity  cannot  be  over-emphasized  as  recent  experience 
indicates. South Africa’s parallel import  regime came under  severe pressure &om the 
United States and its pharmaceutical companies, despite the fict that parallel imports are 
so clearly permitted by WTO rules. In the end, of course, the United States relented, but 
only  after  substantial  countervailing  pressure  was  exerted  by  non-governmental 
organizations (NGos). Of course, the WTO rule helped, but it was not enough in itself 
to stave off pressure. 

Some have argued that the TRIPS Agreement requires no changes because it allows 
countries to grant broad-sweeping exceptions to IP laws in the event of an emergency, 
as indeed the AIDS crisis could be argued to be. But for the reasons spelt out above, this 
exception will not help ffican countries because, even if they suspended their IP laws, 
they would still have to obtain the AIDS drugs from partner countries. These partner 
countries  cannot  invoke  similar  emergency  exceptions  unless  the  emergency  is  a 
domestic one; that is, India cannot suspend its IP laws because of an AIDS crisis in Afiica. 
To be sure, any change in IP rules should not become or be seen as a licence for 
widespread infringement  of patent rights. Appropriate safeguards  can be  designed to 
prevent this.  First, third-country production of drugs under “compulsory licences” for 
export can be restricted both to countries in real need and to multilaterally certified (by 

2  The co-operation of the international community in facibtating supply by the Indnn company may need to 
go even &her.  For example, drugs manufactured in third countries will need to obtain regulatory approval either 
in the country of production (under compulsory licence) or &om other countries or the WHO. 

328 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the World Health Organization (WHO)) instances of public health problems. Second, 
patent holders should be provided reasonable compensation for third-party  use of the 
patent  which  could be  specified  in  advance to avoid legal  uncertainty. And  finally, 
countries  should be  assigned  the  responsibility of preventing drugs produced  under 
compulsory  licences  fiom  leaking  into  other  markets,  and  undermining  legitimate 
patent production.3 

Thus the proposal to change TRIPS rules would run along the following lines. In 
the  event  of  a  WHO-certified  public  health  crisis  in  a  least-developed  country, 
governments in  other countries should be fiee  to  grant  compulsory licences to  their 
pharmaceutical companies to  export the  necessary drugs to  the  country/countries  in 
crisis. Compliance with the normal procedures for granting such licences, specified in 
Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular paragraph (Q, should not be necessary; 
however, patentees affected by the compulsory licence should be provided a nominal 
remuneration of say  2 to 4  percent.  The country/countries  granting the  compulsory 
licence should co-operate with  tradmg partners to ensure that  drugs produced under 
such compulsory licences do not find their way into markets other than those affected 
by the crisis. The international community, under the aegis of the WHO, should make 
concerted and expeditious efforts to  ensure that drugs produced  under  such licences 
satisfy the regulatory criteria for marketing approval. 

Another reason why such a proposal might necessitate changes to current TRIPS 
rules is  that  TRIPS, even if it  allowed compulsory licences to be  used  for exporting, 
would not allow hfferent compensation levels to the patentee depending on whether 
the production under compulsory licensing was destined for the domestic market or for 
poorer foreign markets. Ths differentiation must be allowed, not just for the obvious 
equity reason  that  the poorest  countries should have to pay  less, but  also, as will be 
explained below, because compensation under compulsory licensing in middle-income 
countries should contribute  toward bearing research  and development  (R&D) costs. 
Hence there will, in general, be good theoretical reasons, to calibrate the compensation 
under compulsory licensing to the user of the product. 

IV.  OTHER OPTIONS FOR AFRICA 
A. 

Increased Aid 

A number  of respectable voices, including Harvard’s Jefiey  Sachs,  have  argued 
strongly in bvour  of addtional  aid  to  finance the  provision  of low-priced  drugs to 

3  In  discussions of differential pricing, legitimate concern are  expressed by  the pharmaceutical companies 
about the leakage of “parallel goods” into rich country markets, undermining patent protection there. However, it 
should be noted that this threat existed, in a more serious form, in a pre-Trws world and was reasonably successfully 
dealt with. As long as rich country markets have good enforcement capability, the leakage problem need not be 
serious. The arrival of the  Internet and  the  attendant increase  in  Internet-based sales, of course, makes national 
enforcement more difficult, underlining the need for greater co-operation between countries. 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND TRIPS 

329 

countries in crisis, and against any dilution of international intellectual property rules to 
achieve this objective. 

Consider  the  question:  additional  aid  or  dution of  IPrules?  The  underlying 
economics can be posed starkly as follows. Drugs to AIDS sufferers need to be provided 
at  the lowest possible  cost. This can be  achieved in two ways  that  are not  mutually 
exclusive: 

-  by  diluting  the  patent  rights  conferred by  IPrules,  allowing  drugs to  be 

produced at the lowest marginal cost of production; or 

-  by  maintaining  the  monopoly  or  quasi-monopoly  power  of 

the 

pharmaceutical companies, with the taxpayers making good the difference. 

In the former case, the pharmaceutical companies would contribute to the implicit 

subsidy to AIDS victims. 

Reliance on the aid route alone is likely to be insufficient. First, there can never 
really  be a guarantee that truly additional aid would be forthcoming: given the rising 
number  of  claims  on  a  diminishing supply  of aid,  there  is  the  likelihood that  the 
resources that flow on account of AIDS have merely been &verted away from other uses. 
Second, while  aid  might  provide  the  money,  it  will  have  to  be  accompanied by  a 
mechanism for delivering drugs to those in need. Experience suggests that even in the 
best of circumstances, aid delivery in Afiica is encumbered and inefficient. 

On the other hand, the advantages of diluting IP protection are twofold. First, it 
will represent a market-based solution to improving the access of AIDS victims to cheap 
drugs, obviating the need for aid and for any attendant delivery mechanism. Its  chief 
&sadvantage, namely the resulting dent to the profits of pharmaceutical companies and 
the blunting of incentives to undertake R&D, will probably be minimal because of the 
low purchasing power of the affected markets. Hence, diluting IP protection must be 
part of the complementary international effort to tackling the AIDS crisis. Of course, it 
is possible, indeed highly likely, that even the near-competitive prices achieved through 
the compulsory licensing solution proposed above will be unaffordable for most AIDS 
victims,  so  that  additional  aid  might  remain  a  necessary  policy  response  by  the 
international community. 

B.  WHO’S Essential Drugs List 

Another recent proposal would allow countries not to accord patent protection to 
drugs that are on WHO’S Essential Drugs List. However, the List excludes drugs that are 
deemed costly to produce  even if they are essential from a public health perspective, 
intrinsically biasing the List against the inclusion of patented drugs. Many current drugs, 
such as those for treating AIDS, and future drugs could thus be excluded, limiting the 

330 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

value of this approach for the poorest countries. Another problem would be its potential 
for misuse.  If a large number of countries chose to deny protection to these drugs, the 
loss in profits to the patent holder could be significant enough to deter R&D. 

C.  Voluntary Eforts  by Pharmaceutical Companies 

One of the noteworthy features of the recent AIDS crisis has been the response of 
pharmaceutical companies in  agreeing to  voluntarily  lower  the  price  of AIDS drugs 
(presumably well below what they would otherwise have charged). In part, this has been 
the consequence of effective and concerted pressure by a wide array of consumer groups 
and NGOS. But another important contributing factor has been the threat of competitive 
supplies from  third  countries such  as  In&a  and Brazil  which  has  made  this  market 
“contestable”, even if actual supplies have not been  forthcoming from firms in these 
countries.  It  would  be  absolutely  crucial  that  this  contestability  be  preserved  and 
rendered clearly legal and legitimate, as the proposal made above would ensure. 

V.  THE MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES 

Applying differential pricing to middle-income countries such as Brazil, Argentina, 
South Africa, Turkey, possibly  China or even India is more complicated. And it is one 
that arises because of distributional considerations both within and across countries. The 
dilemma is highlighted by considering the application of two extreme patent regimes- 
full patent protection or no patent protection. 

For the sake  of simplicity, let us assume  that middle-income countries have  two 
groups of consumers of medicines-rich 
and poor. With no patent protection, supplies 
are forthcoming at competitive prices for both  groups. While  this is fair  to  the poor 
(after all, this was  the  logic of the first proposal made  above for the  least-developed 
countries) in  the  middle-income  countries, it can justifiably be seen as unfair  to  the 
patentee because he receives no profit fiom sales to the rich in that country. The rich 
in the middle-income  countries do not  contribute to  the R&D costs that go toward 
creating pharmaceutical inventions. In this context, the allegation of fiee-riding assumes 
greater legitimacy. After all, if the rich in high-income countries can be expected to bear 
the burden of creating pharmaceutical inventions, the mere fact of borders should not 
be a persuasive argument for the rich in middle-income  countries to also not take on a 
similar burden.  It might even be inefficient in so far as  the rich in all middle-income 
countries could constitute a large enough market and account for a non-neghgible share 
of pharmaceutical companies’ global profits. 

On the other hand, the opposite solution of full patent protection, while being fair 
to the rich, is unfair to the poor, as their access to drugs is impeded and the contribution 
that they make toward pharmaceutical company profits can be seen as excessive. 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND TRIPS 

331 

The problem, in a nutshell, is that the patent regime is  a very blunt instrument; 
given the territorial application ofpatent laws, they have to be uniform within a country 
and  hence, by  definition, cannot distinguish between  rich  and  poor.  Any  resulting 
outcome will be unfair to one group. 

It is thus clear that no patent regime in the middle-income country can solve this 
distributional issue  within  it.  Governments will  therefore  have  to  rely  on  other 
instruments for  acheving  segmentation consistent with  social  objectives.  There  is, 
however, an IP issue, which needs to be addressed through compulsory licensing. 

We can now define a socially efficient and internationally equitable patent regime. 
Ths would involve poor consumers paying marginal or close to marginal cost and the 
rich paying the monopoly price. This way, the latter group can also contribute toward 
R&D costs.  It  is  fair, because the  middle-income  country can  achieve an  outcome 
where the negative externality imposed by the international regime on the poor within 
it is ofliet, while at the same time ensuring that the rich contribute fully toward R&D 
costs. 

Suppose that the government of the middle-income country proposes to acheve 
this segmented outcome by procuring drugs and then  using domestic instruments to 
segment the two markets. Suppose further that these drugs wdl be procured through 
compulsory licensing. What would be a fair r0yalty?4 

What constitutes reasonable compensation under compulsory licensing? The TRIPS 

Agreement is ambiguous, even unhelpfid, on this score. Its Amcle 31  requires that, in 
the event of compulsory licensing, the patentee must be paid “adequate remuneration 
in  the  circumstances of  each case, taking into account the  economic value  of the” 
compulsory licence. No standards for giving greater specificity or meaning to the notion 
of adequate compensation are provided. Summarizing the  cross-country  experience 
with  compulsory licensing, Scherer  and  Watal  note  that  if  the  profits  lost  by  the 
monopolist  because  of  the  compulsory licences were  the  standard for  determining 
adequate compensation, the resulting royalty payments would be so high as to prevent 
price reduction and increased drug availability.5 Thus, there is  an inherent contradiction 
between  compulsory licensing, which aims to increase competition, and a profit-based 
standard for compensation that would preserve the monopoly right of the patent. 

Votaries  of  compulsory  licensing tend  to  advocate  the  Canadian  practice  of 
granting a 4 percent royalty as the standard for adequate compensation, particularly in 

4  Compulsory licensing will, in general, not be the first-best policy response to achieving the socially efficient 
and international equitable outcome. It could be superseded by two others: first, the country can abandon patent 
protection altogether but transfer to patent owners the monopoly profit that  they would have obtained had they 
been able to enforce their patent vis-d-vis the rich in the country; alternatively, the country can enforce full patent 
protection on the understanding that the patent owner returns to the country any profits in excess of that obtained 
fiom the rich consumers. 
5  F.M. Scherer and J. Watal, Post-THPS Optionrfor Aaess to Patented Medicines in Developing Countries, mimeo, 

Harvard University, 2001. 

332 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the pharmaceutical sector. But this number has no appealing justification, because it is 
not anchored in commonly understood economic or legal concepts. 

It would seem that any notion of adequate compensation must reconcile the equity 
objective that underlies the use  of compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals with the 
need  to  preserve, at  least  to  some  extent,  the  incentives for  R&D.  An  alternative 
perspective suggests that adequate compensation must reconcile equity objectives with 
a  basic  himess  objective, namely, that  users of patented products  contribute toward 
R&D costs. Where a country is large relative to the world market, fairness and incentive 
objectives are essentially the same. But where a country is small, it is possible to make a 
fairness case even in the absence of a significant impact on incentives for R&D. 

This fairness agreement, while difficult to defend when applied to poor countries, 
assumes greater legtimacy when applied to a set of rich consumers, even in developing 
countries. Because  the  quantitative magnitudes related  to  these  equity, fairness and 
incentive objectives will vary across countries, it is possible, even likely, that adequate 
compensation will be country-specific rather than country-invariant. 

A  simple framework for  determining adequate compensation is  proposed here. 
Each  country should divide its population into  two  groups-the 
poor,  who  should 
obtain drugs under competitive or close-to-competitive conditions, and the rich who 
should contribute their hll share toward R&D costs. In practice, any cut-off between 
the two wiU prove to be arbitrary; but the essence should be to divide the population 
into identifiable groups according to their ability to contribute to R&D  costs.  Some 
dlustrative calculations to determine what the orders of magnitude of this royalty should 
be and what factors should condition this royalty are also provided. 

Figure 1 explains this framework. It has three panels: Panel A represents the market 
for  drugs constituted by  the  rich  in  middle-income  countries;  Panel B  shows  the 
comparable demand curve for the poor; and Panel C is the country-wide demand curve, 
obtained by horizontally summating the curves in the first two Panels. 

The first-best outcome is one where the rich pay monopoly prices (the monopoly 
outcome in Panel A) and the poor pay  competitive prices. If the government decided 
to procure drugs under compulsory licensing, it should aim at an outcome that provides 
pharmaceutical companies the profit as in Panel A.  The compulsory licensing outcome 
is shown in Panel C. Very simply, t h s  outcome should be such that the total royalty paid 
to the patentee (royalty rate R times the quantity Q) is the same as what the patentee 
would have obtained had he been allowed to charge the monopoly price to the rich 
segment of the market in the middle-income country. 

Graphically, the area EFCPCL in Panel C should be identical to the area ABCPM in 
Panel A. The point A in Panel A represents the monopoly outcome in the rich segment 
of the market; if the  patentee had  been  able to  segment markets within  the middle 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND TRIPS 

333 

A 
A 

D 

PCL 

C 

D 

PCL 

C 

/‘aneIC:  Comb- 

f 

Outcome W r

 conrpuIsory licemjng 

DI 

income country he would have been able to charge a price PM and obtain a profit of 
ABCPM. With compulsory licensing serving the combined market, market equilibrium 
is  at E in Panel C, resulting in a royalty-inclusive price PCL. The royalty rate R  (the 
difference between the price PCL and marginal cost C) should be such that the resulting 
royalty payment EFCPCL is the same as the profit that the patentee could have obtained 
by exercising his patent right in the rich segment of the market. This royalty R can thus 
be seen as fair compensation under a compulsory licence because the middle-income 
country is contributing M y  toward R&D without fiee-riding. 

How much WID  R be? It is easy to calculate the value of R. In the rich segment of 
the  market, the  analysis  of moving &om a patent regime  to  a  compulsory licensing 

334 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

regime is formally equivalent to that of examining the impact of a cut in the tax rate on 
tax  revenues.  In  the  patent  regime,  the  “tax” rate  was  equal  to  PM-C. Under  the 
compulsory  licensing regime,  this  rate  is  cut  from  PM-C to  R.  Unless  the  initial 
equilibrium is  at  a Laffer point,  this  reduction in  tax rate  will lead  to  a  decline in 
revenues (royalties to the patentee in this instance). The difference wdl be made up by 
royalties in the poor market equal to R times the demand in the poor market. 

Formally, it can be shown that: 

Where M is the monopoly royalty in the rich segment; PM is the price in the rich 
segment  with  hll  patent  protection  and  PCL is  the  price  in  both  markets  with 
compulsory licensing; M+PM is  thus the ad  valorem “voluntary” royalty rate, the rate 
that a monopolist would have charged a licensee under a voluntary contract. Q refers 
to  the  equilibrium quantities  with  superscripts  denoting  the  relevant  market  and 
subscripts the relevant policy regme (monopoly (M) and compulsory licensing (CL)). 
R+PcL is  the  ad  valorem  royalty  rate  under  compulsory  licensing.  Thus,  the 
monopoly rate is the weighted average of the compulsory-licensing royalty rates where 
the weights denote the share of the rich and poor segments (in terms of value) in relation 
to the revenue in the rich market under 111 patenting6 

The  expression  in  the  first  set  of  brackets  denotes  the  ratio  of  consumer 
expenditures after and before the reduction in royalty and is hence directly related to 
the elasticity of price demand. The greater the elasticity, the lower the royalty rate under 
compulsory licensing @.+PcL) d need to be to ensure that the patentee makes his 
original profit  (the left  hand  side  of  the  expression). Similarly, the  larger the  poor 
segment of the market (greater the expression in the second brackets), the lower will be 
the royalty under compulsory licensing. 

Table  1 provides some illustrative  calculations as  to  the  fair  royalty  rate  under 
compulsory licensing for different values of the key underlying determinants. Three 
features are worth noting.’ First, as emphasized above, fair royalty rates are likely to vary 
across situations and hence across middle-income countries. Thus, any suggestion (as in 
Scherer and Wattal) that countries adopt a fured royalty under compulsory licensing as 
in Canada, is not really defensible on theoretical grounds. Second, the dismissal  of the 
“profits-lost”  test  for  determining royalty  rates  under  compulsory licensing is  also 
untenable.  The essential point  here is  that while  equity considerations may justiq  a 
departure from this test, by the same token, this departure must be confined to groups 

6  These weights do not add up to one. 
7  It is clear that this fiamework can be refined further. For example, the requirement that the poor should also 
contribute something, albeit much smaller in amount than the rich, can easily be incorporated into the fair royalty 
calculation. 

AIDS,  DRUG PRICING AND TRIPS 

335 

TMLE 1 : ROYALTY RATES  UNDER COMPULSORY LICENSING IN A MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRY- 

ILLUSTRATIVE CALCULATIONS 
When elasticity ofdemand 
ofrich consumers = -2 

And share of poor in total 

demand (percent) = 
60 
4.9 

13 
33 
10.3  8.0 

49 
6.2 

The royalty rate will be 

When elasticity of  demand 
of  rich consumers = -1.75 
And share of poor in total 

demand @ercent) = 
58 
6.8 

13 
13.4  10.9 

44 
8.8 

33 

who really deserve the equity opt-out.  In other words, the profits-lost test should be 
applicable to richer income groups. 

Third, the calculations also have some intuitive appeal. The fact that royalty rates 
decrease as the share of the poor in total drug consumption increases translates into an 
appealing rule that the poorer the middle-income country the lower will be the royalty 
rate. Fourth, under the proposed fi-amework, the data requirements for calculating the 
fair royalty rate are reasonably simple. Essentially, the demand curve for rich and poor 
need to be estimated, which would provide the basis for computing the fair royalty rate. 
Finally, the proposal made in Section 111 that TRIPS rules should be changed to allow 
compulsory licensing for  exports  to  the  poorest  countries  could  also  apply  to  the 
middle-income  countries.  That  is,  a  middle-income  country  (or  indeed  any  other 
country) should be allowed to export drugs produced under compulsory licensing to 
another  middle-income  country.  However,  a  key  pre-condition  must  be  that  the 
remuneration paid to the patentee should be  “fair” in the sense described above. Ths 
means also that production under  compulsory licensing in a  middle-income country 
may  have  differential rates  of  compensation  depending on  the  destination of  such 
production. 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

Differential pricing for pharmaceuticals has assumed increased significance recently 
and is seen as an important way of meeting the needs of the poorest and middle-income 
developing  countries.  Differential  pricing  encompasses  a  variety  of  options  for 
developing countries as  regards  the  choice  of patent regmes  but, in  the  context of 
obtaining affordable access  to  drugs, meaningfbl  dfferential pricing  can  only  result 
through  the  use  of  compulsory licensing. This article has  made  two suggestions on 
compulsory licensing, one  relating to  the  poorest  countries in  Afkca  and the  other 
relating to middle-income developing countries. 

For Africa, providng affordable access to drugs, especially in the context of the 
current AIDS crisis, will require changes to  current TRIPS rules.  In particular, third- 
country  governments  should  be  allowed  to  grant  compulsory  licences  to  their 

336 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

pharmaceutical companies, under  some safeguards, so  that  they  can  export drugs at 
close-to-competitive  conditions  to  Africa.  Effective  patent  protection  fosters R&D 
activity, but safeguarding the poorest countries’ access to medcines, at a time of a truly 
devastating epidemic, need  not  undermine  it.  Indeed, the  proposal  outlined above 
would result in a distinct improvement in global welfare-better 
fiordability of drugs 
for  the  poorest  of  the  poor  without  weakening  the  global  innovation  climate  for 
medicines. To be sure, the large pharmaceutical companies would see some reduction 
in their profits, but these are likely to be negligible. On the other hand, the gain in lives 
saved  and  averting a  catastrophe-human 
the  poorest  countries 
would be immeasurable. Surely, this is a trade-off well worth making. 

and  economic-in 

As  regards compulsory licensing by middle-income countries, a good case can be 
made that the compensation that is paid to patentees must be fair, in the sense that the 
rich in these countries (not the entire population) contribute toward R&D costs. This 
article  has  proposed  a  simple  framework  for  determining  such  compensation  and 
provided some illustrative calculations. In general, fair compensation will be country- 
specific, and is likely to be higher than the 4 percent (based on the Canadan experience) 
that is often cited as a standard for compensation under compulsory licensing. Two key 
determinants  of fair  compensation will  be  the  elasticity of  demand  of  the  rich  for 
medcines, and the number of poor consumers. 


