The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4, pp. 96–113

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12022

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products? An Analysis
of the Recent Controversy Over Rejected AOC
Wines in France

Genevieve Teil*
INRA, Centre Regional de Recherche Agronomique, Station experimentale de Boukhalef

Producers defending terroir have called for and obtained a reform of the AOC (French GI) regulation which they deem
to be incapable of containing “dangerous shifts” in the interpretation of terroir. An analysis of their accusations shows
that the intellectual property dimension of AOCs is returning to the forefront of concerns. The “terroir” quality of
AOCs is the multifaceted result of a duet between the vintner and his vineyard, allowing greater creativity. The present
reform embraces this change by adding to regulations specifying the means, an accreditation more receptive to
innovation. However, it runs into difﬁculties over the assessment of typicity upon which the AOC quality guarantee
has to be based. This paper concludes with a discussion of the reasons for these difﬁculties and suggestions for an
assessment1 better suited to the multifaceted nature of typicity.

Keywords terroir; intellectual property; production; geographical indication

Des producteurs defenseurs des terroirs ont demande et obtenu une reforme des AOC qu’ils jugent incapables de
contenir de « dangereuses derives » de l‘interpretation du terroir. L’analyse de leurs accusations fait apparaıˆtre un
tetour sur le devant de la scene du register de la propriete intellectuelle des AOC: leur qualite de terroir est le
resultat pluriel d’un duo d’auteurs, le vigneron et son vignoble, a` la creativite renforcee. La reforme en cours epouse
ce changement en ajoutant a` l’obligation de moyens de la reglementation une habilitation plus ouverte a`
l’innovation. Mails elle achoppe sur la question de l’epreuve de la typicite sur laquelle doit prendre appui la garantie
de qualite des AOC. Nous discutons pour finir les raisons de ces difficultes et proposons une epreuve ajustee a` la
nature plurielle de la typicite.

Mots clefs: terroir; propriete intellectuelle; production; Appellation d’Origine Controˆlee

Challenging a Fragile Construction

At the end of the phylloxera crisis that progressively destroyed European vineyards, Joseph Capus,
“father” of the Appellations d’Origine Controˆlees2 (AOC,
the well-known French Geographical
Indication), set about helping to restore the quality and reputation of French wines and recorded in a report
(Capus, 1947) the establishing of the Geographical Indications Act. By establishing an intellectual
property link between a production and a deﬁned geographical boundary, the 1919 Act3 concerning
geographical indications protected the productions of each winegrowing area from the “copies” that had
ﬂourished all over the world while French producers were being confronted by an almost total shortage of
grapes. This Act was deemed a failure. It led to a proliferation of producers who enjoyed the protection of
the name without making any attempt to sustain the pre-eminence of its quality. It was replaced by the
1935 Decree, (Republique Franc¸aise (1935) establishing appellations d’origine controˆ lees or controlled

* The author’s work is devoted to improving understanding of the mode of existence of an object within a collective.
She examines this question by looking at the controversies surrounding the certiﬁcations of taste or quality of objects;
the issues at stake in these controversies can, at times, raise questions about the ontology of objects.

96

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

designations of origin, adding controlled production restrictions and a quality guarantee for consumers.
The AOC was therefore set up not merely to protect a production origin but also to indicate a remarkable
quality, the “quality of terroir,” the fruit of the producers’ labor and inventiveness over the centuries in
enhancing the speciﬁc viticultural characteristics of their vineyards.

Geographical indications are thus original quality labels combining two dimensions for supervising
product marketing—protecting intellectual creativity, that is the wines invented every year by a deﬁnite
set of “authors,” and indicating quality on the market. What’s more, they are the only indications of quality
regulated by the French Consumer Code also to be covered by the Intellectual Property Code4 (articles
L711-4, L121-1 and L 722-1).

However, these two dimensions may be antinomic; intellectual property protects an author’s
productions but it speciﬁes nothing of the work’s qualities. On the contrary, it leaves intellectual
creation as free as possible from restrictions; quality indicators, on the other hand, specify the quality
of a product, in other words, the properties or characteristics of autonomous market goods, indepen-
dently of any connection with a particular producer. As AOC wines form an intellectual creation,
their “quality” is not speciﬁed a priori; as an indicated and guaranteed quality for the consumer, it has
to be.

Tensions between the regimes of intellectual property and of the qualiﬁcation of goods have already
been noted with regard to industrial production, patents and standardization (Foray, 1993; Liotard, 2008).
Studies have brought to light company strategies of ﬁling for patents to monopolize standards. The
situation is slightly different for AOCs, especially since the intellectual property regime is collective and
not linked to one of the economic actors’ ﬁling for a patent.

Hermitte (2001) made a rapid legal and historical examination of this dual dimension of the AOCs.
This approach would still seem to be an exception since studies continue to treat AOCs from
the viewpoint of these two regimes separately. Several authors address the various legal difﬁculties
raised by appellations d’origine Controˆ lees in international law concerning intellectual property5:
they have an unlimited duration of protection and never become part of the public domain because their
author is a collective entity that lives on through successive generations of vintners established on
AOC land (Charlier and Ngo, 2007; Handler, 2006; Ibele, 2009; Josling, 2005; van der Merwe,
2009). According to these authors, AOCs are not subject to the rules of intellectual property. Moreover,
the unlimited duration of protection prevents AOCs
from being considered as collective
brands. This impedes therefore them coming under national legal regulations and fuel debates in
international law.

The aspect of the AOC as a sign of quality has also been the subject of much controversy (Rufﬁeux
and Valceschini, 1996): in order to constitute a “genuine” sign of quality, the AOC should be able to prove
that it really does provide the consumer with the quality it claims. However, there is no detailed
description, deﬁnition or criterion for terroir quality. In June 2010, the International Organization of Vine
and Wine deﬁned terroir as follows:

DEFINITION OF VITICULTURE AND WINE-MAKING TERROIR: “Viticulture and
wine-making “terroir” is a concept which refers to an area in which collective knowledge
develops, to interactions between the identiﬁable physical and biological environment, and to
applied viticulture and wine-making practices, which provide distinctive characteristics for
products originating from this area. “TERROIR” includes speciﬁc characteristics of soil,
topography, climate, landscape and biodiversity.”

The deﬁnition is procedural and no AOC (or, since 2008, “PDO,” Appellation d’Origine Protegee6)
regulation clearly explains the speciﬁc typicity of its products. Producers, wine-drinkers, journalists, etc.,

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

97

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

are able to say if a wine is typical, but their opinions may differ. Scientists too have difﬁculty in
formulating precisely the “terroir quality” that AOCs protect. These difﬁculties divide those who conclude
that terroir and its quality are merely “social constructions” with no material “grounds” (Berard and
Marchenay, 1995) and thus, from an economic point of view, an obstacle to competition (Torre, 2002),
from those who, on the contrary, believe that it involves a predetermined and particularly complex
conjunction of material and human factors, which needs to be identiﬁed (Cadot, 2006; Frayssignes, 2001;
Laporte, 2000).

Both registers of the PDO regulations give rise to debates about the inconsistencies and oddities of the
regulations, which lead to positions of principle as to how sound they are. Capus was attached to this dual
dimension of creativity within the framework of the AOC, and the control he introduced to AOC
regulations suggested an assessment that was a compromise between the two requirements: a control of
compulsory minimum viticulture and wine-growing practices (pruning, yields, proportion of grape
varieties planted, etc.), analytical tests to measure sugar, alcohol and volatile acid content, and lastly, an
approval tasting to obtain AOC certiﬁcation for each wine marketed, for each new vintage.7 This
assessment was carried out by the producers themselves, who were considered to be both the most
competent and the most vigilant since they had the most at stake in developing and defending the
qualitative superiority of their AOC.

This assessment has always been at the heart of the controversy surrounding its credibility
(Teil, 2010). The jury is an assessment tool that in some way “incorporates” the notion of typicity; it is
difﬁcult, for example, to assess whether it functions correctly or incorrectly since there is no test to verify
its judgment. In complete contrast to the idea of competence and severity that led to their introduction,
approval juries have regularly been accused of being both judge and jury, and therefore lenient.8

Despite these problems, the law on Controlled and then Protected Designations of Origin has been a
great success for almost 80 years, not only in France but also in Europe and elsewhere. However, in recent
years, some vintners have themselves criticized the AOC’s inability to protect and guarantee the terroir
quality of their wines. They challenge the ability of the approval tasting to differentiate between true and
false terroir wines and have demanded a return to higher terroir quality of wines. Their action led to a
reform of AOC regulations. However, far from bringing terroir back to greater agro-climatic determinism
and a more explicit description of its qualitative characteristics, the return to greater terroir “authenticity”
is increasing its dimension of multifaceted intellectual creation and, as a result, the problems posed by the
PDO’s quality guarantee. The reform that fairly readily espoused the demands of vintners supporting the
return to terroir authenticity regarding restrictions on practices seems to run into difﬁculties over the
revived question of proving the typicity of a wine.

This paper does not attempt to justify the challenge to the functioning of the AOCs that led to the
reform, nor does it seek to identify the (possibly) abusive strategies that motivate it or make it the result of
a social conﬂict. Although it takes up the main themes of the latest controversy, this is not in an attempt to
decide whether or not the rejection by approval juries is justiﬁed or if they constitute an obstacle to
competition, nor is it to suspect vintners of trying to tilt the typicity of their AOCs to their advantage. It
draws upon the controversy to show the transformations in the “nature” of terroir linked to the return to
authentic terroir, and their consequences on the methods of proving the terroir quality of wines. It then
suggests a few guidelines to draw up a multifaceted critical protocol better suited to this evolution toward a
multifaceted quality. Instead of the “boundaries” between law, economics and society—a formulation that
supposes that these registers form separate domains—the problem addressed here navigates all these
dimensions. It shows how the speciﬁc conﬁgurations the actors intend to give the objects they produce,
raise legal and economic issues when the proof of their existence is in question.

This fundamentally pragmatic9 work is based on several studies, including, in particular, a recent
study of the issues involved in the certiﬁcation of the environmental quality of wines, carried out by a team

98

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

of researchers as part of the “Wine Without Pesticides” Program funded by the French Ministry for
Ecology. This study (Teil et al., 2011) is based on a dual corpus of texts on the subject and on 231 long,
non-directive interviews with more than 280 people, all interested in one way or another in wine-related
environmental issues. Those interviewed were selected to cover as wide as possible a range of
environmental questions in winegrowing and without exclusion a priori. The producers were initially
selected from three AOC areas with differing climates (Languedoc, Pays de Loire and Jura), and with a
variety of marketing strategies. The other interviews took place either in these regions or, in the case of
journalists or the administration, where they were based. Tracing this controversy then led us to depart
from this geographical benchmarking and study all the players, especially producers we shall call here
“terroir vintners” 10 from other regions who have also contributed to helping reconﬁgure the notion of
terroir.

The Emergence of a New Controversy Surrounding Terroir

The annual approval tasting was often judged to be lax, on the grounds that it rejected only very few of the
wines presented.11 In the early 2000s, however, it began to exclude for “non-typicity” producers who were
known to be strongly committed to the quest for and expression of terroir in wines:

“There are now countless good wines that are rejected by an approval system that often
(inevitably?) appears to be wide of the mark with regard to quality. The latest to date, as far as I
know, is the 2011 vintage Rose from the Domaine de la Begude.” 2011. » http://www.
les5duvin.com/article-la-dictature-par-la-couleur-la-mode-est-toujours-bete-et-ephemere-
103447477.html, consulted 16 April 2012

The approval tasting is not an exam; it aims to guarantee the gustative quality of the AOC’s wines by
highlighting faults or discrepancies in style deemed too signiﬁcant. Thus, whenever possible, juries add to
their “defect” or “non-typical” rejection verdicts practical advice on treating the wines to render them
consistent with the AOC’s wines at the next tasting (Communaute Economique Europeenne, 1974).
However, at the risk of marketing their production as simple “table wine,” the vintners in question
refuse—in the name of their engagement with regard to terroir—any “doctoring” of their wine, which they
interpret as a compromise of principle. The wine critic quoted above continues on his blog, citing
explanations for this refusal by the producer:

“It was with a hint of sadness that we ﬁlled in the form downgrading our Bandol-designation
Rose wine. Decidedly weary of being rejected, it was a bit like the end of a love affair.

For several years now, it’s been increasingly difﬁcult to get approval for our Rose—it was
granted in extremis after countless administrative procedures and interminable debates about
what a Bandol Rose should be. [Our] coral-coloured Rose wines [are different from others],
which are becoming more and more transparent, following the current trend. Having been
vintners for ﬁve generations, we don’t pay much attention to trends.

Our wines […] are above all an unadorned reﬂection of the terroir, climate and vintage. This
Rose seems to us to be one expression among many of this wonderful AOC. As such, our
precedent 2010 vintage, which sold out two months after it was bottled, was refused approval
several times and was eventually allowed to be designated ‘Bandol’ but given a warning. This
is a bit disconcerting when you think that we are among those who use the largest proportion

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

99

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

of Mourvedre, one of the great grape varieties of the area, in our blending. As we didn’t really
want to fail any more—we’re a bit old for that now—and be rejected once again for not
belonging to the family of Bandol wines, we found another family for it—Vins de France.”
http://www.les5duvin.com/article-la-dictature-par-la-couleur-la-mode-est-toujours-bete-et-
ephemere-103447477.html, consulted on 16 April 2012

Rather than blaming the typicity of their wines, on the contrary, the “rejected” vintners challenge the
competence of juries to recognize the expression of terroir. They see this as a sign of various “shifts” that
they have been pointing out for several years in the interpretation of terroir quality and AOC regulations.
For over 20 years, vintners have been accusing AOCs of giving in to what they consider inacceptable

transformations in the interpretation of the notion of terroir typicity.

The ﬁrst of these “shifts” is seen as too much “transparency” among producers who do nothing more
than apply the techniques required by their AOC without seeking to give their product “soul,” as might be
expected from an intellectual production. They behave as though they were mere mechanical processes
with no project and no personal investment in their production. The typicity of these wines is weak and ﬂat,
with no character; they call this “shift” the “AOC recipe.”

The second, which they call “technological,” is, in a way, the opposite. It highlights a subversion of
the vineyard by the vintners, who regard it as a supplier of raw materials from which they produce a wine
as they think best. In contrast to the vintners mentioned above, they have a very well-established project,
but one in which the vineyard makes little contribution except to serve it. They are accused of substituting
typicity with a style that is too personal.

The third shift is similar, except that it is not related to the creativity of the producer, but to his
excessive quest for productivity, which reduces the work of the vineyard to the production of grapes that
make a proﬁt. Here again, they take the geographical area as a supplier of raw materials, but instead of
using this raw material for the vintner’s aesthetic project, it is used to serve customer demand, especially
with regard to price and taste. The typicity of their wines is “commercial” and tends to be reduced to a few
common, non-speciﬁc traits of their terroir.

In all three instances, vintners are accused of not adequately taking into consideration their vineyard’s
contribution to their wine. They are not sufﬁciently attentive to it, drowning its voice in overly
sophisticated technical processes or excessively productive agricultural practices, or, on the contrary, they
think that the vine does everything on its own and all that is required to have a typical wine is to follow the
recipe.

But what do they want instead?

The Expression of Terroir Is Not “Mechanical”!
The rebels who claim to seek greater authenticity in the terroir quality of wines criticize the producers who
see terroir as nothing more than the result of applying the restrictions of AOC regulations. They claim that
terroir does not appear from nowhere; it is not already there, waiting to reveal itself if producers do not
“mess up” the batch or make any major mistakes. Regulations allow a “false” interpretation of terroir to be
established, in which the vineyard is seen as a natural element, with no will or restriction of its own,
generously producing and expressing terroir just so long as the producer does not hinder it in any way, in
other words, if he follows the recommendations of AOC regulations in accordance with ordinary best
practices.

On the contrary (they continue), terroir is hard to deﬁne and needs to be researched in depth
with regard to identifying its particular features and ﬁne-tuning the viticultural and wine-making
techniques that enable it to be expressed to the full. A terroir wine cannot be produced by simply
following a recipe, using grapes grown in a geographical indication area; there has to be commitment to a

100

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

process for understanding and deciphering the speciﬁc message that each vineyard or plot brings to the
terroir.

In the “mechanical” interpretation, terroir quality is not inventive enough. Vintners simply reproduce
the recipes invented by their predecessors. Furthermore, the designation of the recipe—all the viticulture
and wine-making practices perfected over the years by previous generations—comes exclusively from
using the name of the location of the vineyard where the terroir quality ﬁrst emerged. AOCs are thus
accused of seizing the name of the site where the wine was produced to designate viticulture and wine-
making practices. Their action, therefore, has something in common with monopolizing a recipe that can
only be designated by the name of the place where it was invented.

The Opposite Criticism of “Fabricating” Wines
Jonathan Nossiter’s ﬁlm Mondovino (Nossiter, 2004) is the mouthpiece for a different criticism leveled at
some of their colleagues by vintners seeking terroir authenticity. They accuse them of forgetting terroir or
treating it as no more than a supplier of raw materials that the vintner can manipulate as he sees ﬁt to serve
his own aesthetic project. From their point of view, these vintners make quality wines—but not terroir
wines. They forget that they are not the only ones to create and produce the quality of their wines.

The rebels demand greater respect for and attention to the vineyard so that its own contribution to
terroir can continue to be decipherable. For them, a terroir vineyard is not a mine or an oil ﬁeld. It is not a
mineral deposit whose production is adjusted to the demands of the operator. It marks its production with
qualities that vary according to the year, but that are particular to its terroir vineyard. And to achieve this,
the terroir vignoble requires care, attention, and receptiveness to its speciﬁcities. For example, the vintner
has to apply himself to reading his terroir’s thousand and one subtle nuances in each plot of vines that
express all the particular facets of a single terroir. The vineyard is not, therefore, a simple resource, even if
the vintner’s project is excellent and well received. It is a contributor to the quality, which requires respect
and recognition for its contribution to the production process.

So it is necessary for the vineyard, as well as the vintner, to be an active contributor to this innovative

intellectual creation which is terroir wine.

An Original Intellectual Coproduction, Both Creative and Local
The interpretation by the rebel vintners contrasts with both that of “mechanical” vintners and their
detractors. By insisting on the vintner’s interpretation, and on the unpredictable nature of the expression of
terroir, they make terroir production itself unpredictable, the result of an intellectual process of
deciphering, interknowledge and interpretation. From their point of view, the practices of terroir vintners
are interventions that are continually reinvented and never reproduced, since terroir never expresses itself
in the same way from 1 year to the next, or from one plot to another in the AOC area.

Being non-mechanical and non-predetermined (again, as interpreted by the rebel producers), quality
is a production, in the sense that it is the result of creative work. The contribution to this work by the
vintner is an interpretation of terroir expression, in other words, an intellectual work. Like every
interpreter, he is the author of his interpretation. But what is the corresponding contribution by the
vineyard as the producer of terroir grapes?

A plant in a ﬁeld bears fruit; this production is the result of relatively predictable biological activity
that is supervised and mastered by the farmer’s project. But in the minds of terroir vintners, the grapes
produced by terroir vineyards do not submit to the vintner’s project; they produce grapes whose quality
each year is unpredictable and different from previous years. So the expression of terroir in the grapes must
be rediscovered with each new vintage.

The vineyard therefore has the agency, unpredictability and capacity of an author constantly to
renew itself over the course of its production.12 It also has the individuality of the author. The notion

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

101

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

of author attaches an identiﬁable personality to a production. The cadastral plan, as an ofﬁcial
site record, unequivocally situates all the plots of land that make up a production region. It makes
it possible to associate a local production to a member of a collective. This is the “cru,” a plot
which has a homogeneous terroir expression, and all the plots together make up the AOC terroir
area.

The idea emerging from the collaboration between the vineyard and the vintner, emphasized by the
rebels, is very close to that of the couple formed by the composer and the musician. The latter must respect
the composer’s work, and not distort it or heavy-handedly overload it. Neither should his performance be
too mechanical nor too “academic,” with no soul, as it would fail to express his own visual and musical
interpretation, or in this case, the vintner’s own interpretation of the spirit and taste of the terroir. Yet the
acknowledgement of the vineyard as a proper co-author of the wine requires of course a legal standing, as
suggested by Stone (1972) and later (among other) Hermitte (1993) and Latour (1995) for every
contributor to our common world.

Reforming AOC Regulations

The rejections suffered by vintners supporting a return to terroir have led them to call for AOC regulations
to be reformed.

In addition to the approval procedure, they denounced restrictions upon vintners’ viticultural and
wine-producing practices that are simultaneously too rigid and too lax and that ignore the protection of
terroir. Regulations allow agricultural practices that destroy vineyards, such as the use of phytosanitary
aids that disrupt biological balances even though they are essential components of terroir, and they allow
yields that are far too high, excessively diluting terroir expression. On the other hand, they set rules that are
too inﬂexible on the proportion of grape varieties planted and on the sugar or alcohol content, regardless of
climatic variations and the effects of the vintages.

To publicize the legitimacy of their refusal to accept these restrictions and the “absurdity” of terroir
wines being downgraded to table wines, certain vintners founded SEVE,13 an organization whose
manifesto denounces the “shifts” that have, in their opinion, taken possession of tasting juries:

The Controlled Designation of Origin project is dedicated to:

– The gustative originality of the wine.
– A history and collective knowledge, qualiﬁed as local, loyal and constant usage.
– Accepting the location’s genius, including its “faults.”

However, it is clear that, since the creation of the INAO in 1935, this vision has been swept
aside by an industrial shift of viticulture, which has led to a standardisation of tastes.

Today, on the contrary, AOC criteria too often exclude authentic wines.

SEVE vintners do not recognise themselves in these shifts and esteem that the consistency of
AOCs is in danger. (SEVE manifesto, http://www.vin-authentique.net/pageLibre00010204.
html, consulted on 11 April 2012)

The authorities accepted the problem and began to reform AOC regulations (article D641-85
(repealed on 1 July 2008) of the new Rural Code). The reform’s conception and implementation
aroused much debate and, on some points, tension still runs high among producers and with the
authorities.

102

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

A Vintner’s Disposition Toward His Vineyard
For vintners who support a return to terroir, the vintner must be an interpreter, like a translator or a
musician interpreting a piece of music or a director putting on a play. He interprets the work, the
composition or the terroir’s message to reveal its meaning, its beauty and reﬁnement or its interest for
customers. A terroir wine is a project, a commitment. There is no recipe for a good terroir wine. Methods
cannot be known a priori but depend on how the project carried out by the vintner–vineyard partnership
progressed. The contribution of each party is different. Vintners have to be attentive to their terroirs,
identifying the talents of their plots and working out a project that brings out the best in them. It is a
respectful and considerate approach by the vintners with regard to their vineyards expressed as a certain
number of practices adapted to the project.

Like all interpreters, and unlike the owner of an oil ﬁeld, vintners do not simply have rights (to exploit
the vineyard’s production); they also have duties, in particular the duty to understand the vineyard and not
hamper its expression or distort it with an interpretation that is too personal. The vineyard can
demand respect and receptive attention from the vintner, and, notably, demand not to be destroyed by
unsuitable practices. The defenders of terroir insist on the harmful effects of viticultural practices that do
not respect terroirs;14 for them, this is the ﬁrst step that a vintner must take if he claims to be attentive to his
terroir.

And vice versa, the vineyard also has a duty toward its partner, the vintner. It has to produce grapes

that express typicity; the vintner must know that his efforts are not in vain.

The reform does not touch upon AOC zoning; a vineyard’s capacity to produce interesting and typical
grapes is already established, having been identiﬁed in the past when the AOCs were created. The
evolution of a vineyard, its erosion, the degradation of the soil and its eventual exhaustion, are all elements
that the vintner has learned or has to learn to overcome. The vineyard cannot be held responsible for the
deterioration of its capacity to produce terroir, only the vintner, because of the mistreatment he might
inﬂict.

The reform adopts this idea, by adding an accreditation for estates to a set of compulsory practices:

“Products that may be granted a controlled designation of origin label are products […] whose
production is subject to procedures that include accreditation for operators, inspection of
production conditions and inspection of products.” Article L641-5, Rural and Maritime
Fishing Code

[The control or inspection programme] provides for means to issue the accreditation
recognising the operator’s aptitude to satisfy the requirements of the speciﬁcations of the label
that s/he wishes to be granted” Article R642-39, Rural and Maritime Fishing Code

This is granted after an on-site visit to verify the vintner’s moral, practical and material commitment
to his vineyard and the quality of his products. The vintner must give a detailed explanation of his
reasoning as to how to bring out the qualities of his vineyard and implement appropriate viticultural and
viniﬁcation techniques.15

The accreditation avoids an a priori detailed explanation independent of the vineyard and, on the

contrary, authorizes the adjustment and interpretation of each terroir’s particularities.

From Certification of Commitment to Certification of Result
Since the PDO certiﬁcation is a guarantee of quality, the authorities do not just grant accreditation to
estates without examining their effects on the marketed product; they demand more concrete guarantees
than a simple commitment—an inspection to provide an “objective” conﬁrmation of quality and justify

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

103

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

the existence of a quality certiﬁcation. In addition to speciﬁcations for practices, they also expect that a test
of the result will prolong the guarantee, with the control of a set of characteristics that are speciﬁc to wines
from the same PDO area, thus conﬁrming justiﬁcation for the quality label.

The authorities listened to the criticisms of the producers’ juries and the various accusations of
incompetence, conﬂict of interest and commercial “shifts” that were made about them. They proposed
more diversiﬁed juries from wider boards and better trained in tasting with a view to assessing the
conformity of the wines.

“a) Committees responsible for the organoleptic examination must include the three following
groups:

– technicians (with proof of recognised technical expertise in this area)
–“ bearers of the memory” of the product (operators with competence in the ruling or retired
operators recognised by the profession)
– product users (restaurateurs and those working in the catering industry, food trade operators,
informed consumers who are members of recognised consumer associations, any person suggested
to the ODG by the inspection group, etc.)”16

The work of the jury would then be guided by a detailed description of typicity, a request included in

the new PDO regulations in European legislation:

“Speciﬁcations enable interested parties to verify that production conditions relating to
designation of origin or geographical indication are respected.

They comprise, at the minimum, the following elements:

a. the name to be protected;
b. the description of the wine: […]

for a wine granted a designation of origin, its principal analytic and organoleptic characteristics;
c. if applicable, the speciﬁc oenological practices used to produce the wine in question as well as the

restrictions applicable for its production;

d. the delimitation of the geographical area in question;
e. maximum yields per hectare;
f. the indication of the grape variety/varieties from which the wine is obtained” (2008)

This European requirement is relayed by the French administration for whom the impossibility of
giving a detailed description of the shared and distinguishing characteristics of the designation
demonstrates that there is no real difference, a deﬁciency that prevents the very possibility of establishing
a sign of quality:

We are now clashing with our head of the Inspection Body who tells us, ‘If you are not
capable of demonstrating that your designation produces typical wines, we’ll tell you
that you do not deserve the PDO’. Regardless of the heterogeneity of the terroirs, grape
varieties or cultural or oenological practices, a Coˆtes de Duras has to resemble other Coˆtes de
Duras wines otherwise, for the Approval and Inspection Board, it doesn’t qualify as one.
(Vintner 2)

104

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

It is hard to give a detailed description of typicity—this point is not new—and the previous measure to
control typicity (the approval tasting) circumvented this problem. It was carried out as a test in which the
experience of typicity incorporated in the tasters’ “palates” meant that a selection could be made between
wines that were typical and wines that were not, without needing to specify what the typicity actually
consisted of. However, the opacity of this method is no longer appropriate and the previous assessment in
the form of the former approval tasting was revised from start to ﬁnish.

It cannot be said that there are no “criteria” for terroir quality to appreciate wines—but they are not
unanimous, and are often short-lived and variable. Should vintners strive to deﬁne their typicity more
clearly and “set it in stone” in order to arrive at a real conformity test giving a real guarantee that the
certiﬁcation is relevant? Terroir vintners are divided on this question.

For some, this is impossible and dangerous. The pre-deﬁnition of typicity would only lead PDOs
along false trails and encourage the production of a stereotyped quality as well as encouraging producers
to resort to dubious expedients to produce it as cheaply as possible. The quest for quality cannot be
orientated in advance to obtain predetermined tastes; its assessment can only come from clients and tasters
who are attached to terroir quality and whose opinions contribute to the building of reputations. So it has to
be left to the market, to brands and even to wine critics, and not to a certiﬁcation of results. Further still,
they also contest the validity of PDO speciﬁcations: the more drastic and restrictive they are, the more they
impose a selective vision of terroirs and qualities, basing this on times gone by. For these vintners, the lists
of authorized grape varieties, in particular, are totally arbitrary reductions of the great diversity of grape
varieties used in local vineyards throughout history.

“Guided” Creativity
Nonetheless, these partisans of brand strategies do not have unanimous support; their opponents hold dear
the notion of a PDO that brings together a community of producers obliged to make a collective effort to
promote a regional or more localized terroir. For them, the PDO is a sign identifying their quality, and an
object of pride. Without it, they fear that the style of their wines will be diluted in too great a variability of
interpretations of terroir. They want a framework for the practices and commitment of each vintner in
seeking out terroir, and for juries to verify the terroir quality of wines to protect it, especially from the
whims of fashion.

However, the quest for a framework for typicity always comes up against the same problem. If it is
ﬂexible to allow for innovation, it also leaves the door open to the misappropriations from which it
seeks to preserve PDOs. On the other hand, if the detailed description of typicity is more speciﬁc,
“return to terroir” vintners ﬁnd their quest guided in advance in directions that may well turn out to be
dead ends.

The return to terroir emerging with these vintners is not making it easier to determine what terroir is.
On the contrary, it is distancing a little more the notion of a predetermined and veriﬁable result of a set of
factors or causes, and bringing it closer to the idea of artistic creation.

The notion of typicity that guides them is, indeed, close to that of artistic style; Bach or van Gogh can
be recognized from a certain style of painting or music which can be expected to shine through in
interpretations of the works. But all bodies of work by great creators contain atypical pieces, from their
youth, or from their periods whose classiﬁcation is not always deﬁnitive or agreed upon and can change
over time. Is it possible to limit and deﬁne typicity to a set of more or less loose criteria and still remain
discriminatory?

Artistic creation does not offer much of a solution. Music, in particular, may receive high praise and
countless seals of approval, but there are no quality certiﬁcations, especially not state-awarded ones. Even
national orchestras whose repertoire may border on the a priori limits of acceptable music do not have
repertoires with predeﬁned boundaries.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

105

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Pluralizing the Judging of Typicity

Vintners are tenacious and imaginative; the multifaceted notion of “family of tastes” has been suggested to
replace a unique and overly reductive delimitation of the typicity, but it has been rejected by vintners on
the grounds that its application would lead to uncontrollable or arbitrary variety:

[…] it is hard to claim that a PDO is not a family. In a family, there are tall people, fat people,
people with brown hair, and people with blond hair—and yet all still belong to the same
family. (Vintner 1)

It is as hard to deﬁne the typical taste of wines as it is to associate phenotypical variations to genes.
Just as typicity is not a “thing,” neither can it be reduced to a set of admissible typicities. Some people
have, therefore, advised abandoning the detailed description of the “correct” interpretation of typicity and,
on the contrary, sticking to an inventory of agreed “faults”:

We should limit ourselves to eliminating only those wines with prohibitive faults, i.e. faults
that are clearly and unanimously identiﬁed by the tasters and that mean that the wine cannot be
considered “loyal and marketable. (Vintner 2)

However, the increasingly intense quest for terroir and the banning of the use of products accused of
hindering the expression of terroir have shown that faults could become “relative” and highly debatable: a
“true” terroir wine that does not use sulfur displays, for the tasters, aromas of ethanal, which for a long time
have been considered a “fault” of the wine-making process.

This system only works if tasters trained in detecting faults are capable of determining the
relativity of a fault, and if the notion of the fault is clearly deﬁned. One day we will have to
settle the debate about ethanal—is it or is it not a fault? Almost all the victims of the “old
system” were due to the presence of ethanal because there was no or too little use of SO2. For
ﬁfty years, tasters have been trained to identify three main faults: oxidation, reduction and
ethanal. We should not be surprised that, as soon as they come across it, they take great
pleasure in highlighting it. (Vintner 3)

The list of faults, even widely accepted ones, has not been able to resist the revolution in taste that has
accompanied the vintners’ quest for terroir authenticity. Some of them, such as ethanal or oxidation, have
become the subject of ﬁerce controversy; conversely, “new faults” are raising the issue once again.17 For
all that, faults have still not lost their character as elements structuring the judgment. But as absolute faults
that are independent of the production process or terroir cannot be listed, the vintner above suggests
sticking with “relative” faults, in other words, appraised in relation to the way in which the wine was
produced.

Whether it is approached through its faults or its qualities, typicity still cannot be deﬁned in advance;
as indicated by the idea of a family of typical tastes, this is a multifaceted notion. It allows for a variety of
productions that cannot be reduced to something predeﬁned.

This requirement has been taken into account by the reform, which has introduced boards of varied
tasters each with their own different views of typicity. However, the variety introduced should not be
reduced to a “family” or list of acceptable views of typicity. Each member of the jury must base his
judgment not on a viewpoint or on particular “tastes,” but on respect for plurality. For this reason, we must
ensure that judges are capable of stepping outside of themselves and their habits and preferences to
examine other notions or views of typicity.

106

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

This “shift” can be achieved in two ways when tasters are called upon to judge typicity “relative to the
wines” as stated by the vintner quoted above, that is with regard to the project that guided their production,
or when a taster judges a product based on the “tastes” of another taster. Discussions between judges or
with the producers of the wines being tasted are often the occasion for such “shifts” or “openings up” to
plurality.

However, a protocol such as this, open to discussion with colleagues and understanding the product
tasted, is fairly directly opposed to the protocols of sensorial analysis, an individual analysis that is isolated
and blind, as recommended by reports (Cesar, 2002) to achieve a more reliable tasting:

[Your rapporteur] considers it […] urgent to strengthen the guarantees regarding the
procedures used within the framework of tasting committees. For example, this involves
organising the isolation of the tasters in order to avoid discussions of a nature to compromise
the objectivity of the judgment.

In this respect, it would be highly advisable to establish a certiﬁcation of procedures by a
third-party body. Nevertheless, this should not exclude the deﬁning of rules shared on a
central level in order to guarantee a certain harmonisation.

Lastly, it would be beneﬁcial to offer tasters relevant training that would teach them to
explain and motivate their appraisal of each product examined. (Cesar, 2002): 85 (Emphasis
made by the rapporteur)

The Misguided Rejection of Plurality as a Sign of “Error”
Everyone can sense that resorting to a wider variety of tasters will inevitably lead to a wider variety of
tasting judgments, and this variety is very often interpreted as showing lack of precision in the tasters’
appraisals. This is especially true for sensorial analysis, which stipulates that an objective assessment of
quality exists—the perception of the object judged in its “truth.” Consequently, the differences in
judgments are due to inﬂuences that disperse or bias them.

The notion of typicity as a multifaceted object is antinomic with this presupposition of “real”
existence. The variability of typicity does not arise from a lack of precision or an error of judgment; on the
contrary, it is associated with its multifaceted mode of existence. The conformity test requiring a strict and
precise deﬁnition of what has to be judged that goes along with this “essentialist” ontological
presupposition is equally incompatible with the multifaceted mode of existence. The conclusion that can
be drawn from the impossibility of reducing typicity to “something” or to a list of criteria, which would
consequently mean that typicity does not exist and is, at best, a mere illusion or an imaginary social
construction, is also erroneous. It is based on the idea that typicity has to have an “essential,” pre-existent
mode of existence, whilst the people involved see it otherwise. Indeed, they never interpret the variability
of typicity as the sign of an existential problem of typicity, but rather as a characteristic of a notion that
brings together a “family” of productions. It would be judged as such if the variability of typicity were
total, if any wine whatsoever could be considered typical. But it is not open to all productions; not all wines
are typical of their terroir, but neither are all tasters unanimous in their acceptance or rejection.

Drawing Inspiration From the Wine Critic’s Assessment
Typicity is not the only multifaceted object; gustative quality is equally so. The taste of wines is subject to
numerous tastings by wine critics who assess the quality of wines in respect for its multifaceted character.
To do this, they call upon not just one, but a variety of tasters and tasting protocols, of which the best
known is blind tasting.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

107

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

The advantage of blind tasting is that it prevents tasters from basing their verdict on what other
producers or other tasters may say about the product. The taste alone perceived during a single tasting
occasion is an experience that signiﬁcantly reduces the object. Only very rarely does it allow the product
being drunk to be identiﬁed with certainty and to be associated through memory with other judgments by
other tasters or with other tasting occasions. But if the taster is unable to recognize the product, this is also
because s/he is tasting a wine without knowing much of what it is, what it claims to be, the way it was
produced and the project it represents. In classical music or painting, professional judges usually can
recognize a work merely from the sound of the music, can recognize from a painting the artist, the oeuvre,
the period […] As far as wine is concerned, this recognition is very difﬁcult, and blind judging is a
judgment made with considerable lack of information, based on a very much reduced and individual
experience of the wine.

Wine critics are aware of this aspect of blind tasting, but they nevertheless still use it.18 It is common
for a wine tasted blind to receive a different judgment from when it is tasted in full knowledge of the facts.
Critics use this effect to scrutinize the “tastes,” sensibilities and “bias” of their own or others’ personal
perceptions, and to distance themselves from previous experiences and tastings. In so doing, they try to
avoid being “swayed by ﬁrst impressions,” looking beyond “appearances” and reassessing their judgment.
Non-blind tasting,19 on the other hand, is based on all the other judgments that the taster is willing to
take into account. The result is a less personal, more collective judgment, but one that risks being merely
the echo or reproduction of another’s judgment. Like terroir typicity, each new judgment of taste must be
the result of an “authentic” questioning, in other words, an investigation, and not the automatic repetition
of a set of predetermined elements.

The combination of the two protocols for blind and non-blind tasting, both used by critics, allows
tasters to be part of a “judging collective” producing a collective assessment of wines. The comparison of
the various separate judgments by all of the tasters, which are divergent but nonetheless relevant, invites
the tasters to position themselves as individuals within a panel of judges, an operation on which the
composition of the ﬁnal collective judgment is based, and to analyze their own judgment too. This
procedure with its multiple protocols connecting the individual and the tasters’ collective informs the
multifaceted judgment of the multifaceted object that is the gustative quality of a wine.

Toward a Collective, Localized Assessment of a Non-Predefined Typicity
So there is a tasting assessment that allows the quality of a wine to be judged, at the same time respecting
the plurality of quality, and without having to make this quality explicit beforehand. This assessment is
different from the recognition test, and is related to the mode of existence of a particular quality with
multiple characteristics.

So the authors’ creativity can be preserved by judging the style or typicity of a wine without making it
a judgment of conformity to a predeﬁned framework. It is a very common judgment procedure for wine
critics to whom terroir vintners regularly submit their wines.

So from now on, why not leave it to the assessment by wine critics already in place? This is what is
suggested by supporters of brands but rejected by the others, since the question of typicity and terroir is not
necessarily central to what is a quality judgment by this assessment. Could it not be left to those wine
critics who are interested in terroir and who, whatever is decided, will pronounce judgments on future
terroir products?

Criticism is a continual assessment that is constantly producing itself. It extends to include all those
who are interested, from the connoisseur to the simple purchaser of a bottle of wine.20 It is a widespread
assessment which can never produce an overall vision or one single judgment.21 However, the purpose of a
quality sign is to provide a guarantee. It must therefore be based on a well-deﬁned assessment that
nevertheless produces a judgment respecting plurality. Being less than perfect, like all systems, this

108

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

judgment will have its strengths and weaknesses but it is still one, single judgment. The critical assessment
must therefore be adapted to situate this “widespread assessment” in time and space. To do this, we could
attempt to imitate how criticism works, by organizing blind tasting sessions for the collective of tasters
from the various boards selected, followed by non-blind tastings and, above all, discussions to link up the
different judgments without erasing their plurality. Then, and contrary to the way criticism functions, the
collective must come to an argued decision to approve or exclude the wine.

The notion of typicity emerging from such an assessment is not deﬁned a priori; it comes from
comparing many different judgments. It has the advantage of being precise and yet more ﬂexible than
predeﬁned, agreed criteria, which are always too rigid and/or too slack. Typicity can therefore follow more
closely the process of producing terroir taste. The jury’s plurality is a crucial feature, as is its interest in
terroir. The reform provides the possibility of recruiting tasters, which is certainly a move in this direction,
but it must not ﬁnd itself restricted by juries that are too small or by the limited diligence of some of them.
Lastly, each of the juries must be headed by someone who ensures that the plurality of the judgments is
respected.22

Conclusion

The idea of tradition, which plays a central role in PDOs, has helped eclipse the creative dimension of the
production of PDOs despite this being dear to the INAO as it was to Joseph Capus, their founder. The
historical continuity of recognizing a quality supports the argument for the existence and general interest
of protecting a style of wine, and discriminating between legitimate and opportunistic requests.
Nonetheless, this historical continuity does not prevent tradition from being constantly reinvented, as
numerous authors have pointed out.23

The recent controversy over PDOs in France brings their nature of innovative intellectual creation
back into the spotlight, and in doing so, their duality too. As a sign of quality, PDO regulations must be
able to prove that the commitment to offer consumers a speciﬁc quality has been successful, which is
generally achieved with tests of conformity to the declared quality. However, as a creative production that
is continually being reinvented—a common format for all artistic productions—it is difﬁcult for terroir to
accept a predeﬁnition of its quality.

Do we have to choose between these two somewhat antinomical “natures” of PDOs, and transform
them into brands open to innovation but whose quality is not guaranteed by a public label? Or should we,
on the contrary, establish quality signs that can be tested, like standards that would guarantee a strict
gustative framework for each PDO’s products?

Many producers are opposed to this. It is indeed difﬁcult to imagine separating the two “natures” of
terroir quality, which both seem to be indispensable elements for their success. The competitive dynamic
of PDO wines stems from the creative nature of terroir, and this maintains the interest for these
productions. As innovative productions in ﬁerce competition for quality, they generate the prestige
attached to wine and the curiosity of consumers from every country, including those that have never
consumed such products. As signs of quality, they then accompany the wines in their distribution channels
and facilitate the choices of these consumers who are requesting them. But it is, in fact, the combination of
these two registers,
in spite—or because—of their contradictions, which fuels their success by
maintaining the interest of a very wide range of drinkers for quality wines.

The difﬁculties encountered by the reform arise from the issue of the guarantee of quality. Signs of
quality are usually associated with “objective tests” that require quality to be made explicit, and whose
credibility increases in proportion to the precision of the description.

The earlier approval tasting, which did not require a detailed description of typicity, meant that the
ambivalence of PDOs could remain at the heart of their success. Terroir vintners challenged this approval

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

109

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

tasting, and the reform made radical modiﬁcations. Juries are recruited from very wide boards to take
better account of the diverse visions of wine typicity, and thus of the plurality of typicity.

However, we should not then (as suggested by the authorities seeking an “objective” quality
certiﬁcation) abruptly reduce it by eliminating this somewhat awkward diversity. The demands of
innovation and creation make this objectivation an intolerable reduction for productions whose main
characteristic is plurality. The ensuing standardization would be nothing but a surreptitious reintroduction
of a deﬁnition of typicity, the source of the producers’ revolt. We need to look elsewhere.

A tool to appraise the quality of wines already exists—wine criticism—which works along a
diametrically opposed principle. Like art criticism, it multiplies tasters and protocols rather than reducing
them, in order to take into account as fully as possible all the different facets and visions of terroir and its
quality. Instead of fearing that judgments of taste will be dispersed, we suggest making this a resource, and
establishing an appraisal system that imitates criticism while still “insisting upon” the production of a
single, collective judgment.

About the Author
Genevieve Teil, INRA, Centre Regional de Recherche Agronomique, Station experimentale de
Boukhalef, Route de Rabat, 90000 Tangiers, Morocco; e-mail: genevieve.teil@agroparistech.fr

Notes
1. At the author’s request, I have translated the French word “epreuve” as “assessment” in order to distinguish it

from “test”, which, in this article, is used exclusively to refer to a speciﬁc kind of assessment.

2. The senator recorded the establishing of the Geographical Indications Act; Capus (1947).
3. Republique Franc¸aise (1919) “Loi du 6 mai 1919 relative a` la protection des appellations d’origine.”
4. In this way, it differs from a simple norm:

“Unlike other forms of qualiﬁcation (‘Labels Rouge’, Conformity Certiﬁcates, etc.), identity criteria are
speciﬁc to each product and very closely related to their terroir. In addition, their qualiﬁcation does not depend on
an exhaustive ‘standardisation’ approach but, on the contrary, on promoting a relative variability within the
framework of the designation” (Scheffer and Roncin, 2000, p. 67).

5. The property right question addressed here is that of the production of the vintners, the wines and not, as it occurs
un some articles (Gangjee, 2012), that of the quality sign itself, the geographical indication «coˆteaux du Layon»
or «Schoenenbourg grand cru».

6. AOCs have become Appellations d’Origine Protegees (AOP) (In English: Protected Designation of Origins

(PDO) since the European Regulation Communaute Europeenne (2008).

7. French decree no. 67-30 of 9 January 1967 (Communaute Economique Europeenne, 1974).
8. A slightly more individualistic argument explains that, since they cannot always recognise their own wines, each

member of the jury is extremely indulgent so as not to risk ruling out his own production.

8. By pragmatic, we mean the analysis of actors’ activity that emerges from the work of James (1996 [1912]).

10. This designation is only to emphasise the extreme revival of interest in terroir that they are promoting. It makes no
judgment on the success of their approach or the failure or unfounded nature of terroir approaches from other
vintners who are not involved with this movement and have, on the contrary, fought against it.

11. This lack of severity from approval juries is mentioned in Information Report no. 349 (2001–2002) by Gerard
CE´ SAR, for the Economic Affairs Committee L’avenir de la viticulture franc¸aise: entre tradition et deﬁ du
Nouveau Monde, which notes only a few percent of rejections each year. This accusation, still contested by the
INAO (interview with an INAO representative) (INAO, 2005), indicates that over 10% of wine samples are
rejected (p. 44).

110

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

12. In the article by Hermitte cited above, the author describes terroir as “the co-author of the product”, p. 202.
13. Throughout his presidency until his death in 2006, Rene Renou, appointed President of the INAO’s National

Committee of Wines and Brandies in 2000, argued for the need to reform GIs.

14. Although often initially the reﬂections of terroir vintners, the fragility of terroirs is not the crucial element. The
environment also is fragile, as are water and biodiversity. They can all be protected by appropriate means,
independently of the issue of GI certiﬁcation. This is the position that France’s Ministry of Agriculture has always
supported, insisting upon the need to separate environmental questions and product quality certiﬁcation.

15. Directive concerning the approval procedure provided for in Article L. 641-5 of the “Code Rural pour les

Appellations d’Origine Controˆlees,” INAO-DIR-2008-01.

16. Directive from the Approval and Inspection Board linked to the Committee responsible for the organoleptic
examination. INAO-DIR-2008-02 revision 1, Institut National de l’Origine et de la Qualite (INAO) referring to
recommendations in the report by G. Cesar cited above.

17. For several months, vintners and wine critics have been discussing tastes that are more or less desirable or
unacceptable and that might be connected to the increased presence of Brettanomyce bacteria in some wines
seeking a strong terroir expression.

18. Unlike art critics, the huge majority of wine tasters continue to regard it as the condition of “good,” objective and
independent judgment. But none of them only tastes blind, and in any case, the tasted products are then revealed
after the blind tasting, which allows all the different experiences of the product to be brought together ex post,
whether they took place on different occasions or were made by other tasters.

19. Also called sighted-tasting.
20. Criticism is not relativist—judges do not all have the same credibility; the activity of judging wines is coupled
with another register of judgment—the competence of each taster, which lends a different weight to each
judgment.

21. For a fuller demonstration of this point, see Teil (2012).
22. This is also what Joan Kee suggests to help tackle problems of copies for intellectual productions. She suggests
that in one single but multifaceted judgment, the judgment of a “connoisseur” (“a skill learned only through
example, not precept,” not limited to speciﬁc detailed descriptions of the notion of style), helps to discriminate
between good and bad candidates for a quality of origin, a quality known as original when it involves an author,
and “local” when it involves a geographical indication (Kee, 2012).

23. See, for example, Letablier (1997) or with regard to wine, Stanziani (2006).

References
Berard, L. and Marchenay, P. (1995) ‘Lieux, temps et preuves—La construction sociale des produits de terroir’,
Terrain, numero-24—La fabrication des saints (mars 1995, [En ligne], mis en ligne le 08 juin 2007 [online].
Available at http://terrain.revues.org/3128. Consulte le 22 mars 2013).

Cadot, Y. (2006) ‘Le lien du vin au terroir: complexite du concept de typicite’, Revue des Oenologues et des

Techniques Vitivinicoles et Oenologiques, 118, 9–11.

Capus, J. (1947) L’Evolution de la legislation sur les appellations d’origine; Genese des appellations controˆ lees.

INAO—Editions Louis LARMAT, Paris.

Cesar, G. (2002) ‘L’avenir de la viticulture franc¸aise: entre tradition et deﬁ du Nouveau Monde’, Rapport
d’information no 349 (2001–2002) de M. Gerard CE´ SAR, fait au nom de la commission des affaires
economiques, depose le 10 juillet 2002.

Charlier, C. and Ngo, M.-A. (2007) ‘An Analysis of the European Communities: Protection of Trademarks and
Geographical Indications for Agricultural Products and Foodstuffs Dispute’, The Journal of World Intellectual
Property, 10, 171–86.

Communaute Economique Europeenne (1974) ‘Decret CEE no. 74-871 du 19 octobre 1974 relatif aux examens

analytique et organoleptique des vins a` appellations d’origine controˆlee’, JO CE.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

111

Genevieve Teil

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Communaute Europeenne (2008) ‘Reglement CE No 479/2008 du Conseil du 29 avril 2008 portant organisation
commune du marche vitivinicole, modiﬁant les re‘glements (CE) no 1493/1999, (CE) no 1782/2003, (CE)
no 1290/2005 et (CE) no 3/2008, et abrogeant les re‘glements (CEE) no 2392/86 et (CE) no 1493/1999’.

Foray, D. (1993) ‘Standardisation et Concurrence: Des Relations Ambivalentes’, Revue d’Economie Industrielle,

63(1), 84–101.

Frayssignes, J. (2001) ‘L’ancrage Territorial D’une Filiere Fromagere d’AOC. L’exemple du Systeme Roquefort’,

E´ conomie Rurale, 264–265, 89–103.

Gangjee, D. (2012) ‘Quibbling Sibblings: Conﬂicts Between Trademarks and Geographical Indications’, Chicago-

Kent Law Review, 82(3), 1253–91.

Handler, M. (2006) ‘The WTO Geographical Indications Dispute’, Modern Law Review, 69(1), 70–80.
Hermitte, M.-A. (1993) ‘L’animal a` L’epreuve du Droit des Brevets’, Nature, Sciences et Societes, 1(1), 17–55.
Hermitte, M.-A. (2001) ‘Les Appellations D’origine Dans la Genese des Droits de Propriete Intellectuelle’, Etudes et

Recherches—Systemes Agraires et Developpement, 2001(32), 195–207.

Ibele, E.W. (2009) ‘The Nature and Function of Geographical Indications in Law’, Estey Centre Journal of

International Law and Trade Policy, 10(1), 36–49.

INAO (2005) Rapport d’activite 2004–2005. INAO, Paris.
James, W. (1996 ([1912]). Essays in Radical Empiricism. University of Nebraska Press & Longmans Greens and Co.,

New York.

Josling, T. (2005) ‘What’s in a Name? The Economics, Law and Politics of Geographical Indications for Foods and

Beverages’, Paper presented to the Institute for Integration Studies, 30.

Kee, J. (2012) ‘Connoisseurship and Its Potential in Matters of Copyright’, Law, Culture and the Humanities,

8(2), 333–49.

Laporte, C. (2000) ‘L’Appellation D’origine Controˆlee Comme Garant de la Typicite des Productions Viticoles’,

Revue d’Economie RE` gionale et Urbaine, 2000(3), 557–70.

Latour, B. (1995) ‘Moderniser ou E´ cologiser? A` la Recherche de la ‘Septieme’ Cite’, Ecologie Politique, 4(1),

5–27.

Letablier, M.-T. (1997) L’art et la Matiere—Savoirs et Ressources Locales Dans les Productions Speciﬁques. Centre

d’Etudes de L’emploi, Paris.

Liotard, I. (2008) ‘Persistance et Intensite des Conﬂits Entre Normalisation et Propriete Intellectuelle: Les
Enseignements de la 3e Generation de Telephonie Mobile’, Revue Internationale de Droit E` conomique, t. XXII,
1(1), 47–65.

Nossiter, J. (2004) Mondovino DVD. TF1 Video, Paris.
Republique Franc¸aise (1919) ‘Loi du 6 mai 1919 relative a` la protection des appellations d’origine’.
Republique Franc¸aise (1935) ‘Decret-loi du 30 juillet 1935 Defense du marche des vins et regime economique de

l’alcool’.

Rufﬁeux, B. and Valceschini, E. (1996) ‘Biens D’origine et Competence des Consommateurs: Les Enjeux de la

Normalisation Dans L’agro-Alimentaire’, Revue D’economie Industrielle, 75(1), 133–46.

Scheffer, S. and Roncin, F. (2000) ‘Qualiﬁcation des Produits et des Terroirs Dans la Reconnaissance en aoc’,

E´ conomie Rurale, 258, 54–68.

Stanziani, A. (2006). ‘3. Qualite des Produits et Regles de Droit Dans Une Perspective Historique’, in Eymard-

Duvernay F.O. (ed.) L’e’conomie des Conventions, me’Thodes et re’sultats. La Decouverte, Paris.

Stone, C.D. (1972) ‘Should Trees Have Standing? Towards Legal Ricghts for Natural Objects’, Southern California

Law Review, 45, 450–501.

Teil, G. (2010) ‘The French Wine “Appellations d’Origine Controˆlee” and the Virtues of Suspicion’, Journal of

World Intellectual Property, 13(2), 253–74.

Teil, G. (2012) ‘No Such Thing as Terroir? Objectivities and the Regimes of Existence of Objects’, Science

Technology and Human Values, 37(5), 478–505.

112

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Nature, the CoAuthor of Its Products?

Genevieve Teil

Teil, G., Barrey, S. Floux, P. and Hennion, A. (2011) Le vin et L’environnement: Faire Compter la Difference. Presses

de l’Ecole des Mines, Paris.

Torre, A. (2002) ‘Les AOC Sont-Elles des clubs ? Reﬂexions sur les Conditions de L’action Collective Localisee,

Entre Cooperation et Regles Formelles’, Revue D’economie Industrielle, 100, 39–62.

Van Der Merwe, A. (2009) ‘Geographical Indication Protection in South Africa With Particular Reference to Wines

and to the EU’, Estey Centre Journal of International Law and Trade Policy, 10(1), 186–95.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

113


