DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12083

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

WTO “Paragraph 6” system for affordable access
to medicines: Relief or regulatory ritualism?

Muhammad Z. Abbas BA, LLB, LLM, PhD |
Shamreeza Riaz BA, LLB, LLM, PhD

Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia

Correspondence
Shamreeza Riaz, Queensland University of
Technology, George Street, GPO Box 2434,
Brisbane QLD 4000 CRICOS No. 00213J,
Australia.
Email: shamreeza.riaz@hdr.qut.edu.au

Regulatory Ritualism means acceptance of regulatory goals
while losing focus in achieving them. In other words, it means
ignoring of goals or objectives of a process or mechanism and
focusing too much on regulations, rules, and formalities.
Advanced countries and developing countries have been in a
continuous negotiation over access to drugs ever since
coming into effect of TRIPS Agreement. The Doha Declara-
tion was a rare negotiation win for third world countries. This
paper endeavors to apply the notion of Regulatory Ritualism
to Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration 2001 and to
subsequent WTO General Council's Waiver Decision 2003
which aimed at giving effect to Paragraph 6 flexibility. The
first part of the paper discusses the historical background of
the Doha Declaration and 2003 Decision. The second part of
this paper analyses Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration and
subsequent Waiver Decision in the light of the notion of
Regulatory Ritualism and Rule Complexity, with a special focus
on Apotex-Rwanda case study, the case of India and the case
of Australia. The final part of this paper sums up the
discussion on the issue and provides suggestions.

K E Y W O R D S
Apotex-Rwanda, access to drugs, compulsory licensing, Doha
Declaration, Paragraph 6, patent monopoly, public health,
regulatory ritualism, rule complexity, TRIPS flexibilities

© 2017 The Authors. The Journal of World Intellectual Property © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

32 | wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip

J World Intellect Prop. 2018;21:32–51.

ABBAS AND RIAZ

1 |

INTRODUCTION

| 33

The Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement required patent protection for
inventions in all fields of technology including pharmaceuticals (WTO, 1994). An obvious and direct consequence of
monopoly on drugs is an increase in prices of needed medicines; patent protection on medicines, therefore, emerged
as a common issue for third world countries where purchasing power is too low to afford patented medicines (Rozek,
2000). The access to drugs problem was foreseen and TRIPS included public health safeguards like non-voluntary
licensing of drug patents but this flexibility was of little significance for least developed countries1 and developing
countries with no drug manufacturing capacity because of the “domestic use” condition attached to it (WTO, 1994).
This very issue was highlighted by human rights activists, NGOs, and public health advocates in the wake of the
outbreak of HIV/AIDS in Africa in the very beginning of the Twenty-first century. The Doha Declaration 2001 (TRIPS,
2001), and subsequent WTO General Council's Waiver Decision 2003 (WTO, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c) aimed at
reforming the existing system in order to resolve the issue of access to drugs for poorer countries.

It has been observed that the issue of access to drugs has remained a hot issue even after breakthrough pro-
access developments like Doha Declaration (WTO, 2001) and 2003 Waiver Decision. The adoption of a resolution on
“Access to medicines in the context of the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health” presented by 13 countries (Saez, 2016)2 in the 32nd session of the Human Rights Council
(13 June 2016–1 July 2016) is a recent development in this regard (Kulkarni, 2016). The resolution notes that actual or
potential conflicts exist between the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement and access to affordable medicines
(Mitra-Jha, 2016); the resolution urges member states to make full use of TRIPS flexibilities for affordable access to
medicines (Human Rights Council, 2016) and specifically recalls the Doha Ministerial Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health in this context (Kulkarni, 2016). The resolution fully recognizes the implications of
pharmaceutical patent monopoly for policy coherence in developing countries.

The United Nations Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines Report released on 14
September 2016, is another recent development. The Report found that the Paragraph 6 system has failed to provide
a workable solution for countries lacking drug manufacturing capacity of their own. The Report recommended that
“WTO Members should revise the paragraph 6 decision in order to find a solution that enables a swift and expedient
export of pharmaceutical products produced under compulsory license” (UN, 2016). On one hand, World Health
Organization aims that “by 2030, the deadline for the Sustainable Development Goals, all countries must be able to
provide full coverage for quality health services to their entire populations” (Kieny, 2016) while on the other hand
access to drugs remains an “illusive goal” for millions of people (Mitra-Jha, 2016).3

Bilateral and regional free-trade agreements, which set TRIPS-Plus intellectual property standards, have arguably
constrained the use of legitimate TRIPS flexibilities reaffirmed in the Doha Declaration (Abbas & Riaz, 2013). The
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)—an ambitious free trade agreement that the United States has negotiated with 11
other countries (New Zealand, Australia, Canada, Japan, Singapore, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru,
and Vietnam)—is the most recent example of such trade deals requiring enhanced rights and remedies for
multinational drug companies. Article 18.6.1(b) recognizes the right of member states to utilize the Waiver flexibility
but it neither makes any commitment for effective implementation of this public health solution nor puts any
obligation on member states to take necessary steps to use this flexibility for the sake of improving access to essential
medicines in the poorer countries. This provision stipulates that:

In recognition of the commitment to access to medicines that are supplied in accordance with the Decision
of the General Council of August 30, 2003 on the Implementation of Paragraph Six of the Doha Declaration
on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/L/540) and the WTO General Council Chairman's
Statement Accompanying the Decision (JOB(03)/177, WT/GC/M/82), as well as the Decision of the WTO
General Council of December 6, 2005 on the Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement, (WT/L/641) and the
WTO General Council Chairperson's Statement Accompanying the Decision (JOB(05)319 and Corr. 1,WT/

34 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

GC/M/100) (collectively, the “TRIPS/health solution”), this Chapter does not and should not prevent the
effective utilisation of the TRIPS/health solution (The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, 2015).

Most recently, the intergovernmental South Center organized a discussion on implementation of WTO
“Paragraph 6” System alongside the WTO Council for TRIPS meeting held on 8 November 2016 (The South Centre,
2016).4 The panelists, including Yuanqiong Hu, Dean Foster, Denis Broun, and Suerie Moon, generally considered the
Paragraph 6 system an unworkable solution to provide affordable access to medicines to patients in poorer countries.
Roger Kampf, Counsellor at the Intellectual Property Division of the WTO, presented several issues for consideration
such as: how to use the Waiver scheme as a practical procurement tool; how to actively engage ministries of health
and procurement agencies in the process; and how to make generic drug companies’ participation in the scheme
economically viable (Nightingale, 2016). Keeping in view the significance of access to a cheap generic version of
medicines in attaining global public health goals, this paper aims at critically evaluating the practical implications of
implementing Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration and the Waiver flexibility in the light of the notion of Regulatory
Ritualism.

According to John Braithwaite, Ritualism means, “acceptance of institutionalized means for securing regulatory
goals while losing focus on achieving the goals or outcomes themselves” (Braithwaite, 2008). Similarly, according to
Jolyon Ford, “The ‘ritualism’ concept relates to formalistic participation in a regulatory system, engaging in the
institutional processes created to achieve substantive regulatory goals but taking these verification and reporting
processes as the point of the exercise, while losing all focus on the goals themselves” (Ford, 2016). The central theme
of this paper is that the flexibility provided under Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration has been over-shadowed by the
procedural formalities that are unnecessarily complex and burdensome and do not comply with the intended purpose
of the flexibility.

1.1 | Historical background of the Doha Declaration

In 1995, the World Trade Organization (WTO) linked intellectual property (IP) protection with the trade because
signing TRIPS is a prerequisite condition to become a member of the WTO. The 20-year patent protection provided to
innovations in pharmaceutical industry, under Article 27(1) of the TRIPS Agreement, has direct implications for access
to drugs, especially in poorer countries (WTO, 1994). The patients in urgent need of a patented drug cannot wait for
20 years to have access to the drug (Jain, 2008).

It was anticipated at the time of drafting the TRIPS Agreement that drug patents may have serious practical
implications for poorer countries. Public health safeguards like compulsory licensing of drug patents5 and parallel
importation of patented drugs6 (Kraus, 2004) were therefore included in the TRIPS Agreement (Durojaye, 2008).
Under Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement, member states were allowed to “provide limited exceptions to the exclusive
rights conferred by a patent” (WTO, 1994).

Third world countries soon realized that the flexibilities provided under the TRIPS Agreement were not easy to
use because of formidable practical implications. For instance, in 1997, in South Africa, the effort of Nelson Mandela's
government to improve the availability of affordable medicines by making changes in Medicines and Related
Substances Control Amendment Act7 to allow parallel importation of patented medicines was challenged in the South
African High Court. Backed by 39 giant
research-based drug manufacturing companies, Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers’ Association of South Africa, alleged that the government of South Africa had violated not only
the TRIPS Agreement but also the South African Constitution by making the amendment that allowed parallel
importation of medicines (Case No. 4183/98).

This case in South Africa fueled concerns about the ability of the WTO member states to use the legitimate public
flexibilities provided under the TRIPS Agreement. Against the backdrop of this case, public health groups started a
campaign for an official confirmation that WTO dispute settlement proceedings would not be initiated against member
states if they resort to using TRIPS public health safeguards. A number of public health groups and non-governmental

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 35

organizations like Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF),8 Oxfam International, the Health Global Access Project (Health
GAP),9 the Consumer Project on Technology (CPTech),10 and Health Action International (HAI)11 started campaigning
on this issue in collaboration with national treatment action groups in countries like South Africa, Kenya, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Brazil, Thailand, India, and others (Hoen, 2016).

In this context, the MSF, Health Action International and Consumer Project on Technology sponsored the
first meeting on compulsory licensing of AIDS medicines held at the UN in Geneva on 25–27 March, 1999.12
On 25–26 November, as a part of this campaign, the NGOs organized the “Conference on Increasing Access
to Essential Drugs in a Globalized Economy: Working Towards Solutions” which took place in Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.13 This Conference was immediately followed by the Third WTO Ministerial Conference14 which
began in Seattle, Washington, United States, on 30 November, 1999. Though the issue of public health and
access to medicines was not on the official agenda of this Ministerial Conference,
it received attention
because of the context in which the Conference was held. The Ministerial Conference, however, ended
without any progress on the issue.15

By the time the Fourth WTO Ministerial Conference was held in Doha, Qatar in November 2001, the access to
drugs issue had emerged as a global issue because of the devastating effects of the HIV/AIDS crisis in the poorer
countries and aggressive challenges against pro-access measures of governments in these countries. For instance, in
June 2001, the United States Trade Representative challenged the Brazilian Industrial Property Law's compulsory
licensing provisions16 alleging a violation of Article 27(1) of TRIPS and initiated a dispute settlement proceeding at
WTO (DISPUTE DS199, 2001).

The developed countries and developing countries were at odds on the issue of access to drugs because of their
conflicting interests. The position of developed countries, led by the United States, became weak because of anthrax
threat in the United States following a terrorist attack in September 2001. Prompt access to affordable supplies of
antibiotic Ciprofloxacin was needed and the US government used the threat of compulsory licensing of the patent on
ciprofloxacin while negotiating with Bayer, the patent owner pharmaceutical company (Carroll & Winslow, 2001). This
case negatively affected the pro-patent argument of developed countries and members of the Doha meeting reached
a consensus that obligations under TRIPS should not bar member states from taking measures for the protection of
public health (Hunter et al., 2009).

The Doha Ministerial Declaration adopted during the Fourth WTO Ministerial Conference aimed at
dealing with public health issues caused by pharmaceutical patents,17 especially the issue of access to drugs
for HIV/AIDS’ patients in poor countries (Jain, 2008). The Declaration fully recognized the gravity of the
public health problems18 (Nightingale, 2016) and affirmed the sovereign right of member states to adopt
measures, like compulsory licensing of pharmaceutical patents and parallel importation of patented drugs, to
protect public health (The Doha Ministerial Declaration, 2001). Though the Declaration was not meant to
substantially amend the TRIPS Agreement (Correa, 2004a, 2004b), it not only affirmed the right of member
states to avail themselves of the TRIPS public health flexibilities (Reichman, 2009) but also stated that public
health crisis can represent a national emergency (Barton, 2004). Paragraph 5(c) of the Doha Declaration
stipulated as follows:

Each member has the right to determine what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of
extreme urgency,
including those relating to HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and other epidemics, can represent a national emergency or other circumstances of
extreme urgency (The Doha Ministerial Declaration, 2001).

it being understood that public health crisis,

The Doha Declaration was a significant success for public health groups and governments of low-income member
states and the consensus achieved in the Ministerial Conference was hailed as “one of the major political achievements
of the developing countries” (Correa, 2002). Some commentators called it “a bill of rights for the public health
regulation of medicines” (Drahos & Henry, 2004).

36 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

1.2 | Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration

The condition of “domestic use” imposed under Article 31(f) of the TRIPS Agreement was a serious concern for
poorest countries having no drug manufacturing capacity of their own. Regarding the use of the compulsory license,
Article 31(f) stipulates that: “any such use shall be authorized predominantly for the supply of the domestic market of
the Member authorizing such use” (WTO, 1994). Though the word “predominantly” has not been defined anywhere in
the TRIPS Agreement, the mere use of this word shows that it is meant to narrow down the scope of compulsory
licensing of pharmaceutical patents by confining its use to national borders. This provision, therefore, puts a
restriction that the generic copies of the drug manufactured by the use of compulsory licensing must be used within
the territorial limits of the member country that has granted a compulsory license.19 This restriction on export of
generics had a twofold negative impact: (i) WTO member states with generic manufacturing and exporting capacity,
like India, would lose their external market and would have lesser economic incentive to produce generic copies of
drugs even if the production was permissible under the legitimately granted compulsory license; (ii) This restriction on
exports meant developing and least developed countries lacking reverse engineering capacity could not import the
generics from countries capable of manufacturing copies of drugs.20

The domestic use condition was a cause of serious concern because a vast majority of countries hit by HIV/AIDS
lacked sufficient drug manufacturing capacity of their own and relied upon imports from major generic drug
manufacturing countries like India to cater for the needs of the millions of patients in these countries (Descheemaeker,
2012–2013). If member states with enhanced technological capability were barred from exporting the generics,
manufactured by invoking compulsory licensing, to these developing and least developed countries, it clearly meant
that access to needed medicines would remain a pipe dream for poorest countries, despite TRIPS’ public health
safeguard, because medicines are patented in all the countries with manufacturing capacity (Durojaye, 2008). This
particular concern caused by Article 31(f) was highlighted at the Fourth WTO Ministerial Conference in Doha (Janodia
et al, 2008). The practical issue faced by developing and least developed countries, having no manufacturing capacity,
because of “domestic use” restriction imposed under Article 31(f) was expressly acknowledged by the Doha
Declaration under Paragraph 6 of the Declaration. The exact text of Paragraph 6 is as under:

We recognize that WTO Members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical
sector could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the TRIPS Agreement. We
instruct the Council for TRIPS to find an expeditious solution to this problem and to report to the General
Council before the end of 2002 (The Doha Ministerial Declaration, 2001).

This issue could not be resolved in the Doha meeting and required further negotiations. The issue was
discussed at the Fifth Ministerial Conference in Cancun held in 2003. A compromise in this regard was reached by
the WTO General Council on 30 August 2003, to establish a mechanism to permit such export on a case-by-case
basis (WTO, 2003b). The Decision waived the “domestic use” restriction and is referred to as WTO General
Council's Waiver Decision 2003.21 This amendment to the TRIPS Agreement was not approved by WTO members
until 2005 (WTO, 2005a, 2005b). The sixth WTO Ministerial Conference was held in Hong Kong in
December 2005. The WTO member states endorsed the proposal to transform the Waiver Decision into a
permanent amendment to the TRIPS Agreement.22 The amendment can be formally adopted only after two-thirds
of WTO members accept the change. The original deadline set for formal acceptance of the amendment was 1
December 2007. On 30 November 2015, the General Council extended the deadline, for the fifth time, to 31
December 2017.23 As of this writing, the two-thirds threshold for formal adoption of the amendment to make the
health flexibility permanent has been finally attained. Dominica and Benin accepted the amendment on 28
November and 23 November 2016, respectively. Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Liechtenstein, Vietnam, and the United
Arab Emirates followed suit and notified ratifications. The amendment entered into force on 23 January 2017
(WTO, 2017).

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 37

1.3 | Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration and regulatory ritualism

The TRIPS Council took around two years to reach an agreement on a mechanism to give effect to Paragraph 6 of the
Doha Declaration because the pro-access spirit of Doha could not last for long. During this lengthy negotiation, the
fundamental disagreement was over whether the solution should be based on Article 30 or Article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement. Low-income members of the WTO, the World Health Organization, and public health groups pressed for
an economically feasible, simple and speedy solution that would have relied upon Article 30 which reads as follows:

Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided that such
exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third
parties (WTO, 1994).

A solution based on Article 30 would have automatically allowed export of a drug once a compulsory license was
issued or need to import was expressed by the importing member state. This solution would have been consistent with
Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration which specifically asked for an “expeditious solution” to address public health
needs.

The economically advanced countries, on the other hand, supported a solution based on Article 31 which required
a grant of two compulsory licenses with all their procedural requirements because it did not leave the option of an
automatic exception (Hoen, 2016). The solution advocated by the industrialized world was lengthy, complex and
economically risky. These concerns were raised by Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) in a briefing note published on 24
June 2002:

One fundamental disadvantage of an Article 31 solution is that a decision needs to be taken before a
compulsory licence can be granted and export can take place. The supply of a medicine to a country in need
could either be held up (for example if negotiations with the patent holder take place in the process of
application for a compulsory licence) or stopped altogether (an application for a compulsory licence is no
guarantee that it will be granted and can be refused, sometimes for good reasons, sometimes not). Put
yourself in the position of someone suffering from a lethal disease and in need of medicines that are
unaffordable under patent. Your government has acted and issued a compulsory licence for import to your
country. Would you prefer that the medicines you need could be produced and supplied to your country (a)
automatically; or (b) after somebody in a different country has eventually come to a decision that, in this
case, it would be allowed?24

The Perez Motta Text, named after the then Chairman of the TRIPS Council, was drafted in December 2002 as an
attempt to achieve consensus on the solution to Paragraph 6 problem. Though the Motta draft was far from ideal,25
most delegations were prepared to accept it keeping in view the looming 2002 deadline (Hoen, 2002). Paragraph 1(a)
of the Perez Motta Draft defined “pharmaceutical product,” for the purposes of paragraph 6 solution, as “any patented
product, or product manufactured through a patented process, of the pharmaceutical sector, needed to address the
public health problems as recognized in paragraph 1 of the Declaration.” The Perez Motta Draft failed due to
opposition by the United States to the scope of application26 because in this Draft a reference was made to Paragraph
1 of the Doha Declaration which mentions HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and other epidemics. The Draft was not
acceptable to the United States because of her demand to restrict the application of the draft only to HIV/AIDS,
malaria, and tuberculosis (Feichtner, 2012).

Finally, a consensus was reached and, based on the mandate of the Doha Declaration 2001, a decision to waive
“domestic market” restriction, imposed by Article 31(f) of the TRIPS Agreement, was adopted on 30 August 2003. The
2003 Decision was followed by the first ever amendment to the TRIPS Agreement on 6 December 2005, just before

38 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

the 2005 WTO Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong (Gerhardsen, 2005). Although the wording of the amendment is
different, it contains almost the same elements as the Decision. Five paragraphs of Article 31bis27 are compatible with
the text of paragraph 2, 3, 6, 9, and 10 of the Waiver Decision (Durojaye, 2008).

The Waiver Decision of August 2003, reached after extensive negotiations, was hailed as a pro-access

compromise. Dr. Supachai Panitchpakdi,28 the then WTO Director-General, is reported to have said:

This is a historic agreement for the WTO. The final piece of the jigsaw has fallen into place, allowing poorer
countries to make full use of the flexibilities in the WTO's intellectual property rules in order to deal with the
diseases that ravage their people. It proves once and for all that the organization can handle humanitarian as
well as trade concerns (WTO News, 2003).

The WTO still considers the Paragraph 6 solution a landmark development. Roberto Azevêdo, the present WTO
Director-General, is reported to have said on 24 November 2016: “It is a very important agreement because it is an
authorization for developing countries that do not have the capacity to manufacture pharmaceuticals, to have
affordable access to them by means of importing from third parties. . . without infringement of intellectual property
rights” (Kenny, 2016).

This waiver to provide an expeditious solution to a public health emergency, however, is not unconditional. The
waiver can be used subject to numerous conditions and only to the extent necessary. Only eligible countries, either
LDCs or developing countries with insufficient or no drug manufacturing capacity, are entitled to use the waiver
flexibility.29 Given below are the important procedural requirements for availing the flexibility:

1. Prior negotiation for a voluntary license:

The generic company in the exporting country, willing to supply the needed drug to the importing country under
the Waiver flexibility, is required to negotiate a voluntary license with the patent holder/s before applying to the
government for a compulsory license30 (MSF Canada, 2006). These negotiations are normally complex, protracted
and time-consuming. The foreseen burden of prolonged negotiations may have a bearing on the decision of the
generic manufacturer to participate in the process (MSF Canada, 2006). This requirement of negotiating a
voluntary license is an unnecessary burden which tends to cause potential delay to timely access to the urgently
needed drug. In order to achieve the primary objective of the regime, viz. access to needed drugs in a timely
manner, the process needs to be simplified by deleting this first step of negotiating a voluntary license.
Unnecessary delay and cost of unnecessary litigation can be avoided if the process starts by directly submitting an
application for a compulsory license.

2. Notification of intention from the importing country:

A general notification of intent is required from the importing member states (TRIPS Amendment, 2005). The least
developed countries (LDCs) are exempted from this requirement of notification of intent (TRIPS Amendment,
2005). The eligible importing country is required to notify the Council for TRIPS of its intention to import the
needed drug;31 the eligible country must provide requisite information to the Council that is, specific name of the
needed drug and the estimated quantity of the drug. Moreover, the importing country must specify whether the
product is protected by a patent. Furthermore, the potential importing country must provide a confirmation to the
Council that the country has no or insufficient manufacturing capacity of its own32 and wants to issue a non-
voluntary license under Article 31 of TRIPS (Abbott & Van Puymbroeck, 2005). The determination of
manufacturing capacity excludes production facilities owned or controlled by the patent holder. The
manufacturing capacity means the capacity to manufacture the specific drug in question and not the general
drug manufacturing capacity (Para 2[a][ii], Article 31bis).

3. Compulsory licensing applications in both countries:

The generic manufacturer, willing to supply the generic drug, is required to apply for two compulsory licenses: one
in the exporting country or home country and one in the importing country if the needed drug is patented in the

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 39

importing country.33 The mechanism may, however, be used without a request for compulsory license by a generic
company in the importing country if the importing country decides government use for public non-commercial
purposes or for national emergency. The compulsory licenses are required to be granted only for a predetermined
limited duration (Durojaye, 2008). It is important to note here that, within the overall scheme of the TRIPS
Agreement, the grant of a compulsory license itself entails numerous legal, administrative, and procedural
complications. Fully aware of the effort, cost, and risk involved in seeking dual compulsory licenses, generic
manufacturing companies may decide not to participate in the process. Secondly, the condition of the limited
duration of the license appears to be an unnecessary requirement because the issue of access to the needed drug
will remain as long as the drug patent is in force. The unnecessary hassle to renew the compulsory license for
limited durations is an administrative burden which discourages generic manufacturers from participating in the
Waiver scheme. The objectives of the scheme can better obtain if the term of the compulsory license is defined as
the time under which the patent is still valid.

4. Notification of authorization from the exporting country:

The member country that has manufacturing capacity and willingness to export the needed drug is also required to
notify the Council for TRIPS regarding grant of the non-voluntary license; the notification must contain the
following requisite information to be supplied to the Council:
a. the name and address of the licensee;
b. the product(s) for which the license has been granted;
c. the quantity(ies) for which it has been granted;
d. the country(ies) to which the product(s) is (are) to be supplied;
e. the duration of the licence;
f. the address of the website where the supplier will post the information referred to in paragraph 2(b)(iii) of the

Decision (Durojaye, 2008).

The restriction on the quantity of medicines that can be manufactured for export to an eligible country by using the
waiver flexibility appears to be unreasonable and inhibitive. It is almost impossible, both practically and
economically, to have a clear estimate of the quantity of the needed drug especially in the case of epidemics and
pandemics. The entire process, starting with the voluntary license negotiations between the patent holder and
generic manufacturers and involving a succession of complex procedural step, needs to be repeated for the
purchase of more drugs if the need exceeds the forecasted amount. The regime can better deliver if a swift and
simplified procedure is provided to amend the compulsory license when the additional quantity of the drug is
needed by the importing country.
Each individual generic manufacturing company is required to maintain a website to post the requisite information.
This requirement is onerous for generic drug companies, especially for smaller firms. The unnecessary cost of
maintaining individual websites can be avoided if the regime is amended to allow a central website within the
patent office of the exporting country to serve the same purpose.

5. Adoption of anti-diversion measures:

Only the quantity of the product required by the importing member can be manufactured under compulsory
license and the entire production of the generic manufactured under the compulsory license must be exported to
the eligible country in need of the generic drug.34 The exporting country is required to post on a website certain
information, about quantities being supplied, before shipment of the drug manufactured under the decision
commences.35 There is a further requirement for exporting country to maintain a distinction between the generics
manufactured for domestic use and the generics manufactured for export under waiver flexibility. The rationale for
this distinction is to prevent abuse of the waiver flexibility. There is a clear understanding that generics
manufactured under this scheme should not be treated as “lawful parallel imports” (Abbott & Reichman, 2007). The
exporting country may manufacture the drug with a distinguishable36 shape, color, size, or distinctive outer
packaging or bottle caps or even a different trademark name37 of the drug in order to maintain the distinction. The
drugs to be exported under the 2003 decision are required to be identifiable “through specific labeling or marking”

40 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

and this requirement could be satisfied by literally stating on the label that the drug had been manufactured under
the Waiver Decision (Correa, 2002).38
The additional burden of compliance with the onerous anti-diversion measures, which not only add to the cost of
production but can also be subject to litigation, may negatively impact the decision of the generic drug
manufacturers to participate in the process. Generic manufacturers tend to shy away from participating in the
regime keeping in view the additional costs incurred on these measures and on potential litigation.39 Instead of
putting the willing member states and generic manufacturers in a never-ending exercise of evaluation and
monitoring, an appeal mechanism to the compulsory license may be included in the regime as an alternative
approach to making sure that the scheme is not used for commercial purposes.
Though the Waiver Decision aimed at addressing the practical implications of “domestic market” condition, it
seems to have created more hurdles because of Regulatory/Procedural Ritualism and Rule Complexity. The
developed countries arguably had a “strategy of loading-up the Waiver Decision and Amendment with
bureaucratic requirements” (Abbott & Reichman, 2007).
In view of Abbott and Reichman (2007), “the
complications that emerged in the Waiver Decision and Amendment were the product of a decision to reject
an administratively simple solution at Doha, and to construct a new, administratively complex regime, as
envisioned in provisions introduced by the EU and the United States.”

James Love, Director Knowledge Ecology International, is reported to have said about the Waiver scheme that:
“The new agreement has very modest benefits, and it has very substantial costs, risks, and uncertainties” (Love, 2003).
Mr. Greg Perry, Director General of the European Generic Medicine Association, expressed a similar view about the
scheme. He is reported to have said at the WTO Public Forum 2008 that: “The WTO's 2003 August 30 Decision
concerning compulsory licenses is complicated, unworkable and unable to deliver any significant improvement in
access to medicines” (European Generic Medicine Association, 2008). In emergency situations like an outbreak of an
epidemic resulting in hundreds or even thousands of deaths every day, access to the needed life-saving drug may be
delayed because of the formalities and bureaucratic approach of the Waiver scheme. Let alone the use of this
expeditious mechanism, most of the developing and least developed countries have not even implemented the
enabling legislation to avail this waiver because of the complexities involved.

1.4 | The case of Rwanda

As of this writing, the Waiver flexibility—which is based on a drug-by-drug, country-by-country, and case-by-case
decision-making process- has been used only once ever since the adoption of the Decision in August 2003. In
December 2004, Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) committed itself to test the 2003 solution to the Paragraph 6
problem and convinced the Canadian drug company Apotex Inc., to manufacture a fixed-dose combination of the
lamivudine, and zidovudine (later known as TriAvir).40 These drugs were
three HIV/AIDS drugs nevirapine,
protected under nine Canadian patents: four owned by Glaxo Group, two owned by the Wellcome Foundation,
two belonged to Shire Biochem, and one belonged to Boehringer Ingelheim and Dr. Karl Thomae (Hestermeyer,
2007). Apotex Inc., attempted to negotiate voluntary licenses with the patent holders but the negotiations failed
because at that stage no importing country was identified as the recipient country (Knowledge Ecology
International, 2010). Despite MSF's efforts, no developing or least developed country was willing to be named as
an importing country possibly because of the industry pressure which Thailand and Brazil had to face, in the very
recent past, after resorting to compulsory licensing of pharmaceutical patents in March 2007 and May 2007,
respectively (Hestermeyer, 2007).

Finally, in May 2007, Rwanda, a small economy, took a bold step and signaled its willingness to be named as an
importing country. On 17 July 2007, Rwanda became the first least developed member to notify the WTO TRIPS
Council of its intention to import the HIV/AIDS drug TriAvir from the Canadian drug manufacturer Apotex Inc.41 As a
least-developed country, Rwanda was exempted from the requirement to establish its eligibility as an importing

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 41

member. Apotex Inc., filed a compulsory license in Canada for manufacturing 15.6 million tablets and exporting them
to Rwanda.

Only a small number of developed countries have made changes in their national laws to give effect to the Waiver
Decision and Canada is one of these countries. In May 2004, Canada enacted the Jean Chrétien Pledge to Africa Act,
2005 (JCPA) in order to implement the Decision.42 Under the JCPA, “export only” compulsory licenses can be granted
to Canadian generic manufacturing companies for supply of generic drugs to countries with no or inadequate drug
manufacturing capacity (MSF Canada, 2006). The amended law came into force in May 2005. Schedule 1 of the Patent
Act was also amended in September 2005 to include Apo-TriAvir in the listed drugs. The amendment was made to
resolve a technical issue. Under the Patent Act, a “pharmaceutical product” is defined as “any product listed in
Schedule 1” (Jean Chrétien Pledge to Africa Act, 2005). To be eligible for manufacture and export under JCPA, a
pharmaceutical product must be listed in Schedule 1. In the case at hand, Schedule 1 included all the components of
Apo-TriAvir but the new composite drug was not listed.

In December 2005, after removal of the technical barrier, Apotex sought approval from Health Canada to
manufacture the needed drug for export. In June 2006, Health Canada approved the drug (Knowledge Ecology
International, 2010). At this stage, no recipient importing country was identified yet. In July 2007, Rwanda became the
first country to notify WTO of its intention to use the Waiver (Knowledge Ecology International, 2010). In July 2007,
Apotex began negotiations with major patent holders to acquire the voluntary licenses but the negotiations failed and
Apotex had to apply for a compulsory license in September 2007. On 19 September 2007, under its amended law,
Canada issued an export only compulsory license to allow Apotex Inc., to manufacture and export the needed
combination drug Apo-TriAvir to Rwanda for a period of 2 years. On 4 October 2007, Canada notified the TRIPS
Council of the first authorization under the Waiver Decision (WTO News). In October 2007, a public tender was
opened by Rwanda for the supply of Apo-TriAvir. The tender process took eight months and in May 2008, Apotex Inc.,
announced that it had won the Rwanda public tender to supply the drug (Knowledge Ecology International, 2010;
Nightingale, 2016).

The first shipment of 6,785,000 tablets was delivered to Rwanda in September 2008 followed by the second
shipment of 7,628,000 in September 2009 (Knowledge Ecology International, 2010). Rwanda's order was finally
completed after meeting the procedural requirements of a lengthy process including: adopting the system into
national legislation, negotiating with patent holders for voluntary license, granting of necessary compulsory licenses
for manufacture and export of the needed drug, making necessary notifications to the WTO, and manufacturing of the
product as per distinguishing requirements. The delay in the delivery of the medicine showed that the mechanism was
unnecessarily too complex, time-consuming and burdensome to provide an expeditious solution to the problem of
access in emergency conditions (Rimmer, 2008). The following statement of Dr. Felipe Garcia de le Vaga, MSF's AIDS
Doctor, very precisely describes the challenges in implementing the Waiver flexibility:

When we order medicines normally, all we need to do is type up a form, send it to the supplier and pay the bill—
then we receive the shipment. With this system we have to persuade a government to notify the WTO, find a
company willing to produce, push to get a drug on the list of eligible medicines, wait for voluntary license
negotiations to be completed, wait for the compulsory license application to be made, and then granted ... For a
disease that kills 8,000 people a day, not only is this not a solution, it's unacceptable (MSF Canada, 2006).

This case shows that the procedure to use the flexibility is overly intricate and cumbersome. Given the fact that
economies of scale are needed to attract interest from producers, the Waiver is arguably unrealistic. The regime is
arguably not economically viable for generic drug companies because the generic manufacturer has a very limited
economic incentive to go through with a risky and uncertain procedure because the product is manufactured for just
one importing country for a very limited time period, making it difficult for the generic manufacturer to recoup the
investment for producing the generic version of the drug. All prior efforts and investment expire after completion of
the order under the regime (Mathur, 2008).43

42 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

Since completion of its order in September 2009, Apotex has not participated in the Waiver scheme again nor has
any other generic manufacturer done so. Apotex has, in fact, expressly announced that it will not use the Waiver
scheme again because of complexities and delays involved in using the scheme (Apotex, 2009). In a letter written to
Health Canada and Industry Canada, John Hems, the then Director, Regulatory Affairs of Apotex, expressed policy
concerns of Apotex related to the Waiver scheme (Hems, 2007). Hems criticized the onerous administrative burdens
of the scheme, like the requirement to maintain a website, which could deter smaller manufacturers from participation
in the scheme (Hems, 2007). Jack Kay, the then President of Apotex, also criticized the Waiver regime as costly and
complicated. He is reported to have said that Canada must “fix or change the legislation if we want to meet the original
intent of getting life-saving drugs to developing countries” (Hoen, 2016). Dean Foster, Deputy Director for Global
Affairs, Government of Canada, recently articulated that “there were a certain amount of growing pains and lessons to
be learnt through being the first and only test case under the paragraph 6 system,” given the complexity of regulatory
regime of Paragraph 6 system (Nightingale, 2016).

Senior researchers like Dr. Matthew Rimmer, a Professor of Intellectual Property and Innovation Law at the
Faculty of Law, at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT), have criticized the Waiver regime because of its
failure to realize its promise. Dr. Rimmer noted that:

The Hong Kong amendment to the TRIPS agreement is a very controversial amendment. The WTO General
Council decision is highly problematic. It is highly problematic because only a few countries have actually
implemented the decision. . . the talk that we heard earlier was a little bit naïve in suggesting that merely
adopting this protocol will of itself lead to the greater export of pharmaceutical drugs. This experience thus
far has been that those mechanisms have not been working (Rimmer, 2007).

If a large generic manufacturer like Apotex is not willing to use the regime because of lack of economic incentive
then no smaller generic manufacturer can be expected to use the Waiver scheme because of costs involved in using
the scheme. During a hearing of the European Parliament, involving consideration of the Waiver scheme, it was
concluded that it was unlikely for any drug company in Europe to use the scheme (Hestermeyer, 2007). The Waiver
scheme has therefore not been acceptable to generic drug companies because it is not economically rational.

1.5 | The case of India

The robust, flexible, and fast-track compulsory licensing regime introduced by India in the Patents (Amendment) Act
2005, under s 92A, aimed at incorporating the spirit of the Waiver Decision 2003. Section 92A stipulates that:

Compulsory license shall be available for manufacture and export of patented pharmaceutical
products to any country having insufficient or no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector
for the concerned product to address public health problems, provided compulsory license has been
granted by such country or such country has, by notification or otherwise, allowed importation of the
patented pharmaceutical products from India. The Controller shall, on receipt of an application in a
prescribed manner, grant a compulsory license solely for manufacture and export of the concerned
pharmaceutical product to such country under such terms and conditions as may be specified and
published by him.44

It can be noted that a less restrictive language has been used and procedural requirements have been kept simple in
order to incorporate the spirit of the Waiver Decision 2003. The provision merely puts the condition of a notification and
does not require the issuance of two back-to-back compulsory licenses in importing and exporting countries. Moreover,
this provision ignores another procedural requirement of the Waiver scheme by not specifying a number of drugs to be
manufactured under the scheme. Furthermore, this provision does not provide for anti-diversion measures like separate

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 43

packaging, shape, or coloring. The provision is also silent about the payment of royalty to the patent owner and does not
refer to any formula for calculation of royalty (Rehman, 2011).

Indian compulsory licensing regime is subjected to serious criticism by multinational drug companies. In its 2008
submission to United States Trade Representative (USTR), the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America
(PhRMA) criticized the Indian compulsory licensing provisions as the most damaging provisions (Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America, 2008). It is argued that India has provided an ambiguous compulsory licensing regime which
is considered as the broadest in its scope as compared to other jurisdictions (Mueller, 2007). It is important to note that
despite its gaps and flexibilities, the Indian regime is not considered as an economically lucrative option by the majority of
Indian pharmaceutical companies. A study conducted by the World Health Organization (WHO) showed that only 25 firms
out of 103 firms considered the Indian regime economically lucrative. Only 6 out of these 25 firms are capable enough to
meet demands of the export market (Sampath, 2005). The regime cannot be successful unless the commercial expectations
of the firms are met and they are inclined to engage in the Waiver scheme. This has not been possible so far. Denis Broun,
Head of Government Affairs, Cipla Ltd. recently articulated that Paragraph 6 system is a cumbersome and ineffective
process and that Cipla, a leading generic manufacturer in India, will not use the regime in its current form (Nightingale, 2016).
The regime is, therefore, unlikely to achieve the objectives of the Doha Declaration 2001.

1.6 | The case of Australia

The enactment of domestic enabling legislation in Australia, to give effect to the Waiver Decision, provides the most
recent example of snail-speed adoption of regulations on the subject even in advanced countries like Australia. In
August 2002, the Doha Declaration was endorsed by Mark Vaile, then Trade Minister, who was reported to have said:

. . . this is a historic agreement. It is a further demonstration that the WTO is able to respond to the public-
health problems faced by developing countries and to make its contribution to broader domestic and global
action to address this crucial social issue. . . all WTO member countries had a moral obligation to resolve this
issue. The problems more pooer countries face in dealing with ravaging diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria
and tuberculosis are immense. After many months of work, all WTO members have agreed on an outcome
that will allow these countries better access to affordable medicines. This decision is one endorsed by all
WTO members. Now we must move past old battle lines and all work to ensure the solution makes its
contribution to dealing with the public health problems poorer countries face (Vaile, 2002).

Unfortunately, this concern for poorer countries could not last for long. Soon after the Doha Declaration,
Australia arguably supported the US in its effort to produce an unworkable, cumbersome, costly and complex solution
during the course of the Paragraph 6 negotiations (Drahos, 2007). Dr. Rimmer notes that “the Australian Government
has been unaccountably slow to respond to the urgent and pressing public policy issues in respect of patent law and
access to essential medicines” (Rimmer, 2015).

Australia showed little enthusiasm in establishing a patent regime to facilitate the export of essential medicines to
poorer countries under the Waiver Decision. On September 12, 2007, Australia accepted the terms of the TRIPS
Protocol; supporting legislation was needed to give effect to the Waiver Decision; the Parliamentary Joint Standing
Committee on Treaties alleged its support to implement appropriate legislation in this regard (Vines, Crow, & Faunce,
2012). The Committee recognized that “Providing better access to medicines to the world's poorest people is a worthy
subject for an international treaty” (Rimmer, 2015). The Committee further observed that it “supports acceptance of the
Protocol, followed by any necessary amendments to the Patents Act 1990 (Cth) to allow for compulsory licensing to
enable export of cheaper versions of patented medicines needed to address public health problems” (Rimmer, 2015).
The legislation process was to be coordinated by IP Australia.45 IP Australia released its consultation paper,
Implementing the TRIPS Protocol, in April 2010, nearly 3 years after the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties report.
Dr. Craig Emerson, then Minister for Trade, and Senator Kim Carr, then Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science, and

44 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

Research, announced jointly in March 2011 that by the end of 2011 the Labor Government intended to make changes
in the law in order to give effect to the Waiver Decision (Carr, 2011). No substantial progress could be made with
regards to the proposed legislation during the remainder of 2011. The preparation of the draft Bill has delayed
arguably because of domestic patented drug industry's lobbying as the announcement to give effect to the Waiver
Decision had surprised the originator pharmaceutical companies (Summerfield, 2011).

The Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill 2013 was drafted, in a decade after the adoption of the Waiver Decision
2003, and introduced in the House of Representative on 30 May 2013. The Bill was passed by the House of Representative
without amendment and it was introduced in the Senate without delay but the Prime Minister of Australia called a general
election on 4 August 2013, and the Bill lapsed (IP Australia, 2015). The new elected government expressed concerns about the
provisions implementing the TRIPS Protocol. Before reintroducing the legislation in the parliament, IP Australia was advised to
initiate a consultation process. In January 2014, IP Australia invited comments on an exposure draft of a revised proposed bill
(IP Australia, 2015). On 19 March 2014, the Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill 2014 was introduced in the House of
Representatives. The Bill was passed by the House of Representatives, without amendment, on 24 November 2014, and then
by the Senate on 9 February 2015. The Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Act 2015 received Royal Assent in
February 2015 and came into effect on 25 August 2015 (IP Australia, 2015).

Under s 136B of the Act, the Federal Court46 has been authorized to grant a compulsory license to “exploit a
patented pharmaceutical invention for manufacture and export to an eligible importing country” (IPLA Act, 2015)47
provided that “the proposed use of the pharmaceutical product is to address a public health issue in the eligible
importing country (a) in a national emergency (or other extremely urgent circumstances); or (b) by the public non-
commercial use of the product” (IPLA Act, 2015). Moreover, “The patentee must be paid an agreed amount of
remuneration, or an amount of remuneration determined by the court” (IPLA Act, 2015).

Section 136D(3) requires that the Court must be furnished with:

a copy of statement made by or on behalf of, and with the authorization of, the eligible importing country to
the effect that it will take reasonable measures within its means, proportionate to its administrative
capacities and to the risk of trade diversion, to prevent re-exportation from its territory of a pharmaceutical
product imported into its territory in accordance with a PPI compulsory license (IPLA Act, 2015).

Commentators have criticized this provision as arbitrary and abstract because the Federal Court arguably lacks
expertise, enthusiasm, and evidence to determine an importing country's administrative and financial capabilities. If a
statement is made by way of affidavit, how will the Court attest the facts given in the statement in the absence of a
procedure to interrogate or cross-examine the statement-maker (Vines et al., 2012).

Section 136D(4) of the Act further requires that the Court must be furnished with a statement made by the
importer “to the effect that it will take reasonable measures within its means to prevent the pharmaceutical product
from being used other than in accordance with a PPI compulsory license (IPLA Act, 2015). Furthermore, s 136E of the
Act requires that the Federal Court needs to be satisfied that the application for compulsory licensing has been “made
in good faith”; the pharmaceutical product is to be imported by the eligible importing country or on behalf of, and with
authorization of, the eligible importing country; and the purpose of import is to address a public health problem in the
eligible importing country (IPLA Act, 2015).

These provisions undermine the intent of the Waiver scheme because if the Court, in the absence of evidence, needs to
satisfy itself, for instance, by calling representatives of foreign governments or expert witnesses, it would not only delay the
application process but also add to complexity and cost of the application. Section 136E(1)(e) further requires that the
applicant must attempt to negotiate a voluntary license with the patentee on reasonable terms and conditions (IPLA Act,
2015). Furthermore, s 136E stipulates several stringent minimum conditions which include the following:

1. no more than the quantity of the pharmaceutical product that is determined by the Federal Court to be necessary

to meet the needs of the eligible importing country is manufactured;

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 45

2. the entirety of the pharmaceutical product manufactured for that purpose is exported to that country;
3. the pharmaceutical product is labeled and marked in accordance with the regulations;
4. before shipment of the pharmaceutical product begins, the shipment information prescribed by the regulations is
made available on a website by, or on behalf of, the licensee for a minimum period prescribed by the regulations;
5. the duration of the license is only for the period of time determined by the Federal Court to be necessary to address

the public health problem concerned;

6. the license does not give the licensee, or a person authorized by the licensee, the exclusive right to work the

patented pharmaceutical invention;

7. the license is to be assignable only in connection with an enterprise or goodwill in connection with which the

license is used;

8. the licensee must give the Commissioner the information prescribed by the regulations in relation to the license in

accordance with the regulations (IPLA Act, 2015).

Section 136F of the Act, therefore, requires the Federal Court to delve even deeper into complex technicalities of
the field of public health in order to forecast the quantity of the needed drugs and to determine the duration of the
compulsory license (Vines et al., 2012). It can be noticed that the Australian regime, which was finally adopted after
inordinate delays, involves issues of regulatory ritualism and leaves ample room for pharmaceutical patent owners to
exploit complicated procedural requirements to delay and frustrate the issuance of compulsory licensing.

2 | CONCLUSION

Regulatory Ritualism means acceptance of regulatory goals while losing focus in achieving them. In other words, it
means an excessive focus on formalities, rules and regulations to the point of undermining an organization's goals. If
notion of Regulatory or Procedural Ritualism is applied to WTO General Council's Waiver Decision 2003, which came to
give effect to Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration 2001, it can be noted that the intent or rationale of the Waiver
flexibility got eclipsed by the regulations, procedural details and formalities involved in using the flexibility. The
ritualist regulations have posed serious problems for effectiveness and implementation of the flexibility. The Waiver
flexibility was hailed as a rare negotiation win for third world countries and it envisioned a worth pursuing regime
keeping in view the human rights implications of the access to drugs issue. But, unfortunately, the Waiver Decision
could not make the desired or substantial practical impact because of ritualistic regulations.

The rationale behind providing the Paragraph 6 flexibility was to provide an expeditious solution to the problem of
affordable availability of medicines especially in emergency situations but the procedure to use this flexibility is tedious
and unnecessarily burdensome. Use of this flexibility involves so many formalities which place an unnecessary
administrative burden on both the importing and the exporting country. Moreover, use of this flexibility requires specific
changes to national patent laws. In fact, the attainment of objectives of this flexibility depends on willingness of member
states to enact enabling domestic legislation. Most of the developing and least developed countries have failed to
incorporate this complex waiver flexibility in their national patent laws. The fact that this mechanism has remained
almost unused shows that it did not provide a workable solution to the problem. To make the waiver solution workable or
economically viable as a practical procurement tool, it should be reviewed, deregulated and reformed substantially to
make it fast, simple, and efficient mechanism after cutting down unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles and absurd conditions
of ritualist compliance that go against the rationale and objectives of this mechanism and cause unnecessary delay.

3 | ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Muhammad Zaheer Abbas is a Lecturer in Law at the Department of Law, Faculty of Shariah and Law, International
Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Currently, he is a PhD candidate and Research Assistant at Queensland

46 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia. His main experience is in intellectual property law and has
published eight papers in peer-reviewed national and international
journals. His research is mainly related to
intellectual property law issues, especially pharmaceutical patents and access to drugs. His recent research includes:

1. “Pros and Cons of Compulsory Licensing: An Analysis of Arguments,” International Journal of Social Science and

Humanity, 2013.

2. “TRIPS Flexibilities: Implementation Gaps between Theory and Practice,” Nordic Journal of Commercial Law, 2013.
3. “Evolution of the Concept of Compulsory Licensing: An Analysis of Key Developments before and after TRIPS,”

Academic Research International, 2013.

4. “Rationale of Compulsory Licensing of Pharmaceutical Patents in the Light of Human Rights Perspective,” Pakistan

Perspectives, 2014.

5. “Sports Anti-Siphoning Laws and the Controversy of Sports Broadcasting: A Case Study of Pakistan,” Journal of

Intellectual Property Law and Practice, 2015.

Mr. Muhammad is currently working on “Pharmaceutical Patent Opposition as an Access to Drugs Strategy.” He is

also a focal person from his university for Intellectual Property Organization (IPO) Pakistan.

Shamreeza Riaz is a Lecturer in Law at the Department of Law, Faculty of Shariah& Law, International Islamic
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Currently, she is also a PhD candidate and Research Assistant at Queensland
University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia. Her main interest is in human rights law and she has explored
many human rights aspects of Intellectual property, especially pharmaceutical patents, and access to drugs. She has
written 15 research articles for national and international journals and is co-authored for above mentioned articles
with Muhammad.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Authors acknowledge Dr. Matthew Rimmer, Professor of Intellectual Property and Innovation Law at the Faculty of
Law, at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) for his valuable comments and suggestions on earlier draft.
The authors also acknowledge the editor and reviewers of this journal for their valuable comments.

ENDNOTES

1 The list of LDC members of the World Trade Organization is available online at https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/

minist_e/mc9_e/brief_ldc_e.htm (Last accessed 20 July 2016).

2 The resolution was presented by Turkey, Thailand, Brazil, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Senegal, Peru, Paraguay, Indonesia, India,
Haiti, Egypt, and China. This block of 13 developing countries is referred to as the “Core Group” which is chaired by Brazil.
The Core Group has requested the Human Rights Council to convene a panel on access to medicines at its 34th session in
March 2017 taking into account the recommendations of the United Nations High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines.
3 It is estimated that every year 150 million people are pushed into impoverishment because of increase in health-care cost.
4 The event was organized by the South Centre in collaboration with Brazil, India, South Africa, China, and MSF to discuss

solutions toward Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration.

5 Though the term “compulsory licensing” has not been used in the TRIPS Agreement, a set of conditions has been stipulated

under Article 31 for grant of a non-voluntary license or “other use without authorization of the right holder.”

6 Parallel imports are cross-border trades in a non-counterfeit patented product without the permission of the intellectual
property owner. Parallel imports can be used as an effective mean of procuring cheaper drugs when there are significant
price differences for the same patented drug in different markets. According to a study on international reference pricing
conducted in 1998, the price of Smithkline Beechman's version of Armoxil varied significantly in different markets. It was
$50 in Germany, $40 in Indonesia, $36 in Malaysia, $29 in the Philippines, $22 in New Zealand, $16 in Italy, $14 in Canada,
and $8 in Pakistan. The permissibility of parallel imports is governed under the legal doctrine of “exhaustion of rights” or “first

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 47

sale doctrine.” Under this doctrine, the patent holder exhausts their right to control subsequent sale after first sale by the
patent owner or their licensee. See (Kraus, 2004)

7 The Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act (1997) No. 90. It amended the Medicines and Related

Substances Control Act, No. 101 of 1965.

8 The MSF is an independent medical humanitarian international organization that provides aid to those affected by exclusion
from healthcare, natural disasters, epidemics and armed conflict. See https://www.msf.org/ (last accessed 20 July 2016).
9 The Health GAP is an organization of human rights and public health activists who campaign against policies of neglect and
work for eliminating barriers to global access to affordable medicines. See https://www.healthgap.org/ (last accessed 20
July 2016).

10 The Consumer Project Technology (CPTech) is currently known as Knowledge Ecology International, 2016 (KEI). KEI is a
non-governmental organization which deals mainly with issues related to effects of IP rights on public health and
competition policy. See https://www.keionline.org/ (last accessed 20 July 2016).

11 The Health Action International (HAI) is a non-governmental organization dedicated to strengthening medicines policy to

improve public health. See https://haiweb.org/ (last accessed 20 July 2016).

12 More than 120 delegates from 30 countries met at the Palais des Nations in Geneva to discuss non-voluntary licensing of
pharmaceutical patents as a potential strategy to deal with the issue of affordable access to essential drugs in the low
income countries. Summary of the meeting is available online at https://www.msfaccess.org/content/aids-and-essential-
medicines-and-compulsory-licensing (last accessed 20 July 2016).

13 “Amsterdam Statement on Access to Medicines” was developed at the Amsterdam Conference and can be accessed at

https://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/d/Jh1461e/1.4.html (last accessed 20 July 2016).

14 The Ministerial Conference is the highest decision-making body of the WTO and it can make decisions on all matters under

any of the WTO agreements, including the TRIPS Agreement.

15 Summaries of the meetings held during the Seattle Ministerial Conference are available online at https://www.wto.org/

english/thewto_e/minist_e/min99_e/min99_e.htm (last accessed 20 July 2016).

16 Brazilian Industrial Property Law, 1996, Article 68(1).
17 Though only HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria have been mentioned in Paragraph 1 of the Doha Declaration, it is argued
that this provision needs to be interpreted broadly and generously so that other important diseases may be covered under
scope of this provision.

18 Roger Kampf, Counsellor, Intellectual Property Division, WTO, commented during an event organized by the South Center
on November 8 that “Doha Declaration was the first-time trade, not health ministers, recognized the gravity of public
health issues and placed TRIPS into the wider national and international contexts.”

19 The condition of “domestic market” does not apply when the non-voluntary license is granted to remedy an anticompetitive

practice. See TRIPS Agreement, Article 31(k).

20 The manufacturing capacity here means the capacity to manufacture a specific product, and not the general capacity to

manufacture pharmaceutical products.

21 The Decision was made on the basis of a draft decision in document IP/C/W/405 that the TRIPS Council had agreed to

forward to the General Council.

22 The amendment is known as the TRIPS Protocol. It is also known as the Hong Kong Amendment.
23 See “Members accepting amendment of the TRIPS Agreement” available online at https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/

trips_e/amendment_e.htm (last accessed 30 September 2016).

24 “Why Article 30 will work. Why Article 31 will not” available online at http://www.msfaccess.org/content/why-article-30-

will-work-why-article-31-will-not (last accessed 21 July 2016).

25 The Pérez Motta Text was criticized by the public health groups and NGOs because it created cumbersome procedures to
determine member states’ eligibility to avail the flexibility. Moreover, the Text introduced cumbersome measures to
prevent diversion of generic drugs, manufactured under the system, to markets in rich countries. The NGOs called upon the
delegates to reject the Motta Text. See https://www.msfaccess.org/content/letter-cptech-oxfam-msf-and-hai-wto-
delegates-regarding-december-16-2002-chairmans-text.

26 The USA, the EU, Japan, and some other industrialized countries have a stance that diseases such as asthma, heart disease,
and cancer do not constitute public health problems in the developing and least developed countries. See Letter from
CPTech, Oxfam, MSF, and HAI to WTO delegates regarding 16 December 2002 Chairman's Text for “solution“ to
Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health https://www.msfaccess.org/content/letter-cptech-
oxfam-msf-and-hai-wto-delegates-regarding-december-16-2002-chairmans-text (last accessed 21 July 2016).

48 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

27 Full text of Article 31bis is available online at http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/wtl641_e.htm, (last accessed

21 July 2016).

28 Dr Supachai Panitchpakdi was fully aware of the public health implications of the TRIPS Agreement as he had previously
served on the WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health and he had opened the first meeting of the WHO
Network for Monitoring the Impact of Globalization and TRIPS on Access to Medicines. See https://www.who.int/
mediacentre/trips/en/ (Last accessed 2 July 2016).

29 List of least developed countries is available online at doi: https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org7_e.

htm, (Last accessed date 3 March 2016).

30 In the case of national emergency or other urgent circumstances or in case of public non-commercial use, the requirement

of prior negotiation may be waived.

31 Notifications under paragraph 2(a)(ii) of the Decision, https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news03_e/trips_stat_

28aug03_e.htm (Last accessed 2 July 2016).

32 Least developed countries (LDCs) are eligible to use the Waiver mechanism automatically. Under Paragraph 2(a)(ii) of WTO
General Council Decision of 6 December 2005 Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement, developing countries may be eligible
to use the Waive procedure by making a determination of insufficient or no manufacturing capacity. The determination of
lack of manufacturing capacity excludes the production facilities owned or controlled by the patent owners. This provision
stipulates that: “Where the Member has some manufacturing capacity in this sector, it has examined this capacity and
found that, excluding any capacity owned or controlled by the patent owner, it is currently insufficient for the purposes of
meeting its needs. When it is established that such capacity has become sufficient to meet the Member's needs, the system
shall no longer apply.” See the Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement (WT/L/641), 8 December 2005.

33 Least developed countries (LDCs) are entitled to use the Waiver mechanism without issuing domestic compulsory licenses.
Similarly, member states where the drug is not patented are also entitled to use the Waiver scheme without granting
compulsory license. There is a mandatory requirement of granting domestic compulsory license in all other cases. See
Paragraph 2(a)(iii) of WTO General Council Decision of 6 December 2005 Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement.

34 Under the proposed Article 3,1bis, the member states are obliged to enable patent owners to protect themselves against
unauthorized re-exportation of drugs produced under the Waiver scheme. It is important to note here that, under the
proposed Article 31bis, a relaxation has been designed with regard to re-exportation to a member country of a regional
trade agreement of which at least half of the members are least developed countries. The re-exportaion is allowed if the
product is manufactured and exported to one member country under the compulsory license. The importing countries are,
however, not exempted from the requirement of issuing separate compulsory licenses. See Paragraphs 3 and 4 of WTO
General Council Decision of 6 December 2005 Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement.

35 The supplier may use its own website or the page on the WTO website dedicated to the Decision. This document was

produced by the Drug Action Programme of the Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy.

36 The Decision, however, does not clarify who should be able to distinguish the drugs manufactured under the Decision; be it

medical doctors, retailers and distributors, customs authorities, or general public.

37 “The General Council Chairperson's Statement on the August 30 Decision,” See WT/GC/M/82 (dated 13 November 2003)

at https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/gc_stat_30aug03_e.htm (last accessed 22 July 2016).

38 For instance, by indicating in the label “Product made for country X under the WTO General Council Decision of 30

August 2003 (WT/L/540).”

39 A 2006 report of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) notes that “Anti-diversion measures that generic companies must comply

with are onerous and are further disincentive to their participation in the process.” See MSF Canada, 2006.

40 Apotex is the largest manufacturer of generic drugs in Canada and every year it exports generic drugs worth more than
Canadian $2 billion to over 115 countries. See https://www.apotex.com/global/about/default.asp (last accessed 20
September 2016).

41 The government of Rwanda stated that: “based on Rwanda's present evaluation of its public health needs, we expect to
import during the next two years 260,000 packs of TriAvir, a fixed-dose combination product of Zidovudine, Lamivudine,
and Nevirapine manufactured in Canada by Apotex, Inc. However, because it is not possible to predict with certainty the
extent of the country's public health needs, we reserve the right to modify the foregoing estimate as necessary or
appropriate.” See IP/N/9/RWA/1 at https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/FE_Search/FE_S_S006.aspx?&Language =
ENGLISH&SourcePage = FE_B_009&Context = Script&DataSource = Cat&query = @Symbol = IP/N/8/* + or + IP/N/9/
* + or + IP/N10/*&DisplayContext = popup&languageUIChanged = true (last accessed 21 July 2016).

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 49

42 The JCPA, named after a Canadian politician and statesman Jean Chrétien who served as the Twienth Prime Minister of
Canada from 4 November 1993 to 12 December 2003, is commonly referred to as the Canadian Access to Medicines
Regime (CAMR).

43 The condition of predetermined limited production for a limited time period also has a bearing on price of the generic drug
manufactured using the Waiver scheme because setting up of dedicated manufacturing facility involves substantial costs.

44 The Patents Act (1970), s 92A(1) and (2).
45 IP Australia is the government agency responsible for the administration of Australia's patent legislation. See Madden

(2007).

46 In Canada, rather than a court or judicial officer, the Commissioner of Patents is authorized to grant the compulsory license

required to export the needed drugs under the Waiver regime.

47 Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Act 2015, s 136B.

ORCID

Shamreeza Riaz

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6418-0448

REFERENCES

Abbas, M. Z., & Riaz, S. (2013). Trips flexibilities: Implementation gaps between theory and practice. Nordic Journal of

Commercial Law. Available online at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2367901

Abbott, F. M., & Reichman, J. H. (2007). The Doha Round's public health legacy: Strategies for the production and diffusion of

patented medicines under the amended TRIPS provisions. Journal of International Economic Law, 10(4), 921–987.

Abbott, F. M., & Van Puymbroeck, R. V. (2005). Compulsory licensing for public health: A guide and model documents for

implementation of the doha declaration paragraph 6 decision. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement (TRIPS Amendment). (2005). World Trade Organization, WT/L/641 8 DECEMBER

2005, https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/wtl641_e.htm

Apotex. (2009). CAMR Federal Law needs to be fixed if life-saving drugs for children are to be developed. Press release.
Barton, J. H. (2004). TRIPS and the global pharmaceutical market. Health Affairs, 23(3), 146–154.
Braithwaite, J. (2008). Regulatory capitalism: How it works, ideas for making it work better. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar

Publishing.

Carr, S. K. (2011). Better access to medicines for countries in need. Media Release, https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-

252103396.html (last accessed 5 November 2016).

Carroll, J., & Winslow, R. (2001). Bayer agrees to slash price for cipro drug. Wall Street Journal, A3. Case No. 4183/98.
Correa, C. M. (2002). Implications of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health (pp. 3–37). Geneva: World

Health Organization, Essential Drugs and Medicine Policy.

Correa, C. M. (2004a). Implementation of the WTO general council decision on paragraph 6 of the doha declaration on the

TRIPS agreement and public health. World Health Organization.

Correa, C. M. (2004b). Supplying pharmaceuticals to countries without manufacturing capacity: Examining the solution agreed
upon by the WTO on 30th august, 2003. Journal of Generic Medicines, 1(2), 105–119. https://doi.org/0.1057/palgrave.
jgm.4940002

Descheemaeker, S. (2012). India, pharmacy of the developing world IP, trade and the access to medicine. Jura Falconis Jg,

49(3), 563.

Drahos, P. (2007). Universal access to treatment for HIV/AIDS: Does Australia's policy on trade and intellectual property help?

HIV Matters, 2, 5–7.

Drahos, P., & Henry, D. (2004). The free trade agreement between Australia and the United States: Undermines australian

public health and protects US interests in pharmaceuticals. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 328(7451), 1271–1272.

Durojaye, E. (2008). Compulsory licensing and access to medicines in post Doha era: What hope for Africa? Netherlands

International Law Review, 55(1), 33–71. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0165070×08000338

European Generic Medicine Association. (2008). WTO compulsory licenses system is unworkable and will not improve access

to medicines. (Press release 25 September 2008).

Feichtner, I. (2012). The law and politics of WTO waivers: Stability and flexibility in public international

law. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Ford, J. (2016). The risk of regulatory ritualism: Proposals for a treaty on business and human rights. Oxford: University of Oxford.

50 |

ABBAS AND RIAZ

Gerhardsen, T. I. S. (2005). WTO strikes agreement on TRIPS and public health on eve of ministerial. Intellectual Property
Watch, https://www.ip-watch.org/2005/12/06/wto-strikes-agreement-on-trips-and-public-health-on-eve-of-ministeri
al/ (Last accessed 21 July 2016).

Hems, J. (2007) Letter from John Hems (23 January 2007). re: CAMR Consultation Paper, Available online at: https://www.

camr-rcam.gc.ca/review-reviser/camr_rcam_apotex_18-eng.pdf

Hestermeyer, H. P. (2007). Canadian-made drugs for Rwanda: The first application of the WTO waiver on patents and
medicines. American Society of International Law Insights, 28(11). Available online at: https://www.asil.org/insights/
volume/11/issue/28/canadian-made-drugs-rwanda-first-application-wto-waiver-patents-and

Hoen, E. '. (2016). Private patents and public health: Changing intellectual property rules for access to medicines Health Action

International.

Hoen, E. (2002). TRIPS, pharmaceutical patents, and access to essential medicines: A long way from Seattle to Doha. Chicago

Journal of International Law, 3(1), 27–46.

Human Rights Council. (2016). Human Rights Council suspends thirty-second session after adopting 33 resolutions and one

decision, Provisional Roundup, A/HRC/32/L.23/Rev.1.

Hunter, R. J., Lozada, H. R., Giarratano, F., & Jenkins, D. (2009). Compulsory licensing: A major IP issue in international business

today. European Journal of Social Sciences, 11(3), 370–377.

Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (IPLA) Act. (2015).
IP Australia. (2015). TRIPS and compulsory pharma licences for LDCs: Reaching the endgame. The IPKat. Available online at:

http://ipkitten.blogspot.com.au/2015/03/australia-trips-and-compulsory-pharma.html

Jain, T. (2008). Compulsory licences under TRIPs and its obligations for member countries. Amicus Books An Introduction,

29, 33.

Janodia, M. D., Sreedhar, D., Ligade, V. S., Udupa, N., Srivastava, S., & Satyanarayana, K. (2008). Solution to contentious issue

of Article 31(f) of TRIPS agreement. Indian Journal of Medical Research 128(1), 84.

Jean Chrétien Pledge to Africa Act (JCPA) (2005), Section 21.02.
Kenny, P. (2016). Amended TRIPS agreement close to ratification, says WTO's azevedo. Intellectual Property Watch,
(25 November 2016). www.ip-watch.org/2016/11/25/amended-trips-agreement-close-ratification-says-wtos-azevedo/
Kieny, M. P. (2016). A comprehensive and fair solution to the price of medicines. (5 July 2016). World Health Organization,

https://www.who.int/mediacentre/commentaries/fair-price-medicines/en/ (Last accessed 22 July 2016).

Knowledge Ecology International (KEI). (2010). Canada's Intervention to TRIPS Council: Experience using the System

(Apotex-Rwanda Case).

Knowledge Ecology International. Human Rights Council heats up during informal talks on the primacy of human rights over
international trade and IP regimes (18 June 2016). Knowledge Ecology International, https://keionline.org/node/2602.
(Last accessed July 3, 2016).

Kraus, L. (2004). Medication misadventures: The interaction of international reference pricing and parallel trade in the

pharmaceutical industry. Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 37(2), 527.

Kulkarni, R. M. (2016).UN Human Rights Council Adopts Landmark Resolution for Promoting Access to Medicine in
Developing Countries. Spicy IP, Available online at: https://spicyip.com/2016/07/un-human-rights-council-adopts-
landmark-resolution-for-promoting-access-to-medicine-in-developing-countries.html (Last accessed 22 July 2016).

Love, J. (2003). CPTech Statement on WTO Deal on Exports of Medicines. Consumer Project on Technology, Washington DC, 30.
Madden, J. (2007). Transcript of Evidence, 6. 22 June 2007.
Mathur, H. (2008). Compulsory licensing under section 92A: Issues and concerns. Journal of Intellectual Property Rights,

13(5), 467.

Mitra-Jha, S. (2016).UN Human Rights Council adopts landmark resolution on access to medicines. Firstpost, https://www.
firstpost.com/world/un-human-rights-council-adopts-landmark-resolution-on-access-to-medicines-2868570.html (Last
accessed July 22, 2016).

MSF Canada. (2006). Neither expeditious nor a solution: The WTO August 30th decision is unworkable-an illustration through
Canada's Jean Chrétien pledge to Africa (Report prepared for XVI International AIDS Conference, Toronto August 2006).
Retrieved from Médicins Sans Frontières website: https://www. doctors withoutborders. org/news/hiv-aids/
WTO_chretien. pdf

Mueller, J. M. (2007). The tiger awakens: The tumultuous transformation of india's patent system and the rise of indian

pharmaceutical innovation. University of Pittsburgh Law Review, 68(3), 491.

Nightingale, A. (2016). WTO ‘Paragraph 6′ system for affordable medicine: Time for change? (11 November 2016) Intellectual

Property Watch.

Rehman, H. A. (2011). The Pharmacy of the developing world: India, patent law and access to essential medicines, (Thesis) The

Australian National University, 156–171.

Reichman, J. H. (2009). Comment: Compulsory licensing of patented pharmaceutical inventions: Evaluating the options. The

Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 37(2), 247–263.

ABBAS AND RIAZ

| 51

Rimmer, M. (2007). Transcript of Evidence, 10.
Rimmer, M. (2008). Race against time: The export of essential medicines to Rwanda. Public Health Ethics, 1(2), 89–103.
Rimmer, M. (2015). Submission to IP Australia, the productivity commission, and the department of health and ageing.

Intellectual Property And Global Health, 6, 7–14.

Rozek, R. P. (2000). The effects of compulsory licensing on innovation and access to health care. The Journal of World

Intellectual Property, 3(6), 889–917. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1747-1796. 2000.tb00158.x

Saez, C. (2016). Access to medicines resolution adopted by UN human rights council. ACI Information Group.
Sampath, P. G. (2005). Economic aspects of access to medicines after 2005: Product patent protection and emerging firm
strategies in the Indian pharmaceutical industry. United Nations University-Institute for New Technologies (UNU-INTECH).

Summerfield, M. (2011). Surprise! New Pharmaceutical Compulsory Liceses Proposed.
The Doha Ministerial Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health. (2001).
The Patents Act. (1970).
The South Centre. (2016). ‘Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health: An Effective solution?
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement. (2015).
UN, United Nations. (2016). United Nations Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines Report, Available online

at: https://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/final-report/ (Last accessed 15 November 2016).

Vaile, M. (31 August 2002). Vaile welcomes breakthrough on essential medicines, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Vines, T., Crow, K., & Faunce, T. A. (2012). Balancing public health, trade and intellectual monopoly privileges: Recent

Australian IP legislation and the TPPA. Journal of Law and Medicine, 20, 280–294.

WTO. (2003a). The General Council Chairperson's Statement on the August 30 Decision. WT/GC/M/82.
WTO. (2003b). World Trade Organization, Implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health, Decision of the General Council of 30 August 2003, August 30, 2003, WT/L/540, available online at
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/implem_para6_e.htm (Last accessed 2 July 2016).

WTO. (2005a) General Council Decision of 6 December 2005 Amendment of the TRIPS Agreement, WT/l/641.
WTO News. (2003). Decision removes final patent obstacle to cheap drug imports. Available online at: https://www.wto.org/

english/news_e/pres03_e/pr350_e.htm (Last accessed July 2, 2016).

WTO, World Trade Organization. (1994). Agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights, Marrakesh

Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization.

WTO, World Trade Organization. (2001). Dispute Settlement: Dispute DS199.
WTO, World Trade Organization. (2001). WTO Doc WT/MIN (01)/DEC/2.
WTO, World Trade Organization. (2003c). General Council Decision of 30 August 2003 (WT/L/540). Available online at:

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/implem_para6_e.htm (Last accessed 20 July 2016).

WTO, World Trade Organization. (2005b). Members OK amendment to make health flexibility permanent. (6 December

2005).

WTO. (2017). WTO IP rules amended to ease poor countries’ access to affordable medicines.

How to cite this article: Abbas MZ, Riaz S. WTO “Paragraph 6” system for affordable access to medicines:
Relief or regulatory ritualism? J World Intellect Prop. 2018;21:32–51. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12083


