The U.S.  Export Control Regime for Encryption 

Is  Liberalization on  the Horizon? 

Lisa H. MARINO* 

For  years,  encryption  technology  has  been  listed  on  the  U.S.  Munitions  List 
and,  accorhngly, subject  to  a  highly  restrictive  export  control regime.  Throughout 
the  first  five  years  of  the  Clinton  Administration,  the  Administration  struggled  to 
develop  an  export  policy  for  encryption  which  would  meet  the  demands  of  the 
computer  industry  for  liberalization  while  at  the  same  time  placating  U.S.  law- 
enforcement  agencies.  Law-enforcement  agencies  have  insisted  on  controls  on  the 
technology  to  ensure  the  government’s  abihty  to  access  encrypted  data  upon  a 
showing  of  demonstrable  need.  The initial  results  were  a  pair  of  flawed  proposals: 
first,  the  ignominious  Clipper  chip,  followed  closely  by  the  reviled  key-escrow 
proposal. While always professing a  commitment to increasing the competitiveness of 
U.S. encryption technology, the  Administration has  bent  over backwards to  appease 
law-enforcement  concerns.  Meanwhde, the  U.S.  computer  industry has  complained 
relentlessly about the  competitive restraints it has  been  operating under  as  a  result  of 
the Administration’s restrictive export policy for encryption. 

The  last  year  has  been  a  period  of  significant  activity  with  respect  to  U.S. 
encryption  export  policy-activity 
that  may  signal  the  death  knell  for  the  “Big 
Brother”  export  policy  that  has  characterized  the  Adrmnistration.  Last  fall,  the 
Administration  unveiled  its  latest  encryption  export  proposal-liberahzation 
of 
export  controls  for  certain  strengths  of  encryption  in  exchange  for  specific 
commitments to develop key-recovery  systems. While significantly closer to the type 
of restrictions that  the  industry has  indicated  are  acceptable,  the  policy  is  stdl mdes 
behind the market for encryption technology. 

For  the  first  time,  the  computer  industry is  not  alone in its  complaints. There 
was  signlficant  activity  in  the  105th  Congress  on  encryption  issues-with 
bills  in 
both  the  Senate  and  the  House  coming  close  to  a  final  vote.  A judicial  decision 
finding  the  U.S.  export  control  regime  for  encryption  unconstitutional  has  also 
created  momentum  for  further  change  in  the  Admmistration’s  encryption  policy. 

* Associate, O’Melveny & Myers LLP, Washington, D.C. 
The views expressed herein are solely those of the  author. 

102 

T H E   

Finally,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  respected  international  institutions  have 
announced  their  unwillingness  to  participate  in  any  mandatory  global  key-access 
system,  thereby  rendering  the  Adrmnistration’s key-recovery  proposal  unworkable. 
The Administration  now  has  little  choice  but  to  accept  the  inevitable-a  market- 
driven export control policy for encryption technology. 

The Admmistration finds itself‘ with  its back against  the wall,  in part, because  of 
the  explosion  of  the  encryption  technology  market.  Encryption  can  serve  many 
purposes  including  protecting  proprietary  information  from  economic  espionage; 
protecting the privacy of personal records; protecting d t a r y  and dplomatic  secrets; 
and  preventing  crimes which  might be  hrthered  by  eavesdropping  (i.e. phone  card 
or credit card theft).’ Its most  significant use  is likely to be  on the Internet, where it 
can be used  to protect the  security and integrity of on-line  commercial transactions. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  the  total  value  of  goods  and  services  traded  over  the 
Internet will reach $8 billion in 1997, and could reach $330 billion five years later.2 

The US. industry has  traditionally been very  successhl in  the  global computer 
market.  For  instance, the  United  States  holds  an  estimated 75 percent of the  global 
software  market  and  roughly  the  same  share  of  the  global  Internet  economy, 
accordmg  to  studes  by  the  Global  Internet  Project.3  As  a  consequence,  the  U.S. 
computer  industry  is  highly  dependent  on  exports.  Indeed,  60  percent  of  the 
U.S.  computer  industry’s  revenue  comes from  outside  the  United  States.4  The U.S. 
industry’s  leadership of the  global encryption technology market-place,  however, has 
been  significantly hampered by  the  U.S.  government’s export  controls. For example, 
although  the  majority  of  general  purpose  software  products  available  on  foreign 
markets  are  of  U.S.  origin,  t h s  is  generally  not  the  case  with  encryption  software, 
where the markets tend to be much more national.5 

to  abandon 

the  Administration 

This  article  dscusses  the  problems  with  the  Clinton  Adrmnistration’s export 
control  regime  for  encryption  technology  and  burgeoning  forces  whch  could 
ultimately  cause 
law-enforcement-centred 
approach.  Section  I  dscusses  the  fundamentals  of  encryption  technology  and  the 
U.S.  export  control regime for  encryption  and  Section  11 traces the  development  of 
the  Clinton  Administration’s  policies  on  encryption  and  the  computer  industry’s 
reactions. Section III  examines the legislative attempts to liberalize the  export control 
regime  for  encryption  and  the  stalemate  that  has  resulted.  Section  IV  looks  at  the 
other  institutions,  both  without  and  within  the  United  States,  generating  pressure 
for  the  United  States  to  adopt  a  more  market-driven  approach  to  encryption 
technology. 

its 

at 7 2. 

See Dorothy Denning, Encryption Poliry and Market  >ends,  17 May 1997, on-line: www.cosc.georgetown.com., 

Jim Barksdale,  Washington may  Crash  the  Internet  Economy,  Wall St. J., 26  September 1997, at A2. 
See id. 
See 11. James  Bidzos,  Nothing  S&e  About  Encryption  Bills, Investor’s Bus. Daily, 26  September 1997, 7 14 
See Denning, supra, footnote 1, 7 12. 

(on-line). 

THE U.S. EXPORT CONTROL REGIME F O R  ENCRYPTION 

103 

I.  A BRIEF PRIMER O N  ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGY 

AND THE U.S. ENCRYPTION 

EXPORT CONTROL REGIME 

Encryption  technology  uses  complex  algorithms  combined  with  keys  to 
scramble and unscramble a  readable message.  The algorithm blends the key,  whxh is 
a  unique,  randomly generated number  stream, with  the  data that  is  to be protected. 
The length  of  the  key  used  to  encrypt  messages,  which  is  expressed in  “bits”,6 is 
used  to  measure the  strength of the  encryption. The longer the  key,  the  harder  the 
encryption is to crack. 

Two  dstinct  encryption  methods  have  been  developed.  The  first,  known  as 
private  key  encryption,  uses  the  same  key  to  encrypt and  decrypt data.  This  is  the 
method  which  has  been  used  most  oRen  by  the  U.S.  d t a r y . 7   The  primary 
advantage of private key  encryption is  its speed.* Private key  encryption, however, is 
clumsy.9 Extraordmary key  management and cbstribution systems must be maintained 
to  ensure  that  the  sender  and  recipient  of  the  message  have  the  same  key  whde 
ensuring  that  the  key  does  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  thud  party.10  The  second 
means  of  encryption, known  as  public  key  encryption, solves  t h s  security problem. 
The public  key  which  is  used  to  encrypt the  data  can  be  kept  avadable  in  an open 
dlrectory.11  Only  the  private  key,  used  to  decrypt,  needs  to  be  protected.12  An 
additional  advantage  of  public  key  systems  is  that  they  can  provide  a  method  for 
generating hgital signatures, which are used  to  authenticate messages. 

The U.S.  Data Encryption  Standard (DEs), whch  is  used  in  d i o n s  of  cre&t 
card and ATM (automatic teller machme) transactions each day, employs a key  with a 
length  of 56 bits.13 DES is  a  private  key  system. Despite doubts about its  continued 
abhty  to  provide  adequate  security, DES was  reaffirmed  as  the  national  standard  in 
1993,  a  designation  which  will  stand  until  at  least  1998.14  An  extremely  popular 
alternative to  DES is  RSA, a  public,  variable-length  key  system.  Despite its  lack  of 
government endorsement, RSA enjoys global popularity and over four million copies 
of  RSA exist  world-wide.15  Under  current  U.S. export  control  standards,  neither 

ti  “Bits” are the number of 0’s  and  l’s, in digital computer language, which  compose the key.  See Michael 
b e y ,  Computers  Made  Plain:  Decrypting  the  Erbiage  of  Encryption,  Investor’s Bus.  Daily,  1 October  1997, 7  16 
(on-line). ’ See Richard Lardner, Keys to  the  Code, Dow Jones Interactive, 1 July  1997, 7 10 (on-line). 

See Krey, supra,  footnote 6, 7 7. 
See Lardner, supra,  footnote 7. 
l o   See id. 
See id. 
l 2   See id. 
l 3   See id. 
l4  See  Lance J.  H o h a n  (ed.), Building  in  Big  Brotlzer:  The  Cryptographic  Po’oliq Debate,  Springer-Verlag. 
New  York,  1995,  at  38.  In January  1997, the  Department  of  Commerce  requested  comments  on  proposed 
draft  minimum  acceptability requirements  and  evaluation  criteria  for  DESS successor:  62  Fed.  Reg.  93,  2 
Januay 1997. 
See  Amy  Fleischmann, Personal  Data  Security:  Divergent  Standards  in  the  European  Union  and  the  United 

States,  19 Fordham L.  Rev.  143, 162 (1995). 

104 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

DES nor  RSA is  readily  exportable.  There  are  no  restrictions,  however,  on  the 
domestic sale  of encryption products.16 

The  export  of  encryption  technology from  the  United  States  has  traditionally 
been  governed by  the  International Traffic  in  Arms  Regulations  (ITAR), which  are 
promulgated  under  the  authority  of  the  Arms  Export  Control  Act  (AEcA).~’ The 
ITAR  control  the  export  of  items  listed  on  the  U.S.  Munitions  List  and  are 
adrmnistered by  the  Office  of Defense  Trade  Controls in  the  Department  of  State. 
The  Commerce  Department  ahnisters  the  Export  Ahnistration  Regulations 
(EAR), which  regulate  the  export  of  “dual-use’’  items  listed  on  the  Commerce 
Control  List.l8  Products  that  fall  under  the  EAR can  be  exported  under  a  general 
licence;  products  that  fall  under  the  ITAR need  a  separate  licence  application  and 
review  which  ordinarily  entalls  a  referral  to  the  Defense  Department  and  the 
National  Security  Agency  ( N S A ) . ~ ~  The  State  Department  has  the  authority  to 
transfer  jurisdiction  over  export  applications  for  any  encryption  product  to  the 
Commerce  Department,  and  sometimes  does  so  in  a  commomty  jurisdiction 
determination,  if  it  determines  that  the  product  no  longer  needs  case-by-case 
review.20 The  State  Department  routinely  transfers  jurisdiction  over  encryption 
products that  use  keys  of 40 bits  or less  to the  Commerce  Department  after a  one- 
time review.21 

11.  THE ADMINISTRATION’S ENCRYPTION EXPORT CONTROL POLICY- 

EVOLVING, BUT NOT ENOUGH 

Since its  early  days,  the  Clinton  Ahnistration has  supported some  version  of 
key  recovery.  The  Administration  has  liberalized  its  export  policy  with  respect  to 
encryption technology-but 

it has always remained several steps behind the market. 

The  Administration’s  first  attempt  at 

the 
introduction  of  the  Clipper  chp,  used  in  voice-encrypted  technology,  and  the 
Capstone  chip,  used  to  encrypt  e-mail  and  data  files.22 Both  chps,  which  were 

liberaking  encryption  was 

l6  Unless  a  manufacturer  of  a  product  containing  encryption  technology  is  willing  to  make  a  different 

version  of the product  for exporter, however, the export controls act as  a defacto domestic restriction. 

See 22 C.F.R. 5  121.1, Category xm(b)(l) (1997). 
The  statutory  authority  for  the  EAR  is  the  Export  Adrmnistration Act  of  1979 which  lapsed  on  20 
August  1994. Since then, its provisions have remained  in force through the Export  Administration Regulations, 
and  the  President’s  annual  invocation  of  the  International  Emergency  Powers  Act:  see  62  Fed.  Reg.  52514, 
10 October 1997. 

l9  A.  Michael  Froomkin,  It  Came  From  Planet  Clipper:  The  Battle  Over  Cryptographic  Key  “Escrow”,  Chi. 

Legal F.  15, 21 (1996). 

See id. 
See id. 

*’  See Fleischmann, supra,  footnote 15, at  164. 

THE U.S. EXPORT CONTROL REGIME FOR  ENCRYPTION 

105 

designed by  the  NSA, are  tamper-proof  and  encrypted with  EES, a  secret  SKIPJACK 
algorithm with  an  80-bit  key  length.23 The chips contain a built-in  key  which must 
be  escrowed  with  government  agencie~2~ and  are  f d y   exportable.25  The  rules 
governing  the  key  escrow  were  issued  as  procedural  rules,  without  notice  and 
comment, and therefore can be changed at any  time.26 

The Administration took  a  unique  approach to  promoting the  EES chips  as  the 
market  standard-one which  evaded  the  due  process  rule-malung  requirements  of 
the  Adrmnistrative  Procedure  Act.  The  chps  were  made  a  Federal  Information 
Processing  Standard  (FIPs).~~ FIPS is  a  voluntary  standard  which  is  to  be  used  in 
government procurements.28 Thus,  the  government hoped  to jump-start  the  market 
for EES chips through government procurement. 

Despite  this  innovative  attempt  to  rig  the  market,  the  Clipper  and  Capstone 
chips  failed  to  catch  01129  for  several  reasons.  First,  the  industry  was  hostile  to  the 
classified  nature  of the  SKIPJACK algorithm.30 Second, the  chps could  only be  used 
with  special hardware.31 Finally,  the  government had  ready access  to  the  keys  under 
murky  standards.32  Not  only  &d  t h s  provoke fears  of Big Brother, it also  prevented 
the user  of the chip fiom having a means of readily recovering the encrypted data.33 
In  response  to  the  industry’s failure to  adopt  the  Clipper  and  Capstone  chps, 
the  Administration  unveiled  a  draft  set  of  criteria  for  a  key-escrow  system  at  a 
1 September  1995 governmenthndustry  meeting sponsored by  the National Institute 
of  Standards  and  Techn0logy.3~ Under 
the  key-escrow  proposal,  encryption 
technology  of  up  to  64  bits  would  be  exportable  as  long  as  the  keys  needed  to 
decode the  encryption were stored with  a  government-certified  key-escrow  agent.35 
The agent  would be  authorized to  provide the  keys  to  either the  owner or  to law- 
enforcement  officials  with  a  court-authorized  search  warrant.36  In  order  to  be 
exportable,  the  product  had  to  lack  the  capacity  to  decrypt  messages  or  files 
encrypted  by  non-escrowed  products, 
includmg  products  whose  key-escrow 

” See Froomkin, supra,  footnote 19, at 25. 
24  One-half  of the key  is  escrowed with the Department  of Treasury and the other with the  Department 
of Commerce:  see  Fleischmann, supra,  footnote  15, at  154. The Capstone  chip  also  has  a more limited second 
key  for  this  system  is  not  retained  by  the  government:  see  Froomkin,  supra, 
key-encryption  capability-the 
footnote 19, at 29. 

Technologies, 41 Vill. L. Rev. 289, 291 (1996). 

25  See Dorothy E.  Denning and William E.  Baugh, Recent  Developments: Key Escrow  Encryption  Policies  and 
’’ See id. 
” See Froomkin, supra,  foomote 19, at 26. 
” See ibid., at 32. 
’I’  See  ibid.,  at  33: noting that  the  Clipper  chip  was  unpopular  &om inception  while  the  Capstone  chip 
’’  See id. 
’(’  See Denning and Baugh, supra, footnote 25, at  291. 
’’ See id. 
33  See id. 
34  See  US. Issues  Dr4t Encryption  Criteria as  Software  Makers  Protest,  Inside  U.S.  Trade,  8 September  1995, 
9 2 (on-line\. 
1996, fiB  2 and 7 (on-line). 

35  See ’Major Companies  to  make  Key  Recovery  Productfor  N e w  Export  Rules,  Inside  U.S. Trade, 4  October 
36  See ibid., 7 5. 

had only limited success. 

\ 

I ,  

106 

T H E   

mechanisms  had  been  altered  or  disabled.37  Moreover,  the  product  had  to  be 
resistant  to  any alteration  that  would  &sable  or circumvent the  key  escrow.38  Non- 
escrowed  encryption  using  a  key  length  of  up  to  40  bits  would  continue  to  be 
exportable.39 

to 

ready  accessible 

the  U.S.  government.40  Moreover, 

Once  again,  the  Adrmnistration’s  announcement  failed  to  generate  anything 
more  than  lukewarm  support  from  the  industry.  The  key-escrow  proposal  was 
criticized as  being  at  odds with  the  commercial reahties  of the  market-place.  Many 
buyers,  particularly  foreign  buyers,  had  no  desire  to  purchase  encrypted  products 
with  keys 
the 
Ahnistration’s proposal was  over-broad because in addition to  covering data  (a use 
for  which  there  was  some  market  demand  for  key-recovery  systems),  it  also 
encompassed  encrypted  voice  communications  which  no  one  outside  law- 
enforcement officials had  any  use  for. The overarchmg industry complaint, however, 
was  that  the  proposal  did  not  significantly liberalize the  strength of  the  encryption 
which  could  be  exported.  There  was  no  good  reason  to  limit  the  export  of  key- 
escrow  encryption  technology  above  64-bit  keys,  which  was  on  the  low  side  of 
encryption  capacity,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  government would  have  relatively 
easy  access  to  the  encrypted   material^.“^  Not  surprisingly,  the  draft  criteria  were 
never formally adopted. 

The  industry,4*  however,  &d  come  forward  with  its  own  proposal  for  a 
workable encryption  export  control scheme which  included a  key-recovery  system. 
As  a  preliminary  matter,  the  industry recommended  that  all  encryption technology 
which  was  readily  commercially  available  should  be  exportable  without  key 
recovery.43  Stronger encryption  should  be  exportable when  combined  with  a  key- 
recovery system.44 Under the industry’s proposed key-recovery  plan: 

(1)  any key  length would be exportable; 
(2)  users would be able  to select their own key  holders; 
(3)  it would  be  harder  to  bypass  the  key-recovery  system  than  to  employ very 

strong non-key-escrow  encryption; 

(4)  programs themselves would not provide for multiple encryption; and 
(5)  the  system  would  be  able  to  identify the  key  holder without  notifying the 

party encrypting the information.45 

37  See  Text  cf  Nisr 0 7 4  Criteria for  Enqption  Exports,  Inside U.S.  Trade,  8 September  1995, 

3  (on- 

line). 

3x  See id. 
39 See id. 
40  See  U S .  Issues  D74f  Encryption  Criteria,  supra,  footnote 34, f 5. 
41  See ibid., f 15. 
42  Id. The proposal was put forth by  the Business Software Alliance. 
43  See  U S .  Issues Draj  Encryption  Criteria,  supra,  footnote 34, f 16. 
44  See id. 
45  See ibid., f  17. 

T H E  U S .  EXPORT C O N T R O L  REGIME FOR  ENCRYPTION 

107 

In  the  meantime,  the  default  U.S.  policy  was  to  allow  mass-market  software 
exports only  of  products  using  keys  of  40  bits  or  shorter.46  Inchidual  licences  for 
stronger  encryption  remained  available  only  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  with  some 
granted for 56-bit  encryption but few licences granted for anythng stronger.47 

By  early  1996, the  computer  industry was  once  again  screaming for  relief from 
the  restrictive  export  controls  on  encryption.48  The  Business  Software  Alliance 
released  a  study  in  February  1996  which  inhcated  that  40-bit  encryption  key 
products offered, in practical terms, no real  protection against  theft of information.49 
Indeed, a  French graduate student was  able  to crack Netscape's  40-bit  encryption in 
only a few days.50 The study concluded that  encryption needed to be  at least  75 bits 
long to  provide adequate protection.5'  Only a  few months later, RSA Data Security 
announced  that  it  had  teamed  up  with  Nippon  Telephone  & Telegraph  (NTT) to 
manufacture  abroad  an  encryption  chip  with  key  lengths  far  exceedmg  the  56-bit 
U.S.  threshold  for  hscretionary  exp0rt.5~ Many  feared  t h s  signalled the  emergence 
of a foreign threat to U.S. leadershp of the encryption technology field. 

Accordmgly, the  Administration revamped  its  encryption policy  once  again.  In 
the  fall  of  1996,  the  Administration  replaced  its  key-escrow  proposal  with  one 
advocating  key  recovery.  In  a  key-recovery  system,  the  pieces  of  the  key,  which 
would  themselves be  coded,  would  be  separated  into  thrds  and  stored  with  three 
parties-two 
key-recovery  agents and the  owner.53  If  an unauthorized individual or 
company  gained  access  to  one  part  of  the  code,  the  information  would  stdl  be 
protected because  they  would  not  have  the  entire  key.54  Law-enforcement  officials 
with proper warrants could get access to the complete key? 

Under  the  Administration's  interim  regulations, published  in  December  1996, 
companies  could export  DES and  other  56-bit  algorithms provided  that  they  had  a 
plan  for  implementing key  recovery and  for  buildmg  the  supporting  irhastructure 
internationally,  with  commitments  to  explicit  benchmarks  and  milestones.56 
Temporary licences  would  be  granted  for  six-month  periods  for  up  to  two  years, 
with  renewals  contingent  on  the  company  meeting  certain  recovery  technology 

46  See  BSA Study  Says  Exportable  Encryption  Goods  Ofer  No  Protection,  Inside  US. Trade, 9 February  1996, 

7 3 (on-line). 
47  See id. 
48  See  CSPP Callsfor Immediate Easing  OfExport  Controls  on  Encryption,  Inside U.S. Trade, 19 January  1996, 
8  1 (on-line).  The  Computer  Systems  Policy  Project,  composed  of  the  Chief Executive Officers  of  thirteen 
leading computing manufacturers, issued a  report calling  upon  the Administration to liberalize  export controls 
on generally available strengths of encryption: see id. 
4v  See BSA Study,  supra,  footnote 46, 78 1 and 6. 
See ibid.. 7l  4. 
51 See ibid.; 9 7. 
52  See Administration  Signals  Minor  Flexibility  on  Encryption  Controls,  Inside U.S.  Trade, 7 June  1996, 7  12 
53  See Major  Companies, supra,  footnote 35, 7 12. 
54  See ibid., 7 5. 
55  See id. 
56  See 61 Fed. Reg.  68572, 68573, 30 December  1996 

(on-line). 

~ 

108 

T H E  JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

milestones.57  After  two years,  56-bit  products  without  key  recovery would  cease  to 
be  exportable.58  In  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  two-year  window,  exporters  are 
required  to  submit  business  plans  for  the  development  of  key-recovery  products.59 
Furthermore, jurisdction  over  most  encryption  products  was  transferred  from  the 
State Department to the Department  of Commerce.60 Lastly,  companies could begin 
exporting recoverable  encryption technology, upon  one-time  approval, regardless  of 
strength.61 

Again,  industry  criticism  was  vociferous.  Indeed,  no  sooner  were  the  interim 
regulations  published,  than  the  industry  began  to  threaten  to  take  its  case  to 
Congress.62  The  critics  fell  into  two  camps-those  who  had  problems  with  the 
specifics  of the  Administration’s proposal  and  those who were  opposed  to  any  key- 
access system. Those in the former group felt that  the administrative requirements of 
the  regulations  made  it  so  dfficult  to  get  a  licence  that  they  would  act  as  a 
disincentive to  key-recovery  development.63 Moreover,  the  incentive  wasn’t  really 
necessary-at 
the  time  the  regulations  were  being  drafted,  a  group  of  thrty-five 
companies,  led  by  ISM,  had  already  announced  plans  to  develop  key-recovery 
products.64 

More  importantly,  the  Administration’s proposal  again  ignored  the  reahties  of 
the  time  the 
the  market-place.  Liberahzing  56-bit  encryption  was  no  carrot-by 
regulations were  published,  128-bit  encryption was  well on its way  to  becoming the 
de facto  Internet  standard.65 Moreover, while  the  proposals  were  modfied  to  remedy 
industry complaints that  companies would be  forced to  abandon the  customers who 
purchased 
the 
regulations allowed for adhtional quantities of non-recovery  products to be exported 
to existing customers after the window expired only in amounts proportionate to the 
customer’s  embedded  base,  malung  it  dfficult  for  suppliers  to  convince  foreign 
customers of  their  continued  reliability.66  Further,  while  companies w d  be  allowed 
to  service  the  products  exported  during  the  two-year  window  afterwards,  they 

the  non-key-recovery  systems  during  the 

two-year  window, 

57  See ibid., at  68574. 
5R  See id. 
59  See id. 
6o  See The White  House,  Ofice of the Press  Secretary, Executive Order, Administration of Export  Controls 
U J  Encryption  Products, 15 November  1996: all encryption  products  except those specifically designed, developed 
or  otherwise  modified  for  military  applications,  are  transferred  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Commerce 
Department. 

See 61 Fed.  Reg.,  at  68574. Only six  companies, including Netscape, have  thus far  taken  advantage  of 
using  it to export  128-bit encryption  products: see Matej Vipotnick,  U S .  Ruling  May Aid 

this provision-each 
Net Encryption  Sojbarc Exports, Fin. Times, 27 August 1997, at  14. 
62  See  Draf, Encrypfion  Rqiilation.~ Leave  Crucial  Questions  Unanswered,  Inside  U.S.  Trade,  13 December 
1996, 7  9  (owline): quoting BSA spokeswomen, who  stated  that  “our worst fears  3re  realized  ... we’ll have  to 
go the Hill next year.” 
6.3  See  Despite  Strong  Criticism,  Administrafion  Cbse  tu  Finishing  Encryption  Regs.,  Inside  U.S.  Trade,  6 
December  1996, 7 1 (on-line). 
64  See ibid., 7 21. 
’’ See  Letter  from  Ira  Rubmstein,  Senior  Corporate  Attorney,  Microsoft,  to  Nancy  Crowe,  Bureau  of 
‘‘ See Letter from Boyd J. McKelvian, Chairman, Industry Coalition  on Tech. Transfer, to Nancy  Crowe, 

Export  Adnlin.,  13 February 1997, at 4: comments on encryption  regulations. 

Bureau of Export Admin.,  13 February 1997, at 2: comments on encryption  regulations. 

THE US.  EXPORT CONTROL REGIME FOR  ENCRYPTION 

109 

cannot  upgrade  the  strength  of  the  encryption.67  Finally,  the  regulations  mandate 
that  key-recovery  products  not  be  interoperable  with  existing  non-key-access 
encryption  products.68  Therefore,  if  key  recovery  is  a  success,  the  majority  of 
existing encryption technology would be rendered prematurely obsolete. 

Other industry critics took  a  more hard-lined  view. To  them,  any key-recovery 
system  was  objectionable  because  it  multiplied  the  risk  that  encrypted  data  would 
not  remain secure.69 Regardless of the  camp they fell into, the underlying complaint 
of  the  industry remained the  same:  the  Administration’s latest export  control policy 
would  not  make  them  any  more  competitive with  foreign  encryption suppliers and 
might even further hamper their competitiveness.70 

In May  1997, probably as  a  partial response to  the  legislation  (discussed  inza in 
Section  III),  the  Commerce  Department  announced  that  it  would  allow  export  of 
non-recoverable  encryption  with  udmited  key  length  for  products  that  were 
specifically  designed  for  financial  transactions.  Banks  would  be  allowed  to  export 
these non-key-recovery  products, regardless  of strength, following a one-time  review 
of  the  potential  end-users.  The  relaxation  is  based,  in  part,  on  the  notion  that 
financial institutions are subject to other  regulatory obligations.71  This move may  be 
the  first  of  several  towards  a  more  market-driven  export  control  regime  by  the 
Administration. 

111.  THE LEGISLATIVE MORASS 

By  February  1997, bds  had  been  introduced  in  both  the  House  and  Senate 
which  went  several  steps beyond  the  Administration’s policy  in  liberahzing  export 
controls  on  encryption.  The  House  bill,  introduced  by  Rep.  Goodlatte  (R-VA), 
H.R. 695,  the  Security and  Freedom through  Encryption  (SAFE) Act,  would  allow 
U.S.  companies  to  export  most  encryption  products  without  any  key-recovery 
system.  The SAFE Bdl also  explicitly prohibits mandatory  key  escrow and  allows the 
sale  of  any  encryption  product  in  the  United  States.72  Two  Senate  bds,  one 
introduced  by  Sen. Burns  (R-MT),  S. 377,  Promotion  of  Commerce  On-Line  in 
the Digital Era Act of 1997) (Burns Bd), and one introduced by  Sen. Leahy,  S. 376, 
the Promotion of Commerce On-Line In the Digital Era Act of 1997 (the Pro-CODE 

67  See 61  Fed. Reg.,  at 68574. 

7  10 (on-line). 
from  Ira Rubenstein.  supra, footnote 65. 

See  Encryption  Regulations  do  Little  to  Sway  Supporters  Offgislation,  Inside  U S  Trade,  10 January  1997, 

69  See  Matt  Blaze,  Cryptography  Policy  and  the  Znformation  Economy,  27  December  1996, attached  to  letter 

Shortly after  the  Regulations were published,  a group of sixteen  major  trade  associations, including the 
U.S.  Chamber  of Commerce,  the  Business Sofiware  Alliance,  the  Center  for Democracy and Technology,  and 
the  National  Foreign  Trade  Council,  sent  a  letter  to  President  Clinton  charging  that  his  encryption  policy 
failed  to  address  the  needs  of  both  American  businesses  and  the  general  public:  see  Eade  Groups  Reiterate 
Opposition to  Proposed Encryption  Regs.,  Inside U.S.  Trade,  21 February  1997, 77 2 and 4 (on-line). 
71  See Adnrinistration  to  Decontrol  Encryptionfor  Financial Service3  Firms,  Inside U.S. Trade,  16 May  1997, 7 6 
(on-line). 
72 See S A F ~  Bill, & 2804, 2803. 

110 

THE JOUKNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Act)  contained  virtually identical  encryption liberalization. The bdls  that  eventually 
emerged  from  the  committee  review  system,  however,  bore  little  resemblance  to 
these initial drafis. 

A.  The Senate Bills 

Shortly  after  the  Senate  bdls  were  introduced,  the  Administration  let  it  be 
known that both bdls went beyond the Administration’s comfort leve1.73  Indeed, the 
Administration  prepared  its  own  draft  encryption  legislation.  The  Adrmnistration’s 
draft  bdl,  however,  did  not  propose  any  changes  to  the  existing encryption  export 
regime.  Instead,  it  proposed  a  regime  to  regulate  law  enforcement’s  access  to 
encryption  keys.  Under  the  Administration’s proposed  bdl,  a  government-certified 
agent  would  be  allowed  to  release  a  key  upon  receipt  of  a  court  order, federal  or 
state  subpoena  or  a  request  from  the  Attorney-General  based  on  the  Foreign 
Intehgence  Surveillance Act.74 More importantly, the Administration’s bdl contains a 
preference  for  public  entities  serving  as  the  key  agent.75  The  draft  legislation  also 
limited  the  legal  liabhty  of  the  key  agents76 and  the  potential  uses  for  recovered 
information.77 

While  the  Administration’s bill  was  never  actually  introduced,  it  &d  generate 
momentum  for  a  third  compromise  Senate  bill,  the  Secure  Public  Networks  Act 
(SPNA), S.  909, introduced by  Sens.  McCain, Kerrey and Hollings. Under the SPNA, 
all encryption of 56 bits and less would be  exportable after a  one-time  review78 and 
encryption based  on a  qualified system  of key  recovery would  be  exportable after a 
one-time  review  regardless  of  key  length.79  Borrowing  from  the  “become-the- 
market”  strategy  behnd  the  Clipper  chp,  the  SPNA would  require  all  government 
purchases  of  encryption  to  be  based  on  a  quahfied  system  of  key  recovery.80  The 
legislation  does,  however, specifically  exempt the  private  sector  from  any mandated 

7 3   See Administration  Frames Encryption  Bill  but  Shows  no  Flexibility  on  Exports,  Inside  U.S.  Trade, 21 March 

1997, 77 6-8  (on-line). 
(on-line). 

74  See Administration  to Hold  Line  on  Ofidol Access to Encryption  Keys, Inside US. Trade, 4 April  1997,  12 
7s  See ibid., 77 14-15. 
76  Key agents would  incur  no  civil  or  criminal liability for disclosing information  in  accordance with the 

authorized procedures: see ibid., fl 16. 
authorized requests from foreign governments: see ibid., f 13. 

77  Recovered  information  could  only  be  used  for fact-finding  in  legal  proceedings and  complying with 
’*  SPNA, 0 302. 
7y  Ibid., 0 304. 
*’ 

Ibid., $4  202-205. 

THE U S .  EXPORT  CONTROL REGIME  FOR ENCRYPTION 

111 

participation  in  qualified  key-encryption  systems.81  The  legislation  also  contains  a 
provision  encouraging  (but  not  requiring)  the  export  of  non-key-recovery 
encryption above 56 bits when  found  to  be  generally commercially available.82 The 
SPNA also would create an  Information Security Board, consisting of equal numbers 
of public  and private sector members,  to provide  the  President with  updates  on the 
state-of-the-art  of  encryption  technology.83  Finally,  the  bill  contained  provisions 
about  the  certification  of  key-recovery  agents  and  the  condltions  governing  key 
release  along the lines proposed by  the Administration.84 

Senator  Kerrey  subsequently proposed  an  amendment  to  the  bill  which  more 
specifically  defined  the  make-up  and  mission  of  the  Board,  giving  the  majority  of 
the  government  spots  on  the  Board  to  the  law-enforcement  community.  The 
amendment  defines  the  Board  membership  as  the  Secretary of  Commerce,  and  as 
appointed by  the  President,  a  representative from the  National Security Agency,  the 
Federal Bureau  of  Investigation, the  Central  Intelhgence  Agency,  the  Office  of  the 
President, and four representatives from industry.85 The Board would  meet  quarterly 
with  the  express  purpose  of  making  recommendations  to  the  President  on 
permitting  the  encryption  of  stronger  products.g6 The  President  must  accept  the 
Board's  recommendation  to  increase  the  level  of  non-recovery  system  encryption 
exportable  after  one-time  review,  unless  he  determines  that  to  do  so  would  be 
contrary to  national security,87 in which  case  the  President must  issue  an Executive 
Order  preventing  the  recommendation  from  taking  effect,  and  notift  Congress.88 
The  bdl,  as  approved  by 
includes  the  Kerrey 
Amendment.89 The Administration has issued a tentative endorsement of SPNA.'~ 

the  Commerce  Committee, 

" Ibid., 5 207. 
82 Specifically,  the  legislation  proposes that  the  Secretary of  Commerce  considers  the  following factors 
when  evaluating  encryption:  whether  an  encryption  product  is  generally  avadable  and  is  designed  for 
installation  without  alteration  by  purchaser;  whether  the  encryption  product  is  generally  available  in  the 
country  to  whch  the  encryption  product  would  be  exported;  whether  the  encryption  products  offering 
comparable  security  and  level  of  encryption  are  available  in  the  country  to  which  the  encryption  product 
would be  exported;  or whether the encryption product  would be imminently available in the  country  to which 
the product would be exported  see ibid., at 4  307. 

-83  See ibid., at 5 80i. 
84  See generallv  ibid..  at  titles  IV,  v,  and  VII. The legislation provides  for certificate authorities  that  certify 
that  a  user  of  a  paiticular  encryption  key  holds  excluske  access  to  that  key.  Certificate  authorities  are  not 
required to also be  government-certified key holders. 
's  See  Text: Summary of  Kerrey Amendment,  Inside U.S.  Trade, 20 June 1997, 7 2 (on-line). 
86  See  ibid.,  74 3  and  5.  The  Board  would  make  its  decision  on  the  basis  of  four  criteria:  whether 
stronger encryption  products  are  generally  available; whether  they  are  generally  available in  countries  that  are 
export destinations; whether comparable products are available; and whether the product  would  be  imminently 
available in other countries: ibid., 7 4. 

87  See ibid., 7 6. 
88  See id. 
89  See  Senate  Pnnel  Oknys  Encryption  Bill  but  Changes  Likely  before  Floor  Wte, Inside U.S. Trade,  20 June 
90 See  Zxt: Daley  Letter  on  Enqption,  Inside  U.S.  Trade,  20 June  1977, 4 8  (on-line).  The  same letter 

1997 (on-line). 

repudiated the Burns legislation: see id. 

112 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Notwithstanding the Commerce Committee’s approval of the bill, it had not yet 
been  reported  out  of  the  Committee  by  September,  delaying  its  consideration, 
through  sequential  referral,  by  the  Judiciary  Committee,gl  where  a  substantial 
number  of committee members have  indicated their  intent  to  mould the  bdl with  a 
stronger law-enforcement bent.92 

Moreover, 

the  Burns 

legislation  whch  provides  for  more 

immediate 
liberahation  retains  a  number  of  committed  supporters, including  Senate majority 
leader  Trent  Lott,93 prompting  speculation  that  neither  SPNA nor  the  Burns  Bill 
could  ultimately be  passed.94  Supporters of  SPNA blame  the  Administration’s failure 
to  strongly lobby for  a  compromise bdl  as  the  cause  of the  deadlock.95  By  late  fall, 
the  Senate was  not  much closer to  a final vote on  an  encryption bill.  In  a  speech in 
late  October,  in  which  he  optimistically  expressed  his  hope  that  Congress  could 
resolve  encryption issues  “within two months”,  Senator Lott conceded that he could 
report no concrete progress  in the legislative process.96 

B.  The House Bill 

The  SAFE Bdl  managed  to  emerge  intact  &om both  the  House Judciary  and 
International Relations C0mmittees.~7 In  this  form,  the  bill  had  enough  support in 
the  House  for  passage.9* During  the  review  by  the  National  Security Committee, 
however, an  amendment, known  as the Weldon-Dellums Amendment, was  approved 
that  would  effectively  eviscerate  the  SAFE B111.99  Under  the  Weldon-Dellums 
Amendment,  the  President  would  notify  Congress  within  thirty  days  of  the 
enactment of  legislation  of  the  maximum  level  of  encryption strength which  could 
be  exported  “without  harm  to  the  national  security  of  the  United  States.”1o0 After 
this  initial determination,  the  President would  undertake similar notifications on an 
annual basis. 201 

See House,  Senate Facing  Tough Fight  to  Pass  Encryption Legislation, Inside U.S. Trade,  12 September  1997, 

f 2 (on-line). 
7  1 (on-line). 
(on-line). 

92  See  Senate Judiciary  Members  Back  Law-Enforcement Angle  on  Encryption,  Inside U.S. Trade,  11 July  1997, 
93  See Lott Draws  Hard  Line against  Commerce Committee  Encryption Bill, Inside U.S. Trade, 4 July  1997, 1 6 
94  See ibid., 7 7. 
95  Senators  Leahy,  Kerrey  and  McCain  have  criticized 

the  Administration  for  alternatively  not 
understanding  the  issues  and  not  becoming  “totally  engaged”  in  the  debate:  see  House,  Senate  Facing  Tough 
Fcqht, supra, footnote 91, 77 5 and 7. 
96  See  Lott  Callsfor Renewed  E f r t  to  Pass  Encryption Lefislation,  Inside U.S.  Trade, 31 October  1997, 77  1 
- ?,, -. . .... _, . 
See,  e.g.,  International  Relations  De,&eafs  Attempt  to  Weaken  Etlcryptiun  Bili,  Inside  US.  Trade,  25 July 

”’  See  Goodlitte  Encryption Bill  Facing  Tough  Fight  in  National  Security  Panel,  Inside US.  Trade,  1 August 
99  See House,  Senate Facing  Tough Fight, supra, footnote 91, at 71 16 and 17. 

See Amendments  To H.R.  695  Ofered  by Mr  Weldon and  Mr  Dellums,  H.R.  Rep.  No.  105-108, pr.  3  at 

2nd Z  (nn-line) 
1997, B 1 (on-line). 
1997, 7 1 0  (on-line). 

2  (1997). 

”” See id. 

THE U.S. EXPORT CONTROL REGIME FOR ENCRYPTION 

113 

The  House  Commerce  Committee,  as  well  as  the  Judiciary,  International 
Relations,  National  Security  and  Intelligence  Committees,  were  then  given  two 
weeks  to  craft compromise bills.  The  Intelligence  Committee  went  on  to  adopt  a 
substitute  bd,  offered  by  Reps.  Gross  (R-Fla.)  and  Dicks  (D-WA)  which  would 
allow  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  to  regulate  encryption  exports  “in  close  co- 
ordination with  the  Secretary of Defense” and  other agencies which protect national 
security.102  The  b d   would  only  allow  the  export  of  encryption  products  of 
unlimited  strength  h e r   31  January  2000,  following  a  one-time  review  by 
Commerce.103 At  that  time,  all  encryption  exports  would  be  required  to  have  a 
mandatory  key-recovery  function  which  would  allow  “immechate  access”  to 
encrypted information  (with a  limited  exception for  voice  encryption products). 104 
The  legislation  also  introduced,  for  the  first  time,  mandatory  key  recovery  for  all 
encryption  systems  used  domestically  afier  31  January  2000  (with  a  grandfather 
clause for products purchased prior  to that date) .lo5 

In  contrast,  the  House  Commerce  Committee  endorsed  an  entirely  chfferent 
approach,  rejecting  an  amendment  analogous  to  the  Gross-Dicks  Amendment.106 
The Commerce  Committee  version,  drafted by  Reps.  Markey  (D-MA)  and Whte 
(R-WA)  retains  the  original  SAFE Bill’s 
language  liberalizing  all  encryption 
systems. lo7 However, it also  creates a  National Electronic Technologies Center (NET 
Center) that would keep the FBI, state and local law-enforcement  agencies abreast  of 
the  latest  encryption  technology108  and  would  double  criminal  penalties  where 
encryption  is  used  to  commit  or  hide  a  crime.lo9 The  industry  has  endorsed  this 
compromise.110 However, it must  stdl compete with  the  other  three versions of  the 
bill  before  the  House  Rules  Committee-the 
original  SAFE Bill,  the  Weldon- 
Dellurns  version,  and  the  Gross-Dicks  version.  Moreover,  the  House  Rules 
Chairman  has  publicly  expressed  h s  strong  opposition  to  any  legislation  which 
contains any broad-based liberalization of encryption export controls.lll 

Thus, there was  little likelihood of passage  of a bill  significantly liberalizing U.S. 
export  controls  on  encryption  in  1997.  Senator  Lott,  a  supporter  of  the  Burns 
legislation in the Senate, indicated his support of the  creation of a NET Center  as  an 
avenue  for  compromise.112  Admmistration  officials,  however,  stated  that  such  a 

-.. . . ~ ~  

8 and  9. 
10. 

Io2  See  House  Intelligence Panel  Approues  Broad  C h a n p  lo Encryption  Bill,  Inside  U.S.  Trade,  19 September 

1997, 7 2  (on-line). 
Io3  SPP ihid..  TI  7 
’04  See ibid.: 
’‘)‘ See  Scott Ritter, House  Panel  Rejects  Planfor Domestic Encryption  Controls,  Dow Jones News  Service, 25 
‘05  See ibid., 
September  1997, 7 1 (on-line). 
lo’  See ibid., 7 6. 
‘Ox  See ibid., 77 7 and 8. 
See  ibid., 7 8. 
‘(I9 
’I”  See  ITAA  Welcomes  Encryption  Compromise  in  Houre,  Business Wire,  25  September  1997  (on-line):  the 
Information  Technology  Association  of  America  has  over  11.000  direct  and  affiliate  members  in  the 
information  technology industry 
111  See Lott  Callsfor Renewed  Efort,  supra,  footnote 96, at f  10. 
‘12  See ibid., 79 4 and  5. 

114 

T H E   

compromise would be  unacceptable because encryption  above  90 bits would  remain 
“effectively unbreakable”.l13 Moreover,  the  circulation  of  an  FBI draft  encryption 
bill  which  would  mandate  key-access  systems  for  encryption  products  sold 
domestically  has  called  into  question  the  Admmistration’s  continued  support  of  a 
compromise bill in the SPNA vein.114 

IV.  WHY THE ADMINISTRATION WILL  HAVE  TO ABANDON 

ITS POSITION 

The Administration’s encryption  export  control  regime  has  come  under  attack 
on all fronts. Within the last year,  the  Organisation for Economic Co-operation  and 
Development  (OECD) issued  its  encryption  guidelines  which  failed  to  endorse  a 
global mandatory key-recovery  system while the European Commission has  recently 
repudiated such a  system. Although the  U.S.  export  regime  survived judicial review 
by  a  federal  court  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  a  federal  court  in  Cahfornia  has 
found  encryption  export  controls  under  both  the  International  Traffic  in  Arms 
Regulations  and  the  Export  Adrmnistration Regulations  unconstitutional. There  is 
therefore  significant  impetus  for  the  Administration  to  liberalize  the  export  of 
encryption  technology, without  conditioning  such liberahation  on  the  creation  of 
key-recovery  systems. 

A.  Repudiation ofMandatory Key Recovery  by  the  OECD and  the European  Union 

In March  1997, the  OECD issued  its long-awaited  Guidelines on  encryption.115 
Ambassador  David  Aaron,  the  U.S. Permanent  Representative  to  the  OECD, had 
been  appointed  as  U.S. special envoy  for  cryptography116 In  this  role,  Ambassador 
Aaron  was  to  promote  international  co-operation  and  fachtate  the  creation  of  a 
global  key-recovery  system.  The  OECD Guidelines would  be  an  indication  of  the 
success  of his  efforts. 

The  OECD Guidelines  expounded  eight  basic  principles  for  encryption 
is  no  recommendation 

technology  policy117  There  is  one  notable  omission-there 
for any type of mandatory key-recovery  system. Instead, the Guidelines state that: 

’ 1 3   See id. 
‘I4  See House,  Senate,  Facing  Tough  Fight,  supra, footnote 91, 77 9-11. 
‘I5  See  Cryptography  Policy  Guidelines,  (Guidelines)  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 

Develo  ment, Paris, France, 27 March  1997. 

“‘See 

Crypto  raphy,  15 November 1996. 

The  White  House,  Office  of  the  Vice  President,  Vice  President  Announces  Special  Envoy  for 

’ P ’ See Guidelines, supra, footnote  115. The guidelines not otherwise discussed herein  include:  encryption 

methods  should  be  trustworthy  in  order  to generate confidence in  information and  communication systems; 
users  should  have  a  right  to  choose  any  encryption method,  subject  to  applicable law;  technical  standards  for 
encryption should  be  developed at national  and  international levels; the fundamental  rights of the individual to 
privacy,  including  secrecy  of  communication  and  protection  of  personal  data  should  be  respected;  and  the 
liability of  individuals and  entities  that  offer  encryption services or hold  or  access encryption keys  should  be 
clearly identified.  See id. 

THE US. EXPORT CONTROI. REGIME FOR ENCRYPTION 

115 

“...  national cryptography policies may  allow lawful access to plain text or cryptographic 
keys of encrypted data. These policies must  respect the  other principles contained in the 
Guidelines to the greatest extent possible.””s 

Indeed,  the  Guidelines  endorse  the  “market-driven  development  of  cryptographc 
methods”.llg  Furthermore,  the  Guidelines state  that  “governments should  remove, 
or  avoid  creating  in  the  name  of  cryptography  policy,  unjustified  obstacles  to 
trade.”120  Thus,  the  Guidelines  are  devoid  of  any  ringing  endorsement  of  the 
Administration’s key-recovery  proposals and  indeed, politely  dismiss  them  in  favour 
of what the unencumbered market might develop. 

In  early October  1997, U.S. hopes for  a  mandatory  global key-recovery  system 
were dealt another heavy blow.  The European Commission released  a lengthy report 
rejecting  both  key-recovery  and  key-escrow  systems.121  The  Report  raised  four 
general  objections  to  any  key-access  system:  vulnerabdity;  privacy;  cost;  and 
effectiveness.122  Because  these  criticisms  mirror  those  made  by  the  U.S. computer 
industry, they are worth  exploring. 

First,  the  Report  points  to  the  additional  vulnerabhty  that  any  key-access 
system  introduces into  an  encryption  system.  Hackers  have  always,  and  will  always, 
find  ways  to  breach  security.  Key-access  schemes,  which  increase  the  number  of 
people  with  knowledge  of  a  key,  also  increase  their  likelihood  of  su~cess.1~3 
Moreover,  there  is  the  implicit  risk  that  any  modifications  performed  on  an 
encryption system to allow for key  recovery d contain bugs  allowing unauthorized 
users access to the encrypted data. 

A  related objection articulated by  the  Commission is  that  the  existence of key- 
access  systems  undermines  the  purpose  of  encryption-to 
protect  the  privacy  of 
personal  information.  As  such,  key-access  systems  are  inconsistent  with  European 
data-privacy  laws  because  they  “hinder  the  secure  and  free  flow  of  personal 
information and the provision of related goods and service~.”1~4 

Moreover, any key-access  system wdl be surmountable. Criminals wdl inevitably 
be  able  to  obtain  encryption  without  key  access,  thereby  defeating  the  entire 
purpose of the  key-access  system.125  Indeed, a  user  could even mix non-recoverable 
and  recoverable  encryption,  which  would  stdl  stymie  decryption  through  key 
recovery. 126 

Finally,  there  is  the  substantial cost  of buildmg  a  key-access  system. Significant 
cost  factors would  include:  response  time  to  deliver  keys;  storage  time  for  session 

”*  See ibid.,  Guideline No. 6 .  
119  See ibid., Guideline No. 3. 
See ibid.,  Guideline No. 8. 

1997. The Commission’s paper does not specifically refer  to the U.S. global push for key access. 

12’  Towards  a  European  Framework for  Digital  Signatures  and  Encryption,  European  Commission,  8 October 
Iz2  See ibid., 0 111.2.3. 
i23  See id. 
Iz4  See ibid., 111.2.4. 
lZ5  See ibid.,  111.3. 
Iz6  See ibid.. 111.2.3. 

116 

T H E  JOURNAL OF  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

keys;  authenticating  the  government  agency’s  request  (particularly  when 
the 
requesting party  is  a  foreign  government); securing transfer  of  recovered  keys;  and 
internal security safeguards.127  The Report  correctly  notes  that  the  cost  of building 
key-access  systems  has  not  been  adequately  discussed,  particularly  with  respect  to 
global key-access  systems. 128 

On a  broader  note,  the  Commission  concludes  that  key-access  systems  pose  a 

threat to the rise of electronic commerce. In the Commission’s words: 

“ ... if  citizens and companies have  to fear that  their communication and transactions are 
monitored  with  the help of  key-access  or  sirmlar schemes ... they  may  prefer  remaining 
in the anonymous off-line world and electronic commerce wdl just not happen.”lZy 

If key-access  systems must exist at all,  the  Report  concludes, they should be limited 
to what is  absolutely necessary.130 

Indeed,  even  on  the  domestic  front,  by  mid-1997,  there  were  questions as to 
the  validlty  of  law  enforcement’s  need  for  key-access  systems.  One  of  the 
Administration’s policy’s  staunch supporters (and one of the few academics to defend 
the  existing regulations), Professor Dorothy  Denning,  in  conjunction  with  W a r n  
Baugh Jr.,  released  a study on criminal cases in which  criminals had used  encryption 
technology.131  Despite  findmg  that  the  number  of  such  cases  is  growing at  rate  of 
50  to  100  per  cent  annually,  they  concluded  that  law-enforcement  investigations 
were not  seriously hampered by  criminal use  of encryption.132  Either the encryption 
used  was  not  that  powerfd,  parties  under  investigation handed  over  the  necessary 
keys,  or there was  sufficient unscrambled evidence available.’33  This study dealt quite 
a  blow  to  the  theory  that  some  sort  of  key-recovery  system  was  essential  to  law- 
enforcement efforts. 

B.  The Judicial Branch  Weighs In-Constitutional  Constraints on  Encryption  Controls 

Withm  the  last  two years,  opponents  of  the  U.S. encryption  export  controls 
have  challenged  the  export  control regime  on legal grounds.  Of particular  note  are 
cases  brought  before  the  U.S.  federal  courts  in  the  District  of  Columbia  and 
California. 

The  Adrmnistration  was  able  to  successfully  defend  its  policies  in  a  lawsuit 
brought in  the District of Columbia, Karn  v.  U.S. Department ofStute.134  Philip Karn 
submitted commodity jurisdction  requests to the Department  of State for two items: 
a  book  entitled Applied  Cryptogruphy, and  diskettes containing the  encryption source 

See id. 
See id. 
-. . ~... 
See ibid.,  111.3. 

13”  See id. 
13’  Elizabeth Corcoran, Enuption:  Who will  Hold  the Key? Wash.  Post, 4 August  1997, at F1 
132 See id. 
133  See id. 
‘34  925 F.  Supp. 1 (D.D.C. 1996). 

THE U.S.  EXPORT CONTROL REGIME FOR  ENCRYPTION 

117 

codes printed  in Part  Five  of the Applied  Cryptography text. The Department  of State 
concluded that  the  text was  not  subject to  its jurishction,  but  the  hskettes  were,  as 
material  subject to  the  ITAR.  Mr  Karn  contested  the  government’s classification  of 
the diskettes on three grounds: 

(1)  that  the  designation was  arbitrary and  capricious and an abuse of dscretion 

under the Adrmnistrative Procedure Act; 

(2)  that  the  regulation  of the  hskette  violated  the  plaintiffs  First  Amendment 

right to freedom of speech; and 

(3)  that the  regulations arbitrarily treated the diskette differently to  the book in 
violation of the Fifth Amendment’s guarantee of substantive due process.135 
The  Court  quickly  hspatched  each  of  plaintiffs  claims.  The  APA claim  was 
dismissed  because  the  Arms  Export  Control  Act,  under  which  the  ITAR are 
adrmnistered, expressly  bars  judicial  review  of  the  designation  of  items  as  defence 
items, a  prohibition the  Court believed reasonable in light of the  deference afforded 
the President in matters of foreign p0licy.136  The Court  granted summary judgment 
in  favour of  the  government on Karn’s  First  and  Fifth  Amendment  claims,  again  in 
part  because the  regulations were  protected by  a  “national security” justification.  In 
sum, in the  Court’s opinion, the  case was  a  “classic example” of how the  courts can 
become needlessly  engulfed “in litigation involving policy decisions made within  the 
power  of  the  President  or  another  branch  of  the  government.”*37 The  case  was 
appealed,  but  was  promptly  remanded  back  to  the  District  Court  in  light  of  the 
Adrmnistration’s transfer  of  encryption materials  from  the  ITAR  to  the  Em.138  No 
opinions have been issued in the case since the remand. 

A  federal  court  in  Cahfornia, however,  viewed  a  very  similar set  of  issues  in  a 
very  different  light.  Daniel  Bernstein,  a  Ph.D.  canddate  at  the  University  of 
Cahfornia, Berkeley,  requested  a  commodity jurisdiction  determination with  respect 
to  two  language  source files  containing an  encryption algorithm he  had  developed, 
an  academic paper concerning the  same,  a  description in Enghsh  of how  to  use  the 
algorithm,  and  instructions  in  English  for  programming  a  computer  to  use  the 
algorithm.  Initially, he  was  told  that  all  five  were  restricted  under  the  IWR.  After 
two  years,  when  the  lawsuit  was  filed,  that  decision was  moddied  to  include  only 
the language source files.  Mr Bernstein’s  contentions included: 

(1)  that the AECA and ITAR were unconstitutional under the First Amendment; 
(2)  that the AECA and ITAR violate the constitutional rights of equal protection 

and freedom of expression; and 

135 See ihid.,  at 2. 
136  See ihid., at 5-6. 
13’  See ihid., at  1. 
138 See  Karn  v.  U S .  Dep’t  .f State,  No.  96-5121,  1997 U.S.  App.  LEXIS  3123  (D.C. Cir.,  21  January 

1 997). 

118 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

(3)  that  the  actions  of  the  defendants  were  arbitrary  and  capricious  and 

constituted an abuse of discretion under  the A I J A . ~ ~ ~  

While  the  Court  ultimately  rejected  most  of  the  plaintiffs  contentions, it  dld 
find Category X I I I ( ~ )  of the  ITAK  (the provision of the  ITAR directed to  encryption 
software)  unconstitutional,  under  the  First  Amendment,  as  a  prior  restraint  on 
speech.140  In  classi@ng  the  encryption  algorithm  as  speech  deserving  of  First 
Amendment protection,  the  Court made  clear  that  the  algorithm was  protected  not 
because  it  enabled  encryption  but  because  it  was,  itself,  speech.141  In  order  for  a 
restraint on speech to be constitutional: 

(1)  the  licensor  must  make  the  licensing  decision  withn  a  specific  and 

reasonable period of time; 

(2)  there must be prompt judicial review; and 
(3)  the  censor  must  bear  the  burden  of  going  to  court  to  uphold  a  licensing 

denial. 142 

The  ITAR  failed  on  all  counts.  Relying  on New  York  Times  Co.  v.  United  States,’43 
the  Court  quickly  rejected  the  defendants’  national  security justification  for  the 
I T A R . ~ ~ ~  
The decision was  issued  in  December  1996, just  weeks before the  interim 
final regulations on key  recovery were to take effect. 

Accordingly,  the  Court  was  asked  to  reconsider  its  decision  in  light  of  the 
Administration’s transfer  of  encryption  products  from  the  ITAR  to  the  EAR. In  an 
August  1997 Opinion,  the  Court  once  again found  the  regulation  of the  export  of 
encryption  commodities  and  software  to  be  unconstitutional as  a  prior  restraint.145 
Interestingly, the  Court’s  r d n g  is  not  based  on  the  commercial use  of  encryption 
but  instead is  based  on  the  scientific use  (or development) of  encryption, which  is 
more  likely to  be  “expressive”.146 Again,  because  the  EAR did  not  have  a  specified 
time-limit  for  decisions as  to  exportability  and  because  there  was  stdl  no  provision 
for judcial review,  the  Court found that  the  regulations  governing encryption failed 
to meet  any prong of the three-part  restraint standard for constitutionality. l47  Indeed, 
the  Court  found  the  EAR to  be  more  troubling than  the  ITAR because,  under  the 
EAR, encryption software is singled out from other software for &fferential treatment 
the  EAR  explicitly  covers  electronic  publication  even  when  the 
and  because 

139  See Bernstein  u  U S .  Dep’t of State, 922 E  Supp. 1426, 1429 (N.D. Cal.  1996). 
‘40  See Bernstein u  U S .  Dep’t ofState, 945 F.  Supp. 1279, 1290 (N.D. Cal.  1996). 
14’  See ihid., at  1287. 
142  See ihid., at  1289. 
143 403  U.S.  713  (1971).  A  case  in  which  the  Supreme  Court  invalidated  a  prior  restraint  on  the 

publication of the Pentagon Papers despite a “national security” justification for the restriint. 

‘44  See ihid., at  1288. 
145  See Bernstein  u  U S .  Dep’t ofstate, No. C-95-0582-M~q 1997 U.S.  Dist. LEXIS 13146 *63 (N.D. Cal., 

25 August  1997). 

14‘  See ibid., at  *53. 
14’  See ibid.,  at  *62. 

T H E  U.S. EXPORT C O N T R O L  REGIME FOR ENCRYPTION 

119 

information  to  be  published  is  already  publicly  available.148  The  transfer  of 
encryption  products  to  the  Department  of  Commerce’s jurisdiction  also  made  the 
national  security justification  even  less  ~ompelling.14~ The  Court  agreed  to  delay 
enforcing the decision pending appeal.150 

CONCLUSION 

There  are  currently  several  factors  weighing  heavily 

in  favour  of  the 
Admmistration  further  liberalizing  export  controls  on  encryption.  First  is  the 
explosive  growth  of  demand  for  encryption  products.  Second,  although  Congress 
was  unable to pass  encryption legislation in  1997, it probably will in the near future 
unless  the  Adrmnistration  pre-empts  the  need  for  such  legislation  by  liberalizing 
encryption on its own terms.  Similarly, while the decision findmg the current export 
control regime  unconstitutional may  be  reversed on  appeal, the Administration may 
want  to  modify  its  export  controls  on  encryption  in  case  it  is  not.  Finally,  the 
Adrmnistration  must  come  to  terms  with  the  fact  that  the  requisite  international 
support for a mandatory global key-access  system is missing.  In the absence of such a 
global  system, there  is  no  reason  for  the  United  States to  mandate  that  encryption 
products  contain  key-recovery  features  because  of  the  ease  of  circumvention. The 
point where market-driven  liberalization can no longer be ignored has  arrived. 

See  ibid., at *55. 
149  See  ibid., at  *58. 
150 See  Encryption Export Ban  Delayed  Until Appeal, L.A. Times, 30 August  1997, at D2. 


