The  (2007) Vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 149–169

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2007.00318.x

Asking and Telling: Can ‘‘Disclosure of
Origin’’ Requirements in Patent
Applications Make a Difference?

Alison L. Hoare and Richard G. Tarasofsky
Energy, Environment and Development Programme

This article seeks to evaluate, based on current practice at the national level, the justiﬁcations
for ‘‘disclosure of origin’’ requirements in patent applications for inventions involving genetic
resources. It provides a review of national legislation within Europe and the Americas, and
describes the impact of these measures to date. The lessons learnt, relating to the feasibility
and effectiveness of the legislation, are described. Options for the future development of this
legislation are outlined, and suggestions are made as to how to move forward on this issue
and, thus, to help facilitate fair and equitable resource use.

Keywords patents; disclosure requirements; genetic resources; access and beneﬁt sharing

It is nearly 10 years since the idea of introducing ‘‘disclosure of origin’’ requirements
(DRs)1 for patents relating to genetic resources (GRs) and associated traditional
knowledge (TK) entered policy discussions in the context of the Andean Pact,2 an
idea that quickly attracted proponents around the world. Therefore, it is timely to
consider what has been achieved to date.3 The proposal to amend patent legislation
arose in answer to the charge that ‘‘biopiracy’’ and misappropriation of GRs are
permitted or even encouraged by this legislation. The remedy to this injustice is
believed by proponents of DRs to lie partly in requiring patent applicants to
disclose certain information about the GRs used in their inventions. The purpose of
this kind of disclosure would be to help ensure that no patent was granted in cases
where the invention was linked to GRs that had been improperly acquired or
utilized. At the national level, several jurisdictions have enacted legislation mandat-
ing or requiring disclosure, while at the international level DR proposals continue
to be debated, as yet without agreement.

This article seeks to evaluate, based on current practice at the national level, the
justiﬁcations for DRs. Following this introduction, national legislation on DRs in
Europe4 and in the Americas5 is reviewed, describing its development and the
particular approaches adopted. Experience with this legislation is discussed, in-
cluding its impact on patent ofﬁcials and applicants, and the lessons learnt in
relation to feasibility and effectiveness. The ﬁnal sections of the article focus on the
implications of these ﬁndings for the future development of DRs and consider ways
to move forward on this issue. First, though, it is important to understand the
nature of the debate and locate it in its broader context.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 149

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

The Contours of the Debate: Arguments and Strategic Considerations

Proposals for disclosure need to be seen in the wider context of efforts to challenge
the patent system, which are being made on the basis that it does not adequately
address equity concerns and the needs of developing countries. DR proponents
argue that disclosure is not only necessary as a defensive measure against mis-
appropriation but also to restore trust in the patent system. Trust would be
enhanced because such a measure could help prevent the granting of ‘‘bad’’ patents,
and also because it would locate the patent system more appropriately within the
global architecture of agreed norms. Thus, DRs would respect the stipulations of
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), including that GRs are subject to
national sovereignty, their access and utilization be based on prior informed
consent (PIC), and there should be fair and equitable sharing of beneﬁts.

However, opponents of DRs are concerned about a number of factors mainly
linked to the feasibility of such proposals. The extra burden placed on inventors is
seen as disproportionate compared with the actual size of the problem. Further,
these requirements are considered by some industry representatives as impossible to
comply with fully, while it is argued that patent ofﬁcials are not competent to assess
the veracity of disclosure claims, particularly those requiring evidence of PIC or
compliance with national legislation. In addition, DRs may further overload the
patent system, resulting in long delays, avoidance of the requirements and possibly
a decline in research. This would ultimately defeat one of the objectives of the CBD,
namely sustainable use of GRs and the sharing of beneﬁts that could arise from this.
More fundamentally, there is the view that the patent system is not the
appropriate vehicle for combating this kind of misappropriation. Rather, it is felt
that national legislation on controlling access to GRs would be far more effective
than using the patent system. In addition, there are those who argue that the actual
record of the patent system is not that bad in preventing misappropriation.
Although there have been some well-known cases of ‘‘bad’’ patents, many of these
have been resolved using traditional patent remedies. To cite two examples, a US
patent that had been granted for the use of turmeric in wound healing and a
European patent for the use of neem oil as a fungicide were both challenged and
subsequently revoked on the grounds of lack of novelty, these resources having a
long history of such usage within India (Commission on Intellectual Property
Rights, 2002; Dutﬁeld, 2005a). Neither of these patents should have been granted;
however, the patent system was able to resolve these particular cases. Therefore, to
prevent such ‘‘bad’’ patents being granted in future, it could be argued that what is
needed is not reform of patent legislation, but, rather, more stringent assessment of
applications, with better prior art searching and more demanding inventive-step
thresholds.

One of the characteristics of this debate is that many of the key terms and
concepts are not fully deﬁned, nor is there consensus among the proponents as to
the extent or nature of the DRs.6 The following questions highlight some of the

150

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

practical and conceptual issues being debated. How far back should the disclosure
requirement reach: to the ‘‘origin’’ of the GR or the ‘‘source’’ for that inventor?
Should the patent applicant be required to show evidence of the consent of the
origin or source country? What if that country does not have national legislation
governing access to GRs? And what about beneﬁt sharing—does this need to be
demonstrated? What if TK is involved—is consent of the local community knowl-
edge holder required? Another set of uncertainties relates to the consequences of not
complying with the DR. Should the DR be mandatory? If so, should the intellectual
property right be impaired or should other types of penalties be imposed if the DR
is not met?

Different opinions on these questions have resulted in a range of DRs being
elaborated, and these can be grouped into three types (Dutﬁeld, 2005a; Queen Mary
Intellectual Property Research Institute, 2004). The ﬁrst is a voluntary requirement
for disclosure of the country providing the GRs, aimed at facilitating transparency
related to their use and commercialization. There would be no legal consequences for
breaching this measure. The second is a mandatory requirement for disclosure of this
information, with penalties for non-compliance including revocation of the patent as
well as possible civil or criminal penalties. A third type is also mandatory, but would
require the submission of proof from the provider country that the CBD rules on
access to GRs and protection of any associated TK had been complied with.

The choice of which type of DR, if any, is most appropriate is linked to wider
opinions on the patent system itself. Those who are hostile to the basic premises of
the patent system or are sceptical that it could adequately address perceived
inequities tend to be supportive of stringent DRs. Such measures are regarded as
a necessary part of a wider effort to reform the patent system, in order to align it
more closely with what some consider to be the interests of developing countries. In
contrast to this are those who do not see a need for major reform of the patent
system. Typically, they support less strict DRs, if any at all, arguing that access and
beneﬁt-sharing (ABS) issues should not be dealt with by the patent system, as the
primary goal of this system is to promote innovation.

The International Dimension

Much of this debate has been played out on the international stage. DRs have been
on the agendas of the CBD, the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Discussions within these forums have
centred on whether an international DR should be implemented, and if so, how, for
example, through amendments to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) or Patent Cooperation Treaty
(PCT). Although none of these negotiations have achieved consensus, the interna-
tional process seems to have inﬂuenced some national efforts to introduce DR
legislation. At the same time, some countries opposed to DRs claim that they may
not be consistent with international obligations set out in the TRIPS Agreement.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 151

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

For example, it has been argued that if these requirements are conditions for
patentability, then they violate the TRIPS Agreement, as article 29 sets forth rules
on disclosure, article 62.1 allows for only ‘‘reasonable’’ procedures and article 27.1
provides for non-discrimination in patent availability (see, for example, Carvalho,
2000; and submission by Japan in WTO, 2001, paragraph 155). This point is highly
debatable, as noted later in this article.

In the CBD, DRs are encouraged by the Bonn Guidelines (CBD Conference of
the Parties [CBD COP] 6, Decision VI-24 A) and they are currently being explored
in the framework of the proposed international regime for GRs.7 In WIPO, DRs
have been a signiﬁcant part of two agenda items: the Intergovernmental Committee
on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore, which was requested by the CBD COP to assess the relationship between
access to GRs and DRs in patent applications, and the Substantive Patent Law
Treaty.

National Legislation

While debate is ongoing within international forums, a number of regions and
countries have introduced their own legislation for disclosure requirements. The
nature of these requirements varies, reﬂecting in part the balance of interests and
priorities within these countries, as well as differences in their legal framework.

Development of DR Legislation in Europe
European countries were prompted to legislate on this issue by the 1998 European
Commission (EC) Biotechnology Directive. Under this legislation, disclosure by
patent applicants is encouraged, but is not obligatory. The preamble states that:

Whereas if an invention is based on biological material of plant or
animal origin or if it uses such material, the patent application should,
where appropriate, include information on the geographical origin of
such material,
if known; whereas this is without prejudice to the
processing of patent applications or the validity of rights arising from
granted patents (Recital 27, Directive 98/44/EC).

Denmark ﬁrst proposed the inclusion of a reference to DRs in the Directive. It
was the subject of some debate and negotiation between the European member
states, and due to the reservations of a number of countries, the paragraph on DRs
was included in the Directive’s preamble rather than in the main text. Thus, the
result is that the requirement is purely voluntary. Indeed, when implementing the
Directive, not all European Union (EU) countries adopted legislation on this issue.
Just four EU countries have done so to date8 (Belgium, Denmark, Germany and
Sweden), as has Norway, while Switzerland has draft legislation, currently being
considered by its parliament.

The decision of these countries to adopt DRs was inﬂuenced by a range
of factors. For example, the Danish government was keen to implement such

152

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

legislation because it had been proactive on this issue within Europe. Also signiﬁcant
was the fact that the national debates on disclosure were part of a wider consultation
on implementing the EU Directive. The Directive was very controversial in some of
the countries, mainly because it formalized the patenting of life-forms. This was the
case in Norway, where the Directive met with considerable opposition,9 and so the
introduction of DRs was, in part, a means of appeasing those opposed to it.

During the national debates, voices were raised both in support of and opposed
to DRs. Those stakeholders who were more supportive of DRs tended to be those
who were involved with environmental or development issues—these included non-
governmental organizations, some academics and also certain government depart-
ments. Typically, they were motivated by the wish to promote the aims of the CBD,
and also to support developing countries on this issue, many of whom are strong
proponents of DRs.

Industry and those government departments dealing with trade and industry or
economic affairs were more sceptical, concerned as to the potential impact of DRs
on the domestic biotechnology industry, and on research and development activ-
ities. There was particular concern within a number of government departments as
to the impact of such legislation on smaller companies. This is because such
companies tend to be the main ones making national patent applications, to which
the DRs would apply, as opposed to those ﬁled under the European Patent Ofﬁce
(EPO) or international patents ﬁled through the PCT, which are not affected by
national requirements. Questions were also raised as to the effectiveness of this
measure in dealing with ABS issues, and, furthermore, whether such issues were in
fact best dealt with by the patent system.

However, in none of the countries was the adoption of DRs highly contro-
versial. This was perhaps because of the recognition that these national require-
ments would have a limited impact because the vast majority of patent applications
are ﬁled through the EPO or PCT. Indeed, the adoption of national DRs was
regarded, to a large degree, as a means of demonstrating political support for this
issue, rather than actually having a signiﬁcant impact on improving ABS. Thus,
they were primarily adopted in order to signal support for an issue important to
developing countries and also as a potentially valuable ﬁrst step towards the
elaboration of such a requirement at the international level.

The Approaches Adopted
In amending their patent laws, Belgium,10 Denmark11 and Sweden12 all largely
followed the text of the EC Directive, and so, in these countries disclosure is
required of geographic origin for inventions based on biological material. Switzer-
land’s draft legislation13 uses a slightly different terminology, requiring declaration
of ‘‘source’’ rather than origin. The term ‘‘source’’, as it is deﬁned in the Swiss
proposal, was used in order to deal with those situations in which the origin was
unknown. Thus, source is deﬁned as the entity that is competent to grant access to
the GRs, or to participate in the sharing of beneﬁts arising from their utilization.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 153

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

Applicants would be required to declare the ‘‘primary source’’, which may be the
country or community providing the GRs, or if this is unknown, to disclose the
‘‘secondary source’’, for example a gene bank or botanic garden, or, indeed, sources
such as scientiﬁc journals or databases on TK (Addor, 2005).

Norway introduced a more extensive requirement, reﬂecting the high degree of
political support here for this measure. For inventions concerning or using
biological material, disclosure is required of the country providing this material
as well as the country of origin, if this is different. Furthermore, information on
whether PIC has been sought also needs to be provided, if this is a requirement in
the providing country or country of origin. However, if either the country of origin
is not known, or whether PIC is required here, this can be stated (this option does
not exist with respect to the providing country).

Disclosure of PIC was considered in Sweden and Denmark, as well as in
Switzerland’s draft legislation. However, this was not adopted because of concerns
over the feasibility of such a measure, given the patchy nature of national access
legislation in many source countries. In addition, it was argued in Switzerland that
disclosure of PIC is not necessary as disclosure of the source is sufﬁcient to achieve
the objectives of this measure—for Switzerland, these include enhancing transpar-
ency, assisting in prior art searches and improving trust in the patent system.

None of the countries introduced a DR for evidence of fair and equitable
beneﬁt sharing. This was either simply not considered (the case in Belgium and
Denmark) or it was not thought to be feasible (in Norway and Switzerland). The
problems that were highlighted related to the subjective nature of determining what
is ‘‘fair and equitable’’, and also the fact that patent applicants would not be able to
provide evidence of beneﬁt sharing because the commercial beneﬁts would not yet
be known.

Nor does the existing EU member state legislation refer to the use of TK in an
invention. This was due to concerns about the difﬁculties of deﬁning this concept,
which it was felt could make the DR unworkable. However, Switzerland has
adopted a different approach, their draft legislation requiring disclosure for
inventions based on ‘‘traditional knowledge related to genetic resources’’. Here, it
was argued that such a requirement would be of value in allowing the providers of
such knowledge to trace its use, and facilitate searches for prior art.

The other area in which the national legislation on DRs varies is in relation to
the consequences of non-disclosure. During the debates on this issue, some
proponents of disclosure argued for strict DRs, that is, affecting the validity of
patents. Such strict requirements were not adopted by any of the countries, largely
due to concerns that this could create legal uncertainty, a critical issue for industry.
In addition, as discussed above, concerns were expressed that substantive require-
ments would be in conﬂict with the TRIPS Agreement. This argument is con-
troversial and has been countered by a number of countries (WTO, 2006a,
paragraph 139) as well as some experts (see, for example, Correa, 2005; Sarnoff,
2004). It was for this reason that Norway and Denmark took the route of criminal

154

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

sanctions. In both these countries, non-compliance would not affect the handling of
a patent application nor the validity of a granted patent. However, penalties could
be imposed under their penal codes, as these include an obligation to provide
correct information to a public authority. This would allow for the imposition of a
ﬁne or a prison sentence.

In Sweden, there was also concern over the compatibility of a mandatory
requirement with the TRIPS Agreement. However, the approach adopted in
Norway and Denmark was not an option here because the Swedish civil code does
not enable prosecution in the case of a false declaration being made within a patent
application. Therefore, Sweden decided to introduce a voluntary requirement, with
no sanctions for non-compliance.

In Belgium, a novel approach to disclosure had initially been considered, it
being proposed that non-compliance with a DR would be contrary to the concept of
ordre public and morality, on the basis that in such a case the invention would have
been developed in breach of the CBD. However, this was not adopted, apparently
because the legislation never made it through parliament due to changes in
government. Instead, Belgium introduced a simple formal requirement. Under this
legislation, non-compliance could, in theory, result in a patent application not being
processed, although this would seem an unlikely event, given that the patent ofﬁce
does not check compliance. This is because the Belgian patent ofﬁce is not a
searching authority, and so has no research facilities. Belgian patents, valid for 6
years, can be granted without a search on the prior art. For patents of 20 years,
prior art search is outsourced to the EPO, but no examination of patentability is
undertaken. If a Belgian patent has been granted, then criminal sanctions could, in
theory, be sought through the courts for wrongful disclosure, and this could result
in a ﬁne or payment of damages.

Switzerland has proposed a similar measure. Under its draft law, failure to
comply would result in rejection of the patent application, while wrongful declara-
tion could be prosecuted ex ofﬁcio, and the applicant would be liable to a ﬁne of up
to 100,000 Swiss francs. In such cases, the draft law also allows for the judge to order
publication of the ruling—the intention behind this being that it would function as
an additional incentive for applicants to comply in order to maintain their reputa-
tion. One ﬁnal and signiﬁcant difference lies in the draft Swiss legislation. If
implemented, this will apply to both national and international patents (where the
latter designate Switzerland), thus making it much more widely applicable.

DRs in Central and South America
The South and Central American countries examined here have all introduced DRs,
that refer not only to GRs but also to TK. This is a reﬂection of the great political
signiﬁcance given to TK protection in these countries. Peru and Colombia are both
members of the Andean Community, and so are subject to the disclosure require-
ment outlined in Community Decision 486—this requirement applies to the member
countries’ ‘‘biological and genetic heritage, together with the traditional knowledge

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 155

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

of their indigenous, African American, or local communities’’.14 Brazil’s legisla-
tion15 refers to the country’s genetic heritage and associated TK, while in Costa
Rica,16 to components of biodiversity—a term that also includes any associated
knowledge.

Within the Andean Community, patent applicants are required to provide
evidence of an access agreement for the use of the GRs or TK in question. In Costa
Rica, patent applications must be accompanied by a certiﬁcate of origin and the
PIC. In Brazil, only disclosure of origin is required.

In all these countries, disclosure is mandatory. Thus, in cases of non-compli-
ance the patent application would not be processed or, where the patent has already
been granted, it would be declared void. However, the legislation only applies to
GRs and TK from within their own territory. Thus, Brazil and Costa Rica only
require disclosure for their national resources, while in Peru and Colombia,
disclosure is required for resources from the Andean Community.

Experiences with Existing DR Legislation

To date, DRs have had limited impact in all these countries. This is in part because
they have not been in place very long. The relevant Andean Community Decisions
(391 and 486) took effect in 1996 and 2000, respectively, and it was only in the latter
that the DR was elaborated. Brazil’s legislation was passed in 2001 and that of
Costa Rica in 1998. The European legislation was passed more recently. Denmark
was the ﬁrst to introduce DRs, amending its legislation in 2000. In Norway and
Sweden, DRs were introduced in 2004, and in Belgium this took place in 2005.

Another reason for the limited impact of these requirements is that they only
refer to national patent applications. Consequently, a relatively small number of
patent applications are affected by this legislation. The Norwegian patent ofﬁce
estimates that about 20% of all patent applications that they receive are national.
Similarly, the Swedish ofﬁce estimates that national applications account for 25%
of all biotechnology-related applications (of which there are about 300 a year),
although most of these go on to be ﬁled through the EPO and are discontinued at
the national level.17 As explained above, the DRs of the Latin American countries
are even more narrowly applicable in only covering applications that use GRs or
TK from within their own territory.

Consequently, there have been very few patent applications in which disclosure
has been made. In Colombia, there was only one known application subject to the
DR, and in Costa Rica there have not been any.18 In Europe, only the Norwegian
patent ofﬁce had data on the number of applications in which disclosure had been
made, and they had received ten such applications.19 None of the other patent
ofﬁces kept records of applications where disclosure had been made, but they all
estimated that there had been few, if any. In Denmark, no applications in which
disclosure had been made could be recalled, and it was thought likely that there had
not been any. In the 6 months since the implementation of Belgium’s disclosure

156

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

requirement (from May to October 2005), a quick survey of patent applications
found that there had been just six national applications concerning pharmaceuti-
cals, although it was unknown whether these used biological matter.

In Brazil and Peru, the legislation has yet to have any impact because the DR
legislation has not been fully implemented. In Brazil, the rules to implement the
legislation on DRs have yet to be developed. Consequently, there remains un-
certainty as to how to enforce the legislation and so it has not yet been used.
Similarly, in Peru, the Andean Community Decisions have not been fully imple-
mented and additional legislation is required.

Lessons Learnt

Although the impact of these measures has been very limited, there are some lessons
that can be learnt from current experiences. These relate to both the feasibility and
effectiveness of this legislation.

Feasibility
Concerns about feasibility arise both in relation to patent applicants and those
charged with administering the requirements. With respect to the latter, in both
Brazil and Peru problems have been encountered with implementing this legisla-
tion—the regulations to implement the legislation have yet to be developed, and so
there is insufﬁcient legal certainty to enable use of this measure.20 In those countries
that have implemented DRs, these have not yet presented any problems for the
relevant authorities, for example in terms of workload or ability to check com-
pliance, simply because of the limited scope and applicability of the requirements.
With respect to the feasibility of DRs for patent applicants, the main question is
whether it is possible for applicants to comply, that is if they are able to provide the
necessary information. For example, it has been suggested that applicants may ﬁnd
it difﬁcult to determine the geographic origin of a resource that they have used, for
example, if this was sourced from an ex situ collection. Concerns have also been
expressed about the feasibility of disclosing evidence of an access agreement or
other form of PIC, for example, if the resource came from a country with no ABS
legislation. No experiences of the former scenario have been reported, but the latter
situation did prove problematic in Colombia. Here, the one patent application in
which disclosure was required did not initially fulﬁl this requirement because no
access agreement had been obtained for the GRs in question. This was apparently
due to the difﬁculties of doing so, because of the complexity of Colombia’s access
regime.21

Another issue related to feasibility is that of whether it is possible to deﬁne
clearly the link between a resource and invention that will trigger the DR. Indeed, it
was reported by the Norwegian patent ofﬁce that they have received a number of
requests for clariﬁcation regarding which inventions would be subject to the
requirement.22 It is unknown whether the concerns of potential patent applicants

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 157

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

were adequately addressed, but this highlights the potential of this legislation to
create some uncertainty.

Effectiveness
Those who are sceptical about DRs also question the effectiveness of this measure.
Certainly, the existing legislation has had little effect in relation to ABS policy goals.
The limited applicability of the current legislation undermines its effectiveness as a
tool to prevent resource misappropriation or to facilitate ABS because it can so
easily be circumvented. Whether more extensive requirements would be more
effective is open to debate, as will be considered further below.

An additional reason for their limited effectiveness is that in European
countries, disclosure is not checked or veriﬁed by patent ofﬁcials. Nor is there
any system to monitor those applications in which disclosure has been made.
Consequently, the existing legislation has done little if anything to increase the
transparency of the patent system and facilitate the monitoring of resource use.

The one positive impact of the existing legislation has been that it has
reportedly raised awareness of CBD issues within certain sectors. This was noted
by participants in this research from within Europe, who felt that the national
consultations held on the implementation of the EC Directive and the issue of DRs
had resulted in a better understanding of the CBD and ABS issues. This suggests
that such legislation could have an important indirect impact on ABS issues. Thus,
even if this measure was unable to enforce compliance or remained limited in scope,
it could still serve to increase compliance with ABS requirements through increasing
understanding and awareness of the issues.

Discussion

Options for the Future Development of DRs
The case for DRs remains unproven. Indeed, experiences with national legislation
have raised some doubts both as to the feasibility and the effectiveness of this
measure. This raises the question of the best way to proceed—whether it is worth
continuing down this route with the extension of DR legislation, or whether in fact
alternative measures would be more effective and should be explored.

There are a number of options for the extension of DR legislation, including:



the implementation of national measures by more countries, or the introduction
of stricter measures in those countries that already have such legislation;

 within Europe, harmonization of patent legislation, either through a new EC

directive or amendment of the European Patent Convention (EPC);

 harmonization at the international level, for example, through the amendment

of the TRIPS Agreement or of the PCT.

The ﬁrst option would be of little value, given the limited scope of national
measures, and for this reason there is little political appetite to go down this route.23

158

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

The second option could have a wider impact if the EPC was amended, as this
would mean that European patents would also be affected. However, this is not
being proposed by any of the member states. Rather, those countries in favour of
DRs, and indeed the EC as a whole, are advocating reform at the international
level, which, it is argued, would be most effective in preventing resource misappro-
priation. There is also strong opposition to further European legislation from
within the private sector, concerned that such legislation would place European
business at a competitive disadvantage vis-a`-vis countries that do not have these
requirements.

This leaves the third option of harmonization at the international level. This
has the advantages that it would create a level playing ﬁeld for patent applicants,
and that all applications could be affected. For these reasons, this route is favoured
by the proponents of DRs. Thus, Norway (WTO, 2006b), Switzerland (WTO,
2004a; 2005a), the EC (WIPO, 2005) and Brazil (together with a number of other
megadiverse countries) (WTO, 2004b; 2005b; 2006c) have all submitted proposals
to the WTO and WIPO for the introduction of an international DR. These will not
be considered here, except to note that the approaches being advocated largely
reﬂect those adopted within each of the relevant jurisdictions.

Ways Forward
Negotiations on the introduction of an international DR are ongoing within the
CBD, WTO and WIPO. However, debate over this issue seems to have reached an
impasse. One factor hampering progress is the emotive nature of the debate. For
example, many of those concerned about resource misappropriation regard this as a
moral issue, and describe these activities in terms of resource plundering, biopiracy
and neo-colonialism. History is a signiﬁcant factor in this debate, in particular the
experiences of colonialism in many developing countries, and, in addition, the long
history of neglect of indigenous peoples’ rights. However, while these factors may
add moral weight to the arguments deployed, they often do not sit well with those
who regard the patent system simply as a means to promote innovation and the
activities of the biotechnology industry in terms of economic development. This has
led to a situation in which the various stakeholders meet often, but simply reiterate
their point of view, with little progress being made on ﬁnding agreement on the
substantive issues.

This situation is not helped by the fact that the debate is often seen in terms of a
simple division between the private sector and developed country interests versus
those of rural communities and developing countries. This is overly simplistic, not
least because of the fact that there is a burgeoning biotechnology industry in many
developing and biodiverse countries, for example in Brazil and India. Consequently,
the lines between provider and user countries are becoming increasingly blurred,
and the debates going on within many countries are more nuanced than is often
suggested.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 159

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

An additional factor underlying the slow progress on this issue is that it
has become a bargaining chip in the international negotiations. For example,
DRs are regarded as an important negotiating tool for many developing countries
within the WTO, and progress on this and related issues within the CBD has been
linked to the need to ﬁrst reach agreement within the WTO. However, at the time of
writing, it is impossible to predict with conﬁdence when the Doha Round of
negotiations will be concluded, given that so many deadlines have already been
missed.

The limited progress on DRs has not been helped by the fact that, as
highlighted in this article, their effectiveness and feasibility remain unproven. There
is a need for further evidence, either to support or disprove the case for DRs, and a
number of steps could be taken that would facilitate this, while also enabling
progress to be made in enhancing ABS.

First, there is the need for additional information on the impact of the existing
national DRs. To date, there has been no monitoring of the patent applications
affected, and so there is little deﬁnite information available as to the impact of this
legislation or its effectiveness. Indeed, without some means to monitor and record
the affected patents, the effectiveness of this legislation as a transparency measure is
limited.

For those countries with such legislation, a monitoring system should be
established, for example a notiﬁcation system could be established through the
CBD’s Clearing House Mechanism. This was called for by a number of experts
participating in this research, and it is also an element of the proposals on DRs from
both the EC (WIPO, 2005) and Norway (WTO, 2006b) to the WTO. In the EC’s
proposal, such a system is described as ‘‘an indispensable measure’’ in order to
make disclosure effective. Notiﬁcation would indeed make it easier for the source
countries to check whether their resources had been used in an invention, and would
also provide useful information on the impact of this legislation and so enable a
better understanding of the value of this measure.

In addition, there is the need to investigate more closely the feasibility of DRs—
thus, whether it is in fact possible to keep track of all the subsequent uses of a
resource, and how far down the research chain disclosure requirements will still
apply. Research chains can be highly complex and technological advances are
making them even more so, with increasingly varied ways of using GRs and
extracting elements of these. Thus, GRs are being transformed into ‘‘less corporeal
and more informational forms’’ (Parry, 2004, p. 5). These resources and their
‘‘extracts’’, being far more easily transmissible, are also far more difﬁcult to monitor
and control, making this a huge task for either patent ofﬁces or those institutions
charged with controlling the use of GRs. There is also the issue of at what point it
can be said that a product or extract is sufﬁciently far removed from the original
resource that any obligation for disclosure ends (or indeed any other obligations,
such as beneﬁt sharing), as the end-product may have very tentative links to the
original resource.24

160

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Given the ongoing discussions on proposals for a mandatory international DR,
which would require far more extensive monitoring of resource use, there is serious
concern about these questions within the research and industry sectors. The task of
tracking all uses and transactions would be a huge one, both within this sector, and
for those charged with administering any such system. There is a risk that any
beneﬁts gained from the improved monitoring of GR use (i.e. from ensuring that
fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing was implemented) would be vastly outweighed by
the costs of implementing and running the system. Further, an overly burdensome
system could also act as a major disincentive to undertake research and develop-
ment activities based on GRs. Concerns about this have led to suggestions that a
completely different approach is needed, in which the whole ‘‘project’’ of tracking
and compensating for particular uses of resources be abandoned (Parry, 2004), as is
considered further below.

In addition to these practical issues, there is the need for clariﬁcation of the
objectives of DRs (Dutﬁeld, 2005b). As touched on earlier in this article, there are
fundamental differences in perspective between the various stakeholders on this
issue, at the root of which lies the question of what role the patent system should
have in addressing ABS issues. On the one hand are those who think that this
system should not allow patents to be granted for inventions in which there has been
inequitable conduct. Therefore, it is argued that DRs should be introduced as a
means to prevent this, for example through linking a requirement to disclose
evidence of PIC with patent validity. This is seen as an essential step to restore
trust in the patent system, which has come to be regarded by many as a means of
misappropriating knowledge and resources.

On the other hand are those who do not think that the patent system is the place
where these issues should be addressed—these include those who do not support
any DRs, as well as those who support the use of DRs as a transparency measure.
With respect to the latter position, it is held that DRs should operate simply as a
means to monitor the use of GRs, thus facilitating the enforcement of ABS
legislation, or, alternatively, to assist patent ofﬁces with searches for prior art.

The question of whether DRs should be a transparency measure, or a means to
enforce ABS compliance in themselves, is a difﬁcult one. Finding an answer requires
an assessment of what objectives can realistically be attained through introducing
DRs, and also consideration of whether there are any alternative, and more
efﬁcient, means of achieving these goals. In fact, because there is something of an
impasse within discussions over DRs, the best way to move the debate forward may
be to look at these alternatives, as they could enable the heat to be taken off DRs.
Thus, the development of alternatives to monitor and control the use of GRs could
mean that DRs were not necessary, or that it would be sufﬁcient for them to
function simply as a transparency measure rather than one of compliance.

One option to be explored is the use of other means of improving equity within
the patent system, and there are a number of legal principles within patent law
through which this could be done (WIPO, 2003b). One proposal is for wider use of

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 161

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

the doctrine of ‘‘unclean hands’’. For example, if it is not disclosed that an invention
was based on GRs or TK that were obtained in contravention of foreign law, this
could bring the doctrine of unclean hands into play, or, alternatively, that of fraud
(Abbott, 2005; Carvalho, 2000; Sarnoff and Correa, 2005). This doctrine has been
used in the USA to prevent the enforcement of rights to a patent, when the patent
applicant withheld the fact that the invention was based on misappropriated
information (Sarnoff, 2004). It could also be used in combination with DR
legislation—for example the latter operating as a transparency measure, facilitating
the monitoring of patent applicants’ compliance with foreign law requirements—
such as those for PIC and compliance with ABS legislation. However, it should be
noted that the doctrine of ‘‘unclean hands’’ has only been applied to patents within
the United States, and elsewhere its use is controversial, particularly in Europe.

Greater use of the rules on inventions that are contrary to ordre public and
morality could also be made to reject certain patent applications (Visser, 2004, pp.
207–40). Such provisions, as outlined in article 27.2 of the TRIPs Agreement, are
exceptions to the criteria for patentability and refer to the exploitation of an
invention. These concepts tend to be interpreted narrowly, and most treaties and
national laws have not included consideration of the way in which an invention, or
any related GRs or TK, have been appropriated in this context. However, a wider
interpretation may be possible. For example, New Zealand’s legislation makes a
link with ABS requirements. Here,
if an invention is derived from or uses
indigenous ﬂora, fauna or TK, and the applicant declines to provide details of
any ABS arrangement that may have been entered into, the application might be
objected to. This is possible if it is deemed that use of the invention would be
contrary to ordre public and morality, for example because it would be offensive to
Maori people (WIPO, 2003a, paragraph 64).

In addition to exploring these options within the patent system, more direct
approaches to improving ABS also need to be investigated. At the forefront of the
steps needed to enhance ABS is the implementation of effective national ABS
legislation. Only about 26 countries have developed such legislation to date25 and so
improving this situation should be a priority. Addressing this issue is potentially
beneﬁcial to both the users and providers of GRs—for the latter group, it will
enable them to control and monitor the use of their resources, while for the users, it
will improve predictability of access, for example, through clarifying the appro-
priate legislation and the systems through which approval for access should be
obtained.

Indeed, many stakeholders and experts hold that taking action in this area
would be far more effective in promoting ABS than the wider implementation of
DRs, because such legislation would cover all material being transferred and not
just that for which patent applications are made. This is certainly a valid point.
However, these two measures could also be complementary to each other, with DRs
functioning as an additional measure to monitor compliance with national ABS
requirements.

162

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

One means by which DRs could help to do this is if they operated in
conjunction with an international system for a certiﬁcate of origin for GRs. The
development of such a system, which would be aimed at monitoring resource use
and the compliance of users with ABS requirements, is currently being debated
within the CBD, where a Group of Technical Experts has been established. Such a
system could readily operate in concert with DRs, for example, if the disclosure
requirement was for this certiﬁcate.

Another area where progress could be made is through international legal
cooperation, for example, whereby reciprocal agreements on enforcement of
judgments could be made. Currently, if a country’s ABS legislation is breached,
there are no means of seeking legal redress in other jurisdictions unless such an
agreement is in place. Similarly, it is very difﬁcult for a government, or other
interested party, to challenge a patent granted in another jurisdiction if they
consider that the invention was developed in breach of their own ABS regulations
(Dutﬁeld, 2005a).

Looking more broadly, collective approaches to risk and burden sharing could
also be explored in order to improve equity. For example, a strict liability regime
could be created, which would entail requiring compulsory insurance or other
ﬁnancial preparedness for all those using GRs in case misappropriation is dis-
covered. A similar approach might be to establish an international collective fund,
perhaps contributed to by industry and governments, to provide compensation to
those from whom GRs are misappropriated or simply as a means of funding
conservation and development in provider countries.

In fact, this latter approach has been suggested as potentially a better model for
the return of beneﬁts, rather than following the existing route of seeking to monitor
and control individual commercial uses of GRs. Thus, Parry (2004), as a result of
her research into the biotechnology industry, concluded that the complexities of
research processes were such that any attempt at establishing chains of use through
monitoring and tracing would not only be immensely burdensome but also
‘‘morally corrosive’’. The latter comment was made on the basis that the imple-
mentation of a system that was ineffective (failing to return beneﬁts to source
countries and presenting a huge burden to the users of resources) would only serve
to increase distrust among the various stakeholders. This has already happened to
some extent, as is reﬂected in the despair felt by some within the private sector about
the CBD and its implementation, as well as by some biodiverse countries who have
yet to see any signiﬁcant increase in beneﬁts from the use of their resources.

Consequently, it is suggested that efforts to monitor all uses of resources be
abandoned, and, rather, a levy be imposed of a percentage of the proﬁts arising
from their commercial use. This levy would be paid into a fund that could be used to
support development and conservation projects, or alternatively, to provide com-
pensation in cases of resource misappropriation. Such a fund is to be established as
part of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (ITPGRFA)—a proportion (yet to be determined) of the beneﬁts

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 163

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

arising from the commercialization of a GR covered by the Treaty to be paid into
this fund. However, the slow progress to date within this forum does give some
pause for thought as to the feasibility of such a scheme. However, such a fund has
been successfully established within the oil sector—the International Oil Pollution
Compensation Funds (IOPC), which is ﬁnanced by oil recipients, providing
compensation for oil pollution damage. Thus, the establishment of a fund linked
to GR use could perhaps present a better option than those currently being explored
under the existing CBD regime.

Indeed, other voices have also been raised questioning the wisdom of continu-
ing down the current route. For example, Safrin (2004) describes the present
situation as one of hyper-ownership, the over-reaching of the patent system in
combination with the assertion of strong sovereign rights having created an ‘‘anti-
commons’’ in GRs. This is preventing their optimal utilization and conservation,
the current regime both hindering research and development activities and also
failing to increase the return of beneﬁts to provider countries. Therefore, while
exploring the various measures and technical options that have been suggested,
including proposals for DRs, care is needed that the bigger picture is not lost sight
of. Thus, a critical view must be maintained of the functioning of the whole
regime—what its objectives are and whether these are actually being achieved.

Conclusion

The need for, and beneﬁts of, DRs remain uncertain. Whether they can be a
valuable tool
in improving ABS depends partly on whether the problems of
feasibility can be resolved. In addition, it depends on the availability of alternative
measures, as if these offer better solutions DRs may not be necessary or could
perhaps function simply as a transparency measure. However, because of the high
proﬁle of this issue within international negotiations and the high priority given to
ABS matters in many countries, it is unlikely to come off the agenda any time soon.
Therefore, all parties need to continue to engage in the debate and ﬁnd constructive
agreement—if only to allow for negotiations to focus on other pressing issues. This
debate needs to be based on practical questions such as costs, deﬁnitions and
terminology and the capacity of institutions and personnel, to help ﬁnd a solution
that is workable and effective.

While DRs were originally conceived as a means of preventing resource
misappropriation, they also have a wider goal, and that is to promote sustainable
development by enhancing ABS. However, there is a risk that overly tough
measures on disclosure could have the opposite effect, deterring researchers and
the private sector from engaging in this sector, and, thus, reducing opportunities for
beneﬁt sharing. Furthermore, these could discourage openness and transparency
about research and development activities, which would be to the detriment of both
science and the patent system—the functioning of the latter relying to a degree on
trust. Conversely, if no steps are taken to address concerns over the equity of the

164

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

patent system—including the misappropriation of GRs—this could also have a
negative impact on research activities, for example, if source countries refuse access
to their resources. Thus, either side could achieve a Phyrric victory.

Ultimately, a way needs to be found to restore trust between resource owners and
those who wish to access and exploit these, in order to achieve the goal of facilitating
fair and equitable resource use. DRs could play a valuable role in this. An alternative
scenario is that they could in fact further undermine trust, both in the patent system
and the CBD. Therefore, other options should continue to be explored.

About the Authors

Alison Hoare is an Associate Fellow, Environment and Development Programme at
Chatham House, 10 St James Square, London SW1Y 4LE, UK; e-mail: alhoare@
chathamhouse.org.uk

Richard Tarasofsky is Head of the Energy, Environment and Development Pro-
gramme at Chatham House, 10 St James Square, London SW1Y 4LE, UK; e-mail:
rtarasofsky@chathamhouse.org.uk

Notes

The authors would like to thank Graham Dutﬁeld for his comments on earlier drafts of this
paper.

1 DRs may actually refer to a wide range of requirements, including not only disclosure of

geographic origin or source but also evidence of PIC or compliance with ABS
regulations, for any GRs or (in some cases) associated TK that have been used in an
invention. This is described later in the article.

2 See Andean Pact Decision 391 on a Common Regime on Access to Genetic Resources

(1996), which led to Decision 486 on a Common Intellectual Property Regime (2000)
containing a DR.

3 This article is drawn from research carried out under the research project Impacts of

IPR Rules on Sustainable Development (IPDEV)—a project funded by the 6th
Framework Programme, DG Research of the European Commission. Further details
are available at hhttp://www.ip4development.org/i [Accessed on March 2007]. The
research was based on questionnaires and interviews of patent ofﬁcials, non-
governmental organizations, private sector and academics around the world conducted
in 2005 and 2006, as well as two expert workshops held in London in 2006.

4 The countries investigated in Europe were Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and

Switzerland.

5 The countries studied in the Americas were Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru.
6 Comprehensive analyses of the options for designing and implementing DRs are

available in Sarnoff and Correa (2005) and WIPO (2003b).

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 165

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

hhttp://www.ip-watch.org/weblog/index.php?p=260

7 See the website available at

&res=800&print=0i [Accessed on March 2007] for a description of the recent
negotiations on this issue at CBD COP-8.
8 This was the situation as of August 2006.
9 Norway was not required to implement the Directive because it is in the European

Economic Area rather than being a member of the EU.

10 Law No. 2005-04-28/33: Loi modiﬁant la loi du 28 mars 1984 sur les brevets d’invention, en

ce qui concerne la brevetabilit ´e des inventions biotechnologiques.

11 Act 412, 31 May 2000 and Regulation 1086, 11 December 2000.
12 Rule 5(a), Patents Regulations (SFS 2004:162).
13 This is available online at hhttp://www.ige.ch/E/jurinfo/j100.shtm#a03i [Accessed on

March 2007].

14 Decision 486 (‘‘Common Intellectual Property Regime’’) December 2000.
15 Provisional Measure No. 2.186-16 (23 August 2001).
16 Biodiversity Law of Costa Rica (Law No. 7,788) (1998).
17 As mentioned previously, the draft Swiss legislation would be applicable to both

national and international patent applications, and so would overcome this problem.

18 This was the situation as of February 2006.
19 This was the situation as of September 2006.
20 Personal communications: National Institute of Industrial Property (INPI), Brazil,

September 2005; and Institute for the Defense of Competition and Protection of
Intellectual Property (INDECOPI), Peru, February 2006.

21 Personal communication, Superintendencia de Industria y Comercio (SIC), Colombia.

September 2005.

22 Personal communication, Norwegian Patent Ofﬁce. October 2005.
23 It should perhaps be noted that the Chinese government is currently considering

amendments to its patent law, which may require patent applicants to disclose the
origin of biological and genetic resources used in their inventions (Wu, 2006).

24 A number of research scenarios have been described in a document produced by the

European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA, 2004),
these illustrating the diversity of research processes and chains, and the difﬁculties these
present in terms of the obligation to comply with a disclosure requirement.

25 These data come from the CBD database on ABS measures [online]. Available at

hhttp://www.biodiv.org/programmes/socio-eco/beneﬁt/measures.aspxi [Accessed on
October 2006]. It should be noted that the database may not be comprehensive.

References

Abbott, F. (2005) Preservation and Use of Genetic Resource Assets and the International
Patent System, A study for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway. Draft of 31
March 2005, Rev. 1.2. Hong Kong Ministerial Revision.

Addor, F. (2005) ‘Switzerland’s Proposals Regarding the Declaration of the Source of

Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge in Patent Applications and Switzerland’s
Views on the Declaration of Evidence of Prior Informed Consent and Beneﬁt Sharing in

166

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Patent Applications’. Paper presented at the ICTSD/CIEL/IDDRI/IUCN/QUNO
Dialogue on Disclosure Requirements: Incorporating the CBD Principles in the TRIPS
Agreement on the Road to Hong Kong. WTO Public Symposium, Geneva, 21 April.
Commission on Intellectual Property Rights (2002) Integrating Intellectual Property Rights

and Development Policy. DFID, London, September.

Convention on Biological Diversity Conference of the Parties 6, Decision VI-24 A, ‘Bonn

Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts
Arising Out of their Utilization’ [online], para. 16(d), p. 268. Available at hhttp://
www.biodiv.org/doc/decisions/COP-06-dec-en.pdfi [Accessed on October 2006].

Correa, C. M. (2005) The Politics and Practicalities of a Disclosure of Origin Obligation,

Occasional Paper 16. Quaker United Nations Ofﬁce, Geneva.

de Carvalho, N. P. (2000) ‘Requiring Disclosure of the Origin of Genetic Resources and PIC
in Patent Applications Without Infringing the TRIPS Agreement: The Problem and the
Solution’, Washington University Journal of Law and Policy, 2, 371–401.

Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 6 July 1998, on the

legal protection of biotechnological inventions [online]. Available at hhttp://
europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/1998/l_213/l_21319980730en00130021.pdfi
[Accessed on October 2006].

Dutﬁeld, G. (2005a) Thinking Aloud on Disclosure of Origin, Occasional Paper 18. Quaker

United Nations Ofﬁce, Geneva.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2005b) ‘Disclosure of Origin: Time for a Reality Check?’. Paper presented at the

ICTSD/CIEL/IDDRI/IUCN/QUNO Dialogue on Disclosure Requirements:
Incorporating the CBD Principles in the TRIPS Agreement on the Road to Hong Kong.
WTO Public Symposium, Geneva, 21 April.

European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (2004) Inventive

Endeavours in the Pharmaceutical Sector and the Potential Impact of Disclosure of
Geographic Origin of Genetic Material. European Federation of Pharmaceutical
Industries and Associations, October.

Parry, B. (2004) Trading the Genome. Investigating the Commodiﬁcation of Bio-Information.

Columbia University Press, New York.

Queen Mary Intellectual Property Research Institute (2004) Disclosure of Origin in Patent

Applications, Report to the European Commission, October. Unpublished report, Queen
Mary Intellectual Property Research Institute, London.

Safrin, S. (2004) ‘Hyperownership in a Time of Biotechnological Promise: The International
Conﬂict to Control the Building Blocks of Life’, The American Journal of International
Law, 98, 641–85.

Sarnoff, J. (2004) ‘Compatibility With Existing International Intellectual Property

Agreements of Requirements for Patent Applicants to Disclose Origins of Genetic
Resources and Traditional Knowledge and Evidence of Legal Access and Beneﬁt
Sharing’. Memorandum to Public Interest Intellectual Property Advisors (PIIPA), 23
June.

Sarnoff, J. D. and Correa, C. M. (2005) ‘Analysis of Options for Implementing Disclosure of

Origin Requirements in Intellectual Property Applications’, A Contribution to
UNCTAD’s response to the invitation of the Seventh Conference of the Parties of the
Convention on Biological Diversity. UNCTAD/DITC/TED/2005/14. United Nations,
New York.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 167

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

Asking and Telling

Visser, C. J. (2004) ‘Making Intellectual Property Laws Work for Traditional Knowledge’, in

J. M. Finger and P. Schuler (eds), Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual
Property in Developing Countries. World Bank and Oxford University Press,
Washington, DC and Oxford, pp. 207–40.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2003a) Draft Technical Study on Disclosure
Requirements Related to Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge. Document
prepared by the Secretariat. Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, 5th Session, Geneva, 7–15
July. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/10, 2 May 2003.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2003b) ‘Technical Study on Patent Disclosure

Requirements Related to Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge’, Submission
by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity. 7th Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, 9–20 and 27
February 2004. UNEP/CBD/COP/7/INF/17, 15 December.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2005) ‘Disclosure of Origin or Source of Genetic
Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge in Patent Applications’, Document
submitted by the European Community and its Member States. Intergovernmental
Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore, 8th Session, Geneva, 6–10 June, 2005. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/8/11, 17 May.

World Trade Organization (2001) ‘Minutes of Meeting. Council for Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights’ held in the Centre William Rappard, 27–30 November
and 6 December 2000. IP/C/M/29, 6 March.

World Trade Organization (2004a) ‘Further Observations by Switzerland on its Proposals

regarding the Declaration of the Source of Genetic Resources and Traditional
Knowledge in Patent Applications’, Communication From Switzerland. Council for
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. IP/C/W/433, 25 November.

World Trade Organization (2004b) ‘Elements of the Obligation to Disclose the Source and
Country of Origin of the Biological Resources and/or Traditional Knowledge used in an
Invention’, Submission from Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, India, Pakistan, Peru, Thailand,
and Venezuela. Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. IP/C/
W/429/Rev.1, 27 September.

World Trade Organization (2005a) ‘The Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Protection of Traditional Knowledge
and Folklore and the Review of Implementation of the TRIPS Agreement Under Article
71.1’, Communication from Switzerland. Council for Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights. IP/C/W/446, 30 May.

World Trade Organization (2005b) ‘The Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the

Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Protection of Traditional
Knowledge—Elements of the Obligation to Disclose Evidence of Beneﬁt-Sharing under
the Relevant National Regime’, Submission from Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, India, Peru and Thailand. Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. IP/C/W/442, 18 March.

World Trade Organization (2006a) ‘The Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the
Convention on Biological Diversity’, Summary of Issues Raised and Points Made, Note
by the Secretariat. Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
IP/C/W/368/Rev.1, 8 February.

168

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r Asking and Telling

Alison Hoare and Richard Tarasofsky

World Trade Organization (2006b) ‘The Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement, the

Convention on Biological Diversity and the Protection of Traditional Knowledge.
Amending the TRIPS Agreement to Introduce an Obligation to Disclose the Origin of
Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge in Patent Applications’, Communication
from Norway. General Council, Trade Negotiations Committee, 14 June 2006. WT/GC/
W/566, 14 June.

World Trade Organization (2006c) ‘DOHA Work Programme—The Outstanding

Implementation Issue on the Relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the
Convention on Biological Diversity’, Communication from Brazil, India, Pakistan,
Peru, Thailand and Tanzania. General Council, Trade Negotiations Committee. WT/
GC/W/564, 31 May.

Wu, J. (2006) ‘China Pushing Forward With IP Protection’ [online]. Mondaq, 21 September.
Available at hhttp://www.mondaq.com/article.asp?article_id=42902&lk=1i [Accessed
on October 2006].

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 169


