An Action Agenda for the Next WTO Round 

A Post-Seattle Perspective 

Dilip K. DAS* 

I.  STRIKING A BALANCE 

To eliminate the likelihood of another Seattle, the Agenda of the next Round of 
multilateral trade negotiations (MTNS) must strike a balance between the interests of the 
industrial and the developing economies. Although the four Members of the Quad1 are 
the  largest  traders  and  overwhelmingly  dominate  global  trade,  the  developing 
economies dominate the  Membership of the World  Trade Organization in  terms of 
sheer numbers. Striking a  balance includes Agenda, process and  outcomes. A lack of 
balance will not only imperil the next Round, but also any hture MTNS. The Round, 
therefore, must not  only focus on those sectors in which industrial economies have a 
special advantage, such as financial services and information technology, but also those 
in whch developing economies have special interests, such as agriculture, construction 
and maritime services. It must not only include protection of intellectual property rights, 
of interest  to  the industrial economies, but  also address  issues  of current  or potential 
concern for developing economies, such as property rights for knowledge embedded in 
tradtional  medicines,  or  the  pricing  of  pharmaceuticals  in  developing  economies 
(Stiglitz, 1999a). 

In  approaching the  new  negotiations, the  Member  delegations must  take  into 
account  the  marked  institutional disadvantage that  developing and  Asian  economies 
have in participating meaningfully in negotiations. For instance, while nineteen of the 
forty-two African WTO Members are not even represented at the WTO headquarters in 
Geneva,  the  average  number  of  trade  officials  from  each  of  the  Organisation  for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) economies is seven. In addition, the 
future  negotiations  must  not  be looked  at  in  isolation, but  in their proper  historical 
context.  Other  than  differences in  the  levels  of economic  growth,  Stightz correctly 
draws attention  to  the  “suspicions born  of a legacy of past  power  imbalances”. The 
developing and the industrial economies play on an uneven playing field which is sloped 
against the former. Developing countries face greater volatility; this includes volatility 
created  by  trade  liberalization.  They  find  it  relatively  more  difficult  to  deal  with 
economic adjustments which are a consequence of trade liberalization. A related factor 

~  *  Economic Analysis and Research Division, Asian Development Bank, Manila, the Philippines. 
1  The European Union, Canada, Japan, and the United States are the four Members of the Quad 

738 

THE  

is  that developing and Asian  economies either do not have social safety nets, or have 
only weak ones. Unemployment has been a persistent problem in the majority of them. 
Thus, regulations and liberalization measures that prima facie look even and fair to both 
of the  country  groups may  have very  different and unequal consequences for them. 
Therefore,  the  power  imbalances  at  the  bargaining  table  are  exacerbated  by  the 
imbalances of consequences. 

The Uruguay Round, and the Rounds before that, focused on liberalizing tariff and 
non-tariff  barriers  on  manufactures.  A  1997 joint  study  by  the  United  Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development  (UNCTAD) and the WTO concluded that the 
manufacturing sectors with  the highest levels  of tariff escalation and tariff spikes were 
textiles and apparel, footwear, leather goods, and travel goods.2 All of these sectors are of 
special interest to exporters in developing and Asian economies, especially clothing and 
textiles, which are often subject to tariff rates of 12 to 30 percent in the OECD economies 
(UNCTAD/WTO, 1997). Issues  like  these  need  to  be  considered  for  re-opening  if  a 
sufficient number of developing and Asian  economies have rational and well-founded 
concerns. 

The  seven  Rounds  of  MTNS before  the  Uruguay  Round  &d  little  to  address 
barriers to agricultural trade, which was a sector of immense interest to many developing 
and Asian  economies because  they had  a  comparative advantage in  it.  When  it  was 
addressed during the Uruguay Round, despite some healthy progress, it fell victim to 
“&rty  tariffication”. Tariffs on agricultural products continue to be high even after the 
implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture. Recent calculations 
show  that  in  industrial economies the  production  weighted-average  nominal rate  of 
trade assistance to agriculture was 33 percent, compared to 2 percent for other primary 
and manufacturing industries (Anderson et al., 1999). The agricultural liberalization that 
occurred was  driven by  the interests of industrial country exporters such as  Austraha, 
Canada, the United States and developing countries that are part of the Cairns Group.3 
Exporters of tropical products did not play an active role in the design of the agricultural 
liberalization Agenda (Stiglitz, 1999b). 

11.  CRAFTING AN  ACTION AGENDA 

The dexterity and clairvoyance with which an Agenda for the next MTN is crafted 
will determine the rhythm  of world trade in  the  twenty-first  century. As  seen in the 
preceding  Section,  two of  its  indispensable  qualities  will  have  to  be  fairness  and 
comprehensiveness  (Stightz,  1999a).  The  basic  challenge  facing  WTO Members, 
including the Asian economies, is to craft such an Agenda for the next Round of global 

nation  (MFN) tariff on manufactures. 

2  Tariff spikes are defined as tariff rates of at least  12 percent or roughly three times the average most-favoured- 
3  Cairns is the name of a city in eastern Australia. AU the eighteen Members of the Cairns Group, which does 
not include the United  States, are substantial  exporters of farm products. The eighteen Members are: Argentina, 
Austraha,  Bolivia,  Brazil,  Canada,  Chile,  Colombia,  Costa  Rica,  Fiji,  Guatemala,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  New 
Zealand, Paraguay, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand and Uruguay. 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO  ROUND 

739 

trade  negotiations  that  provides  opportunities  for  the  broadest participation  and  the 
greatest potential for agreement on significant new trade reforms. This Agenda should 
also include some of the old problematic issues like the Multifibre Arrangement (MFA). 
Given  the  diverse and  divergent trading interests of the participants, formulating the 
Agenda will take some effort. 

Not only  will interests differ but  the  impact  of the  Round on the  participating 
economies will necessarily be asymmetric. In addition, while some trade issues can be 
broken down on North-South  or regional lines, others do not clearly break along such 
lines, although  they  do enter  the Agenda. The constituencies driving the  new  trade 
issues are diverse and span the different regions of the globe. For instance, it is obvious 
that the smaller least-developed countries of the world have little in common with larger 
developing ones such as Brazil, the People’s Republic of China, and India. In fact, the 
latter country group finds economies such as the newly industrialized economies (NIES) 
to be competitors as  often as allies during the MTNS (Das, 1999). 

To be sure, crafting an Agenda is not a trivial exercise because all of the economies 
participating in  the  MTNS should be  able to  “take home”  some of their  negotiating 
priorities--some  of which may well be far-fetched-otherwise 
they will perceive the 
Round  as  a  failure from  their  perspective. Therefore,  the  new  Agenda  should have 
something of value for every participating Member. This is essential, because without it 
participating economies may neither be able to attract enough domestic political support 
to be able to participate in the MTNS nor reform their own trade regimes. This makes 
the process of crafting an Agenda an arduous and onerous one at best and, as  was  seen 
in Seattle, an impossible one at worst. 

To  begin  with,  developing  and  Asian  economies  must  devise  a  clear-headed 
pragmatic strategy before crafting an Agenda. None of the developing economies study 
in a methodical manner the desirable contents of the implications of a multilateral trade 
agreement in an  area of interest to it. They leave this work  to multilateral institutions 
and think-tanks in the industrial countries. Little wonder that most developing countries 
lack negotiating capacity for a Round with an extended Agenda and one that extends 
for a long period  of time. Even large developing and Asian  economies such as Brazil, 
China and India have few trade experts who can play  the negotiation  game as well as 
their industrial country counterparts. This asymmetry in experience had a detrimental 
impact on the outcome of the Uruguay Round and may again have a similar impact on 
the next Round. Given the asymmetry in bargaining power between the industrial and 
the developing economies, it is again likely that the Agenda of the next Round would 
be influenced more by the industrial economies. Developing and Asian economies need 
to make up for this gap in institutional capability in the near future. Whde they do so, 
they  should  make  the  best  use  of  the  resources  available  from  the  multilateral 
organizations. 

To  use  the  oft-cited  bicycle  analogy, if we  need  the  next  Round  to  keep  the 
momentum of MTNs going, we should not load the bicycle with so much baggage that 

740 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

it collapses from excess weight. Having a relatively small number of topics to negotiate 
on or around would be a pragmatic and functional idea. A large number of negotiating 
issues is  sure to severely tax the negotiating and institutional capacity of countries and 
cannot be concluded in a reasonable time-span. The time period for the Round should 
be fixed at three years; only under extraordinary circumstances should it be extended to 
four years.  Also, to take stock of progress, there is  need for a mid-term  review. This 
meeting  should  be  at  the  Ministerial  level  and  suggest  mid-course  correction,  if 
necessary. 

There  are  strong political economy  arguments supporting a  Round involving a 
“single undertaking”.4  The  single  undertaking  is  a  meaningful  part  of  the  strategy 
because  it facilitates trade-off  across topics between  the developing and the industrial 
economies. For instance, liberalization in agriculture and dismantling of the  MFA on 
pre-determined lines are of interest to developing countries. Other than that, it will be 
in their interest to seek a mohfication  of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), as well as to liberalize some specific service sectors 
and modes of supply. Conversely, industrial countries would be looking for additional 
developing country commitments in the form of more bindings and reductions in the 
bound  and  applied  tariff  rates  of  industrial  products  as  well  as  some  adhtional 
commitments  in  the  services  sector.  One  way  of  overcoming  the  opposition  of 
entrenched  protectionism  in  industrial  economies-in 
sectors  such  as  agriculture, 
maritime services, or textiles-is 
to take advantage of the pressure that export interests 
in the industrial economies will bring to bear on their own governments to negotiate in 
order to open up developing country markets (Krueger, 1999). 

Non-trade  Agenda  items,  such  as labour  and  environmental standards, must  be 
banished  permanently.  Although  the  European  Union  and  the  United  States  are 
expected to renew efforts to graft labour and environmental issues onto the multilateral 
Agenda  with  an  objective to  “harmonise” the  labour and environmental laws  of the 
WTO Members, this thicket must be avoided. A substantial body of academic research 
is now available that persuasively argues against inclusion of these items in any Round 
of  MTNS in  the  present  or  future.  Scholars in  international trade  consider  them  an 
“intrusion” in trade affairs  and trade policy  (Anderson, 1996). Developing and Asian 
economies need to take a concerted stand and oppose this intrusion in unison. Similarly, 
competition or antitrust-related issues must not be allowed to be on the Agenda, given 
the WTO’S unsuitability to monitor  and police the domestic activities of private-sector 
companies. Thus  viewed,  labour-,  environment-  and  competition-related  issues  are 
incompatible for the WTO given its mandate, and would not help the next Round to 
take off  Beyond the Built-In  Agenda and MFA, only carefully selected areas should be 
included in  the  Agenda. WTO Members should seek an  “early harvest”  of realizable 
agreements if progress stalls-as 
is always a likely possibility-in  more contentious areas. 

4  This  implies that  the results  of the negotiations are adopted  as  a package  and that  they  apply  to all WTO 

Members. Members are not given discretion to choose part or parts of the entire package. 

AGENDA  FOR THE NEXT WTO  ROUND 

741 

Other than concerns regarding the appropriate Agenda, it is vitally important for 
the developing and Asian economies to take a pragmatic stand while deciding on broad 
negotiating items. Upon entering the negotiations, the criteria that developing countries 
can  profitably  employ  in  deciding  their  negotiating  position  should  include  the 
following considerations: 

- 

-  the  net  benefits  they  would  expect  to  obtain  for  their  economies,  both 
through their own liberalization and through improved access to the markets 
of others; 
the net benefits that would result from setting new rules and/or  changing the 
existing ones; and 
the institutional capacity needed to implement whatever new agreements are 
reached. 

- 

The last criterion is important because of the problems many developing and Asian 
economies  have  encountered  in  implementing  the  Uruguay  Round  Agreement 
(Michalopoulos, 1999). 

Lindsey et  al.  (1999) have suggested a formula for the next Round. The principal 
strands of their  suggestion  are  as  follows.  First,  during the  negotiations participating 
Members need to abandon the trahtional “export good/import  bad” mindset. Instead 
their  mindset  should be  that  trade  liberalization is  its  own reward.  Second,  especial 
attention must be paid to slashing agricultural tariffs, particularly the highest tariff rates. 
All  agricultural tariffs  below  5  percent  should  be  eliminated.  Export  subsides  and 
production-distorting  domestic subsidies must be  eliminated. Third,  commitment  of 
the industrial economies to fully implement  the Agreement  on Textiles and Clothing 
by 31 December 2004 must be reconfirmed. Fourth, trade in services must be liberalized 
through a “negative list”, which assumes all service sectors would be liberalized unless 
specifically excluded. Fifth, the Dispute Settlement Understandng should be reformed 
to create adhtional liberalization. Sixth, the Anti-Dumping  Code must be tightened so 
that  domestic  “fair  trade”  laws  do  not  intervene  and  cannot  be  used  as  a  tool  for 
protectionism.  Seventh, full compliance with  the  existing TRIPS Agreement  must  be 
sought without  opening it to further negotiations. Finally, enforcement of labour and 
environmental  standards  through 
trade  sanctions  must  be  rejected.  Likewise, 
competition policies should not be allowed to be made part of the Agenda. These are 
pragmatic, if somewhat ambitious proposals, and targeting them during the next Round 
would certainly have far-reaching implications. 

111.  THE BUILT-IN AGENDA 

The Marrakesh Agreement had a “Built-In Agenda” for the next Round of MTNs, 
which includes further negotiations in agriculture and services. Although  the breadth 
and depth of these two sets of issues provide the Next Round with a certain scope and, 

742 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

going  by  experience  of  the  Uruguay  Round  these  issues  can  potentially  keep  the 
negotiators busy  for a while, they cannot comprise a Round, The reason is that for a 
Round of MTNs  to be launched, a “critical mass  of issues”  is  needed. That being said, 
these two  areas do provide a starting point  for the  next Round. MTNS are generally 
wide-ranging,  as  was  the  Uruguay  Round.  In  wide-ranging  MTNS the  negotiating 
countries can  exchange cross-sector  concessions, necessary  for  a  successful Round of 
MTNS. Had the scope of the Uruguay Round not been extended to agriculture, textiles, 
services  and  intellectual  property,  its  results  would  have  been  limited  and  its 
achievements would not have been so highly rated. 

The Agreements on information technology products, basic  telecommunications 
services,  and financial services were also a part of the Built-In  Agenda of the Uruguay 
Round and were finally completed on schedule. Other than these three, many of the 
substantive Agreements that  were arrived at during the Round have “general review 
provisions” after stipulated periods of hffering lengths. These reviews could create fresh 
areas for negotiations on those or related subjects. 

The Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture and the General Agreement on 
Trade in Services (GATS) share an important characteristic; that is, they go further and 
call specifically for negotiations to carry forward the process of liberalization embarked 
upon during the Uruguay Round. This was expressly noted in these two Agreements 
because negotiators were aware of their weaknesses. It was well known  that what was 
achieved during the Round was a mere beginning and that the two Agreements needed 
to  be  broadened.  When  they  are  broadened  in  scope  in  the  next  Round,  these 
Agreements are  expected to  affect  major  trade  interests of most  countries, either  as 
exporters or importers. Each one of these two  Agreements provided a  framework of 
principles, rules, and procedures of practical significance largely related to  the specific 
liberalization of commitments made by individual WTO Members. It was recommended 
that these rules and procedures be followed at the time of further negotiations, although 
some of these rules may need to be re-examined  (Anderson, 1998; Das, 1998). 

A.  Agricultural  Negotiations 

The General AgTeement  on Tariffi and Trade (GATT) had treated the agriculture 
sector  differently  fi-om  the  industrial  sector.  After  1950, a  great  deal  of  growth  in 
agriculture protection  occurred  in  the  industrial economies and  subsequently in  the 
NIES. The protectionist trend accelerated in the  early  1980s, and trade in  agricultural 
products remains subject to costly distortions. The widespread use  of export subsidies 
was perhaps the most disruptive element in the operation of world agricultural markets. 
That it was a contentious issue is proved by the fact that it became the largest stumbling 
block during the Uruguay Round due to disagreement between the EU and the United 
States on almost all  aspects  of the  draft Agreement.  It  delayed the  conclusion of the 
Round  by  two  years.  The  EU  worked  hard  to  defend  the  Common  Agricultural 

AGENDA  FOR THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

743 

Policy  (CAP), which was  essentially designed to be  a price support scheme for certain 
agricultural products (such as wheat) to protect EU farmers.5 

The principal beneficial impact of the Uruguay Round was that a foundation for 
reversing the trend of growth in agricultural protection was laid. The Uruguay Round 
Agreement on Agriculture irreversibly changed the  climate of farm policy-making  in 
both  advanced and  developing countries. Albeit,  it has  not  resulted in  large  cuts in 
agricultural  protection.  Article  xx of  this  Agreement  relates  to  commitment  to 
negotiations  on  trade  in  agricultural products. The practice  of subsidzing  exports of 
agricultural products has  been  constrained by  the  Uruguay Round, but  most  of the 
subsidies are allowed to continue in a reduced form. All the WTO Members have arrived 
at a consensus regarding these commitments. In addtion, they had an “agreed exchange 
of  information”  to  allow  Members  to  better  understand  the  issues  involved.  This 
exchange has been in progress through informal discussions in the WTO Committee on 
Agriculture. The principal issues that were discussed included market access, domestic 
support, and export subsides. 

Negotiations  on  trade  in  agricultural products  have  come  to  acquire  a  certain 
pattern. It is likely that this pattern will, with some variations, be repeated during the 
hture Round. What can be reasonably expected is that the United States and the Cairns 
Group will again push for further trade liberalization and for total elimination of export 
subsidies.  The  Cairns  Group  Members  have  been  asking  for  “fundamental reform 
whch will put trade in agricultural products on the same basis as trade in other goods.”6 
As  the Cairns Group comprises the exporting countries, their demand in this respect is 
the most ambitious. The EU, Japan and Norway will take the position that any reforms 
in trade in agricultural products be progressive and that  “non-economic  concerns” be 
respected. It is likely that the EU may again propose merely reform of its CAP and stop 
at that. 

Negotiations on agricultural trade  are  highly  significant for  the  developing and 
Asian  economies  because  agricultural  protection  and  intervention  in  the  industrial 
economies has  remained  higher  than  protection  of trade  in  manufactures. To  make 
things worse, farmers and rural communities that depend on agricultural production in 
the developing and Asian  economies often remain subject to higher effective taxation 
and production disincentives than manufacturers. As  the largest incidence of poverty in 

5  The European Union annually sets indicative prices for individual farm products that are usually higher than 
the international prices. The rationale for fudng higher prices is higher costs of production in the EU economies. 
When these products are imported into the EU, the difference between the indicative price and the international 
price  is  levied  like  a tariff.  Each  agricultural product has  a levy  depending upon  the  indicative price,  called  a 
“variable levy”.  Thus  the  EU  markets  are  shielded &om international  competition.  Such  agricultural support 
measures function as incentives for more production that leads to over-production.  To export the over-produced 
agricultural items, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) provides export subsidies. To undertake price support 
and export subsidy, the CAP has a large budget, which is two-thrds  of the total EU budget. As  the United States 
has a highly competitive agricultural sector, it has constantly complained about the trade distortions created by the 
CAP, in particular about the export subsidies. At  the end of the Uruguay Round, the Agreement on Agriculture 
was concluded, but it was almost a bilateral agreement between the E U  and the United States. Other Members of 
the WTO had little choice but to accept it so that the Round could be brought to an overdue conclusion. 

6 See CommuniquC of Cairns Group Ministers, Sydney, 3 April 1998. 

744 

THE  

the developing and Asian economies is generally among farmers, it is important that the 
most  be made  of the  opportunities  offered  by  the  Built-In  Agenda  during  the  next 
Round, so that this group benefits as much as possible. Liberalizing trade in agricultural 
products would increase the role of the market discipline in the allocation of resources 
in the agricultural sector. Market-access negotiations  should be given their due priority 
because  the  potential  welfare  gains from liberalizing  access  to  agricultural  markets is 
huge (Anderson et al.,  1999). 

The final post-Uruguay  Round tariff bindings for the major agricultural products 
are  high  in  both  developed  and  developing  economies,  but  they  are  higher  in  the 
former. Thus, there is a pressing need to negotiate down these bound tariffs in the next 
Round.  Laird  (1999)  suggested  that  in  the  next  Round the  bound  rates  should be 
brought  down  to  the  actual  rates  to  begin  with.  Having  achieved  that,  further 
liberalization  should  begin.  This  could  best  be  achieved  by  adopting  a  logical  and 
effective formula similar to the one used for industrial products in the Tokyo Round. 
Accorlng to this formula, the higher  tariffs should be reduced  more and lower tariffs 
should  be  reduced  less.  At  present,  tariff  spikes  are  high  or  extremely  high  in  the 
following products and product groups: major agricultural staple food products such as 
meat, sugar, milk, and cereals; cotton and tobacco; fruits and vegetables; and processed 
food products  (canned meat, fruit juices,  etc.) (UNCTAD/WTO, 1997). As many of the 
tariff  spikes  in  the  industrial  economies  are  extremely  high,  this  formula  will  make 
negotiations  efficient.  It  also  makes  sense  on  mercantilist  strategic  grounds.  Tariff 
escalation with progressing stages of processing is another characteristic of tariff barriers 
in agricultural trade. The above formula will also help reduce effective protection  more 
than would simple radial reduction. 

B.  Tanff Quotas 

The pervasiveness of “dirty  tariffication”  is  a well-known  phenomenon and the 
Agreement on Agriculture  recognizes that it could result in reduced  market access for 
agricultural products  of which some imports were permitted in the past through  non- 
tariff  barriers  such  as  voluntary  export  restraints.  The  Agreement  on  Agnculture 
provided for the  introduction  of tariff quotas7 to raise the  share of imports  to at least 
5 percent of domestic consumption of that agricultural product for which imports were 
reduced  to a  neglible level before  the Uruguay Round.8  A two-tiered  tariff structure 
was stipulated to achieve the 5 percent market-share  target by the year 2000. The tariff- 
quota provision  was applied at bilateral and global levels, with the former allocated to 
traditional  export  suppliers  on  the  basis  of  historical  market  shares,  and  the  latter 
available, in principle, on a most-favoured-nation  (MFN) basis. 

The problem with  tariff quotas was that the bilateral arrangements  kept the new, 

7  Under a tariff quota, tariff rates are applicable to a quota of imports in such a manner that  a higher rate is 
charged on imports in excess of the quota. The quota and tariff may be determined in terms of quantity or value. 
The 5 percent consumption level was scheduled for the year 2000. 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

745 

more  efficient  suppliers  out  of  the  market.  The  global  quota  had  several  serious 
administrative problems.  How the global quota should be allocated turned out to be a 
rancorous  issue.  The  WTO had  allowed  importing  countries  to  incorporate  their 
preferential  tradmg arrangements  into the market-access  opportunities,  which  further 
complicated  this  issue.  Consequently,  the  5 percent  market-share  level  could  not be 
reached in many cases. Besides, in some cases imports were charged higher outside-of- 
quota tariff rates.  The next  Round will have to address these issues and resolve them 
while  bearing  in  mind  the  efficiency  considerations.  Global  efficiency  will  be  best 
served by first unieing the bound tariff rates and the rate applicable to the tariff quota 
to the level that will ensure the minimum import requirement. The next step should be 
to  bring  down  the  tariff  rates  gradually  (Panagariya, 2000).  Developing  and  Asian 
economies  must  also  negotiate  for  increasing  access  under  tariff  quotas  significantly 
above the current 5 percent  of consumption level. 

C.  Export  Subsidy 

Although the Agreement on Agriculture forbade any new subsihes, it tolerated the 
existing ones. Both industrial  and developing economies were  to slash budget  outlays 
on export  subsidies. The proportions  of cuts were  large for the  industrial  economies 
(36 percent) and relatively smaller for developing countries (24 percent). Likewise, the 
volume of subsidized exports was to be reduced in both country groups, accordmg to a 
pre-determined  schedule,  between  1995 and  2004.  The magnitude  of subsidy  is  far 
larger in the industrial economies than in the developing ones. The former accounted 
for 80 percent of the global volume of agricultural subsidies in 1995, and these subsidies 
are concentrated on a small number ofproducts, namely, cheese, butter, wheat and beef. 
Therefore,  the  task  of  agricultural  subsidy  reduction  has  to  be  disproportionately 
focused on the industrial economies. Nothing less than a ban  on farm export subsidies 
is  needed  to  bring  agriculture  into  line  with  non-farm  products  under  the  WTO 
(Binswanger  and  Lutz,  2000).  Such  a  ban  will  benefit  many  potential  developing 
country exporters. The other subsidy that needs to be drastically reduced is the domestic 
producer subsidy. This wdl entail binding aggregate support levels as well as support for 
individual  commodities,  outlawing  carryovers  of  “savings”  from  year  to  year,  and 
cutting high  subsidy spikes. 

D.  Sanitary and  Phytosanitury Measures 

These measures are  designed  and  intended  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of public 
health.  With  the  liberalization  of  agricultural  products  into  industrial  economies, 
sanitary and phytosanitary  (SPS) measures will assume increasing importance.  This is  a 
problem area for the developing and Asian economies because the majority of them are 
not  technologically  well-equipped  to  cope  with  them.  Another  area  is  lack  of 

746 

THE  

information about  SPS measures in  the  developing and Asian  economies. Whle the 
Agreement  on  SPS  Measures  does  acknowledge  this  and  encourages  industrial 
economies  to  provide  technological  assistance  to  developing  economies,  it  leaves 
provision to the donor country’s hscretion. In the next Round, this Agreement should 
be taken further and a formal mechanism for ensuring its implementation should be laid 
down. Also  during the  next  Round, developing and Asian  economies should guard 
against the use of existing and new SPS measures for protectionist purposes. 

Iv.  FURTHERING TRADE IN SERVICES 

The  General  Agreement  on  Trade  in  Services  was  a  first  step  towards  a 
comprehensive framework  to  regulate  trade  in  services.  The  WTO Secretariat has 
classified  services  into  eleven  broad  categories:  business  services;  communication 
services;  construction  and  other  related  services;  distribution  services;  educational 
services;  environmental  services;  health  care  services;  tourism  and  related  services; 
recreational services; cultural and sporting services; and transport services. Obligations 
of individual countries under  the  GATS were specified in  their  “Schedule of Specific 
Commitments”  for  market  access,  which  also  provided  a  list  of  exceptions. These 
Schedules are an integral part of the Agreement. As  the Uruguay Round was not able 
to conclude all sectors and it was felt that there was enormous room for improvements, 
it was  decided to  continue negotiations immediately after the  entry into force of the 
GATS. 

Many  key  obligations in  the  GATS apply  only  to  those  services for  which  the 
country concerned has  made liberalization commitments in its  Schedule. In the next 
Round, negotiations on trade in services will certainly focus attention on improvement 
in the rules, but  their primary emphasis is likely to be  on extendmg the reach of the 
present  rules  by  adding  to  the  coverage  of  WTO Members’  services  Schedules 
(Anderson, 1998; Das, 1998). Negotiations should strive for progressively higher levels 
of  liberalization  of  trade  in  services.  In  essence,  success  in  the  next  Round  of 
negotiations will  depend  upon  the  extent  to  which  Member  countries are  able  to 
improve their Schedules of Specific Commitments in terms of the increased coverage 
in  sectors  and  degree  of  liberalization.  Several  scholars  (Snape,  1998; Warren  and 
Findlay,  1999) observed that the GATS is too general in its attempt to cover all kinds of 
service delivery and all forms of barriers to access, while at the same time not general 
enough in terms of obligations of countries malung liberalization commitments. Snape 
and  others  have  argued  that  GATS, like  the  WTO, must  embrace  MFN and  national 
treatment principles, and  the  current  practice  of countries taking MFN and  national 
treatment exceptions must be abandoned. 

Strengthening Article  VI  of the  GATS, which  provides  the  basic  framework for 
minimizing trade  distortions created  by  domestic  regulations,  should  be  one  of  the 
important objectives of the next Round. Article v1(1) states that: 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO  ROUND 

747 

“In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Member shall ensure that all 
measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, 
objective and impartial manner.” 
A strengthened version of t h s  Article  could go a long way in facilitating market- 
access liberalizing by  committing Member countries to the reform  of regulations  that 
impede  competition.  Under  the  amended  version  of Article  VI,  Member  countries 
should be asked to establish procedures for the review  of regulations at the request  of 
the exporters of services. 

The new negotiations  need  to  ensure  that  the  amended  version  of Article  VI  is 
based  on  objective  and  transparent  criteria,  and  is  not  more  burdensome  than  is 
necessary to ensure the quality of the service that is being exported. Transparency  can 
be achieved by asking the Member countries to explicitly state the objectives served by 
a  restrictive  policy  regulation.  Such  a  statement  will  facilitate  and  expedite  any 
examination of whether the regulation is  “more burdensome  than necessary to ensure 
the  quahty  of  the  service”.  This  Article  can  be  further  improved  in  a  fundamental 
manner.  For  instance,  it  can  define the  “quality  of services” by  including  reliability, 
safety,  integrity  of  network,  and  service  to  under-served  regions  and  population 
segments. 

As stated earlier, the GATS was only the beginning of trade regulations in services; 
it is indeed possible to make significant improvements  in it during the next  Round of 
MTNS (Whalley  and  Hamilton,  1996). Article  x1x:l  of  GATS aims  at  “achieving  a 
progressively higher  level of liberalization”  and  mandates  development  of new rules. 
There is also a need for an explicit mandate for work on improving the clarity of the 
Agreement.  According  to  Low  and  Mattoo  (1999),  there  are  several  obvious 
ambiguities of a fundamental nature in the GATS in its present form. The areas that need 
immedate clarification and attention include: 

-  the relationship  between  market  access and  national  treatment,  in  order  to 
treatment 

specifj  precisely  the  scope  of  existing  and  future  national 
commitments; 
the  relationship  among modes  of supply with  respect  to commitments  on a 
given  services activity. For instance,  if a  service is  delivered  under  different 
modes,  it  should  be  considered  a  “like”  service  regardless  of  the  modal 
distinction  made in the Schedule; 
confirmation of the principle of technological neutrality within modes; that is, 
within a mode of supply, a service is regarded as  “like”  independently  of the 
means  by  whch  it  is  delivered.  This  should  confirm  that  existing 
commitments  cover electronic delivery of the service in question; 
removal of interpretative confusion regarding the true scope of bound market 
access and national treatment; and 
development  of a  detailed  nomenclature  for  general  application  to  trade  in 
services. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

748 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Article XIX can potentially provide more assistance and guidance on the content of, 
and preparation for, negotiations. It says that the negotiations  are to be directed in such 
a manner that the final outcome is  “the reduction or elimination of the adverse effects 
on trade in services” (GATS, 1994).9 It emphasizes that liberalization in trade in services 
should  take  place  “with due  respect  for  national  policy  objectives  and  the  level  of 
development  of  individual  Members  [of the  GATS],  both  overall  and  in  inlvidual 
sectors.”  This  provision  can  be  profitably  utilized  by  the  developing  and  Asian 
economies. It further suggests “appropriate flexibility for individual developing country 
Members for opening fewer sectors, liberalizing types of transactions . . .” To provide a 
better knowledge and understandmg of trade in services, Article XIX of GATS called on 
the WTO’S Council for Trade in Services to carry out an assessment of trade in services 
in  overall terms  and  on a  sectorial basis  before  the  launching  of the  next  Round  of 
MTNS. The WTO has  responded  by  conducting  various  scholarly  studies of trade  in 
services. 

One of the conspicuous weak spots of the GATS is that it has ignored subsidies. Just 
as in trade in goods, subsidies have a distortive effect on trade in services, and should be 
negotiated  in  the  next  Round.  Some,  not  all,  middle-  and  low-income  developing 
countries  need  flexibility in  the  use  of subsidies to dcvelop their  services sector. This 
should be allowed  to them. As  opposed to this, industrial  economies that have robust 
services sectors should be subjected  to stricter discipline in this regard, identical to the 
regulation  on subsidies in trade in goods. 

One  of  the  areas  of  special  interest  to  developing  and  Asian  economies  is 
liberalization  involving the  movement  of natural  persons,  particularly in construction 
services. Several developing economies, particularly those in Asia, have developed large 
capacities in exporting construction services over the last two decades because they have 
comparative advantages in this area. Maritime services are another major area of interest 
to developing economies.  Shipping conferences,  which  are veritable  cartels, set prices 
and pursue other collusive activities in 85 percent  or more of maritime services. These 
cartels are often exempt from antitrust law in the industrial countries. Negotiations on 
this issue were started in 1995, but they were inconclusive. When they were suspended, 
it was decided that they would be re-started  in 2000 in a wider context. 

Electronic Commerce 

The  impact  of  the  information  revolution  in  lowering  communication  and 
computing  costs  is  adding  a  whole  new  dimension  to  global  economic  integration. 
During the  1980s, globalization of merchandise  trade and investment altered the entire 
manufacturing  scene.  In  the  1990s, the digital  revolution,  aided  by  deregulation  and 
transferring  of many  services  from  the  public  to  the  private  sector,  transformed  the 

Refer to  Part  IV,  Article xlx, of the Articles of Agreement  of the General Agreement on Tradc in Services 

(GATS). 

AGENDA FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

749 

services sector, particularly knowledge-based or idea-based industries. Previously non- 
traded services have now become the highly trade ones. Their tradeability has become 
so  high  that  in  some products national borders  are becoming irrelevant. The digital 
revolution  has  made  information one  of the  key  factors of production.  Unlike  land, 
labour  and  physical  capital,  information  is  highly  mobile  internationally.  Financial 
capital was already internationally mobile (WTO, 1998a). 

Trade  through  electronic channels or  the  Internet  is  now  classified  as  trade  in 
services. Discussions in the WTO have reached a consensus on this point. Up until 1999, 
electronic  trade,  or  e-commerce,  was  small  (US$  26  billion)  but  it  is  growing 
dynamically and may approach one tnlhon dollars by 2004 (OECD, 1999). E-commerce 
is  the  newest  subject  to  dawn  on  the  horizon  of  MTNS. E-commerce  offers 
unprecedented opportunities for both industrial and developing economies. In the short 
run, the gains are likely to be concentrated in the former, but over the long haul, the 
latter may have more to benefit from e-commerce. Given its explosive growth in recent 
years,  it  is  going to  be  an  important  area  for  negotiation in  the  next  Round.  The 
explosive growth  so  far has  occurred in  a  legal  vacuum with  few  accepted rules and 
disciplines. The  cross-border  nature  of  the  transactions has  made  the  issue  of  legal 
jurisdiction unclear. But there is  little doubt  that before it is  too late a framework of 
global rules for transactions through the Internet w d  have to be established. 

E-commerce  was  first  discussed  in  the  context  of  the  Geneva  Ministerial 
Conference  in  May  1998.  It  was  proposed  that  the  Member  countries should  not 
impose any  tariff barriers  on  electronic transmissions. As  e-commerce  was  growing 
rapidly, the United  States proposed that  the WTO should demonstrate support for its 
continuing expansion and that no precedent should be set for taxation or regulation of 
this  sector. A standstill was  agreed and WTO Members concurred to  “continue  their 
current  practice  of  not  imposing customs  duties  on  electronic transactions”  (WTO, 
1998b). 

The original U.S. proposal was intended to become a multilateral agreement that 
would  permanently  exempt  electronic  transmissions from  tariffs.  Many  developing 
country  Members  were  put  off  by  the  proposal  because  they  felt  that  it  was  not 
sufficiently dxussed and explored. They were not willing to pledge themselves never 
to impose any tariff or taxes on it-not  without thoroughly studying the possible fiscal 
and  revenue  implications  of  such  commitment.  Several  developing  economies, 
includmg India and Pakistan,  have  raised  questions regarding dfferent related issues, 
including the  risk  of discrimination in  favour  of e-commerce  over  traditional trade, 
potential loss of revenue, and the issue of proper recording of transactions. In May 1998, 
WTO Ministers formally agreed that the WTO should conduct a comprehensive study 
of all trade-related issues of global e-commerce. This study was also to take into account 
the economic, financial and development needs of developing economies. Its mandate 
was to draw up a list of recommendations for the Third Ministerial Conference to be 
held in November-December  1999 in Seattle. 

750 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Concerns of the developing and Asian economies r e g a r d q  loss  of tariff revenae 
seems  somewhat  exaggerated  because  most  countries  provide  many  and  large-scale 
exemptions to their existing tariff schedules. Although a consensus exists regarding the 
application  of  all  GATS provisions  to  e-commerce,  and  that  the  “technological 
neutrality”  of  GATS means  that  electronic  supply  of  services  is  permitted  unless 
specifically  excluded,  there  are  many  moot  points  and  uncertainties.  Some  of  the 
unanswered  questions are: 

- 
- 

- 
- 
- 

how to classify Internet access and services; 
whether certain products, when they are electronically transmitted, should be 
classified as goods; 
how to link this arrangement to the Telecommunication  Agreement; 
how to ensure privacy of transactions; and 
how to value encrypted data and the like (WTO, 1999). 

Although  GATS Members  agree  regarding  applying  the  GATS discipline  to 
e-commerce,  they  still need  to decide whether  electronic  trade  is  treated  as  Mode  1 
(cross-border trade) or Mode 2 (consumption abroad). It is important to determine this 
because  this  distinction  will  determine  the  impact  of  liberalization  on services.  For 
instance,  if a country  gave full market  access under  Mode 2 for a  particular  financial 
service that is traded electronically, the commitment  will have no liberalizing impact if 
e-commerce  is classified as supply under Mode 1 rather than 2 (Das, 1999; Panagariya, 
2000). A  related  issue of intellectual  property  right  protection  on the Internet  is  also 
likely to be raised in the next Round. The issues open for discussion relate to copyright, 
trade marks, access to technology  and enforcement.  In anticipation of this, the World 
Intellectual  Property  Organization  has  been  carrying  on  research  on  these  issues. 
Developing  country  participants  in  the  negotiations  must  study  the  WIPO Copyright 
Treaty  and  the  WIPO Performances  and  Phonograms  Treaty,  adopted  in  December 
1996. Developing and Asian economies may be subjected to some pressure to sign these 
Treaties during the next Round. It will serve the former well not to include IPRS in the 
next Round and relegate the negotiations  to an indefinite future date. 

A major concern of many developing countries is that they do not at present have 
adequate technological  expertise to meaningfully negotiate a multilateral agreement. If 
they  still go ahead,  they  may  end up  assuming commitments which  they  can neither 
understand  nor  implement.  It is  best  for  them to  agree  to  continue  the standstill on 
protection  and defer multilateral negotiation to sometime in the future. If a majority of 
WTO Members feel the need for an agreement, it may be put in place, but it should not 
be part of a single undertaking requiring developing country participation. 
v.  BEYOND THE BUILT-IN AGENDA: POTENTIAL ISSUES 

Beyond  these  two major,  and  already agreed  areas which  could help  initiate  the 

AGENDA  FOR THE  NEXT WTO ROUND 

75 1 

next Round of MTNS, there are several significant areas and issues waiting to be taken 
up as Agenda items. First, consultations were underway on rules of origin during 1999 
and 2000. Second, some WTO Members had suggested the inclusion of environment, 
competition,  and  investment  during  the  last  two  Ministerial Conferences,  although 
there is so far no consensus on this.10 Third, suggestions were made regarchng inclusion 
of trade facilitation and e-commerce.  Although  the WTO Secretariat started work  on 
these issues, there are again divergent views on whether they should be included in any 
new Round. Fourth, some subjects involve “general review provisions” (see Section III, 
above) mandated under  the Marrakesh Agreement.  Accordmg to the schedule, these 
general reviews were expected to occur starting in 2000. Some of these could be folded 
into  any  new  Round.  Trade-related  intellectual  property  rights  and  trade-related 
investment measures were two important areas of this kind. Finally, there are subjects 
such as industrial tariffs and labour standards that have not been agreed for any kind of 
consideration, but which have been suggested repeatedly by some WTO Members. 

The  above  subject  areas  offer  a  vast  array  of  Agenda  items  for  multilateral 
negotiations to choose from. In some subjects, developing and Asian  economies have 
not evolved a stand. TRIPS is one such important subject. It is not as yet decided whether 
to  include  it  in  the  wider  array of issues  for  the  next  Round.  On other  issues, the 
developing and Asian economies have a choice ofwhether or not to support multilateral 
negotiations on the subject. They also have to choose whether to do so in a separate and 
parallel negotiation, or combine the negotiations in a “single undertalung”. It is natural 
that,  based on the net benefits criteria, different countries and country groups would 
certainly have  asymmetric and varying degrees of interest  and  commitment  in  these 
topics. For the next Round of MTNS to start, it is  necessary to reach some consensus 
among the Members of the WTO regarding the desirability of negotiations in each one 
of these areas. 

Some of the most important areas for chscussion are presented and analysed below. 
As  it was pointed out in Section II that too many issues will severely tax the negotiating 
skills and institutional capacity of the developing and Asian economies, the number of 
proposed issues has been kept herein to a manageably low level. To be sure, the number 
of issues should be meaningfully small, but there should be a critical mass to justify a full 
Round of MTNS. Only the vitally important ones are being proposed here for the next 
WTO Round. 

A.  The WTO and  System Strengthening 

Although creation of the WTO was not visualized when the Uruguay Round was 
launched, the possibility ofits creation emerged during the negotiations. It was a system- 
strengthening measure. Its establishment has generated some controversies. They range 

lo  The First Ministerial Conference of the WTO was held in December 1996 in Singapore, and the Second in 

May  1998 in Geneva. 

752 

THE  

from concern about national sovereignty (particularly in India and the United States) to 
concern about whether the WTO can integrate international trade disciplines on goods, 
services, and intellectual property, given the possibility of cross-retaliation with the new 
dispute settlement procedures agreed to under the Uruguay Round. 

an  antithesis-of 

The “single undertaking”  clause or all-or-nothing  approach  (noted in  Section  11, 
above) adopted to implement the decisions of the Uruguay Round, in which countries 
must  accept  the  results  of  the  Round  without  exception,  is  a  strong  discipline- 
strengthening  approach.  It  was very  different-almost 
the approach 
adopted during the Tokyo Round, which was menu-driven.  That approach had some 
soft  spots because  it  allowed  countries  to  accede  to  some  codes  but  not  to  others 
(Whalley, 1996). Long before the creation of the WTO, Jackson  (1989) had posited his 
strong and oft-cited  thesis on restructuring and strengthening the global trading system. 
The structure of the WTO agreed under the Uruguay Round came remarkably close to 
the one posited  by  him.  He, inter alia, proposed  a new draft charter for a global trade 
institution  that  imposed  few  substantive  obligations  but  would  apply  them  on  a 
definitive,  rather  than  provisional basis. Jackson  believed  that  the  major benefit  from 
pursuing  such  an  arrangement  was  the  coherence  that  would  be  embohed  by  the 
organization under its constitution,  clear mandate, and orderly rules for its Secretariat. 
Globalization is  one of the key forces that are pushing for a further expansion  of 
the WTO mandate, particularly in the policy-coverage  dimension. A growing share of 
gross domestic  product  is  being  traded  by  an increasing number of economies.  This 
endeavour  involves  not  only  transnational  corporations  but  also  medium-sized 
corporations  and sometimes  small firms in both industrial  and developing economies. 
These enterprises are increasingly spreadmg their activities, such as sourcing, marketing, 
and  investment,  across national  boundaries.  It is  widely  felt  that  the  WTO discipline 
reflects  these  and  other  modern  commercial  realities.  In  addition,  as  globalization 
progresses  and  economies  become  more  intertwined,  there  is  an  increased  risk  that 
tradmg partners  will  be  affected by  spillovers from  ostensibly domestic policies. This 
makes it imperative to strengthen and expand WTO’S mandate. 

The mandate given to the WTO is expanded in Article III  of the WTO Agreement, 

which spells out the five hnctions of the WTO: 

-  to administer and implement the multilateral and plurilateral trade agreements 

- 
- 
- 
- 

that together make up the WTO; 
to act as a forum for multilateral trade negotiations; 
to administer arrangements for the settlement of disputes; 
to review national trade policies; and 
to co-operate  with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank with 
a view to achieving greater coherence in global economic policy-making. 

A  strengthened  and  extended  dispute  settlement provision,  the system of regular 
trade policy reviews, and co-operation  with the other supranational bodies were three 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

753 

of the most significant innovations of the Uruguay  Round. These have resulted in a 
much-strengthened  WTO, which  in turn  can  be  taken  for  the  principal institutional 
innovation of the Uruguay Round. 

There is no apparent and pressing need for substantial institutional improvements 
in the WTO at this stage. None of the WTO  Members have sought any fundamental 
change in the new institution. However, the U.S. and Canadian delegations proposed 
an initiative to “consider how to improve the transparency of WTO operations”, which 
cannot be  called a fundamental  change.  The  transparency these  two  countries  have 
asked for goes beyond  Article x of the  GATT, which  requires transparency related to 
trade-related policies and practices of governments. It further implies notitjring the WTO 
regarding developments in environmental and labour policies. Criticism has also been 
expressed on such issues as the slow-moving procedures for accession to the WTO, lack 
of substance in the role of the Council for Trade in Goods, and the level of minimum 
budget contribution payable by countries with small shares in world trade. To be sure, 
some  of  these  problems  could  be  overcome  by  appropriate  administrative changes 
(Blackhurst, 1998; Croome, 1998). 

B.  Restraining Dumping Abuses 

By far the most controversial and problem-ridden Uruguay Round Agreement was 
on  anti-dumping  measures. Lindsey  et  al.  (1999) consider it  “the major  flaw in  the 
WTO”. Anti-dumping  rules became one of the central issues of the Tokyo Round and 
subsequently in the Uruguay Round, and lack of agreement among countries on anti- 
dumping  reforms  threatened  the  success of the  Round. At  present  it  is  possible  for 
countries  to  block  “dumped”  imports  in  an  entirely WTO-consistent  manner,  even 
when the foreign producers whose goods are targeted are engaged in perfectly normal 
business practices that do not meet any plausible definition of “unfair trade”.  Lindsey 
(1 999) presents numerous  examples of ways  in which  anti-dumping  laws in industrial 
economies punish normal business practices. 

Anti-dumping  abuses are becoming an increasingly serious problem for the global 
tradmg system. The recent alarming increase in the number  of anti-dumping  actions 
pursued by both industrial and developing economies has caused considerable concern 
among  economists, trade  reformers, and policy-makers.  The Uruguay  Round Anti- 
Dumping  Agreement  lays  down  regulations regarding how governments  which  use 
anti-dumping measures should establish the existence of dumping and damage, or threat 
of damage, to domestic producers.  It goes further and prescribes procedures for anti- 
dumping investigations and for the imposition or termination  of anti-dumping  duties. 
As the Anti-Dumping  Agreement was finalized somewhat hastily during the dying days 
of  the  Uruguay  Round,  a  number  of  concessions were  made  to  the  views  of  the 
industrial economies. However, the Agreement is fully in effect for all WTO Members 
and there is no provision for its general review. 

754 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The so-called  “screwdriver  plants”  and  their  output is  a chestnut  in  this  regard. 
Industrial economies  agree  that  when  such  plants  carry out the final assembly in the 
importing  country  or  a  third  country  to  circumvent  tariffs,  the  importing  country 
should be allowed anti-dumping  action against their products. While it was agreed that 
universally  accepted  rules  on  “anti-circumvention’’  action  were  desirable  and  that 
discussion should continue in the Anti-Dumping  Committee, no time-frame was set for 
this  (Clarida,  1996). Even  the  First Ministerial  Conference in  Singapore set no work 
programme for anti-dumping  apart from an effort to improve notifications.  The anti- 
circumvention  issue  may  be  raised  in  the  “Millenium  ROUII~” by  the  industrial 
economies. 

Croome  (1998) pointed  out  that  the pattern  of use  of anti-dumping  action  has 
shifted significantly in the recent past.  The Anti-Dumping  Agreement  was negotiated 
when almost all anti-dumping  measures were imposed by the industrial economies.  In 
the past, it was the “sin” of the industrial countries-in 
particular of Canada, the EU, 
and the United States. There has been a striking change in this trend. Oflate, developing 
and  Asian  economies  have  taken  to  imposing  anti-dumping  measures.  In  1996 and 
1997, developing countries accounted for seventeen out of twenty-three  notifications 
of anti-dumping  actions to the WTO. The list of users was a roll call of the developing 
countries  most  active  in  the  WTO. It  included  Argentina,  Brazil,  Chile,  Colombia, 
India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, the Philippines,  Singapore, Thailand 
and Venezuela. Several of the actions taken  were against suppliers in other developing 
countries. 

An interesting turn of events in this regard is that at present U.S. corporations are 
divided over the anti-dumping  issue. While some corporations  (particularly large steel 
producers)  still  prefer  rules  that  would  allow  easier  introduction  of  anti-dumping 
measures, other corporations having strong export interest  (as well as performance) are 
aware of the risk  that weaker  rules would expose  them to greater  risk in their  export 
markets.  Another  new  element  in  the  situation  is  that  the  WTO is  now  discussing 
competition issues and might one day negotiate on them. Hong Kong, China and Korea 
have pointed out that effective rules could make anti-dumping  action superfluous. All 
these  new  elements  are  bound  to  affect  the  outlook  for  any  future  multilateral 
negotiations on the anti-dumping  rules, 

During  the  Seattle  Round,  the  U.S.  delegation  was  dead  set  against  any 
rationalization of WTO anti-dumping  rules. Among other things, it ignored the interests 
of its own exporters, who were being injured by foreign  anti-dumping  action in their 
markets.  Experience  of  the  last  five  years  shows  that  anti-dumping  measures  have 
enormous potential for abuse and non-transparency.  In the next Round an overhaul of 
the  WTO Anti-Dumping  Agreement  is  called  for,  and  imposition  of  meaningful 
restrictions on protectionist abuse is badly needed. An important measure in this regard 
is to redefine  “dumping” so that anti-dumping  duties are imposed only when market- 
distorting practices such as trade barriers or subsidies in the exporting markets are clearly 

AGENDA FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

755 

identified. Therefore, WTO discipline must be tightened in this area. To be sure, such 
tightening holds promise for improving market-access condtions in both developed and 
developing countries. 

C.  Market Access and  Tunis 

The fundamental rationale of all trade negotiations was-and 

continues to be-to 

improve  market  access  by  bringing  down  tariff  barriers  and  bindng  them.  These 
objectives were the ruison d’Ctre  of all the MTNS since the inception of the GATT/WTO 
system  half  a  century  ago  down  to  the  Tokyo  Round.  In  the  First  Ministerial 
Conference in Singapore in 1996, Ministers renewed their commitment to progressive 
liberalization and elimination of tariffi and non-tariff barriers to trade in goods, but did 
not  include tariff reduction  in the  long list  of subjects on wluch  they agreed to start 
working,  perhaps  because  the  tariff  reductions  on  industrial  products  agreed  upon 
during the Uruguay Round were being brought into force, mahng it unnecessary to 
add  it  to the  list.  The MFN tariff-reduction  process  entailed reduction  in  five equal 
annual instalments, the last one of which was to be made on 1 January 1999. Again, as 
a result of the three recent sectoral Agreements, the MFN tariff is being brought down 
in  many  countries.  This  is  particularly  applicable  to  the  Information  Technology 
Agreement reached in July 1997. 

Some sectoral  negotiations, both  of the  regional  and  global  variety,  were  also  in 
progress.  For  instance,  the  Asia-Pacific  Economic  Co-operation  Council  (APEC) 
economies, committed to their brand of “open regionahsm”, had identified fifeen product 
categories  as  canddates  for  early  voluntary  trade  liberahzation.  Of  these,  nine  were 
considered priority areas  for commencing liberahation.  At  the  same  time,  tariffs were 
being scaled down in Europe. Ths was being done under bilateral agreements between 
the EU economies on the one side and the transition economies of Eastern Europe on the 
other. The EU economies were also undertalung a similar exercise with the economies of 
the  Association  of  South-East  Asian  Nations.  Ths  is  certainly  not  an  exhaustive 
enumeration of tariff reduction endeavours that were in progress during this period. 

With  the  contemporary regional,  sub-regional,  and  sectoral initiatives on  tariff 
reduction one may be seized by the futility of any such future exercise. This impression 
is  incorrect  because,  first,  most  observers  concur  that  a  broad-based  and  balanced 
Round of MTNs cannot possibly ignore tariff reduction. Even after the Uruguay Round 
Agreements are  implemented, by  which  time  tariffi  on manufactured goods will be 
down  to  very  low  levels,  there  will  be  sufficient  scope  for  tariff  reduction  on 
manufactured and non-manufactured goods. High  tariffs  still impede trade, and tariff 
spikes continue to a!Zect  a  number  of sectors, both  in industry and agriculture. High 
tariff lines with spikes are to be found in both industrial and developing economies. In 
the industrial country markets, numerous tariff spikes are present in products of interest 
to developing country exporters. The number of tariff lines with spikes was  hgher in 

756 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

agriculture than in industry. Before the launch of the  Seattle Ministerial Conference, 
during the  preparatory  phase,  both  developing and industrial Members of the WTO 
called for new negotiations on market access and tariffs. 

Low tariffs, such as those below 3 percent, also create a nuisance to trade. Nuisance 
tariffs  are not  likely to provide any significant protection for domestic industries, but 
have  high  domestic  administrative costs.  Sometimes these  costs  are  higher  than  the 
revenue generated. They are known to generate lengthy admmistrative procedures and 
burdens to traders. They not  only hamper efficient trade flows but also have costs. In 
addition  to  focusing  on  tariff-slashing,  the  next  Round  may  devote  its  energy  to 
harmonisation that would reduce tariff spikes and escalation. 

Many developing economies, particularly those in Latin America, have managed to 
keep a large gap between applied and bound tariffs. The latter are much higher than the 
former. If this gap is reduced-even 
better, eliminated-it  will contribute to improving 
the predictability of market access. In adhtion, bringng the bound tariffs down would 
provide the developing and Asian  economies some bargaining chps, without  any loss 
of  revenue  or  domestic  protection.  The  next  Round  can  also  be  useful  from  the 
perspective of domestic trade policy.  Developing and Asian  economies may  use  it as 
leverage against domestic interest groups that resist tariff reduction. 

The  average  trade-weighted  MFN tariffs  facing  developing  country  exports  of 
manufactures in the OECD markets, although small in absolute terms (3.4 percent), tends 
to be  almost four  times as  high  as  those faced by  other OECD countries (Hertel and 
Martin, 1999). As  industrial products make up almost three-quarters  of the exports of 
developing countries and are of importance to practically all of them except the Sub- 
Saharan  countries, advancing negotiations in  this area  during the  next Round would 
offer an  opportunity to slash  tariffs,  particularly to address the  continuing problem of 
tariff spikes. 

In order to  have tariffs  slashed  in  the  industrial country markets on products  of 
interest to developing country exporters, developing and Asian  economies would need 
to improve access to their own markets. Their own applied tariffs are not only higher 
than those in the industrial country markets but also have a greater degree of dspersion. 
The newest trend in trade is that developing country exports of manufactures to other 
developing countries are on the rise. Except for Latin American economies, developing 
economies have not bound a significant proportion of their industrial tariffs. Even those 
that have bound, have opted for “ceiling bindings”, with bound rates much higher than 
applied rates. The ideal approach for tariff slashing in the next Round would be to adopt 
a  greater proportional reduction for higher bound tariff rates  in both  developing and 
industrial economies (as was  discussed  in Section III.A, above). High tariff spikes exist 
not only in  agricultural product  groups but also in textiles and clothing; footwear and 
leather  products;  and  some  automotive  and 
transport  equipment  products 
(UNCTAD/WTO, 1997). These products and product groups are of great significance to 
exporters in several developing and Asian economies. 

AGENDA FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

757 

A mutually beneficial approach can be adopted in which developing and industrial 
countries exchange tariff concessions. On their part, developing countries may reduce 
ceiling bindings and some applied tariffs, while industrial economies may hrther slash 
tariffs  on industrial products for  developing country products and  bring a  significant 
reduction in the spike tariff rates.  This line of negotiations is  doubly beneficial to the 
developing and Asian economies, and could result in welfare gains of a high order, while 
also liberalizing the trade regimes in the developing and Asian economies and stabilizing 
them by bindmg more products. In addition, they would benefit from increased market 
access in the industrial economies (Michalopoulos, 1999). 

D.  Textiles and Apparel 

Inclusion of trade in textiles and apparel within  the ambit of the WTO regme is 
widely considered a major achevement of the Uruguay Round.  This is an important 
area  for the developing economies in general and Asian  economies in particular. The 
transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothng (1994) reached during the Uruguay 
Round Qd not promise a great deal in absolute terms, but it did achieve a lot relative 
to  the  past.  The Multifibre Arrangement was  considered  “the mother  of  all GATT- 
inconsistent  measures”  (Martin  and  Winters,  1996).  Under  the  1994  Textiles 
Agreement, all WTO Members committed that  come the year 2004, the MFA, which 
dated from 1974,11 will cease to operate. The ten-year period between  1994 and 2004 
was  divided into  sub-periods  during which  growth  rates  in MFA growth-rate  quotas 
were to be elevated, and products were to be progressively taken out of the coverage of 
the MFA. It is because of this schedule that textiles and apparel has adopted a low profile 
as an issue for the next Round. 

A significant achievement of the transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothing 
is  that it adopted the goal of tariff-only  restraints on trade in these products. As  in the 
Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture, the  implementation of this  Agreement 
needs  careful monitoring.  The three-yearly  review  of  1998 showed  that  very  little 
progress  was  achieved in  dsmantling protection  (Anderson,  1999). Therefore,  even 
more effort is required to minimize further slippage-particularly  when China joins in. 
There were some built-in problems with the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing 
which did not surface until the implementation began. If one examines the fine print of 
the Agreement, tariffs are not going to be the key constraint on trade fast  enough  to 
make  quotas  redundant  by  the  end  of  the  transition  decade.  Hertel  ef al.  (1996) 
calculated that  by  the year  2005  the  quotas would  have  increased by  about  half  the 
amount necessary for them to become redundant. If so, tariffication would require the 

11 In reality, restrictions on textiles and apparel exports date back to the 1930s. Protectionist measures included 
high tariff protection  and some voluntary restraints on exports, notably against Japan. A Short-Term Arrangement 
(STA) in the cotton textile trade was reached in 1961 at the initiative of the United States and under the auspices of 
the General Agreement on Tarif& and Trade. A Long-Term Arrangement Regarding International Trade in Cotton 
and Textiles (LTA) was then concluded in 1962 by imposing a 5 percent growth h i t  on imports of cotton products 
and placing a large share of developing country exports under a trade regime. 

758 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

other half of the increase to occur at the end of the ten-year  transition period, that is, 
on  31  December  2004.  This  raises  questions  about  the  political  commitments  to 
implementation. So  far, there is  no indication that the  major importing countries are 
d i n g  to liberalize MFA quotas in a reasonable manner in the next tranche, which is 
scheduled for 31 December 2002. Doing so would decisively prove helpful in meeting 
the Agreement goals in 2004 (Spinanger, 1999). Besides, the transitional Agreement on 
Textiles and Clothing specifies nothing about what might or might not happen beyond 
2004. Textiles and apparel as a sector is  going to return to the WTO discipline, which 
need  not  mean  that  free trade  will prevail in  the  future.  Developing countries have 
apprehensions whether textiles and apparel WLU  become  open  to  dumping action by 
industrial countries (Whalley, 1999). 

The transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothing reached during the Uruguay 
Round has  nothing  in  its  text  that  gives  rise  to  new  negotiations in  the  immediate 
future, but it does have a provision for reviews before the end of each of its three phases 
of implementation. The first such review, which was completed in 1998, showed that 
very little progress had been made up until then. The developing countries felt that the 
importing  countries,  in  particular  Canada,  the  EU  and  the  United  States,  had 
completely disregarded the spirit of the Agreement by  applying its letter in ways that 
have  brought  about  little  or  no  liberalization  so  far.  Some  industrial  economies, 
includlng the above-named ones, have supplemented the effects of repealed quotas by 
unjustified anti-dumping actions as well as  restrictive rules of origin  (Croome, 1998). 
Textile-  and apparel-exporting  countries are concerned  that  so much  of the  agreed- 
upon  MFA liberalization measures have been  left for  the  final years  of  the  transition 
period so that full integration of trade in textiles and apparel in the WTO regime may 
never  be  achieved.  However,  the  importing  industrial economies hsagree  with  the 
exporting  economies  on  these  issues.  They  are  sure  of  meeting  the  deadlines  by 
1 January 2005. On their part, the industrial countries complain of the level of tariff and 
non-tariff  barriers  on  imports  of  textiles  and  apparel  maintained  in  the  developing 
economies, particularly in the Asian economies. 

The  MFA is  one  area  in  which  the  opinions  of  developing  economies are  in 
complete unison in the WTO. Twenty-three exporting economies are Members of the 
International Textiles and Clothing Bureau, a body through which they co-ordmated 
their position in the textiles negotiations during the Uruguay Round. During the last 
review  of  the  Agreement  in  the  WTO Council  for  Goods, the  Bureau  presented  a 
cogent, unified  case.  Representatives of Colombia, Hong Kong,  China  and  Palustan 
made  forceful  statements  on  behalf  of  the  exporters.  This  show  of  solidarity  is 
indispensable for the exporting developing countries. An  additional apprehension the 
exporting  countries have  is  that  the  importing  countries may  increasingly resort  to 
changes in rules of origin (see Section v.K, below), anti-dumping action, and measures 
supposedly introduced to protect the environment and labour standards as substitutes for 
present quantitative restrictions. 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO  ROUND 

759 

Since the MFA covers a wide range of products (cotton, synthetic fibres, wool, silk, 
and  ramie)  and  a  large  number  of  countries,  one  can  expect  that  the  impact  of 
dismantling it will be significant. Importing countries will benefit fiom lower import 
prices due to abolition of quota rent. After MFA is dismantled, importers can source from 
the most efficient exporters. Import competition will also improve resource allocation. 
The exporting countries that have comparative advantages in textiles and apparel will 
benefit because they will be able to expand their exports. The MFA quotas will no longer 
restrict the exports of competitive  producers. At  the same time,  the less-competitive 
exporters, which were able to export only due to their MFA quotas, will soon lose their 
market shares. It should, however, be noted that exporting countries would face lower 
prices after the dismantling of the MFA. Thus viewed, eliminating the MFA would lead 
to enhancement of global welfare. 

Two recent developments have buttressed the case of broaching MFA-related issues 
and re-negotiating and broadening the transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothing 
in the next  Round.  Since its signing in  1994, several important transformations have 
occurred in the pattern of trade in textiles and apparel. Two of the most important ones 
are,  first, that  there  has  been  a tremendous  growth  in  regional trade  in  textiles  and 
apparel, particularly among the major importers-the  EU and the United States. Much 
of this trade is free of quota restraint, which is the characteristic of the MFA. There has 
been  a rapid growth  in  imports in  the  United  States from  Mexico  under  the North 
American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA), which  has  developed  according  to  the 
NAFTA rules, not according to the MFA quotas. Textiles and apparel imports have also 
grown from Jamaica and the Dominican Republic under the Caribbean Basin Initiative, 
under  transformation  rules.  Likewise,  the  Central  European  countries  (the  Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovalua) have increased their textiles and 
apparel exports to the EU economies. This trade is also free of quota restraint and has 
grown rapidly. This regional trade growth has  built a  constituency among a subset of 
exporting countries which  now finds itself more favourable to the MFA. Expansion of 
regional  trade  has  also  weakened  the  generalized  opposition  to  the  MFA from  the 
exporting developing economies. 

The second material transformation  is  that  the pattern  and direction of trade in 
textiles and  apparel has  undergone  several changes. Some two decades ago,  Korea, 
Taiwan  and Hong Kong accounted  for almost 60 percent of all developing country 
exports in these products. These exports were growing rapidly and they were tightly 
constrained by the MFA. Consequently, quota-hopping  foreign investment took place 
in ASEAN economies, which  also began to face the tight quota constraints over time. 
These two country groups were  the most dynamic  exporters  of textiles and apparel 
and were  the  source  of strong pressure to  dismantle the  MFA. The scenario in  the 
1990s was  markedly  different.  By  the  late  1990s, it  was  China  that  accounted  for 
60 percent of total exports of textiles and apparel from the developing economies, and 
China  was  not  a  Member  of  the  WTO. The  exporting  developing  and  Asian 

760 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

economies  resent  MFA quotas in the  important OECD countries less now because it 
provides them with selected markets. Besides, the most dynamic exporters of the past 
are now left with unused and unfilled MFA quotas because many of them have moved 
up the technology  and growth ladder, and textiles and apparel is not as important an 
item  of export  as  it  was  in the past.  Their comparative  advantage  now is  in higher 
electronics  and  higher  technology  products.  This  has  reduced  the  pressure  for 
dismantling the MFA quotas from the former dynamic exporters of textiles and apparel 
(Whalley, 1999). 

By the year 2000, South Asia has become a large exporter  of textiles and apparel. 
India became the second largest shipper after China, and Pakistan and Bangladesh have 
significant exports in this product category. Pressure for full implementation  of the MFA 
now comes from these countries.  O f  these countries, Bangladesh falls in the category of 
least-developed  countries;  therefore,  it  is  free  from  quota  restraints in  the  EU.  This 
made Canada and the United States the principal focus of exporting countries’ drive to 
implement the transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothing. 

Yet another reason why textiles and clothing is assuming a low profile for the next 
Round is  the recent conflicts among the exporting developing countries.  Of late, there 
have  been  complaints  from  some  exporting  countries  against  China  and  India 
subsidizing  exports  and  production,  respectively.  These  two  large  exporters  are 
providing  subsidies  through  pricing  of  petrochemicals  and  synthetics,  respectively. 
There have also been disputes among the exporting developing countries over access to 
each  other’s  markets.  All  this  is  breaking  down  the  old  unity  of stance  among the 
developing economies on textiles and apparel exports. 

Why textiles and apparel has  assumed a low profile  as  an issue to be raised during 
the next Round has been adequately explained. In addition, many industrial economies, 
including the  United States, many not be prepared  to negotiate their  tariff rates until 
2004, although the EU announced in March  1999 that it has no intention of excluding 
the issue of textiles and apparel from the next Round. Therefore, efforts should be made 
by  developing and Asian  economies  to raise MFA-related  issues.  In  order  to improve 
global efficiency in this sector of trade, some of the pressing issues that they should still 
try to open negotiations  on are: 

- 
- 

- 

accelerating the pace of integration; 
expanding  the  base  of  negotiations,  malung  it  more  comprehensive  and 
speedmg up the dismantling process; and 
slashing the higher average tariffs in this category as well as tariff spikes. 

E.  Trade-Reiated Aspects  of  Intellectual Propetty Rights 

Many industrial economies, in particular  the United States, have endeavoured for 
stronger  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  through  bilateral,  regional,  and 
multilateral  actions.  The  United  States has  been  concerned  about  the  international 

AGENDA FOR THE  NEXT WTO ROUND 

761 

infringement  of  IPRS  since  the  early  1980s.  This  concern  reflected  the  strong 
competitive position of U.S. knowledge-based industries (USIA, 1998). As  opposed to 
this,  the  developing and Asian  economies believe that  such protection  will result in 
reduced welfare for them and the global economy as  a whole. They believe that as  a 
public  good,  innovations  have  crucial  characteristics,  namely,  “non-rivalry  in 
consumption and non-exclusion” (Panagariya, 1999). The former implies that the use 
of innovation by  yet another individual does not reduce its availability to the existing 
users.  That is, the marginal social cost of an innovation is zero. Non-exclusion implies 
that  once  an  innovation has  been made,  we  cannot prevent others from using it. As 
innovations have  costs, no  one wants  to  re-invent  the  wheel.  It  is this  public-good 
thinking that is behind the opposition of the developing and Asian economies to certain 
facets of trade-related intellectual property measures. 

Despite  resistance  from  some  developing country  Members  of  the  WTO, the 
United States was  able  to multilateralize the  IPR  issue  during the Uruguay Round. It 
succeeded in doing so because it was clear that having some kind of IPR  regime for the 
United States was a deal breaker for the whole Round. Also, the WTO Members knew 
that, without an agreement on IPRS,  the United States would increase the application of 
“Special 301” to sanction IPR-infringing countries (Taylor, 1997). Developing country 
members believed that the TRIPS Agreement would work as  a deterrent to the use  of 
“Special 301” by the United States. 

The successful conclusion of the  TRIPS Agreement was  heralded by many trade 
analysts  as  a  triumph  of  the  Uruguay  Round.  It  is  also  considered  the  most 
comprehensive and best international agreement on intellectual property to date. It is 
comprehensive in that it has clear provisions on MFN and national treatment clauses, as 
well as on transparency. These are the three important cornerstones to protecting the 
rights of intellectual property holders (Otten and Wager, 1996). The TRIPS Agreement 
extends patent protection for industries critically dependent on strong IPR  regimes. One 
of the most important examples is the pharmaceutical industry. Before the Agreement 
was  signed  in  1994, some  twenty-five  developing countries did  not  respect  patent 
protection for pharmaceutical products. 

The TRIPS Agreement included trade in counterfeit goods. Although it did  not 
promote  a globally applicable standard  OF  IPR protection  immediately, it did lay  the 
foundation for future convergence toward higher standards of protection  on a  global 
scale. Constantly, emerging new technologies have led to the continuous adaptation of 
IPR-protection  instruments.  For  example,  the  evolution  of  IPR  protection  for 
biotechnology  and  its  implications  for  agriculture  and  the  pharmaceutical industry 
represent  important  new  areas  with  high  relevance  for  developing  and  Asian 
economies. Computer software and the dgital environment, such as the Internet, are 
other  important  examples. IPR  regimes are  still in  a  state of flux in  all  these  areas, 
although  some  inchoate  trends  are  emerging.  They  are  being  ratified  by  new 
international  agreements  with  minimum  standards  of  protection,  and  pose  new 

762 

THE  

challenges for the legal systems of the developing and Asian  economies as well as for 
institutions  that  have  played  a  prominent  role  in  the  international  diffusion  of 
knowledge. Therefore,  the TRIPS Agreement provided for a review in the year 2000 
to  “examine  relevant  new  developments  which  might  warrant  modifications  or 
amendment of the Agreement.” 

The  TRIPS Agreement,  as  noted  above,  requires  WTO Members  to  observe 
minimum standards Of  IPK protection. It is a complex legal system, which so far has been 
uncharted  territory for trade-policy  officials. The advantage of its  inclusion in WTO 
regulations is that it is equipped with binlng dispute settlement procedures. Although 
the  TRIPS obligations  were  applied  immediately  to  the  industrial  economies,  the 
developing economies were given a transition period. The Uruguay Round Agreement 
gave developing economies up until January 2000 to apply TRIPS rules, and the patent 
rules will  not  be  applicable until January 2005 to products that  were  not  patentable 
when the Agreement was signed. Policy-makers in the developing countries should pay 
greater  attention  to  strengthening  TRIPS legislation  because  recent  economic  data 
indicate that stronger IPR protection tends to have positive long-term economic benefits 
for the developing economies (Maskus, 1998). 

Developing  economies  are  obliged  to  provide  MFN treatment  and  national 
treatment to other WTO Members in their protection  of intellectual property. While 
they  can  decide  not  to  support patent  protection  for  pharmaceuticals or  agricultural 
chemicals, they do have to allow regstration of patent applications. India failed to do so 
and  invited  a  formal  dispute case  against it  in the  WTO Dispute  Settlement Body. 
Anecdotal evidence shows that a significant number of developing countries have not 
yet been able to adapt their legislation to the Agreement’s minimum standards. During 
1997 and  1998, the  TRIPS Council  was  engaged in research  and  inquiries as  well  as 
negotiations on some specific IPR  issues. It has also reviewed the intellectual property 
legislation of the industrial economies and has plans to conduct similar reviews for the 
developing economies. TRIPS-related  research, deliberations, and negotiations are sure 
to continue in  the future. A  country-by-country  review of TRIPS legislation is  to be 
undertaken soon by the TRIPS Council. 

Several developing and transitional economies have recently asked for an extension 
of the time period for implementation of TRIPS obligations. Canada and the EU &d not 
disagree with their demand. India recently asked for revision of the TRIPS Agreement 
because the In&an government feels that it does not reflect the original objectives of the 
Agreement with respect to transfer of technology. Several African nations are asking for 
a  comprehensive change  in  the  TRIPS Agreement.  A  formal  review  of  TRIPS was 
mandated for the year 2000. This review must be undertaken in the next Round and 
reflect the concerns of the developing and transitional economies. Although a  formal 
review does not have to involve negotiations, developing countnes need to make them 
a part of thc rcvicw and modi!+  the TKIPS Agreement. 

AGENDA  FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

763 

F. 

Subsidies and  Countervailing Measures 

Among the Uruguay Round Agreements, one whose provisions are less stringent 
for  the  developing countries  than  for  the  industrial economies is  the Agreement  on 
Subsidies and Countervailing  Measures. Under  the Agreement,  subsidies intended  to 
improve export performance are “actionable”, but if their motive is to promote research 
and development or to help a disadvantaged region they are permissible. The old dctum 
that a subsidy “threatening and causing injury” to producers in the importing country 
should  be  punishable by  countervailing  measures stays.  Industrial economies  can  no 
longer subsidize their exports. But developing economies with per capita income below 
US$  1,000 are allowed to maintain their  subsidies for an indefinite period.  All  other 
developing countries have to phase out the subsidies by January 2004. Two important 
rules of this Agreement were  scheduled to be reviewed in late  1999. They related to 
subsidies that amount to more than 5 percent of the value of the product, or which are 
given to cover an industry’s operating losses, and the “green” subsidies.12 It was strongly 
felt that these subsidies have trade-distorting effects and must be dismantled (Feketekuty, 
1998). Clarification of the rules on measures and pricing policies that are disguised as 
export subsidies are two of the important outstandng issues that need to be addressed 
in the “Millenium Round”. Although  several glaring deficiencies continue to exist in 
subsichation calculations in anti-subsidy proceedmgs, WTO Members have not evinced 
any interest in new negotiations. They are more concerned with implementation of the 
Agreement  because  a  large  majority  of  them  have  provided  little  implementation- 
related information. 

A subsidy-related issue that was left unresolved during the Uruguay Round was the 
use of export credits. After long-drawn negotiations, it was not brought under export- 
subsidy constraints. The OECD countries  had  negotiated  a code  for  non-agricultural 
export credits which put limits on export credit terms and the length of credit extension. 
Agricultural exports  have  not  been  included  in  this  Agreement,  despite a  Uruguay 
Round  Agreement  undertaking  to  work  towards  internationally  agreed  disciplines. 
Thus, this issue is a natural candidate for inclusion in the next Round. WTO Members 
need to negotiate on the allowable terms for export credit, and hence to calculate the 
magnitude of the subsidy that is involved if and when softer credt terms are offered. 
Subsidy-equivalent calculations have not been easy. One way of resolving this is, having 
calculated the subsidy equivalent, to charge it against the  export-subsidy  limits in the 
agreed schedule for the exporting country. 

Export  subsidies  in  agriculture  (Section  I I I . ~ ,  above)  are  largely  the  policy  of 
developed countries, particularly the EU. A push to rein in export subsides will be high 

‘2  The “green” subsidies or the “green” domestic policies are defined in the Uruguay Round Agreement as 
those which have no or marginal trade distortion. They include, for example, services rendered by  a government 
(research, inspection, stockpiling, domestic food aid). Direct payments to producers are allowed under the “grecn” 
subsidies, but they should be in the form  of income support with no link to production, or as compensation to 
substantial shortfall in income resulting from  natural disasters. The “green”  subsidies are granted  as exceptional 
measures. 

764 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

on the Agenda of the Cairns Group. The United States, which holds significant “rights” 
to export subsidies in the WTO, has made cautious  use of subsidies recently. It will be 
strongly inclined to reduce, if not eliminate, export subsides in the next Round. Only 
ten developing economies committed to slash export subsidies. This does not mean that 
they and others continue subsidizing without limits. If anything, it implies that they may 
not subsidize their exports at all. The only export subsihes that are temporarily allowed 
are those that reduce the cost of marketing exports, and international freight charges on 
export shipments. Thus, the majority of developing and Asian economies stands to gain 
by  having  export  subsides further reduced  in the next  Round.  Cuts in  subsidies will 
improve their competitive situation in international trade, without imposing any further 
constraints on them. 

G.  Safeguards 

Article  XIX  of the  GATT was  on  safeguards,  and  for  nearly  two  decades  it  was 
considered ineffective. There was a serious need for its thorough revision. The Uruguay 
Round  Agreement  on  Safeguards  aims  at  facilitating  structural  adjustment  and  to 
enhance  rather  than  limit  competition  in  global  markets.  Its  basic  rationale  was  to 
address the lack of control over “legitimate”  safeguard measures and the excessive and 
non-transparent  use of distortive grey-area measures. If the Agreement only succeeds in 
controlling such  measures it would  amount  to  an improvement  in  the  safeguard area 
from the point  of view  of  competition  policy.  In  the new Agreement,  a  considerable 
amount of procedural and substantive detail has been introduced, where formerly there 
was  only a  GATT Article containing,  in a  single paragraph,  the basic requirements  for 
applying  a  safeguard measure,  namely,  “serious  injury  or  threat  thereof’  caused  by 
increased  imports.  There  was  no  procedural  requirement  of  an  investigation  to 
determine the existence of “serious injury or threat thereof’.  Procedural rules for such 
an investigation have also been determined. In the absence of such a requirement, there 
was  a  tendency  to  apply  safeguard  measures  where  they  were  not  substantively 
warranted. 

The so-called  grey-area  measures have been banished from the WTO regime. The 
Agreement  represents  a  trade-off  that  outlaws  the  grey-area  measures  and  installs  a 
special mechanism which allows departure from the general MFN rule with particularly 
tight  restrictions  on the most  dynamic  suppliers.  This provision  is  known  as  “quota 
modulation”  and  can  be  applied  easily  and  less  provocatively.  The  Agreement  on 
Safeguards is fully in force, with one exception. A special provision  allowed the EU to 
continue  to  restrict  imports  of Japanese  cars up  until  the  end  of 1999. Although  no 
Member  governments  are  presently  seeking  changes  in  the  Agreement,  developing 
economies, including Asian economies, will continue to keep close surveillance on how 
it is applied (Croome,  1998; Morgan,  1999). Therefore, this issue does not have a high 
priority  for the next Round. 

AGENDA FOR THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

765 

H.  Trade-Related  Investment Measures 

During  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s, the  value  of  sales  by  foreign  affiliates  of 

transnational  corporations  exceeded global  exports  of  goods  and  services  (UNCTAD, 
2000). As a consequence of many changes in the global economy, over the years foreign 
direct investment (FDI) has grown at a rapid clip. Falling costs of communication have 
eased  the  constraints on  global rationalization of production,  leadmg to  ever  greater 
geographic specialization and international splicing of the value chain. FDI has become 
as  important as trade in the conduct of international economic relations.  Increasingly, 
therefore, a  need for multilateral rules on investment was widely felt. Having a set of 
common rules that are not product-specific, but activity-specific would be good for the 
global economy. 

The OECD responded by  launching the  Multilateral Agreement  on  Investment 
(MAI) in  1995, but  it  failed to  take  off largely because  of disagreements among the 
twenty-nine  Members of the OECD. MAI negotiations not  only covered FDI but  also 
technical  know-how  and  portfolio  investment.  Therefore,  many  negotiating 
delegations felt that the MAI would restrict their ability to regulate the flow of portfolio 
investment.  The  MAI  also  faced  popular  opposition  from  non-government 
organizations  on  the  grounds  that  it  sought  excessive  power  for  transnational 
corporations. Subsequently, efforts were made to have an MAI-like agreement under the 
WTO. Polemicists charge that any WTO agreement on investment that  resembles the 
MAI would erode the power of national governments to regulate commercial activities 
within their own borders. A popular target for criticism is a clause in the MAI that would 
allow private businesses to “sue” national governments in the WTO Dispute Settlement 
Body for damage caused by national policies that reduce the value of their investments. 
FDI was  a  major  issue  during  the  Uruguay  Round  negotiations,  although  the 
developing and Asian  economies have historically shown reluctance to provide a right 
of establishment to foreign investors. They consider investment policies a part of their 
economic  development  policies  and  prefer  to  maintain  flexibility  in  this  regard. 
Conversely, the United States took considerable initiative in the negotiations on TRIMS 
during the Uruguay Round. Therefore, TRIMS became a contentious issue and the next 
Round  of negotiations  may  not  yield  a  great  deal. The U.S.  objective has  been  to 
establish  a new  set of regulations prohibiting governments from attaching potentially 
trade-distorting  conmtions  on  FDI. Although  five  trade-distorting  measures  were 
identified, the final outcome of the U.S. endeavours was modest. Industrial economies 
were required to eliminate these trade-distorting measures by January 1997, developing 
economies  by  January  2000,  and  the  least-developed  countries  by  January  2002 
(Croome, 1998). Unlike the developing economies, the industrial economies strongly 
feel that the TRIMS Agreement needs further negotiation. In addtion, any future review 
of the Agreement will need to include consideration of “whether the Agreement wlll 
need  to  include  investment  policy  and  competition  policy”  (TRIMS Agreement, 
Article IX). 

766 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

This  is  a  valuable  negotiating  chip  for  developing  countries,  as  the  industrial 
economies are the  demandeurs in this area of negotiations. Some scholars (Hoekman and 
Saggi, 1999) point  to the possibility of a “ p n d  bargain” for the developing economies. 
Although  there  may  be  signlficant  scope  for  a  large  benefit  as  quid  pro  quo,  a  broad 
investment agreement should be approached carefully by developing and Asian economies. 
A broader Agenda would indeed benefit those developing and Asian economies that face 
domestic resistance in adopting better FDI policies; however, there is a definitive downside. 
Attempts to broaden the Agenda may allow some special groups to seek cross-issue linkages 
in areas such as environmental and labour standards, whch are not core issues for the WTO 
and bear no relationship to its objective of expandmg international trade. 

Given this situation, while there is some rationale for opening up negotiations  on 
TRIMS, none justify  its  re-opening  at  this  time.  Beyond  the  achievements  of  the 
Uruguay Round, there is no pressing need to re-open  TRIMS negotiations  in the next 
Round. Developing  and Asian  economies  should adopt TRIMS negotiations  only as  a 
low-priority  item on their Agenda. Transnational  corporations seeking better access to 
developing country  markets  must be able to offer incentives  to domestic groups  and 
host-country  governments and mobilize them to reconsider or oppose existing restraints 
on FDI. In  future,  when  these  negotiations  are  re-opened,  they  should  build  on  the 
achievements of the Uruguay Round. 

I. 

State Trading 

Whle Article XVII of the GATT stipulated the right of Members to grant special rights 
to a limited number of governmental and non-governmental  enterprises, it also reminds 
Members  that  State tradmg enterprises can  erect significant non-tariff  bamers to trade. 
State trading importers can reduce market access below the levels agreed in the Uruguay 
Round negotiations, and State trading exporters and importers can use “hidden” export 
subsidies to increase market share. State tradmg exporters and importers are also known 
to exploit  their  monopoly  or monopsony  power  (Das, 1991). The potential  for trade 
distortion and the likelihood of the application of non-tariff barriers is highest when State 
trading enterprises benefit from monopoly  import or export rights. 

Governments, through their special rights or privileges, can create trade distortions 
by favouring particular exporters and by  fixing prices. The decision-making  process of 
these enterprises is influenced by government objectives that are not solely in accordance 
with commercial considerations. Present rules applying to State trading are not adequate. 
U d k e  many  other provisions of the WTO that  constitute exceptions  to general rules, 
they  not  only lack the  necessary precision  that would  ensure that  their  enforcement is 
feasible but also do not take into account the implications of new disciplines introduced 
during the last Round of MTNS. During the Uruguay  Round there  was an attempt to 
address the shortcomings of Article XVII, but the Understanding on the Interpretation of 
Article XVII  of GATT  appears to have fallen short of malung the necessary clarifications. 

AGENDA  FOR THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

767 

To  establish the  nature  and  extent  of  trade  dstortions  due  to  State  trading,  a 
Working Party was set up in April 1998 under the Understanding. This Working Party 
examined  notifications  by  the  WTO Members  of  enterprises  covered  by  a  newly 
designed  questionnaire  for  trade-&stortion  notifications.  The  findings  were  to  be 
analysed during  1999 and 2000 by  the Worlung  Party.  Based  on these  findings, the 
Working Party is  to recommend how to ensure MFN and national treatment in State 
trading, as well as consider ways of tightening the disciplines spelled out in Article XVII. 
Use of State trading, albeit declining, is stlll rampant in the developing economies. 
They use  this instrument for controlling domestic markets and to regulate trade. Any 
change in Article XVII in the next Round will have a direct impact on these developing 
economies. Asking for an exemption &om strict regulation in this regard is questionable 
because  it  is  not  in  the  long-term  interests of the  developing and Asian  economies. 
Long-term adoption of State trading is detrimental for growth. It adds to hstortions of 
incentives and sharply reduces efficiency of resource allocation (Das, 1991). As  a short- 
term measure they can seek “special and differential treatment” provisions of the WTO, 
but  in the medium-term  it is  best  to take initiatives in dismantling their State trading 
enterprises and adopt the WTO dxipline in this regard. 

J.  Dispute Settlement Provisions 

The central institutional feature of the WTO is its &spute settlement process. At the 
end of WTO dispute settlement procedures, if all else f d s ,  lie multilaterally approved 
trade sanctions. The Dispute Settlement Understandmg ( D s u ) ~ ~  
is a binding treaty. This 
is  a  welcome measure toward  a  more rule-oriented  system that is  expected to  allow 
better adjustment of friction between Nation-States as well as greater predictability and 
reliability for traders. However, it has come under criticism from various quarters. Some 
of  its  rules  and  procedures  have  been  seriously castigated  (Cameron and  Campbell, 
1 997). 

Overall the  1995-1999 period, the number  of consultations sought by  Members 
quadrupled. These consultations played a central role in dispute settlement. Of the one 
hundred and thrty-eight  consultation requests made up until 30 June  1998, seventy- 
two were not brought  before a panel.  Thus, more than half of the cases were settled 
through consultations (Panagariya, 2000). Developing countries were active participants 
in  this  process.  They  not  only  brought  cases  against  industrial  economies, but  also 
against other developing economies. In addition, the rate of compliance has been high. 
This applies to both cases against developing and industrial economies. 

Although  there  has  been  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  number  of  consultations, 
developing and Asian economies feel themselves at a disadvantage in dispute settlement 
proceedmgs, particularly if  the  opposing party  is  the  United  States or  the  EU.  The 
developing and Asian  economies feel at a disadvantage because of the technical nature 

13 See Article XXVI  and Annex 2 of the WTO Agreement. 

768 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

of disputes. They are neither able to present their cases forcefully nor defend themselves 
adequately.  The  industrial  economies  are  far  better  equipped,  both  legally  and 
technically. They can not only call  on an array of legal  experts, but also  the technical 
support of corporations often involved in the disputes. 

A decision was taken at the end of the Uruguay Round, in April 1994, regarding 
a  complete review of the DSU. A meeting of the Dispute Settlement Body in March 
1998 also agreed that WTO Members should submit written suggestions regarding the 
issues and rules that should be taken up for negotiations. The DSU review identified five 
issues: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

the operation of the surveillance function; 
the professionalization of dispute settlement panels; 
the problem of developing country Member participation in the system; 
transparency and accession issues; and 
the adequacy of resources available to the WTO for processing disputes. 

These issues can be taken up for negotiations in the next Round. 

K.  Rules of  Origin 

This  issue  has  introduced  an  element  of  uncertainty  in  international  trade. 
Therefore, several guilng principles were agreed upon  by  WTO Members regarding 
rules of origin during the Uruguay Round. Even small trading Members are interested 
in  establishng harmonized  rules  of origin because  they  will  successfully  eliminate a 
favoured instrument for protectionist action. Developing country  exporters recognize 
that  they  have  substantial  trade  interests  at  stake;  therefore,  they  prefer  to  have  a 
definitive set of rules of origin. As alluded to earlier (see Section v.D, above), these rules 
are  of  particular  interest  to  the  textile  and  apparel  exporters  who  frequently  face 
problems on this  count.  Imprecision in  these rules  can be  used  as  substitutes for the 
quantitative restrictions that are being phased out under the Agreement on Textiles and 
Clothing (Croome, 1998). 

As regards the guiding principles, a consensus was  arrived at that these rules must 
be objective, prehctable, coherent, and based on positive standards. An export product 
should be considered as originating fiom a country where it was wholly produced; or, 
if  more  than  one  country  was  associated  with  its  production,  where  it  was  last 
substantially  produced.  As  this  appeared  somewhat  simplistic,  development  and 
adoption of a single set of harmonised rules of origin was  considered necessary.  This 
work was  being done by  the Technical Committee on Rules of Origin of the World 
Customs Organization. This has been underway for some time and may or may not be 
completed  before  the  next  Round  starts.  Developing  countries  need  to  request 
relaxation of the stringent rules of origin applied to the textiles and apparel sector. Many 
of them find rules of origin being used as a hidden non-tariff barrier in this sector. Many 

AGENDA FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

769 

industrial economies tend  to impose stringent process requirements in their  national 
rules-of-origin  laws. 

VI.  ONGOING 

ISSUES 

As  a  follow up  to the  Uruguay Round, work  was  started in  the  following four 

subject areas in the WTO: 

trade and investment or FDI; and 

-  trade and the environment; 
-  trade and competition; 
- 
-  trade facilitation. 
At present, none of these areas are being covered by multilateral trade negotiations 
in a substantive manner. The first two issues are virtual intruders into the trade arena 
and, therefore, developing and Asian  economies should ignore them. However, work 
has progressed sufficiently on the latter two subjects, and they should be taken up for 
serious review in the next Round. 

VII. REPLACING THE  “GREEN ROOM” 

The WTO operates by consensus, but the consensus-building process has broken 
down. This problem had already reached significant proportions before the failure of 
Seattle. The “Green Room” process of evolving consensus has been much maligned 
because many consider it the biggest contributing factor behind the failure at Seattle. 
The  “Green  Room”  was  functional  and  worthwhile  when  GATT was  a  small 
organization, but it is unsuitable for the WTO given its current Imensions, diversity, 
and mandate. The WTO is  a much larger organization, and the  “Green Room” has 
been  left  behind  by  the  rapid  expansion  of  global  trade.  It  should,  therefore,  be 
abandoned. 

The “Green Room” should be replaced by a small, informal steering committee of 
it C-20. Schott and Watal(2000) have made a very similar suggestion. This 
twenty-call 
steering committee should be charged with developing consensus on trade issues among 
the  Member  countries.  This  group  would  not  be  seen  by  the  WTO Members  as 
undercutting existing WTO rights and obligations because Members themselves would 
create  it.  The  steering  committee  would  contribute  to  inclusive,  efficient  and 
transparent  decision-malung,  although  each  Member  would  maintain  the  ultimate 
decision to accept or reject such a pact. 

Membership of this  steering committee  should be  based  on broad  participation 
among WTO Members.  Clear, simple and objective criteria should determine it. For 
instance: 

-  absolute value of foreign trade (defined as exports plus imports); 

770 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL.  PROPERTY 

-  global geographical representation (with at least  two  participants from each 

region). 

Given the above criteria, the four Members of the Quad (Canada, the EU, Japan, 
and the United States) would be the most significant Members of the C-20. The other 
possible  Members  would  be  chosen  from  Hong  Kong,  the  Republic  of  Korea, 
Singapore,  Switzerland,  Mexico,  Malaysia,  Australia,  Thailand,  Brazil,  Norway, 
Indonesia, India, Turkey, Poland, South Afixa, the  Czech Republic, the Philippines, 
and Argentina. Indeed, the People’s Republic of China should be added to this list after 
it becomes a Member of the WTO. 

Under the world-trade-share criterion, a large number of the current Green Room 
participants  would  continue,  which  includes  important  Asian  and  Latin-American 
developing economies. However, some of the regions, notably Sub-Saharan Africa, the 
Andean Community, the  Caribbean, and Central America would not be represented. 
Therefore, a pre-agreed  number  of seats on the  C-20  would have to be reserved for 
these under-represented regions. To be sure, there would be competition for the reserve 
slots. Some countries would qualifj. simply because of their dominant trade share; others 
would have to co-ordmate with other trading partners to ensure that their cumulative 
trade passes the bar. 

Groups of countries, based on present regional arrangements or formed on an ad hoc 
basis,  would  be  encouraged to  pool  resources and  share representation. The Nordic 
countries followed this practice during the  GATT regime.  Several developing country 
groupings  also  work  on  these  lines.  The  Mercosur  and  the  Caribbean  Regional 
Negotiating Machinery are two good examples. These groups would be voluntary and 
would select their representatives for participating in the negotiations on their behalf 
An arrangement like this would in no way impede issue-based  alliances among different 
groups.  For  instance, the  Cairns  Group  on agriculture might  find support among a 
sizable share of the C-20  delegates (Schott and Watal, 2000). The idea of a group of 
countries being represented by one of them in an international organization is an old 
one.  The International Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank  and  regonal  development 
banks have all successfully followed it for decades. 

VIII.  SUMMING UP 

The dexterity and clairvoyance with which an Agenda for the next WTO Round 
of MTNS is crafted will determine the rhythm of world trade in the twenty-first century. 
There  is  an  imperious need  for  it  to  be  a  balanced Agenda,  squarely  reflecting the 
interests and concerns of the industrial and the developing countries. Whlle the Quad 
countries dominate global trade, the developing economies dominate the WTO in terms 
of sheer numbers. Therefore, a lack of balance will not  only imperil the next Round 
but also any future MTNS. The time period of the Round should be fixed at three years 
and it should take up a relatively small number of issues so that it does not severely tax 

AGENDA FOR  THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

77 1 

the negotiating  and institutional capacity of the developing and Asian  economies. To 
take stock of progress, there is a need for a mid-term  review. Non-trade Agenda items, 
such as  labour and environmental standards, must be banished permanently from the 
MTNS. Similarly, competition-  or antitrust-related issues must not be allowed to be on 
the  Agenda.  Developing and Asian  economies need  to  take  a  pragmatic stand while 
deciding on broad  negotiating items.  They  need  to  approach the  issue  with  a  new 
mindset.  Beyond  the  Built-In  Agenda  and  built-in  problems  with  the  MFA, only 
carefully selected items should be included in the Agenda. 

Agriculture, being a large trade sector and a contentious issue, is again sure to take a 
good deal of time, energy and resources. The same applies for multilateral negotiations on 
services,  because  so much is yet  to be  done. An agreement on e-commerce should be 
deferred for some time in the near future. There is little felt need among WTO Members 
for substantial institutional improvement in the WTO. There is  a need to learn from the 
post-Uruguay Round experiences, and to re-open the issue of anti-dumping measures and 
rationahze them. A broad-based  and balanced Round of MTNs cannot possibly ignore tariff 
reduction. High tariff lines with spikes are to be found in both industrial and developing 
economies. In the industrial country markets, numerous tariff spikes are present in products 
of interest to developing and Asian  economies. The number of tariff lines with spikes is 
higher in agriculture than in manufactures. The gap between applied and bound tariffs, 
generally  to be found in  the developing counties, needs  to be removed. Industrial and 
developing economies need  to  adopt a  mutually beneficial  approach. Developing and 
Asian economies may use the next Round to make domestic trade-policy  adjustments by 
using it as leverage against domestic interest groups that resist tariff reduction. 

Efforts are required to minimize, if not  arrest, slippage in the implementation of 
the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing. Although the importance of this Agreement 
is declining due to structural changes in trade in textiles and apparel, some aspects of it 
need to be discussed to improve global efficiency in this sector. Several developing and 
Asian economies have reported problems in implementing the TRIPS Agreement. Many 
of them have asked for more time for implementation, and India has asked for a revision 
of the Agreement. These issues need to addressed in the next Round. Some subsidy- 
related  issues  were  left  unresolved  during  the  Uruguay  Round.  This  issue  is  of 
considerable  significance  to  the  developing  and  Asian  economies.  On  their  part, 
developing  and  Asian  economies  need  to  slash  subsihes  in  their  trade  structures. 
Working  group  consultations  were  underway  in  the  area  of  State  tradmg.  The 
safeguards issue and TRIMS are low-priority areas for the next Round. Some unresolved 
issues in the area of dspute settlement can be raised, although it is not a pressing issue. 
Clarifications are needed for certain aspects of rules-of-orign  “guidmg principles”. 

As  the “Green Room” process has failed to serve the MTNS, a functional alternative 
needs  to  be  devised.  A  steering committee  of twenty,  based  on broad  participation 
among WTO Members, can serve the global trading system better than the old “Green 
Room” process. 

772 

THE JOURNAL OF WOFUD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

References 

March, pp. 77-88. 

London, Vol.  I. 

mimeographed. 

Anderson, K.,  1996: The Intrusion of  Environmental and  Labor Standards into Trade Policy, in Martin and 

Winters (eds.), op. cit., pp. 435-462. 

Idem,  1998: Domestic Agricultural  Policy  Objectives and  Trade  Liberalization: Synergies  and  Trade-Ofs, 
101, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 

C~M/AGR/CA/TD/WS(~~) 
Paris. 

Idem,  1999: The  WTO Agenda for  the  New Millennium,  The Economic Record,  Vol.  76, No.  228, 

Anderson, K., B.  Hoekman, and A. Strutt, 1999: Agriculture and  the  WTO: Next Steps, mimeo, The 

World Bank, Washington, D.C., available at <(http://www.worldbank.org/trade*. 

Bhagwati, J., and R.E. Hudec (eds.), 1996: Fair  Trade and  Harmonization, MIT Press, Cambridge and 

Binswanger, H.,  and E.  Lutz, 2000: Agricultural Trade Barriers,  Trade Negotiations, and  the Interests of 

Developing Countries, paper presented at UNCTAD x, Bangkok, Thailand, 12 February 2000. 

Blackhurst, R., 1998: The Capacity ofthe  WTO to Fu@l Its Mandate, in JSrueger (ed.), op. cit. 
Cameron,  J.,  and  K.  Campbell,  1997:  Dispute  Resolution  in  the  World  Trade  Organization, 

Clarida, R.H., 1996: Dumping: In Theory, in Policy, and in Practice, in Bhagwati and Hudec (eds.), op. cit. 
Croome, J., 1998: The Present  Outlook for Trade Negotiations in the World Trade Organization, The World 

Bank, Washington, D.C.,  Policy Research Workmg Paper No.  1932. 

Das, Dilip K.,  1991: Import  Canalization, Sage Publications, London. 
Idem, 1998: Trade in Financial Services and  the Role ofthe GATS: Against the Backdrop of  the Asian  Crisis, 

32 J.W.T. 6, December, pp. 79-114. 

Idem, 1999: The Millennium Round and  the Asian Economies: A n  Introduction, Asian Development Bank, 

Manila, Occasional Paper No. 20, November. 

Feketekuty, G., 1998: Defining Subsidiaries in a  Global System: Economic, Legal, and  Political  Criteria, in 

General Agreement on  Trade in  Services (GATS), 1994:  General Agreement  on  Trade in  Services  and 

Swoolcock (ed.), op. cit. 

Related Instruments, WTO, Geneva. 

Hertel, T.W., W. Martin, K. Yanagishima, and B. Dimaranan, 1996: Liberalizing Manufactures Trade in 

a Changing World Economy, in Martin and Winters (eds.), op. cit. 

Hertel, T.W., and W.  Martin, 1999: Developing  Countries'  Interests in Liberalizing  Mantgactures  Trade, 

paper presented at the CERP Workshop, London, 19 and 20 February. 

Hoekman, B., and K. Saggi, 1999: Multilateral Disciplines for Investment-Related  Policies? paper presented 
at the Conference on Global Regionalism, Istituto B r i  Intemazionah, Rome, 8 and 9 February. 

Jackson, J.H., 1989: The World Trading System, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Krueger, A.O.  (ed.), 1998: The  WTO as  an  International  Organization, University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago, U S A .  

Idem, 1999: The Developing Countries in the Next Round of Multilateral  Trade Negotiations, The World 

Bank, Washington, D.C., Policy Research Working Paper No. 21 18. 

Laird, S.,  1999: Multinational Approaches to Market Access Negotiations, in Mendoza et al. (eds.), op n't. 
Lindsey, B.,  1999: The U.S. Antidumping Law: Rhetoric versus Reality, Cat0 Institute, Washmgton, D.C., 

Center for Trade Policy Studies, No. 7. 

Lindsey, B., D.T. Griswold, M.A.  Groombridge, and A.  Luckas,  1999: Seattle  and  Beyond: A  WTO 
Agenda for  the  New  Millennium,  Cat0  Institute, Washington, D.C.,  Center  for  Trade  Policy 
Studies, No. 8. 

Low, P.,  and A. Mattoo,  1999: Is  there  a  Better  Way? Alternative Approaches to Liberalization  under the 

GATS, available at ((http://www.cid.harvard.edu/cidtrade*. 

Martin, W., and L.A. Winters, 1996: The Umguay Round: A Milestone for the Developing Countries, in 

Martin and Winters (eds.), op. dt., pp. 1-29. 

Idem (eds.), 1996 The Umguay Round and the Developing Countria, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

AGENDA  FOR THE NEXT WTO ROUND 

773 

Maskus, K.E.,  1998:  The International  Regulation of Itttellectuat Property, Weltwirtschaftlisches Archiv, 

Mendoza, M.R.,  P.  Low  and  B.  Kotschwar  (eds.), 1999:  Trade  Rules  in  the  Making,  Brookings 

Vol. 134, NO. 2, pp. 205-229. 
Institutions, Washington, D . C . 

Michalopoulos, C., 1999: Developing  Country  Goals and  Strategiesfor the Millennium  Round, The World 

Bank, Washmgton, D.C., Policy Research Working Paper No. 2147, July. 

Morgan, C., 1999: Safeguard  and  Competition  Policy, paper presented at  the WTO-ADB Seminar on 

Trade Remedies and Competition Policy, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 11-13  May. 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 1999: The Economic and  Social 

Impact of Electronic Commerce, OECD, Pans. 

Otten, A., and H. Wager, 1996: Compliance with  TRIPS: T h e  Emerging  World View, Vanderbilt Journal 

of Transnational Law, Vol. 29, No. 3, May, pp. 391-413. 

Panagariya, A., 1999: TRIPS and  the  WTO: A n  Uneasy Marriage, paper  presented at  a  seminar at  the 

World Trade Organization, Geneva, 20 July. 

Idem, 2000:  The Millennium  Round  and  Developing  Countries: Negotiatittg  Strategies and  Areas  of Benefit, 

Center for International Development, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Schott, J.J.,  and J. Watal, 2000:  Decision  Making in  the  WTO, Institute for International Economics, 

Washington, D.C.,  Policy Brief No. 00-2,  March. 

Snape,  R.H.,  1998:  Reaching  Efective  Agreements  Covering  Services,  in  Krueger  (ed.),  op.  cit., 

pp. 279-296. 

Spinanger, D., 1999: Faking Liberalization and  Finagling Protectionism: The ATC at its Best, Kiel Institute 

Stightz, J.E., 1999a: Two Principlesfor the Next Round: Or How to  Bring  Developing  Countries i n j o m  (he 

of World Economics, Gel, Germany, 14 July. 

Cold, Washington, D.C., 21 September. 

Idem,  1999b: Addressing  Developing  Country  Priorities  and  Needs  in  the  Millennium  Round,  speech 
delivered  at  the  Harvard  University  Center  for  Business  and  Government,  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, 29 November. 

Swoolcock, P.M.  (ed.), 1998: Subsidies  in  the  Governance of the  Global  Economy,  Oxford University 

Press, New York. 

Taylor, C.O., 1997: The Limits ofEconomic Power: Section 301 and  the  World Trade Organization Dispute 
Settlement System, Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, Vol. 30, No. 2, March, pp. 201-243. 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 2000:  World Investment Report, 

UNCTAD, New York, July. 

United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development/World  Trade  Organization 
(UNCTAD/WTO), 1997: Post- Uruguay Round  TanyEnvironmentfor Developing  Country Exports, A n  
UNCTAD/WTO]Oiflf Study, TD/B/COM, 1/14, Geneva. 

United  States  Information  Agency  (USA), 1998: Intellectual  Property  in  the  TRrPs  Era,  Economic 

Perspective, available at ahttp://usia.gov/journals/joumals.htms. 

Warren, T., and C. Findlay, 1999: Measuring Impediments to  Trade in Services, Centre for International 
Economic  Studies,  university  of  Adelaide,  Adelaide,  South  Australia,  Discussion  Paper 
No. 99/19. 

Whalley, J. 1996: Developing  Countries and  System  Strengthening  in  the  Uruguay Round, in Martin and 

Winters (eds.), op. cit., pp. 409-435. 

Idem,  1999: Notes on Textiles and Apparel in the Next Trade Round, paper presented at a Conference on 
“Developing  Countries  in  the  Next  WTO Trade  Round”,  held  at  Harvard  University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 5 and 6 November. 

Whalley, J.,  and  C.  Hamilton,  1996:  The  Trading  System  after  the  Uruguay  Round,  Institute  for 

International Economics, Washington, D.C. 

World Trade Organization (WTO),  1998a: Electronic Commerce and  the Role ofthe W T O ,  WTO, Geneva. 
Idem, 1998b: Declaration on Global Electronic Commerce, WTO, Geneva, W T / M I N / ( ~ ~ ) / D E C / ~ ,  
26 May. 
Idem, 1999: Work Programme on Electronic Commerce, WTO, Geneva, S/C/8, March. 


