The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 341–347

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00386.x

Introduction: Designing Intellectual
Property Institutions for the Twenty-First
Century

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

At the end of the last century, intellectual property was ascendant. Thanks to the
many developments that came to fruition after the Second World War—advances in
such ﬁelds as materials and computer science, telecommunications, nuclear energy
and biotechnology—society was transformed into a knowledge economy. As ﬁrms
began to appreciate the importance of information as a source of economic
gain, they demanded new intellectual property rights. Copyright terms increased
and rights over digitized products were strengthened; trademark protection was
transformed from a mechanism for preventing confusion into a tool to control most
aspects of trademark use, including use on the internet; and the domain of patents
was extended to encompass software, genetic information, business methods and
even sports moves. New sui generis regimes—covering performances and broad-
casts, celebrity images and databases, industrial design and topographies, geo-
graphic indications and plant varieties—were recognized so that economic returns
could be captured from even the most marginal of advances
(Dreyfuss
et al., 2001).1

The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS Agreement) was in a sense a crystallization of this trend. It reconceptua-
lized intellectual property as a trade issue and imposed eight different intellectual
property regimes (copyrights, trademarks, patents, geographic indications, indus-
trial design, layout design, unfair competition and trade secrecy) on all of the
members of the World Trade Organization. On the theory that strong protection
would spur global innovation by enhancing incentives to invent, improve technol-
ogy transfer by providing new incentives to disclose and commercialize and lead to
direct foreign investment in less developed regions of the globe, the TRIPS
Agreement applied the same set of minimum standards to under-developed
economies operating far from the knowledge frontier as it did to highly developed
countries with vibrant creative industries.

But the bloom is off the rose. As Daniel Gervais, Professor of Law at
Vanderbilt University and a renowned authority on the TRIPS Agreement, suggests
in his contribution to this special issue, there is little empirical evidence that strong
intellectual property protection has improved social welfare (Gervais, 2009). With
the exception of a few countries that were at the cusp of development at the time
that the TRIPS Agreement went into force (all of which might have enacted
stronger protection even in the absence of the TRIPS Agreement), countries that

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

341

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

lacked strong intellectual property rights before TRIPS have not become innovative
since the TRIPS Agreement came into effect. Any foreign direct investment that has
occurred is uncorrelated with the extent to which these countries have complied
with TRIPS mandates. Technology transfer to developing countries has, if any-
thing, decreased. Nations that lack the capacity to innovate at world levels
experience intellectual property protection as nothing more than a tax, an increase
in price that puts the fruits of the world’s intellect beyond the grasp of all but the
richest of citizens.

In the developed world, the situation is not radically different. Certainly, there
are many who are beneﬁting from their newly acquired ability to extract wealth
from countries that formerly lacked intellectual property protection and from
advances that would, under prior law, have entered the public domain. However,
the expansion of intellectual property rights has also introduced new problems.
Copyrights are harder to clear in a world in which rights endure for several
generations. Control over trademarks can morph into control over language and
free expression. In the patent sector, the difﬁculties are particularly acute. Modern
products are often highly complex, with single products incorporating hundreds of
patented advances. The expense involved in negotiating and licensing the relevant
thickets of rights can raise the cost of commercialization beyond the point of
proﬁtability. Innovation is also chilled. Rights can now extend so far upstream they
dominate broad technological opportunities. And since these patents can cover
fundamental truths about nature, it is often not possible to invent around the
claimed invention in situations where right holders charge too much or refuse to
deal with potential users (Dinwoodie and Dreyfuss, 2005).

There are also larger, more profoundly political and philosophical issues at
play. Intellectual property is no longer an abstruse legal right of interest to only a
small cadre of professionals. The problem of providing the poor with AIDS
medications alerted much of the world to the darker side of intellectual property
protection, and especially to the problems associated with imposing intellectual
property obligations on countries too poor to pay supra-competitive prices. More-
over, the recording industry’s decision to sue their own customers for sharing music
ﬁles has had a strong educative effect (albeit not the one the recording industry was
hoping for). These actions, which challenged a very popular use of the internet,
made it clear how deeply intellectual property rights interfere with full utilization of
the capabilities of modern technology. Indeed, the public quickly learned that
making web and music mash-ups, digitally appropriating art, engaging in serial fan
ﬁction, posting homemade videos, or taking advantage of full-text search functions
could require extensive negotiations and the payment of hefty licensing fees
(Crawford, 2007).2 With the development of grassroots user groups and the
establishment of non-governmental organizations interested in intellectual property
issues, the political economy has been radically altered. Demands for more
protection now meet with stronger opposition at both domestic and international
levels (Kapczynski, 2008).

342

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

Not only have observers started to question the operation of intellectual property
laws, they have also begun to wonder whether (or when) exclusive rights are needed at
all. Larry Lessig and Yochai Benkler argue that by reducing the cost of creating and
distributing innovative materials, new technologies make intellectual property protec-
tion more than unhelpful; they also render exclusivity unnecessary (Benkler, 2006;
Lessig, 2004). Indeed, Eric von Hippel has spawned a veritable cottage industry of
scholars examining the many vibrant innovative communities that work under sharing
norms outside the realm of traditional intellectual property rights (von Hippel, 1988).
These communities engage in creative activities in a range of ﬁelds—extreme sports,
fashion, cooking, magic, comedy (Buccafusco, 2007; Loshin, 2008; Oliar and Sprig-
man, 2008; Raustiala and Sprigman, 2006) and as Katherine Strandburg and Fiona
Murray show, especially academic science (Murray et al., 2009; Strandburg, 2005).
The accomplishments of open initiatives can be seen in the palpable success of such
products as Linux, Apache, Firefox and Wikipedia. Nor is this phenomenon new. As
Megan Richardson, Professor of Law at Melbourne Law School, demonstrates in
these pages, many of the world’s greatest innovations—those shown at the famous
international exhibitions of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries—were often not
patented (Richardson, 2009). Instead, other beneﬁts provided adequate incentives
both to invent and to disclose. Exhibitors reaped reputational and, advertising gains
from showing their work. They attracted collaborators and, in some cases, govern-
ment funding. Furthermore, part of their return came in the form of the knowledge
they acquired by seeing the exhibits of others.

Richardson asks whether ‘‘exhibition norms’’ could take root once again.
Along similar lines, Gervais suggests that the time has come for ‘‘a calibration
process’’, by which he means a reassessment of the role that intellectual property
rights should play in the international economy. The pieces in this issue take up that
challenge. Looking at international intellectual property law, Gervais suggests that
obligations must be adapted to the economics of the country in question. In his
view, the current regime works well for the developed world, but it needs to be
substantially modiﬁed as applied to the least developed countries that, at present,
have no hope of reaping proﬁts from exclusive rights. In the middle are countries
that could beneﬁt from intellectual property laws, but only if they simultaneously
adopt an innovation strategy that comprises other facets of their economies.

The remainder of the articles discuss issues in patent law and ask how its
contours should be reshaped to deal with emerging difﬁculties. Luigi Palombi,
Director of the Genetic Sequence Right Project at the Australian National
University, examines the problem of upstream patenting (Palombi, 2009). Using
patents in the ﬁeld of synthetic biology as examples, he demonstrates how deceptive
drafting can be. Although patents are often framed in a form that makes the
claimed subject matter appear to be the work of humans, they can actually privatize
information essentially identical to the form in which it is found in nature. Since
these patents cannot be invented around, they eliminate the possibility of compe-
titive research and thus potentially slow the progress of science. Palombi suggests,

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

343

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

as one set of ‘‘calibrations’’, changes to the doctrines of patentable subject matter
and inventiveness (non-obviousness).

Ann Monotti, Professor of Law at Monash University, and Susy Frankel,
Professor of Law at Victoria University (Wellington) (and the organizer of the
conference on which this volume is based), tackle the problem of recalibrating
dominant patents in a different way. They debate the wisdom of enacting an
experimental use defence to (or exemption from) patent infringement (Frankel,
2009; Monotti, 2009). The defence would permit researchers to use patented
inventions without authorization and payment so long as their objectives were to
advance science and not to compete unfairly with the patent holder. Under such an
approach, the problem identiﬁed by Palombi would abate, for the use of patented
synthetic biology inventions to study nature would be permissible. But since
commercial uses would be subject to the patent, synthetic biologists would retain
an incentive to invent and disclose.

The devil in such proposals is, of course, in the details. Frankel would, like
Gervais, tailor the law to the economic circumstances of the country implementing
it. Thus, she favours a defence that would give small, innovative economies (such as
her own New Zealand) a comparative advantage as an attractive place in which to
establish research facilities. Monnoti’s concern is with making sure the exception is
not so broad that it undermines incentives to invent research tools. She therefore
offers speciﬁc language designed to draw clear lines among the possible uses of
patent technologies. She also suggests alternatives to a statutory exemption,
including changes in licensing practices that would reserve for non-commercial
entities the right to use the licensed technology for research purposes.

Even the wisest law will cause problems if it is not implemented properly. Fiona
Rotstein, a research fellow at Melbourne Law School, Chris Dent, Research Fellow
at Melbourne Law School and Kimberlee Weatherall, Senior Lecturer at TC Beirne
School of Law (Queensland), consider the issue of challenging determinations of
patent validity (Rotstein and Dent, 2009; Weatherall, 2009). Both articles view
third-party challenges as essential to the integrity of the system, for third parties
often have information that the patent ofﬁce cannot obtain from its own search or
does not receive from the patent applicant. Since administrative challenge can also
be less costly than litigation, it is an important mechanism for releasing information
into the public domain. Rotstein and Dent provide a comparative analysis of third-
party challenge procedures in the United States, Australia and under the European
Patent Convention. While they ﬁnd that the essentials of all three systems are similar,
utilization is not. The differences lie in the cost and culture of the various national
adjudicatory systems, the other opportunities these systems offer to challenge
validity and the effect of the adjudication on the subsequent rights of the challenger.
Weatherall would exploit these features. In her view, the key problem is attracting
the right challengers. Competitors, who may have relevant information that the patent
ofﬁce has not seen, may hang back, hoping for a free ride—that is, in the expectation
that someone else will come along and pay all the costs of invalidation. Non-

344

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

competitors, who may be more likely to challenge the patentability of inventions in the
ﬁeld on ethical or moral grounds or to promote open and collaborative innovation,
may be unable to pay the high cost of invalidation or may lack standing under the
relevant justiciability rules. Weatherall suggests that the solution to these problems is to
ﬁnd mechanisms for lowering or spreading the cost of patent challenges, enhancing the
effect of a successful challenge, making patent information more accessible and
changing the law on when non-competitors’ submissions are appropriate.

Susan Glazebrook, Judge of the Court of Appeal of New Zealand, is also
concerned about implementation. She investigates the manner in which patent
cases, which are highly technical as to both fact and law, are adjudicated. She too
takes a comparativist approach, examining the ways in which the United States,
Australia, the United Kingdom and Japan have utilized specialized courts in an
effort to improve decision-making. She notes that, as between these jurisdictions,
there are signiﬁcant differences in where specialization is deployed (at the trial or
appellate level, or both), whether the patent judges also hear other cases; the extent
to which specialized courts are in competition with hierarchically equivalent
decision-makers; and the opportunities for input by experts in the ﬁeld to which
the patent pertains. Many of her observations on the value of each of the different
approaches would apply to any judicial system. However, Glazebrook’s ﬁnal
conclusions are based on the size of the patent docket in New Zealand. Thus, they
are of particular value to similar small innovative economies.

Together, the contributions by Rotstein and Dent, and Weatherall and Justice
Glazebrook offer many useful suggestions for improving the quality of patents.
Importantly, Weatherall makes another key point: ‘‘quality patents’’ (patents that
survive challenge) are not the same as patents that actually promote innovation;
expanding the opportunity to challenge validity does nothing to ensure that the law is
geared to enhancing the environment in which innovation occurs. Taken as a whole,
however, the contributions in this special issue go a long way toward helping readers
think through the issues of institutional design. By considering the norms of sharing,
broader innovation strategies, the relationship between economic conditions and
intellectual property law, the articles raise questions about when exclusive rights are
needed and how they should be structured. The need for innovative technological
solutions to such problems as global warming, escalating healthcare costs and the
threat of terrorism makes the discussion of such issues one of today’s imperatives.

About the Author

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss is Pauline Newman Professor of Law, New York University
School of Law; e-mail: DREYFUSSR@juris.law.nyu.edu

Notes

1 For a general discussion of these issues, see Dreyfuss et al. (2001).
2 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. v Grokster Ltd (2005) 545 US 913.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

345

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

References

Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and

Freedom. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Buccafusco, C. J. (2007) ‘On the Legal Consequences of Sauces: Should Thomas Keller’s

Recipes be Per Se Copyrightable?’, Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, 24(3),
1121–56.

Crawford, S. P. (2007) ‘The Internet and the Project of Communications Law’, UCLA Law

Review, 55(2), 359–407.

Dinwoodie, G. and Dreyfuss, R. C. (2005) ‘WTO Dispute Resolution and the Preservation of
the Public Domain in Science’, in K. E. Maskus and J. H. Reichman (eds), International
Public Goods and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized Intellectual Property
Regime. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 861–83.

Dreyfuss, R., Zimmerman, D. L. and First, H. (2001) Expanding the Boundaries of

Intellectual Property. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Frankel, S. (2009) ‘An Experimental Use Exception from Patent Infringement for New

Zealand’, Journal of World Intellectual Property, 12(5), 446–66.

Gervais, D. (2009) ‘(Re)implementing the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of

Intellectual Property Rights to Foster Innovation’, Journal of World Intellectual
Property, 12(5), 348–70.

Kapczynski, A. (2008) ‘The Access to Knowledge Mobilization and the New Politics of

Intellectual Property’, Yale Law Journal, 117(5), 804–85.

Lessig, L. (2004) Free Culture: The Nature and Future of Creativity. Penguin Press, New

York.

Loshin, J. (2008) ‘Secrets Revealed: How Magicians Protect Intellectual Property Without
Law’, in C. A. Corcos (ed.), Law and Magic: A Collection of Essays. Available at hhttp://
ssrn.com/abstract=1005564i [Accessed August 2009].

Monotti, A. (2009) ‘The Australian Experimental Use Exemption: A Current Overview’,

Journal of World Intellectual Property, 12(5), 422–45.

Murray, F. E., Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Kolev, J. and Stern, S. (2009) Of Mice and
Academics: Examining the Effect of Openness on Innovation, NBER Working Paper
Series w14819 [online]. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=1369055i [Accessed
August 2009].

Oliar, D. and Sprigman, C. (2008) ‘There’s No Free Laugh (Anymore): The Emergence of
Intellectual Property Norms and the Transformation of Stand-Up Comedy’, Virginia
Law Review, 94(8), 1787–867.

Palombi, L. (2009) ‘Beyond Recombinant Technology: Synthetic Biology and Patentable

Subject Matter’, Journal of World Intellectual Property, 12(5), 371–401.

Raustiala, K. and Sprigman, C. (2006) ‘The Piracy Paradox: Innovation and Intellectual

Property in Fashion Design’, Virginia Law Review, 92(8), 1687–777.

Richardson, M. (2009) ‘Patents and Exhibitions’, Journal of World Intellectual Property,

12(5), 402–21.

Rotstein, F. and Dent, C. (2009) ‘Third-Party Patent Challenges in Europe, the United States
and Australia: A Comparative Analysis’, Journal of World Intellectual Property, 12(5),
467–500.

346

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

Intellectual Property Institutions for the Twenty-First Century

Rochelle C. Dreyfuss

Strandburg, K. J. (2005) ‘Curiosity-Driven Research and University Technology

Transfer’, Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Economic Growth,
16, 93–122.

von Hippel, E. (1988) The Sources of Innovation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, NY.
von Hippel, E. (2005) Democratizing Innovation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Weatherall, K. (2009) ‘It’s Not Just Competitors: Acknowledging and Accommodating

‘‘Interfering Busybodies’’ and their Challenges to Patent Validity’, Journal of World
Intellectual Property, 12(5), 501–24.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 5

347


