Public Interest u e m s  the Pharmaceutical Industry’s 

Monopoly in South Africa 

Tshimanga KONGOLO* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Conflicts  between  private  interest  and  public  interest,  competition  law  and 
intellectual property law, individual rights and community (collective) rights, and national 
public policy and patent protection of pharmaceuticals are not new, although they are far 
from finding adequate solutions. The South ffican litigation involving pharmaceutical 
companies and the South &can  government is a typical case of such a struggle.’ 

The most suitable title for this article would have been “Public Interest and Welfare 
Considerations  Triumph  against  the  Monopoly  and  Egoistic  Interests  of  the 
Pharmaceutical  Industry  in  South  Ahca”.  But,  because  of  its journalistic  sound, 
preference has been given to the heading above. 

The outcome of the lawsuit came as a relief to the 3.5 million people infected with 
HIv (human immunodeficiency virus) and almost 200,000 people suffering &om AIDS 
in  South  Afnca,  hoping  for  more  affordable  prices  of  medicines  in  general  and 
HIv/AIDs-related  drugs in particular, via parallel imports, compulsory licensing, and the 
availabdity  of  generic  substitutions  as  provided  under  the  contested  Medlcines 
Amendment Act 90 of 1997 (the 1997 Amendment Act). This Act has been opposed 
both  in  and  out  of  South Afiica  by  a  number  of pharmaceutical companies on the 
ground that it conflicts with the South African Patent Act of 1978 (the Patent Act) and 
the  South African Constitution,  and  that  it  goes  against  South &can 
international 
commitments vis-A-vis the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property kghts (TRIPS).  The coming into  force of  the  1997 
Amendment  Act  was  blocked by  the  lawsuit  initiated by  pharmaceutical companies 
before the Pretoria High Court in February 1998. 

It should be pointed  out that South Africa was  threatened with sanctions by  the 
United  States  and  was  placed  on  the  U.S. Trade  Representative’s  “Watch  List”. 
Following  this,  the  U.S.  authorities  requested  South  Afiica  to  either  change  the 
contested  law  or  replace  it  in  order  to  guarantee  and  ensure  the  American 
pharmaceutical industry’s interests. It was also debated in national as well as international 

*  Ph.D., Assistant Professor, Osaka University, Japan. 
Discussed in Section III.A, below and referenced in footnote 12. 

610 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

forums  as  to  whether  the  contested  1997  Amendment  Act  was  reasonable  or 
constitutional. The issue has been to find out which of the two interests should prevail: 
the egoistic and private interests of the pharmaceutical industry, or people’s  lives and 
public interest. South Afiica was faced with this dilemma and challenge. 

Finally,  on  19 April 2001,  the  pharmaceutical  companies that  had  initiated  the 
lawsuit withdrew  their  action giving South f f i c a  the  possibhty  to  promulgate  the 
contested 1997 Amendment Act and to put it into operation. 

In this study, the raison d’gtre  of the 1997 Amendment Act and its relationship with 
the  Patent Act  of  1978, with  particular  emphasis  on  parallel  imports and  compulsory 
licences, will be examined. Further, dmussions of issues of drug pricing and HIV/AIDS in 
South Afhca will be addressed to examine whether there are grounds for supporting the 
1997 Amendment Act or refuting it. To conclude, public interest will be evaluated against 
the monopoly rights of the pharmaceutical industry. This will be discussed as follows: 

- 

11.  Overview of the Contested Medicines Amendment Act 90 of 1997 and 

its Relationship with the Patent Act of 1978 

-  111.  The  Pharmaceutical  Companies’  Lawsuit  against  the  Government  of 

South Africa and Debated Issues 

- 

IV.  Surveys on Drugs Pricing and HIV/AIDS in South Africa 

-  V.  Public  Interest  and  Welfare  Considerations  Triumph  against  the 

Monopoly of the Pharmaceutical Industry 

-  VI.  Conclusion.. 

11.  OVERVIEW 

OF THE CONTESTED MEDICINES AMENDMENT ACT 90 OF  1997 AND 

ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PATENT ACT OF  1978 

The Medicines and Related Substances Control Act No. 101 of 1965 (hereinafter 
the Principal Act), which came into force in 1966, governs the control of medicines in 
South Afhca.2  The regulations to the Principal Act was published in December 1967. 
The Principal Act has been amended several times.3 

2  See  Ministry  of Health,  The Medicines  Regulatory  System  in  South  AJica:  Review  and  Proposalsfor  Refm, 

24 March 1998, South Africa. 

3  Amendment Act No. 29 of 1968: enabled the determination of drugs which were subject to registration and 
their categories of classification. Amendment Acts No. 88 of 1970 and 95 of 1971: allowed for the control of drug 
advertising. Amendment Act No. 65 of 1974: the Council had its name changed to the Medicines Control Council. 
Amendment Act No. 17 of 1979: extended the provisions of the Act to Veterinary Medicines and to labelling and 
advertising. Amendment Act  No. 94 of 1991: regulated the powers, functions and Constitution of the Council; 
abolished the  Medicines  Control  Appeal  Board  and  made  new  provision  for  appeals  against  decisions  of  the 
Council. Amendment Act  No. 90 of 1997: was the first drug regulation legislation  introduced after the General 
Election of 1994, saw the adoption of a programme of health reform, and the launch of the National Drug Policy 
(controversial Act). South  African  Medicines and  Medical Devices Regulatory Authority  Act  (SAMMDU), Act 
No. 132 of 1998 (has been withdrawn). 
(Footnote  3 continued  on next p q e . )  

THE  PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S  MONOPOLY  IN SOUTH AFRICA 

61 1 

On 23 November  1997, the Principal Act was  revised by  the  1997 Amendment 
Act  of  1997, aimed  at  designing a  new  drug  policy  and  at  malung available  more 
affordable medicines.4 It is meaningful to point out that the 1997 Amendment Act has 
not  yet come into force due to the lawsuit initiated by  pharmaceutical companies on 
18 February 1998. 

According to the Preamble of the  1997 Amendment Act, the Act aims, inter alia, 

to provide for: 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

procedures that will expedite the regstration of essential medicines; 

measures for the supply ofmore affordable medicines in certain circumstances; 

the  licensing  of  certain  persons  to  compound,  hspense  or  manufacture 
medicines; 
generic substitution of medicines; and 
the establishment of a pricing committee. 

It is not the purpose of this study to scrutinize the entire 1997 Amendment Act, 
but to emphasize the conflicting provisions embodied in the Act and their relationship 
with the Patent Act of 1978. 

To pave  the  way  for  a  better  understandmg,  all conflicting provisions  provided 
under the two Acts (1997 Amendment Act and Patent Act) wdl be quoted and discussed. 

A.  Conticting Provisions ofthe 1997 Amendment Act 

The  most  conflicting  provision  of  the  1997 Amendment  Act  is  Section  15C 
(measures  to  ensure  supply  of  more  affordable  medicines).  Further,  Sections  22C 
(licensing),  22F  (generic  substitutions),  and  22G  (Pricing  Committee)  have  been 
challenged before the courts. 

Under Section 15C, the Minister of Health is empowered, notwithstanding norms 
provided under  the Patent Act  of 1978, to  take  certain measures aimed at  providing 
consumers with more affordable medicines: 

(Footnote 3 continuedfrom pwious page.) 
The difference between the SAMMDRA Act of 1998 and the 1997 Amendment Act is that the first intended to 
replace the Medicines Act of 1965 (the entire Act). It was deemed to be the new Medicines Act but because ofthe 
non-respect  of some administrative procedures, it was  considered unlawful and later withdrawn.  The Medicines 
Act of 1997 has only revised some provisions embodied in the Principal Medicines Act of 1965. This article deals 
with the most controversial ones. Thus, after the promulgdtion of the 1997 Amendment Act in a few months, this 
Act will be known as the Medicines Act of 1965 as amended. Section 10 ofthe 1997 Amendment Act introduced 
Section 15C ofthe Principal Act; Section l(k) ofthe 1997 Amendment Act introduced Section l(4) ofthe Principal 
Act; Section 14 of the 1997 Amendment Act introduced Section 22F of the Principal Act; Section 14 of the 1997 
Amendment Act introduced Sub-Sections 22G(2) and (3) ofthe Principal Act; Section 14 ofthe 1997 Amendment 
Act introduced Section 22C of the Principal Act. 

4  The Medicines and Related Substances Control Act as revised by the Medicines Amendment Act No. YO of 

1997 was published in the Government Gazette No. 18505 of 12 December 1997. 

612 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

“Section  15C: The  Minister  may  prescribe  conditions  for  the  supply  of  more  affordable 
medicines in certain circumstances so as to protect the health of the public, and in particular 
may: 
(a)  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Patent Act, 1978 (Act No. 57 
of 1978), determine that the rights with regard to any medicine under a patent granted 
in the Republic shall not extend to acts in respect of such medicine, or with his or her 
consent; 

(b)  prescribe  the  conditions  on which  any  medicine  which  is  identical in  composition, 
meets the same quality standard and is intended to have the same proprietary name as 
that of another medicine already registered in the Republic, but which is imported by 
a person other than the person who is  the holder of the registration certificate of the 
medicine already registered and which originates fiom any site of manufacture of the 
original manufacturer as  approved by  the  council in  the prescribed manner, may  be 
imported; 

(c) prescribe the registration procedure for, as well as the use  of, the medicine referred to 

in paragraph (b).” 

In other words, measures or Arectives taken by the Minister ofHealth for this purpose 

override or prevail over norms prescribed withm the fi-amework of the Patent Act. 

Along the same line of reasoning, the Minister of Health has been authorized by 
the 1997 Amendment Act to set conditions and permit parallel imports of medicines in 
general, and  generic drugs in  particular, even in  respect of meAcines which  are still 
protected in South Afnca under the patent regime. Accordingly, the Minister of Health 
may limit the rights of the patentee by granting a compulsory licence to a third party to 
import medicines. That is to say, pursuant to the 1997 Amendment Act, parallel imports 
of generic drugs are acknowledged despite the fact that the Patent Act is silent as to the 
issue of parallel  imports in general and pharmaceuticals in particular. This issue will be 
dealt with later. 

Under Section 22C, the Director-General has been authorized to grant licences to 
make up and dispense medicines to medlcal practitioners, etc. and, further, the Council 
has been given the authority to provide a licence for the manufacturing of meAcines or 
medical devices to manufacturers, wholesalers or distributors: 

“Section ZZC(1):  Subject to the provisions of this Section: 
(a)  the Director-General may on application in the prescribed manner and on payment of 
the prescribed fee issue  to  a  medical practitioner, dentist, practitioner, nurse or other 
person registered under the Health Professions Act,  1974, a licence to compound and 
dispense medicines, on the prescribed conditions; 

(b)  the  Council  may,  on application in  the  prescribed manner  and  on payment  of  the 
prescribed fee,  issue  to  a  manufacturer, wholesaler  or  distributor  of  a  medicine  or 
medical device, a licence to manufacture, act as a wholesaler of or distribute, as the case 
may be, such medicine or medical device, upon such conditions as to the application of 
such acceptable quality assurance principles and good manufacturing and distribution 
practices as the Council may determine.” 

Section  22F  allows  pharmacists  to  advise  and  inform  the  public  about  the 

availability of generic drugs, and their benefits compared to the branded medicines: 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY IN SOUTH AFRICA 

613 

“Section 22F(1): Subject to subsections (2), (3) and (4), a pharmacist shall: 
(a) inform all members of the public who visit his or her pharmacy with a prescription for 
dispensing,  of  the  benefits  of  the  substitution  for  a  branded  medicine  of  an 
interchangeable multi-source medicine; and 

(b)  dispense an interchangeable multi-source medicine instead of the medicine prescribed 
by  a medical practitioner, dentist, practitioner, nurse or other person registered under 
the Health Professions Act, 1974, unless expressly forbidden by the patient to do so.” 
Further, pharmacists have been  given  the  authority  to  dispense a  generic  drug 
instead of the drug prescribed by a medlcal doctor or a competent rnehcal practitioner. 
Under Section 22G, the Minister of Health has been empowered to appoint members 
of the  Pricing Committee and  make  regulations on  the  establishment of a  transparent 
pricing system in respect of all medicines sold in South Africa. Moreover, pharmacists or 
persons licensed to sell drugs are prohibited &om sehng the drugs at a price greater than 
the one provided under the transparent pricing system (single exit price). Pharmacists wdl 
therefore have to sell drugs to the public based on the price sold by wholesalers: 

“Section ZZG(1):  The Minister shall appoint such persons as he  or she may  deem fit to be 
members of a committee to be known as the Pricing Committee. 
(2)  The  Minister  may,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Pricing  Committee,  make 

regulations: 
(a)  on the introduction of a transparent pricing system for all medicines and Scheduled 

substances sold in the Republic; 

(b)  on  an  appropriate dispensing fee  to be  charged by  a pharmacist or by  a person 

licensed in terms of Section 22C(l)(a). 

(3)  (a) The transparent pricing system  contemplated in  subsection  (2)(a) shall include a 
single exit price which shall be published as prescribed, and such price shall be the 
only price at which manufacturers shall sell medicines and Scheduled substances to 
any person other than the State. 

(b)  No pharmacist or person licensed in terms of Section 22C(l)(a) shall sell a medicine 

at a price greater than the price contemplated in paragraph (a). 

(c)  Paragraph (b) shall not be construed as preventing a pharmacist or person licensed in 
terms of this Act to charge a dispensing fee as contemplated in Sub-section  (2)(b).” 
Section 24 provides that any decision emanating fiom the Director-General or the 

Council is susceptible of appeal to the High Court. 

B.  The Patent Act of 1978 

The law that regulates patents in South Ahca is the Patent Act 57 of 1978. It came 
into  effect  on  1 January  1979,  and  has  been  revised  several  times.5  To  meet  the 
recommendations of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights of the World Trade Organization, the Intellectual Property Laws Amendment 
Act No. 38 of 1997 was passed to amend the Patent Act.6 

5  Patent Amendment Act No.  14 of 1979; Patent Amendment Act No.  67 of 1983; Patent Amendment Act 
No.  44  of  1986; Patent  Amendment  Act  No.  76  of  1988; General  Law  Amendment  Act  No.  49  of  1996; 
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Act No. 38 of 1997. 

6  Annual Survey of South AGican Law, Intellectual Property Law, 1997. 

614 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  Patent  Act  deals,  inter  alia,  with  the  purview  of  protection  of  patented 
inventions, conditions for patentability, duration of patent, effect of patent, rights of the 
patentee, compulsory licences in respect of dependent patents and in case of abuse of 
patent rights, and the inhngement and enforcement of rights. 

Accordmg to its Section 25, a new invention which involves an inventive step and 
which is capable of being used or applied in trade or industry or agriculture must qualifjr 
for patent protection.  An invention  that  meets the  three  requirements is  eligible for 
patent.’  That is to say, inventions related to pharmaceutical processes  or products that 
meet  the  prescribed  condtions  of  patentability  are  acknowledged protection  for  a 
period of twenty years 6om the filing date of application. 

The Act has, likewise, provided unpatentable matters in paragraph 2 of Section 25 

as follows: 

“(2)  Anything which consists of: 

(a)  a discovery; 
(b) a scientific theory; 
(c) a mathematical method; 
(d) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation; 
(e) a  scheme, rule or method  for performing  a mental act, playing a  game  or doing 
(0 a program for a computer; or 
(g) the presentation of information, 
shall not be an invention for the purposes of this Act.” 

business; 

In addition, plant varieties are deemed not eligible for patents. 
It should be inhcated that the patentee is entitled to the exclusive right of malung, 
using, exercising, disposing or offering to dispose of, or importing the invention. That 
is  to  say,  these  acts  cannot  be  undertaken  without  the  prior  authorization  of  the 
patentee. In  other  words, the  carrying out  of these  acts  without  the  consent  of the 
patentee amounts to inhngement. It should be noted that the sale of a patented article 
by or on behalf of a patentee or his licensee shall, subject to other patent rights, give the 
purchaser the right to use and dlspose of that article.8 

Under the South Ahcan Patent Act, a compulsory licence can be granted in two 

circumstances: 

- 

- 

in respect of dependent patents (Section 55); 
in case of abuse of patent rights (Section 56). 

Section 55 states: 
“55. Where the working of a patent (hereinafter referred to as a dependent patent) without 
infringement of a prior patent is dependent upon the obtaining of a licence under that prior 
’ Annual Survey of South Aliican Law, Intellectual Property Law, 1996. 
8  Section 45. 

THE  PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY’S  MONOPOLY IN SOUTH AFRICA 

615 

patent, the proprietor of the dependent patent may, if agreement cannot be reached as  to 
such licence with the proprietor of the prior patent, apply to the commissioner for a licence 
under the prior patent, and the commissioner may grant such a licence on such conditions 
as  he may  impose, but  including a  condition  that such licence shall be  used  only for the 
purpose  of  permitting  the  dependent  patent  to  be  worked  and  for  no  other  purpose, 
provided that the commissioner shall not grant such a licence unless: 
(a) the invention claimed in the dependent patent involves an important technical advance 
of considerable economic significance in relation to the invention claimed in the prior 
patent; 

(b) the  proprietor of the  dependent patent granted the  proprietor of the  prior patent  on 
reasonable terms a cross-licence to use the invention claimed in the dependent patent; and 
(c) the  use  authorized  in  respect  of  the  prior  patent  is  not  assignable  except  with  the 

assignment of the dependent patent.” 

Thus, according to Section 55, any dependent  patent  that meets the prescribed 

conditions may be entitled to a compulsory licensing.9 

Under Section 56: 
“56(1)  Any interested peson who can show that the rights in a patent are being abused may 
apply to the commissioner in the prescribed manner for a compulsory licence under the patent. 
(2) The rights in a patent shall be deemed to be abused if: 

(a)  the patented invention is  not being worked in the Republic on a commercial scale 
or to an adequate extent, after the expiry of a period of four years subsequent to the 
date of the application for the patent or three years subsequent to the date on which 
that patent was sealed, whichever period last expires, and there is in the opinion of 
the commissioner no satisfactory reason for such non-working; 
,.. 

(c) the demand for the patented article in the Republic is not being met to an adequate 

extent and on reasonable terms; 

(d) by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence or licences upon reasonable 
terms, the trade or industry or agriculture of the Republic or the trade of any person 
or class of persons trading in the Republic, or the establishment of any new trade or 
industry in the Republic, is  being prejudiced, and it is  in the public interest that a 
licence or licences should be eranted or 
the demand in the Republic fgr the patented article is being met by importation and 
the price charged by  the patentee, his  licensee or agent for the patented article is 
excessive in relation to the price charged therefor in countries where the patented 
article is manufactured by or under licence &om the patentee or his predecessor or 
successor in title. 

1 . .  

A  licence  granted  under  this  Section  shall  include  a  provision  that,  subject  to 
adequate protection  of the legitimate interests of the licensee, the licence shall, on 
application by the patentee, be terminated if the circumstances which led to its grant 
cease to exist and, in the opinion of the commissioner, are unlikely to recur. 

(5) Any  licence  granted  under  {his  Section  shall  be  non-exclusive  and  shall  not  be 
transferable  except  to  a  person  to  whom  the  business  or  part  of  the  business  in 
connection  with  which  the  rights  under  the  licence  were  exercised  has  been 
transferred.” 

9  David F. Sheppard, Patent Law in South Afnca with Particular Reference to the TRPS Agreement, 2 J.W.I.P. 4, July 

1999, p. 607, at 611. Also idem,  Compulsory Licences  in  South Ajhca, Patent World, February 1994. 

616 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

As  noted,  norms  regardmg  compulsory licensing  as  provided  under  the  South 
Ahcan Patent Act are in compliance with the TRIPS Agreement.lO It should be pointed 
out  that  the  South African Patent  Act  is  silent as  to  exhaustion of rights or parallel 
imports of patented products. 

111.  THE PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES’ LAWSUIT AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF 

SOUTH AFRICA AND DEBATED ISSUES 

On 18 February  1998, forty-two pharmaceutical companies (applicants) brought 
an action before the High Court of South Africa (Transvaal Provincial Division) against 
the  Government  of  South  Afkica  (composed of  ten  respondents)  to  challenge  the 
constitutionality11 of some of the provisions embodied in the Medicines Amendment 
Act 90 of 1997. 

A.  The Lawsuit 

The major complaints of the pharmaceutical companies against the Government of 

South Ahca in the case12 w d  now be summarized. 

Section 15C of the  1997 Amendment Act enables and authorizes the Minister of 
Health,  in  conflict with  Sections 43 and 44 of the  Constitution of the  Republic  of 
South Africa,  1996, Act  108 of  1996 (the Constit~tion)’~ 
to  determine  “prescribed 
conditions” for the supply of “more affordable medicines” in “certain circumstances” 
without  setting out  any policy  considerations  or  guidelines  (alternatively, sufficient 
guidelines) which would  serve to limit the Minister of Health’s authority and power 
to do so. 

The Section also enables and authorizes the Minister of Health, in conflict with 
Sections 43 and 44 of the Constitution, to ‘‘determine’’ the extent to which rights under 
a patent granted in the Republic shall apply, irrespective of the provisions of the Patent 
Act No. 57 of 1978. 

Section 15C enables and authorizes the Minister ofHealth, in conflict with Section 
25  of  the  Constitution,14 to  deprive  owners  of  intellectual  property  in  respect  of 

10  See Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement. 
‘1  The Constitution of South Africa was adopted on 8 May 1996, and amended on 11 October 1996. It came 

into force on 7 February 1997. 

18 February 1998, available at: ehttp://www.cptech.org/ip/health/sa/pharmasuit.html*. 

I*  Pharmaceutical  Company  Lawsuit  against  the  Government  of  South  Africa,  Case  No.  4183/98  of 
13  The two provisions deal, respectively,  with  the Legislative Authority  of the Republic and  the  National 
Legislative Authority under which competent legislative authorities in the national, provincial and local spheres are 
provided. 

‘4  Section 25 relates to property: “(1) No one may be deprived of property except in terms of law of general 
application, and no law may permit  arbitrary deprivation  of property.  (2) Property  may be  expropriated only in 
term  of  law  of  general  application:  (a)  for  a  public  purpose  or  in  the  public  interest;  and  (b)  subject  to 
compensation, the amount of which and the time and manner of payment of which have either been agreed to by 
those affected or decided or approved by a court . . .” 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY IN SOUTH AFRICA 

617 

pharmaceutical products of such property, alternatively to  expropriate such property 
without any provision for compensation to be paid in respect thereof. 

The Section is  discriminatory in respect of the enjoyment of patent rights in the 
pharmaceutical  field,  which  discrimination  is  in  conflict  with  the  provisions  of 
Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement,ls an international agreement binding the Republic 
and  to  which  Parliament  has  gwen  effect  by  the  promulgation  of  the  Intellectual 
Property Laws Amendment Act No. 38 of 1997, and consequently such provision is in 
conflict with Section 44(4) of the Constitution16 read with Sections 231 (2) and 231 (3) 
of the Constitution.17 

Section l(4) of the 1997 Amendment Act has been considered as unconstitutional 
because it authorizes and enables the Minister of Health, in conflict with  Sections 43 
and 44 of the Constitution, arbitranly and capriciously to prescribe the “manner” and 
“conditions”  under  which  international  rendering  for  medicines  shall  be  allowed 
without setting out any policy considerations or guidelines in regard to the manner and 
conditions which would limit the Minister of Health’s authority and power to do so. In 
addition, it authorizes and enables the Minister of Health, in conflict with Section 9 of 
the Constitution18 read with Section 8 of the Constit~tion,’~ 
to discriminate in favour 
of imported medicines to the detriment of the manufacturers of local products. 

Section 22F of the  1997 Amendment Act has been considered as unconstitutional 
because  it  authorizes  and  enables  the  Minister  of  Health  to  control  the  practice  of 

‘ 5   According to Article 27(1), patents shall be available for any inventions, whether products or processes, in 
all fields of  technology,  provided  that  they  are  new,  involve  an  inventive  step  and  are  capable  of  industrial 
application. Patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the place ofinvention, 
the  field  of  technology  and  whether  products  are  imported  or  locally  produced.  According  to  Article 27(2): 
“Members  may  exclude &om patentabdity inventions,  the prevention  within their  territory  of the commercial 
exploitation of which is necessary to protect  ordre public or morality, including to protect  human, animal or plant 
life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment, provided  that such exclusion is not made merely 
because the exploitation is prohibited by [domestic] law.” According to paragraph 3 of the same Article: “Members 
may also exclude &om patentability: (a)  diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans 
or  animals:  (b)  plants  and  animals  other  than  micro-organisms,  and  essentially  biological  processes  for  the 
production of plants or animals other than non-biological and micro-biological processes. However, Members shall 
provide  for  the  protection  of plant  varieties either by  patents  or by  an  effective sui generis  system  or by  any 
combination thereof. The provisions of this sub-paragraph  shall be reviewed four yean after the entry into force of 
the WTO Agreement.” 

’6  It is stipulated in paragraph 4 of Section 44 of the Constitution that when exercising its legislative authority, 
Parliament is bound only by  the Constitution, and must  act  in accordance with, and within the limits of,  the 
Constitution. 
17  Section 231 of the Constitution deals with international agreements: “(2) An international agreement binds 
the Republic only after it has been approved by resolution in both the National Assembly and the National Council 
of Provinces, unless it is an agreement referred to in subsection (3). (3) An international agreement of a technical, 
administrative or executive nature, or an agreement which does not require either ratification or accession, entered 
into by the national executive, binds the Republic without approval by the National Assembly and the National 
Council of Provinces, but must be  tabied in the Assembly and the Council within  a reasonable time.”  Further, 
under paragraph (4): “Any international agreement becomes law in the Republic when it is enacted into law by 
national legislation; but a self-executing provision of an agreement that has been approved by Parliament is law in 
the Republic unless it is inconsistent with the Constitution or an Act of Parliament.” 

18  This Section deals with “Equality” of rights. 
19  This Section provides for the “Application” of Bill of Rights: “(1) The Bill of Rights applies to all law, and 
binds the legislature, the executive, the judiciary and all organs of State. (2) A provision of the Bill of Rights binds 
a natural or a juristic person if, and to the extent that it is applicable, taking into account the nature of the right and 
the nature of any duty imposed by the right . . .” 

618 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

substitution  of  prescribed  medicines  by  being  authorized  and  enabled  to  prescribe 
“requirements €or therapeutic equivalence” without any guidelines, standards or policy 
considerations which would limit the Minister of Health‘s authority to do so. Accordlngly, 
it has been argued that Section 22F discriminates unfairly in favour of the manufacturers 
of  products  quahfying  as  interchangeable  multi-source  medlcines  of  a  prescribed 
memcine,  and  to  the  detriment of  the  manufacturer of such  prescribed  medicine, in 
conflict with Section 9 of the Constitution read with Section 8 of the Constitution. 

It has been alleged unconstitutional the fact that the Minister of Health be allowed, 
in conflict with Section 25 of the Constitution, to deprive the owner of the prescribed 
medicine  of  its  property,  alternatively  to  expropriate  such  property  without 
compensation. Further, it has been considered as unconstitutional that Section 22F forces 
a pharmacist, in conflict with Section 16(l)(b) of the Constitution,20 to inform members 
of the public of the “benefits of substitution” regardless as to whether the pharmacist is 
of the view that substitution is beneficial or not. Therefore, it interferes with the right of 
pharmacists  to  dispense  a  prescribed  medlcine  and  obliges  them  to  dispense  an 
interchangeable multi-source  medicine solely  on  the  basis  of price,  and  is  hence  in 
conflict with Section 22 of the Constitution21 read with Section 8 of the Constitution. 
It should be mentioned that pharmaceutical companies have maintained that Sub- 
Sections 22G(2) and (3) are unconstitutional as they provide for and allow, in conflict 
with  Section  9  of  the  Constitution  read  with  Section 8 of the  Constitution,  unfair 
discriminatory treatment of pharmaceutical manufacturers, pharmacists and holders of 
licences as contemplated in Section 22C( l)(a), inasmuch as the burdens imposed upon 
such pharmaceutical manufacturers, pharmacists and holders of permits are not imposed 
upon other participants in that market. 

Finally, the Sub-sections are in conflict with Section 22 of the Constitution in that 
the  freedom  of  trade  of  pharmaceutical  manufacturers,  pharmacists  and  holders  of 
permits  affected thereby  is  restricted to  such an  extent  that  the  essence of the  right 
enshrined in Section 22 of the Constitution is nuhfied. 

As  mentioned above, at the time of the lawsuit, the Pharmaceutical Research and 
Manufacturers of America (PhRIvLA) urged its government to place South A&ca  on the 
USTR’S Watch  List  and  to  put  direct pressure  on the  South African  government to 
withdraw the  1997 Amendment Act  or  to  amend it, in  order  to  safeguard  the  U.S. 
pharmaceutical industry’s  interests.22  This  was  like  asking  South  f i c a  to  abandon 
the lives of millions of infected people in order to receive reductions in U.S. barriers to 
trade  or economic aid. P h w  maintained that the  continuing threat of broad-based 

receive or impart information or ideas. 

*O  According to Section 16(1)@), everyone has the right to freedom of expression, which includes freedom to 
*’ This Section deals with freedom of trade, occupation and profession: “Every citizen has the right to choose 
their trade, occupation or profession keely. The practice of a trade, occupation or profession may be regulated by 
law.” **  Esme du Plessis, The Battle over Making Medicines Affordable, Managing Intellectual Property, June 1998, at 14. 

THE  PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY’S  MONOPOLY IN SOUTH AFRICA 

619 

compulsory licensing and parallel importation in South a c a  was likely to damage the 
U. S. pharmaceutical industry.23 

While  the  contested  1997 Amendment Act  was  blocked  by  the  pending lawsuit 
launched by pharmaceutical companies, the Minister of Health decided to introduce a new 
Bill to Parliament in November 1998. The Bd, called the South &can  Medcines and 
Medical Devices Regulatory Authority Act (SAMMDRA Act, Amendment Act 132 of 1998) 
became law on 30 April 1999. O n  the initiative of the Minister of Health, and jointly with 
the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of South Afnca, the High Court of South 
A&ica was  requested to set aside the Act  and the proclamation of the President on the 
ground that  the  SAMMDRA Act  had  been  improperly and  prematurely proclaimed  by 
the President. This Act  really  should have  been  introduced in parts;  unfortunately, the 
President was wrongly advised and proclaimed the whole Act on 30 April 1999. 

The SAMMDRA Act aimed at establishing a body called the South Ahcan Medicines 
and Medical Devices Regulatory Authority to replace the Medicines Control Council 
(Mcc).  In addtion, the Act retained all the main contested provisions embodied in the 
1997 Amendment Act. The Transvaal High Court declared the promulgation invalid, 
and the Constitution Court confirmed the decision in February 2000. After that ruling, 
the Minister of Health withdrew the SAMMDRA Act. Accordingly, after the withdrawal, 
the  Principal Act  of  1965 (as revised  in  1990), which  the  SAMMDRA Act  sought to 
replace, regulates and controls medicines in South Mica. 

B.  Outcome ofthe Lawsuit and Related Issues 

On 19 Apnl2001, the pharmaceutical companies that, since 1998, had challenged 
the  constitutionality  of  the  1997  Amendment  Act  via  a  lawsuit,  announced  the 
withdrawal of their action. Following this,  it  has  been left  up  to  the  government to 
implement  the  1997 Amendment  Act  in  accordance with  the  prescribed  legal  and 
administrative procedures.  The South  Afncan  government intends to  go  ahead  and 
promulgate the law (the Medicines Amendment Act 90 of 1997). The Minister of Health 
thus published the Draft Drugs Regulations on 1 June 2001 for public comment.24  The 
commenting period  is  normally ninety  days;  thereafter  the  Minister  of  Health  is  to 
evaluate the comments received and formulate the final wording of the Regulations. 

The settlement of the lawsuit will enable the contested  1997 Amendment Act to 
be put into operation, which wdl permit the importing or producing of cheaper versions 
of patented brand-name  drugs, including HIV/AIDS medication.  The outcome  of the 
case  has  been welcomed by  a  large number  of people and organizations all over the 
world, in and out of South Afiica. Pursuant to the  1997 Amendment Act, a Pricing 

23  See Stephen Harrison, Health Legislation, South African Health Review (hereinafter SAHR), 1999. 
24 Draft  Regulations  in Terms of  Act  101 of  1965, as  amended,  1 June 2001,  available  at:  <(http://www. 
polity.org.za/govdocs/regulations*; see  also  SAPA-AP, South  Afncun Government  Publishes  New  Drug  Regulations, 
Health System Trust, 8 June 2001. 

620 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Committee  will be  set  up  to  advise  the  Minister of Health  on  a  transparent pricing 
system for medicines. In addition, the system of generic substitution, which has major 
benefits for consumers, will be activated. 

In  line  with  the  result  of  the  case,  the  South  %can  National  AIDS Council 
(SANAC) has welcomed the outcome. The Council believes that the settlement of the 
case w d  ensure wide access to affordable drugs for the treatment of the various diseases 
that  affect  the  South African  population,  includmg HIv/AIDs.25 Further,  SANAC has 
maintained that the resolution of the case is a victory not only for South Afiica but for 
all who are engaged in the struggle for affordable drugs throughout the world.26 

Generally speaking, the settlement of the lawsuit is  considered as the triumph or 
victory  of  public  interest  against  the  egoistic  interests  and  monopoly  rights  of 
pharmaceutical companies. Issues  covered by the  1997 Amendment Act  are the most 
controversial ones within the framework of patents. It should be noted that the South 
Afixan Patent Act is silent as to the issue of exhaustion of rights, which relates to parallel 
imports. In other words, the Patent Law has neither explicitly permitted nor prohibited 
parallel imports of patented products. Likewise, the parallel imports of drugs are neither 
permitted  nor  prohibited.  Some  commentators  have  maintained  that  South  Africa 
contravenes the TRIPS Agreement as regards the issue of exhaustion of rights in general 
and parallel  imports in particular.27  This is not  correct, because the TRIPS Agreement, 
via its Article 6, has opted not to deal with this issue.28 That is to say that WTO Member 
States are left free to acknowledge or deny parallel imports. Thus, the South African law 
has not violated the TRIPS Agreement on this issue. 

Another issue relates to compulsory licensing. The Patent Act, in Sections 55 and 
56, provides for this regime in respect of dependent patents and in case of abuse of patent 
rights. The issue raised by  the 1997 Amendment Act is fundamental. Notwithstanding 
conditions set out under the Patent Act, the Minister of Health has been  empowered 
under  the  1997  Amendment  Act  to  grant  compulsory  licensing  to  import  or 
manufacture generic drugs still covered by patent in South Afnca. 

Under the patent system, exclusive rights are accorded to the patentee. Further, it 
is  provided  under  this  system  that  the  manufacturing or import  of  generic  drugs is 
reckoned only after the patent expires. In other words, following this line of reasoning, 
in  principle the  manufacturing  or importing  of generic drugs still  covered by  patent 
amounts to infringement?  Are these rules rational? As  said above, these rules aim at 
protecting the rights of the patentee which are private (individual) in essence, and which 

Numiro special: Brevets Pharmaceutiques, Innovations et Santi  Publique, 1, 2000, 46. 

25  SANAC, Press Release, 21 April 2001. 
26  Id. 
27  See Jh6me Dumoulin, Les Brevets et le  priw des Midicaments, Revue Intemationale de Droit Economique, 
28  S.K. Verma, Exhamtion oflntellectual Roputy Rights and Free  Trade-Article  6 ofthe TRIPS Agreemertt, 29 Iic, 
2y  See  Roberto Mazzoleni  and  Richard  R.  Nelson,  The  Benefits  and  Costs  of Srrong  Pacertent  Protecrion: A 

No. 5,1998,534-567. 

Contribution to the  Current Debate, 27 Research Policy, 1998, 281. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY  IN SOUTH AFRICA 

62 1 

intend to guarantee his economic benefit and interest. The authorizing of the import of 
affordable drugs by the Minister of Health should be considered as exceptional. It aims 
at guaranteeing the public interest and people’s health. 

Iv.  SURVEYS  ON DRUGS PRICING  AND HIV/AIDS IN SOUTH AFRICA 

Protection  of pharmaceutical process  patents  in  general and  product  patents  in 
particular has been, both before and after the enactment of the TRIPS Agreement, one of 
the most debated issues, particularly with regard to developing countries. The reason for 
this is that the price of drugs would increase, to the detriment of consumers.30 It has been 
argued that protection of pharmaceuticals should be left to the discretion of each State.31 
However, the TRIPS Agreement requires WTO Member States to accord protection in 
respect of both pharmaceutical processes  and products under a patent regime.32  South 
f f i c a  provides protection in respect of both process and product patents in regard to 
pharmaceuticals. The reality is that prices of drugs are not affordable. Coupled with the 
increasing number of persons with HIV/AIDS in South Ahca, the necessity of providmg 
affordable drugs to save lives is at the centre of South AfEican reform. 

The  South &can 

government  enacted  the  1997 Amendment  Act  to  protect 
public interest in general, and to provide affordable medicines to people infected with 
HIV/AIDS in particular, and in ths Section figures and data give a clear dustration. 

Drug prices may be considered a crucial element in determining access.33 The non- 
availability of anti-retrovirals in the developing world is due to the price of the drugs 
themselves. Yet another reason used to question the necessity for high drug costs is the 
large profits made by the pharmaceutical industry. Drug prices are therefore considered, 
to a large extent, to be managed by their manufacturers, rather than by the market. They 
are less to do with the manufacturing and development costs of the particular product, 
and more to do with the characteristics of the market in which they are placed.34 The 
cost of anti-retroviral drugs in South Afiica is estimated to be between 2,000 and 4,000 
rand  per  person, per  month,  which  makes  it  difficult  for  most  persons  living with 
HIV/AIDS to purchase these products (8.08 rand = 1 U.S. dollar). 

Efforts to promote the production and use  of generic medicines, while unpopular 
with  the research-based  industry, are effective. They not  only stimulate competition, 
but  also promote the development of local manufacturing concerns.35 There is a need 

1997. 

30  Andy Gray and Fatima Suleman, Drug Policy, SAHR, 1999; Andy Gray and Peter Eagles, Drug Policy, SAHR, 

3’  See J.  NoguCs,  Patents  and  Pharmaceutical  Drugs:  Understanding  the  Pressures  on  Developing  Countries, 24 

J.W.T. 6, December 1990, p. 81, at 95. 

for Developing  Countries, International Business Law Review, 2000, 345. 

32  Tshimanga Kongolo, Agreement on  Trade-Refuted Aspects of 
33  See  Elizabeth  Henderson,  TRIPS  and  the  Third  World:  The  Examole  of  Pharmaceutical  Patents  in  India. 
34  Andy Gray and Thulani Matsebula, Drugs Pricing, SAHR, 2000, at 206. 
35  Ibid., at 211. 

intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS 

19 E.I.P.R. 1997, 661. 

)-New  Strategies 

<

.

 

622 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

for research on generic drugs before the expiry of the protection period of patent and 
this should be encouraged and provided for.36 

Fundamental  ways  to  address  prices  would  be  to  weaken  the  monopoly-like 
powers  afforded the  manufacturers by  the  patent  system  via  compulsory  licensing, 
giving a local firm the right to make a copy of an expensive patented drug at a lower 
price while compensating the  patent holder, and parallel imports, buying drugs from 
countries where prices are already lower.3’ 

South Afhca  has  one of the hghest incidence and prevalence rates of HIVIAIDS in 
the  world.38  Of the  estimated global  total  of  people  with  HIV/AIDS, 71  percent  live 
in Sub-Saharan  Atiica. South M c a  has a high infection rate, and has the largest number 
in the world of people living with HIV. South Africa has been described as having one of the 

PROJECTED NUMBERS OF HIV-INFECTED 

INDIVIDUALS IN SOUTH AFRICA-BEST AND WORST CASE 

Figure  1 

SCENARIOS 

Source: Malcolm Steinberg, Anthony Kinghorn et al., Hrv/ArDeFacts,  Figures  and the  Future,  South 

Aftican Health Review, 2000, at 303. 

Africa, 35 J.W.T. 2, April 2001. 

36  T. Kongolo,  Towards  a  More  Balanced  Coexistence of Traditional  Knowledge and  Pharmaceuticals  Protection  in 
37  Gray and Matsebula, supra, footnote 34, at 214. 
38  Ashraf Grimwood, Mary Crewe and Dawn Betteridge, Hrv/Arm-Cuent 

Issues, SAHR, 2000, at 287-299. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY  IN SOUTH AFRICA 

623 

fastest growing epidemics in the world. In 1990, South f f i c a  had an infection rate of less 
than  1 percent.  By  1999, an  average  infection  rate  of  over  22.4  percent  had  been 
estimated. 

The data in Figure 1 provide a picture of the epidemic for the general population.39 
It is estimated that around 3.5 million South Africans are currently HIV-infected.40 This 
number is  projected to be more than double over the next ten years.  Approximately 
13 percent of all South Af?ican adults aged 20-60  are currently infected and these levels 
could rise to 20-23  percent by 2005 and 22-27  percent by 2010. 

Figure 2 shows the proportion  of all new infections projected between  1995 and 
2010 by  gender and age  categories. The percentage of the  South Afican population 

SOUTH AFRICA-PROPORTION 

OF ALL NEW INFECTIONS PROJECTED BETWEEN 1995 AND 2010 BY 

Figure  2 

GENDER AND AGE 

Source: Malcolm Steinberg, Anthony Kinghorn et al.,  Hiv/AiDFFacts,  Figures and  the Future, South 

A6ican Health Review, 2000, at 304. 

39 Health and Related  Indicators, SAHR, 2000, at 467-477. 

UNAIDS/WHO, Epidemiological Fat Sheet on Hrv/AiDs and Sexually Transmitted Infections, South Afnca  (case 

study), 2000 Update. 

624 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

under the age of 25 years is 53 percent, emphasizing the enormous impact that infection 
of young people will have on the population as a whole. 

There  are  currently  200,000 people  estimated to be living with  AIDS in  South 
Africa. This w d  rise rapidly over the next decade to almost a million by the year 2010 
(see Figure 3).41  HIV/AIDS has an impact on the population size and structure, and on 
the  South  African  economy  as  a  whole  (micro-economy  as  well  as  macro- 
economy).42 

V.  PUBLIC INTEREST AND WELFARE CONSIDERATIONS 

TRIUMPH AGAINST THE 

MONOPOLY OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY 

As  demonstrated in the Figures, the HIV/AIDS issue is the most urgent health care 
challenge  facing  the  South  African  government.  From  this  perspective,  some 
commentators  have  recommended  that  the  South  African  government  declare  a 
national emergency for the health crisis pertaining to HIV/AIDS, thereby circumventing 
the strict regulations and making way for the cheaper medicines.43 

PROJECTED NUMBERS OF AIDS CASES IN SOUTH AFRICA UNDER BEST AND WORST INFECTION 

Figure  3 

SCENARIOS 

Source: Malcolm Steinberg, Anthony Kmghorn et  al., Hrv/ArDs-Facts,  Figures  and  the  Future, South 

African Health Review, 2000, at 305. 

41  Malcolm Steinberg, Anthony Kmghorn et af.,  Hiv/AfDs-Facts,  Figurer and  the Future, SAHR, 2000, at 304. 
42  Id. 
43  See mllAfrica.com)). Analysis, 20 April 2001. 

THE  PHARMACEUTICAL  INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY  IN SOUTH AFRICA 

625 

On 10 May  2001, the Pharmaceutical Society of South A f k a  (PSSA) announced 
that medicines would soon be sold at  cost  price across the country. Pharmacists have 
agreed to adopt a simdar system to that of Australia. According to the PSSA, pharmacists 
would  thus  be  selling  prescription  medicine  to  consumers  at  the  price  they  pay 
wholesalers. An  official professional tariff system  would  be  put  in  place by  which  a 
professional fee would  be  charged  on medicine rather than  a profit mark-up.  In the 
generics sector, all prices are expected to come down even before the coming into force 
of  the  1997 Amendment  Act.44  In  accordance  with  Section  15C of  that  Act,  if  a 
company refuses to bring its prices in line with the reference price, then a compulsory 
licence can be issued to parallel import the drug &om another country. 

The South Ahcan case involves both private interest and public interest. Which 

one should prevail? 

As  mentioned  above, by  permitting  parallel  imports or local  manufacturing  of 
generic drugs, the 1997 Amendment Act aims at tackling the issue of HIV/AIDS to make 
the  necessary  drugs affordable to  all, as SouthAfrica  is  menaced  by  the  widespread 
epidemic of HIV/AIDS. It is known that 70 percent of the HIv/AIDs-infected population 
live  in  Africa.  As  indicated  above,  the  number  of  Hwinfected  people  is  sharply 
increasing, and the implications are enormous. It is likewise known that drugs like AZT 
and other HIv/AIns-related  drugs are very costly in developing countries in general, and 
Atiican countries in particular. In fact, they are sold at almost the same price in both 
developed and developing countries. To safeguard public interest, in accordance with 
the 1997 Amendment Act, the Minister of Health may authorize third parties to import 
HIv/AIDs-related  drugs from  another  country  where  these  drugs are  sold  at  more 
affordable prices,  though  the  drugs are yet  to be  covered by patent in South Africa. 
Another  possibhty  is  the  grant  of  a  compulsory  licence  to  local  companies  to 
manufacture H1V/AIDS-related  drugs in South Africa when these drugs are sold at a price 
that consumers cannot afford. 

The  need  for  more  affordable  HIV/AIDS drugs  is  voiced  all  over  the  world, 
particularly  in  developing countries.45  In  the  light  of  these  considerations, Ahcan 
countries  acknowledged, at  the  Summit  pertaining  to  HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis  and 
Other  Related  Infectious Diseases  held at Abuja  (Nigeria), the  necessity of adopting 
measures to tackle HIV/AIDS infection, because it constitutes an exceptional threat to 
Afiica’s  development and  the  life  expectancy  of the  Atiican  peoples.  These diseases 
entad  a  devastating economic  burden  through  the  loss  of  human  capital,  reduced 
productivity and the &version of human and financial resources to care and treatment.46 

2001. 

44  Online Health  News  Service,  Consumers Likely  to  Gain as  Pharmacy Industry  Faces  Overhaul, SA,  11  May 

45  Arvind Subramanian, The AIDS Crisis, Dterential pricing o f h g s ,  and the  TRIPS Agreement-Two  Proposals, 

4 J.W.I.P. 3, May 2001, pp.  323-336. 

46  OAu/Heads  of  State  and  Govemment/AGcan  Summit on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and  Other  Related 

Infectious Diseases, held at Abuja, Nigeria, on 26-27  April 2001 

626 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

At the Summit held at Abuja, Afiican countries declared: 
“We  consider  AIDS as  a  state  of  emergency  in  the  continent. To  this  end, all  tariff  and 
economic barriers to access to funding of AIDS-related  activities should be 
In the same context, on 5 Apnl2001, the WTO-TRIPS Council heard a proposal by 
the %can  Group of developing countries to convene a Special Session of the Council on 
“the crisis arising from the effects of patents on prices and affordability of pharmaceutical 
drugs.’“+* The Afiican Group noted that HIV/AIDS drugs are being priced at many times 
above the cost of production, including investment into research and development. 

In Kenya, AIDS activists launched a campaign to gather support for legislation for a 
parliamentary debate aimed  at making AIDS treatments cheaper.  Campaigners are  to 
collect  signatures  for  a  petition  entitled  “Put  Life  Before  Profit-Make  HIV/AIDS 
Medicines Affordable to All”. About  2.5  million  adults are  officially estimated to be 
living with HIV in Kenya and about 500 people are said to die of HIv-related infections 
every d a ~ . ~ 9  

At  the end of 2000, there were more than 36 million people in the world living 
with  AIDS/HIV-~O percent  more  than  the  World  Health  Organization (WHO) had 
estimated ten years  earlier. Of the total,  16.4 million are women  and  1.5 d i o n  are 
children. More than 90 percent of all cases occur in developing countries. To date, more 
than 22 million people have died from AIDS in the world.50 

The  WHO has  endorsed  and  encouraged  more  use  of  generic  drugs  and  the 
promotion of essential drugs, but how can we reach the situation where the poor get 
sustainable access to drugs at affordable prices? The pharmaceutical companies have a 
moral obligation to contribute to the solution. But we also need to see protective tariff 
barriers and distribution margins come down, and we need to get political acceptance 
for the concept of “equity pricing”, especially for newer, essential drugs of vital public 
health imp0rtance.5~ Equity pricing means that the poor would not have to pay the same 
price for life-saving drugs as those who are better 0E52 

Of the same point of view, the Secretary-General of the UN has urged a broader use 
of generic drugs against HIVIAIDS, and for them to be sold at an affordable price.53 Also, in 
the speech he delivered at the Ahcan Summit in Abuja, the Secretary-General stressed the 
need for a new global campaign in the fight against HIV/AIDS and a massive mobihzation 
for new h n d ~ n g . ~ ~  
He has further noted that more than 25 d o n  Afncans are living with 

47  Id. Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Other Related Infectious Diseases, Nigeria, 27 April 

48  See South Bulletin,  WTO: Confronting a  Crisis ofpublic Perception on  TRIPS, April 2001. 
49  SAPA-AFP, AIDS Adivists  in Kenya Launch  Campaignfor Cheap Drugs Bill, 28 May 2001. 
50  See cchttp://www.planetwire.orgn. 
5’  Press Release, WHA No. 13, 22 May 1999; WHO, the 53rd World Health Assembly. 
52  Press Release, WHA No. 2, 16 May 2000, the 53rd World Health Assembly. 
53 See Le Monde, Lutfe contre le sida: l ’ o N u  lance une campagne enfaueur des m(dicamentsg~nCriques, 3 March 2001. 
54  See UN Press Release,  UN Secretary-General  Calkfor Large-Scale  Mobilization  in Fight Against AIDS, 4 May 

2001. 

2001. 

THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY’S MONOPOLY  IN SOUTH AFRICA 

627 

HIV, accounting for nearly 70 percent of infected adults and children worldwide. Based on 
h s  recent meeting with the leaders of six of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies, 
the  Secretary-General also  noted  that  they  are  now  ready  to  sell  life-saving  drugs  to 
developing countries at the lowest, and greatly reduced, prices possible.55 

The South Ahcan case has opened another door for more consideration of public 
interedhealth  in  acknowledging  some  exceptions  to  the  well-known  principles 
provided under a patent regime, to balance interests. 

VI .  CONCLUSION 

The enactment of the Medcines Amendment Act  90 of 1997 to make available 
more  affordable drugs in  general, and  HIv/AIDs-related  drugs in  particular, was  the 
source  of  dispute  between  the  South  Ahcan  government  and  the  pharmaceutical 
industry. Under this Act, the Minister of Health has been gwen competence to act for 
the public health needs in some situations despite the existence of patent norms that, 
inter a h ,  accord to the patentee the exclusive right to use his invention. 

It has been demonstrated in this study that pharmaceutical products in general, and 
Hlv/AIDs-related  drugs in particular, are very expensive in South Africa. Given the high 
rate of infected persons in South Africa which constitutes a great menace to the effective 
development of that country, as long as drugs are not affordable, dramatic implications 
are foreseeable. Accordingly, the intervention of the government is more than necessary 
to deal with this issue and to safeguard the public interest. 

In  the  same  way,  the  declaration  of  state  of  emergency,  like  in  Brazil,  is 
recommended  to  permit  the  importation  of  cheaper  generic  drugs  or  the  possible 
manufacturing  of  these  drugs  in  South  Afica  despite  the  existence  of  patent,  in 
accordance with the 1997 Amendment Act, unless the patentee co-operates. 

As advocated by the WHO, promoting the use of generic drugs is required to make 
drugs  more  affordable  to  consumers  in  general  and  HIv/AIDs-infected  people  in 
particular. 

The lesson  to  be  learnt from the  South ffican case  is  that  there  is  a  need  for 
“humanizing” the actual patent system to enable recognition of some “prevailing rights” 
vis-d-vis the exclusive right of the patentee. South f i c a  must therefore amend its Patent 
Law  to  include  a  provision  similar  to  Section  15C of  the  1997 Amendment  Act. 
Combined  with  other  already  existing provisions,  such  as  compulsory licences and 
public interest, it can be expected that public health will always prevail over the egoistic 
interests of pharmaceutical companies. 

55  Id. 


