The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6, pp. 129–141

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12025

The Exhaustion Doctrine and
Genetic Use Restriction Technologies:
A Look at Bowman v Monsanto

Jessica C. Lai
University of Lucerne, Switzerland

The relationship between intellectual property rights and technologies used to protect such rights has been gaining
more and more attention in recent years. This has mostly been in the ﬁeld of copyright and digital rights management
technologies (DRMs). However, challenges raised by certain biotechnologies and their inherent reproductive nature
have caused patent and plant variety right (PVR) owners to similarly create genetic use restriction technologies
(GURTs) to protect their rights. Arguments analogous to those raised in the copyright arena have been made that
GURTs exceed the rights of patentees and PVR owners, and prevent permitted uses from being undertaken. This
article discusses these arguments in light of recent case law on the exhaustion doctrine, exactly what it is that GURTs
do and the permitted uses in patent and PVR law. It concludes that the US Supreme Court decision Monsanto v
Bowman, along with the nature of GURTs, the patent speciﬁcation and the limited exceptions to patent infringement,
mean that GURTs actually ﬁt well with patent law and policy. However, the same cannot be said about GURTs used to
protect PVRs, due to the different standards for registration and more extensive exceptions to infringement.

Keywords patent law; exhaustion; biotechnology; GURTs

Introduction

Since the mid-1990s, Monsanto has been under ﬁre for its “terminator seeds,” or its genetic use restriction
technology (GURT) that involves the genetic engineering of seeds so that they will produce a crop once
planted, but then create only sterile seeds.1 More speciﬁcally, Monsanto’s technology was a variety-level
GURT, or V-GURT. Other types of GURTs allow the production of viable seeds, but none of the seeds will
express a speciﬁc trait (e.g. high vitamin C content), unless the plant is exposed to a certain proprietary
chemical or activator compound, which has to be purchased from the seed company. These are trait-
speciﬁc GURTS, or T-GURTs. The uproar against Monsanto was in most part from developing countries
and civil groups concerned by the fact that GURTs remove the ability of farmers to collect seeds from
their crops, forcing them to buy new seeds every year (Barczewski and Zajadlo, 2011, pp. 190–91;
Dutﬁeld, 2003, pp. 493–4; Oczek, 2000, p. 629; Verzola, 2005). Concerns over food security were also
raised (Burk, 2004, pp. 1569–71; Dutﬁeld, 2003, p. 494; Kariyawasam, 2009, p. 42).

It is important, however, not to forget that there is a valid reason why GURTs were invented. Namely,
to protect seeds that are patented or contain patented subject matter, such as certain genetic sequences (or
genes), or methods for genetically engineering for a speciﬁc trait. Patents give their owners the exclusive
right to make, use, offer to sell, sell and import the invention.2 For example, Monsanto holds a patent for
genetically engineered seeds (such as for soybean plants), which are herbicide resistant.3 Speciﬁcally, they
are able to survive exposure to glyphosate, which is a common ingredient in herbicides, including
Monsanto’s well-known Roundup. The invention of such seeds is expensive (Kariyawasam, 2009,
pp. 40–1; Oczek, 2000, pp. 635, 644). Yet, once purchased, their reproduction is simple and of a
proliferating nature. GURTs allow patentees to enjoy their monopoly for the whole patent term
(Pottage, 2011, p. 108). Similar logic can be applied to plant variety rights (PVRs) (Kariyawasam, 2009,
p. 38), also known as plant breeders’ rights (PBRs), which endow their owners with the exclusive right to

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

129

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

produce or reproduce (multiplication), condition the purposes of propagation, offer for sale, sale or
market, export or import, or stock for any of these purposes, their protected variety.4 At the same time,
there have been arguments that GURTs go beyond the rights of patentees and PVR owners, and prevent
exceptions to patent and PVR infringement from being undertaken (Barczewski and Zajadlo, 2011, p. 191;
Burk, 2004, pp. 1569–71; Kariyawasam, 2009, p. 40).

Due to the controversy surrounding GURTs, Monsanto promised not

to commercialise the
technology (X, 1999).5 Instead, the sale of its patented seeds was conditioned under license upon the terms
that that the purchaser would only plant the seeds in one season, could either consume or sell the resulting
crop, but could not save any of the harvested seeds for replanting, or supply the seeds to others for the
purpose of harvesting. Similar licensing terms can condition the sale of PVR-protected seeds. The
resemblance between such licensing terms and the goal and effect of GURTs is obvious.

Despite the licensing terms, Monsanto faced great hurdles trying to monitor the use of their seeds. The
manpower required to ensure that all of their customers were acting in accordance with the licensing terms
would have been extremely expensive. It would not have been difﬁcult for customers to keep some seed,
creating a market failure (Kariyawasam, 2009, p. 39). At the same time, customers tried to get around the
licensing terms. A case of such nature was heard by the United States Supreme Court (USSC) in early
2013, Bowman v Monsanto.6

The decision of the USSC raised particularly interesting questions about the doctrine of exhaustion
(or ﬁrst-sale doctrine) in patent law. It held fast to the traditional conception of the doctrine, while
highlighting the challenges that biotechnology poses to patent law. More speciﬁcally, it showed that patent
law may not be equipped to deal with technologies that by nature reproduce when used, and thereby
execute two exclusive rights at the same time, that is, the rights to use and to make. Ultimately, the USSC
took a very patentee friendly approach that has huge implications on what purchasers and others may do
with patented seeds. The decision furthermore challenges the supposition that GURTS exceed the patent
rights of patentees.

This article looks at the relationship between the doctrine of exhaustion as per Bowman v Monsanto
and GURTs. It seeks to demonstrate that the USSC decision means that GURTs used on patented seeds in
fact do not do anything more than protect patentee rights. Furthermore, this article will discuss how
comparisons between GURTs over patented seeds and digital rights management (DRM) to protect
copyrighted works (on DRM, see Burk, 2005; Grimmelmann, 2005, pp. 1751–58) are misleading. There
are certainly conceptual commonalities between GURTs being used to protect patent rights and the use of
DRM for to protect copyright. However, statements of their equivalence are based on a misunderstanding
of what exactly it is that GURTs do in comparison to DRM, and a failure to acknowledge the differences
between exceptions to infringement in patent and copyright law. Practical similarities between GURTs
used to protect PVRs and DRM on copyrighted works, however, may be valid.

This article starts with a discussion on Bowman v Monsanto and a European Court of Justice (ECJ)
case dealing with the equivalent European patent, Monsanto v Cefetra, before addressing why GURTs are
merely a technological reﬂection of the doctrine of exhaustion. This is followed by an examination of why
differences between GURTs and DRM, and patent and copyright exceptions to infringement,
consequence that GURTs cannot be viewed as the patent law equivalent of DRM for copyright. Finally,
the article discusses situations where GURTs on seeds may exceed the owner’s rights, namely when those
rights are not patents, but PVRs.

The Exhaustion of Patent Rights in the US

This case related to soybean seeds genetically engineered to be herbicide resistant, as described in the
introduction of this article, patented by Monsanto. The seeds were sold under the licensing conditions

130

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

Monsanto

Licence: May Not 
Collect Seed for

Planting

Bowman 
Main Crop 
for Season 

Grain

Elevator 1 

Bowman 
Late-Season

Crop

Other Purchasers 
of Monsanto’s 

Seeds

Grain

Elevator 2 

Figure 1. Depiction of Bowman’s Actions in Bowman v Monsanto

noted above, namely that they could only be planted once and the purchasers were not allowed to collect
seeds from the resulting crop for planting a second crop. Bowman purchased Monsanto’s soybean seeds
and, in accordance with the licence, planted all the seed and then sold his entire crop to a grain elevator
(which then usually sold this on to an agricultural processor for consumption) (see Figure 1).

Bowman, however, planted two crops per season and not wanting to expend too much for a riskier
late-season planting, did not purchase seeds from Monsanto for his second crop of the season. Instead,
Bowman bought soybean seeds from another grain elevator, where he knew that other local farmers who
used Monsanto’s seeds sold their crops. Upon using a glyphosate herbicide on this second crop of the
season, many of the plants survived (and were, thus, derived from Monsanto’s seeds). He collected seeds
from this second crop and used it the following year for his late-season planting, then the following year
and the following, occasionally purchasing more soybeans from the grain elevator to plant. He managed to
harvest eight crops this way before Monsanto discovered his actions and sued him for infringement of their
patents covering the soybean seed.7

Bowman argued that he was not infringing Monsanto’s patents due to the doctrine of exhaustion.8
After all, there had been three sales before Bowman ended up with the seeds to be planted for his late-
season crop. Furthermore, the sale of seeds between the other purchasers of Monsanto’s seeds and the
grain elevator was a prior-authorised sale, as per the licensing agreement.9 This was rejected by the
District Court and the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit before being appealed to the USSC, which
afﬁrmed the decisions of the lower courts.

The doctrine of patent exhaustion applies when there is the authorised sale of an article embodying the
patented subject matter. The doctrine deems that the patentee’s rights over the physical embodiment are
exhausted upon this authorised sale. An analogous doctrine exists in copyright law, where copyright
owners’ rights are also exhausted upon the authorised sale of a physical embodiment of the copyrighted
work.10 In other words, patentees and copyright owners cannot control how purchasers of the physical
embodiments of their inventions and works use those inventions or works, or whether they on-sell them,
for example. This is because the patentee (or copyright owner) has received his/her reward upon the
payment for the ﬁrst sale.11 If the rights of patentees over the physical embodiments of their inventions
were not exhausted upon an authorised sale, patentees would be able to seek rent from the on-sale of the
embodiment, giving too great a monopoly to patentees. Allowing patentees to control the use of sold

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

131

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

embodiments of their inventions would even endow a real property right, beyond the scope of the patent
grant.

The USSC, however, afﬁrmed that the exhaustion only applies to rights pertaining to the particular
article sold. It does not extend to the invention itself, that is, that which is intangible.12 This means that
only the rights to use, offer to sell and sell are exhausted.13 The right to “make” the invention remains with
the patentee.14 As a consequence, purchasers of physical embodiments of patented inventions may not
reproduce them, which is similarly the case in copyright law (Grimmelmann, 2013).15 This is because the
“patent holder has ‘received his reward’ only for the actual article sold, and not for subsequent recreations
of it.”16 If this were not the case and purchasers were entitled to make and sell reproductions, the patent
monopoly would essentially be over after a single (or a few) sales. This would curtail the reward to
patentees for their invention and, thus, also diminish the patent incentive.17 In other words, if the doctrine
of patent exhaustion extended to the right to “make” the invention, patents would not offer enough of an
incentive to invest in invention. Furthermore, any invention that would take place would not be published
in a patent speciﬁcation, as there would be no incentive to seek a patent. Inventors would prefer to keep the
information and knowledge of the invention a trade secret. This would be bad for society, which wants
information and knowledge disseminated in order for there to be further invention (Chisum et al., 2001, p.
15; Landes and Posner, 2003, pp. 294, 326–32).

The question then was whether Bowman was reproducing or making copies of the patented soybeans
by planting the soybeans he purchased from a grain elevator and the seeds he collected from these crops.
The USSC unanimously held that he was:

He took the soybeans he purchased home; planted them in his ﬁelds at the time he thought
best; applied glyphosate to kill weeds (as well as any soy plants lacking the Roundup Ready
trait); and ﬁnally harvested more (many more) beans than he started with. That is how “to
‘make’ a new product,” to use Bowman’s words, when the original product is a seed.18

Bowman argued that the exhaustion doctrine should have applied to the particular facts at hand
because it is the normal “use” of seeds for them to be planted, and “use” is one of the rights that is
exhausted upon an authorised sale.19 This was rejected by the Court. Though the USSC acknowledged that
“[r]eproducing a patented article no doubt ‘uses’ it after a fashion,” it held that planting was reproduction,
which is “making,” and “making” is a right that is not exhausted.20 Therefore, patentees of seeds can
prevent those who purchase them from harvesting seeds from their crops for planting,21 and from planting
such seeds obtained from other sources.22
Indeed, the greater implication of this decision that “planting¼ reproducing¼ making” is that

authorised purchasers of patented seeds are not allowed to plant these without explicit or implied
permission from the patent owners. Put another way, no one other than the patentees of patented seeds may
plant those seeds, as this would infringe on the exclusive right to make the patented invention, regardless
of the doctrine of exhaustion, as it does not include the right to make. Under the particular facts at hand,
purchasers of Monsanto’s seeds were given explicit permission to plant (and, thus, reproduce and make
their patented invention) through the licence agreement.23 As discussed further below, the USSC ruling as
well as the law in the European Union (EU) elaborated in the following, with respect to the exhaustion of
patent rights (or rather the non-exhaustion), would seem to be consistent with GURTs.

The Exhaustion Doctrine in the EU

Notably, the law regarding the rights of patentees to biotechnology inventions is arguably similar in the
EU, where according to Article 9 of the Biotech Directive:

132

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

The protection conferred by a patent on a product containing or consisting of genetic
information shall extend to all material … in which the product is incorporated and in which
the genetic information is contained and performs its function.24

Although no similar case to Bowman v Monsanto has been heard by the ECJ directly addressing
Article 9 and patent exhaustion, this Article would lend itself to a similar ruling as in the United States. In
2010, the ECJ decided on a case involving Monsanto and its herbicide-resistant soybean patent,25
Monsanto v Cefetra.26 In this case, Monsanto’s invention was being used in Argentina, where it was not
patent protected, turned into meal and imported into the Netherlands, where Monsanto did enjoy patent
protection. Monsanto tested the meal and found their patented DNA sequence and the enzyme it encodes,
which makes soybean plants herbicide resistant.27 As Monsanto’s invention was not patented in
Argentina, this was not a case dealing with the doctrine of exhaustion but rather the extent of patentee
rights (here the right to import) with respect to gene-related inventions.

The Grand Chamber of the ECJ ruled that the term “material … in which” used in Article 9 “implies
that the function is being performed at the present time and in the actual material in which the DNA
sequences containing the genetic information is found.”28 Because meal is no longer living, there was no
way for the DNA to perform its function.29 It did not matter that the DNA had performed its function in the
initial material from which the meal was produced, or that it could be extracted and inserted into a living
cell to perform its function there.30 Therefore, Monsanto lost its case.

From this, one could extrapolate that, had Cefetra imported soybeans rather than soy meal, the ECJ
would have held that they were infringing Monsanto’s patent right to import. This is because the soybeans
would have contained the patented genetic material and been capable “at the present time” to “perform its
function.” This makes sense regardless of whether the Netherlands has a local or universal exhaustion
doctrine,31 as the product was not produced in Argentina under licence from Monsanto.

It is not difﬁcult to take the next step of ﬁnding that Monsanto’s right would also include the right to
plant (as this results in reproduction), because of Article 9, which essentially necessitates that any genetic
offspring containing the patented subject matter fall into the patent rights of the patentee. This is supported
by the fact that the intention behind Article 9 was to extend patent protection and ensure that patentees did
not lose control of their inventions as a result of the ﬁrst-sale doctrine and the ability of many gene-related
inventions to propagate (thereby infringing on the patentee’s right to make the invention). The limitation
within Article 9 that the genetic information perform its function was implemented in recognition of the
fact that genetic information can be bred-out, or may be non-viable in harvested/produced materials
(Kock, 2010, pp. 500, 505).32

The EU Biotech Directive is, thus, clearly targeted at protecting the patentees right to “make” the
patented genetic material. In other words, even had soybeans been produced in Argentina under licence from
Monsanto and imported into the Netherlands with Monsanto’s permission, there would be no exhaustion of
Monsanto’s patent right to make/reproduce the invention and those beans could not be planted without
consent from Monsanto. Indeed, Article 9 seemingly goes further than the Bowman v Monsanto decision,
overriding the doctrine of exhaustion completely, such that the patentee would also have the right to use,
import, sell and so on, as long as the patented genetic material is capable of “performing its function.” Of
course, the sale of seeds would usually (if not always) be under the explicit or implicit condition that
purchasers may use and sell the resultant crop, as was the case the Monsanto and its soybeans.

Article 10 of the Directive supports this ﬁnding, as it stipulates that Article 9 does not apply to
biological material obtained from the propagation or multiplication of biological materials either placed
on the market by the patentee or with the patentee’s consent, if the “multiplication or propagation
necessarily results from the application for which the biological material was marketed, provided that the
material obtained is not subsequently used for other propagation or multiplication (emphasis added).”

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

133

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Article 11 of the Directive limits this to some degree, stating that a farmer who legally obtains certain
plant propagating material has implicit authorisation to use “the product of his harvest for propagation or
multiplication by him on his own farm” as consistent with Article 14 of Council Regulation (EC)
No. 2100/94 of 27 July 1994 on Community Plant Variety Rights. What falls within Article 14 is narrow,
e.g. not including the soy plant. Moreover, as there is no “animal variety right”, a breeder of animal
reproductive material only has the implied consent to use the reproductive material “for the purposes of
pursuing his agricultural activity but not sale within the framework or for the purpose of a commercial
reproduction activity”, the extent and conditions of which are dependent on national laws. Notably, these
only give famers implied rights that the Directive clearly allows one to contract out of. In other words,
licence terms forbidding purchasers from collecting seeds for planting cannot not be said to be contrary to
the policy of the “scope of protection” part of the Directive.

GURTs and DRM
GURTs in a different light. If “planting ¼ reproducing¼ making” and the right to make is not exhausted

When we take the ratio decidendi from Bowman v Monsanto and the apparent law in the EU, we can see

after an authorised ﬁrst-sale, then how are GURTs that are used on patented seeds (or seeds containing
patented subject matter) anything other than the technological implementation of patent law? Put another
way, if all V-GURTs do is prevent seeds from making crops that have viable seeds, they are simply
preventing those who buy patented seeds from “reproducing” or “making” the patented invention beyond
the ﬁrst planting, which is all the purchasers have the right to do anyway. Purchasers of patented seeds
from patentees have at least implied permission to plant the seeds to grow one crop and the V-GURTs
simply preclude the purchasers from infringing on the patentees’ right to “make” the invention beyond
this. As to T-GURTs, which prevent seeds derived from purchased seeds from expressing a desired trait
(likely related to a patent), these are effectively also a reﬂection of the doctrine of exhaustion. The patented
genetic sequence would still be present in the offspring seeds and, thus, “made” when they are planted.
The patentee gives the purchasers an implied licence to continue to plant the collected seeds and, hence,
make the patented subject matter, but retains control of switching-on the genetic modiﬁcation. T-GURTs,
therefore, are like a technological means of ensuring that no one can beneﬁt from making the patented
invention without the patentee’s permission.

Thought GURTs may be compatible with patentee rights and the doctrine of exhaustion, this is not
necessarily to say that it is coalescent with patent law policy as a whole, as they may prevent exceptions to
infringement from taking place. This could upset the patent law balance between ensuring that there is
enough of an incentive for invention to take place and the disclosure of the invention, on the one hand, and
guaranteeing public access to the invention and providing for enough space for future invention to occur,
on the other hand. In this respect, it has been argued that GURTs are the patent law equivalent of DRM and
the circumvention of DRMs)33 for copyright (e.g.
anti-circumvention laws (that protect against
Barczewski and Zajadlo, 2011; Burk, 2004; Dutﬁeld, 2003, p. 494; Verzola, 2005). This is twofold.
Firstly, there is a supposition that, like DRMs, GURTS prevent allowed exceptions from infringement
from taking place. Secondly, it has been stated that, because GURTs themselves are patented, these
patents act like anti-circumvention laws, as they prevent people from tampering or reverse engineering the
GURTs (Burk, 2004, p. 1567). As elaborated in the following, such arguments, as they relate to patented
seeds, are ﬂawed because of a misconception of what it is that patent law protects and also what the
exceptions to infringement are.

Unlike copyright law, which has a myriad of settled exceptions—such as fair use, fair dealing,
exceptions for teaching, private use and academic research—patent law has very few exceptions to
infringement. None are speciﬁcally mandated or delineated under international law.34 Classically, the

134

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

only exceptions found at the national level are for experimental use, government use35 and compulsory
licensing.36 Regardless of that fact that not all states have these exceptions durably implemented or in
practice,37 none of them are prevented by GURTs. DRM can prevent users accessing and/or copying the
protected content, when copyright exceptions often allow certain degrees of reproduction under speciﬁc
circumstances. In contrast, GURTs do not prevent access to the invention, which in the case of seeds is the
genetic content of the seeds. They merely prevent the seeds from creating viable seeds when planted and
mature, or the seeds from expressing a patented genetically engineered trait unless exposed to a certain
compound. For instance, there is nothing stopping researchers from purchasing seeds and looking at the
genetic content and experimenting with it, so far as allowed within their jurisdictions. Moreover, because
of the nature of patent law and the registered patented invention, GURTS have absolutely no effect on
people’s ability to read the patent speciﬁcation and make/use/sell/import it to the extent allowed under the
exceptions in any given jurisdiction. For example, researchers can look at the patent speciﬁcations for the
seeds and undertake their experimental use so far as allowed in their jurisdiction, without even having to
think about GURTs. Likewise, governments (and their agents or contractors) will still be able to read the
patent speciﬁcations for the seeds and exploit the patents, as per the exceptions to infringement. Finally,
exceptions for the purposes of compulsory licences allow the recipients of such licences to exploit the
patent—usually to meet local demand of the invention—and the fact that GURTs are used on the products
marketed by the patentee does not affect this. In other words, access to the intangible invention as per the
patent speciﬁcation is not inhibited by GURTs.

The second line of thought that patents for GURTs are analogous to anti-circumvention laws in
copyright is also ﬂawed. Firstly, as elaborated upon in the preceding paragraph, GURTS do not need to be
circumvented in order for exceptions to patent infringement to be undertaken on patented subject matter
contained in seeds. One can still look at the genetic material held in a seed or go directly to the patent
speciﬁcation. Secondly, simply tampering with or reverse engineering the GURTs is not implicitly patent
infringement of the patents protecting the GURTs. As per the exhaustion principle, once a seed is
purchased, one is only forbidden from “making” the patented invention. On can use, offer to sell, or sell the
invention. It is entirely possible for one to tamper with, deconstruct, or remove the GURT from a seed
without “making” the invention.

To be clear, this article is not commenting on the way in which patentees may use GURT-protected
seeds on the market. It may very well be that such technologies placed on seeds containing patented
subject matter allow patentees to act in anti-competitive ways, however, this is a problem for competition
law. Furthermore, questions regarding food and biosecurity, and ethics and morality are not strictly
speaking questions that patent law can deal with, but rather policymakers and legislators, who may decide
that GURTs are contrary to certain public policies. However, arguments that Article 27.2 of the
Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS Agreement) allows Member States
to exclude GURTs from patentability (such as from Dutﬁeld, 2003, pp. 492, 494) are ﬂawed. This is
because Article 27.2 (which is almost word-for-word implemented in many jurisdictions)38 allows
Members to exclude inventions “the commercial exploitation of which” is contrary to ordre public or
morality. If the commercial exploitation of the GURTs is to protect patentee rights over seeds
encapsulating patented subject matter and is coherent with patent law and policy, it is difﬁcult to see how
this commercial exploitation is contrary to ordre public or morality. Such a conclusion would be an
argument that the entire patent system is in conﬂict with ordre public or morality.

Questioning whether society wants to incentivise the development of GURTs with patents is also
misleading (Dutﬁeld, 2003, p. 492). This is because the patent incentive has a dual nature; regarding the
invention itself and the knowledge that it brings. Perhaps one can question the use of the invention itself for
ethical, moral or competition law reasons. However, there can be little doubt that the biotechnological
information behind the technologies is valuable to society. As noted by Black (2002, pp. 20–1), technology

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

135

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

itself has no intention (its users do) and, according to Pottage (2011), technology in and of itself has no
absolute instrumentality. In other words, there are multiple potential uses of any piece of knowledge or
information. This is why many states allow for the patentability of inventions the commercial exploitation
of which may contravene ordre public or morality, so long as there is one potential exploitation of an
invention that does not.39 Moreover, not allowing patents for GURTS would not prevent their use and
would, thus, not remove any of the concerns raised by proponents against GURTs.

Overall, GURTs ﬁt well with patent law and policy. They are not only a technological reﬂection of the
licensing terms of seed patentees (as noted by Oczek, 2000, p. 646), but are consistent with patent law
itself, both with respect to patentee rights and the exceptions to infringement. The following section
analyses situations where GURTs might go beyond any right of seed manufacturers.

When Might GURTs Go too Far?

There are situations where GURTs could potentially exceed any kind of intellectual property right owned
by a seed company. This is, for example, if GURTs were used on seeds without any patent protection, or
for which patent protection has expired (CBD, 1999, p. 31; Dutﬁeld 2003, p. 491; Kariyawasam, 2009,
p. 40). In other words, when there is no underlying intellectual property that the GURTs are protecting.
This is of course possible. The questions are whether it is probable. If never or no longer patent protected,
there is no reason why consumers would have to go to a single company to purchase seeds. Even if the
seeds had something particular about them, such as a desirable trait, there is nothing to stop other
companies from reverse engineering the seeds and offering identical seeds without GURTs.40 Or if the
seeds had previously been patent protected, competitors could simply read the patent speciﬁcation and
offer the same seeds GURT-free. The same arguments apply for seeds that were never PVR protected, or
for which PVR protection has expired. The market would make it a disadvantage to place GURTS on seeds
that do not have an underlying intellectual property interest.

Another situation where GURTs may exceed the legal rights of seed owners is when they are placed
on seeds that do not have patent protection, but PVRs. PVRs are different from patents in that they
narrowly only protect breeders of varieties.41 Under the International Convention for the Protection of
New Varieties of Plants (UPOV 1991):

“variety” means a plant grouping within a single botanical taxon of the lowest known rank,
which grouping, irrespective of whether the conditions for the grant of a breeder’s right are
fully met, can be

- deﬁned by the expression of the characteristics resulting from a given genotype or
combination of genotypes,

- distinguished from any other plant grouping by the expression of at least one of the said
characteristics and

- considered as a unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated unchanged …42

PVRs traditionally protected cross-breeding, but can now potentially also protect genetically
engineered varieties.43 They are easier to obtain than patents (without qualiﬁcations such as “invention,”
“non-obviousness,” and “utility”)44 and, thus, grant weaker rights. Consequently, the exceptions to
infringement of PVRs under international law are explicitly delineated and broad, unlike under
international patent law. Under UPOV 1991, breeder’s rights do not extend to acts done privately and for
non-commercial purposes, acts done for experimental purposes and acts done for the purposes of breeding

136

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

other varieties.45 Furthermore, Member States may implement an exception “within reasonable limits and
subject to the safeguarding of the legitimate interests of the breeder, restrict the breeder’s right in relation
to any variety in order to permit farmers to use for propagating purposes, on their own holdings, the
product of the harvest which they have obtained by planting.”46 There is, thus, a potential exception for
farmers to save seeds (the so-called “farmer’s right”). Article 17 further allows Member States to restrict
the exercise of PVRs for the purposes of the public interest, including through the authorisation of a third
party to undertake one (or more) of the exclusive rights (with remuneration).

According to Article 16 of UPOV 1991, PVRs:

shall not extend to acts concerning any material of the protected variety, … which has been
sold or otherwise marketed by the breeder or with his consent in the territory of the
Contracting Party concerned, or any material derived from the said material, unless such acts

(i) involve further propagation of the variety in question …

International law for PVRs, thus, comprises the same non-exhaustion of the right to propagate as held
in Bowman v Monsanto. In this respect, GURTs are congruent with PVR owners’ rights. However, GURTs
are arguably an ill-ﬁt to the exceptions to infringement of PVRs compared to patent rights. Firstly, this
is because of the nature of PVRs, which—unlike patents—do not have a speciﬁcation that deﬁnes the
variety at a scientiﬁc level and how to make it. If one cannot actually use the seed for propagation because
of a V-GURT, or because the desired trait of the variety switches off because of a T-GURT, it is not as easy
for one to go back to the PVR registration and create the variety oneself in order to undertake the
exceptions for private and for non-commercial use, or for the purpose of breeding further varieties. This is
especially the case if one is merely a hobby gardener. Experimental use may also be restricted, though only
experimentation through propagation or cross-breeding; a molecular biologist would still be able to
perform experiments on the varieties.

Secondly, GURTs are inconsistent with national laws that allow for farmers to save seeds for planting
(such as the narrow exception in the EU outlined above), or that have compulsory licence mechanisms for
the public interest, allowing third parties to undertake the exclusive rights. If a GURT is placed on a PVR-
protected variety, it may be difﬁcult for a third-party authorised by the government to produce/reproduce
the variety for the public interest in the absence of a patent-speciﬁcation-like disclosure. Furthermore,
though a V-GURT clearly prevents farmers from saving seed (CBD, 1999, p. 31), it is unclear how we
would deﬁne the relationship between a T-GURT and the farmer’s right. T-GURTs do not prevent farmers
from collecting viable seeds, but does the fact that these seeds have their desired traits switched off mean
that the farmer’s right is not met? Are the T-GURTs contrary to the public policy behind the farmer’s right
(as argued by Burk, 2004, pp. 1565, 1569)? Arguably, one could answer “yes” to both questions, if the
PVRs were granted because of those particular traits and we view the exception as applying speciﬁcally to
the variety as speciﬁed in the registration.

Overall, GURTs do not coalesce with PVR law and policy. This is because they offer patent-like
protection, where PVRs are supposed to be weaker in nature. It is furthermore because of differences
between the patent speciﬁcation and the PVR registration, which affects the ability of exceptions to
infringement from being undertaken. In this sense, the use of GURTs to protect PVRs is, thus, analogous to
the use of DRM to protect copyrighted works.

Conclusion

At ﬁrst glance, arguments that the Bowman v Monsanto case is overly pro-patentee and illogical, and that
GURTs surpass the rights of patent owners, seem plausible. However, as this discourse has shown, the

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

137

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

result of Bowman v Monsanto is in many ways logical and necessary because of the public policy reasons
of why we have patent law at all. To not distinguish between the exclusive rights to make from other rights
for the purposes of the doctrine of exhaustion would make a patent of little value. What would be the
purpose of investing large sums of money into invention and the patent grant process, if after a few sales,
the monopoly would be essentially lost? It would be more tempting to keep inventions as trade secrets,
which is undesirable for society, which wants as much new knowledge published as possible in order to
further future invention.

Because the doctrine of exhaustion does not include the right to make the patented invention, and thus
does not include to the right to plant or reproduce it, V- and T-GURTs on sold seeds do not exceed the
patent grant. Arguments that GURTs prevent allowed exceptions to infringement taking place have been
smuggled over from the DRM debate with respect to copyright law. However, as discussed in this text,
these arguments are unfounded because of: (1) the different nature of patented inventions (being disclosed
in a speciﬁcation) compared to the copyrighted work; (2) the different and fewer exceptions to patent
infringement as opposed to copyright infringement; and (3) the dissimilar way in which GURTs function
(to prevent reproduction or trait expression, but not access to the intangible invention) compared to DRMs
(which can prevent access and reproduction).

The doctrine of exhaustion for PVRs similarly does not extend to the right to produce or reproduce the
protected variety. However, GURTs are not a good reﬂection of PVR law and policy. This is because
international law has speciﬁcally outlined mandatory exceptions to infringement, which GURTs may
preclude because PVR registrations do not necessarily allow one to emulate the variety. Furthermore,
GURTs can prevent other exceptions to infringement from being undertaken, such as a farmer’s right or
permitted third-party use.

Therefore, Bowman v Monsanto highlights that GURTs are neither inconsistent with the rights of
patentees, nor patent law policy. However, the use of GURTs to protect the interests of PVR owners
is dubious. This is in most part because PVRs are meant to be weaker rights. They are easier to obtain, do
not require an “inventive” quality and are tempered by more user rights. Thus, though GURTs are in line
with patent rights and policy, which are stronger rights, we may question their use for PVR-protected
seeds.

About the Author

Jessica C. Lai, Frohburgstrasse 3, P.O. Box 4466, 6002 Lucerne, Switzerland; e-mail: jessica.lai@unilu.ch

Notes

1. Different types of GURTS are explained in CBD (1999, pp. 21–30).
2. Article 8 WTO Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS Agreement), Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1C, 1869 UNTS 299; 33 ILM 1197 (adopted on 15
April 1994, entered into force 1 January 1995).

3. US Patent Nos 5.352.605 and RE39,247E.
4. Article 1(vi) International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV 1991) (adopted 2
December 1961), as revised at Geneva (10 November 1972, 23 October 1978 and 19 March 1991). “Breeder” is
deﬁned in Article 14(1).

5. See also <http://www.monsanto.com/newsviews/Pages/terminator-seeds.aspx> (last accessed 27 October
2013). Though rumours are aﬂoat that Monsanto is considering introducing GURTs after all; Ledford
(2013).

6. Bowman v Monsanto, 569 US __ op cit. Kagan J (for the Court) (2013).

138

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

7. Bowman v Monsanto, 1–3.
8. Bowman v Monsanto, 3.
9. Ibid.

10. There is an exception to this in jurisdictions with resale royalty rights (such as the EU and Australia), whereby
artists of artistic works may receive further compensation for further sales of their works, depending on a variety
of factors. Under international law, states may decide whether or not to provide this right; Article 14ter WIPO,
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 828 UNTS 222 (adopted on 9 September
1886), as revised at Stockholm (14 July 1967).

11. Bowman v Monsanto, 4.
12. Bowman v Monsanto, 4–5.
13. Whether exhaustion extends to the right to import depends on whether the jurisdiction where one wishes to import
has a local, regional or universal exhaustion principle (and, thus, the parallel importing laws of the jurisdiction).
For example, though Bowman produced his crop under license from Monsanto, he did not have the right to import
his beans soybeans into the EU, where Monsanto holds an equivalent patent. This is because the EU has regional
exhaustion, such that Monsanto’s rights in the EU are not exhausted by the legal placement of the invention in a
non-EU jurisdiction.

14. Ibid.
15. Grimmelman discusses the challenges to copyright and the exhaustion doctrine with respect to digital

technologies and copyright law.

16. Bowman v Monsanto, 5.
17. Bowman v Monsanto, 5–8.
18. Bowman v Monsanto, 5–6.
19. Bowman v Monsanto, 7–8.
20. Bowman v Monsanto, 8.
21. This holding is consistent with J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc. v Pioneer Hi-Bred Int’l, Inc., 534 US 124, 140 (2001).
22. Bowman v Monsanto, 7.
23. Bowman v Monsanto, 9.
24. EC Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the Legal Protection of

Biotechnological Inventions (Biotech Directive), OJ L 213/13 30.7.98 (emphasis added).

25. EPO Patent No. 0 546 090.
26. Monsanto Technology LLC v Cefetra BV and Ors, ECJ C-428/08 (Grand Chamber, 2010).
27. Monsanto Technology LLC v Cefetra BV and Ors, paragraphs 18–21.
28. Monsanto Technology LLC v Cefetra BV and Ors, paragraph 35.
29. Monsanto Technology LLC v Cefetra BV and Ors, paragraph 37.
30. Monsanto Technology LLC v Cefetra BV and Ors, paragraphs 38–39.
31. The Netherlands, as an EU state, has EU-wide exhaustion. In other words, there is EU-wide exhaustion as soon as

a good enters the EU territory with the consent of the patentee.

32. Article 9 is not relevant for gene-related inventions that are not used in vivo, but only ex vivo or in vitro, and which
are not propagated. This is clear from reading the rest of Chapter II of the Biotech Directive on “Scope of
Protection,” namely Articles 8, 10 and 11.

33. For example, this is particularly strong in the United States; Digital Millennium Copyright Act 1998, Pub. L. No.

105–304, 112 Stat. 2860.

34. Such as the WIPO, Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 828 UNTS 303 (adopted on 20
March 1883, entered into force 16 April 1970), as revised at Stockholm (14 July 1967); or TRIPS Agreement.
35. Also called “crown use” in jurisdictions with monarchies or constitutional monarchies, such as the UK, New
Zealand, Australia and Canada. For the purposes of this paper, the terms government use and governmental
authorisation include crown use and authorisation from the crown.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

139

Jessica C. Lai

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

36. These are the main exceptions. There are other related exceptions. See WIPO (2009, pp. 25–46).

Experimental use is not expressly mentioned in international law, but is potentially allowed under Article 30 of
the TRIPS Agreement, which allows Members to provide limited exceptions to infringement, “provided that such
exceptions do not unreasonably conﬂict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.”
The TRIPS Agreement does not specify exhaustively the grounds upon which crown/government use or
compulsory licensing may take place, only formalistic conditions under which use without authorisation of the
right holder may be allowed (Article 31).

37. For example, the United States has an extremely narrow experimental use exception; Strandburg (2004). Where
experimental use exceptions do exist they are usually drafted with vague terminology incorporating nebulous
distinctions, leaving both owners and users unsure of their positions. See OECD (2002, p. 81). Compulsory
licensing mechanisms have also been poorly used in practice. See ALRC (2004, paragraphs 27.10, 27.18),
Cornish et al. (2010, paragraphs 7–41-7–42, 21–19), Correa (2000, p. 97).

38. For example, Article 6.1 Biotech Directive; s. 14(1) Patents Act 2013 (NZ). The United States does not have such

an exception.

39. For example, “Guidelines for Examination in the European Patent Ofﬁce” (June 2012), at Part G, chapter II-7.
40. Ibid.
41. For a solid overview of the protection of plants via patents or PVRs in Europe, see Bostyn (2013).
42. Article 1(vi) UPOV 1991. “Breeder” is deﬁned in Article 1(iv).
43. Article 14(5)(c) UPOV 1991.
44. PVRs shall be granted when a variety is new, distinct, uniform and stable. Grant cannot be subject to any other
conditions, except for appropriate denomination and other formalities; Article 5 UPOV 1991. Like patents, they
are protected for a minimum of 20 years (except trees and vines, which must be protected for a minimum of 25
years) (Article 19).

45. Article 15(1) UPOV 1991.
46. Article 15(2) UPOV 1991.

References

Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC). (2004) Genes and Ingenuity Report: Gene Patenting and Human

Health. Commonwealth of Australia, Sydney.

Barczewski, M. and Zajadlo, J. (2011) ‘Intellectual Property and Technology—Looking for the Twelfth Camel?’, in
A. Kur and V. Mizaras (eds.), The Structure of Intellectual Property Law: Can One Size Fit All? Edward Elgar,
Cheltenham, UK, pp. 182–92.

Black, J. (2002) ‘Critical Reﬂections on Regulation’, Australian Journal of Legal Philosophy, 27, 1–35.
Bostyn, S. J. R. (2013) ‘Patentability of Plants: At the Crossroads between Monopolizing Nature and Protecting

Technological Innovation?’, The Journal of World Intellectual Property, 16, 105–49.

Burk, D. L. (2004) ‘DNA Rules: Legal and Conceptual Implications of Biological “Lock-Out” Systems’, California

Law Review, 92, 1553–87.

Burk, D. L. (2005) ‘Legal and Technical Standards in Digital Rights Management Technology’, Fordham Law

Review, 74, 538–73.

Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). (1999) ‘Consequences of the Use of the New Technology for the Control
of Plant Gene Expression for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biological Diversity’, Subsidiary Body on
Scientiﬁc, Technical and Technological Advice, Fourth Meeting (CBD Doc. UNEP/CBD/SBSTTA/4/9/Rev.1).
Chisum, D. S. Nard, C. A. Schwartz, H. F. Newman, P. and Kieff, F. S. (2001) Principles of Patent Law, 2nd edition.

Foundation Press, New York.

Cornish, W. Llewelyn, D. and Aplin, T. (2010) Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyright, Trade Marks and Allied

Rights, 7th edition. Sweet & Maxwell, London.

140

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

The Exhaustion Doctrine and Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

Jessica C. Lai

Correa, C. (2000) Integrating Public Health Concerns into Patent Legislation in Developing Countries. South Centre,

Geneva.

Dutﬁeld, G. (2003) ‘Should We Terminate Terminator Technologies’, European Intellectual Property Review

(EIPR), 25, 491–5.

Grimmelmann, J. (2005) ‘Regulation by Software’, The Yale Law Journal, 114, 1719–58.
Grimmelmann, J. (2013) ‘ReDigi, Digital First Sale…and Star Trek’, Publishers Weekly. Available at <http://www.
publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/digital/copyright/article/56646-grimmelmann-redigi-digital-ﬁrst-sale-and-
star-trek.html> [accessed on October 2013].

Kariyawasam, K. (2009) ‘Terminator Technology as a Technological Means of Forcing Intellectual Property Rights in
Plant Germplasm: It’s Implications for World Agriculture’, European Intellectual Property Review (EIPR), 31,
37–44.

Kock, M. A. (2010) ‘Purpose-bound Protection for DNA Sequences: In Through the Back Door?’, Journal of

Intellectual Property Law & Practice, 5(7), 495–513.

Landes, W. M. and Posner, R. A. (2003) The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law. Harvard University

Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ledford, H. (2013) ‘Seed-Patent Case in Supreme Court: Loss of Patent Control Could Rekindle “Terminator”

Technology’, Nature, 494, 289–90.

Oczek, J. P. (2000) ‘In the Aftermath of the “Terminator” Technology Controversy: Intellectual Property Protections
for Genetically Engineered Seeds and the Right to Save and Replant Seed’, Boston College Law Review, 41(3),
627–57.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2002) ‘Genetic Inventions, Intellectual

Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies’.

Pottage, A. (2011) ‘Biotechnology as Environmental Regulation’, in A. Philippopoulos-Mihalopoulos (ed.), Law and

Ecology: New Environmental Foundations. Routledg, Oxford, UK, pp. 105–25.

Strandburg, K. J. (2004) ‘What Does the Public Get? Experimental Use and the Patent Bargain’. Wisconsin Law

Review, 1, 81–155.

Verzola, R. (2005) ‘Software and Seeds: Lessons in Community Sharing’, Seedling, 3, 13–17.
World, Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (WIPO). (2009) ‘Exclusions from Patentable Subject Matter and Limitations to the

Rights’, Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Thirteenth Session (WIPO Doc. SCP/13/13).

X (1999) ‘Terminator Genes: Fertility Rights’, The Economist, 353(8140), 104.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

141


