The  (2010) Vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 315–365

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00389.x

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in
Continental Europe than in the United
Kingdom? A Comparative Analysis of the
Recent Case Law in France, Italy and the
United Kingdom

Estelle Derclaye
Associate Professor and Reader in Intellectual Property Law

This article shows that despite a vast harmonization programme in the ﬁeld of copyright
and registered design right, the degree of protection of designers in the European Union
still differs greatly. This is owed to the lack of harmonization in copyright and unfair
competition laws. The article shows
there a difference in the
scope of protection between the common law and civil law countries but also between civil
law countries. The countries chosen for the comparison are the United Kingdom, France
and Italy. The article concentrates on the case law of the last 5 years and concludes that
there is a need for further harmonization in the ﬁelds of copyright law and unfair compe-
tition law, as well as guidance from the European Court of Justice on the test of infringement
for registered designs as it has been interpreted very differently in at least two member
states.

that not only is

Keywords designs; copyright; unfair competition; Europe

Since the beginning of the 1990s, the European Union (EU) has undertaken a vast
programme of harmonization in the ﬁeld of copyright and designs. However, such
harmonization work has not (yet) encompassed all areas of copyright and even
though the directive on the legal protection of designs1 has harmonized most of the
aspects relating to designs, some of its important concepts have been interpreted
differently by the national courts. Aspects of products can be protected across
Europe, not only by design right and copyright but also by unfair competition. As
most of unfair competition law is still governed by national law,2 it is readily
apparent that the degree of protection can vary depending on the member state
where protection is sought. This article shows that despite the almost sterling
harmonizing results achieved by the Design Directive, the EU’s piecemeal harmo-
nization in the two legal ﬁelds of copyright and unfair competition law has led to
rather important differences between European countries in the scope of protection
for designs of products (and this article does not touch upon the protection of
designs by trademarks, which renders the situation even more complex). As a result,
designers are better protected in the EU’s civil law jurisdictions in comparison with the
United Kingdom. Furthermore, the analysis reveals that some civil law jurisdictions

r 315

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

protect designers better than other civil law jurisdictions. The article focuses mainly
on the protection of designs of fashion articles and accessories (i.e. clothes, patterns,
shoes, hats, fashion shows, belts, bags, jewellery). France and Italy have been
chosen because they are undoubtedly, with the United Kingdom, the European
fashion capitals and an abundant body of case law has already developed in this
ﬁeld. The article focuses on the recent case law, i.e. that of the last 5 years, as it
coincides roughly with the beginning of the litigation on the new design laws at
national and Community levels (the Design Directive had to be implemented by 28
October 2001 and the Regulation came into force on 6 March 2002).3 The
discussion concentrates on the important features concerning the degree of protec-
tion designers can receive, namely the subject matter and protection requirements,
rights4 and infringement. There is virtually no recent case law on the issues of
defences and authorship/ownership. As to duration, owing to European harmoni-
zation, there are no differences between the countries reviewed and the United
Kingdom, although there are some small idiosyncrasies in Italy and the United
Kingdom. When discussing statutory laws on designs, as they are all inspired from
the Design Directive, reference will only be made to provisions that are dissimilar to
their UK equivalents or provisions that left room for interpretation. Nonetheless,
from time to time, examples from the case law will be given to illustrate similar
rules. The article concentrates only on current substantive law. It is, however,
recognized that the present disharmony between member states laws in the ﬁeld of
design protection dates back a long time and results from different legal cultures
and development. Therefore, a historicolegal analysis of the reasons behind the
current disharmonized state of the law is beyond the scope of this article but would
deserve to be undertaken. The article is divided into three sections: copyright law,
design law and unfair competition law. Each section is further subdivided by
country, examining the legal situation ﬁrst in France, then in Italy and ﬁnally in the
United Kingdom. The last section makes comparisons and draws conclusions. As
the Design Directive is a relatively new and purely European instrument, it is brieﬂy
introduced before the ﬁrst section for the beneﬁt of the many non-European readers
of this journal.

Preliminaries: The Design Directive in a Nutshell

In the EU, design law is regulated by national laws on copyright and unfair
competition, and also by two Community instruments, the Design Directive and the
Design Regulation. The latter is substantially identical to the former so that a
presentation of the Design Directive is sufﬁcient for the purposes of this article. The
Design Directive aims to protect the ‘‘appearance of the whole or a part of a
product resulting from the features of, in particular, the lines, contours, colours,
shape, texture and/or materials of the product itself and/or its ornamentation’’. This
is how ‘‘design’’ is deﬁned in the directive’s ﬁrst article. Designs are protected if they
are new and have individual character. For complex products (those that can be

316

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

assembled and disassembled), each component part must have these two character-
istics and, in addition, must be visible during the normal use of the product (article
3). Novelty means that the design must differ in material details from designs that
have been made available to the public before the date of ﬁling of the application for
registration or, if priority is claimed, the date of priority (article 4). Paragraphs 1
and 2 of article 5, respectively, state that:

1. A design shall be considered to have individual character if the
overall impression it produces on the informed user differs from the
overall impression produced on such a user by any design which has
been made available to the public before the date of ﬁling of
the application for registration or,
if priority is claimed, the date
of priority. 2. In assessing individual character, the degree of freedom
of
in developing the design shall be taken into
consideration.

the designer

Article 6 deﬁnes what is meant by disclosure for the purposes of assessing
novelty and individual character. Article 7 excludes certain designs from protection,
those solely dictated by their technical function and those of interconnections (but
those designs of interconnections that allow multiple assembly or connection of
mutually interchangeable products within a modular system can obtain protection).
Designs contrary to morality and public policy are also excluded from protection
(article 8).

The scope of protection, which, in other words, is the test for infringement,
includes ‘‘any design which does not produce on the informed user a different
overall impression’’ (article 9). Designs are initially protected for 5 years from the
date of ﬁling, a term that can be renewed up to a maximum of 25 years (article 10).
Article 11 lists the grounds of refusal or invalidity of designs, among which one
ﬁnds, for instance, that the design is not a design, that it is not new, that it breaches
a copyright or a trade mark right, etc. Finally, articles 12 and 13 deal with rights
and exceptions. The right holder has the exclusive right to use the design and to
prevent any third party not having his consent from using it. This includes but is not
limited to ‘‘the making, offering, putting on the market, importing, exporting or
using of a product in which the design is incorporated or to which it is applied, or
stocking such a product for those purposes’’. In this respect, article 15 provides for
the application of the exhaustion of rights. The last two substantial provisions
concern the relationship between registered design and other laws. Article 16 allows
the cumulation of national registered design rights with unregistered design
rights (UDRs), trade marks or other distinctive signs, patents and utility models,
typefaces, civil liability or unfair competition, both at national and Community
level where relevant. Article 17 forces member states to cumulate copyright
protection with design protection if
the two intellectual
property rights are both met, something some member states’ laws did not allow
previously.

the conditions of

r 317

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Copyright Law

France
Statutory Law
Protected Subject Matter. In France, as in Italy and other civil law countries, works
are protected under the exclusive condition that they are original expressions. In
contrast with the United Kingdom, works do not need to be ﬁrst categorized.5
This feature of continental copyright law is by deﬁnition more protective as
potentially anything can be protected by copyright. This has been illustrated
recently by the perfume cases in France and the Netherlands6 and in the fashion
industry, by a recent French Supreme Court (Court of Cassation) case that held
that fashion shows are protectable by copyright.7 The French copyright provisions,
which are contained in Book I of the 1992 Intellectual Property Code (IPC) as
amended, enumerates a non-exhaustive list of works that can be protected including
works of applied art and fashion articles. The relevant provisions of Book I of the
IPC state:

Article L. 111-1 The author of a work of the mind, from the simple fact
of its creation, beneﬁts from a right of intangible property that can be
opposed to all.

Article L. 112-1 The provisions of this Code shall protect the rights of
authors in all works of the mind, whatever their kind, form of
expression, merit or purpose.

Article L. 112-2 The following in particular, shall be considered works of
the mind within the meaning of this Code: . . .

101 Works of applied art . . .

141 Creations of the seasonal industries of dress and articles of fashion.
Industries which, by reason of the demands of fashion, frequently renew
the form of their products, particularly the making of dresses, furs,
underwear, embroidery, fashion, shoes, gloves, leather goods, the
manufacture of fabrics of striking novelty or of special use in high
fashion dressmaking, the products of manufacturers of articles of
fashion and of footwear and the manufacture of fabrics for upholstery
shall be deemed to be seasonal industries.

Works of applied art are those that have a utilitarian function. A wide range of
functional articles has been held protectable by the courts. For instance, a salad
basket,8 a bottle opener,9 a signalization mast and packaging for quail’s eggs (for
references, see Lucas and Lucas, 2001, p. 75, fn. 40). Relevant to the fashion industry,
hair styles, for instance, have already been long protected,10 as well as a jumper model11
and, more recently, a model’s make-up (Gauthier, 2001, p. 111).12 The protection’s
limit is ‘‘purely’’ functional articles. This limit is reﬂected in the ﬁeld of designs in

318

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

article 7 of the directive, which excludes designs solely dictated by function and
interconnection features. In France, this is known as the theory of multiplicity of
shapes, which applies to both copyright and design right. The theory means that
once there is place for arbitrary shapes, copyright protection is possible. But for
some commentators, it should not mean that so long as it is possible to conceive
several possible shapes, copyright subsists (Lucas, 2006, p. 108, no. 125). What is
relevant is the functional aim not the utilitarian result. Thus, according to them,
copyright can subsist only if the author is animated by aesthetic preoccupations
(Lucas, 2006, p. 108, no. 125). As a result, a shape without being exclusively
functional can be insufﬁciently arbitrary to reveal the personality of the author and
thus not be protected by copyright (Lucas, 2006, p. 109, citing other authors). This
analysis means that a lot of works of applied art cannot beneﬁt from copyright law’s
protection.

Another important feature of French copyright law is the theory of the unity of
art, which is enshrined in articles L. 112-1 and 513-2 of the IPC (Greffe et al., 2008,
pp. 50, 62). According to this theory, there should be no criterion to distinguish
between art and industry because otherwise it would force courts to make subjective
aesthetic judgements (Suthersanen, 2000, p. 137). In other words, art is ‘‘dedicated
to unity in its most diverse manifestations, it can be deﬁned neither by beauty nor
even by the aesthetic feeling it tends to arouse’’ (P ´erot-Morel, pp. 46–7).13

The theory of the unity of art thus implies that there is total cumulation between
copyright and design laws (Greffe et al., 2008, pp. 49 ff).14 It means that the owner
of a registered model can invoke design and copyright laws separately or together so
long as the protection requirements of both rights are fulﬁlled (Dreyfus and
Thomas, 2006, p. 280). It also means that the duration of the design right is
prolonged by that of copyright if the two protections subsist (Dreyfus and Thomas,
2006, p. 280). But this does not mean that design protection can be sought at the
expiry of the copyright (Gauthier, 2007, p. 130). In any case, the design would not be
new anymore. In summary, the maximum length of protection possible is 70 years after
the death of the designer. It is interesting to have both protections because the
modalities for seizures or distresses and the sanctions are different in the two laws.15

Protection Requirements. What are the protection requirements? Ideas are, like in the
United Kingdom and Italy, and virtually everywhere in the world (following article 9.2
of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights [TRIPS
Agreement]), not protected. The requirement of originality is not stated in the statute
but in the case law. Originality means that the author must have expressed his personal
stamp in the work but merit or an artistic or aesthetic aspect is not required.

Rights and Infringement. Article L. 122-4 prevents reproduction be it total or
partial, in any form, and includes adaptation and arrangement. As ideas are not
protected, there cannot be infringement if the defendant takes an idea of the
claimant’s work. Another principle is that the more original a work is the more

r 319

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

protection it receives (Lucas, 2001, p. 242). Courts appreciate infringement by
looking at the similarities (Gauthier, 2007, pp. 831–6). After having done that, they
look at differences. A total resemblance is not needed; what is important is the
overall impression (Dreyfus and Thomas, 2006, p. 334; Gauthier, 2001, p. 708,
citing cases). If the differences do not destroy the overall impression, there is
infringement. On the other hand, if the second works presents differences that are
characteristic to it, then there is no infringement (Gauthier, 2001, p. 709). But there
can be partial infringement when the infringer has added some personal creation to
the unlawful copying (Gauthier, 2001, p. 710). To determine whether there is
infringement, one seeks to ﬁnd whether the characteristic elements of the work have
been copied (Gauthier, 2007, p. 831; Lucas, 2001, pp. 242, 250, no. 287). Resem-
blances arising from the functional elements are not relevant. Confusion is an
indication that there can be infringement but it is not one of its conditions (Lucas,
2001, p. 243).

Case Law
A recent decision of the Court of Cassation has shown how broad the deﬁnition of
‘‘work’’ is in France. The French Supreme Court held that fashion shows could be
protected by copyright.16 In this case, several professional photographers, who had
been invited to fashion shows and had been allowed to take photographs only for
the speciﬁc press organizations who had asked for them and only for information
purposes, subsequently uploaded the photographs and also videos of the shows on a
website. The French Federation of Couture and several haute couture companies
(including Chanel, Christian Dior and Hermes) complained to the central unit for
the repression of industrial and artistic infringements, following which the French
equivalent of the Crown Prosecution Service sued the photographers for copyright
infringement. The Paris Court of Appeal (CA) held that they infringed the copy-
right not only in the claimants’ clothes but also in the fashion shows themselves.
Before the Court of Cassation, the defendants argued that the making available of
the photographs on the internet was allowed by the exception for the purposes of
reporting current events.17 They also argued that they had an implicit authorization
to communicate the works to the public. In a handful of paragraphs, the Court of
Cassation simply dismissed the photographers’ appeal by stating that the CA had
legally justiﬁed its decision.

This case shows the generosity and malleability of continental laws and the
potentially long list of fashion creations that can obtain protection through the very
generous author’s right regimes. The shows themselves are protected (supposedly as
choreographies) as well as the clothes and other fashion accessories used in the
shows.

Otherwise, the most recent case law of the French Supreme Court and the
courts of appeal shows a straightforward application of the copyright principles
exposed above.

320

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

Following the theory of the multiplicity of shapes, courts have refused copy-
right protection to underwear,18 to a bottle’s cap19 and to tiles, because their novelty
consisted above all in making water ﬂow better. However, the distinctions drawn
are not always clear. Courts contradict themselves sometimes (Gauthier, 2001, p.
119).

As regards the protection requirements, early decisions, just after the entry into
force of the new design provisions, did not apply the law correctly. They confused
the protection requirements and infringement tests of copyright law with those of
design law.20 The fourth chamber of the CA Paris (one of the most proliﬁc counts in
this area) sometimes made a clear distinction between the requirements of copyright
and design21 but, most of the time, made a less clear distinction, bluntly mixed the
notions of the two laws or inverted them.22 The most surprising is that it is not only
the same chamber of the CA Paris, but the same section, which often delivered
decisions going in opposite directions. Worse, the CA Paris even broke an
important copyright rule. In a case concerning signalization panels, the court held
that there should be an aesthetic intention that makes the object ‘‘merit’’ copyright
protection.23 However, it is well settled that the notions of aesthetics and of merit
are absent from French copyright law. Finally, in 2007, the Supreme Court put an
end to this confusion and reminded that, in copyright law, the protection require-
ment is originality not novelty.24 Also on the notion of originality, courts had
previously rightly recalled, and, afterwards, continued to apply, the principle that
the combination of known elements does not exclude creativity per se.25

After the Supreme Court’s ruling, the CA Paris came back to a correct
application of copyright principles. In a case involving an earring combining corals
and shells, the court agreed that the design was protected (the stamp of the author’s
personality was present) and that the defendant, H&M, reproduced the original
characteristics of the claimant’s design. The change in the colour did not affect the
global impression.26 In another case involving the famous Longchamp bags, the
court held that, in copyright law, infringement is to be assessed by looking at
whether the original elements have been copied not whether there is confusion for
the average consumer.27 In April 2008, the court held that socks were copyright-
protected as they showed the personality of their author, Delphine Murat.28 She
had made choices about the shape, size of ribbons or laces and the way they are to
be laced around the ankle or leg. It did not matter that elements composing the
socks were banal as long as the combination (such as adding ribbons) was original.
The appreciation must be made globally. As the overall impression was similar for
two models of socks, they were infringed.

Italy
Statutory Law
Protected Subject Matter. The Italian Copyright Act dates from 194129 and has
been amended to take into account the several copyright directives and the
Design Directive. As in France and other civil law countries, only originality

r 321

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

is required to gain protection and works do not need to be ﬁrst catego-
rized. According to article 1, copyright attaches to:
‘‘all works of the mind
having a creative character which belong to literature, music, ﬁgurative
arts, architecture, theatre or cinematography, whatever their mode or form of
expression’’.

As in France, the act then enumerates a non-exhaustive list of works that
can be protected (e.g. see Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, pp. 1487–9)30 such as,
relevant to our discussion, choreographic works, works of the ﬁgurative arts and,
most importantly, works of industrial design that present per se a creative character
and an artistic value (article 2). This last paragraph (article 2.10) was modiﬁed
by the act of 2 February 2001, n. 95, which implemented the Design Directive.
Indeed, in the past, Italy precluded the cumulation of copyright and design, which is
now mandated by the Design Directive. This was known as
the rule
of the scindibilita` (separability) (e.g. see Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 343).
Therefore, the act deleted the relevant provision (article 2.4) of the 1941 Italian
copyright act, which prevented industrial designs from being protected also by
copyright. However, article 2.10’s ambiguous wording (‘‘per se’’ and ‘‘artistic
value’’) does not mean that the criterion of separability has been reintroduced
(Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 345; Musso, 2008a, p. 80). Many commentators
therefore think that no aesthetic or value judgement should be made for industrial
designs (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 346; Musso, 2008a, p. 68). However,
in effect, because of its ambiguity, the requirement is susceptible to diverse
(Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 346)31 and could well
interpretations
have reintroduced the criterion of separability.32 As a result, the criterion of artistic
value is also possibly anti-constitutional. Commentators therefore think that the
requirements of creative character and artistic value are different (Fabiani, 2008,
p. 495).33 Creative character needs to be present in any copyright work while, for
industrial designs, artistic value is necessary in addition to it. The concept of creative
character is uncontroversial and, like in France, it means the personal elaboration of
the author capable of expressing a degree of originality, even if modest.34

Protection Requirements. As in France and the United Kingdom and other
countries, copyright does not protect ideas or information (e.g. see Marchetti and
Ubertazzi, 2007, pp. 1489–90). This is stated in article 6 of the act. There is also no
protection for methods or styles of fashion. For this reason, the Court of First
Instance (CFI) Milan ruled in the 1950s that a lady’s head-dress remained
unprotected by copyright.35 To be protected, the work must display a creative
character and an intellectual effort (articles 1 and 6). This criterion is similar to that
required in France. As has been noted above,
it seems that the criterion of
originality (creative character and artistic value) is different for industrial designs.
We will see below how courts have interpreted it.

Rights and Infringement. The reproduction can be partial but the work must be
recognizable in its original elements in the second (alleged infringing) work (Musso,

322

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

2008a, pp. 262–3). If those characteristics are present, it is irrelevant that the second
work is creative as well (Musso, 2008a, p. 265). Nevertheless, a ‘‘holistic’’ compar-
ison must be made between the two works. So, if the second work is a real
recreation that in fact is only inspired from the previous work, there will be no
infringement (Musso, 2008a, pp. 266–7). Accordingly,
it makes sense that a
registered design is infringed if it is reproduced in a painting, drawing or photo-
graph (Musso, 2008a, pp. 74–5) and not only as such, that is, in the form of the
same three-dimensional object. A French court recently gave a similar ruling.36

Duration. There are some idiosyncrasies relating to the duration of copyright works
in Italy.
‘‘Simple photographs’’, i.e. not original ones, are protected 20 years
from their making (article 92). This may be of interest to fashion houses who hire
photographers to make pictures of their works, although generally they will
be original and, thus, the copyright will last for 70 years post mortem auctoris
(p.m.a.) More on point was the new rule for works of applied art, which stated
that they beneﬁt from 25 years p.m.a. rather than the normal longer duration of
70 years p.m.a. (article 44 of the act of 10 February 2005, n. 30) (Guizzardi, 2005,
pp. 106–10; Venturello, 2005, p. 210). The rationale behind this shorter duration
was the fear that owners of copyright on designs are more likely to have a monopoly
that would be anti-competitive. However, the rule was changed back to the normal
copyright duration of 70 years p.m.a. following an infringement action from the EU
against Italy.37

An unresolved issue is what happens when there is overlap between copyright and
registered design when the latter’s duration is over and the former still continues.
Under one interpretation, it could mean that the expiration of the design right
means consent to the industrial use of the product but not to use in its artistic
function. Another interpretation could be that the owner of the design registration
can beneﬁt from copyright protection for the ordinary duration but still within the
limits of the industrial function of the product. A third interpretation is that there
should be a joint and inseparable circulation (Musso, 2008a, pp. 87–8).38 Thus, it is
far from certain that total cumulation applies in Italy.

Case Law
First of all, it should be noted that none of the decisions elaborated on the
infringement test as the infringements seemed to have been straightforward in the
several cases. This section’s emphasis will therefore be on protected subject matter
and protection requirements. The Italian courts have correctly applied the new law
by always reminding that the inseparability rule is now irrelevant.39 However, their
interpretation of the new requirement of creative character and artistic value varies.
Indeed, the concept of artistic value seems to require something in addition to
creative character, which is the only requirement for all other works. It has been
noted that, up to 2003, courts correctly applied the law without making a
distinction with other copyright works on the criterion of originality.40 However,
later, courts interpreted the double criterion in very different ways, which now

r 323

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

generates legal uncertainty. Sometimes,
it has been interpreted very vaguely,
sometimes in more detail. Sometimes courts have clearly said that artistic value
was a separate criterion not equal to creative character, adding what they meant by
that. Often, courts also looked at the prizes and awards that the design objects
received to determine their originality. Let us review these decisions in turn.

In the ‘‘vague’’ category, one decision can be quoted. It relates to the Wagenfeld
Lamp produced by Technolumen, under a licence agreement with the creator,
Professor Wagenfeld, who died in 1990.41 The lamp was inspired by the Bauhaus
movement (1920s). The court said that there was no doubt that the design presented
a creative character of artistic value. This was because of:

the special nature of its shape and structure, the harmony and balance of
its lines, the artistic expression of a creative and aesthetic search for the
conceptualisation of a ‘‘type’’ of table lamp carried out in the context of
the Bauhaus movement.

The defendant’s lamp was identical so there was infringement. It is not clear
from this judgement if the two criteria are separate or not and whether aesthetic
value is required.42

Other decisions gave a more detailed interpretation of the new requirement. For
most of them, artistic value is not an additional requirement. However, their rulings
seem to look for something in addition to the ‘‘normal creativity’’, which is required
for all other works. A ﬁrst case concerned jewels that conjured up the works of
Picasso, Miro` and Modigliani.43 They were considered original and infringed. The
court deﬁned the criterion of originality as follows: ‘‘the works show the artistic
intuition which inspires them, evidencing also the emotions that they succeed to
transmit to the observer, so that one can recognize them a creative character so to
render them protectable as copyright works’’ (emphasis added).

Thereafter, the court also said that the jewels showed ‘‘personal elaboration’’
and an ‘‘original remembrance’’ of the works of the painters. Such elaboration had
a particular character also in relation to the form of the jewels. The court also held
that the terms ‘‘per se’’ do not mean that courts must determine the aesthetic value
of the work. Otherwise, it would completely defeat the deletion of article 2.4 and
reinstate the separability rule. The court seemed to say that the artistic value is
related to creativity.44

Similarly, the CFI Bologna held that the expression ‘‘artistic value per se’’ does
not require more creativity in the quantitative sense—which would be an aesthetic
subjective standard—but a different attitude from the object. This means an
expression of the personal representation of the object by the author; it must be
an ‘‘artistic object’’ having an autonomous value in the framework of a separate
circuit.45 This seems to mean that the object must also be able to circulate on the
‘‘art market’’ (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 347).46 Another decision involving
the design of a lamp held that a creative act even minimal, which manifests itself in a
concrete form and susceptible of objectiﬁcation (externalization) is sufﬁcient.47

324

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

Finally, for the CA of Milan, the requirement of artistic value should not refer
to the notion of ‘‘work of art’’ but to an ‘‘artistic’’ evaluation, typical of the ‘‘genre’’
(sort) of industrial design, for which every product would be artistic if considered
such by a single social group.48 However, strangely, a month earlier the same court
had held on the contrary that the design must be a work of art, adding that the
requirement of artistic value is different than just a ‘‘new and beautiful line’’.49 It
also added that the easy serial reproduction of the design was a symptom of a
prevailing industrial-functional aspect of the design that excludes artistic character.
As rightly noted, the requirement that the work should not be easily reproduced in
series would de facto exclude the major part of industrial design works. This does
not seem compatible with the Design Directive because article 17 of the latter does
not seem to allow that copyright protection may be denied simply because the work
has characteristics belonging to industrial designs.50

Several courts have, on the contrary, sometimes explicitly, sometimes implicitly,
held that the two requirements were separate and therefore both required.51
However, courts used diverse criteria to hold so.52 Decisions of the CFI Milan
are interesting on this point. The court speciﬁed that the requirement of creativity,
which applies to all works, means the expression of an idea that shows the author’s
personality, without it meaning that there must be a high level of creativity. On the
other hand, the artistic value means the emotional and communicative manifestation
that the artist succeeds to transmit to those who come in contact with its work
(emphasis added).53 This is close to the interpretation given by the CFI Venice,
in the Martino v Gioielli and Magie case.54 The CFI Milan later stuck to this
interpretation in a case concerning the so-called Panton chair created by Verner
Panton in the 1960s.55 It said that the requirement of artistic value adds up to that
of creative character and means that there must be a value different from the simple
aesthetic pleasure of the object and which transcends its natural destination.
Accordingly, the chair, because of its aerodynamic and continued line, its harmo-
nious proportions, the shape absolutely innovative in respect of the conception of
the classical chair, appeared to be the manifestation of a speciﬁc research and an
expressive intuition, autonomously justiﬁed in view of the practical use, which can
exercise a particular attraction on the perceptive level. This resembles the argu-
mentation made in the Wagenfeld case discussed above. The court added that the
appreciation of artistic value must not be made ex post in relation to the author’s
and object’s success but with reference to the characteristics of the product at the
moment of its creation. In this case, it was even more evident that the chair was
protectable since it was extremely original at the time it was created. Earlier, the
CFI Milan had added that the artist’s intention was not to be examined.56 Thus
seemingly, so long as the result is artistic, the design can be protected. While the CFI
Milan seemed to stop short at requiring artistic merit, some courts went further and
held that an artistic value was akin to it.57

Other courts held that the requirement of artistic value exists in those works
that show a contribution by the author qualitatively superior to that required by the

r 325

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

design law.58 A good illustration is the Casa Damiani v Re Carlo (Casa Damiani)
case in which the CFI Turin held that the shape of a jewel was protected by
copyright, design and also unfair competition.59 We will return to those two aspects
of the decision when these other areas of the law are discussed later. ‘‘Blue Moon’’
consisted of the shape of a quarter-moon with a grid of irregular diamonds inserted
in this shape. The court deﬁned the requirement of artistic value as a different
concept from creative character (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 346),60 that is
‘‘the design should have originality, from an aesthetic point of view, stronger than
the other shapes on the market’’ (emphasis added). The court also said that there is
a difference with design law on this point because there must be ‘‘a personal artistic
contribution of the author, which gives to the shape concerned an autonomous
representative value’’. As to the creative character, the court held that:

[it] must be interpreted as of superior quality in comparison with indivi-
dual character of design law, being aimed at identifying a shape which
not only strikes the attention of the consumer, since not common on the
market, but which is appreciated since its represents a personal
production of its author.

A recent case from the CFI Venice is perhaps one of the clearest on the topic
and contradicts some of the above judgements.61 For instance, the requirement of
artistic value, which the court says is clearly separate from that of creative
character, does not involve an ex ante appreciation but an ex post one.62 Also,
the work must not necessarily be destined for the art market. It clearly says that it is
so because such criteria would risk reinstating the separability rule. For the court,
the concept of aesthetic degree is better. So artistic value is evaluated, among others,
i.e. not exclusively, by the collective recognition at exhibitions, by reviews or expert
opinion. In short, the work must have a signiﬁcant aesthetic merit. The mere
aesthetic pleasure is insufﬁcient.63 The design must be particularly deserving. In yet
other words, there must be an outstanding aesthetic value.

Finally, the CFI Milan also found that the fact that the design was awarded
prizes or was recognized by numerous museums is an indication of its protectability.
A recent and interesting case in this respect involved another lamp, the famous
‘‘Arco’’ lamp designed by the Italian designer Achille Castiglioni at the beginning of
the 1960s.64 The CFI Milan used the same argumentation as in the Panton chair
case,65 and described ‘‘artistic value’’ as follows: the lamp obtained numerous prizes
for its simple, agreeable and aesthetic lines transcending its natural destination.
Its value cannot make abstraction of a perspective that contemplates the historical,
cultural and environmental background in which its creation is located together
with the consideration of the communicative and suggestive moment evoked on the
object’s observer, beyond the technico-functional projection. The lamp displays a
formal rigour through the dynamism of its essential design, the perfect harmony of
the relationships of the lines, forms and volumes and the absolutely innovative
conception in respect of the classic lamp. The court added that the lamp had been

326

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

recognized by many museums and cultural institutions as one of the most relevant
expressions of the aesthetic conceptions of the Italian design after the war, having
an artistic taste, which differentiates the product from other design products of
ephemeral and ordinary conception. In the same vein, the same court also held that
the Panton chair was recognized by many important museums of contemporary art
and that it had a style strongly individual to its author.66 But the CFI Milan had
warned earlier that:

the award of a prize destined to reward goods characterised by an
advanced and culturally-aware projection [and] given by a design
association to a work does not automatically show there is an artistic
connotation.67

In conclusion, the CA Milan decisions seem to be the ﬁnal word on the issue as
they are the decisions by the highest court so far. Although the court’s decisions
contradict themselves, it is clear that something more than originality is needed, be
it artistic merit or something just below it. Most of the other courts also require
something more than just creative character even if they sometimes say they do not.
Thus, one can say that generally, in Italy, something more than just creativity is
needed, in contrast with French law but similarly to UK law.

United Kingdom
Statutory Law
Protected Subject Matter. As stated in ‘‘Statutory Law (Copyright Law, France)’’, the
ﬁrst main difference between UK and continental copyright law is the requirement
of categorization, which narrows down copyrightable subject matter. If a work does
not fall within one of the eight categories stated in the Copyright Act (sections 1–8
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act [CDPA] 1988 as amended), namely
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, sound recordings, ﬁlms, broadcasts
and typographical arrangements of published editions, it cannot be protected, even
though it is an original expression.

Protection Requirements. Like France and Italy, the United Kingdom also adheres
to the idea/expression dichotomy as mandated by the TRIPS Agreement.68 Like in
France (and unlike in Italy), the requirement of originality is not stated in the
statute but in the case law. First of all, the work must not be copied from another
work and must originate from the author.69 Then what is required is sufﬁcient, skill,
judgement, labour or capital, which is lower than the requirement in France and
Italy as no creativity is required.

Rights and Infringement. The CDPA grants holders of copyright in most works the
same set of rights, namely the rights of reproduction, issuing copies of the work to
the public, rental and public lending, performing, showing or playing in public,
communicating the work to the public and adaptation (sections 16–21). Indeed,
holders of copyright in artistic works do not enjoy the rights of performance,

r 327

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

showing or playing in public nor of adaptation. The test of infringement is stated in
section 16(3) of the act and consists of taking the whole or a substantial part of the
work, directly or indirectly. Thus, a causal connection must be proved, in other
words, access to the copyright work.

Case Law
Protected Subject Matter. The lack of protection owed to the categorization
requirement is famously illustrated in the Merchandising Corporation of America
v Harpbond (Adam Ant)70 and Creation Records and Others v News Group News-
papers (Creation Records)71 cases. In the ﬁrst case, the artwork in question was a few
lines of make-up in the American-Indian style, which was painted on the artist’s
(Adam Ant of the pop group Adam and the Ants) face. The main reason why it was
not protectable is that it could not be considered a painting as it needed to be ﬁxed
on a surface and as the marks would disappear when the artist would wash, it could
not be a painting.72 The second case dealt with a scene for the cover of a pop music
album. An uninvited journalist took a virtually identical photograph of the scene as
the one that would appear a few weeks later on the album cover. Since the album
photograph was not copied, the journalist’s shot having been taken independently,
the claimant had to qualify the scene as a copyright work. It consisted of a number
of objets trouv ´es (including a Rolls-Royce in a swimming pool, a scooter, a clock, a
phonograph) placed in the grounds of a hotel with the artists standing by them. As
the scene was static, it could not be a dramatic work. It could also not be an artistic
work as it could not be said to come under the normal acceptation of the term
‘‘sculpture’’, nor a collage (as the court restrictively interpreted the term as
necessitating the objects to stick together), or a work of artistic craftsmanship as
there was no craftsmanship involved. Thus make-up or fashion, which would
consist in non-permanent body art, would arguably not be protectable in the United
Kingdom. Purely static fashion scenes would not be protectable either but fashion
shows could probably be classed as dramatic works. This is because there is
generally some sort of action or maybe even a story conveyed. There is also
sufﬁcient unity for the show to be performed again. Both elements are required for a
dramatic work to subsist.73

Apart from fashion shows, according to this categorization scheme, can fashion
articles be protected by copyright? There have been decisions about clothes. In
short, only ‘‘highly artistic’’ clothes can be protected because they fall under the
category of works of artistic craftsmanship, which requires the works to be artistic
in addition to being original. The requirement of ‘‘artistic’’ was deﬁned in the
seminal House of Lords case George Hensher v Restawile Upholstery (Lancs.).74
But no single deﬁnition emerged as their lordships could not agree on one. Criteria
include the fact that the work is considered a work of art or something artistic that
must be decided, depending on the law lord, by the judge, the public or experts.
Another test several law lords uttered and that has been followed in several later
cases is the criterion of intention and/or result. The creator must have intended to

328

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

create something artistic and, for some law lords, the result must also be artistic.
How to decide whether it is artistic was not stated by those law lords but,
presumably, one must fall back on one of the three criteria stated above. What is
clear from the subsequent case law is that functional, although original, clothes are
much less likely to be protected,75 simply because they are not artistic while haute
couture clothes should normally be.76 Indeed, not only must the clothes be artistic,
they must generally be hand-made.77 The fact that clothes are exhibited in a
museum (even a high-brow one such as the Victoria and Albert Museum) is not
a determining factor to decide that they are works of art.78 The same ﬁndings would
apply to all other fashion articles in three dimensions such as bags, shoes, hats, belts
and jewellery. Patterns are more likely to be protected though, as we would be in the
realm of graphic works that include paintings and drawings and do not need to be
artistic or hand-made.

Rights and Infringement. As to rights, while the lack of a right of adaptation is not
really problematic in practice as the borderline between reproduction and adapta-
tion is unclear (the ﬁrst should always encompass the second), the fact that artists
do not enjoy the performance right is. Nothing could be done to stop a competitor
who would show the protected genuine garments or other fashion objects in public,
for instance in a show, nor to extract a licence fee from this activity. A difference
between other copyright works, which is explained with difﬁculty, especially as
artistic works beneﬁt from the communication to the public right, would include
showing the same works online rather than live.

this second stage if

As to infringement, ﬁrst, copying must be proven. If there is no direct
proof of access, one has to identify the similarities and differences between the
two works to ascertain copying. Then, whether a substantial part has been taken
needs to be established. It does not matter at
there
are similarities between the two works and therefore if they do not look similar,
provided that one ﬁnds that a substantial part has been taken.79 A substantial
part is evaluated qualitatively rather than quantitatively.80 This means that
taking a commercially signiﬁcant or simply an important part even if small will
amount to infringement.81 However, the part taken must be original, that is,
incorporate the skill, judgement, labour or capital invested by the claimant.82
The work cannot be dissected but must be looked at as a whole.83 Lord Mummery
in the recent CA case Baigent v Random House (Baigent) usefully summarized
the test as follows. Although he clearly stated it was not an ‘‘exhaustive check
list’’, the six steps ‘‘will usually need to be considered, preferably in a chronological
setting’’:

(1) What are the similarities between the alleged infringing work and the original
copyright work? Unless similarities exist, there is no arguable case of copying.
. . .

(2) What access, direct or indirect, did the author of the alleged infringing work

have to the original copyright work? . . .

r 329

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

(3) Did the author of the alleged infringing work make some use in his work of

(4)

(5)

material derived by him, directly or indirectly, from the original work?
If the defendant contends that no such use was made, what is his explanation
for the similarities between the alleged infringing work and the original
copyright work? Are they, for example, coincidental? Or are they explained
by the use of similar sources? If the latter, what are the common sources that
explain the similarities? How were the sources used by the authors of the
respective works?
If, however, use was made of the original copyright work in producing the
alleged infringing work, did it amount,
in all the circumstances, to ‘‘a
substantial part’’ of the original work? . . .

(6) What are the circumstances or factors that justify evaluating the part copied in
the alleged infringing work as ‘‘a substantial part’’ of the original copyright
work?84

There is relatively little copyright litigation relating to fashion articles as it is very
difﬁcult to obtain protection for such three-dimensional articles owing to the
categorization hurdle.85 As to patterns, the Designers Guild v Russell Williams
(Textiles) (Designers Guild) case is a prime example of the good protection afforded
to wall-paper and therefore by extension to any fashion patterns. The claimant’s
wall-paper depicting a ﬂoral design in an impressionistic style over a blue and
white striped background was protected against a similar reproduction by the
defendant.86

Two important sections of the act in relation to infringement of artistic works
must also be brieﬂy explained. As copyright infringement extends to indirect
copying, the making of things depicted in drawings amounts to infringement
(section 17(3)). This led to the indirect protection of many functional articles that
would otherwise not qualify as works of artistic craftsmanship or sculptures, and
therefore with it, to an abuse or distortion of copyright law (functional articles that
should have been protected under registered design or patent law could obtain
copyright protection without passing the hurdles of registration and for a much
longer time). This trend culminated and was abolished in the famous British
Leyland v Armstrong case (British Leyland).87 There the House of Lords invented
a right of repair to curb the abuses to which the string of cases led. This judge-made
defence was shortly thereafter overridden by the introduction in 1988 in the new
copyright act of the section 51 defence.88 In short, the section means that when a
design document—which can be a literary or artistic work such as drawing, a
photograph or even something in three dimensions—depicts something that is not
an artistic work, making articles to this depiction will not infringe the copyright in
the drawings. Thus, indirect infringement of the drawing of an exhaust pipe by
building exhaust pipes based on the drawing will fall within this defence. But if the
design document depicts a sculpture or a work of artistic craftsmanship (a statuette,
a beautiful jewel or haute couture clothes), then it will be an infringement to make

330

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

those articles. The problem lies in the woolly concept of artistic work as the case law
on artistic works, as seen above in this section, is not settled. Therefore, it is not
always clear when the defence applies.

One other peculiarity of the British system is that copyright’s duration is reduced
in some cases. Section 52 of the CDPA provides that if a protected artistic
work (with some exceptions, namely sculptures, wall plaques, medals, medallions
and printed matter primarily of a literary or artistic character) is produced by
an industrial process and exploited commercially (i.e. more than 50 copies are
exploited commercially or it consists of goods manufactured in lengths or pieces not
being hand-made), the duration of the copyright transforms itself to 25 years
from the ﬁrst marketing of the industrially produced articles in question. This can
happen during the life of the designer or after.

Designs

France
Statutory Law
The French IPC deals with designs in its Book V. The Design Directive was
implemented in the IPC by an ordonnance (order) of 25 July 2001, which came into
force on 28 July 2001. The order clearly states that the total cumulation rule and the
theory of the unity of art are maintained (Greffe, 2001).

Excluded Subject Matter. Ideas, styles or genres are not protectable (Greffe et al.,
2008, p. 27). As to functional forms, the theory of the multiplicity of shapes is still
applicable (Lucas, 2006, p. 108, no. 125).89 As we saw in ‘‘Statutory Law (Copyright
Law, France)’’ above, under this theory, if a technical effect can be obtained by
several different shapes, the latter must be considered as separable from the
technical effect.

Protection Requirements. Article L. 511-2 and L. 511-3 of the IPC implemented the
requirements of individual character and novelty. However, in France, individual
character is not translated as ‘‘caracte` re individuel’’ but as ‘‘caracte` re propre’’ (own
character). French law also uses the terms ‘‘informed observer’’ rather than
‘‘informed user’’. But as will be seen below when analysing the case law, it seems
that the slight variation in the wording does not make a difference (Hadjadj-Cazier,
2004, p. 28).

French literature is of the clear opinion that the copyright and design laws’
protection requirements are different (Kamina 2001, no. 40, p. 3258; 2003, p. 28;
Lucas and Lucas, 2001, p. 93; P ´erot-Morel 2005, p. 9; Piatti, 2004). However, some
think that novelty is redundant because own character includes novelty (De Cand ´e,
2003, p. 396, citing Humblot, 2003, p. 990; Massa and Strowel, 2003, p. 73). Com-
mentators also think that as regards constraints on the freedom of the designer, if
the sector is crowded, even slight differences will be enough to confer own character
to the design and that the freedom of the designer is appreciated only by objective

r 331

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

and not subjective criteria (Hadjadj-Cazier, 2004, p. 29). Divulgation in only one
member state is sufﬁcient to destroy novelty and acts done outside the EU also
destroy novelty so long as EU professionals interested in the sector could have
known about the design (Hadjadj-Cazier, 2004, p. 26).

Rights and Infringement. Article L. 513-4 of the IPC provides that ‘‘making, offering,
putting on the market, importing, exporting, using or possessing a product em-
bodying the design to these ends, without the consent of the owner is unlawful’’.
Possessing does not appear in the directive, although the latter mentions ‘‘stock-
ing’’, which may amount to the same. Anyway, the directive’s list is non-exhaustive.
Under the old design provisions, advertising in a catalogue was held to constitute
an act of infringement.90 Since the directive’s list is open, this case law could be
upheld.

As regards the infringement test, the terms used by the French act differ slightly
from those of the directive. The act states that ‘‘the protection given by the
registration of a design extends to all designs which do not produce on the informed
observer a different global visual impression’’ (emphasis added). However, it seems
clear that the only impression that counts is visual (Stone, 2008, p. 384).91
Commentators are of the opinion that since the new law has not changed much
on this point, infringement will be appreciated as before, taking into account the
similarities and not the differences (Dreyfus and Thomas, 2006, p. 334; Greffe et al.,
2008, pp. 442 ff.). Generally, courts refer to the differences only to reject them by
stating that they do not prevent infringement.92 As in copyright law, partial
reproduction can also be infringement (Greffe et al., 2008, p. 442). Of course, if
there is only similarity in the genre, functions or ideas, there is no infringement. In
other words, there is only infringement if the parts that are new and have individual
character also appear in the infringing design (Greffe et al., 2008, pp. 446–9).
Neither the quantity, quality or merit of the infringing products nor the commercial
prejudice are relevant in the appreciation of infringement (Dreyfus and Thomas,
2006, p. 335; Greffe et al., 2008, pp. 439–41). The process, material, medium or
destination is also irrelevant (Dreyfus and Thomas, 2006, p. 335).

For the literature, the risk of confusion is irrelevant in design law.93 Sometimes
there is only one element of the product that is protected by design right. Therefore,
how can one use the likelihood of confusion criterion to determine whether there is
infringement?94 More importantly, it is, as some have argued, dangerous to use this
criterion because it prevents the claimant from using the action in unfair competi-
tion, which requires confusion.95

Case Law
Excluded Subject Matter. As said above in ‘‘Statutory Law (Designs, United
Kingdom)’’, ideas and styles are not protected. For instance, in the ﬁeld of fashion,
protection has been rejected for the idea of including cloth inside a transparent
material in order to make jewels96 and for a style of clothing realized with the
patchwork technique.97

332

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

Following the theory of the multiplicity of shapes, courts have refused protection
to shapes whose aesthetic conﬁgurations were inseparable from the functional
characteristics and were needed for the comfort that was sought,98 allowed saving
material and space99 or corresponded to the cheapest and simplest mode of
construction.100 In each case, it was so, as long as the appearance was imposed
exclusively by technical functions. Of course, where there is an ornamental aim,
protection can be granted.101 Of relevance to the fashion industry, it has been held
that while the reversibility of a bag had a functional character, this modality
proceeded from an aesthetic research and a creative effort.102 The bag was held
protected both by copyright and design law. In another more recent case concerning
packaging for ham slices, the court did not contest that the design was functional
but held it was protected because a variety of shapes could fulﬁl the same
function.103 On the other hand, the design of a karate glove was held unprotectable
because the shape chosen could not be dissociated from the aim pursued.104

Protection Requirements. On the issue of protection requirements, courts have had
to remind the obvious. For instance, the Court of Cassation held that a design once
protected by copyright but fallen in the public domain cannot be registered as a
design, as it is not new.105 The CA Paris also reminded that it is also not possible to
protect a genre by design law.106

As was stated in ‘‘Case Law (Copyright Law, France)’’, at the beginning, when
the new design law had just entered into force, courts were not clear on the
distinction between copyright and design laws’ respective requirements. This
confusion was perhaps owed to the Court of Cassation decision of 6 May 2003,
which held that not only novelty but the stamp of the personality of the author must
be examined when assessing the validity of registered designs.107 Only in 2007 did
the Court of Cassation rule that rights have to be applied distributively108 and a
decision of the CA Paris has since then followed this ruling.109 The CA Paris did not
use this to make the distinction between the two requirements of novelty and indivi-
dual character either. But in two recent decisions, it has started to do so.110 What is
also clear is that, like in copyright law, if novel, the combination of public domain
or known elements, can grant protection.111 It is interesting to note that when
copyright and design laws are both invoked to protect a product, most of the time,
novelty and originality are recognized together or rejected together (Kahn, 2006,
p. 22). A lot of the cases involved fashion articles. As to constraints on the freedom
of the designer, if the sector is crowded, even slight differences will be enough to
confer own character to the design (Hadjadj-Cazier, 2004, p. 29). Certain courts
have considered the ﬁeld of male shoes as a crowded sector and applied this rule
(Hadjadj-Cazier, 2004, p. 29). Two decisions have interpreted the notion of
‘‘informed observer’’. The Tribunal of First Instance of Paris held that it is not
an expert. It is a user not with an average attention but a special vigilance, because
of its personal experience or its extended knowledge of the sector in question.112
Later, the CA Paris held that the informed observer for hairdryers destined to hair

r 333

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

salons is the professional.113 It is unclear who the professional is here; is it a
hairdresser or a maker of hairdryers? We suppose it is the former.114

Infringement. Up until 2008, both the Court of Cassation and the CAs examined
whether there was likelihood of confusion or not in order to determine infringe-
ment.115 Even worse, some courts applied the criterion of risk of confusion in the
eyes of an average consumer while the law invoked was copyright. If there was no
risk of confusion, the action for infringement of a registered design right was
rejected. In addition, the CA even often amalgamated the concepts of average
consumer and informed user.116 In a decision of March 2008, the Court of
Cassation clearly stated that the risk of confusion must not be checked to determine
infringement of a registered design.117 The case law now accords with the litera-
ture’s views (De Cand ´e, 2004, p. 940; Greffe, 2008, p. 38; Kahn, 2006, p. 24).
Therefore, it can be said that likelihood of confusion is neither a sufﬁcient condition
nor a necessary condition for infringement (Greffe, 2008, p. 38). In other words,
courts are free to examine whether there is confusion or not but this alone should
not determine the outcome of the case. The risk of confusion is the criterion
qualifying an unfair competition act distinct from the infringement act or an
element that aggravates the prejudice suffered by the victim of the infringement
of the design (De Cand ´e, 2004, p. 940; 2008, p. 447). As commentators had
previously pointed out, the use of likelihood of confusion to reject a copyright or
design action is also prejudicial to the rights owners as they cannot act on the basis
of unfair competition anymore.118 The CA Paris followed the above mentioned
Court of Cassation’s March 2008 ruling in a decision of April 2008, resolutely
afﬁrming that risk of confusion was irrelevant for infringement of both copyright
and design right.119

On the other hand, there does not seem to be many decisions interpreting in detail
the new test for infringement set out in article 9 of the directive (‘‘any design which
does not produce on the informed user a different overall impression’’) or as the
French law implemented it ‘‘all designs which do not produce on the informed
observer a different global visual impression’’. Of note, however, is the parallel
litigation involving Procter & Gamble against Reckitt Benckiser about Procter &
Gamble’s Community registered design right for its air freshener Febreze, a
cylindrical sprayer with a trigger copied by Reckitt’s Air Wick Odour Stop. The
CA Paris gave a different outcome to the case than the CA for England and
Wales.120 In a very short judgment, the CA Paris found there was infringement on
the basis of the old test for infringement, that is, reproduction of essential elements,
rather than ‘‘different global visual impression’’. It noted that the design had to be
scrutinized with attention in order to see that the superior part of the sprayer is
slightly curved while it is ﬂat on Reckitt’s model. Lastly, it is unclear whether the
French Supreme Court has endorsed the new test. In a recent case concerning
perfume ﬂasks, it agreed with the test of infringement used by the CA Paris, which
simply held that the reproduction of the original characteristics of the design and

334

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

the irrelevance of minor differences did not affect the visual resemblance.121 This
test seems to be a combination of the old and the new test and, if the accent is on the
visual impression, then it accords with the new law.

Italy
Statutory Law
The act of 2 February 2001, n. 95, implemented the Design Directive. It was then
replaced by the act of 10 February 2005, n. 30, which revamped the whole of Italian
industrial property law. Section III of the act (articles 31–44) deals with designs and
the text is virtually identical to the text of the directive. Therefore, there are no
differences in this respect between Italian, French and UK law, except of course if
the courts have taken a different interpretation to some provisions, which is
examined hereafter.122

Case Law
Litigation on designs in the last 5 years has, for some reason, been less intense than
in France; in addition, very few cases have been appealed, let alone to the Supreme
Court. Indeed, the Italian Court of Cassation’s sole decision on the new design law
was only issued in January 2009 and does not add to the statutory law as it simply
states that a shape for which design protection was asked had been known and
diffused on the market since Antiquity is not new.123 In addition, the design had no
individual character either.

Excluded Subject Matter. Courts have simply applied the statutory law to say that
ideas and general conceptions are not protectable by design right124 nor are forms
that are solely dictated by the technical function of the product.125

Protection Requirements. Many courts have interpreted the requirement of indivi-
dual character and its internal condition of informed user. Early on courts had
interpreted the notion of informed user ‘‘as the ﬁnal consumer which has contin-
uous experience with regard to the utilization of the product’’.126 Three recent cases
in the ﬁeld of fashion have further elaborated the two concepts.

In the Casa Damiani case concerning the infringement of Damiani’s jewel ‘‘Blue

Moon’’,127 the court deﬁned the informed user as:

the receiver of the product who, owing to his culture and experience, has
an average standard of knowledge of the ﬁeld of which the speciﬁc
product is part. He is therefore able to appreciate the differences between
the designs in conﬂict, which the common user would not be qualiﬁed to
assess. The individual character has to be recognised by users who are
familiar with and have knowledge in the ﬁeld to which the design refers.

The court also construed the concept of individual character. According to the
court, the model has to show an element or such a combination of elements in
order to provoke on the informed user an overall feeling of dissimilarity. The
elements can be unknown or there can be a combination of already known

r 335

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

elements. Unfortunately, the court added that the elements must be aesthetic. Small
differences of detail are not relevant. In the case at hand, while neither the shape
itself nor the idea of inserting diamonds was new in the ﬁeld of jewellery, the
combination of these elements gave the design its individual character. There was an
overall
impression of dissimilarity with previous jewels. The designer had a
maximum degree of liberty when creating the design, assuming that with shapes
of jewels the designer has broad margins of creative liberty unrestricted by technical
needs. The court found the defendant’s design infringing.

For the CFI Bari,128 a shape has individual character if it is a new and different
shape that has the capacity of attracting the attention of the ﬁnal consumer. The
informed user is the interested addressee of the product, that is, the ﬁnal consumer
who is normally interested in the shape of the product of the sector, or the consumer
sensitive to the aesthetics of consumer goods.

In another case concerning jewels (bracelets and necklaces), the CFI Venice gave
a judgment that is perhaps the most researched and convincing on the notion of
informed user as it derives its ﬁndings from the directive’s and recitals’ text.129 The
court deﬁned the informed user as not an expert in the ﬁeld but a consumer, who
materially uses the product in which the design is embodied and whose attention is
markedly superior to the average. This means that the informed user is constantly
informed about the characteristics of products and of their evolution, so that the
informed user can distinguish the variations that are not perceptible to the eyes of
the average consumer.130 Informed users read the sector’s specialist reviews
regularly and with attention—that is, not simply skimming through—and are
interested in attending fairs in order to keep up to date on the new products offered
by the sector’s producers.131 The court added that, without doubt, this criterion
reduces the possibility of infringements in comparison with the trademark criterion
of average consumer. In the Procter & Gamble v Reckitt litigation mentioned above
in ‘‘Case Law (Design, United Kingdom)’’, the CFI Milan similarly held that the
informed user is ‘‘a consumer who is able to recognize those different characteristics
that purchasers with average knowledge of the relevant product would not
recognise’’.132 Thus, Italian courts converged with a deﬁnition of informed user
close to that of the United Kingdom and France: not an expert, a designer or an
average consumer but a user who is aware of the product’s trends.133

The concept of margin of freedom of the creator has also been interpreted. The
CFI Rome held that when the margin of freedom of the creator in speciﬁc sectors is
restricted (here the sieve sector), even a modest variation of shape can be sufﬁcient
to give its individuality to the design.134 In the same vein, the CFI Venice held that it
is necessary to examine whether the sector in question is more or less crowded. If the
sector is more crowded, then small differences are more relevant than when it is less
crowded.135 This seems valid for both individual character and infringement. In this
case, there was no infringement because small details meant that the alleged
infringing bracelets and necklaces had themselves an individual character. This is
because the sector of jewellery was held to be crowded.136

336

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

The CFI Bari set out a test in four stages to establish individual character: (1)
identiﬁcation of the relevant sector; (2) determination of the relevant prior art; (3)
identiﬁcation of the informed user and (4) comparison of the general impression of
the registered design and the prior art.137

A number of courts also had to deal with the notion of divulgation. Three of
them were delivered by the CFI Turin. In 2004, the court held that there was no
divulgation when the production and commercialization had been very limited and
occurred in a country far away, outside the EU, and the product had never
been presented in Italian fairs.138 In the second case, a year later, the court held
that the divulgation of a registered design, which occurred from showing prototypes
of the design to a few clients, was circumscribed to a few third parties and occurred
in the same period (only a few months) in which the design was registered, did not
have such a signiﬁcant character of diffusion, neither at the national nor at the
temporal level, so as to invalidate the design.139 In the third case dating from
2007,140 a competitor had made a similar jewel with very small differences
compared with another previous one so that it did not produce a different overall
impression on the informed user. The design had been published or used outside
Europe (Japan) by a competitor who presented it at a fair and sold a few products
embodying the design abroad (outside Europe). Only a limited number of articles
were sold but this was sufﬁcient to destroy novelty in this case as it was a luxury
item and Japan is an important market for the Italian jewel industry. Therefore, the
registration of the subsequent design was cancelled for lack of novelty because the
use/publication was known by the interested sectors within the EU. An earlier
decision, handed down by the CFI Vicenza in 2002, held that a necklace design was
not novel because a similar bracelet was divulged before the date of registration of
the necklace design and there is an ideal relationship between necklaces and
bracelets in the sense that the ﬁrst makes one immediately think of the second
element of the set.141

Infringement. Few courts have given indications in the cases discussed above on
how to interpret the test for infringement. Like for the Italian cases involving
copyright reviewed above, this seems to be owed to the fact that the defendants in
the several cases seem to have made straightforward copies.142 One court held that
there is infringement even if the imitation is accompanied by signs that distinguish
the origin of the products. Thus, like in France, the likelihood of confusion is not a
necessary condition to ﬁnd infringement.143 It is also well settled that courts will
look at the registered design (i.e. as it appears in the registration documents) and
not at the product, i.e. how the design has been commercialized (Marchetti and
Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 373).144 More generally, courts simply apply the overall
impression test and hold that insigniﬁcant modiﬁcations made by the imitator have
no weight (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 373, citing decisions). If the sector is
crowded, the degree of originality required from the alleged infringing design is
modest (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 373).145 Recently, the CFI Turin, in a

r 337

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

case concerning a Community-registered design but not of a fashion article,
interpreted further the test of infringement.146 Fiat sued Great Walls Motors
(GWM) for infringement of the design of its ‘‘Nuova Panda’’ by GWM’s ‘‘Peri’’
car. The Nuova Panda was held protected. It was clear that the Peri car was not
identical. There were a number of differences at the front and back of the car and
also on the sides (prolongation of the back window in the Peri car). The court held
that even if the car sector was crowded, no car on the market was similar to the
Nuova Panda. So GWM had enough freedom to manoeuvre and the small
differences still created the same overall impression. According to the court, there
can only be a different overall impression when the defendant’s design possesses
itself novelty and individual character. It was not the case and GWM’s car was held
to infringe. This interpretation is very protective of designers as imitators will have
themselves to insure their designs are new and have individual character in order
not to infringe.

United Kingdom—Registered Designs
Statutory Law
First of all, it must be noted that in addition to copyright law, the United Kingdom
has two types of protection for designs: registered and unregistered design mights.
They will be examined in turn. The Registered Designs Act 1949 (RDA), as amended
following the Designs Directive,147 rewrites religiously the provisions of the
directive so that there is nothing speciﬁc or different to mention in this section,
except that the United kingdom has opted to have a must-match exclusion, as
allowed by the directive since it was left unharmonized (section 7A(5) of the RDA).

Case Law
Not surprisingly, the case law on the new registered design right in the United
Kingdom is not terribly dense, unlike in France and to a lesser extent Italy. The
reason is that cases of intellectual property nature are only heard by one court, the
High Court of England and Wales, as opposed to the myriad of same level ﬁrst
instance courts in most other European countries. As is known, litigation is much
more costly too so that the number of cases ending up in the courts is also
considerably lower. Nevertheless, the judges in the two cases that have so far
interpreted the new law have already settled quite a number of issues. Excluded
subject matter has not come to be interpreted but the concepts of informed user and
infringement have been thoroughly discussed.

Protection Requirements. In WoodHouse UK plc v Architectural Lighting Systems
(t/a Aquila Design) (Woodhouse), the court embarked, obiter dictum, on a deﬁnition
of the informed user.148 Accordingly, the informed user must be a regular user of
the sort of article registered, thus it could be a consumer or buyer or he could
otherwise be familiar with the subject matter, i.e. through use of it at work. He is
not a manufacturer nor the average man in the street but a person to whom the
design is directed. He must not have:

338

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

an archival mind (or eye) or more than an average memory but it does
. . . demand some awareness of product trend and availability and some
knowledge of basic technical considerations (if any). . . . Focus on eye
appeal seems more pertinent than familiarity with the underlying
operational or manufacturing technology (if any).

On the facts, which involved the design of a street lamp, that meant that the
informed user was ‘‘a regular member of an urban development team (typically in a
council) who is primarily interested in the appearance of street furniture but who
also has a basic grasp of a product’s technical underlay—and maybe, cost’’.149 He
‘‘must have in his mind’s eye the visual impact of the lantern in situ—during the
daytime moreover and from a little distance from the base of the pole upon which
the ensemble is suspended’’.150 Jacob LJ, who delivered the CA’s judgment in
Procter & Gamble Company v Reckitt Benckiser (UK) Ltd151 (Procter & Gamble),
basically conﬁrmed Woodhouse on this point and held that the informed user is not
a person skilled in the art as in patent law or the average consumer of trade mark
law. In addition, he took the view that the test for individual character is that the
impression produced on the informed user by the design must be clearly different
from that produced on him by prior designs, as opposed to simply different.152
According to him, ‘‘smaller differences will be enough to create a different overall
impression where freedom of design is limited’’.153 Consequently, ‘‘protection for a
striking novel product will be correspondingly greater than for a product which is
incrementally different from the prior art, though different enough to have its own
individual character and thus be validly registered’’.154

infringement was also interpreted by Jacob LJ

Infringement. The test of
in
Procter & Gamble. He held that
‘‘what matters is what strikes the mind
of the informed user when it is carefully viewed’’155 (emphasis added), as opposed
to after, when the informed user does not have the design in front of him
anymore. The informed user will examine the products with a reasonable degree
of care:

In this exercise the level of generality to which the court must descend is
important. Here, for instance, it would be too general to say that the
overall impression of the registered design is ‘‘a canister ﬁtted with a
trigger spray device on the top’’. The appropriate level of generality is
that which would be taken by the notional informed user.156

Contrary to the individual character test, however, the test at the level of
infringement is that the impression must be ‘‘different’’ not ‘‘clearly different’’.157
It will therefore be difﬁcult to establish infringement, since provided the defendant’s
design is different, it will escape liability, as happened in the case, although the
design was very different from anything that had been designed in the ﬁeld
previously. So Procter & Gamble’s design was valid but not infringed.

r 339

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

United Kingdom—Unregistered Designs
Statutory Law
UDR is regulated in sections 213–264 of the CDPA. It was introduced in 1988 to
remedy the absence of copyright protection for functional articles taken away by the
British Leyland case.158

‘‘Design’’ means the design of any aspect of shape or conﬁguration (whether
internal or external) of the whole or part of an article. As with copyright, the right
arises automatically without any formality to accomplish, as its very name
indicates. No eye appeal is required. Therefore, both functional and aesthetic
designs are covered, thereby ﬁlling the gap left by the law on works of artistic
craftsmanship. The right lasts generally 10 years from the date when it is ﬁrst
marketed.159

Excluded Subject Matter. Four types of designs are excluded from protection.
Section 213(3) provides that design right does not subsist in:

(a) method or principle of construction;
(b)

features of shape or conﬁguration of an article, which

(i)

(ii)

enable the article to be connected to, placed in, around or against, another
article so that either article may perform its function, or
are dependent upon the appearance of another article of which the article
is intended by the designer to form an integral part; or

(c)

surface decoration.

Paragraph (b)(i) is often referred to as the must-ﬁt exclusion and paragraph (b)(ii)

as the must-match exclusion.

Protection Requirements. The ﬁrst requirement is that the design must be ﬁxed.
Second, it must be original (section 213(1) and (4)). These are the exact same
requirements as in copyright law. The design must therefore not be copied and
display sufﬁcient skill, judgement and labour.160 In addition, the design must not be
commonplace.

Rights and Infringement. The owner of UDR in a design has the exclusive right to
reproduce the design for commercial purposes, inter alia, by making articles to that
design (section 226(1)). Reproduction of a design by making articles to that design
is deﬁned by section 226(2) as meaning: ‘‘copying the design so as to produce
articles exactly or substantially to that design’’. The test is therefore different from
that of copyright law, which requires copying of a substantial part. It must also be
noted that if an article is protected both by copyright and UDR, at the stage of
infringement, copyright prevails (section 236). UDR does not disappear but yields
at the infringement stage, avoiding thereby cumulation of the rights.

340

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

Case Law
Excluded Subject Matter. First of all, as surface decoration is not protected, two-
dimensional patterns are per se excluded. This is not to say that all surface
decoration will be two-dimensional. Some decoration like embroidery on garments
will be in three dimensions but will still be excluded.161 A second important
exclusion that can often apply in the fashion industry is that covering methods
and principles of construction. As was decided in the Parker v Tidball case,162 which
involved the design of mobile phone cases, stitching in seams is a method of
construction. This case can be contrasted with one involving umbrella cases.163 In
that dispute, the design of the umbrella case was the shape or conﬁguration
produced by the methods of construction, not the methods by which that shape
or conﬁguration was produced. The seams at the edges and corners of the umbrella
case were not surface decoration either. They were part of making the article and
not added later. They gave the article its speciﬁc shape. In the same vein, it was held
that the ‘‘arrangement of zippers and piping for the expansion section of a suitcase
design’’ (Torremans, 2008, p. 346) was not a method or principle of construction.164
The other two exclusions are less relevant in the fashion industry. As a matter of
fact, there is no case yet applying the must-ﬁt or must-match exclusions to fashion
articles. But there could be parts of articles the designs of which could be must-ﬁt or
must-match, for instance parts of shoes or bags.

Protection Requirements. As stated above, originality in the copyright sense is
required and,
in addition, the design must not be commonplace. The test of
‘‘commonplaceness’’ was given by Mummery LJ in Farmers Build Ltd v Carrier
Bulk Materials.165 After establishing that the design is original, the court should
compare the design of the article in which design right is claimed with the design of
other articles in the same ﬁeld, including the alleged infringing article, as at the time
of its creation. Then it must ascertain how similar that design is to the design of
similar articles in the same ﬁeld of design. The comparative exercise has to be
carried out objectively in the light of the evidence from experts in the relevant ﬁeld
pointing out the similarities and the differences and explaining the signiﬁcance of
them. The law was further developed in a recent High Court case: Virgin Atlantic
Airways v Premium Aircraft Interiors Group.166 It was held that experts must not
evaluate the factual evidence but only point out the similarities and differences and
their signiﬁcance without concentrating on the similarities alone or the differences
alone as it would give an unbalanced view. In the end, however, it is for the court to
decide whether the design was commonplace. That judgement is one of fact and
degree according to the evidence in each particular case:

The closer the similarity of the various designs to each other, the more
likely it is that the designs are commonplace, especially if there is no
causal
link, such as copying. If a number of designers working
independently of one another in the same ﬁeld produce very similar

r 341

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

designs by coincidence the most likely explanation of the similarities is
that there is only one way of designing that article. Then the design in
question can reasonably be seen as ‘‘commonplace’’. . . . If however,
there are aspects of the plaintiff’s design of the article which are not to be
found in any other design in the ﬁeld in question, and those aspects are
found in the defendant’s design, the court would be entitled to conclude
that the design in question was not ‘‘commonplace’’.167

Rights and Infringement. As the test is substantial similarity, it tends to protect less
than copyright law, as well stated in L Woolley Jewellers v A&A Jewellery: ‘‘On that
test it may not be enough to copy a part, even a substantial part. Regard has to be
had to the overall design which enjoys design right’’.168 Thus it is a test of overall
impression. However, if the claimant is clever enough to rely only on the part of the
article where his UDR resides and is allegedly infringed, he can circumvent the
UDR infringement test and the result will be the same as in copyright law as the
whole or substantial part of that part of the article will have been copied. Because of
this, at the level of infringement at least, UDR is as protective as copyright law.

Unfair Competition

France
In France, it is possible to sue on the basis of civil liability in addition to copyright or
design infringement, and for that matter the other intellectual property rights (IPR) as
well. Such action in unfair competition is based on general civil liability enshrined in
article 1382 of the French Civil Code (CC). There are many unfair competition acts
that have been developed by the courts. The part of unfair competition law that renders
copying unlawful is the tort of parasitism or slavish imitation. The action is available
not only to competitors but anyone who justiﬁes an interest. As parasitism is based on
civil liability, to win the action, breach, damage and causal link must be proven.
However, courts interpreted those requirements very loosely over the years. This is to
the point that there is no need to prove any of these three requirements to win the
action (Golaz, 1992, p. 64). According to the case law, the copied creation must not be
banal, nor be a necessary and functional form (Buydens, 1993, pp. 707, 721; Passa,
1997, p. 272). Only the copying of arbitrary forms is parasitic.

The case law on the tort of parasitism is unsettled to say the least. It is still
unclear whether the Court of Cassation considers that copying the creation is
sufﬁcient or also requires likelihood of confusion for the action to succeed. The case
law of the Courts of Appeal is equally divided. On the other hand, the majority of
French commentators are against the tort of parasitism, which, strictly speaking,
only requires copying.169 Indeed, it renders IPRS redundant. The tort of parasitism
is also in blatant contradiction with the general principle of the freedom to copy
applicable in French law. Commentators, however, agree that the unfair competi-
tion action should succeed if the unfair competition act complained of is distinct

342

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

from the infringement act. An act is distinct if there is not simply copying but also a
likelihood of confusion between the claimant’s and defendant’s products. In this
case, it cannot really be called parasitism. So how have the French Supreme Court
and the Courts of Appeal recently ruled in cases dealing with fashion articles?

The following cases from 2006 and 2007 show how unclear the position
in a case involving the
of the French highest court is. In November 2006,
copy of Scottish patterns, the Court of Cassation set aside a decision which
ruled that the defendant’s copying and marketing at a lower price was unfair and
did not examine whether there was a likelihood of confusion.170 It held that,
according to article 1382 of the CC, it is not unlawful simply to copy someone’s
creation. The breach exists in the speciﬁc way copying is done. However,
often an afﬁrmation that there is risk of confusion rather than a proof of it is
sufﬁcient to convince the court.171 In December 2006, the court held that so long as
there is a likelihood of confusion, other elements can be received under the unfair
competition action such as the ‘‘range effect’’ (here shirts, shop arrangement and
advertising panels). Therefore, for instance, to reproduce the same range of clothes
but at an inferior quality is a distinct fact only if it generates a risk of confusion.172 In
a decision concerning the design of a bag, the court held that using a colour not
described in the registration documents but identical to that in which the bag was
marketed was a fact distinct from design infringement.173

These cases seem to apply the unfair competition action in the orthodox way.
However, in 2007, the same day, the Supreme Court handed down two rather
contradictory decisions that leave the law uncertain. Both cases concerned fashion
articles (glasses and lace).174 In the Boll ´e case, the claimants argued that the
defendant copied models of glasses and thereby infringed their copyright. The
CA Lyon had held they were not and also rejected their action in unfair competition
as there were no facts distinct from copying. The Court of Cassation set the decision
aside. In the second case, the facts were similar: Solstiss argued that its lace, which
was protected by copyright, was copied. The Court of Cassation set the decision
aside arguing that the CA Lyon should not have allowed the unfair competition
action in addition to the copyright one because there was only slavish imitation. The
Supreme Court held that there is unfair competition when either there is confusion
or the defendant beneﬁts of the investments or reputation of another. However,
copying always implies beneﬁting from the investments of another and copying is
no different from what the infringement action sanctions. In several decisions of
2008, the Supreme Court seems again to prefer the orthodox view of the unfair
competition action.175 Finally, it must be noted that according to the Supreme
Court’s case law, the risk of confusion is appreciated according to the consumer of
average attention who does not see the litigious products simultaneously.176

At the level of the CAs, the same confusion reigns, not to mention the courts of
ﬁrst instance. Many courts, especially the CA Paris, hold that in the ﬁeld of fashion,
using the same colours, dimensions, material (range effect), with or without
confusion, depending on the court, entails liability.177 For instance, it has been

r 343

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

held that reproducing authentic Dior glasses cases in addition to infringing
Dior glasses’ designs is a fact distinct from design infringement that led to a
condemnation also for unfair competition.178 In another case, the CA Paris ruled
that selling infringing shoes in shops close to that of Hermes’ are not acts of unfair
competition because Hermes clients are very particular and cannot confuse shoes
distributed by Hermes with shoes from another origin.179 Two other recent cases are
worth mentioning to illustrate the correct application of the unfair competition
action. They also involved copyright infringement and were discussed above in
‘‘Case Law (Copyright Law, France)’’. In the case involving an earring design
combining corals and shells by Scooter, the designs were protected by copyright.
The colour change effected by the defendant did not affect the global impression.
The court rejected the action in unfair competition for slavish imitation and sale at a
lower price as they were not distinct facts.180 In the Murat case, since for some mini-
socks there was a possibility of confusion, the court held there was also unfair com-
petition. However, recently the CA Paris has again departed from the interpretation.181
In conclusion, in France, the ﬂou artistique reigns as to the conditions of the
unfair competition action. This can, on the one hand, be a handy situation for
litigants to exploit but, on the other, creates great legal uncertainty. One marvels
why and how the CA Paris and Court of Cassation can swing between one and the
other position in such shorts periods of time.182 It seems that the French Supreme
Court has now settled for the orthodox scope of the unfair competition action.

Italy
Like in France, the Italian CC prohibits acts of unfair competition. Article 2598 of
the CC provides that:

Subject to the provisions concerning the protection of distinctive signs and

patent rights, acts of unfair competition are performed by whoever:

(2)

(1) uses names or distinctive signs that are likely to create confusion with the
names or distinctive signs legitimately used by others, or closely imitates the
products of a competitor, or performs, by any other means, acts that are likely
to create confusion with the products and activities of a competitor;
spreads news and comments, with respect to the products and activities of a
competitor, which are likely to discredit them, or treats as his own the good
qualities of the products or for enterprise of a competitor;
avails himself directly or indirectly of any other means, which do not conform
with the principles of correct behaviour in the trade and are likely to cause
harm to another’s business.

(3)

According to well-settled case law, the unfair competition action requires a
relationship of competition between the claimant and defendant (Marchetti and
Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2071).183 In some instances, courts have asked that the
competitor’s business constitutes a stable organization. Some courts have also held
that non-proﬁt organizations could fall into the notion (Marchetti and Ubertazzi,

344

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

2007, p. 2072). A relationship of competition exists when the two subjects have
common clients, effective or potential (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2073).
While commentators have proposed to broaden the category of persons who can
sue to any person even if they are not businesspersons or at least also to the liberal
professions, this does not seem to have been taken up by the courts and this opinion
remains in the minority (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, pp. 2074–5). According to
well-settled case law, the damageability of the act is sufﬁcient. Thus, the claimant
must not prove an effective prejudice. It is not required either that the damage
corresponds to an advantage for the competitor who acts unfairly (Marchetti and
Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2078).

The Italian courts constantly hold that the tort of slavish imitation, which is
based on article 2598(1), requires a risk of confusion (Marchetti and Ubertazzi,
2007, p. 2082).184 Imitation is unlawful when there can be confusion between
products according to a judgement based on the general impression of their aspect,
some courts adding that one should pay more attention to the resemblances than to
the differences (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2083). This judgement must be
made according to the average capacity of perception and of memory of the
consumer of the product, looking at the competence of the consumer (Marchetti
and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2083).185 If the alleged infringing product differs by non-
marginal elements that have a distinctive value, there is no breach. In addition,
article 2598(1) only applies to products that have a shape that distinguishes them
from that of other products on the market. Usual shapes, shapes determined by the
nature of the product, and those generalized and standardized in the sector are not
covered by the tort (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, pp. 2083–4). As to shapes with
ornamental value, the position that is shared by the majority of the courts, is that their
imitation is allowed only when these shapes are susceptible of variants. The imitator
has the burden of differentiating his product (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2085).
A few (isolated) courts have held that the imitation of the product not
sanctioned under article 2598(1) can, however, be considered contrary to principles
of professional correction and therefore be sanctioned under article 2598(3). Thus for
some, the imitation of a competitors’ product implies an appropriation of the labour
of someone else, which advantages him unfairly and, thus, is contrary to article
2598(3) (Marchetti and Ubertazzi, 2007, p. 2086). No confusion is required if acting
under article 2598(3). However, the Italian Supreme Court recently held that it is not
contrary to article 2598(3) for a competitor to reproduce his rival’s product in its
identical shape.186 Therefore, it seems now clear that there must be a likelihood of
confusion in order for the action in unfair competition for slavish imitation to succeed.
The Italian tort of parasitism is different from that of slavish imitation, as it
requires more conditions. The courts require that the acts of imitation by the
competitor must be systematic and continuous, i.e. prolonged in time (Marchetti
and Ubertazzi, 2007, pp. 2109–10; Suthersanen, 2000, pp. 410–1). Thus, isolated
acts are not actionable; there must be a series of acts imitating several initiatives of a
competitor. The imitator must follow constantly in the wake of another.

r 345

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Three cases in the ﬁeld of fashion illustrate the above principles. In the Casa
Damiani case,187 the CFI Turin held that there was slavish imitation (article 2598(1)
of the CC) as the defendant’s jewel was confusing with the claimant’s ‘‘Blue Moon’’.
The CFI Venice held that the fact that a design is not infringed does not mean that
there cannot be slavish imitation of the same products.188 The latter is judged by the
diligence of the average consumer and not by that—higher—required of the
informed user when judging individual character of the design. The colours of
the jewels in question were not in the design registration but were relevant at the
level of unfair competition. Thus, there was slavish imitation as the adoption of
identical colours created the same overall impression on the average consumer. In
the same vein, the CA Milan held in a case concerning furniture that although the
latter could not be protected by copyright, the copies were slavish because the
furniture could have been reproduced without taking the shape, dimensions and
colours of the originals in their entirety.189

United Kingdom
There is no such thing as unfair competition law in the United Kingdom.190 Besides
intellectual property rights, the only way to protect intellectual assets from copying
is through the tort of passing off, which is based on the common law. There is
therefore no statutory law regulating this area of the law and passing off is based
only on judge-made law.191 To win an action in passing off, the claimant must show
he gained goodwill over his product, that the defendant made a misrepresentation
and that, as a consequence (causal link), the claimant suffers damage (although as
long as the two ﬁrst conditions are fulﬁlled, damage will often be presumed).192 The
claimant can obtain an injunction or declaration that the defendant has ceased
activity and has a choice between receiving damages or account of proﬁts (Torre-
mans, 2008, p. 483).

Goodwill in terms of get-up and therefore two- and three-dimensional objects
can be protected. The most famous case is certainly the so-called ‘‘Jif Lemon’’ case
(Reckitt & Colman Products v Borden) where the goodwill resided in a lemon-shaped
container containing lemon juice.193 There are extremely few if any examples of
decided cases involving goodwill in get-up in the ﬁeld of fashion.194 One can,
however, think of cases where goodwill could exist in a fashion design such as the
multi-colour stripe pattern so distinctive of Paul Smith’s scarves and other garments
or Burberry’s chequered design so that an action could lie if the pattern would be
reproduced by another trader (although it may be a struggle to prove deception as
will be explained below). There must be goodwill ‘‘in time and space’’ (i.e. the
trader’s ‘‘reputation’’ must have existed for a certain amount of time and must exist
over a certain territory). These two requirements have been stretched so much that
they are easily fulﬁlled.195 However, passing off will hardly protect a design that has
just been launched on the market. A month or so is generally required for goodwill
to exist. There is a tendency not to ﬁnd goodwill if the name or get-up adopted is
descriptive, although a strict requirement of distinctiveness like in trademark law is

346

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

certainly not required.196 There must normally be a common ﬁeld of activity in the
sense that the defendant and claimant’s goods or services must be similar.197
However, if the claimant’s sign is well known, the similarity of the activities is
generally irrelevant. So long as there is misrepresentation, in other words, provided
a substantial part198 of the relevant public is deceived (i.e. has bought the goods of
the defendant thinking they were those of the claimant) or is likely to be deceived,
the tort is committed.199

As can readily be seen, it is therefore very easy for a defendant to escape
liability. In order to beneﬁt from the efforts made by the claimant, the defendant
can copy even exactly the claimant’s design but afﬁx a different sign or his trade
mark to avoid confusion. Consumers who buy fashion articles generally pay some
attention to what they buy and even to the trademark, and are thus less likely to be
confused.200 The tort is therefore of limited help to designers.

Comparison and Conclusion

So, are designers better protected in France or Italy than in the United Kingdom?
The answer is yes and no. Overall, they are slightly more protected in France but, in
Italy, the level of protection is rather similar to that in the United Kingdom.

As to copyright law, the situation is quite different in the three countries
reviewed. At the level of protection, French and Italian droit d’auteur is simulta-
neously more and less protective than UK copyright law. It is more protective
because more products can be protected owing to the absence of categorization. It is
less protective because,
in the United Kingdom, some artistic works such as
drawings and sculptures are protected at the lower level of sufﬁcient skill, judge-
ment, labour or capital. There is a caveat, however; make-up will not be protected
in the United Kingdom because of the Adam Ant case, while it will be in France and
probably also in Italy. Yet, there is a great difference between Italy and France on
one important point. In France, the level of protection is simply the stamp of the
creator’s personality, which is the same threshold for all works, and is less high than
that for works of artistic craftsmanship in the United Kingdom, where something
akin to merit or at least artistic intention is required.201 On the other hand, it seems
that Italian courts have had difﬁculties with getting past the old separability rule.
Similarly to works of artistic craftsmanship in the United Kingdom, some sort of
artistic value or character seems required one way or another by most courts for
industrial design. One interpretation of the highest court (CA Milan’s 21 November
2006 ruling) seems rather similar to the interpretation of the requirement of the term
‘‘artistic’’ by Lord Reid in George Hensher v Restawile (it is artistic if a substantial
section of the public thinks it is).202 As to the other Italian decisions, how high the
artistic aspects of the design should be is still unclear but the tests vary almost as
much as in the United Kingdom. On this point, it may well be that the Italian
situation is not very different from the current chaos the United Kingdom still

r 347

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

suffers from in this area of the law. Litigants in Italy will therefore have to target
their pleadings to ﬁt in the different criteria elaborated by each court.

However, the differences between member states as to the level of originality
may well have been evened up by the ECJ, as a result of its recent Infopaq ruling.203
The court held that the criterion of originality for all works protected by copyright
is the author’s own intellectual creation. Therefore, the higher criteria used for
works of applied art in Italy and works of artistic craftsmanship in the United
Kingdom are arguably no longer applicable. In addition, sculptures and graphic art
are no longer protected in the United Kingdom simply by virtue of having expanded
skill, judgement, capital and/or labour. In sum, copyright protection for designs
over the EU is now much harmonized, which is a good thing for designers. The fact
that subject matter is not harmonized will still entail differences between countries.
The designs which cannot fall within a category in the United Kingdom will remain
unprotected, whereas, provided they are original, they will be protected in other
civil law countries.

Because holders of copyright in artistic works do not enjoy the rights of
performance, showing or playing in public nor of adaptation in the United King-
dom, there are, by deﬁnition, less protected than in France and Italy where no
distinction is made as far as rights are concerned between different types of work.
On the other hand, the copyright infringement tests are pretty similar in the three
countries. The French and Italian principles are very close to those applying in the
United Kingdom as elaborated in Designers Guild204 and recently even more clearly
restated in Baigent.205 But, perhaps, the rule that similarities are more important
than differences is one difference that could make it easier to ﬁnd infringement in
France and Italy than in the United Kingdom. Therefore, at the level of infringe-
ment, the protection is as strong, if not stronger, than in the United Kingdom. The
real difference between the United Kingdom and the two other countries examined
at the level of copyright is therefore at the subject matter and protection require-
ment level. The other major difference between the three countries is in the
differences on total cumulation and on the copyright term of protection of designs.
Designers may be less protected in Italy than in France and the United Kingdom
because total cumulation is not certain. By contrast, designers will generally be
more protected in Italy than in the United Kingdom, because the effect of section 52
will often shorten the term of protection to less than the author’s life or less than the
copyright term.206

What about registered design right? Thanks to the narrow construction of
technical effect by the Advocate General in Philips v Remington,207 British, French
and Italian courts (and the Ofﬁce for the Harmonization of the Internal Market)
seem to converge on this point.208 Thus, the exception of technical effect will, in
many cases, not matter (Stone, 2008, p. 382). The French and Italian interpretation
of ‘‘informed user’’ would accord with the deﬁnition in the United Kingdom: not a
designer, a design expert or the average consumer but someone between those two
latter notions, in other words, a user/consumer who is aware of the product’s

348

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

trends. The test of individual character is also interpreted in similar ways in the
three countries. British, French and Italian courts agree that when the freedom of
creation of the designer is more constrained, small differences are more relevant—
and thus individual character can subsist—than when it is less constrained. But the
interpretation of the infringement test differs in the three countries and leads to
different outcomes. While courts agree that likelihood of confusion is irrelevant and
that the test of ‘‘overall impression’’ is not a ‘‘fragmented comparison of fully
detailed particulars’’,209 the test applied by the CA of England and Wales differs
from that applied by the French and Italian courts. This discrepancy is well
illustrated by the different rulings arrived at in the six different member states
where the Procter & Gamble litigation took place.210 In the United Kingdom, the
test of infringement is different from the protection requirement: a clearly different
impression is not needed at the level of infringement, which leads to less instances
of infringement. In France, the two tests (individual character and infringement) are
identical. In fact, neither the travaux pr ´eparatoires of the regulation nor its articles 6
and 10 suggest a different test for validity and infringement (Stone, 2008, p. 383),
which seems to prove the French judges are right. Also in the Procter & Gamble
litigation, the French court compared the products as marketed,211 whereas the
correct way to judge infringement is to compare the claimant’s design with the
defendant’s product, as the CA of England and Wales in the same case did and also
according to Italian well-settled case law. Finally,
if the infringement test as
interpreted by the CFI Turin in the Fiat case is followed, it will diverge greatly
from that applied in the United Kingdom and even France. In conclusion, apart
from the crucial issue of infringement, the French and Italian courts’ interpretation
of the new designs provisions is broadly in harmony with that of the UK courts.
A word must be said about the additional protection conferred by UDR, which
is unique to the United Kingdom. UDR partially ﬁlls the gap in relation to works of
artistic craftsmanship. It partially does because the term of protection is much less
long than that of copyright: 10–15 years rather than 70 years after the life of the
author is hardly comparable. Also, it excludes subject matter that copyright does
not, most importantly surface decoration, so it does not ﬁll the gap for body art and
make-up. It also is rather useless if cumulated with copyright as, at the level of
infringement, copyright takes over. In this sense, it may become redundant because
of the new Community UDR which resembles it a lot (on this, see Derclaye, 2004,
pp. 292–4). The only really signiﬁcant advantage UDR has is that it lasts longer
(10–15 years in comparison to three).

Finally, whether unfair competition law protects designers better in France is
unclear. They are not more protected if courts reject the tort of parasitism, as the
action then resembles the tort of passing off. But they are if they do accept it.
Overall, one can say that designs are slightly more protected in France than in the
United Kingdom and that this higher protection depends a lot on which court will
adjudicate the case. On the other hand, designers are less well protected in Italy by
unfair competition law than by some French courts as it is very clear now that risk of

r 349

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

confusion is a necessary feature of the unfair competition action. The protection of
designers in Italy is in this respect similar to that in the United Kingdom. Furthermore,
in contrast with France, as parasitism is distinct from slavish imitation and as it
requires continuous and systematic copying acts, it will rarely be useful for designers. A
similarity of the unfair competition action in the three countries is that damage will
often be presumed if the other conditions are fulﬁlled. Before concluding, it must not be
forgotten that, as stated in the introduction, in all three countries, there may also be
differences in the areas not reviewed in this article, such as ownership and exceptions.
In conclusion, as can be seen from the discussion throughout this article and the
comparative summary in the conclusion, designers are better protected on
the continent than in the United Kingdom, which comes as no surprise. As stated
in the introduction, there are also historico-legal reasons to this state of affairs (such
as the United Kingdom courts generally being more pro-competition). However, it
was beyond the scope of this article to discuss them as the article focused only
on current substantive law. What is more surprising is that the combination of the
triple protection of designs by copyright, design and unfair competition is similar in
the United Kingdom and Italy and, therefore, that there is a greater difference
between French and Italian law than between Italian and UK law (apart maybe on
the single issue of registered design infringement; beneﬁting from UDR makes no
real difference). In this light, it will be interesting to see if the tort of parasitism
survives in France, and, most importantly, if member states’ courts are going to
carry on interpreting the requirements of the Design Directive in a harmonious way.
According to some, for instance, ‘‘the more abstract the expression of the attributes
of the ‘‘informed user’’, the greater the risk of inconsistent decisions between
Member States’’ (Stone, 2008, p. 381). In any case, a ruling of the European Court
of Justice is already urgent as the test of infringement is interpreted in different ways
in at least two (important) member states.212 Other ‘‘gaps’’ may also be exploited by
litigants. For instance, there are more exceptions in copyright laws than there are in
design laws. Claimants might therefore prefer to sue exclusively for infringement of
their design rights. Moreover, the number of copyright exceptions still greatly
differs from member state to member state, adding to the interest of ‘‘law-
shopping’’ that of forum-shopping. But while a further harmonization of copyright
law and of the ﬁne details of its relationship with design law and unfair competition
law might well be necessary, this may not happen in the near future (Derclaye, 2009,
especially introduction and conclusion). In short, harmonizing one area is well and
good but it does not solve problems if the other additional parallel protections are
not also harmonized. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that a great harmoniza-
tion programme such as that carried out in the ﬁeld of registered designs can have
hugely beneﬁcial effects when directives leave no option (with the exception of the
must match exclusion) as was the case of the Design Directive. For this, the EU
institutions must be applauded and can only be encouraged to carry this on in other
relevant areas of intellectual property law. Divergences in interpretation of Com-
munity instruments by courts will inevitably always occur but they can be levelled

350

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

out by the European Court of Justice and this has now happened for originality
with the Infopaq ruling. Failing or awaiting which, the text being the same all over
the EU, national judges can simply look at what their colleagues in other member
states have decided in similar matters, and they tend increasingly to do, as in the
Procter & Gamble litigation, and, fortunately,
in—so far—a very harmonious
manner.213

About the Author

Estelle Derclaye, is Associate Professor and Reader in Intellectual Property Law at
the University of Nottingham. She holds degrees in law from the University of
Lie` ge, The George Washington University (LL.M.) and London (Ph.D.). Prior to
joining the University of Nottingham in 2006, Estelle practised intellectual property
at an international law ﬁrm in Brussels and was previously a lecturer at the
Universities of Leicester and London (Queen Mary). She also spent time as a
scholar at the Max-Planck Institute for Intellectual Property and Competition Law
(Munich) in 2002 and 2004. In 2008, she was appointed as a member of the
Copyright Expert Panel of the Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property
Policy, which advises the UK Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (http://www.sabip.
org.uk). Estelle’s main interests are in intellectual property law,
in particular
copyright and designs law. She is the author of The Legal Protection of Databases
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2008) and Research Handbook on the Future of EU
Copyright (Edward Elgar Publishing, 2009) and co-author (with A. Strowel) of
Droit d’auteur et num ´erique: logiciels, bases de donn ´ees et multimedia–Droit belge,
europ ´een et compar ´e (Bruylant, 2001). Estelle regularly presents her research at
conferences in Europe and overseas, and has been a visiting lecturer at the Universities
of Lie` ge, Brussels (KUB), Turin, Montpellier, Paris-Sud and King’s College London.
A list of her publications can be found on http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/law2/staff/
estelle.derclaye; email: ederclaye@hotmail.com and estelle.derclaye@nottingham.ac.uk

Notes

1 EC Directive 98/71/EC of 13 October 1998 on the legal protection of designs, [1998] OJ

L289/28.

2 See, however, the most comprehensive but still very partial attempt to harmonize unfair
competition law at EU level, but only from a business-to-consumer perspective with the
‘‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’’, directive 2005/29/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005 concerning unfair business-to-consumer
commercial practices in the internal market and amending Council Directive 84/450/
EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 of the European Parliament and of the
Council [2005] OJ L149/22.

3 EC Regulation 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on Community designs [2002] OJ L3/1, in

force the 60th day after publication in the Ofﬁcial Journal (later referred to as ‘‘the
Regulation’’).

r 351

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

4 Moral rights have deliberately been left outside the scope of the article. It is a well-known
fact that the United Kingdom poorly protects moral rights (assertion required for the right
to attribution, exceptions aplenty, full-blown waivers . . .), while France and other Euro-
pean countries such as Italy protect them strongly (e.g. perpetual protection, no or very
limited waivers). On this topic, see Adeney (2006), Bently (2002) and Strowel et al. (2000).
5 See sections 1–8 of the current UK copyright act, the Copyright, Designs and Patents

Act (CDPA) 1988 as amended.

6 Kecofa v Lancoˆme (2006) ECDR 26 (Supreme Court of the Netherlands); CA Paris, 4th
chamber, L’Or ´eal v Bellure (2006) ECDR 16, although the French Court of Cassation
then nipped the new trend in the bud in Bsiri-Barbir v Haarmann and Reimer (2006)
ECDR 28.

7 5 February 2008, Roberts A. D. et al. v Chanel et al. [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.legifrance.gouv.fr/afﬁchJuriJudi.do?oldAction=rechJuriJudi&idTexte=
JURITEXT000018095801&fastReqId=644344959&fastPos=1i [Accessed January
2009]. For a discussion, see ‘‘Case Law’’ (France, copyright Law).

8 Cass.crim., 2 May 1961, JCP G 1961, II, 12242, comment Aymond; Cass.crim., 30

October 1963, D., 1964, p. 678, comment Franc¸ on.

9 Cass.crim., 9 October 1974, JCP G, 1976, II, 18311, comment A.C.; Revue Internationale

du droit d’auteur (RIDA) 3/1975, p. 176; D. 1974, Inf. Rap, p. 228.

10 See CA Aix-en-Provence, RD Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, 1957, 151, p. 189; Tribunal
Correctionnel, Paris, 11th chamber, 12 July 1977, Gazette du Palais, 1978 1, p. 41. Lucas,
2001, p. 116, citing CA Aix, 11 June 1987, Cahiers de droit d’auteur, January 1988, p. 23.

11 Civ. 1st, 8 December 1987, Bulletin Civil I, no. 341.
12 Citing CA Paris, 1995, cited by Kerever, RIDA, October 1995, 241.
13 Cited by Suthersanen (2000, p. 137).
14 Also arguing that France is probably the only country in the EU to have the principle of
total cumulation and p. 67 concluding that it is also probably the most protective system
in Europe.

15 On seizures and for recent decisions applying the theory, see Greffe et al. (2008,

pp. 62–5).

16 Cass., 5 February 2008, Roberts A. D. et al. v Chanel et al. For a comment, see Derclaye

(2008b, pp. 286–7).

17 See article L. 122-5, 91 of the French Intellectual Property Code, as amended by Law no.

2006-961 of 1 August 2006, which implemented the so-called InfoSoc or Copyright
Directive (2001/29).

18 Lyon, 30 October 1952, D., 1953, 10.
19 Com., 1 December 1987, D. 1988, somm. 394, comment Burst.
20 See also ‘‘Case Law (Copyright Law, France)’’ for designs.
21 See CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 4 June 2003, Billon Fre`res et Cie v Vera Finzi et Mecotex; CA
Paris, 4th chamber, B, 20 June 2003, Longchamp v Conran Shop, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles,
2003, p. 397, comment P. De Cand ´e; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 6 February 2004, Dira
Mode v RB Fashion; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 28 January 2004, Display Factory v Pejoine,
Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2004, p. 933, comment P. De Cand ´e; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A,
11 January 2006, Solune v City Sacs, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2006, p. 455, comment P. De
Cand ´e (in order to be protectable a work only needs to be original).

352

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

22 See, for example, CA Paris, 4th chamber, 17 January 2003, Bellamy v Mod’8, Propri ´et ´e
Industrielle — Bulletin Documentaive (PIBD), 2003, no. 765, III, 299 (children’s shoes,
appreciated own character and originality as one); CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 23 May
2003, Redskins v Naf Naf, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2003, comment P. De Cand ´e, p. 399
(rejected copyright protection because the design was not novel); CA Paris, 4th chamber,
B, 21 January 2005, Thi Dong Thai Le v B. Cintius (Asiatic style clothes—fusion of
criteria); CA Paris, 4th chamber B, 25 March 2005, France Nouveaut ´e v Pohl (scarf—
does not cite any criteria); CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 16 March 2005, 3 Suisses France v
Natalys (dress—amalgamates the criteria of the two laws), all cited by Cand ´e, 2005, p.
448; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 15 February 2006, Ateliers de confection et d’impression
ACI v J. Cassegrain (Longchamp bag), Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2006, p. 455, comment
P. De Cand ´e (mixed the two criteria). For other cases in the same vein, see CA Paris, 4th
chamber, B, 21 January 2005, Celice et Jeanne v Biche de Bere, PIBD, 2005, III, p. 285;
CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 1 February 2006, PIBD 2006, III, p. 298; CA Paris, Chambre
Correctionelle, 22 January 2007, SARL L., Jurisdata no. 2007-327632; CA Montpellier,
2nd chamber, A, 3 January 2006, SA Majar v Benoist, Jurisdata no. 2006-358530,
Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, June 2008, comment Gasnier. See also Hadjadj-Cazier (2004, p. 30).
23 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 14 September 2005, Marcal v Pardo, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles,

2006, p. 455, comment P. De Cand ´e.

24 Cass.com., 20 March 2007, X v Compagnie Francaise des eaux spiritueux, Propri ´et ´es
Intellectuelles, 2007, p. 469, comment P. De Cand ´e (bottle cap unprotectable for lack of
originality).

25 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 1 December 2006, Santoni Calzatore v Hermes Sellier et al.,
PIBD, 2007, III, no. 847, p. 187; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 27 September 2006, Tulipe v
Ubu, PIBD, 2006, no. 840, III, p. 748. See also CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 23 May 2008,
Mosaic v Opium and S. Prunet, PIBD, 2008, no. 880, III, p. 516; CA Paris, 4th chamber,
B, 30 May 2008, Lignes ambiance and vide central v Nuera Solutions, PIBD, no. 881, III,
p. 552 (the different elements of a vacuum cleaner are in isolation not original but their
combination, which incorporates characteristics not imposed by technical function, for
example material and colour, is original).

26 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 7 November 2007, H&M v Scooter, Revue Internationale de la

Propri ´et ´e Industrielle et Artistique (RIPIA), 2007, no. 229, p. 35.

27 CA Paris, 4th chamber, 23 November 2007, Amatai Services v Jean Cassegrain and
Longchamp SAS, PIBD, 2008, no. 866, III, p. 51; Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, June 2008, p. 41,
comment Gasnier.

28 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 16 April 2008, D. Murat et DLM v H&M, RG no. 07/1890.
Five models of socks (mini-socks) made by a fashion designer (D. Murat) were copied by
H&M (mini-steps). They were registered at OHIM in 2005 but the claimant decided to
sue on the basis of copyright and unfair competition. To see the socks, see hhttp://
www.minisock.comi[Accessed January 2009].

29 Act of 22 April 1941, no. 633.
30 It must be noted that, in comparison with France, the Italian literature on the topic since the
new law is, as yet, much less thick so that there are only a couple of relevant up-to-date books.
31 As shall be seen, there are already not only divergent doctrinal opinions but also judicial
decisions on the new protection requirement of article 2.10. See R. Pellegrino, comment

r 353

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

under Court of First Instance (CFI) Bologna, 3 August 2001, Cassina v Dimensione
Direct Sales, Giurisprudenza Commerciale, 2005, p. 82/II, at 96.

32 Pellegrino, comment under CFI Bologna, 3 August 2001, at 100; Fabiani (2008, pp.

496–7), and also citing Dalle Vedove (2001, p. 341).

33 See also Pellegrino, comment under CFI Bologna, 3 August 2001, p. 106.
34 See Cass. 7077/90, Il Foro Italiano, Rep. 1990, keyword Diritto d’Autore, n. 68, recently
reafﬁrmed by CFI Venice, 13 February 2008, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Thun v Egan.
35 CFI Milan, 10 June 1954, Diritto d’Autore, 1955, p. 71, cited by Suthersanen (2000,

p. 213).

36 CFI Nanterre, Griegst v Soc. Lab. Yves Rocher, 14 September 2005, unpublished (golden
mask worn by a model which was the main theme of the photograph) cited by Musso,
pp. 74–5.

37 See article 4.4 of the act of 15 February 2007, no. 10 and for details, Marchetti and

Ubertazzi (2007, pp. 378–9).

38 The third interpretation is proposed by Guizzardi (2005, pp. 144 ff.).
39 CFI Florence, 6 August 2003, Tekno v Technolumen GmbH & Co KG and Peter Strobel,

Italian Intellectual Property, 2004, p. 61; CFI Venice, specialized section, 2 February
2004, no. 9283, Martino v Gioielli and Magie, Diritto Industriale, 5/2005, p. 527.

40 Commentator of the decision in Tekno v Technolumen, Italian Intellectual Property,

above.

41 CFI Florence, 6 August 2003. The lamp can be seen on the website available at hhttp://

www.tecnolumen.de/12/Wilhelm_Wagenfeld_Table_lamp.htmi[Accessed January
2009].

42 Pellegrino, comment under CFI Bologna, 3 August 2001, p. 104 also agrees that the
court has not stated in an analytical way the signiﬁcance to be given to the requirement
of artistic value.

43 CFI Venice, 2 February 2004, Martino v Gioielli and Magie.
44 For Marchetti and Ubertazzi (2007, p. 346) however, the court meant that creativity
does not coincide with artistic value. They also cite a decision from CFI Monza, 23 April
2002, Annual Italiani di dimitto d’autore (AIDA), 2003, 914 also ruling in the same direction.

45 CFI Bologna, 2 August 2004, Giurisprudenza Commerciale 2005, II, 82.
46 In sharp contrast see CFI Venice, 13 February 2008, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Thun

v Egan.

47 CFI Venice, 21 October 2005, AIDA, 2006, 544.
48 CA Milan, 21 November 2006, Vitra Patente AG v High Tech Srl, Rivista di Diritto
Industriale, 2007, II, 40, comment Sena. Musso (2008a, p. 83) however thinks that the
ﬁrst instance court correctly held that designs must be works of art to be protected by
copyright. Along similar lines, see the ruling in CFI Venice, Thun v Egan.

49 CA Milan, 17 October 2006, ICF Srl, Citra Collections AG, Herman Miller,
Giurisprudenza Italiana, 2007, p. 2241 (furniture had creative character but not artistic
value), comment Milanesi.

50 Milanesi, comment under CA Milan, 17 October 2006, p. 2245. For a similar

interpretation, see CFI Bologna, 3 August 2001, Cassina v Dimensione Direct Sales,
Giurisprudenza Commerciale, 2005, pp. II/82-88 (Le Corbusier furniture) which held that

354

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

an industrial product, even if reproducible in series, can be protected by copyright when
it is possible to free itself from the utilitarian function in order to acquire an artistic
function, which gives it an autonomous consideration in other commercial circuits where
the product is no more used but simply contemplated. Pellegrino says (p. 105) that the
design will be protected when it has a value that is separable from that which comes from
its utilitarian function, an interpretation that recalls the separability rule.

51 CFI Turin, 17 December, 2004, Casa Damiani v Re Carlo, at p. 209, comment by
Venturello (2005), who notes that it appears from the case that the new requirement is
the ‘‘artistic value’’, since ‘‘creative character’’ is foreseen by article 1 of the Italian
Copyright Act for all works (belonging to literature, music, architecture, etc.) protected
by copyright law; CFI Milan, 29 December 2006, Soc. Flos v Soc. Casa and Famiglia
Semeraro, Rivista di Diritto Industriale, 2007, II, 41, comment Sena (clearly stating there
must be both an artistic value and a creative character); CFI Bari, 27 October 2003, AIDA,
2005, 469. CFI Venice, 13 February 2008, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Thun v Egan.

52 Milanesi, comment under CA Milan, 17 October 2006.
53 29 March 2005, cited by Musso (2008a, p. 83).
54 CFI Venice, 2 February 2004.
55 CFI Milan, 28 November 2006, High Tech v V.P., Diritto d’Autore, 2008, p. 87. The
chair can be seen on website available online at hhttp://www.designmuseum.org/design/
verner-pantoni[Accessed January 2009].

56 CFI Milan, 30 November 2004, Soc. Minotti Italia Trading v Rainaldi, AIDA, 2005, 590.
57 See CFI Venice, 4 February 2004, AIDA, 2005, 1032.
58 CFI Venice, 2 February 2004, Martino v Gioielli & Magie; CFI Bologna, 3 August 2004,

AIDA 2005, 539; CFI Milan, 20 November 2004, AIDA, 2005, 590; CFI Turin, 17
December 2004, AIDA, 2005, 603; CFI Milan, 29 March 2005, AIDA, 2005, 641.

59 17 December 2004. The jewel can be seen on the website available at hhttp://

www.damiani.iti [Accessed January 2009], click on collections, then masterpieces,
then blue moon.

60 Who also think that the court meant that creativity is an additional requirement,

different from artistic value.

61 13 February 2008, Thun v Egan.
62 Contrast with the Panton case, above.
63 See for a similar point of view, the Panton case above.
64 CFI Milan, 8 February 2007, Soc. Casa and Famiglia Semeraro v Soc. Flos, Rivista di Diritto
Industriale, 2007, II, 42, comment Sena. The lamp can be seen on the website available at
hhttp://www.designmuseum.org/design/achille-castiglionii [Accessed January 2009].

65 28 November 2006.
66 CFI Milan, 18 January 2007, Soc. High Tech v Vitra Patente AG, Rivista di Diritto

Industriale, 2007, II, 41, comment Sena.

67 CFI Milan, 30 November 2004, Soc. Minotti Italia Trading v Rainaldi, AIDA, 2005, 590.
68 The most recent and highest court’s judgment applying it is Designers Guild v Russell

Williams (Textiles) [2001] FSR 11 (HL).

69 University of London Press v University Tutorial Press [1916] 2 Ch 601; Ladbroke v

William Hill [1964] 1 WLR 273, at 291.

r 355

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

70 [1983] FSR 32.
71 [1997] EMLR 444 (ChD). For commentary on these cases and the cases relating to
works of artistic craftsmanship discussed in the next paragraph, see Bently and Sherman
(2009, pp. 72–82), Cornish and Llewelyn (2007, paragraphs 11-14–11-21) and
Torremans (2008, pp. 187–92).

72 This reasoning is very criticizable as surface can be anything and the act does not require
permanence for a work to be ﬁxed. The unnamed reason for the decision seems to have
been a lack of originality as the design was very simple. On this latter point, see Laddie et
al. (2000, paragraphs 4.20 and 4.37).

73 Green v Broadcasting Corp of New Zealand [1989] RPC 700; [1989] 2 All ER 1056 (PC);
Norowzian v Arks Ltd and Guinness Brewing Worldwide Ltd (No 2) [1999] FSR 79; [2000]
EMLR 67 (CA).

74 [1976] AC 64 (HL).
75 For an example, see Merlet v Mothercare [1986] RPC 115 (baby and mother rain cape).
76 See Shelley v Rex Features [1994] EMLR 134 (the monster’s mask and clothes for

Kenneth Branagh’s Frankenstein movie were held to be prima facie works of artistic
craftsmanship) but contrast this with Lucasﬁlm et al. v A. Ainsworth & Shepperton
Design Studios [2008] EWHC 1878 (ChD) which rejected copyright protection to the
Star Wars’ stormtrooper helmets and armour.

77 George Hensher Ltd v Restawile Upholstery (Lancs.) Ltd [1976] AC 64 (HL) (although
not required, it was stated that it would be very difﬁcult for mass-produced objects to be
qualify). See also Guild v Eskandar [2001] FSR 38 (ChD).

78 Guild v Eskandar [2001] FSR 38.
79 Designers Guild v Russell Williams (Textiles) [2001] FSR 11.
80 Ladbroke (Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd [1964] 1 WLR 273 (HL).
81 See, for example, BBC v Time Out [1984] FSR 64.
82 Cantor Fitzgerald International v Tradition (UK) [2000] RPC 95; Designers Guild v

Russell Williams (Textiles) [2001] FSR 11.

83 Designers Guild v Russell Williams (Textiles) [2001] FSR 11.
84 Baigent v The Random House Group Ltd [2007] (EWCA) Civ 247, at paragraph 124.
85 For yet another example involving articles which are close to fashion articles where
protection was denied for lack of artistic character, see Vermaat v Boncrest [2001] FSR
143 (bedspreads and cushion covers).

86 For an older case dealing with sketches for dress designs, see Bernstein v Murray [1981]

RPC 303.

87 [1986] RPC 279.
88 For more on British Leyland and section 51, see, for example, Bently and Sherman

(2009, pp. 678–83) and Torremans (2008, pp. 317–22) .

89 For a recent decision, see CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 28 March 2008, Borelly v NCM,

Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2008, p. 445, comment P. De Cand ´e.

90 CA Paris, 21 March 2001, PIBD, 2001, II, 510.
91 All six national courts in the Procter & Gamble v Reckitt Benckiser parallel lawsuits
concerning Febreze (see below) agreed that what is in issue is the visual impression not
taste, touch, small or sound. The EU Design Regulation is also clear on that point.

356

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

92 For instance, in a recent case, the only difference between the claimant’s and defendant’s
bags was their dimension. See CA Paris, 7 February 2003, Cassegrain v Cecop, cited by
Dreyfus and Thomas (2006, p. 335).

93 Comment by C. Caron under Cass., 19 September 2006, CCE, February 2007, pp. 30–1,

citing Az ´ema and Galloux (2006, no. 1223); Passa (2006, no. 751).

94 Caron, comment under Cass., 19 September 2006, CCE, February 2007, p. 31. In our
view, it could be used if one looks only at the part that has been copied, as it is the only
one object of protection.

95 Caron, comment under Cass., 19 September 2006, CCE, February 2007, p. 31; Kahn
(2006, p. 24); P. De Cand ´e, ‘‘Dessins & mode` les’’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2005, p. 454.
On unfair competition, see ‘‘France (Unfair Competition)’’.

96 CA Paris, 7 October 1982, PIBD, 1983, III, p. 15.
97 CA Paris, 18 September 2002, Gal v Yves St Laurent, cited by Dreyfus and Thomas

(2006, p. 282).

98 CA Paris, 8 October 2003, Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, April 2004, p. 28 (underwear design).
99 CA Paris, 5 February 1987, D., 1988, somm., p. 394.
100 CA Paris, 26 January 1981, PIBD, 1981, III, p. 231.
101 Cass.com., 7 December 1993, PIBD, 1994, III, p. 190; CA Paris, 4th chamber, 14

September 2005, PIBD, 2005, III, 680.

102 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 9 February 2005, PIBD, 2005, III, 375. For comments, see

Dreyfus and Thomas (2006, p. 284) and Kahn (2006, p. 22).

103 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 7 April 2006, Fleury Michon v Herta, PIBD, 2006, no. 832,

III, 446.

104 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 28 September 2005, PIBD, 2005, no. 820, III, 747.
105 Cass.com, 22 March 2005, Verceral v Faience et Cristal de France, PIBD, 2005, III, p. 372.
106 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 17 March 2006, Hermes Sellier v Pier Import, Propri ´et ´es

Intellectuelles, 2006, p. 459, comment P. De Cand ´e.

107 Marken Trading v Opportunity [online]. Available at hhttp://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/

afﬁchJuriJudi.do?oldAction=rechJuriJudi&idTexte=JURITEXT000007047359
&fastReqId=790600178&fastPos=1i [Accessed January 2009].

108 Cass.com., 20 February 2007, Jurisdata no. 2007-037746; Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, 2007,

Comm. 43, note Gasnier.

109 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 20 June 2007, La Semelle Moderne v Artimex, Propri ´et ´es
Intellectuelles, 2007, p. 468, comment P. De Cand ´e (soles’ designs held both new and
having their own character).

110 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 4 March 2008, Chamborelle v Sarl Wis; CA Paris, 4th

chamber, B, 23 May 2008, PIBD, 2008, no. 880, III, p. 516 (Mosaic v Opium and S.
Prunet). For comments, see P. De Cand ´e, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2008, p. 443.

111 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 4 March 2005, Nelson v Etam, PIBD, 2005, III, p. 406 (skirts’
models); CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 1 February 2006, PIBD, 2006, no. 828, III, p. 298
(shoes’ models); CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 27 September 2006, PIBD, 2006, no. 840, III,
748. See also Gauthier (2007, p. 133), citing Civ. 1ere, 20 March 2001, RIDA, July 2001,
p. 347 (ring); Com. 17 March 2004, RIDA, July 2004, p. 263 (model for plates).

112 Court of First Instance (CFI) of Paris, 15 February 2002, Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, 2002,

Comm. 80 (Zygote et M. Fabry v Habitat France).

r 357

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

113 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 11 February 2004, Velecta Paramount v Parlux, Propri ´et ´es

Intellectuelles, 2004, p. 940, comment P. De Cand ´e.

114 For additional recent decisions on protection requirements in the ﬁeld of fashion, see

Greffe et al. (2008, pp. 192–4).

115 See Cass.com., 19 September 2006, Velecta Paramount v Parlux et Car, Propri ´et ´es

Intellectuelles, 2007, p. 473, comment P. De Cand ´e; see also CCE, February 2007, p. 30
(hairdryer design), comment C. Caron; for the CA decisions, see De Cand ´e (2004,
p. 940), De Cand ´e (2006, pp. 459–60), De Cand ´e (2007, p. 473) and Kahn (2007, p. 22,
at 26).

116 See CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 25 June 2005, Bellure v Beaut ´e Prestige International

(registered design right—design of perfume bottle); CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 29 June
2005, Deveaux v Marie-Claire (copyright—drawings); CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 4
February 2005, Carbonari v Verjat Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2005, p. 454, comment P.
De Cand ´e (registered design right—labels for cheese containers).

117 Cass.com., 26 March 2008, FS-P+B, Frendo v Ets Tarrerias Bonjean (knives), Jurisdata
no. 2008-043353, Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, June 2008, p. 38, comment F. Greffe. See also De
Cand ´e (2008, p. 447). See also Cass.com., 23 September 2008, PIBD, no. 883, III, p. 608
(Manufacture G ´en ´erale Horlogerie v G. Ellia, Auchan France, G ´en ´erale de marques
(Suisse) et LGE), in which the court set aside a decision holding that there was
infringement because the global visual impression could create a risk of confusion.

118 See ‘‘France (Unfair Competition)’’.
119 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 11 April 2008, Chaumet v Camille & Lucie, Propri ´et ´es

Intellectuelles, 2008, pp. 446–7, comment P. De Cand ´e. See also CA Paris, 4th chamber,
B, 18 April 2008, Cashtex-Popny v Memo France, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2008, p. 447,
comment P. De Cand ´e and CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 23 November 2007, Amatai v Jean
Cassegrain, PIBD, 2008, no. 866, III, p. 51 (copyright infringement).

120 [2007] EWCA Civ 936 (CA); CA Paris, 14th chamber, A, 14 January 2007, Reckitt v
Procter & Gamble [online]. Available at hhttp://oami.europa.eu/pdf/design/cdcourts/
Air_Wick.pdfi [Accessed January 2009]. For the discussion of the English case, see
‘‘United Kingdom—Unregistered Designs’’.

121 Cass., 1 July 2008 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/

afﬁchJuriJudi.do?oldAction=rechJuriJudi&idTexte=JURITEXT000019127786
&fastReqId=789785982&fastPos=1i [Accessed January 2009].

122 On registered design right, see, for example, Auteri et al. (2005) and Marchetti and

Ubertazzi (2007).

124 Cass., 21 January 2009, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Fratelli Guzzini v Lega.
125 CFI Milan, 4 May 2004, ivi, 225; 20 April 2004, SPI 2004, 84 and 3 March 2004, Italian

Intellectual Property Courts Case Law Report, 2004, I, 129; CFI Rimini, 10 October
2001, GA-DI, 2001, 4312.

126 CFI Bologna, 2 July 2004, SPI 2004, 179.
126 Venturello (2005), citing CFI Milan, 3 March 2004, Italian Intellectual Property Courts

Case Law Report, 2004, I, 129; CFI Rome, 27 February 2004, Italian Intellectual
Property Courts Case Law Report 2004, I, 237. However, at the very beginning, courts
tended to state simply that the informed user was the average ﬁnal user (CFI Rome, 16
June 2004, SPI 04, 347 and 3 June 2004, SPI 04, 343) or the person to whom the product
is directed and who possess an average knowledge of the commercial sector of the

358

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

product (CFI Turin, 1 October 2001, SPI 04, 440; CFI Venice, 23 December 2003, SPI
04, 165.I).

127 CFI Turin, 17 December 2004. See also above ‘‘Case Law’’ (Copyright Law, Italy).
128 1 December 2004, Kikau persiane v Toma, Giurisprudenza annotata di diritto industriale,

2005, 592.

129 13 July 2005, Calgaro group v Double Vi Oro, Il Foro Italiano, 2005, I, 3503, comment

Casaburi. See also more recently, CFI Turin, Great Wall Motors v Fiat, 3 September
2008 [online]. Available at hhttp://oami.europa.eu/ows/rw/resource/documents/RCD/
case-law/torino.pdfi [Accessed January 2009] (the informed user is the attentive and
prepared consumer).

130 13 July 2005, Calgaro group v Double Vi Oro, at 3512.
131 Ibid., at 3512.
132 CFI Milan, 11 July 2006, p. 5, cited by Stone (2008, p. 380). See also, most recently, CFI
Turin, 20 March 2008, DaimlerChrysler v Nord-Auto et al., Il Foro Italiano, 2008, p. 1654
(copies of the Smart car Community design) in which the court held that the informed
user is the person who, if he or she is not an expert in the ﬁeld, is much more attentive to
the details than an average consumer and is in condition to recognize a model by
confronting it to previous models and technical evolutions, knowing (by deﬁnition) the
market well.

133 See again, recently, CFI Venice, 13 February 2008, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Thun v
Egan in which the court reafﬁrms that the informed user is not the average consumer.
134 12 March 2003, Domo v Soc. it. Pentole, Giurisprudenza annotata di diritto industriale,
2005, 146. See also CFI Rome, 3 June 2004, SPI 04, 343, which also applied the theory of
crowded art.
135 Supra n. 131.
136 This contrasts with the Casa Damiani v Re Carlo case, CFI Turin, 17 December 2004,

Italian Intellectual Property, 2005, p. 201.

137 1 December 2004, Kikau persiane v Toma, Giurisprudenza annotata di diritto industriale,
2005, 592. For other earlier decisions interpreting the notion of individual character, see
CFI Naples, 11 December 2003, Italian Intellectual Property Courts Case Law Report
2004, I, 178; CFI Bari, 27 October 2003, Italian Intellectual Property Courts Case Law
Report, 2004, I, 16; CFI Udine, 28 January 2002, Giurisprudenza Italiana, 2002, 8–9,
1662; Ricolﬁ (2002).

138 CFI Turin, 17 December 2004, Giurisprudenza di Merito, 2005, 1059.
139 27 April 2005, Plastimark v La Boita, Giurisprudenza Italiana, 2006, 73. This ruling is

strange as there is a grace period of 12 months in article 6(2)(b) of the directive anyway.

140 31 May 2007, Casa Damiani v Re Carlo, Il Foro Italiano, 2007, I, 3560.
141 1 October 2002, Chimento v Superoro, Giurisprudenza annotata di diritto industriale,

2004, 306.

142 See, however, the Calgaro case above.
143 CFI Florence, 9 July 2004, Ariete v Stefan, Giurisprudenza annotata di diritto industriale,

2005, 420.

144 Although the authors do not report any decision taken after the entry into force of the

new law.

145 Citing CFI Venice, 13 July 2005, Il Foro Italiano, 2005, 3503; CFI Rome, 3 June 2004, Il
Foro Italiano, 2005, 343; CFI Udine, 28 January 2002, Giurisprudenza Italiana, 2002, 1663.

r 359

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

146 3 September 2008, Great Walls Motors v Fiat, above.
147 It was amended by the Registered Designs Regulations 2001, which entered into force on

9 December 2001.

148 (2006) ECDR 11, paragraphs 50–52.
149 Ibid., at paragraph 51.
150 Ibid., at paragraph 52.
151 [2007] EWCA Civ 936 (CA), paragraphs 16, 17, 23, 24–29, 32. The case concerned a
registered Community design but since the substantive law is identical, it is relevant.

152 Ibid., at paragraphs 16–19 of the judgement, which is based on recital 14 of the

Regulation which provides in relevant part: ‘‘The assessment as to whether a design has
individual character should be based on whether the overall impression produced on an
informed user viewing the design clearly differs from that produced on him by the
existing design corpus . . .’’ (emphasis added).

153 Ibid., paragraph 30.
154 Ibid., paragraph 35.
155 Ibid., paragraph 25.
156 Ibid., paragraph 35.
157 Ibid., paragraph 35.
158 On the UDR, see, for example, Bently and Sherman (2009, pp. 686–707), Cornish and

Llewelyn (2007, paragraphs 15-37–15-52) and Torremans (2008, pp. 341–59).

159 For the full explanation of the rule, see section 216 of the CDPA. It varies between from
10 years to just under 16 years depending whether creation of the design coincides or not
with the ﬁrst marketing of articles made to the design.

160 C&H Engineering v Klucznik & Sons [1992] FSR 421.
161 Mark Wilkinson v Woodcraft Designs [1998] FSR 63 (engraving, painting); Jo-Y-Jo Ltd v
Matalan Retail Ltd [2000] ECDR 178 (embroidery on a garment was surface decoration
since it was comprised of stitches added to the garment after it was made).

162 [1997] FSR 680.
163 A. Fulton Co v Grant Barnett & Co [2001] RPC 257 (ChD).
164 Landor and Hawa International v Azure Designs [2006] ECDR 31 (CA).
165 [1999] RPC 461 (CA).
166 [2009] ECDR 11.
167 [1999] RPC 461, at 482.
168 [2003] FSR 15 (CA), at paragraph 19.
169 For a description, see Derclaye (2008a, chapter 3). In the ﬁeld of fashion, see also Kahn

(2006, 2007).

170 Cass., 14 November 2006, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2007, p. 118, comment J. Passa. See

also Kahn (2007, p. 26).

171 Cass.com, 20 March 2007, Jurisdata, no. 2007-038233; Kahn (2007, p. 26).
172 Cass.com., 20 February 2007, PIBD, 2007, III, no. 853, p. 380 and Cass.com., 23

January 2007, Movitex et Daxon v Fuego, PIBD, 2007, no. 849, III, p. 258.

173 Cass.com., 28 November 2006, Mr X, St ´e Maison du Kelsh & St ´e Alscacienne de

Maroquinerie v St ´e Cr ´eation Li Yi Sa Lys (2007) IIC 739 (jump bag).

174 Cass.com., 12 June 2007, Boll ´e v Euro Protection [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.legifrance.gouv.fr/afﬁchJuriJudi.do?oldAction=rechJuriJudi&idTexte=
JURITEXT000017895625&fastReqId=1567160901&fastPos=2i [Accessed January

360

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

2009] and Solstiss v Erco Pizzi [online]. Available at hhttp://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/
afﬁchJuriJudi.do?oldAction=rechJuriJudi&idTexte=JURITEXT000007530316
&fastReqId=484986935&fastPos=1i [Accessed January 2009].

175 Cass.com., 1 July 2008, 1633 v St ´e Conception de presse et d’ ´edition (SCPE), PIBD,

2008, no. 885, III, p. 674 (a magazine sued another for infringement of its cover page’s
layout which it had registered a design for. The Court of Cassation set the CA’s decision
aside as it had decided there was parasitism for simply copying the layout, which is not a
fact distinct from infringement. Conversely, it held that the CA wrongly refused
to take the copy of the claimant’s pink frame and of the colours’ characteristics of the
claimant’s magazine into consideration as these acts were creating confusion and
therefore were distinct facts which should have been sanctioned by the unfair
competition action). Cass., 2 December 2008, 07-19.436 and 08-11.699, Revue Lamy
droit de l’immat ´eriel, 2009, no. 45, pp. 18–19.

176 Cass.com., 3 July 2001, Nathan v Hachette, cited by Greffe et al. (2008, p. 487).
177 For most recent cases, CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 16 January 2008, C&A France v Eurl
HG; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 16 January 2008, Sarl Trading European Company v SAS
Guy Degrenne; CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 20 February 2008, Consortium M ´enager
Parisien v EPB (range effect constitutes unfair competition); CA Paris, 4th chamber, A,
21 November 2007, Dessange International v Denaive; CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 11
April 2008, Chaumet v Camille & Lucie, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2008, p. 451, comment
P. De Cand ´e (range effect does not constitute unfair competition).

178 CA Paris, 7 September 2005, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 2006, p. 91, comment J. Passa.

See also Kahn (2006, p. 24).

179 CA Paris, 4th chamber, B, 1 December 2006, Santoni Calzatore v Herme`s, PIBD, 2007,

no. 847, III, p. 187.

180 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 7 November 2007, H&M v Scooter, RIPIA, 2007, no. 229,

p. 35.

181 CA Paris, 4th chamber, A, 17 December 2008, Oscar and Lola v Soci ´et ´e Codico, Gazette du

Palais, 21 March 2009, no. 90, p. 40.

182 It seems to be because of frequent changes of staff at the Supreme Court and strong

divergences of opinion between the judges.

183 Citing a number of decisions. On unfair competition, see also Auteri et al. (2005).
184 Recently, see Cass., 21 January 2009, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674, Fratelli Guzzini v

Lega, which repeats, albeit quickly in passing, that slavish imitation requires likelihood
of confusion.

185 For a recent case, see CFI Venice, 13 February 2008, Il Foro Italiano, 2009, p. 674,

Thun v Egan, where the court speciﬁcally states that the test to be used is the average
consumer.

186 Cass., 28 February 2008, no. 5437, Mega Blocks v Lego Systems, Il Diritto Industriale,

2008, pp. 277 ff. On this case, see Musso (2008b).

187 CFI Turin, 17 December 2004.
188 Supra n. 131.
189 CA Milan, 17 October 2006, ICF srl, Citra collections AG, Herman Miller,

Giurisprudenza Italiana, 2007, p. 2241.

190 It was recently reafﬁrmed by the Court of Appeal in L’Oreal v Bellure (2008) ETMR (1)
1. For a discussion in historical perspective, see Bently and Sherman (2009, pp. 778–80).

r 361

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

191 Of course the United Kingdom is bound by the directives in the ﬁeld of unfair

competition law, mainly the UPC Directive (supra n. 2) and the Misleading and
Comparative Advertising Directive (directive 2006/114/EC of the European Parliament
and the Council of 12 December 2006 concerning misleading and comparative
advertising, [2006] OJ L376/21/. For detail commentary on the law of passing-off, see,
for example, Bently and Sherman (2009, pp. 726 ff.), Cornish and Llewelyn (2007,
paragraphs 17-01–17-44) and Torremans (2008, pp. 457 ff.).

192 Draper v Trist & Tristbestos Brake Lining (1939) 56 RPC 429 and Procea Products v

Evans & Sons (1951) 68 RPC 210.

193 [1990] 1 all ER 873.
194 Burberrys v Cording (1909) 26 RPC 693 (Burberrys alleged goodwill on the term ‘‘slip-

on’’ for coats but failed); Chelsea Man Menswear v Chelsea Girl [1987] RPC 189
(clothes). However, in both cases, the goodwill was not in the shape of the garments or
their pattern but in their names.

195 See BBC v Talbot Motor Co. Ltd [1981] FSR 228 (goodwill held to subsist for ’carfax’

service (radio trafﬁc information) even though the service had not yet been launched
because the BBC had done a lot of advertising); Chelsea Man Menswear v Chelsea Girl
[1987] RPC 189 (claimant sold clothes in Leicester, Coventry and London but obtained
injunction for all of England and Wales because people and goods move around
country).

196 Phones 4U v Phone4u.co.uk Internet [2007] RPC 5 (CA). See also Torremans (2008,

pp. 459–60).

197 See, for example, Harrods v R Harrod (1923) 41 RPC 74.
198 See Neutrogena v Golden [1996] RPC 473 and Bently and Sherman (2009, pp. 757–8).

A substantial part does not mean a majority but it must be more than de minimis.

199 See Lego Systems Aktieselskab v Lego M Lemelstrich [1983] FSR 155; Irvine v Talksport

[2002] FSR 943, conﬁrmed on appeal [2003] FSR 619.

200 In the same vein, see Reckitt & Colman Products v Borden [1990] 1 All ER 873.
201 George Hensher Ltd v Restawile Upholstery (Lancs) Ltd [1975] RPC 31. See also recently
Lucasﬁlm et al. v A. Ainsworth & Shepperton Design Studios [2008] EWHC 1878 (Star
Wars’ stormtrooper helmet and armour neither sculptures nor works of artistic
craftsmanship).

202 [1976] AC 64, at 78.
203 Case C-5/08, Infopaq International A/S v Danske Dagblades Forening, 16 July 2009.

Available at hhttp://www.cuma.europa.eui [Accessed August 2009].

204 [2000] 1 WLR 2416 (HL).
205 [2007] FSR 24, per Mummery LJ, paragraph 124.
206 Although both France and the United Kingdom have the same total cumulation rule as
opposed to Italy, in the United Kingdom, the effect of total cumulation is lessened in the
cases where section 52 of the CDPA applies.

207 In its Opinion of 21 January 2001 in case C-299/99, Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo

Colomer said that:

the level of ‘‘functionality’’ must be greater in order to be able to assess the
ground for refusal in the context of designs; the feature concerned must
not only be necessary but essential
in order to achieve a particular

362

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

technical result: form follows function. This means that a functional
design may, nonetheless, be eligible for protection if it can be shown
that the same technical function could be achieved by another different
form.

208 See supra n. 164, FSR 22; afﬁrmed [2007] FSR 9 (CA). For other references, see Stone

(2008, p. 382).

209 Words used by the Handelsgericht Wien in the Procter & Gamble litigation and

rephrased by the other courts in the parallel litigation. See Stone (2008, p. 383) citing the
court at p. 8 and also the Oberster Gerichtshof, paragraph1.2. All courts in the litigation
also agreed that what is in issue is the visual impression not the taste, touch, smell or
sound. Stone (2008, p. 384). On this point, the regulation is clear. See also above the
French test of ‘‘global visual impression’’.

210 Namely Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and England and Wales. See Stone

(2008, p. 376).

211 See commercial court of Evry, 5 April 2006, case no. 2006R00065. So did the Belgian

and Austrian courts in the case.

212 A ﬁrst ruling on the Design Regulation should be out soon in case C-32/08, Fundaci ´on
Espa ˜nola para la Innovaci ´on de la Artesan ´ıa (FEIA) v Cul de Sac Espacio Creativo, S.L.
and Acierta Product & Position, S.A., a reference for a preliminary ruling from the
Juzgado de lo Mercantil Nu´ mero Uno, Alicante, lodged on 28 January 2008. But the
question refers to article 14 of the regulation, which deals with ownership. It asks
whether the term ‘‘employee’’ encompasses commissioned persons. Advocate General
Mengozzi, in its Opinion of 26 March 2009, said that article 14(3) of the regulation must
be interpreted in the sense that the regime it provides applies only to designs created by
employees, i.e. persons within a subordinated work relationship. The holder of the right
to the design created within the framework of a contractual relationship other than
within a subordinated work relationship, such as designs carried out by the
commissioned for the commissioner, must be determined in accordance with the express
intention of the parties and the law applicable to the contract. The legislation of a
member state that assimilates, to determine the holder of the right to the design, the
designs carried out by the commissioned for the commissioner to designs created by
employees, is not contrary in article 14(3) of the regulation.

213 The French judge in Procter & Gamble apart.

[Correction added after online publication 16 April 2010: in the Notes section, all
instances of ‘chapter’ have been changed to ‘chamber’]

References

Adeney, E. (2006) The Moral Rights of Authors and Performers, An International and

Comparative Analysis. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Auteri, P., Floridia, G., Mangini, V., Olivieri, G., Ricolﬁ, M. and Spada, P. (2005) Diritto

industriale, Proprieta` intellettuale e concorrenza, 2nd edition. Giappichelli, Turin.

Az ´ema, J. and Galloux, J.-Ch. (2006) Droit de la propri ´et ´e industrielle, 6th edition. Dalloz, Paris.
Bently, L. (2002) Between a Rock and a Hard Place. The Institute of Employment Rights,

London.

r 363

Estelle Derclaye

Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Bently, L. and Sherman, B. (2009) Intellectual Property Law, 3rd edition. Oxford University

Press, Oxford.

Buydens, M. (1993) La protection de la quasi-cr ´eation. Larcier, Bruxelles.
Cornish, W. and Llewelyn, D. (2007) Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyright, Trade Marks

and Allied Rights, 6th edition. Thomson, Sweet & Maxwell, London.

Dalle Vedove, G. (2001) ‘Dal modello ornamentale all’Industrial Design’, Diritto d’Autore, 3, 341.
De Cand ´e, P. (2003) ‘Dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 9, 396.
De Cand ´e, P. (2004) ‘Dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 13, 940.
De Cand ´e, P. (2006) ‘Dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 21, 459.
De Cand ´e, P. (2007) ‘Dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 25, 473.
De Cand ´e, P. (2008) ‘Dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´es Intellectuelles, 29, 447.
Derclaye, E. (2004) ‘The British Unregistered Design Right: Will it Survive Its New

Community Counterpart and Inﬂuence Future European Case Law?’, Columbia Journal
of European Law, 10(2), 265–95.

Derclaye, E. (2008a) The Legal Protection of Databases: A Comparative Analysis. Edward

Elgar, Cheltenham.

Derclaye, E. (2008b) ‘French Supreme Court Rules Fashion Shows Protected by Copyright—
What About the United Kingdom?’, Journal of Intellectual Property Law and Practice,
3(5), 286–7.

Derclaye, E. (ed.) (2009) Research Handbook on the Future of EU Copyright. Edward Elgar,

Cheltenham.

Dreyfus, N. and Thomas, B. (2006) Marques, dessins et mode`les, protection, d ´efense,

valorisation, 2nd edition. Delmas, Paris.

Fabiani, M. (2008) ‘Moda, sﬁlate di modelle, protezione del diritto d’autore’, Diritto

d’Autore, 4, 492–9.

Gauthier, P.-Y. (2001) Propri ´et ´e litt ´eraire et artistique. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
Gauthier, P.-Y. (2007) Propri ´et ´e litt ´eraire et critique, 6th edition. Presses Universitaires de

France, Paris.

Golaz, E. (1992) L’imitation servile des produits et de leur pr ´esentation, ´etude compar ´ee des

droits franc¸ ais, allemand, belge et suisse. Droz, Gene` ve.

Greffe, F. (2001) ‘Ordonnance du 25 juillet 2001: transposition de la directive communautaire
du 13 octobre 1998: une harmonisation limit ´ee et inutile’, Juris-Classeur P ´eriodique ed.
E, 239.11., 48, 1900.

Greffe, F. (2008) ‘Comment under Cass.com. 26 March 2008. FS-P+B, Frendo v Ets

Tarrerias Bonjean’, Jurisdata no. 2008-043353, Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, p. 38.

Greffe, P., Greffe, F. and Greffe, P.-B. (2008) Trait ´e des dessins et des mode`les, 8th edition.

Litec, Paris.

Guizzardi, S. (2005) La tutela d’autore del disegno industriale: incentivi all’innovazione e

regime circolatorio. Giuffre` , Milan.

Hadjadj-Cazier, N. (2004) Strat ´egies de protection du design: mieux prot ´eger les cr ´eations

esth ´etiques. La Documentation Franc¸ aise, Paris.

Humblot, B. (2003) Juris-Classeur P ´eriodique ed. E, 24, 990.
Kahn, A.-E. (2006) ‘Un an de droit de la mode’, Communication Commerce Electronique, 24.
Kahn, A.-E. (2007) ‘Un an de droit de la mode’, Communication Commerce Electronique, 22.
Kamina, P. (2001) ‘Le nouveau droit franc¸ ais des dessins et mode` les’, Dalloz Affaires, 40,

3258.

364

r Are Fashion Designers Better Protected in Europe than in the UK?

Estelle Derclaye

Kamina, P. (2003), Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, April, Comment 32, 28.
Laddie, H., Prescott, P., Vitoria, M., Speck, A. and Lane, L. (2000) The Modern Law of

Copyright, 3rd edition. Butterworths, London.

Lucas, A. (2006) Trait ´e de la propri ´et ´e litt ´eraire et artistique, 3rd edition. Litec, Paris.
Lucas, A. and Lucas, H.J. (2001) Trait ´e de la propri ´et ´e litt ´eraire et artistique. Litec, Paris.
Marchetti, P. and Ubertazzi, L. (2007) Commentario breve alle leggi su proprieta` intellettuale e

concorrenza, 4th edition. CEDAM, Padova.

Massa, C. and Strowel, A. (2003) ‘Community Design: Cinderella Revamped’, European

Intellectual Property Review, 25(2), 68–78.

Musso, A. (2008a) Diritto di autore sulle opera dell’ingegno letterarie e artistiche. Zanichelli,

Bologna.

Musso, A. (2008b) ‘The Relationship Between a Limited-In-Time Patent and Design
Protection with the Provisions Against Slavish Imitation or Other Unfair Trade
Practices’, comment on A. Ohly’s presentation presented at ATRIP conference [online].
Available at hhttp://www.ip.mpg.de/shared/data/doc/atrip_musso.doci [Accessed
January 2009].

Passa, J. (1997) Contrefac¸ on et concurrence d ´eloyale. Publications de l’IRPI no. 15, Litec,

Paris.

Passa, J. (2006) Trait ´e de droit de la propri ´et ´e industrielle, Vol. I. La Librairie g ´en ´erale de droit

et de jurisprudence, Paris.

P ´erot-Morel, M.-A., Sijthoff Monograph.
P ´erot-Morel, M.-A. (2005) ‘A propos du maintien de l’unit ´e de l’art dans le nouveau droit des

dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´e Industrielle, April, Etudes, 9.

Piatti, M.-C. (2004) ‘Autonomisation du droit franc¸ ais des dessins et mode` les’, Propri ´et ´e

Industrielle, December, Etudes, 7.

Ricolﬁ, M. (2002) ‘La nuova disciplina dei disegni e modelli al vaglio della giurisprudenza’,

Giurisprudenza Italiana, 8–9, 1662.

Stone, D. (2008) ‘Some Clarity, Some Confusion: 12 P&G v Reckitt Benckiser Decisions

Help Explain Registered Community Designs’, Journal of Intellectual Property Law and
Practice, 3(6), 376–85.

Strowel, A., Salokannel, M. and Derclaye, E. (2000) Moral Rights in the Context of the

Exploitation of Works through Digital Technology [online], Study commissioned by the
DG Internal Market. Brussels, EC Commission. Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/
internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/etd1999b53000e28_en.pdfi [Accessed January
2009].

Suthersanen, U. (2000) Design Law in Europe. Sweet & Maxwell, London.
Torremans, P. (2008) Holyoak & Torremans Intellectual Property Law, 5th edition. Oxford

University Press, Oxford.

Venturello, M. (2005) ‘Recent Constructions of Italian Law on Designs and Models in Case
Law, Comment Under CFI Turin, 17 December 2004, Casa Damiani v Re Carlo’, Italian
Intellectual Property, 201.

r 365


