DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12081

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Monopoly v. Openness: Two sides of IP coin in the
pharmaceutical industry

Olga Gurgula

Lecturer at Aston University, PhD Candidate
at Queen Mary University of London, LLM
(London), Ukrainian Qualified Lawyer

Correspondence
Email: o.gurgula@qmul.ac.uk

The pharmaceutical industry extensively relies on the patent
system. It actively lobbies for the strengthening of patent
protection of its medical products and the results of its efforts
may be found in the majority of bilateral and multilateral
agreements, including the TRIPS and the most recent TPPA,
augmented by private patent strategies pursued by pharma-
ceutical companies. However, some recent developments show
the emerging tendency of implementing different business
models by pharmaceutical companies that may mark the
beginning of transformation of this industry. Among these
developments is an “Open innovation” model, which has
increasingly been followed by some research institutions and
pharmaceutical companies aiming at facilitating the creation of
new and affordable medicines, as well as providing transparency
in order to enhance safety and efficacy of drugs. This article will
discuss these two current developments in the pharmaceutical
industry, that is, strong IP protection against open innovation.

K E Y W O R D S
access to medicines, open innovation, patents, the
pharmaceutical industry

1 |

INTRODUCTION

Traditionally, intellectual property is seen as a monopoly granted by the state in order to reward the creator/inventor
and to facilitate dissemination of knowledge that otherwise would be kept secret. Out of all types of intellectual
property rights, patents are the strongest monopoly one can obtain over the results of his intellectual creations.
Possession of such a monopoly controls the use of a product protected by the patent; most importantly, its price.

© 2017 The Authors. The  © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

206 | wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip

J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:206–220.

GURGULA

| 207

A classic example of patent monopoly may be found in the pharmaceutical industry, where the unique role of
intellectual property is due to the industry's specific features. On the one hand, pharmaceutical companies invest
significant financial resources and time into the R&D process, and further transformation of the resulted invention
into an effective and safe medicine. On the other hand, the development and marketing of drugs are under vigilant
control of the state. Within this complex environment, the crucial need for strong patent protection, as it is claimed by
the industry,1 stems from the nature of the product: the development of a successful drug requires substantial time
and resources, but considerably less time and investments to copy it. Therefore, for the purpose of protection of their
inventions and prevention of free-riding, pharmaceutical companies extensively rely on the patent system.

One of the main arguments for strong patent protection, which is actively articulated by the pharmaceutical
industry, is the high cost of R&D that amounts to between US$ 800 million2 (Angell, 2005; Frank, 2003; Light &
Warburton, 2011; Morgan, Grootendorst, Lexchin, Cunningham, & Greyson, 2011; the Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry,
2009) and US$ 2.6 billions (DiMasi, Grabowski, & Hansen, 2015).3 According to the industry figures, as few as 1 in
5,000 to 10,000 tested compounds are successfully launched (The Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry, para 161). Some
studies go as far as claiming that 60% of the pharmaceutical inventions made between 1981 and 1983 would not have
been developed at all and 65% of those inventions would not have been introduced into commerce if patent
protection had been unavailable (Mansfield, 1986).

Hence, it is accepted that the pharmaceutical industry is the IP monopoly oriented industry with the need of
strong patent protection. It actively lobbies this idea and the results of its efforts may be found in the majority of
bilateral and multilateral agreements, including the TRIPS and the most recent TPPA.

This is in contrast with other industries that rely on other forms of protection, such as trade secrets4 (Kulakowski
& Chronister, 2006), trade marks, copyrights and design rights. Despite such an attractive advantages of the monopoly
power provided by the patent, such a business model may not be of a great interest to other industries. The software-
based industry, for example, has increasingly used intellectual property in a different way. Instead of restricting access
to their intellectual property, some companies open it to their users (e.g. Linux), sometimes on a royalty-free basis,
deriving their income from a service support and a tailor-made software. These developments have created the
antipode of the traditional copyright, the so-called “copyleft”.

However, some recent developments in the pharmaceutical

industry may mark the beginning of the
transformation of this industry, proving that monopolistic patent strategies may not be the best business models
after all. Among these developments is an “Open innovation” model, which has increasingly been followed by some
research institutions and pharmaceutical companies aiming at facilitating the creation of new and affordable
medicines, as well as providing transparency to enhance safety and efficacy of drugs.

This article discusses these two current developments in the pharmaceutical industry, that is, strong IP protection
against open innovation. It will be explained that pharmaceutical companies can use their intellectual property restrictively
in order to protect market monopoly of their products. Intellectual property can also be used as an open source, facilitating
the creation of new medicines through providing free access to IP protected information. This article will outline these
different models of drugs development. It will first discuss the traditional position of the pharmaceutical industry, which is
aimed at strengthening patent protection by means of international and bilateral instruments, as well as private business
practices. The article will then turn to the emerging tendency towards implementing “Open innovation” models in the drugs
development process with some recent examples of how these models are facilitated by international organisations, state
authorities, individual initiatives and pharmaceutical companies themselves.

2 | STRENGTHENING OF MONOPOLY POWER

2.1 | When drugs were not protected by patents

Once upon a time, when drugs were not protected by patents . . . The modern pharmaceutical industry is relatively
young and is considered to be an offspring of the dyestuff and chemical industries. The establishment of the

208 |

GURGULA

pharmaceutical industry is closely linked to an incidental discovery made by Willian Henry Perkin, a young scientist at
the Royal College of Chemistry in London (Firn, 2010, p.40; Greenwood, 2008, pp. 49–50; Myers, 2003, p. 295). In
1856, he was given a task to synthesise quinine from coal-tar, an industrial waste product of gas lighting (Dutfield,
2009, p.11). Although unsuccessful in his initial task, he nevertheless discovered the dyeing properties of mauve that
eventually led to the development of several completely new industries, including the synthetic dyestuff, chemical
and pharmaceutical industries (p. 12). The dyestuff and chemical industries were dominated by German companies
such as Bayer, Hoechst, BASF and AGFA, some of which became more famous for drugs than dyes (p. 12). Later,
companies like Merck, Eli Lilly and Roche, which supplied natural products such as morphine, quinine and strychnine,
also started a large-scale production of drugs (Taylor, 2015).

Despite the importance of this scientific development and the establishment of an entirely new industry, patent
protection of drugs had not been available in most of the countries until recently. In nineteenth century Europe,
typically only the process of producing a drug was patentable5 (Boldrin & Levine, 2005). This meant that, after a drug
had been discovered, other companies were free to manufacture and sell it using a different process of making it. The
pharmaceutical industry, therefore, invested considerable time and efforts in order to convert its products from non-
patentable subject matter to the invention that has arguably the strongest patent protection compared to inventions
in other industries.

2.2 | Further strengthening of pharmaceutical patent protection on the international
level: TRIPs and TPPA

The signing of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPs agreement) in
1994 became a grand victory of the “Big Pharma”. Heavily lobbied by the industry, this agreement finally set a
level6 (Matthews, 2002). Article 27 of the TRIPs
minimum standard of patent protection on an international
agreement establishes the rules on patentable subject matter and provides that:

. . . patents shall be available for any inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology,
provided that they are new, involve an inventive step and are capable of industrial application. (emphasis added)

Such a mandatory minimum standard resulted in the protection extended to all

including
pharmaceuticals. As a result of this international treaty, every signatory Member State undertook an obligation to
introduce patent protection for drugs in their national legislations, as well as implement relevant mechanisms for their
registration and enforcement.

inventions,

Such changes were particularly detrimental to developing countries that could not afford the burden of
pharmaceutical patents: they had no administrative resources and knowledge in order to implement an adequate
examination and registration process, and they were also lacking the necessary financial resources to bear the cost of
expensive patented medicines. While understanding the challenges of developing countries, a few flexibilities were
introduced into the TRIPs agreement, such as parallel importation, compulsory licensing and the possibility for the
Member States to frame their own rules on IP exhaustion and patentability requirements.

However, despite the great value of these flexibilities, they are increasingly curtailed by free trade agreements
signed between developing and developed countries (Dutfield, 2001; So, 2004; Matthews, 2011; United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, 2006, p.195; United Nations High Level Panel on Access to Medicines
Report, 2016; WHO, WIPO, WTO Report, 2013, p.83). These free trade agreements tend to strengthen the IP
protection of medical products on the bilateral and regional levels. These so-called “TRIPs-plus” provisions usually
set a higher level of intellectual property protection than is required by TRIPs.7 It is believed that such provisions
delay generic market entry and lead to higher prices and restricted access to medicines in the signatory countries
(UNITAID, 2014).

GURGULA

| 209

The concerns over access to medicines and excessive pricing are particularly relevant to the Trans-Pacific
Partnership Agreement (the TPPA) signed in 2016.8 It is described as a model agreement for the twenty-first century,
implying that similar provisions will appear in future trade agreements (Voon, 2013). This regional agreement
substantially elevates the patent protection of medicines comparing to the TRIPs agreement standards (Correa, 2015).
For instance, the TPPA provides the extension of the 20 year patent term for pharmaceutical patents as a
compensation for “unreasonable or unnecessary delays” during marketing authorisation of drugs,9 as well as provides
a patent term adjustment for “unreasonable” delays by the patent office.10 (Matthews, 2015a).

Further, Article 18.37 of the TPPA provides that:

Each Party shall make patents available for any invention, whether a product or process, in all fields of
technology, provided that the invention is new, involves an inventive step, and is capable of industrial
application.

Thus, this provision mirrors Article 27 of TRIPs agreement. However, it goes further adding the following section:

. . . each Party confirms that patents are available for inventions claimed as at least one of the following: new
uses of a known product, new methods of using a known product, or new processes of using a known product.

These provisions, therefore, provide pharmaceutical companies with the opportunity to engage in the
evergreening practices that allow them to extend the protection of a drug beyond the term of a basic patent11 (The
Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry, 2009, paras 20 and 138).

Moreover, previous version of the TPPA's Intellectual Property Chapter, proposed by the US and leaked in
February 2011, contained an additional sentence in this Article, which guaranteed a patent for new uses or methods of
using a known product: “. . . even if such invention does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that
product” (emphasis added)12 (Love, 2014). Although this phrase was deleted in the subsequent version of the Chapter,
it shows the unprecedented level of protection lobbied by the US for its pharmaceutical corporations.13 Despite the
withdrawal of the US from the TPPA, the discussions of its ratification by the remaining members continue.14
Therefore, such a favourable provisions towards the pharmaceutical industry is likely to have a significant effect on
access to medicines should this agreement come into force.

As can be seen from the above discussion, the level of intellectual property protection gained by the pharmaceutical
industry by means of introducing the patent protection for drugs into national laws, free trade agreements and
international treaties has substantially increased during the last few decades. Such development has led to the
strengthening of market power by pharmaceutical companies and increased the entry barriers for competitors.

2.3 | Further strengthening of patent protection by business strategies

Strengthening of international and national intellectual property laws, which enable pharmaceutical companies to
increase protection of their products and enhance their market power, is not the only tool in the arsenal of the
pharmaceutical industry. Individual business strategies of pharmaceutical companies may also be very effective,
which, when used together with the strong IP protection and other regulatory rules, may substantially extend market
exclusivity of a drug beyond the terms and scope of initial patent protection. Such a dual strategic approach to the
protection of drugs can substantially delay or even block generic competition, as well as stifle the development and
introduction of innovative drugs.

The particular interest to such individual practices in the EU was raised by the AstraZeneca case, when, in 2005,
the company was found by the EU Commission to abuse its dominant position.15 In this case, the originator company
AstraZeneca was accused of two abuses. The first concerned the abuse of the patent system by providing misleading
information to the patent office and obtaining a supplementary protection certificate that led to the unlawful
extension of the patent protection of the company's product Losec (omeprazole). The second abuse related to the

210 |

GURGULA

misuse of marketing authorisation procedures. The company employed several strategies in order to deter a generic version
of its product from entering the market when its patent for the original product Losec was about to expire. Due to the
success of this strategy, the company was able to keep generics off the market in some countries. In 2005, AstraZeneca was
fined EUR 60 million by the EU Commission. In 2010, the General Court upheld the Commission's decision.16

The EU Commission, concerned about the anticompetitive practices of pharmaceutical companies, as well as the
evident market failure, launched an inquiry into the pharmaceutical industry. In 2009, after its in-depth investigation,
the Commission released a Report, which outlines several practices of pharmaceutical companies that are likely to
cause delays of both generic and innovative competition (The Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry, 2009). The Commission
found that brand-name pharmaceutical companies protect their market share by employing a tool-box of practices,
which enable them to block generic competition and deter innovative competitors.17 These practices include inter alia
patent thickets18 (Gurgula, 2017), life-cycle strategies for follow-on products (Bansal, Sahu, Bakshi, & Singh, 2009;
Granstrand & Tietze, 2015; Hemphill & Sampat, 2012), defensive patenting (The Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry, para
1117) and patent settlement agreements19 (Federal Trade Commission Staff Study, 2010).

Despite the Commission referring to these strategies as a reason for the delays of generic entry, they have not
become the focus of its attention. For instance, practices such as patent settlement agreements, while heavily litigated
by the US FTC for more than a decade, have only recently raised the interest of the EU Commission. Moreover, strategic
patenting, although being claimed in the Commission's Report as a reason for the delay of generic competition, has not
been investigated by the competition authorities at all. The lack of control of these particular practices by the
competition authorities results in the (ab)use of the patent system by pharmaceutical companies for the detriment of
consumers leading to excessive prices and restricted access to medicines (Matthews & Gurgula, 2016b).

3 | OPEN ACCESS IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

As the FTC acknowledged in its seminal 2003 Report: “[e]ver greater intellectual property protection is not necessarily
socially beneficial” (The FTC Report, 2003). Hence, on the other side of the IP fence erected by the pharmaceutical
industry, there is a growing understanding of the importance of open innovation and open access for the benefit of
society. The changes in the way the drug development process is perceived have occurred as a result of, among other
things, a significant decrease in the development and approval of innovative drugs on the one hand; and a lack of
transparency and restricted access to the data, which has raised considerable concerns about the safety and efficacy
of medicines, on the other hand. “Open innovation” or “open science” is an emerging trend in drugs development, the
most important features of which are that “all data and ideas are freely shared, anyone may participate and there are
no patents” (Robertson et al., 2014; Shaw, 2017; Wells, Willis, Burrows, & Hooft van Huijsduijnen, 2016). The benefits
of this approach compared to the traditional models of the drugs development process is its speed, access to a wide
network of experts, disclosure of both positive and negative data and a reduction in unnecessary duplication of
research worldwide (Robertson et al., 2014). Open science in the pharmaceutical industry mimics the open source
movement in software development acknowledging its significant achievements (ibid).

At present, such changes are mainly driven by academics, NGOs and public research institutions. However, a
number of pharmaceutical companies have also shown some interest in these new business models of drugs
development moving towards collaboration and open access. By way of example, this section will outline several
initiatives pursued by public and private organisations in the recent years aiming at achieving transparency and open
innovation in the pharmaceutical industry.

3.1 | Initiatives on the international level

In September 2016, after completing the extensive discussion and reviewing numerous submissions from various
stakeholders, the UN High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines released its Report on “Promoting innovation and

GURGULA

| 211

access to health technologies” (Matthews & Gurgula, 2016a; Report of the United Nations Secretary General's High
Level Panel on Access to Medicines, 2016). The aim of this UN initiative was to “review and assess proposals and
recommend solutions for remedying the policy incoherence between the justifiable rights of inventors, international
human rights law, trade rules and public health in the context of health technologies” (United Nations High Level Panel
on Access to Medicines Report, 2016, p. 7). The UN High-Level Panel recommended, among other things, that the
results of the publicly-funded research should be made freely and widely available (p. 9), that the data on all completed
and discontinued clinical trials should be made publically available (p. 11), and that patent information on medicines
and vaccines should be made available through publicly accessible databases (ibid).

This initiative was upheld by eleven major funders of medical research and international non-governmental
organisations, including the UK Medical Research Council, Médecins Sans Frontières, the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, and the Wellcome Trust.20 On 18 May 2017, these organisations signed a joint statement agreeing on
“new standards that will require all clinical trials they fund or support to be registered and the results disclosed
publicly” (WHO Press Release, 2017). Such an initiative was a result of the concerns that about 50% of clinical trials are
unreported, often because their results are negative (WHO Press Release, 2017); Progress Reports, 2014. Such
“unreported trial results leave an incomplete and potentially misleading picture of the risks and benefits of vaccines,
drugs and medical devices, and can lead to use of suboptimal or even harmful products” (ibid).

The WHO also actively discusses the alternative incentives for innovation in health products, in particular how to
incentivise more R&D in order to meet global health needs with the focus on the importance to delink “the costs of
R&D from the price of the end product”, as well as to facilitate “Open knowledge innovation” (WHO Report, 2012;
Progress Reports, 2014). In 2016, the WHO launched a global health research and development observatory21 in
order to monitor and analyse relevant information on health research and development, the function of which will
include the integration of available information on funding for health research and development, health products in
the pipeline, clinical trials and research publications, etc (ibid).

In 2011, WIPO, in collaboration with BIO Ventures for Global Health (BVGH), and with the participation of a
number of pharmaceutical companies and other private and public sector research organisations, established the
WIPO Re:Search, a database in which public and private sector organisations share their intellectual property and
expertise with the global health research community. The aim of this initiative is to promote the development of new
drugs, vaccines and diagnostics in the fight against neglected tropical diseases, malaria and tuberculosis by means of
granting access to intellectual property, including pharmaceutical compounds, technologies, know-how and other
data for further research and development.22

Open access initiatives are also taken by the EU, which is also determined to examine alternative mechanisms in
order to enhance access to medicines (Oxfam Briefing Paper, 2014). Thus, under Horizon 2020 (the EU's €80bn
research and innovation funding programme adopted in 2013), some important developments have been undertaken,
including mandating open-access publishing, facilitating the dissemination of research results and encouraging the use
of prizes.23 Another EU initiative under Horizon 2020 is the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) that is aimed at
facilitating R&D through a public-private partnership with the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and
Associations (EFPIA), to enhance knowledge sharing and create tools and methods that will facilitate the development
of better medicines (Europe 2020 Flagship Initiative, 2010).

3.2 | Public initiatives on “missing data”

As was discussed above, there is a considerable concern about the bias in pharmaceutical trial literature (Angell, 2005;
Jones et al., 2013; Rising, Bacchetti, & Bero, 2008; Turner, Matthews, Linardatos, Tell, & Rosenthal, 2008), in particular
regarding “missing data” in pharmaceutical research24 (Dziura, Post, Zhao, Fu, & Peduzzi, 2013; Goldacre, 2013;
Molenberghs & Kenward, 2007). It is claimed that a large proportion of evidence from human trials is unreported, and
much of what is reported is done inadequately.25 The unpublished trials are the trials that show the pharma
companies’ new products in unfavourable lights and may contain evidence that the new drugs are not as effective as

212 |

GURGULA

being claimed, are not effective at all, or are harmful. The fact that pharmaceutical companies withheld such data
undermines the confidence in the safety and efficacy of medicines that are prescribed by doctors as many of the drugs
have been promoted as safer and more effective than they really are. This endangers people's lives and wastes public
funds.

A few initiatives tackling this problem have been launched recently. One is launched by AllTrials26 and
requires that “all trials past and present should be registered, and the full methods and the results reported”.27
Also, in 2013, The BMJ28 announced that it will no longer publish any trial where the authors do not commit to
making the relevant anonymised patient level data available, on reasonable request. Moreover, the journal
published a number of The BMJ's coverage of adverse outcomes associated with hidden clinical trial data. For
instance, in 2014, BMJ Open published the first RIAT (Restoring invisible and abandoned trials) paper on an
abandoned randomised controlled trial that remained unpublished for 20 years, and their reanalysis casts doubt
regarding the survival benefit of further surgery after curative resection of colorectal cancer.29 Another
independent investigation was done with respect to Study 329, the infamous trial of paroxetine (Paxil, Seroxat)
that was claimed to show that the drug was well tolerated and effective in the treatment of major depression in
adolescents (Le Noury et al., 2015). Study 329 was subsequently dubbed by the US Food and Drug Administration
a “failed trial”, as neither treatment was found to be better than placebo (The BMJ, Open Data Campaign, 2016).
The examination showed that the paper was not prepared by the authors claimed in it, but by a writer paid by the
manufacturer (ibid). However, the disturbing fact was that reports emerged of serious adverse effects of
paroxetine in adolescents, including self-harm and suicidal ideation (ibid). In 2012, the US Department of Justice
investigated a failure to report safety data and other misconduct by GSK, and commenced criminal and civil
proceedings with a record $3bn fine (ibid).

3.3 | State initiatives

The problem of unpublished data is exacerbated by the fact that even those clinical trial documents that are submitted
to the marketing authorisation bodies are not available to the public. Most of the countries, including the US, consider
clinical trial reports and other parts of the dossier submitted by pharmaceutical companies as commercial confidential
information and, therefore, not releasable. However, the European Medicines Agency (EMA, 2010) is the only
regulator that has started to give access to clinical trial data (Doshi and Jefferson, 2016; Koenig et al., 2015).

Thus, in October 2014, after a considerable discussion among stakeholders, the EMA published its new policy:
Publication of Clinical Data for Medicinal Products for Human Use, which came into force on 1 January 2015 (EMA,
2014). It allows the EMA to proactively publish clinical data. The main objectives of the new policy are, by making
clinical data available proactively, to enable public scrutiny and application of new knowledge in future research in the
interest of public health (ibid). As a result of these developments, the current approach of the EMA to transparency
covers both the reactive (upon the request from third parties) and proactive release of clinical data (proactive release
of clinical study result summaries on the EU Clinical Trials Register) (Cameron, Knapper, & Evans, 2014; GIPC Report,
2015; Matthews, 2015b).

3.4 | Initiatives of the pharmaceutical industry

Understanding the value of collaboration with other experts in the field, pharmaceutical companies have started to
implement new models of drugs development more actively in the recent years. Such new models are implemented
through collaboration with public research institutions and other originators. This collaboration may diverge in terms
of IP related aspects, spanning from the traditional IP protection of the research results to open innovation with no IP
protection at all and free open access to the generated data. The latter model of open innovation, the so-called
“precompetitive collaboration”, has proven to be successful in the early stages of R&D (United Nations High Level
Panel on Access to Medicines Report, 2016, p. 27). Such collaboration helps to enhance the research in new fields of

GURGULA

| 213

science and expand the knowledge for all, facilitating the progress in development of innovative medicines in a shorter
period of time (ibid). While such business practices of pharmaceutical companies were perceived as an exception in
the past, they are increasingly becoming an emerging tendency, rather than an isolated practice.

A well-known example of private-public collaboration is Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV) that was
established in 1999 with the financial support of the Rockefeller Foundation, Gates Foundation, and three
European governments30 (Gabriel, Stanley, & Saunders, 2017, p. 31). Its goal is to “reduce the burden of malaria in
disease-endemic countries by discovering, developing and delivering new, effective and affordable antimalarial
drugs”.31 The intellectual property over the results of the research belongs to Novartis, which has obliged to
distribute medicines at affordable price to the public sector in countries where malaria is endemic (Gabriel et al.,
2017, p. 31). MMV has also initiated open source research in drug discovery for malaria and neglected diseases,
including the Pathogen Box, which contains 400 diverse, drug-like molecules active against neglected diseases
available free of charge.32 Further, the most recent example of private collaboration is the 2016 agreement
between GSK and Google's parent company Alphabet on collaboration aiming at the development of bioelectronic
medicines—miniature electronic implants for the treatment of chronic disease such as asthma, diabetes, arthritis
and other conditions (GSK Press Release, 2016).

A gradual shift towards open access research can be seen in a launch of partnerships with public institutions by a
number of pharmaceutical companies. These partnerships make freely available all information generated as a result
of such joint collaboration. Such free and open access is anticipated to facilitate further research on the basis of the
released information. An example of a partnership, on the basis of the open innovation model in the pharmaceutical
industry, is the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC),33 the members of which are Abbvie, Bayer, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Canada Foundation for Innovation, the São Paulo Research Foundation, Genome Canada, Janssen, Merck,
Novartis, The Ontario Ministry of Research and Innovation, Pfizer, Takeda, and The Wellcome Trust.34 Although the
SGC receives funding mainly from private pharmaceutical companies, it has undertaken to release and make freely
available all generated output to the public (Pearson, 2012). There are also several individual proposals to share clinical
trial data at patient level, including the GlaxoSmithKline Data Transparency Initiative and Roche Global Policy on
Sharing of Clinical Trial Data (Open Access Research in the Pharmaceutical Industry, 2012). According to these
proposals, researchers may receive access to patient-level data after requests have been reviewed by an independent
panel of experts (EFPIA and PhRMA, 2014).35

3.5 | Public initiatives

Perhaps one of the most important and active elements that guard public interest are various public initiatives, such as
non-governmental organisations, patients groups and individuals, which are vigorously fighting against abuses of
pharmaceutical companies and for transparency and the enhanced access to effective and affordable medicines.
Numerous examples of such public pressure have forced pharmaceutical companies to provide licences (sometimes
even on a royalty-free basis) to generic companies on their medicines, or to decrease prohibitive prices to affordable.
One of the examples of a successful public pressure relates to Gilead's innovative drug Sovaldi (sofosbuvir) that
is used in the treatment of HCV (Hepatitis C). This new generation of medicines offers more efficiency, with many
boasting sustained virologic response (SVR) in more than 90% of patients and fewer side effects than previous treatment
options. It was included in the 2015 Model List of Essential Medicines (Mezher, 2015). However, the company has set
a prohibitive price for the drug of $1,000 per pill, or $84,000 for a 12-week treatment. In the first quarter of 2014,
the company sold $2.27bn of Sovaldi. (Associated Press, 2014; Hensley, 2014; Hoofnagle & Sherker, 2014).

As 75% of the estimated 150–180 million people infected with Hepatitis C live in LMICs, this means that they
cannot afford this essential medicine (Douste-Blazy, 2014; Knox, 2014; The Lancet, 2014). This triggered outcry and
debate throughout the world from patient advocacy groups, which demanded that Gilead lower the price for Sovaldi
and criticised the company for its licensing practices (Oxfam Briefing Paper, 2014). As a result, Gileard has entered into
licensing agreements with several generics manufacturers in India (ibid).

214 |

GURGULA

Some activists argue that the best solution against the abuses of pharmaceutical companies are to forfeit the
patent protection on medicines, and that public health would be better served by systems where essential public
health research is publicly funded, monopoly protections of IP are suspended, and information is freely exchanged
as in the open source software movement (Hubbard and Love, 2004). As an alternative, Love refers to the Medical
Innovation Prize Fund, a legislation proposed in the US Congress, which would allocate part of the US government's
budget to pay substantial cash rewards to researchers who create innovative drugs or vaccines, but remove the
monopoly protections of IP. He says that this will divorce the market for the product from the market for
innovation.36

4 | CONCLUSIONS

Starting from its establishment in the nineteenth century, the modern pharmaceutical industry has gone through
several stages of development. It began with a minimum level of protection afforded by intellectual property and has
culminated into the international and bilateral treaties with the highest level of IP protection that hardly any
inventions receive nowadays. Such a protection is supplemented by private business strategies of pharmaceutical
companies, the most effective of which are the active use of the patent system and regulatory rules. Moreover,
although these strategies may be abusive, competition authorities are reluctant to act fearing that this may affect
incentives to innovate.

Strong proprietary position of the pharmaceutical industry, achieved as a result of changes in the law, as well as
aggressive IP strategies by pharmaceutical companies, often lead to prohibitively high prices of drugs, making them
unaffordable not only to the patients in developing countries, but also in developed countries. As a result, some
authors believe that the pharmaceutical industry has forgotten its initial objective of creating new and innovative
medicines to cure diseases and safe lives (Angell, 2005). Instead, it has become a mega business, or as it is now called,
the “Big Pharma”, with the sole purpose of reaping the yield and increasing it further.

It is, nevertheless, apparent that the global scene in which the pharmaceutical industry operates is changing again.
The open access initiatives from various stakeholders are now framing the new reality in the pharmaceutical industry.
Companies have to adapt their business strategies to this new reality. Some of them shift to the open access model,
sharing their proprietary information with the public institutions or collaborating with other pharmaceutical
companies. Of those, some are genuinely driven by willingness to combat poverty, facilitate creation of new orphan
drugs, and enhance access to affordable medicines. Others either are forced to adapt, or are acting voluntarily with the
understanding that it is the only way to survive. Although it is too soon to salute the defeat of the patent monopoly
dominance, there are clear signs that the ice has cracked and there will be no way back.

To conclude, the pharmaceutical industry is experiencing today a major tension between two powerful interests—
private business interest that strives for IP monopoly in order to protect its revenues, and public interest that
advocates for open access in order to facilitate access to medicines. Although it is hard to predict which of these
interests will prevail, it is, however, clear that the pharmaceutical industry has to adapt to the current realities and
business models, including clinical data transparency, joint collaboration and constant public pressure.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Olga Gurgula is a lecturer in law at Aston University, and a PhD candidate at Queen Mary University of London
(QMUL), she also holds LLM degree from QMUL. Her current research focuses on specific patenting strategies
employed by pharmaceutical companies such as strategic accumulation of patents and product hopping, which
substantially delay or even foreclose generic competition. She is also interested in emerging healthcare technologies,
as well as open innovation and new models of drugs development. Olga is qualified as a Ukrainian attorney in 2004
and prior to the commencement of her PhD research, she worked in private practice over 10 years. She was

GURGULA

| 215

counselling on a wide range of IP and corporate matters and was involved in numerous litigation and arbitration
proceedings concerning a wide range of commercial and civil disputes.

ENDNOTES

1 See, however, Angell (2005). The truth about the drug companies. How they deceive us and what to do about it. Random House
Trade, 37; Ouellette (2010). How many patents does it take to make a drug—follow-on pharmaceutical patents and
university licensing, Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review, 17, 299. Available at http://repository.law.
umich.edu/mttlr/vol17/iss1/7. [Accessed on May 2017].

2 However, this cost is subject to a heated debate. See for example, Angell (2005). The truth about the drug companies. How
they deceive us and what to do about it. Random House Trade, 37; Frank (2003). New estimates of drug development costs.
Journal of Health Economics, 22, 325, 325 (stating that the $802 million estimates “have been a matter of heated debate since
they were first made public in 2001” 2011); Light and Warburton (2011). Demythologizing the high costs of pharmaceutical
research. BioSocieties, 6(1), 34–50; Morgan et al., 2011. The cost of drug development: A systematic review. Health Policy,
100, 4–17.

3 A recent Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development (CSDD) estimated that costs could reach $2.6 billion. See DiMasi
et al. (2015). The cost of drug development. New England Journal of Medicine, 372, 1972–1972, https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMc1504317

4 The most famous trade secret is the Coca-Cola Company's formula for making its nearly 100-year-old product Coca-Cola.

See Kulakowski and Chronister (2006). Research Administration and Management. Jones and Bartlet Publishers, 856.

5 Boldrin and Levine (2005) Economic and Game theory. Against intellectual monopoly. Available at http://levine.sscnet.ucla.
edu/general/intellectual/against.htm. [Accessed on May 2017]. The authors explain that, for example, French law of 1844
forbade patents on pharmaceutical inventions, with subsequent permission of process patents; limited patents on drugs
from 1966; and eventual withdrawal of the ban in 1978. In Germany, pharmaceutical process patents were allowed under
the law of 1877 with the prohibition of product patents. However, in 1891, patent protection was extended to products
obtained through the patented process, and starting from 1967, pharmaceutical product patents were also allowed. In
Switzerland, patents on pharmaceutical products were prohibited by constitution. Limited protection for process patents
was introduced in 1907 due to the constant pressure from German pharmaceutical companies, while product patents were
allowed as recently as 1977. In Italy, after the pressure of foreign pharmaceutical companies, product patents were
introduced in 1978. In Spain, product patents for pharmaceuticals were prohibited under the law of 1931 and only after the
country joined the EEC, starting from 1992, drugs became patentable. In the United States, by contrast, drugs have always
been patentable both in the form of a process and product as they were considered to be chemical products.

6 For the details on the negotiation preceding the conclusion of the TRIPs agreement see Matthews (2002). Globalising

intellectual property. The TRIPs agreement. Routledge.

7 For example, the US-Korea Free Trade Agreement establishes prohibition on pre-grant patent opposition (Article 18.8.4)
and allows patents for new uses or methods of using a known product (Article 18.8(1)). The US-Australia Free Trade
Agreement also allows patents for new uses or methods of using a known product (Article 17.9(1)), establishes data
exclusivity periods (Article 17.(10)(1)), patent term extensions for “unreasonable” regulatory or marketing delays (Article 17
(9)(8)) and restrictions on compulsory licensing (Article 17(9)(4)).

8 The IP Chapter on the TPPA is available at https://www.mfat.govt.nz/assets/_securedfiles/Trans-Pacific-Partnership/

Text/18.-Intellectual-Property.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

9 Article 18.48 of the TPPA “Patent Term Adjustment for Unreasonable Curtailment”.
10 Article 18.46 of the TPPA: Patent Term Adjustment for Patent Office Delays. Section 4 of this article explains that “for the
purposes of this Article, an unreasonable delay at least shall include a delay in the issuance of a patent of more than five
years from the date of filing of the application in the territory of the Party, or 3 years after a request for examination of the
application has been made, whichever is later.”

11 According to the pharmaceutical industry jargon, acknowledged by the EU Commission in its Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry
Report, 2009, paras 20 and 138, a basic patent protects an active compound of the drug, while secondary patents protect
various features of a drug, such as formulation and method of production.

12 For the discussion of the previous versions of the TPPA's IP Chapter see, Love (2014). New leak of TPP consolidated text on
intellectual property provides details of pandering to drug companies and publishers. Available at http://www.keionline.
org/node/2108. [Accessed on May 2017].

216 |

GURGULA

13 The complete text of the US proposal for the TPPA's IP Chapter (10 February 2011) is available at http://keionline.org/

node/1091

14 Press Release (2017). The United States Officially Withdraws from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Available at https://
[Accessed on

ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2017/january/US-Withdraws-From-TPP.
May 2017].

15 Case T-321/05 AstraZeneca AB v Commission [2010] ECR II–2805.
16 The Court decreased the fine from 60 to 52.5 million euros. The appeal against that decision by AstraZeneca was rejected

by the European Court of Justice in 2012.

17 According to the Pharmaceutical Sector Inquiry Report (2009) other practices that may delay competition to the patent-
related exchanges and litigation, oppositions and appeals, interventions before marketing authorisation and/or pricing and
reimbursement bodies.

18 For the critic of the Commission's approach to patent thickets in the pharmaceutical industry see Gurgula (2017). Strategic
accumulation of patents in the pharmaceutical industry and patent thickets in complex technologies—two different
concepts sharing similar features. IIC, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40319-017-0551-8

19 Case T-472/13 Lundbeck v Commission; Case AT.39612—Perindopril (Servier) (2014); FTC v Actavis, Inc., 570 US (2013),
slip op. See also the FTC Press Release (2015). FTC settlement of cephalon pay for delay case ensures $1.2 billion in Ill-
Gotten gains relinquished; refunds will go to purchasers affected cy anticompetitive. Available at https://www.ftc.gov/
news-events/press-releases/2015/05/ftc-settlement-cephalon-pay-delay-case-ensures-12-billion-ill.
[Accessed on
October 2016]; Federal Trade Commission Staff Study (2003). Pay-for-delay: How drug company pay-offs cost
consumers billions. p. 3. Available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2010/01/100112payfordelayrpt.pdf.
[Accessed on
October 2016].

20 These includes the Indian Council of Medical Research, the Norwegian Research Council, the UK Medical Research Council,
Médecins Sans Frontières and Epicentre (its research arm), PATH, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
(CEPI), Institut Pasteur, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Wellcome Trust.

21 The observatory was established according to the Resolution WHA66.22 adopted by the Sixty-sixth World Health

Assembly adopted (May, 2013).

22 WIPO Re:Search, available at http://www.wipo.int/cooperation/en/multi_stakeholder_platforms/.

[Accessed on

October 2016].

23 The H2020 and FP7 reference documents page available at http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/desktop/

en/funding/reference_docs.html#h2020-legal-basis-fp. [Accessed on October 2016].

24 Goldacre (2013). Bad pharma: How medicine is broken, and how we can fix it. Fourth Estate (arguing that about half of the

clinical trials undertaken by the pharmaceutical industry are never published).

25 As reported by the BMJ (formerly the British Medical Journal) available at http://www.bmj.com/content/344/bmj.d8158.

[Accessed on October 2016].

26 AllTrials is an international initiative of Ben Goldacre (author of Bad Science and Bad Pharma), the BMJ, Centre for Evidence-
based Medicine, Cochrane Collaboration, James Lind Initiative, PLoS and Sense About Science and is being led in the US by
Sense About Science USA, Dartmouth's Geisel School of Medicine and the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical
Practice. The AllTrials petition has been signed by 88741 people and 682 organisations (as of September 2016).

27 See http://www.alltrials.net/find-out-more/all-trials/. [Accessed on October 2016].
28 The BMJ is a weekly peer-reviewed medical journal. It is one of the world's oldest and influential general medical journals.

Originally called the British Medical Journal.

29 See http://www.bmj.com/open-data. [Accessed on October 2016].
30 For more details see https://www.mmv.org/. [Accessed on May 2017]; see also Gabriel et al. (2017). Open innovation in
health: A guide to transforming healthcare through collaboration. 31. Available at http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/
open-innovation-health-guide-transforming-healthcare-through-collaboration. [Accessed on May 2017].

31 See “MMV Boilerplate 2017”, available at https://www.mmv.org/newsroom/boilerplate. [Accessed on May 2017].
32 See “The Pathogen Box”, available at https://www.mmv.org/research-development/open-source-research. [Accessed on

May 2017].

33 The SGC website states that the SGC (Structural Genomics Consortium) is a not-for-profit, public-private partnership with
the directive to carry out basic science of relevance to drug discovery. The core mandate of the SGC is to determine 3D
structures on a large scale and cost-effectively—targeting human proteins of biomedical importance and proteins from
human parasites that represent potential drug targets. In these two areas respectively, the SGC is now responsible for

GURGULA

| 217

>25% and >50% of all structures deposited into the Protein Data Bank each year; by September 2011 the SGC had released
the structures of over 1200 proteins with implications to the development of new therapies for cancer, diabetes, obesity,
and psychiatric disorders. Available at http://www.thesgc.org/about/mini_faq#faq_1. [Accessed on May 2017].

34 See http://www.thesgc.org/about/partners. [Accessed on October 2016].
35 In 2013, a joint statement was issued by EFPIA and PhRMA on “Principles for responsible clinical trial data sharing”.
http://www.phrma.org/press-release/joint-efpia-phrma-principles-for-responsible-clinical-trial-data-

at

Available
sharing-become-effective-today. [Accessed on October 2016].

36 See http://www.iavireport.org/Back-Issues/Pages/IAVI-Report-9%285%29-inventionsinnovatethyself.aspx. [Accessed

on May 2016].

ORCID

Olga Gurgula

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7013-9804

REFERENCES

Angell, A. (2005). The truth about the drug companies. How they deceive us and what to do about it. New York: Random House

Trade.

Associated Press. (2014). Medical groups question price of new Hep C drug. CNS News [Online]. Available at http://www.

cnsnews.com/news/article/medical-groups-question-price-new-hep-c-drug. [Accessed on May 2017].

Bansal, I. S., Sahu, D., Bakshi, G., & Singh, S. (2009). Evergreening—a controversial issue in pharma milieu. Journal of Intellectual

Property Rights, 14, 299–306.

Boldrin, M., & Levine, D. K. (2005). Economic and game theory. Against intellectual monopoly. Available at http://levine.sscnet.

ucla.edu/general/intellectual/against.htm. [Accessed on May 2017].

Cameron, G., Knapper, M., & Evans, H. (2014). Clinical studies—the EMA's new approach to transparency [Online]. Available at

http://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/knowledge/publications/122182/clinical-studies-the-emas-new-approach-to-
transparency. [Accessed on May 2017].

Correa, C. M. (2015). Intellectual property in the Trans-Pacific partnership: Increasing the barriers for the access to affordable
medicines. South Centre. Available at http://www.southcentre.int/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/RP62_IP-in-TPP-
Increasing-the-Barriers-Access-to-Affordable-Medicines_rev_EN.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

DiMasi, J. A., Grabowski, H. G., & Hansen, R. W. (2015). The cost of drug development. New England Journal of Medicine, 372,

1972–1972.

Doshi, P., & Jefferson, T. (2016). Open data 5 years on: A case series of 12 freedom of information requests for regulatory data
to the European Medicines Agency. Trials, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-016-1194-7. Available at http://trialsjournal.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13063-016-1194-7

Douste-Blazy, P. (2014). Hepatitis C medicines must be made accessible faster than HIV drugs [Online]. The Guardian.
Available at http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/mar/07/hepatitis-c-medicines-
hiv-aids-drugs. [Accessed on May 2017].

Dutfield, G. (2001). TRIPS and its impact on developing countries. Available at http://www.scidev.net/global/policy-brief/

trips-and-its-impact-on-developing-countries.html. [Accessed on October 2016].

Dutfield, G. (2009). Intellectual property rights and the life science industries. Past, Present and Future. 2nd Edn, World Scientific.
Dziura, J. D., Post, L. A., Zhao, Q., Fu, Z., & Peduzzi, P. (2013). Strategies for dealing with missing data in clinical trials: From

design to analysis. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 86(3), 343–358.

EFPIA and PhRMA. (2014). Principles for responsible clinical trial data sharing. Available at http://www.phrma.org/press-
[Accessed on

release/joint-efpia-phrma-principles-for-responsible-clinical-trial-data-sharing-become-effective-today.
October 2016].

EMA. (2010). European Medicines Agency policy on access to documents (related to medicinal products for human and
veterinary use) POLICY/0043, 30 November 2010 (EMA/110196/2006). Available at http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/
index.jsp?curl=pages/special_topics/general/general_content_000556.jsp. [Accessed on May 2017].

EMA. (2014). European Medicines Agency policy on publication of clinical data for medicinal products for human use. EMA/

240810/2013.

European Commission. (2009). Pharmaceutical sector inquiry: Final report. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/competition/

sectors/pharmaceuticals/inquiry/staff_working_paper_part1.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

218 |

GURGULA

European Commission. (2010). Europe 2020 flagship initiative: Innovation Union’ Communication from the Commission to
the EP, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. COM. Available
at http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/pdf/innovation-union-communication_en.pdf.
[Accessed on May
2017].

Firn, R. (2010). Nature's chemicals: The natural products that shaped our world. UK: OUP.
Frank, R. G. (2003). New estimates of drug development costs. Journal of Health Economics, 22, 325.
FTC Press Release. (2015). FTC settlement of Cephalon pay for delay case ensures $1.2 billion in Ill-Gotten gains relinquished;
refunds will go to purchasers affected by anticompetitive. Available at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/
2015/05/ftc-settlement-cephalon-pay-delay-case-ensures-12-billion-ill. [Accessed on October 2016].

FTC Report. (2003). To promote innovation: The proper balance of competition and patent law and policy, 14. Available at

https://www.ftc.gov/reports/promote-innovation-proper-balance-competition-patent-law-policy

FTC Staff Study. (2010). Pay-for-delay: How drug company pay-offs cost consumers billions. 3. Available at http://www.ftc.

gov/os/2010/01/100112 payfordelayrpt.pdf. [Accessed on October 2016].

Gabriel, M., Stanley, I., & Saunders, T. (2017). Open innovation in health: A guide to transforming healthcare through
collaboration. 31. Available at http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/open-innovation-health-guide-transforming-
healthcare-through-collaboration. [Accessed on May 2017].

GIPC Report. (2015). Clinical data and disclosure policies. The European Union, Member States, and International Best
Practices. Available at http://www.theglobalipcenter.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/021893_EMA_Study_Final.
pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

Goldacre, B. (2013). Bad pharma: How medicine is broken, and how we can fix it. London: Fourth Estate.
Granstrand, O., & Tietze, F.

(2015). IP strategies and policies for and against evergreening. Centre for Technology

Management working paper series, 1. ISSN, 2058–8887.

Greenwood, D. (2008). Antimicrobial drugs: Chronicle of a twentieth century medical triumph. UK: OUP.
GSK Press Release. (2016). GSK and verily to establish galvani bioelectronics—a new company dedicated to the development
of bioelectronic medicines [Online]. Available at http://www.gsk.com/en-gb/media/press-releases/gsk-and-verily-to-
establish-galvani-bioelectronics-a-new-company-dedicated-to-the-development-of-bioelectronic-medicines/.
[Ac-
cessed on May 2017].

Gurgula, O. (2017). Strategic accumulation of patents in the pharmaceutical

industry and patent thickets in complex
technologies—two different concepts sharing similar features. IIC, 48(4), 385–404. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40319-
017-0551-8

Hemphill, C. S., & Sampat, B. N. (2012). Evergreening, patent challenges, and effective market life in pharmaceuticals. Journal

of Health Economics, 31, 327–339.

Hensley, S. (2014). Costly hepatitis C pill shreds drug industry sales record [Online]. NPR Shots blog. Available at http://www.
npr.org/blogs/health/2014/04/23/306236511/costly-hepatitis-c-pill-shreds-drug-industry-sales-record. [Accessed on
May 2017].

Hoofnagle, J., & Sherker, A. (2014). Therapy for hepatitis C-the costs of success. New England Journal of Medicine, 370(16),

1552–3. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24725236. [Accessed on May 2017].

Hubbard, T., & Love, J. (2004). A new framework for global healthcare R&D. PLoS Biology, 2(2), 147–150.
Jones, C. W., Handler, L., Crowell, K. E., Keil, L. G., Weaver, M. A., & Platts-Mills, T. F. (2013). Non-publication of large
randomized clinical trials: Cross sectional analysis. BMJ, 347, f6104. Availabe at http://www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.
f6104. [Accessed on May 2017].

Knox, R. (2014). Maker of $1,000 hepatitis C pill looks to cut its cost overseas [Online]. NPR. Available at http://www.npr.org/
[Accessed on

blogs/health/2014/02/06/272519954/maker-of-1-000-hepatitis-c-pill-looks-to-cut-its-cost-overseas.
May 2017].

Koenig, F., Slattery, J., Groves, T., Lang, T., Benjamini, Y., Day, S., . . . Posch, P. (2015). Sharing clinical trial data on patient level:
Opportunities and challenges. Biometrical Journal, 57(1), 8–26. Availabe at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4314673/. [Accessed on May 2017].

Kulakowski, E. C., & Chronister, L. U. (2006). Research administration and management (p. 856). Burlington, MA: Jones and

Bartlet Publishers.

Le Noury, J., Nardo, J. M., Healy, D., Jureidini, J., Raven, M., Tufanaru, C., & Abi-Jaoude, E. (2015). Restoring study 329:
Efficacy and harms of paroxetine and imipramine in treatment of major depression in adolescence. BMJ, 351, h4320.
Available at http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h4320. [Accessed on May 2017].

Light, D. W., & Warburton, R. (2011). Demythologizing the high costs of pharmaceutical research. BioSocieties, 6(1), 34–50.
Love, J. (2014). New leak of TPP consolidated text on intellectual property provides details of pandering to drug companies

and publishers. Available at http://www.keionline.org/node/2108. [Accessed on May 2017].
Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and innovation: An empirical study. Management Science, 32, 173.
Matthews, D. (2002). Globalising Intellectual Property. The TRIPs Agreement. UK: Routledge.

GURGULA

| 219

Matthews, D. (2011). Intellectual property, human rights and development: The role of NGOs and social movements. UK: Edward

Elgar.

Matthews, D. (2015a). Parallel imports and exhaustion of rights: A European perspective. Paper presented at the Renmin

University of China, China, 17 October.

Matthews, D. (2015b). The fundamental right to the protection of confidential commercial information in the EU: Lessons

from InterMune v. EMA. Paper presented at the Gdansk University, Gdansk, 20 November.

Matthews and Gurgula. (2016a). Submission to the UN high-level panel on access to medicines: The importance of
competition law in facilitating access to medicines. Available at www.unsgaccessmeds.org/s/Submission-to-the-UN-
HLP_on-competition-policy_final5b15d.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

Matthews and Gurgula. (2016b). Patent strategies and competition law in the pharmaceutical sector: Implications for access

to medicines. European Intellectual Property Review, 38(11), 661–667.

Mezher, M. (2015). HCV, cancer drugs added to essential medicines list as WHO calls for lower prices [Online]. Available at

http://www.raps.org/Regulatory-Focus/News/2015/05/08/22127/HCV-Cancer-Drugs-Added-to-Essential-
Medicines-List-as-WHO-Calls-for-Lower-Prices/. [Accessed on May 2017].

Molenberghs, G., & Kenward, M. (2007). Missing data in clinical studies. England: Wiley.
Morgan, S., Grootendorst, P., Lexchin, J., Cunningham, C., & Greyson, D. (2011). The cost of drug development: A systematic

review. Health Policy, 100, 4–17.

Myers, R. (2003). The Basics of Chemistry. USA: Greenwood Press.
Open Access Research in the Pharmaceutical Industry. (2012). Available at http://www.makingsciencenews.com/catalogue/

papers/162/view. [Accessed on May 2017].

Ouellette, L.L. (2010) How many patents does it take to make a drug—follow-on pharmaceutical patents and University
Licensing, Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review, 17, 299. Available at http://repository.law.umich.
edu/mttlr/vol17/iss1/7. [Accessed on May 2017].

Oxfam Briefing Paper. (2014). Trading away access to medicines—revisited: How the European trade agenda continues to
undermine access to medicines. Available at https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp-
trading-away-access-medicines-290914-en.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

Pearson, S. (2012). Open innovation in the Pharma industry is it being fully embraced yet? GEN. Available at http://www.
on

genengnews.com/insight-and-intelligence/open-innovation-in-the-pharma-industry/77899732/.
May 2017].

[Accessed

Press Release. (2017). The United States Officially Withdraws from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Available at https://ustr.
gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2017/january/US-Withdraws-From-TPP. [Accessed on May
2017].

Progress Reports issued as of 21 March 2014 (A67/40). Available at http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA67/

A67_40-en.pdf

Report of the United Nations Secretary General's High Level Panel on Access to Medicines. (2016). Promoting innovation
and access to health technologies. Available at http://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/final-report/. [Accessed on May
2017].

Rising, K., Bacchetti, P., & Bero, L. (2008). Reporting bias in drug trials submitted to the Food and Drug Administration: Review
of publication and presentation. PLoS Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050217. Available at http://
journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.0050217. [Accessed on May 2017].

Robertson, M. N., Ylioja, P. M., Williamson, A. E., Woelfle, M., Robins, M., Badiola, K. A., . . . Todd, M. H. (2014). Open source
drug discovery—A limited tutorial. Parasitology, 141(1), 148–157. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0031182013001121.
Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3884843/. [Accessed on May 2017].

Shaw, D. L. (2017). Is open science the future of drug development? Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 90(1), 147–115.

Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5369032/. [Accessed on May 2017].

So, A. D. (2004). A fair deal for the future: Flexibilities under TRIPS. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Available at

http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/82/11/editorial21104html/en/. [Accessed on May 2017].

Taylor, D., (2015). The pharmaceutical industry and the future of drug development in pharmaceuticals in the environment. In

R. E. Hester, & R. M. Harrison, (Eds.), Pharmaceuticals in the environment.

The BMJ, Open Data Campaign. (2016). Available at http://www.bmj.com/open-data
The Lancet. (2014). Only just the beginning of the end of hepatitis C. The Lancet, 383(9914), 281. Available at
on

http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(14)60087-8/fulltext?rss=yes.
May 2017].

[Accessed

Turner, E. H., Matthews, A. M., Linardatos, E., Tell, R. A., & Rosenthal, R. (2008). Selective publication of antidepressant trials

and its influence on apparent efficacy. The New England Journal of Medicine, 358, 252–260.

UNITAID. (2014). The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement: Implications for Access to Medicines and Public Health. Available

at https://www.unitaid.eu/assets/TPPA-Report_Final.pdf. [Accessed on May 2017].

220 |

GURGULA

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Trade and Development Report 2006, 195.
Wells, T. N., Willis, P., Burrows, J. N., & Hooft van Huijsduijnen, R.

(2016). Open data in drug discovery and
development: Lessons from malaria. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 15, 661–662. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrd.2016.154. Availabe at http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v15/n10/full/nrd.2016.154.html. [Accessed on
May 2017].

WHO Press Release. (2017). Major research funders and international NGOs to implement WHO standards on reporting
clinical trial results [Online]. Available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/clinical-trial-results/
en/. [Accessed on May 2017].

WHO Report. (2012). Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: Strengthening global
financing and coordination Consultative Expert Working Group on Research and Development: Financing and
Coordination. Available at http://www.who.int/phi/CEWG_Report_5_April_2012.pdf. [Accessed on October 2016].

WHO, WIPO, WTO. (2013). Promoting access to medical technologies and innovation intersections between public health,
intellectual property and trade. 83. Available at https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/who-wipo-
wto_2013_e. htm. [Accessed on October 2016].

Voon, T. (2013). Trade liberalisation and international co-operation. A legal analysis of the Trans-Pacific partnership agreement.

USA: Edward Elgar.

How to cite this article: Gurgula O. Monopoly v. Openness: Two sides of IP coin in the pharmaceutical
industry. J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:206–220. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12081


