The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4, pp. 81–95

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12021

How Are Indigenous and Local Communities’ Rights
Over Their Traditional Knowledge and Genetic
Resources Protected in Current Free Trade
Negotiations? Highlighting the Draft Trans-Paciﬁc
Partnership Agreement (TTPA)

Hans Morten Haugen
Diakonhjemmet University College

The article analyzes the relevant traditional knowledge provisions of two chapters of the TTPA: on intellectual
property rights and on the environment. There is no agreement where these provisions shall be included. There is also
wide disagreement over the content of the speciﬁc provisions. Some states want to have a widest possible scope of the
public domain, and no provisions for sanctioning the taking of genetic resources and associated traditional intellectual
property without the consent of indigenous peoples and local communities. The article investigates whether and in
which form indigenous peoples are given stronger rights over their intellectual property in international legal
instruments, compared to non-indigenous traditional communities. It ﬁnds that in many legal instruments, there is no
difference. The strongest provisions on traditional knowledge are, however, found in an instrument that applies only to
indigenous peoples, the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). The article also investigates
whether the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities are stronger in the realm of traditional knowledge than
in the realm of genetic resources. It ﬁnds that this is generally the case. The provisions are analyzed from the
perspective of collective decision-making, defensive protection and positive protection.

Keywords WIPO; Nagoya Protocol on Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing; traditional knowledge; human rights; indigenous
peoples

Drafts of a chapter on intellectual property rights (IPR) in the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement
(TPPA), which includes Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New
Zealand, Peru, Singapore, United States of America and Vietnam, has been leaked (TTPA, 2013a). The
negotiations started between three of them in 2002: Chile, New Zealand and Singapore, with Brunei
joining before the Trans-Paciﬁc Strategic Economic Partnership was signed in 2006 (New Zealand
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 2006). Most attention has been paid to the provisions regulating
copyright (Centre for Law and Democracy, 2013) and access to medicines (Bhardwaj and Oh, 2014). This
article analyzes the draft provisions on patents, traditional knowledge and genetic resources.

More recently, the draft chapter on environment of the TTPA has been made available (ENV;
TTPA, 2013b). There are disagreements on the wording of and the appropriate chapter for including
relevant provisions on traditional knowledge and genetic resources. The United States and Japan are said
to oppose the inclusion of these provisions in the chapter on intellectual property, rather keeping these
provisions in the environment chapter (TTPA, 2013a, p. 45n122). The draft environment chapter does not,
however, seem adequately framed to encompass traditional knowledge and genetic resources. In article 1
of the draft environment chapter, environmental laws is deﬁned narrowly as laws whose primary purpose
is “the protection of the environment, or the prevention of a danger to human life or health […],” relating
to either pollution or conservation. It is explicitly stated that such laws do not extend to “managing the
subsistence or aboriginal harvesting of natural resources […].” The chapter on environment has been
brieﬂy reviewed (Kelsey, 2014).

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

81

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Harvesting of natural resources encompasses harvesting of genetic material of various kinds. The
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) adopts a deﬁnition of genetic material that encompasses
(extract): “material of plant, animal, or microbial origin, such as medicinal plants, agricultural crops and
animal breeds” (WIPO, 2014a; for additional deﬁnitions, see WIPO, 2014b, pp. 17–8). This deﬁnition
includes material that is explicitly excluded from the environmental chapter of the TTPA. Hence, if the
TTPA chapter on environment is to include traditional knowledge and genetic resources, the deﬁnition of
what is to be included in the chapter has to be widened.

In the article, the most relevant draft provisions regulating traditional knowledge and genetic
resources provisions of the IPR chapter and the environment chapter will be analyzed, seen in light
of relevant treaties and other instruments. As the title indicates, traditional cultural expressions
will not be analyzed. Three issues arising from the TTPA negotiations will be addressed: (1)
recognition of indigenous peoples’ rights to be involved in any decision-making with regard to utilization
of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge; (2) recognition of indigenous peoples’
to prevent appropriation of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge
rights
(defensive protection);
indigenous peoples’ exclusive rights over genetic resources and
associated traditional knowledge, including beneﬁts derived from these rights (positive protection).
As both chapter drafts specify which states that are in favor of and oppose the different proposals,
this chapter seeks to outline the different states’ positions and explain the reasons for these various
positions.

(3)

First, however, in order to embed the analysis in a clearer conceptual and legal framework, there will
be clariﬁcations of indigenous peoples and their traditional IPRs as recognized by international law,
followed by clariﬁcations of other traditional (non-indigenous) communities and their traditional IPRs as
recognized by international law.

Indigenous Peoples and Traditional Intellectual Property Rights

The term “indigenous peoples” is primarily applied throughout the article, acknowledging that their rights
have stronger recognition under international law than other communities that are not indigenous. This
follows from common article 1 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR) and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and articles 3 and 4 of the
2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), where also the four states who
initially voted no, have come out in favor of the UNDRIP (Hanson, 2011).

The UN does not have an authoritative deﬁnition of indigenous peoples, but it is generally accepted
that to be termed indigenous a community must have resided in a state’s territory before the establishment
of a state, having distinct institutions and cultures, being in a non-dominant position, and having a self-
understanding of being indigenous, seeking to maintain one’s ancient traditions (UN Forum for
Indigenous Issues Secretariat, 2006). As will be elaborated below, the term indigenous peoples must not
be read so as to include only those indigenous peoples that are recognized by the national parliaments or
governments, but can also encompass peoples that have a traditional living that is highly dependent upon
natural resources within a given territory.

Moreover, the phrase traditional IPRs, and not collective IPRs is applied in the article. There is no
doubt that the majority of traditional intellectual property is held by collectives. The UNDRIP, however,
refers to the term collective in only three provisions, articles 1, 7.2 and 40, as well as once in the preamble.
The term “collective” was deleted from the provision that became article 31 of the UNDRIP
(Cha´vez, 2009, p. 104; on article 31 of the UNDRIP, see also Montes and Cisneros, 2009, p. 162). While
the term “collective” is not explicitly applied in the relevant treaties, the way the speciﬁc provisions are
formulated leave no doubt that the collective aspect is important, as will be seen below.

82

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

that

traditional

This article does not address the question on whether the IPRs system as emerging within the
Western world is at all appropriate to encompass the traditional knowledge (Ougamanam, 2008), but
takes as its starting point
intellectual property protection is being increasingly
recognized. Australia has referred to it as a third pillar in the work of WIPO, in addition to the Berne and
the Paris conventions (WIPO, 2003, p. 13). Moreover, while traditional IPRs must be seen in a larger
context,
including land, self-determination, cultural heritage and human rights (Taubman and
Leistner, 2008, p. 175; see also Haugen, 2012, pp. 101–23), the intellectual property system provides a
legal basis to protect against both misappropriation and commodiﬁcation (Taubman and Leistner, 2008,
p. 79), implying that much traditional knowledge cannot be understood as belonging to the public
domain. Protection of traditional knowledge as undisclosed information, particularly in the form of
know-how, is analyzed by Taubman and Leistner (2008, pp. 37–8) and will not be analyzed further in
this article.

As speciﬁed above, three related questions on indigenous peoples’ traditional IPRs as read out from
international treaties and non-binding documents will be explored: participatory rights in decision-
making; rights to defensive protection and rights to positive protection.

We will answer these questions by analyzing six main sources. First, the 2001 International Treaty on
Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA). Second, the 1994 United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation in Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertiﬁcation,
Particularly in Africa (UNCCD); Third, the 2010 Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological
Diversity (Nagoya Protocol), which is to enter into force 3 months after the 50th ratiﬁcation; by
March 2014 there are 29 ratiﬁcations and an additional 72 states that have signed the Nagoya Protocol.
Fourth, the UN human rights treaties and the interpretative material that have been developed by the so-
called treaty bodies. Fifth, the UNDRIP. Sixth, the two draft instruments, on intellectual property and
genetic resources (WIPO, 2013) and on the protection of traditional knowledge (WIPO, 2014c), both
negotiated under the auspices of WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (WIPO ICG), both of which will be presented
to the WIPO 2014 General Assembly for an eventual adoption.

As concerns traditional IPRs applying to genetic resources, rights to participation as collectives are
explicitly recognized in the Nagoya Protocol. Article 5.2 recognizes “established rights of these
indigenous and local communities over these genetic resources […],” which should be read together with
article 7, requiring states to “ensuring that traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that is
held by indigenous and local communities is accessed with the prior and informed consent or approval and
involvement […]” These provisions are further strengthened by article 12 of the Nagoya Protocol
(traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources). Prior consent implies that consent is given
before the appropriation takes place. Informed consent implies that it is speciﬁed what the appropriated
resources or knowledge will be used for. Recently, the term “free” is also included as the ﬁrst term, namely
that the consent is given without any kind of manipulation, either rewards or coercion, but this requirement
is not applied in the treaties and declarations analyzed in this article.

Traditional IPRs are explicitly recognized in the UNDRIP, article 31.1, on indigenous peoples’ “right
to maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectual property […],” and UNDRIP article 11.2
speciﬁes that the states are to take effective redress measures if indigenous peoples’ intellectual property is
“taken without their free, prior and informed consent […].” UNDRIP article 11.2 will be analyzed in more
detail below, under defensive protection.

Other legal instruments do include the right to participation in the context of traditional knowledge. In
the draft WIPO instrument on traditional knowledge, the draft text has many references to prior informed
consent, but only one draft provision includes the requirement of mutually agreed terms (WIPO, 2014c,

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

83

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

annexure, p. 17 (alternative article 5.1(c)). These provisions might, however, be amended in the ﬁnal
negotiations.

The ITPGRFA article 6.2(c) speciﬁes as one measure for the sustainable use of plant genetic resources
“plant breeding efforts […] with the participation of farmers, particularly in developing countries”; see
also article 13.2(b)(ii). Moreover, the ITPGRFA article 9.2(c) recognizes the “right to participate in
making decisions, at the national level, on matters related to the conservation and sustainable use of plant
genetic resources for food and agriculture.” While genetic resources are obviously relevant for traditional
IPRs, the ITPGRFA does not require that farmers and farming communities have inﬂuence over decisions
relating to IPRs.

The UNCCD has one reference to participation in the provision on traditional knowledge, with article
18.2(a) saying that local populations are to participate in making “inventories of such technology,
knowledge, know-how and practices and their potential uses […]” Such inventories will exclude IPRs on
such knowledge and know-how.

Human rights treaties do not address traditional IPRs, but two interpretations, on the right to take part
in cultural life and on the rights to enjoy the moral and material beneﬁts of one’s intellectual production,
adopted by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (UN CESCR), are relevant (UN
CESCR, 2009 (General Comment 21); UN CESCR, 2006 (General Comment 17)). General Comment 21
reads in paragraph 37: “Indigenous peoples have the right to act collectively to ensure respect for their
right to maintain, control, protect and develop their […] traditional knowledge […].” While it is important
to specify that these peoples have a right to act collectively, General Comment 21 does not specify any
consequences if the indigenous peoples are prevented from acting collectively.

General Comment 17 says in paragraph 32 that states should “[…] ensure the effective protection of
the interests of indigenous peoples relating to their productions, which are often expressions of their […]
traditional knowledge.” By applying the phrase “protection of their interests,” it is reasonable to
understand this as encompassing preventing appropriation of traditional intellectual property without the
indigenous peoples’ consent or approval. The paragraph does not apply the term rights, which can be
explained by the fact that the relevant ICESCR provision (article 15.1(c)) applies the phrase “moral and
material interests.”

Hence, we see that there is recognition of the rights of participation in the context of traditional
IPRs as held by collectives, with the different international instruments having diverse wording and
emphasis. The most explicit wording is found in instruments which are not formally binding under
international law, as the Nagoya Protocol has not entered into force, and as the UNDRIP is formally a
declaration.

As concerns the defensive protection, the most explicit provision is found in UNDRIP article 11.2,

reading:

States shall provide redress through effective mechanisms with respect
to their […]
intellectual […] property taken without their free, prior and informed consent or in violation
of their laws, traditions and customs.

By not specifying—notwithstanding the requirement that the measures shall be “effective”—what
such redress mechanisms shall be, it is difﬁcult to determine exactly what this refers to. It could refer to
costly proceedings before the courts to seek to have patents revoked, as the eligibility requirements are
allegedly not met. Alternatively, it could refer to swifter and less costly administrative procedures. In both
instances, however, the indigenous peoples in question would need to be supported by one or more non-
governmental organization (NGO), either ﬁnancially or by legal counsel, as most indigenous peoples
would most likely not be in a position to bring a case neither judicially nor administratively.

84

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

The other international instruments are less explicit. The requirement that indigenous peoples’
prior and informed consent is compulsory if access to traditional knowledge is to take place in a
legitimate manner, as speciﬁed by article 7 of the Nagoya Protocol, is the most explicit provision on the
defensive protection of traditional knowledge. The scope of this provision is weakened by the two
phrases applied in the introduction, namely “In accordance with domestic law” and “as appropriate.” The
ITPGRFA does not specify any defensive protection beyond the general wording of article 9.2(a) on
protection of traditional knowledge. The draft WIPO instrument on genetic resources speciﬁes in
the bracket paragraphs of draft article 3 that the scope of the draft instrument is to avoid grant of
erroneous patents and misappropriation (WIPO, 2013, annexure, p. 7), and similar formulations can be
found in draft article 4 of the draft instrument on traditional knowledge WIPO, 2014c, annexure, p. 15).
As for human rights instruments, the relevant provisions of the relevant general comments are quoted
above.

Also here, the UNDRIP provides the most explicit wording, and the outcome of the negotiations

under the auspices of WIPO cannot be predetermined.

As concerns the positive protection, in accordance with UNDRIP article 31.2 “[…] States shall take
effective measures to recognize and protect the exercise of these rights,” which are listed in article 31.1 (to
maintain, control, protect and develop traditional knowledge). The term “recognize” implies that some
form of positive protection is foreseen. The wording of UNDRIP articles 31.1, 31.2 and 11.2 has led one
author to claim that IPRs are recognized in the UNDRIP “in a manner that implies the creation of a sui
generis system” (Xanthaki, 2009, p. 31; contra: Kiene, 2009, p. 281). The argument in support of
Xanthaki’s view is the formulations “effective measures to recognize and protect” and “effective redress
mechanisms.”

“Effective” in an intellectual property context is about having an exclusive right to prevent
certain acts relating to the protected material, with mechanisms to make it possible for the right
holder to enforce the rights against any external actor, and where the exclusive rights apply to any
material or knowledge that is given some form of protection (Haugen, 2007, pp. 268–9, 285). An
argument against the position by Xanthaki is that the UNDRIP provisions does not explicitly
require a new legislation, and moreover that an international declaration does not create legally
binding obligations upon states—even if the UNDRIP has been referred to in domestic legislation
and national court decisions (Wong, 2011, p. 40 note 118), as well as by UN treaty bodies and
international human rights courts (Barelli, 2014, p. 15, n 63 and 64). The UNDRIP has a higher
authoritative role than other UN declarations, with the exception for the UN Declaration of Human
Rights, and as argued by one author, states “should use [UNDRIP] article 31 as a reference point
for their work concerning the intellectual property rights of indigenous peoples” (Barelli, 2014,
p. 15).

Irrespective of how the relevant UNDRIP provisions are implemented, it should be noted that the
temporary enclosure that IPR builds upon does not necessarily correspond to the customary law of
indigenous peoples. Therefore, the ﬁrst part of UNDRIP article 31.2, saying that measures in the context of
genetic resources and traditional knowledge are to be taken “[i]n conjunction with indigenous peoples
[…]” is important.

The UNCCD speciﬁes the positive protection in a relatively clear manner, by specifying in article

18.2(b) that the states shall:

ensure that traditional technology, knowledge, know-how and practices are adequately
protected and that local populations beneﬁt directly, on an equitable basis and as mutually
agreed, from any commercial utilization of them or from any technological development
derived there from.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

85

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

This provision requires adequate protection of traditional knowledge. It also asserts that such
protection will provide for commercial beneﬁt sharing. The introductory text of article 18.2 says that states
are to “protect, promote and use traditional knowledge.”

Similar approaches, but with vague requirements and the qualiﬁcations that such measures are to be
undertaken “in accordance with domestic law” and “as appropriate” are found in the ITPGRFA and the
Nagoya Protocol. Within the ITPGRFA there are provisions on monetary and non-monetary beneﬁt
sharing—whose implementation has not met the expectations (Correa, 2013). The beneﬁt-sharing
potential of the Nagoya Protocol is too early to assess.

In summary, the most explicit formulations are found in the UNDRIP. The analysis also shows that
the recognition of traditional IPRs for indigenous peoples is an emerging subject matter under
international law, and not all states are fully prepared to recognize such rights, as the ongoing negotiations
under the auspices of WIPO ICG bear witness to.

Other (Non-Indigenous) Communities and Traditional Intellectual Property Rights

Based on the fact that many states are reluctant to recognize that they have indigenous peoples on their
land, and the objective difﬁculties in specifying who is indigenous and who is not, this might result in
tensions. A premise for this section is a presumption that seemingly much stronger rights can be enjoyed
by those belonging to recognized indigenous peoples as compared to the rights enjoyed by those belonging
to communities that are not recognized as being indigenous. As for indigenous peoples, three related
questions will be analyzed: participatory rights; rights to defensive protection and rights to positive
protection.

With the exception of UNDRIP, which applies only to indigenous peoples, the ﬁve sources as those
analyzed in the section on indigenous peoples above will be analyzed in this section, but the human rights
sources are primarily the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (ICERD) and its Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(CERD), and other human rights soft-law documents and regional human rights jurisprudence will also be
applied.

As concerns the traditional IPRs, neither the ITPGRFA nor the Nagoya Protocol, nor the UNCCD
specify stronger participatory rights for indigenous communities than for other communities. Hence,
farming communities (under the ITPGRFA), local communities (under the Nagoya Protocol) and local
populations (under the UNCCD) are entitled to the same rights as are indigenous peoples. This observation
applies also to the draft WIPO instruments, but there is one provision of the traditional knowledge draft
instrument, on representation of indigenous peoples in a national authority to administer rights, specifying
participation of indigenous peoples (WIPO, 2014c, pp. 18–9).

Regarding participation rights for non-indigenous communities, CERD asserted in 1996 that these
communities have the right to self-determination, and this right is particularly important for preserving
these communities’ culture and identity (UN CERD, 1996, paragraph 10; see also UN Human Rights
Committee, 1994, paragraph 7; and Barelli (2014, p. 11)). Moreover, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights has recognized the right to free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) as a collective right for two
communities (Saramaka people and Moiwana people) that are not recognized as being indigenous, but
whose special relationship with their ancestral lands and territories was recognized as crucial for their
survival (de Schutter, 2013, p. 536n131). Even more recently, the UN-REDD Guidelines for Free, Prior
and Informed Consent requires States to “secure FPIC from communities that share common
characteristics with indigenous peoples […]” (UN-REDD, 2013b, p. 12; see also p. 26).

We see that the distinction between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples is not strictly upheld
on the international plane. The issue is rather whether the communities in question are depending on

86

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

land they have traditionally inhabited and on the resources they have traditionally harvested for their
survival.

On the defensive protection, the prior and informed consent requirement of article 7 of the Nagoya
Protocol applies to local communities. As article 7 speciﬁes that such measures are to be taken in
accordance with domestic law, and as appropriate, the strength of this provision is limited, however.

The CERD has referred to intellectual property on relatively few occasions, and then in the context of
recognition of IPRs for recognized indigenous peoples, not minorities (UN CERD, 2013, p. 4).1 Neither
the CESCR has speciﬁed IPRs and corresponding obligations for other than indigenous peoples (UN
CESCR, 2011a, p. 7, 2011b, p. 10, 2013, p. 5). Moreover, in the two CESCR general comments, the
minorities are listed in separate paragraphs from indigenous peoples, with weaker defensive (and positive)
protection of their intellectual property as compared to indigenous peoples (UN CESCR, 2006, paragraph
33, 2009, paragraph 32).

Finally, as concerns positive protection, there are rather weak provisions in the relevant treaties.
The ITPGRFA article 9.2(a) says that protection of traditional knowledge is one way to promote
farmers’ rights, but leaves it to each state how to go about to ensure such protection. The draft WIPO
instruments, when they are adopted and enter into force, might provide some form of positive protection
also for local communities, but the main emphasis in the current drafts (WIPO, 2013, 2014c) is
on defensive protection. Human rights treaties have a too general wording to be of much use, but
indigenous peoples have called for a more active role by human rights bodies in standard-setting activities
also in the realm of protection of traditional knowledge (UN Working Group on Indigenous Populations,
2002, p. 7).

We saw above that the tendency is to give less emphasis on the clear distinctions between indigenous
peoples and traditionally communities that share common characteristics with indigenous peoples. Still,
however, indigenous peoples are given much more attention than other minorities. As an example, while
indigenous peoples are not explicitly mentioned in the ICERD, and while the CERD has speciﬁed that also
ethnic minorities have the right to self-determination (UN CERD, 1996, paragraph 10), the CERD
individual complaints and early warnings reports have a bias in favor of indigenous peoples. When CERD
has addressed the FPIC requirement in the context of land, only one reference has been made to minorities
(UN CERD, 2012, p. 4), while all other references are to indigenous peoples (UN-REDD, 2013a, pp. 16–
46).2

Hence, the international instrument that has the most explicit provisions on IPRs protection for
collectives is UNDRIP, which applies only to indigenous peoples. While there are other international
treaties (ITPGRFA; Nagoya Protocol (not entered into force)) that recognize local and farming
communities as having similar rights as indigenous peoples in enjoying traditional IPRs protection,
these have less explicit provisions. Therefore, also acknowledging the non-binding nature of the
UNDRIP, the international provisions on the recognition of traditional IPRs on the international level are
limited.

There are, however, regionally based protection systems, most notably the 2000 Andean Community
Decision 486 on a Common Intellectual Property Regime. Three provisions stand out: articles 3
(traditional and collective knowledge), 22 (joint inventorship) and 26(i) (documenting traditional
knowledge). Among nationally based protection systems, India’s 2001 Protection of Plant Varieties and
Farmers’ Rights Act (Act No. 53) is most interesting. Four provisions are relevant: articles 16.1(d)
(recognizing as breeders group of farmers or community of farmers), 41 (recognizing local communities’
contribution in the evolution of any variety), 43 (consent of farmers who have developed a farmers
variety), and 44 (exemption of fees for any farming community’s legal proceedings). Space does not allow
for a detailed examination of these provisions, but it should be noted that Peru is both a party to the Andean
Community Decision 486 and a part of the TTPA negotiations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

87

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

We now turn to the draft TTPA chapters, structuring the analysis under the three dimensions of

participation, defensive protection and positive protection.

Who Is Eligible to Influence Decision-Making on Utilization of Genetic Resources and
Associated Traditional Knowledge?

In the two TTPA draft chapters, there are two articles that are relevant: SS.13 of the draft TTPA chapter on
environment (ENV) and article QQ.E.23 of the draft chapter on IPR. Hence, when paragraphs are referred
to, these paragraphs are found within these two articles.

Paragraph 4 of ENV “recognize the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources, and that the
authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the national governments.” Wording on state
sovereignty is also found in paragraph 2 of IPR, but formulated so that the power of the state applies also to
derivatives of genetic resources. I will ﬁrst address the sovereignty issue and then the issue of derivates.
While sovereignty formulations are found in preambular paragraph 3 of the Nagoya Protocol and in
preambular paragraph 14 of the ITPGRFA, it is important to understand these provisions as relating to the
external dimension. That this emphasis on states’ sovereignty in relation to external actors should not be
applied to prevent indigenous peoples and other minorities from exercising their legitimate human rights
was argued by UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples before the WIPO IGC (UN
Special Rapporteur, 2013, section 4). If the sovereignty provision is understood as giving an exclusive
right of the state to determine access to natural and genetic resources in disrespect of the rights and
interests of indigenous peoples and minorities, this would be in clear contradiction of provisions on the
right to self-determination and enjoyment of cultural rights of human rights treaties, and a range of
provisions of the UNDRIP.

Derivatives are deﬁned by the Nagoya Protocol article 2(e) as “a naturally occurring biochemical
compound resulting from the genetic expression or metabolism of biological or genetic resources, even if
it does not contain functional units of heredity.” Hence, a derivative is taken from a biological or genetic
resource, either through a chemical or a physical process. Derivatisation is the technique which transforms
a chemical compound into another compound or product, and this product is termed a derivative.3 There is
in principle no reason why indigenous peoples and local communities cannot master such a technique. In
the WIPO draft instrument on genetic resources, there is no agreement on whether the derivatives shall be
included in the deﬁnition of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources (WIPO, 2013,
annexure, p. 2). There is also no agreement in the TTPA negotiations. The opposing states include
Australia, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore, and those states that want derivates to be included under the
TTPA sections on genetic resources and traditional knowledge, so that derivatives can be understood as
traditional knowledge, are Brunei, Malaysia, Peru and Vietnam (TTPA, 2013a, p. 45, 2013c, p. 4, 2013d,
section SS.13). The opposing states must be understood as wanting to limit the scope of what can fall
within the exclusive domain of traditional IPRs, as this might restrict the scope of conventional IPRs.
The scope of what can be protected as traditional knowledge is generally subject to diverse views. As
an example, traditional knowledge which has ceased to be the exclusive knowledge of indigenous peoples
or local communities (“already available without restriction to the general public”) is currently bracketed
text in WIPO’s draft instrument on traditional knowledge (WIPO, 2014c, annexure, p. 21). That
knowledge that is generally available cannot be subject to intellectual property protection is the position of
most states, as this is in line with the general novelty requirement of patent rights and plant breeders’
rights. The position of indigenous peoples will be contrary, as they have not been in possession of tools
which has made it possible for them to prevent this knowledge from falling into the public domain. As
noted by the UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples before the WIPO IGC (UN
Special Rapporteur, 2014, p. 7):

88

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

the most

important purposes of

one of
this Committee is precisely to prevent
misappropriations of traditional knowledge that conventional intellectual property law
considers to be in the public domain. To exclude this entire category of subject matter from
protection would, in my opinion, render the work of the Intergovernmental Committee
considerably less relevant.

Hence, indigenous peoples want a broad scope of traditional knowledge that can be subject to some
form of traditional IPRs. Most states, on the other hand, prefer a more limited scope of traditional
knowledge eligible for protection, so that as much traditional knowledge as possible is understood to be in
the public domain. This must be understood to be the core of indigenous peoples’ decision-making as
concerns genetic resources and traditional knowledge.

Preventing Appropriation of Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge
Through Prior Informed Consent

We saw above that the Nagoya Protocol article 7 deﬁnes prior informed consent by (or approval and
involvement from) indigenous peoples and local communities as a prerequisite for the appropriate access
of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources. The draft TTPA ENV chapter does not include
this requirement at all in relation to traditional knowledge, while the draft TTPA IPR chapter says—with
bracketed text—that such access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources is conditional
upon indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ prior informed consent, or approval and involvement;
Australia, Chile, Singapore and the United States being the opposing states (TTPA, 2013a, paragraph 3
(b), 2013c, p. 4). Peru and Mexico are the states proposing a stronger reference to indigenous and local
communities’ approval and involvement when preserving and utilizing traditional knowledge and
innovations (TTPA, 2013d, section SS.13).

Access to genetic resources per se is regulated by requiring in paragraph 5 in the draft ENV chapter
and paragraph 3(a) of the draft IPR chapter. Both provisions say that it is states that are to give the prior
informed consent for access of genetic resources.

Is there a justiﬁcation for this different emphasis on who is to give the consent regarding access to
genetic resources, as compared to access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources?
Turning ﬁrst to the Nagoya Protocol, there is a difference between article 6 (Access to genetic resources)
and article 7 (Access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources). Both apply the terms “in
accordance with domestic law” and “as appropriate.” The former states in article 6.2 an “aim of ensuring
that the prior informed consent or approval and involvement of indigenous and local communities is
obtained […].” Having an aim that consent or approval is obtained is not a strict requirement. Nagoya
Protocol article 7 also applies the phrase “aim of ensuring” but has a different ordering, and ends with
the requirement “that mutually agreed terms have been established.” Hence, in the absence of an
agreement, consent or approval, traditional knowledge cannot be accessed as speciﬁed by Nagoya
Protocol article 7.

In the draft WIPO instrument on genetic resources, when specifying what is to be understood as
misappropriation, there are two bracketed alternatives; either lack or consent by “those who are
authorized” or “competent authority” (WIPO, 2013, annexure, p. 3). This implies that the consent
regarding access to genetic resources is understood to be given primarily by domestic political authorities,
but these authorities can specify that indigenous peoples and local communities can also be authorized to
give consent.

In the UNDRIP article 31.1, the right to maintain, control, protect and develop applies equally to
genetic resources and to traditional knowledge. Article 31.1, unlike Article 11.2, does not refer to consent

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

89

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

or approval, but the verb control must be understood as encompassing the right to reject access in given
circumstances. General Comment 21, which reiterates the wording of the ﬁrst sentence of UNDRIP
article 31.1, includes a sentence specifying the FPIC (UN CESCR, 2009, paragraph 37; see also UN
CESCR, 2006, paragraph 32).

In summary, in adopted treaties and treaties still under negotiation, there is a slight difference in
emphasis on the prior informed consent requirement as regards access to genetic resources and as regards
access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources. This difference is not of such a kind that
there is a basis for allowing those seeking access to genetic resources that have been maintained,
conserved and developed by any indigenous peoples or local communities not to obtain prior informed
consent by these indigenous peoples or local communities.

In the TTPA draft chapters, the possibility to prevent appropriation of genetic resources and
associated traditional knowledge is also affected by the fact that the verbs do differ. In the draft IPR
chapter, New Zealand proposes that prior informed consent may be obtained, while Peru and Malaysia
proposes that such consent shall be obtained. In the draft ENV chapter, the proposal is that such consent
should be obtained. It is a wide difference between a “shall” and a “may” requirement. By New Zealand’s
proposal, the consent or approval by indigenous peoples and local communities is not required, only
optional.

The paragraph is currently opposed by three states: Australia, Chile and Singapore, as well as the
United States—as the United States is said to oppose paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the traditional knowledge
article in the ENV chapter (TTPA, 2013c, p. 4).

Moreover, a proposal that non-compliance with paragraph 3 of the IPR chapter (on prior informed
consent to access genetic resources, traditional knowledge and beneﬁt sharing from the use of such
resources or knowledge) shall be met by “appropriate, effective and proportionate measures” is opposed
by four states, namely Australia, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore (TTPA, 2013a, paragraph 7). It is also
logical that the United States is opposing, as it is opposing the inclusion of the related paragraphs in the
draft ENV chapter. By not acknowledging that non-compliance with the access and beneﬁt-sharing
requirements shall be met by adequate measures; these states then implicitly allow for impunity for those
accessing genetic resources or traditional knowledge in disregard of the rights and interests of the relevant
indigenous peoples and local communities.

Finally, it is relevant to mention that there is no disclosure requirement in the draft chapters,
requiring patent applicants to specify from where the genetic resource and the traditional knowledge
resulting in the patentable invention have been taken. Several proposals have been put before
the Council on TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) and the Trade
Negotiations Committee of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and proposals on a disclosure
requirement have also been presented before the WIPO IGC (European Communities, 2005,
annexure; see also WIPO, 2014c, annexure, p. 12 (draft article 3.1(d)bis) and p. 16 (draft article 4bis)).
The WTO proposal with the broadest support has more than 110 states as co-sponsors (WTO,
2008), but only one state that is a part of the TTPA negotiations: Peru.4 Paragraph 4 of this proposal
reads:

Members agree to amend the TRIPS Agreement to include a mandatory requirement for the
disclosure of the country providing/source of genetic resources, and/or associated traditional
knowledge for which a deﬁnition will be agreed, in patent applications. Patent applications
will not be processed without completion of the disclosure requirement.

The proposed amendment is to add a new paragraph to TRIPS Article 29 (Conditions on Patent

Applicants). The proposal has not been brought further, however.

90

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

While there has been no agreement on disclosure obligations within the WTO, there are free-trade
agreements with disclosure obligations. An agreement where Peru is a party is the 2010 Free
Trade Agreement between the Republic of Peru and the EFTA States (Peru-EFTA FTA). The different
approach in gaining prior informed consent to access genetic resources and access to traditional
knowledge is seen in paragraph 7 of Article 6.5. Paragraph 5 of Article 6.5 also addresses genetic
resources and traditional knowledge in two different sentences—and with references that weakens
the provision (“According to their national law […]” and “As far as provided in their national
legislation […]”). While there is no provision saying that patent applications will not be processed
without completion of the disclosure requirement, as was seen in the WTO proposal above,
paragraph 6 of Article 6.5 of the Peru-EFTA FTA speciﬁes “administrative, civil or criminal sanctions
if the inventor or the patent applicant willfully make a wrongful or misleading declaration of the
origin or source.” This provision can be contrasted with some states’ opposition against appropriate,
effective and proportionate measures, as proposed in draft paragraph 7 of the IPR chapter of the
TTPA.

Recognition of Rights Over Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge,
and Derived Benefits

The draft chapters do not specify a comprehensive protection system for IPRs in order to protect new and
applicable knowledge that has emerged from a traditional context. Therefore, the rights relating to beneﬁt
sharing are the most explicit positive rights that can be read out from the draft chapters.

When outlining what beneﬁts the utilization of the knowledge or resources might result in, differences
exist between the text of the IPR chapter and the ENV chapter. The latter simply says with regard to
traditional knowledge that states “encourage the equitable sharing of the beneﬁts arising from the
utilization of such knowledge, innovations and practices” (TTPA, 2013b, paragraph 3); and with regard to
genetic resources that beneﬁts “should be shared in a fair and equitable way […] upon mutually agreed
terms” (TTPA, 2013b, paragraph 5). Here, we see that the wording concerning genetic resources is
somewhat stronger than the wording concerning traditional knowledge. In this context, it is important to
remember that the draft TTPA understands that consent for accessing genetic resources is to be done by the
competent public authority. Consent for accessing traditional knowledge is according to some states
negotiating the TTPA to be done by the indigenous people or local community—even if there are some
states that do not want to include this speciﬁcation at all.

The terms applied in the two chapters of the TTPA are not of such a kind as to constitute a basis for
any new IPRs system. The terms applied in the ENV chapter are, however, relatively positive in
appreciating the knowledge and innovations of indigenous and local communities (TTPA, 2013b,
paragraph 3). By stating that the knowledge, innovations and practices are to be respected, preserved
and maintained, the parties implicitly take upon themselves duties to ensure that such preservation
and maintenance is actually done. As these duties are not spelled out in greater detail, rather limiting
the rights of the indigenous peoples and local communities over their resources and knowledge,
there is a risk that the provisions of the draft chapters might directly undermine what is positively
appreciated.

In this context, the use of the term indigenous communities does also deserve criticism. While the
term indigenous communities is also applied in for instance the Peru-EFTA FTA, in accordance with the
international developments, the term indigenous communities should be replaced by the term indigenous
peoples.

The positive appreciation of the innovations and knowledge is unique to the draft ENV chapter. The

draft IPR chapter never speciﬁes who are the ones developing this knowledge and innovations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

91

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Conclusion

It cannot be reiterated enough how important it is to have a holistic and comprehensive understanding of
IPRs in the context of indigenous peoples and local communities. First, the rights over land and resources
that is derived from the right to self-determination. Second, the realms within which the right to self-
determination should be exercised, including the pursuing of a peoples’ economic, social and cultural
development, in accordance with article 3 of UNDRIP. Third, the material basis for upholding the
traditional culture, and hence the identity of any indigenous peoples or local community.

This article has seen that the knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous peoples and local
communities, while being appreciated in principle, risks to be weakened in practice by section on
traditional knowledge in the proposed TTPA. While not analyzed speciﬁcally in this article, the TTPA also
build on a wide understanding of the public domain and calls for measures to facilitate access to the
material that has fallen into the public domain (TTPA, 2013a, p. 11, Article QQ.A.13)). Together with the
proposed impunity for those accessing material and knowledge without free and informed consent by
indigenous peoples and local communities, this indicates a development towards stronger disrespect of the
rights of indigenous peoples and local communities.

It might not be surprising that Australia and the United States have positions that seek to place upon
themselves the least onerous duties with regard to indigenous peoples, while Peru seems most concerned
for the rights of indigenous peoples. It is, however, somewhat surprising that a country like Chile sides
with the Australian and US position. Chile has not signed the 2010 Nagoya Protocol and has signed but not
ratiﬁed the 2001 ITPGRFA. An analysis of Chile’s policy on traditional knowledge and genetic resources
ﬁnds considerable ﬂaws in Chilean legislation and policies and gives speciﬁc advice on how Chile can be
better aligned with laws and policies of other Latin American states, also drawing upon the documents
developed within the context of the WIPO IGC (Rojas, 2007).

The duration of these WIPO IGC negotiations, on the other hand, show that indigenous peoples’ IPRs
are not easily recognized under international law. This applies both to the scope of the substantive rights over
genetic resources and traditional knowledge, and to the strength of the procedural rights when external
actors seek to access these resources and knowledge. As the article has shown, UNDRIP, being a non-
binding declaration of considerable authority, recognizes both the substantive and the procedural aspects of
IPRs, including effective redress mechanisms when peoples’ intellectual property have been appropriated
without their consent. Other instruments, like the ITPGFRA and the (not yet entered into force) Nagoya
Protocol are less explicit and apply formulations like “in accordance with national legislation,” which
weakens these provisions. On the positive side, the awareness of indigenous peoples and local communities’
intellectual heritage and innovations are gaining increased recognition in an increasing number of states, and
will be important for tackling global challenges. Treaties like the TTPA should better seek to balance the
interests between different rights holders and nurture such practices, knowledge and innovations.

About the Author

Hans Morten Haugen, Diakonhjemmet University College, P.O. Box 184, Vindern, 0319 Oslo, Norway;
e-mail: haugen@diakonhjemmet.no

Notes

1. The CERD recommendation reads: “The Committee recommends that the State party promptly announce a timetable to
implement the Waitangi Tribunal’s decision [Wai 262 of 2011] in a manner that fully protects the intellectual property
rights of Ma˜ori communities over their traditional knowledge and genetic and biological resources.”

92

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

2. The FPIC requirement is linked to property rights, which is recognized in ICERD article 5(d)(v).
3. The deﬁnition given by the Royal Society of Chemistry is: “The transformation of a chemical compound (the
‘educt’) into another similar compound (the ‘derivative’) by altering one or more of its functional groups” www.

rsc.org/publishing/journals/prospect/ontology.asp?id¼CMO:0001485 [Accessed March 2014].

4. The co-sponsors are (in alphabetical order): ACP Group and the African Group, Albania, Brazil, China, Colombia,
Croatia, Ecuador,
the Kyrgyz Republic,
Liechtenstein, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, Pakistan, Peru, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
Thailand and Turkey.

the European Communities, Georgia, Iceland, India, Indonesia,

References

Barelli, M. (2014) ‘The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: A Human Rights Framework
for Intellectual Property Rights’, in M. Rimmer (ed.) A Research Handbook on Indigenous Intellectual Property.
Edward Elgar, Cheltenham (forthcoming; pre-published version available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.

cfm?abstract_id¼2380581 [Accessed June 2014]).

Bhardwaj, K. and Oh, C. (2014) The Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement: Implications for Access to Medicines and
Public Health [online]. Available at www.unitaid.eu/images/marketdynamics/publications/TPPA-Executive-
Summary.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

Centre for Law and Democracy (2013) Analysis of the Draft Intellectual Property Chapter of the Trans-Paciﬁc
Partnership [online]. Available at www.law-democracy.org/live/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/TPP.IP-ﬁnal.
Dec13.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

Cha´vez, L.E. (2009) ‘The Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Breaking the Impasse: The Middle
Ground’, in C. Claire and R. Stavenhagen (eds.) Making the Declaration Work: The United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, IWGIA Document No. 127. International Work Group for Indigenous
Affairs, Copenhagen, pp. 96–106.

Correa, C.M. (2013) ITPGRFA: Options to Promote the Wider Application of Article 6.11 of the SMTA and to
Enhance Beneﬁt-Sharing. Legal Opinion [online]. Available at www.evb.ch/cm_data/ITPGRFA_Legal_
opinion_Final_130731.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

De Schutter, O. (2013) ‘The Green Rush: The Global Race for Farmland and the Rights of Land Users’, Harvard

International Law Journal, 52, 503–59.

European Communities (2005) WIPO/GRTKF/IC/8/11, Disclosure of Origin or Source of Genetic Resources and
Associated Traditional Knowledge in Patent Applications. Document submitted by the European Community
and Its Member States.

Hanson, E.

(2011) UN Declaration on the Rights of

indigenousfoundations.arts.ubc.ca/?id¼1097 [Accessed March 2014].

Indigenous Peoples [online]. Available at http://

Haugen, H.M. (2007) The Right to Food and the TRIPS Agreement—With a Particular Emphasis on Developing

Countries’ Measures for Food Production and Distribution. Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden & Boston.

Haugen, H.M. (2012) Technology and Human Rights: Friends or Foes? Highlighting Innovations Applying to Natural

Resources and Medicine. Republic of Letters Publishing, Dordrecht.

Kelsey, J. (2014) TPPA Environment Chapter & Chair’s Commentary Posted by Wikileaks. Issues for NZ [online].
Available at www.itsourfuture.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/TPPA-Environment-Chapter.pdf [Accessed
March 2014].

Kiene, T. (2009) The Legal Protection of Traditional Knowledge in the Pharmaceutical Field. An Intercultural

Problem on the International Arena. Mu¨nster, Waxmann.

Montes, A.R. and Cisneros, G.T. (2009) ‘The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples:
The Foundation of a New Relationship Between Indigenous Peoples, States and Societies’, in C. Claire and
R. Stavenhagen (eds.) Making the Declaration Work: The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

93

Hans Morten Haugen

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Indigenous Peoples IWGIA Document No. 127. International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs, Copenhagen,
pp. 138–68.

New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade (2006) Trans-Paciﬁc Strategic Economic Partnership [online].
[Accessed

Available at www.mfat.govt.nz/downloads/trade-agreement/transpaciﬁc/trans-paciﬁcbooklet.pdf
March 2014].

Ougamanam, C. (2008) ‘Local Knowledge as Trapped Knowledge: Intellectual Property, Culture, Power and

Politics’, Journal of World Intellectual Property, 11, 29–57.

Rojas, J. (2007) ‘Traditional Knowledge and Access to Genetic Resources. Critical Elements Towards a National

Policy and Legislation for Chile’, Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, 2, 134–48.

Taubman, A. and Leistner, M. (2008) ‘Analysis of Different Areas of Intellectual Resources, Section 1: Traditional
Knowledge’, in S. von Lewinski (ed.) Indigenous Heritage and Intellectual Property: Genetic Resources,
Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, 2nd edition. Kluwer Law International, Alphen an den Rijn, pp. 59–179.
TTPA (2013a) Intellectual Property [Rights] Chapter Consolidated Text [online]. Available at https://wikileaks.org/

tpp/static/pdf/Wikileaks-secret-TPP-treaty-IP-chapter.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

TTPA (2013b) Environment Chapter Consolidated Text [online]. Available at http://wikileaks.org/tpp-enviro

[Accessed March 2014].

TTPA (2013c) TTP: Country Positions (6 November) [online]. Available at https://wikileaks.org/IMG/pdf/tpp-salt-

lake-positions.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

TTPA (2013d) Report from the Chairs and Consolidated Text for the Environment Chapter [online]. Available at

http://wikileaks.org/tpp-enviro-chairsreport/ [Accessed March 2014].

UN CERD (1996) General Recommendation XXI, The Right to Self-Determination, A/51/18(SUPP), annexure VIII.
UN CERD (2012) CERD/VNM/CO/10-14, Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial

Discrimination, Viet Nam.

UN CERD (2013) CERD/C/NZL/CO/18-20, Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial

Discrimination, New Zealand.

UN CESCR (2006) E/C.12/GC/17, General Comment No. 17, The Right of Everyone to Beneﬁt From the Protection of
the Moral and Material Interests Resulting From Any Scientiﬁc, Literary or Artistic Production of Which He or
She Is the Author (article 15, paragraph 1).

UN CESCR (2009) E/C.12/GC/21, General Comment 21, the Right to Take Part in Cultural Life (Article 15.1(a)).
UN CESCR (2011a) E/C.12/ARG/CO/3, Concluding Observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and

Cultural Rights, Argentina.

UN CESCR (2011b) E/C.12/RUS/CO/5 Concluding Observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights, Russian Federation.

UN CESCR (2013) E/C.12/COG/CO/1, Observations Made in the Absence of an Initial Report From the Congo and

Adopted by the Committee at Its Forty-Ninth Session (12–30 November 2012) [published 2 January 2013].

UN Forum for Indigenous Issues Secretariat (2006) Who Are Indigenous Peoples? [online]. Available at http://www.

un.org/esa/socdev/unpﬁi/documents/5session_factsheet1.pdf [Accessed March 2014]

UN Human Rights Committee (1994) General Comment No. 23: The Rights of Minorities (Art. 27).
UN-REDD (2013a) Legal Companion to the UN-REDD Programme Guidelines on Free, Prior and Informed Consent

(FPIC): International Law and Jurisprudence Afﬁrming the Requirement of FPIC.

UN-REDD (2013b) Guidelines for Free, Prior and Informed Consent.
UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2013) Statement. Indigenous Peoples’ Rights to Genetic
Resources and Traditional Knowledge [online]. Available at http://unsr.jamesanaya.org/statements/statement-
indigenous-peoples-rights-to-genetic-resources-and-traditional-knowledge [Accessed March 2014].

UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2014) Keynote Address. Intellectual Property and
Genetic Resources: What Is at Stake for Indigenous Peoples? [online]. Available at www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/
tk/en/wipo_grtkf_ic_26/wipo_grtkf_ic_26_indigenous_panel_james_anaya.pdf [Accessed March 2014].

94

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

Draft Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement & TK

Hans Morten Haugen

UN Working Group on Indigenous Populations (2002) E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/24 Report of the Working Group on

Indigenous Populations on Its Twentieth Session.

WIPO (2003) WO/GA/30/8, Report From the 30th Session of the WIPO General Assembly.
WIPO (2013) WIPO/GRTKF/IC/26/4 Consolidated Document Relating to Intellectual Property and Genetic

Resource, Rev 2.

WIPO (2014a) Genetic Resources [online]. Available at www.wipo.int/tk/en/genetic [Accessed March 2014].
WIPO (2014b) WIPO/GRTKF/IC/27/INF/7, Glossary of Key Terms Related to Intellectual Property and Genetic

Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural Expressions.

WIPO (2014c) WIPO/GRTKF/IC/27/4, The Protection of Traditional Knowledge: Draft Articles, Rev 2.
Wong, T. (2011) ‘Introduction’, in T. Wong and G. Dutﬁeld (eds.) Intellectual Property and Human Development.

Current Trends and Future Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 1–59.

WTO (2008) TN/C/W/52, Draft Modalities for TRIPS Related Issues.
Xanthaki, A. (2009) ‘Indigenous Rights in International Law’, Melbourne Journal of International Law, 10, 27–37.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 3–4

95


