Stimuli to Adopt and Enforce Patent Systems in 
Argentina and Canada in the Multilateral Trade 

Framework 

Victor F.  RODRIGUEZ* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Patents protect innovation, not invention. Innovation is different from invention; 
as long as they are not carried into practice, inventions are economically irrelevant. A 
patent is a national institution that has jurisdiction only in the Nation-State which grants 
it. Innovative firms file patent applications not  only in the country where they made 
the innovation, but also in those countries that represent a market for the technology 
they want  to  disseminate. Because of the  larger size  of the world market  in  the late 
nineteenth century, innovators put pressure on their governments to sign an agreement 
which dealt with innovation. Thus, like-minded  industrialized countries convened to 
protect innovation in Paris in  1883. Even if they disagreed on particulars, they agreed 
that  the  patent  institution  was  important  for  innovation.  The  Paris  Convention  is 
characterized  by  its  not  imposing  minimum  standards  of  patent  protection  on  its 
signatory Members. 

In the late 1970s, some innovators realized that the protection standard of the Paris 
Convention was weak. Accordingly, there was not enough coverage against the spread 
of  piracy  in  the  world.  By  inhibiting  and  delaying  imitation,  patents  prevent  the 
premature  erosion  of  innovators’  profits,  and  hence  instill  expectations  that  their 
research  and  development  (R&D) expenditures can  be  recouped  if  innovators  are 
sheltered from imitation for a long enough time. In order to avoid a decrease in income 
and  an  absence  of  return  on  investment,  some  innovator  firms  lobbied  their 
governments to consider this issue.  The firms interested in this  endeavour were those 
which obtained benefits from innovation only through patents instead of other means, 
such as natural recognition time-lags, secrecy, know-how  advantages, first-in reputation 
advantages, and structural barriers  to  entry. So, American patent-based firms, namely 
drug  companies, conveyed  their  concern  to  the  U.S. Patent  and  Trademark  Office 
(USPTO). The U.S. government took up this issue and brought  it into the diplomatic 
arena.  The  American aim  was  to  reform  the  Paris  Convention  administered by  the 

*  Master  in  International Relations,  National  University  of Cordoda,  Argentina;  Visiting  Scholar  at  the 
Conference Board of Canada and the Institute of Canadian Studies of the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada. 
The author may be contacted at: (cvictor.rodriguez@ybiz.netn. 

508 

THE JOURNAL. OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO); but this goal was not met due to the 
opposition of developing countries. 

In  the  1980s, without  abandoning  their  quest,  American  innovators  which,  by 
then,  had  added  the  information  technology  sector  to  the  pharmaceutical  industry, 
planned to put intellectual property rights (IPRS) on the Uruguay Round (UR) Agenda, 
despite the fact that this matter had already been regulated in the old General Agreement 
on Tariffi and Trade (GATT) after the Second World War. The strategy was different so 
as  to  elude  the  automatic  objection  of  developing  countries.  Thus,  reciprocal 
concessions,  unilateral  threats  and  the  elimination  of  the  GATT ci  la  carte  approach 
(selective adhesion to GATT Treaties) and the grandfather clause (provisional application 
of the GATT) were used by the American negotiators  during the Round. First, in a quid 
pro qua perspective, the developing countries conceded services and intellectual property 
(IP) whereas  the United States conceded  agriculture and  textiles. Second,  the United 
States used its Trade Act (Section 301, Special 301 and Super 301) as leverage for acting 
as judge, juror and executioner  of countries which maintained unfair trade practices or 
violated the IPRS. Third, the systemic change in the multilateral trade arena would allow 
the  application  of sanctions  for  non-compliance  of  some  standards  due  to  the  new 
single-undertalung  approach  obtained  by  the  United  States  conceding  the  national 
legislation conformity clause. 

During  the  UR  negotiations  (1986-1994),  political  changes  with  economic 
implications took place in the successive Administrations of Argentina and Canada: from 
the  Radical President  Alfonsin through  the Peronist  President  Menem in Argentina; 
and from Conservative Prime Ministers Mulroney and Campbell through Liberal Prime 
Minister Chrttien in Canada. Menem did not care about the federal budget deficit and 
fixed  the  exchange  rate,  which  made  the  Argentinian  economy  inwardly  oriented. 
Meanwhile,  Chrttien  aimed  to  reduce  the  federal  budget  deficit  and,  by  means  of 
favourable exchange rates, made the Canadian economy more outwardly oriented. This 
shows how, when an exchange rate changes, the effects on trade can swamp the effects 
of conventional instruments of commercial policy such as tariffi and quotas. 

After difficult UR negotiations,  the dlplomas finally concluded the Agreement on 
Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The TRIPS Agreement, 
by protecting one factor of production-capital-opened 
the door for similar treatment 
of the other two factors-labour 
and natural resources-to  be brought within the World 
Trade Organization's  (WTO) scope,'  but the parties interested in these new issues were 
scattered  and  not  as  concentrated  as  multinational  enterprises  (MNEs). Why  did 
Argentina  and  Canada, being both technology  and culture  users, concede  IPRS in the 
UR? The focus of this article is on the stimuli to adopt and enforce a patent system by 
these developing and developed WTO Members. 

' S .  Ostry, Intellertuat  Property  Protection in the WTO: Major Issues in fhe Millenriitrm Round, in the  Fraser Institute 

Conference Competitive Strategiesfor Intellectual Property Protection,  Santiago de Chile, 1999, p.  15. 

STIMULI FOR PATENT SYSTEMS 

509 

The article  is  organized as  follows.  The next  Section  outlines the  interests and 
concessions of Argentina and Canada during the TRIPS negotiations. Section III discusses 
the strategies implemented to pursue standards for IP protection. Finally, the last Section 
draws some conclusions about the globalization of IPRS for Argentina and Canada. 

11. 

INTERESTS AND  CONCESSIONS DURING  THE UR NEGOTIATIONS ON IPRS 

Developing countries, including Argentina, opposed the launch of a new Round 
of negotiations  until  the  commitments made  at  the  1982 Ministerial Meeting  were 
implemented. However, developed economies, such as Canada, were proponents of the 
new Round. At last, after difficult and complex bargaining sessions, the Third-World 
economies relaxed  their  attitude  and  a  further  multilateral negotiation  Round  was 
launched.  Argentina  and  Canada  were  featured  as  active  participants  in  the  UR 
bargaining, which can be dlustrated in the establishment of both negotiation locations 
and Agenda issues. Argentina was the first country to advocate Uruguay as a candidate 
for  hosting  the  initial  meeting  of  the  Eighth  Round.  Canada  and  the  European 
Communities (EC) also applied to be the host, with the former being supported by the 
United States and Japan. In the end, the two developed GATT contracting parties failed 
to win the nomination but they achieved their aspirations as venue of the mid-term and 
final Meetings in Montreal and Brussels, respectively. 

Argentina,  as  a  member  of  the  “Group  of  Ten”  developing countries, took  a 
hardline  position  against  services,  investment  and  IPRS; with  respect  to  IPRS, the 
opposition was  based  on  the  assertion that  IPRS were  not  a  GATT issue  and  that  the 
inclusion of the  issue in the  negotiations would  require a  formal amendment of the 
GATT.* Nonetheless,  the  Canadian  government  was  anxious  to  extend  the  GATT’s 
regulatory scope to include the new issues, since there was no negotiation on IPRS in 
the 1988 Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States and the government was 
thus concerned by Section 337 of the Tariff Act. However, Canadian exporters did not 
have as urgent a requirement for IPRS as some of the other developed countries because: 
about 90 percent of Canadian exports go to the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation  and Development  (OECD) countries; about 70 percent to the 
United States, another 10 percent to the EC, and another 7 percent to Japan. 
These countries have not suffered from inadequate IPRS in general; 
the composition of Canadian exports has been resource-based and only about 
10 to 15 percent of Canadian exports have a high IP component to them.3 

- 

- 

2  C.A. Primo  Braga,  Trade-Related  Intellectual  Property  Issues:  The Uruguay  Round Agreement  and  its  Economic 
Implications,  in W. Martin and L.A. Winters (eds.), The Uruguay Round  and  the Developing  Economies,  World Bank 
Discussion Paper No. 307, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,  1995, p. 381, at p. 384. 

3  D. Waters, The Canadian Perspective  on the  G A ~  

TRIPS Negotiations,  in M.G. Smith (ed.), Global Rivalry  and 
Intellectual  Property:  Developing  Canadian  Strategies,  The  Institute for  Research on  Public  Policy,  Halifax,  1990, 
p. 183, at p 187. 

510 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Consequently,  the  IP  issue  as  a  national  interest  was  favourable  neither  for 

Argentina nor for Canada. 

IPR  concessions  made  by  Argentina  and  Canada  can  be  considered  both  as  a 
response to the U.S. threat  of sanctions and as a bargaining  chip to demand particular 
advantages in other areas, such as regionalism, nationalism, agriculture,  trade sanctions, 
trade disputes, protectionism and MNES. The U.S. government has used its Section 301 
to induce recalcitrant nations, such as Argentina  and Canada,  to strengthen their IPRS. 
Pressed by  strong industry lobbies, the United States joined with Japan  and the EC to 
give  a  high  priority  to  the  UR  negotiations  in  order  to  secure  minimum  standards 
among countries. Historically, nations have tended  to maintain  weak IPRS at the stage 
in  their  economic  development  when  they  are  absorbing  technology  much  more 
rapidly  from  abroad  than  they  generate  it  locally.  When  countries  achieve  few 
innovations locally and when they possess limited hard-currency reserves because of the 
repatriation of royalties and profits of MNEs, they are likely to oppose demands that they 
strengthen their IPRs.~ 

From a traditional concession-swapping  approach, Argentina and Canada tried to 
get  some  benefits  from  the  IPR  barters  that  occurred  during  the  UR.  Interplay 
between  bilateralism  and  multilateralism  is  part  of both  Argentinian  and  Canadian 
trade  policy.  Prior  to  the establishment  of the  1991 Southern  Common  Market- 
Mercado  Comlin  del  Sur  (MEKcosuR)-with 
Brazil,  Uruguay  and  Paraguay, 
Argentinian  trade  was  mainly  oriented  toward  Europe  and  the  United  States, but 
Brazil,  whose  trade  pattern  is  automobile-based  intra-industry,  became  Argentina’s 
most  important  trading  partner.  The  genesis  of  the  MERCOSUR is  rooted  in  the 
bilateral  trade  agreement  between  Argentina  and  Brazil  in  1986.  Because  of  the 
Canadian  trade  dependence  on the United  States, the  1965 Auto Pact  and  the  1988 
FTA were  necessary.  Following  a  U.S.  threat  to  impose  countervailing  duties  on 
exports  to  the  United  States  of  automobiles  manufactured  in  Canada,  the  two 
countries reached the Auto Pact of 1965.5 For Canada, the FTA had two rationales: to 
stimulate  Canadian  productivity;  and  to  forestall U.S. protectionism.6  The FTA also 
ensured  that  restrictions  on energy  trade  designed  to  reduce  U.S.  dependence  on 
energy imports were not applied to Canada, its largest foreign supplier of energy. Thus 
Canada  retained  secure  access  to  the  U.S.  market.7  Accordingly,  the  Argentinian 
dependence on Brazil and the Canadian dependence  on the United States were based 

F.M.  Scherer and K.S. Relous,  Unfinished  Tasks: The New International  Trade  Theory  and  the  Post-Uruguay 

Round  Challenges, Issues Paper No. 3, British-North  American Committee, Washington, D.C., 1994, p. 37. 

J.A.  Finlayson and  S. Bertasi, Evolution  .f Canadian  Postwar  International  Trade Policy, in  A.C.  Cutler  and 
M.W. Zacher  (eds.),  Canadian  Foreign  Policy  and  International Economic Regimes,  University of British  Columbia, 
Vancouver,  1992, p.  19, at p. 25. 
S. Weintraub,  Trade Policy  in North America: Where Do  We Go From Here? in C.W. Reynolds, L. Waverman 
and G. Bueno (eds.), The Dynamics  ofNorth American  Trade and  Investment:  Canada, Mexico, and  the  United States, 
Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1991, p. 267, at p. 268. 
’ R.L. Pfaltzgraff Jr.,  Canada and  the  United  States: Issuesfor  the  1990s, in Canada and  the  United  States in the 
1990s: A n  Emerging  Partnership,  Special  Report, Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis, Washington, D.C., 1991, 
p. 72, at p. 76. 

STIMULI FOR  PATENT  SYSTEMS 

511 

on the auto-parts  industry run by  MNES, characterized by an intra-firm  trade pattern 
since the late 1980s. 

The nationalism  issue  is  related  to  the  national  content  requirement.  Menem’s 
Administration privatized almost all  companies owned by  the Argentinian State. The 
Trudeau  Administration  created  the  Foreign  Investment  Review  Agency  (FIRA) in 
1973 so as to Canadianize industrial development and to reduce Canadian vulnerability. 
The GATT has not been deemed to apply to investment measures, but the United States 
won  a  complaint  against  Canada  on  FIRA in  1984, arguing that  the  necessity  of  a 
commitment  to  the  purchase  of  Canadan  goods  as  a  requirement  for  investing  in 
Canada violated the principle of national treatment.8 Nonetheless, the U R  brought the 
Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS), which has very little rule 
content and mostly relates to national treatment.9 

In the case of agriculture, which used to be exempted from key  GATT disciplines 
due to national security after the European starvation during the Second World War, 
Argentina and Canada, as Cairns Group10 founders, got the multilateral trade disciplines 
to apply to this sector which represents an important portion of the total trade volume 
of the former. Argentina has  subsidized tobacco producers to foster local production. 
The access-to-markets  objective was  Argentina’s consistent position,  as  this Southern 
country depends heavily on income from agricultural exports in order to pay its external 
debt services. Canada’s  stance was  paradoxical because of its support of reductions in 
export and production subsidies for agricultureabove all diary, eggs and poultry-and 
the protection of the interests of its less-competitive domestic producers by  defending 
its supply management systems for various commodities.11 

During the UR, both Argentina and Canada were sued via  U.S. Section 301 in 
three and five cases, respectively.12  The American Association of Air  Couriers sued an 
Argentinian  restriction  which  ordered  that  all  delivery  of  international  documents 
should be  done by  domestic services (1983-1989); the  American Association of Soy 
Processors filed charges against  discriminatory taxes  on products derived from soy in 
Argentina 
the  American  Association  of  Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturers claimed  drug  patent  protection  in  Argentina  (1988-1989). American 
licensees of television sued the  discriminatory practise of allowing tax  deductions for 
Canadian  companies  placing  advertisements in  Canadian  programmes,  but  not  for 

(1986-1  988);  and 

_

_

 

8  See GATT, Article 111:4. 

Carnbhdgc 1997, p. 244. 

1.H. Tackson,  The  World  Trade  System:  Law  and  Policy  of  International  Economic  Relations,  The  MIT Press, 

10  The Cairns  Group is a coalition  of  eighteen countries whose  objective  is to achieve  a market-oriented 
agricultural trading system. It takes its name from the Australian resort city where it was created in 1986. The Cairns 
Group (at the time of writing)  consists of: Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Fiji, Guatemala, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand,  Paraguay, the Philippines, South Mica, Thailand and 
Uruguay. 

f ’   Finlayson and Bertasi, supra, footnote 5, at p. 42. 
l2  G. Mastel, &yes  momerciales de EJtador Unidos como resultado de la Ronda Uruguay, Heltasta, Buenos Aires, 1998, 

p.  177. 

512 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Canaman  companies  placing  them  in  American  ones  (1978-1984);  the  American 
Association of Fish Processors filed a demand against the Canalan prohibition  to buy 
salmon and herring (1986-1990);  Canadian subsidies to the pine lumber industry were 
the  object  of a  suit by the Americans  (1986-1987);  Canadian lumber  export practises 
resulted in the launching of a suit by the United States in 1991; and an American  TV 
channel  claimed  that  it  was  denied  access to  the  Canadian  market  due  to  Canadian 
limitations  imposed on the  cultural industry in  1995. Consequently,  Section 301 was 
used to counterbalance export problem suffered by the Americans. 

The threat of trade sanctions brandished by the United States through Special 301 
of its Trade Act generated more respect  for IP and led to the successful conclusion of 
the  TRIPS negotiations  during  the  UR.  Argentina  and  Canada  have  been  in  the 
Special  301  Announcements  since  this  provision  was  in  force,  so  both  countries 
appeared  on the Watch  List  from  1989 through  1992. Canada was withdrawn  from 
the Lists in 1993 by approving an act that ended with patent compulsory licensing for 
pharmaceuticals.  However, Argentina  was added to the Priority  Watch List in  1993, 
then figured as a priority foreign country in  1994 and was again on the Watch List in 
1995.’3 

With  regard  to  multilateral  trade  disputes,l4 the  United  States, in  1999, began 
consultations with Argentina  on pharmaceutical  patents  and test  data required  for the 
authorization  of  the  marketing  of  pharmaceuticals  and,  in  2000,  on  some  patent 
measures  and  test  data  of  pharmaceuticals  and  agrochemicals.  These  bilateral 
consultations  produced  the  desired  result  for  the  United  States and,  in  2002,  a  Bill 
amending the Patent  Act was passed by  Congress.  Meanwhile,  in  1983, Canada,  as  a 
complainant,  lost a case against the United States about Section 337 of the U S .  Tariff 
Act by means of which the imports of a Canadian auto-parts  supplier were barred from 
entering the United  States under the claim that they infringed US. patent rights. The 
trade  restriction  was  thus  considered  necessary  for  U.S.  patent-law  enforcement.  In 
2000, Canada, as a respondent, lost two patent protection cases in the WTO arena. The 
EC  and  their  Member  States  won  a  challenge  to  both  early  working’s  and  its 
complementary  stockpiling  of  pharmaceuticals  because  the  Canadian  provision16 
violated the  ius prokibendil7  six months before  the patent  expiration. Later, the United 
States won its claim against the Canadian patent protection term  of seventeen years, as 

13  Ibid., p. 53. 
I 4   See  cases  for  both  countries  at  the  Website  of  the  World  Trade  Organization,  Dispute  Settlement, 

January 2003, available at: ((http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e.htm#disputes)). 

l 5   I  consider that the European  Community and its Member States won the challenge of both early working 
and  its  complementary  stockpiling because  there  is  no  stockpiling without  early  working  (exploitation) in  the 
“broad  sense”  of  import  or  production.  Therefore,  these  practices  were  inconsistent  with  the  WTO TRIPS 
Agreement.  Nonetheless,  manufacturers  are  allowed  to  begin  the  process  of  seeking  regulatory  approval for 
competing versions of patented products prior to the expiration of the patent term (Section 55.2(1) of the Canadian 
Patent Act). Furthermore, I  only put in brackets Section 55.2(1) of the Canadian Patent Act. Thus, manufacturers 
cannot exploit (import or produce) new drugs before the expiration of the patent. 

I h   See Canadian Patent Act, Section 55.2(2). 
‘7  See the TRIPS Agreement, Article 28.1. 

STIMULI FOR PATENT SYSTEMS 

513 

the  law1* infringed the  de  minimis  period  of  patent protection’g for applications filed 
before 1 October 1989. 

As far as exceptional protection is concerned, Argentina is a new user and Canada 
is an old user of antidumping measures. The EC, the United States and Canada usually 
sell agncultural products with dumped prices due to governmental subsidies. The U.S. 
International Trade Administration has found in two different cases-Canadian 
lumber 
and  Argentinian leather-that 
a  prohbition  to  export  raw  material  could become  a 
subsidy by reducing the local price of such raw materiaL20 Between 1985 and 1994, the 
United  States set  countervailing duties  on  Argentinian-subsidzed products in  three 
cases  and  Canadian  subsidized  products  in  fourteen  cases.21  GATT’s Article  XIX  on 
safeguards  has  gone  unused  because  it  is  not  as  efficient  a  protectionist method  as 
voluntary  export  restraints  (VERS), antidumping  measures  or  countervailing duties. 
Accordingly, import problems are addressed with antidumping and countervailing duty 
legislation. 

MNES are key  international non-State  actors faced with  change, while also  being 
agents of change.22 MNES have been adopting a range of complementary strategies for 
obtaining access  to  international markets, and  complementary new  technologies for 
improving their competitive position  and for properly managing the uncertainty and 
risk  associated  with huge investments in physical and human capital and R&D. Since 
Argentinian and Canadian MNES are highly concentrated, activities and performance are 
important for enhancing trade in the globalization process.23 With regard to the world’s 
largest MNES, only one Argentinian firm and  two  Canadian firms were listed by  the 
United  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD): Ptrez  Companc 
(Argentina), Seagram (Canada) and Thomson  (Canada). Ptrez Companc, a petroleum 
firm, was ranked 30th by foreign assets and 38th by Trans-Nationality Index24 (TNI) in 
the 1999 list of the fifty largest MNES from developing countries.25 Seagram, a beverage 
and media company, was ranked 23rd by foreign assets and 9th by TNI, and Thomson, 
a media and publishing corporation, was ranked 57th by foreign assets and  1st by TNI 
in the  1999 list of the one-hundred  largest MNES from developed countries.26 YPF, an 
Argentinian  petroleum  firm, and  Nortel  Networks,  a  Canadian telecommunications 
company, were both dropped from the above-mentioned lists in 1999. So, trade policy 

~~ 

Discussion Paper No. 1, Industry Canada, Ottawa, 1994, p. 2. 

18  See Canadian Patent Act, Section 45. 
19  See the TRIPS Agreement, Article 33. 
20  Mastel, supra, footnote 12, p.  134. 
21  Ibid., p.  162. 
22  L.  Eden,  Multinationals  as  Agents  $ Change:  Setting  a  New  Canadian  Policy  on  Foreign  Direct  Investment, 
23  S. Rao, M. Legault and A.  Ahmad,  Canadian-Based Multinationals: An Analysis $Activities  and  Perfoonnance, 
24  The Trans-Nationality  Index is an average of three ratios: foreign assets to total assets, foreign sales to total 
25  United  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development,  World  Investment  Report:  Promoting  Linkages,  United 

Working Paper No. 2, Industry Canada, Ottawa, 1994, p. 42. 

sales, and foreign employment to total employment. 

Nations, New York, 2001, p. 105. 

26  Ibid., at pp. 90 and 91. 

514 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

must  deal  with  MNES, because  goods  and  services  are  traded  inside  the  MNES and 
through foreign affiliates. Intra-industry  trade has been a prominent  feature of North- 
North trade, like the automobile and auto-part  flows between Canada and the United 
States, whereas  inter-industry  trade  has  characterized  North-South  trade,  for instance 
between  agricultural  products  from  Argentina  and  high-technology  goods  from 
developed countries. 

Trade and sales indicators of specialization demonstrate that Argentina and Canada 
have  comparative  advantages  in  resources  and  resource-based  manufacturing.  O n  
average,  the  R&D  sales  ratios  of  the  top  Argentinian  and  Canadian  firms  are 
considerably lower than those of the top U.S. firms. The outward orientation of the top 
Canadian companies is higher than that of their American counterparts, given Canada's 
small domestic market.27 It follows, therefore, that  comparative  advantage depends on 
technological innovation rather than natural endowments of labour and capital. 

Last but not least, the  quid pro  quo  approach  used by the Argentinian  commercial 
diplomats  during  the  UR  constituted  a  violation  of  GATT's Part  IV  on  Trade  and 
Development.  In  particular,  developed  countries  should  not  expect  reciprocity  for 
commitments made by them in trade negotiations  to reduce or remove tariffs and other 
barriers to the trade of developing countries such as Argentina.28 Moreover, developed 
countries should reduce and eliminate tariff and non-tariff  barriers to products of export 
interest to developing countries, including customs duties and other restrictions which 
differentiate unreasonably between such products  in their primary and their processed 
Accordingly, there should be a continuous review of world trade development 

with particular reference  to the growth rate of the trade of developing countries.30 

benefits that outweighed costs-that 

AU things considered, the successful conclusion of the TRIPS negotiations required 
a big package-with 
satisfied not only the United 
States, the EC and Japan, but also the coalition of smaller countries, including Argentina 
and Canada.  During the UR, Argentina, as  a developing nation, could have used the 
GATT exception  of reciprocal  concessions, but preferred  to plot  a strategy to  solve its 
trade obstacles by  conceding the General Agreement  on Trade in Services (GATS) and 
the  TRIMS and  the TRIPS Agreement  in order to obtain  the Agreement  on Technical 
Barriers  to  Trade  (TBT), the  Agreement  on  the  Application  of  Sanitary  and 
Phytosanitary  Measures  (SPS), the  Agreement  on  Safeguards,  the  Agreement  on 
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI 
of GATT  1994 (Antidumping Agreement), the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing and 
the  Agreement  on  Agriculture.  So,  Argentina  sought  access  to  foreign  agricultural 
markets for its products  (soy beans; peanuts; soy, sunflower, and peanut  oil; citrus and 

(ed.), Multinationals  in North  America, University of Calgary Press, Calgary, 1994, p. 143, at p.  186. 

27  J. vubley, M. Legault and S .  Rao, Multinationals and Foreign Direct Investment  in North America, in L. Eden 
28  See GATT, Article XXXVI:8. 
2y  See GATT, Article xxxvrl:l(a) and (b). 
3"  See GATT, Article xxxvm:z(d). 

STIMULI FOR PATENT  SYSTEMS 

515 

fruit juices,  especially  grape juice;  sugar;  rice;  and  meat)  through  tariffication,  the 
avoidance of exceptional protection  measures against  steel producers by  meeting the 
specific Codes of the UR, the maintenance of the domestic market share of the local 
textiles and shoe industries through measures of commercial defence, the protection of 
the local pharmaceutical sector by legislating on patent compulsory licences and generic 
drugs, the settlement of rules of origin for auto parts and the gradual elimination of rules 
of investment against the TRIMS Agreement. 

Canada negotiated the creation of the WTO, the TRIMS Agreement, the Agreement 
on  Safeguards,  the  Agreement  on  Subsidies  and  Countervailing  Measures,  the 
Antidumping Agreement, the Agreement on Agriculture and  the Understanding on 
Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes, in exchange for the GATS 
and the TRIPS Agreement. Canada has welcomed new WTO Members in order to form 
a coalition to counterbalance the power of the United States, the EC and Japan. Canada 
has steadily increased its foreign direct investment (FDI), which explains its support of 
the TRIMS Agreement. Given the many suits launched by the United States and the EC 
regarding  trade  protection,  Canada  applauded  the  new  Codes,  although their  rules 
favour power-based trade relations. Canada has litigated French restrictions on scallops 
and Japanese  limitations  on  alcoholic  beverages,  EC  restrictions  on  meat  imports, 
Brazilian export-financing programmes for aircraft, Australian restrictions on salmon, 
Hungarian export subsidies on agricultural products, EC restrictions on the import of 
grains, and Korean treatment of imported bottled water.31 

111.  IPR IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT STRATEGIES 

It is convenient, for analysis purposes, to adopt a separate approach to understand 
the Argentinian and Canadian strategies by reviewing broadly their legal patent systems 
and  the  economic  implications  of  the  new  patent  acts  as  a  result  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement  obligations.  Governments give  a  patent  monopoly  as  a  quid  pro  quo  for 
giving  the  public  information  on  how  to  make  and  use  the  patented  invention. 
However,  in  the  pharmaceutical  industry in  particular, since the  costs  to  develop a 
product  that will go to market are  extremely high, especially if it has  to go through 
regulatory approval, many innovations would not see the light of day if that monopoly 
were not granted. 

If coverage is very narrow, it is too easy to design around the granted patent claims 
and to bring to market a competing product that is essentially riding on the coat-tails 
of  the  innovator.  On the  contrary, if  coverage  is  too  broad,  it  could  chdl  further 
developments  in  the  field.32  Therefore,  when  patent  protection  is  weak  or  non- 
existent, the new products of research-oriented  pharmaceutical firms often face tough 

Law, Ottawa, 1998, p. 229. 

31  M. Hart, Fijy Years ofCanadian  Tradecrft: Canada and  the  GATT  1947-1997,  Centre for Trade Policy and 
32  G. Monroy, It's AlIAbout the Fine Print, Upside: Money and Drugs, April 2001, No. 132, pp. 92-100,  at p. 96. 

516 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

price competition from local imitators,  but, in the long run, innovators will not bring 
newer  and  better  products  to  the  civil  society  because  R&D expenditures  are  not 
recoupable. 

A.  A Legislative Snapshot of  Patent Rights as a  Response to  TRIPS Oblkations 

As far as the effects of the TRIPS Agreement is concerned, in Argentina and Canada, 
the application is not a self-executing one whereby private parties would not be allowed 
to  rely  on the  treaty  language  in  private  litigation  in  domestic 
Moreover, 
Canada and Argentina  have federal systems. Canadian provinces play a critical role  in 
shaping trade policy  responses.34  With regard  to the extent to which  TRIPS standards 
apply to provinces,  municipahties  and territories, Argentina  and Canada, as any other 
WTO Members, are responsible for the observance by regional  and local governments 
and authorities within their territory.35 

Argentina’s Patent Act dates back to 1864 and is based on continental Europe’s legal 
traditions. A vigorous drug-product  exporting industry prospered in Argentina up until 
1995. During that  period,  this developing country  used  not to confer product  patent 
rights, which  meant  that  drugs were  shipped  &om there  to  other  nations  with  weak 
patent protection  and competed with the products of the innovative research-oriented 
companies.36 Passed after stormy parliamentary debates, Argentina’s new Patent Act and 
its Kegulations have been in force since 1996 as a result of Menem’s foreign policy. This 
Iegislation protects  pharmaceuticals, but another law enacted  in 2002 obliges medical 
practitioners to prescribe generic drugs instead of brand-name  medicines. In Argentina, 
IPR administration  has improved since 1992, but there are some delays in the patent- 
granting procedure.  Argentina  is  a party  to most  international treaties that protect  IP. 
Although  the patent  protection  encompasses broader  matters,  the global value  of the 
patent institution is severely diminished by a number of provisions: the excessively lax 
standards  for  compulsory  licensing;  the  possibility  for  employees,  hired  to  create 
inventions,  to  claim  a  right  to  supplementary  compensations  regardless  of  their 
contractual  obligations; the re-establishment  of controls  over technology  transfer; and 
so on. Furthermore, there is a lack of enforcement because of the suspicion ofjuhciary 
corruption,  the  small  number  of cases  regarding  patents,  and  symbolic  sanctions for 
criminal inhingements of the Patent 
The Patent Act follows the criterion of first- 
to-file  (contrary  to  the  American  first-to-invent  approach);  the  scope  of  patent 

1998, p. 39. 

33  C.M. Correa, Acuerdo TNPS: REgimen internacional de la propiedad intelectual,  Ciudad Argentina, Buenos Aires, 

34  K.R. Nossal,  The Impact  ofProvincial Governments on Canadian Foreign  Policy, in D.M. Brown and E.H. Fry 
(eds.), States  and  Provinces  in  the  International  Economy,  Institute  of Governmental Studies Press, Berkeley,  1993, 
p. 232, at p. 234. 

35  See GATT, Article xxrv:12. 
37  R.M.  Sherwood, Lnr Sistemas de Propiedad  lnfeleriual y  el  Estimulo a  la  Inversi6n: Eualuaci6n y  Comparaci6n de 

Schcrcr and Bclous, supra, footnotc 4, at p. 37. 

18 sistemas  depaises en v i a  de desarroh, Heliasta, Buenos Aires, 1997, p. 56. 

STIMULI  FOR  PATENT  SYSTEMS 

517 

protection  is limited only to the claim (as in several European  countries); protection is 
granted  not only  for products but also for processes; the  term  of patent  protection  is 
twenty years, which  cannot be postponed,  from the filing date; and the patent  holder 
has the right to import. 

Canada’s patent legislation dates back  to  1869 and shows a lineage of basic laws, 
grounded in British legal traditions but also with some U.S. features.38 Between  1969 
and  1987, Canada granted  drug product  patents, but required patent holders to license 
their patents at quite modest royalties (typically 3 percent of the licensee’s sales) to drug 
providers. The Mulroney government introduced the 1987 Canadian Patent Act which 
partially  restored  patent  protection  for  pharmaceuticals,  giving  manufacturers  seven 
years of market exclusivity after a new product  entered the market.  It also instituted a 
control  mechanism  to  ensure  fair  pricing  practices  by  establishing  the  Patented 
Medicine  Prices  Review  Board  (PMPRB). In  the  context  of accedmg  to  the  North 
American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA), the  1993 patent  legislation  moved  the 
Canadian  system  closer  to  internationally  accepted  standards  by  eliminating  patent 
compulsory  licences  and  preventing  a  generic  Notice  of  Compliance  (regulatory 
approval) from being used until  the  relevant  patents  expired  or the generic  company 
could  demonstrate  that  its  version  of  the  drug  does  not  infringe  on  the  patent  in 
question. However, as a safeguard, Canada enhanced the powers of the PMMPKB. Canada 
has facilitated market access for copies of patented drugs. Generic manufacturers used to 
infringe  an  existing  patent  under  two  separate  steps  known  as  early  working  and 
stockpiling, but these were  challenged by the EC and their Members  at the WTO. In 
market-access  terms, generic drugs receive preferential treatment fiom provincial drug 
benefit plans through  mandated lowest-cost  alternative,  or mandatory substitution, or 
other reimbursement schemes. Canada does not provide patent-term  restoration to give 
additional patent life to make up for time lost due to the regulatory  process (ten years 
approximately). 

Argentinian and Canadian patent systems have some similarities based on the shared 
goals of promoting innovation by striking a balance between innovators and civil society 
due  to  the  welfare-state  approach.  Both  provide  patents  to  the  first  to  file  upon 
examinations  for novelty,  non-obviousness  and  utility, with  protection  extending  for 
twenty years. Both regimes award proprietary rights of national scope to exclude others 
from making, using and selling the patented processes or products  of claimed subject- 
matter.  The  Argentinian  and  Canadian  systems  define  infi-inging activities  rather 
similarly and  do not  have  specialized federal courts for  cases involving  IP protection. 
Both nations are Members of the Paris Convention. Neither country awards patents for 
high-order  life-forms,  computerized  methods  of doing  business,  software  programs 
(only  protected  by  copyrights  as  literary  works),  or  surgical  methods  and  medical 

38  G.B.  Doern  and  M. Sharaput,  Canadian Intellectual  Property:  The Politics  .f Innovating  Institutions  Interests, 

University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1999, p. 53. 

518 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

treatment.  Argentina  and  Canada  do not  have  provisions  to  reduce  patent  terms by 
regulatory delays. 

However, there are significant differences between the Argentinian and Canadian 
patent  systems. Argentina’s Patent Act  set the principle  of international  exhaustion  of 
rights, while  Canada’s legislation recognizes that patent  rights are exhausted  upon the 
first  sale  in  the  domestic  market,  but  permits  patentees  to  preclude  parallel  imports 
through contract provisions. Argentina recognizes utility models or petty patents, while 
Canada does not. Argentina does not have a system of administrative price control over 
patented medicines similar to the Canadian one. Finally, Argentina is not a Member of 
the Patent Co-operation  Treaty Union, but Canada is. 

Taking  everything  into  consideration,  both  Argentina  and  Canada  are  at  a 
competitive disadvantage when investment decisions are made regarding the location of 
new research and manufacturing projects that involve patent rights. Although Argentina 
and Canada have improved their patent protection, such amendments have not reached 
the  international  standards  established  by  most  of  their  trade  partners  because  the 
Argentinian  and  Canahan  economies  are  still  natural-resource-based  economies  and 
national  economic  policies  are  stdl  structured  around  market  access.  Consequently, 
discrepancies among national IPR regimes generate effects analogous to non-tariff  trade 
barriers. 

B.  The Economic Impacts ofpatent Acts Changes to Comply with the TRIPS Agreement 

Argentina and Canada adhered to the TRIPS Agreement because of a number of the 
interests listed in  the previous  Section. But, besides  the  single-undertaking  obligation 
and  the  risk  of retaliation  for  non-compliance  with  the minimum patent  protection 
standards, there are basically some economic implications caused by the strengthening 
of IPRs. Mask~s3~ estimated impacts of stronger patent rights required by TRIPS (Table 1) 
by  updating figures to millions of 1995 U.S.  dollars through  the use of national  gross 
domestic product deflators and exchange rates. 

TABLE 1: ESTIMATES OF TRIPS PATENT CHANGES IN  MILLIONS OF 1995 U.S.  DOLLARS 
Canada 
- 1,294 
-12 
-2,188 
59 

Net patent rents 
High-technology manufacturing imports 
Foreign-direct investment assets 
Unaffiliated royalties and licensing fees 
Note:  n.a.  = not available. 
Source: K.E.  Maskus, Intellectual  Property  Issuesfor  the  New Round,  in J.J. Schott  (ed.), The  WTO after 

n.a. 
196 
662 
63 

Argentina 

Seattle, Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., 2000, p. 137, at p. 142. 

39  K.E. Maskus, Intellectual  Property Issuesfor  the New Round, in J.J.  Schott (ed.), 7 h e  WI,O afier Seattle,  Institute 

for International  Economics, Washington, D.C., 2000, p.  137, at p. 142. 

STIMULI FOR  PATENT SYSTEMS 

519 

in  high-technology 

Net patent  rents  indicate  the  supplementary income  that  existing patents  would 
have under the TRIPS Agreement.  Canada ends up paying more on the stock of patent 
and  generates  a  net  outward  transfer  of  1,294  d i o n  1995  U.S.  dollars  primarily 
directed to U.S. innovators, which illustrates the country’s main feature of being a net 
technology importer. Hence, weak IPRS are characterized as a mechanism used by some 
governments for appropriating rents from innovators. The next line reports calculations 
of  predicted  changes 
electrical 
machinery  and  professional instruments.  Stronger  patents  reduce  the  trade  inflow  of 
high-technology  products in Canada due to the existence of a market-power  effect and 
a  diversion  of  commerce  to  developing  countries,  while  in  Argentina  the  market- 
expansion effect dominates because of highly competitive local imitative firms. Low IPR 
protection  levels  encourage  maintaining  proprietary  technologies  within  the  firm 
through  FDI, while  patent  protection  gains  strength.  However,  when  protection 
exceeds  a  particular  level,  there  is  a  substitution  effect  favouring  licensing  over 
investment.  Thus, FDI assets  are prectcted  to rise  in Argentina  and  to  fall in  Canada. 
Finally, unaffiliated  royalties and  licensing  fees  (a proxy  for  arm’s-length  technology 
transfer) paid  to  the  U.S.  firms by  Argentina  and  Canada  would  be  59  milhon  and 
63 million  1995 U.S. dollars, respectively.40 

imports-pharmaceuticals, 

As  innovators  are  not  likely  to  stand  the  costs  and  risks  of  introducing  a  new 
technology unless they can hope to be sheltered from the imitation for enough time to 
recoup their R&D spending, expenditures on R&D constitute an input of the national 
innovative capacity of a country. The data presented  in Table 2 illustrate a dramatic gap 
between Argentina and Canada in R&D activities during the last decade of the previous 
millennium:  Canada’s R&D  expenditures  are  almost  ten  times  larger  than  those  of 
Argentina; its expenditures on R&D in relation to the gross domestic product are nearly 
four times larger than those of Argentina; and the per capita R&D expenditures are over 
eleven times larger than those of Argentina. Moreover, Argentinian R&D activities are 
mainly engaged in the governmental sector, while Canahan R&D spending is basically 
incurred by business firms. In particular, the Canadian increase in R&D has been caused 
in  part  by  the  commitments  made  by  Member  companies  of  the  Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturers Association of Canada to raise the ratio  of R&D to sales from less than 
the  5 percent  prevailing in  1984 to  8 percent  in  1991, and  10 percent  in  1996. The 
promise was conditional on the tightening of patent protection  and vice uerm4* 

Patents are  an output  of the  national innovation  process.  IPRS and national patent 
systems constitute an interface between  that outcome and their inputs and represent the 
protection of IP.  Table 3 presents output indicators of science and technology for even 
years  of the  nineties.  First,  patents filed by  residents  in  Argentina have  had  an  erratic 
performance with  an increase in 1996 due to the new Patent Act, whde in Canada the 

40  Ibid., at p. 143. 
41  B.  Pazderka, Patent Protection and  Pharmaceutical REID Spending in Canada, Canadian Public Policy-Analyse 

- 

.. 

de Politiques, xxv, 1999, p. 29, at p. 43. 

520 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

TABLE 2: INPUT  INDICATORS OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998 

Expenditures on RGD 

(Millions of U.S. Dollars): 

Expenditures on RGD as a  Percentage of 

Cross Domestic ,Product: 

Expenditures on RGD Per  Capita 

Argentina 
Canada 

Argentina 
Canada 

(U.S. Dollars): 

Argentina 
Canada 

Sectoral Expenditure  on RGD as a Percentage 

ofthe Total RGD Expenditures: 
Government: 
Argentina 
Canada 

Business: 

Argentina 
Canada 

Universities : 
Argentina 
Canada 

Argentina 
Canada 

Non-Pro@  Organizations: 

ma. 
7,575 

n.a. 
8,491 

n.a. 
10,118 

1,136 
11,059 

1,263 
12,326 

the 

n.a. 
1.45 

n.a. 
1.56 

n.a. 
1.65 

0.42 
1.57 

0.42 
1.61 

n.a. 

273.44 

n.a. 

299.18 

n.a. 
348.52 

32.46 
372.73 

35.27 
407.46 

ma. 
19.9 

n.a. 
52.5 

n.a. 
26.6 

n.a. 
1 .0 

n.a. 
18.4 

n.a. 
52.9 

n.a. 
27.6 

n.a. 
1.1 

n.a. 
15.8 

ma. 
58.7 

n.a. 
24.3 

ma. 
1.2 

40.9 
15.3 

25.9 
59.3 

31.5 
24.2 

1.7 
1.2 

41.1 
13.1 

29.4 
62.0 

27.8 
23.7 

1.8 
1.2 

Note:  ma.  = not available. 

R&D = research and development. 

Source: Red  de  Indicadores  de  Ciencia  y  Tecnologia  (RKYT), El  Estado  de  la  Ciencia:  Principales 

lndicadores de  Ciencia y  Tecnologia, Estilos Graficos, Buenos Aires, 2001, pp.  121 and 141. 

number  of patents filed by residents has  risen. Moreover,  Canada has  had more patents 
filed by residents than Argentina, and non-residents have filed fifieen times more patents 
in Canada than in Argentina. Second, patents granted to residents in Argentina and Canada 
and patents granted to non-residents in Canada have had an erratic behaviour pattern, but 
patents filed by non-residents in Argentina have increased, also as  a  consequence of the 
1996 Patent Act. Furthermore, the gap between patents granted to residents of Argentina 
and Canada has diminished and the same has occurred for patents granted to non-residents. 
Third, Canada’s dependence rates are nearly four times higher than Argentina’s. Fourth, 
Argentina’s self-sufficiency  rates  are  three  times higher  than  Canada’s. Fifth, invention 
coefficients of Argentina have been stable, while those of Canada have increased. 

In  terms  of relative  measures of innovative  interface  between  input  and  output 
indicators, Argentina’s ratios of patents  granted R&D expenditures are nearly twice  as 

STIMULI FOR PATENT SYSTEMS 

52 1 

TABLE 3: OUTPUT 

INDICATORS OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 

1990 

1992 

1994 

1996 

1998 

Patents  Filed  by Residents: 

Argentina 
Canada 

Patents  Filed  by Non-Residents: 

Argentina 
Canada 

Patents  Granfed to Residents: 

Argentina 
Canada 

Patents  Granted to Nan-Residents: 

Argentina 
Canada 

Dependence  Rate (Patents Filed  by 

Non-Residents/Patents  Filed  by Residents): 

Argentina 
Canada 

Self-Suficiency Rate (Patents Filed  by 
Residents/Patents Filed  by Residents 
and Non-Residents): 

Argentina 
Canada 

Coefficient of Invention  (Patents Filed by 
Residents Per  2 00,000 Inhabitants): 

955 
2,549 

1,955 
35,135 

249 
1,109 

510 
13,087 

503 
3,208 

1,919 
40,856 

114 
1,305 

549 
17,027 

694 
3,043 

2,820 
38,419 

451 
852 

1,663 
10,789 

1,097 
3,316 

861 
4,841 

4,012 
45,938 

5,459 
60,841 

342 
709 

1,449 
6,436 

307 
949 

1,382 
8,623 

2.0 
13.8 

3.8 
12.7 

4.1 
12.6 

3.7 
13.9 

6.3 
12.6 

0.33 
0.07 

0.21 
0.07 

0.20 
0.07 

0.21 
0.07 

0.14 
0.07 

Argentina 
Canada 

2.4 
16.0 
Source: R e d   de  Indicadores  de  Ciencia  y  Tecnologia  (RICYT), EL  Estado  de  la  Ciencia:  Principales 

2.0 
10.5 

1.5 
11.3 

3.1 
11.2 

2.9 
9.2 

Indicadoves de  Ciencia y  Technologi’a, Estilos Grkfkos, Buenos Aires, 2001, pp. 123 and 142. 

large as  Canada’s, as shown in  Table 4. What finally matters is both the absolute R&D 
amount  and  the  absolute  number  of  patents  received  due  to  the  significance  of 
indivisibilities and critical mass in this area. Thus, the medium to poor showing in the 
relative  measures  means  a  very  poor  standing in  absolute terms.  This  reality  carries 
potentially serious implications for the performance of the economy.42 

AU in all, Argentina and Canada are small countries compared to the United States 
and they have been increasing the strength of their patent regulations to correspond with 
that in the United  States over time, due to their respective national interests. Stronger 
aggregate patents  have  a  significantly positive impact on manufacturing imports into 
middle-income  and  higher-income  countries  with  strong  imitative  and  absorptive 
capacities, but this tendency is moderate at high levels of protection, suggesting that the 
ability to  attract  more  technology  through  trade is  subject  to  diminishing returns  as 
countries become wealthier. As patent protection becomes stronger, there is a significant 

42  M. Trajcenberg,  Ir  Canada  Missing  the  “Technology  Bonf”? Evidence from Pafent  Dafa,  Industry Canada 

Research Publications Program: Discussion Paper No. 9, Industry Canada, Ottawa, 2000, p. 31. 

522 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

TABLE 4: RATIOS  OF PATENTS  GRANTED  TO R&D  EXPENDITURES 
1996 
1.58 
0.65 

Countrv 
Argentina 
Canada 
Note:  n.a. = not available. 
Source: Compiled by the author, based on information obtained from the “Expenditures on Kesearch 

1998 
1.34 
0.78 

1992 
n.a. 
2.16 

1994 
n.a. 
1.15 

1990 
n.a. 
1.87 

and Development” Section of Table 2, and the “Patents Granted” Section of Table 3. 

stimulus  to  inward  FDI from  technologically  advanced  countries;  as  middle-income 
developing countries raise their protection levels, U.S. MNES tend to shift their location 
decisions toward those nations and away from developed countries with already strong 
standards.  As  patents  get  stronger,  especially  among  higher-income  developing 
economies and developed economies, MNES shift away from majority-owned  affiliated 
activity toward an increasing use of arm’s-length licensing.43 

IV.  CONCLUDING REMARKS 

Although Argentina and Canada were not net innovators they conceded the TRIPS 

Agreement, which  implied  the strengthening of their patent systems. This Treaty was 
not only a response to the U.S. unilateral threat of trade sanctions but also an exchange 
for  obtaining  national  benefits:  bilateral  or  regional  arrangements  to  increase  their 
exports, national content provisions, access to agricultural markets for the farmers of the 
Pampas and the Prairies, avoidance of the effects of US. Section 301 and Special 301, 
compliance  with  WTO decisions  on  cases  involving  IPRS,  defensive  commercial 
measures, investments through MNES and Fm, and technological policies. 

Argentinian and Canadian patent systems have similarities and differences, but they 
share the  aim of encouraging innovation  by  means of a trade-off  between  innovators 
and  civil  society  as  a  consequence  of the  welfare-state  tradition.  Evidence  gathered 
indicates that  investors are not engaging in  R&D activities at American  (or German) 
levels  because  they  do not  rely  completely  on  the  patent  systems  of Argentina  and 
Canada.  Argentinian  and  Canadian innovation  indicators  are  improving  as  economy 
shifts further into the development  and exploitation of advanced technologies. 

Trade flows into large developing countries with strong imitation capacities, such 
as Argentina,  are restricted by  weak  IPRS. Enforcement  of TRIPS standards generates 
the  possibility to increase  their  imports  of patented  goods  or products  derived  from 
patent processes. Further, since FDI is also sensitive to changes in IPRS, the revision of 
patent laws can raise investment significantly. This result depends upon other factors, 
such as the capacity to absorb and to market technologies,  the trade opening and the 

43  K.E.  Maskus, Canadian  Patent Policy  in the North  Amencan  Context, in  Industry Canada and the Centre for 

Innovation Law and Policy, Conference Innoiuhm in the Knowledge-Based Economy, Toronto, 2001, p. 16. 

STIMULI FOR PATENT SYSTEMS 

523 

maintenance  of  competence.  Since  IPRS  can  support  contracts  that  promote 
technology transfer by licence-granting, thus the strengthening of the rights would be 
important  and should improve  technological quality. But this is  not  at all universal. 
Also, because of stronger IPRS, firms might not  grant licences of their technologies, 
except  for  cross-licences  or shared patents  contracts.  Therefore,  there  would  be  a 
trade-off  between  more  incentives  to  grant  licences  and  greater  prerogatives  to 
maintain technologies under strict control. 

The strengthening of Canadian standards would have a mixed impact on inward 
FDI and technology transfer. The scale effect of stronger patents could be expected to 
increase such flows, albeit at higher costs per unit of technology. If inward technology 
trade is  an important consideration for Canadian policy, some movement toward the 
U.S. patent system could offset  the lower incentives to operate in Canada emanating 
horn  the  convergence  from  below  of  standards  in  Argentina.  However,  there  are 
diminishing returns in developed countries for stronger patents in this regard. 

Finally,  intelligent strategies are required to obtain gains from trade diplomacy to 
adopt  and  enforce stronger IPRS by  ensuring that  exporters have  improved access  to 
foreign  markets,  especially  for  agricultural  products,  and  by  negotiating  mutually 
acceptable solutions to concerns about access to medicines by civil society. 


