Non-Trade  Concerns and the WTO Jurisprudence 

in the Asbestos Case 

Possible  Relevance for  International  Trade in Genetically 

Mod$ied  Ovgdnisrns 

Irene MUSSELLI* and Simonetta ZAP,RILLI** 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The World Trade Organization Appellate Body ruling in Asbestos’  is an important 
advance towards the development of a principled jurisprudence on health-based trade 
measures. More  generally, this  decision enables the  moving forward  in  the  uneasy 
question of how to accommodate, within the multilateral trading system, two sets of 
competitive policy objectives: on the one hand, trade liberalization; on the other, some 
non-trade  concerns largely perceived as legitimate policy goals, such as environmental 
and health/safety protection. 

The Appellate Body ruling in Asbestos has been very dwisive. Much of the debate 
on this case has been highly emotive and polarized. Some have criticized the decision 
as  a  misunderstanding and  misapplication of  the  General Agreement  on  Tariffs  and 
Trade (GATT), stressing that it may lead to protectionist abuse and pose a threat to the 
integrity of the trading system. Others have welcomed it as a significant development 
towards  GATT-recognition  of  legitimate,  non-commercial  policy  objectives  not 
designed for trade-restrictive purposes. In  both  cases,  the Appellate Body  d n g  has 
been interpreted as a turning point in WTO jurisprudence. 

Notwithstanding this largely shared consensus on the innovative and far-reaching 
implications of the  Appellate Body  ruling,  it  is  legitimate to  wonder  whether  this 
decision is that groundbrealung. A careful scrutiny of the Appellate Body’s language 
shows, in fact, that the Appellate Body has adopted an extremely cautious approach in 
deciding the matter at stake. Its findings and conclusions strike a subtle compromise, 

*  UN Fellow in Cairo, Egypt. 
**  Legal  Officer, Trade Negotiations and Commercial Diplomacy Branch, Division on International Trade 
and  Commodities, United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD) Secretariat,  Geneva, 
Switzerland. 

The authors are  grateful to Calestous Juma, Joost Pauwelyn, Ed Soule and Matthew Stilwell for their many 

comments. Any errors are, however, the authors’, who may be contacted at: ccsimonetta.zad@unctad.orgo. 

This article reflects the situation as at January 2002. 
1  European  Communifies-Measures  Afecting Asbestos and Asbestos-Containing  Products,  Report of the Appellate 

Body, WT/DS135/AB/R, 12 March 2001. 

374 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

not  always  exempt  from  ambiguities,  between  the  conflicting perspectives of those 
who  require  the  “likeness”  of  products  to  be  determined  solely  on  the  basis  of 
commercial factors and those who want  non-commercial  considerations to be taken 
into account. 

This article seeks to understand whether, and to what extent, the Asbestos case may 
set a precedent for advocating non-commercial considerations in analysis  under GATT 
Article III:4.  Focusing on a speclfic area of concern, the issue of “like-products’’ within 
the framework of trade in genetically moddied  (GM) products, the article intends to 
capture what  the  real  operational significance of the  Asbestos  ruling could be  in  the 
future. 

11.  THE ASBESTOS  CASE: THE PANEL  AND  THE APPELLATE BODY REPORTS 

The Asbestos  case was  concerned with a French regulation (Decree No. 96-1133) 
that set forth prohibitions on the manufacture, processing, sale, import, placing on the 
domestic market and transfer of all varieties of asbestos fibres, followed by certain limited 
and temporary exceptions from those prohibitions. The measure had been adopted by 
France on the ground of the assumed pathogenic potential of asbestos fibres, alleged to 
cause  identified  exposure  diseases  (namely,  mesothelioma,  cancer  of  the  lung, 
asbestosis).  Canada  contended  that  the  Decree  was  incompatible,  inter  a f i a ,  with  the 
national treatment discipline of GATT Article 111:4,  in that it favoured, against imported 
chrysotile  asbestos  and  chrysotile-cement  products,  the  national  industry  of  “like” 
substitute products not  containing asbestos.  The European  Communities  contended 
that asbestos and asbestos-containing products on the one hand, and substitute products 
on the other hand, were not  “like-products”  within  the meaning of Article III:4  and 
pointed  out,  inter  a h ,  that  the  health  risk  posed  by  the  products  in  question  had 
necessarily  to be taken into account when  determining “likeness” under  that Article. 
Canada  maintained  that  the  health  risk  did  not  stand  up  to  examination  when 
determining likeness under that provision. 

According to established GATT practice,* four general criteria provide a framework 

for analysing the likeness of particular products on a case-by-case  basis: 

-  the physical properties of the products; 

2  Working  Party  Report,  Border  Tax  AdjuItments, BISD 18S/97,  at  18. This  Report  was  adopted by  the 
contracting parties in 1970 and has  been  taken up  many times since. The Appellate Body, in theJapan-Alcoholic 
Beverages case, describes the Border  Tax Adjustments Report as setting out “the basic  approach for interpreting W e  
products’,  generally, in the various provisions of the GATT 1947.”: Japan-Taxes  on Alcoholic Beverages, 
or s& 
Report  of  the  Appellate  Body,  adopted  on  1  November  1996,  WT/DSB/AB/R,  WT/DSlO/AB/R, 
WT/DSll/AB/R,  at 22. Tariff classification was not among the basic  elements identified by  the Working Party 
for interpreting likeness. However, it was used as a supplementary element in several adopted Panel Reports: EEC- 
Measures on Animal Feed  Proteins, adopted on 14 March 1978, BISD 25S/49,  at 4.2; Japan-Customs  Duties,  Taxes 
and Labelling Practices on Imported  Wines and Alcoholic Bweruges, adopted on 10 November 1987, BISD 34S/83,  at 5.6; 
far  Reformulated and  Conventional  Gasoline,  Appellate  Body  Report  and  Panel  Report, 
United  States-Standards 
adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body @SB)  on 20 May 1996, WT/DS2/9,  at 6.8 and 6.9. 

THE ASBESTOS CASE 

375 

- 
- 
- 

the end-uses of the products; 
consumers’ tastes and habits; and 
the tariff classification  of the products. 

An  overall determination of whether the products at issue could be characterized 
as “like” requires that the evidence relating to each of those four criteria, along with any 
other relevant evidence, be examined and weighed. 

The Panel  examined the  likeness,  within  the  meaning  of  Article  111:4,  of  two 

different sets of products: 

-  whether  chrysotile-asbestos  fibres  were  “like”  substitute  fibres  (polyvinyl 
alcohol  fibres,  cellulose  and  glass  fibres,  collectively referred  to  as  “PCC 
fibres”); and 
whether  cement-based  products containing chrysotile asbestos  were  “like” 
cement-based products containing one of the substitute fibres. 

- 

In the like-products part of its ruling, the Panel argued that it was “not appropriate” 
to take into consideration the health risks associated with the products involved when 
determining likeness under  GATT Article 111:4,  and found that  chrysotile asbestos and 
chrysotile-cement  products on  the  one  hand,  and  substitute products, on  the  other 
hand,  were  like-products  within  the  meaning  of  GATT Article  111:4.3  It  therefore 
concluded that  the French import restriction violated Article 111:4  of GATT 1994, but 
that it was justified by  the provisions of paragraph (b)  and the introductory  clause  of 
Article xx of GATT 1994. 

The appeal of the  Panel’s  conclusions on likeness provided the Appellate Body 
with the first occasion to examine the meaning of the word  “like” under Article IIL4 
of GATT 1994. The Appellate Body, in  the like-product  part  of its ruling,  departed 
drastically from the approach adopted by  the Panel. Instead of finding a violation of 
Article I I I : ~  justified under Article XX, the Appellate Body found that Canada had not 
satisfied its burden of proving that chrysotile asbestos and PCG fibres were like-products 
under  that  provision, and  concluded  that  it  was  not  established  that  a  violation  of 
Article  IIK4  had  occurred. The same findings and conclusions were formulated with 
respect  to  cement-based  products  containing  asbestos  fibres  and  cement-based 
products containing substitute fibres. One Member of the Division hearing the appeal, 
in a concurrent statement, took a separate stance, submitting that there was ample basis 
for a definitive characterization of chrysotile asbestos as not “like” PCG fibres. Both the 
Appellate Body’s decision and the dissenting opinion will now be examined in greater 
detail. 

3  European  Communities-Measirres  Aflecting  Asbestos  and  Asbestos-Containing Products,  Report  of  the  Panel, 

WT/DS135/R,  18 September 2000, paras. 8.132 and 8.149. 

376 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

111.  A PIONEERING DECISION OR A  CONSERVATIVE APPROACH? 

In  the  Asbestos  ruling,  the  Appellate  Body  considered  that  the  general  criteria 
currently used as a framework for analysing the likeness of particular products on a case- 
by-case  basis  (listed above) did not dissolve the duty or the need  to examine, in each 
case, all of the pertinent  evidence, since neither the text of Article III:4 nor the practice 
of the Appellate Body suggested that any evidence should be excluded a prion’  from  a 
panel’s examination  of likeness.4 The Appellate Body  then  went  on  to  make  a  very 
significant finding  concerning  evidence  relating  to  the health  risks  associated with  a 
product, stating as follows: 

“We are very much of the view that evidence relating to the health  risks associated with  a 
product  may be pertinent  in an  examination of ‘likeness’ under  Article  IIC4  of the  GATT 
1994.”5 
This statement by the Appellate Body has given rise to intense debate. In particular, 
it  has  raised  vigorous  criticism  from  those  opposing  the  incorporation  of  non-trade 
concerns  under  Article  III. First  we  will  confront  the  perspective  of  those  who 
understand the Asbestos decision as the ultimate step towards the inclusion of non-trade 
concerns  in  the  GATT/WTO system. Then  we will  argue  why  the  Appellate Body’s 
reasoning is not as far-reaching as it may appear. 

A. 

“he Radical Perspective 

Some commentators  have perceived the above-reported  passage of the Appellate 
Body’s  reasoning  as  bearing  groundbreaking  and far-reaching  implications.  The idea 
which is taking root among these critics is that health, safety or other concerns that lead 
regulators  to  apply  different  treatment  to  products  may  now  be  considered  when 
examining likeness under Article 111:4,  and not only at the later Article xx stage of the 
analysis.  They  understand  the  Appellate  Body’s  approach  to  likeness  in  Asbestos  as 
introducing a sort of flexibility mechanism for accommodating non-trade  concerns. 

It has been stressed that this shift in emphasis from Article xx  to Article III,  when 
addressing  non-trade  concerns,  may  have 
important  practical  and  conceptual 
implications. Apart from making Article xx redundant and reallocating the burden  of 
proof  from  the  defendant  to  the  plaintiff,  this  shift  seems  to  have  modrfied  the 
perception of the importance of non-trade  concerns under the GATT. It has been argued 
that, while Article xx is an exceptions clause, Article  111 is  a  cornerstone  of the GATT. 
The consideration  of non-trade  concerns under Article  111 rather than under Article xx 
means  that  non-commercial  policy  objectives,  such  as  environmental  and  health 
protection,  are to be interpreted  as fundamental GATT principles. 

Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 102 and 113. 

5  Ibid., at  113. 

THE ASB EST OS CASE 

377 

The Asbestos  decision is widely interpreted as being the ultimate development of a 
GATT/WTO jurisprudence perceived as having become progressively more responsive 
to non-trade  concerns. This alleged evolution is deemed to have passed through some 
key stages. First, a GATT Dispute Settlement Panel6 rejected the statement that Article 
xx(g) and (b) applied only to policies related to the conservation of exhaustible natural 
resources  and  to  living  beings  located  within  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the 
contracting party invoking the provision.7 The Panel’s  reasoning opened the way for 
the  extra-jurisdictional  application  of  Article  XX.  Second,  the  Appellate  Body’s 
jurisprudence  enlarged  the  scope  of  applicability  of  Article  xx(g)S  and  made  less 
stringent the  connection  between  the  measure under  appraisal  and  the  conservative 
policy of that provision.9 This made Article X X ( ~ ) ,  with its more stringent necessity test, 
redundant, in so far as it overlaps with Article xx(g). Finally, critics maintain that with 
the Asbestos case, the Appellate Body has interpreted Article III  as encompassing “non- 
trade” concerns, with unpredictable implications for the integrity of the trading system. 
However,  if  some  additional  dispute  resolutions  are  added  to  this  analysis,  it 
becomes evident that the GATT/WTojurisprudence relevant to the issue of “non-trade” 
concerns has  evolved in  rather non-linear  terms.  In the  early  1990s, a GATT Dispute 
Settlement Panel10  held  that  distinctions unrelated to physical product  characteristics 
were  legitimate  when  objectively  related  to  a  genuine  non-protectionist  policy 
objective. In light of this early jurisprudence, the  “aims” and “effects” of a regulation 
may therefore be important to decidmg whether it violates Article III.  The Panel stated 
that: 

“. . . issues of likeness under Article III should be analysed primarily in terms of whether less 
favourable treatment was based on a regulatory distinction taken so  as to afford protection 
to domestic production”,ll 

and that: 

“. . . the phrase ‘so as to afford protection’ called for an analysis of elements including the aim 
of the measure and the resulting effects.”12 

8 

at 5.13-5.20 and 5.30-5.33. 

United States-Restriction 

on Zmportation $Tuna  (TundDolphin ir),  Report of the Panel, 33 ILM 839 (1994), 
’ The view that the provisions of Article m(g) and (b) cannot be applied extra-juris&ctionaUy was expressed 
on Imports $Tuna,  Report of the Panel, 30 ILM 

by the Panel in the TundDolphin I  case: United States-Restrictions 
1594 (1991), respectively at 5.24-5.29 and 5.30-5.34. 

In the Shrimp/Turtle case, the Appellate Body rejected the view that Article x ( g )  applied only to “mineral” 

or “non-living”  natural resources and extended its scope to “living” resources, such as turtles: United States-Import 
Prohibition  on  Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products, Appellate Body Report, WT/DS58/AEVR,  12 October 1998, at 
127-134. 
In  United  States-Reformulated  Garoline,  the  Appellate  Body  rejected  the  least-trade-restrictive-means 
approach to Article xx(g), finding that the expressions, “necessary to” and “relating to” did not imply “the same 
kind or degree of connection between the measure under appraisal and the State interest or policy to be promoted 
or realized.”:  United  States-Standards 
for Reformulated  and  Conventional  Gasoline, Report of the Appellate Body, 
WT/DS2/AB/R,  29 April 1996, at 17. 

9 

United States-Taxes 

on Automobiles, Report of the Panel dated 29 September 1994, unadopted, DS31/R, 

pp.  1-124. 

11  Ibid., at 5.9. 
12  Ibid., at 5.10. 

378 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

It  is  widely  believedl3  that  the  subsequent  WTO jurisprudence  has  departed 
substantially from  this interpretative line.  The case that merits  closest attention is  the 
Appellate  Body’s  decision  in  the Japan-illcohotic  B w e r a p  case.14  In  this  dispute  the 
Appellate Body, for the purpose of interpreting the “as  to afford protection”  standard 
(GATT 1947, Article  III:~, second sentence) explicitly rejects  considerations  of “aims” 
and “effects”, stating: 

“. . . it does not  matter that there may not have been any desire to engage in protectionism 
in the minds of the legislaton or the regulators who imposed the measure.” 
The Japan-Alcoholic  Beverages case seems, therefore,  to be less  responsive to non- 
trade  concerns  than  the  United  States-Automobiles  case.15  The  assumption  that  the 
GATT/WTO jurisprudence  has  gone 
to  become 
progressively more responsive to public concerns is, therefore, subject to challenge. 

through  a  straight  evolution 

B.  A  Conservative Reading 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Asbestos  case  introduced  non-trade  concerns  into  the 
inquiry under Article 111:4.  It is legitimate to wonder whether the Asbestos decision is that 
far-reaching.  As  anticipated, the careful examination  of the Appellate Body’s language 
in  Asbestos  leads  us  to  interpret  this  allegedly  groundbreaking  decision  in  more 
conservative terms. In particular, the wording of the decision, as well as its internal logic, 
does not seem to provide clear support for the conclusion that regulatory  dstinctions 
reflecting  the  health  risk associated with  a  product,  or other  non-trade  concerns, are 
relevant per  se when determining likeness under that Article.  The Appellate Body has 
been extremely cautious when confronting the question on the application  of a  “risk” 
criterion  in the analysis of likeness under Article  111:4.  After having made a potentially 
far-reaching statement (namely, that “evidence related to the health risks associated with 
a product may be pertinent  in an examination of ‘likeness’ under Article 111:4”16), it has 
carehlly circumscribed the potentially innovative implication of this assertion. Basically, 
it has restricted the innovative significance of its statement by resorting to two types of 
devices. First, it has linked toxicity to the physical characteristics ofthe product. Second, 
it has considered non-trade  concerns associated with a product relevant only when they 
affect the market-competitive  conditions of the product. It may be useful to investigate 
these two points in greater detail. 

Having found that the health risks associated with a product could be pertinent  in 
an  examination  of likeness under  Article  II1:4  of the GATT 1994, the  Appellate Body 

‘3  But not universally believed: R. Howse and D. Regan, The Product/Process Distinction-An 

Illusionary Basis 
for Disciplining  “Unilateralism”  in  Trade Policy,  European Journal of International Law  11, 2000, pp. 249-289,  at 
264-268. 

14  Supra, footnote 2. 
Is  Supra, footnote  10. 
’ 6   Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 113. 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

379 

went  on to make a very significant specification on how  this evidence needed to be 
considered. It stated as follows: 

“We do not, however, consider that the evidence relating to the health risks associated with 
chrysotile asbestos fibres need be  examined under a separate criterion, because we  believe 
that this evidence can be evaluated under the existing criteria of physical properties, and of 
consumers’ tastes and habits.””  (emphasis added). 
The  main  implication  of  this  holding  is  that  products  may  not  be  considered 
‘‘urhke’’  due  to  any  regulatory  distinction  objectively  related  to  legitimate  non- 
protectionist policies.  Regulatory  hstinctions  may  be  pertinent  to  an  inquiry  under 
Article  II1:4  when  referring to  product  characteristics that  have  some  impact  on  the 
physical  properties of the product and on consumers’ tastes  and habits. The Appellate 
Body’s  evaluation  of  toxicity  in  relation  to  the  products  under  consideration  well 
dustrates this point. In relation to asbestos fibres, it found that carcinogenicity constituted 
“a  defining aspect  of  the  physical  properties  of chrysotile asbestos  fibres”l8 and  that 
consumers’ tastes and habits regarding fibres, even in the case of commercial parties, were 
very  likely  to  be  shaped  by  the  health  risks  associated  with  a  product  known  as 
carcinogenic.19 In relation to cement-based products containing asbestos, the Appellate 
Body found that the health risk  associated with the asbestos fibres incorporated in the 
product could be relevant to the inquiry into the physical properties of the product20 and 
would  likely  have  had  an  influence  on  consumers’ tastes  and  habits,  irrespective of 
whether  the  consumer was  a  commercial party  or an  individual.21 In both  cases,  the 
health risk was held to be relevant as much as it reflected the physical properties of the 
product and of consumers’ tastes and habits. Evidence related to process-based  dtfferences 
that do not reflect the ultimate physical constitution of the product, and are not likely to 
affect  consumers’ tastes  and  habits  towards the  product,  is  probably  not  the  kmd  of 
evidence that may be relevant in a determination of likeness under Article III:4. 

The second restraining device is to consider non-trade  concerns associated with a 
product which are relevant in so far as they affect the market-competitive conditions of 
the product. 

17  Id. 
‘8  Ibid.,  at  114: “ ... carcinogenicity, or toxicity, constitutes, as we see it, a defining aspect  of the physical 
properties  of chrysotile asbestos fibres. The evidence  indicates that  PCG fibres, in  contrast,  do not  share these 
properties, at least to  the same extent.  We do not see how ths highly significant physical Merence cannot be  a 
consideration  in examining  the physical  properties  of a  product as  part  of  a determination  of ‘likeness’ under 
Article 111:4  of the GATT 1994.” (emphasis added). 
19  Ibid., at 122: “. , . we are also persuaded that evidence relating to consumers’ tastes and habits would establish 
that  the health risks associated with chrysotile asbestos fibres influence consumers’ behaviour with respect to the 
Werent fibres at issue . . .” 
20  Ibid., at 128: “As the Panel said, the primary physical dlfference between cement-based products containing 
chzysotile asbestos fibres and cement-based products containing PCC fibres lies in the particular fibre incorporated 
into the product.” 
2‘  did., at 130: “. . . we consider it Uely that the presence ofa known carcinogen in one ofthe products would 
have an influence on consumers’  tastes and  habits regardlng that product.  We believe this to be true irrespective of 
whether the consumer of the cement-based products is a commercial party, such as a construction company, or is an 
individual,  for  instance,  a  do-it-yourself  enthusiast or  someone  who  owns  or  lives  or  works  in  a  building.” 
(emphasis added). 

380 

THE JOUKNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Having  considered  that  the  term  “like-products’’ under  Article  I I I : ~  was  to  be 
construed broadly (so as to encompass a more expansive category than in Article 1 1 1 2 ,  
first  sentence)22 and  required  to  be  interpreted  in  light  of the  fundamental purpose 
of Article  111  (which is  to  provide  equality  of  competitive  conditions  for  imported 
products  in  relation  to  domestic products) ,23  the  Appellate Body  construed  likeness 
under Article III:4  in fundamentally commercial terms. The main lines of the Appellate 
Body’s reasoning are well summarized in a significant statement it made: 

“As products that  are in  a  competitive relationship in the market-place  could  be  affected 
through  treatment  of  importr  ‘less  favourable’  than  the  treatment  accorded  to  domestic 
products,  it follows that  the  word  ‘like’ in Article  III:4  is  to  be  interpreted to  apply  to 
products that  are  in such a  competitive  relationship. Thus, a  determination  of ‘likeness’ 
under  Article  111:4  is,  fundamentally,  a  determination  about  the  nature  and  extent  of  a 
competitive relationship between and among products.” (emphasis added).24 
In the Appellate Body’s reasoning, the health risk associated with a product may be 
pertinent  to  the  extent  that,  reflecting  the  physical  properties  of  the  product  and 
consumers’  tastes  and  habits,  it  is  likely  to  influence  the  competitive  relationships 
between products in the market-place.  More generally, the line of reasoning in Asbestos 
seems to suggest that non-commercial  concerns may be pertinent in an examination of 
likeness  under  Article 
impact  on  the  “competitiveness”  or 
“substitutability” of a product in relation to other products. It is, therefore, conceivable 
to say that Article III  is basically about how products compete in the market-place, that 
is, about competitive relationship in the market-place as perceived by consumers. Non- 
commercial  aspects  are  not  relevant  as  such,  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  influence 
commercial factors.25 

III:4  when 

they 

To conclude, it may be useful to turn back to the very wording of the Appellate 
Body’s findings and conclusions. A point that  deserves particular attention is  how the 
Appellate Body stated that  asbestos and PCG fibres, as  well as  cement-based products 
containing asbestos and cement-based non-asbestos-containing products were not like- 
products within the meaning of Article IK4. The Appellate Body did not find that the 

22  In  view  of the  fact  that  Article  1 1 ~ 2  extends  not  only  to  like-products,  but  also  to  products  which  are 
“directly competitive  or substitutable”, and that  Article  111:4  extends only to like-products,  the Appellate Body 
concluded  that  the  product scope  of Article  I11:4  was  broader  than  the  first  sentence  of Article  1 ~ 2 ,  although 
certainly not broader  than  the  combined product scope of the  two  sentences of Article  I I I : ~  of the GATT 1994: 
Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 99. 

23  The  Appellate Body  reiterates  that  the  objective  pursued  in Article  111,  as  enunciated  in  the  ‘‘general 
principle” articulated in Article 111:1,  is  to provide  equality of competitive  conditions  for imported products  in 
relation to  domestic products: Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 97. Although  this general principle is  not explicitly 
invoked in Article M 4 ,  it sets out that provision, which had to be interpreted so as to reflect the non-protectionist 
purpose of the general principle.  It follows that  the word  “like”  in  Article III:~ is to be  interpreted  to  apply  to 
products that are in a competitive reiationship in the market-place, as only products which are in such a competitive 
relationship could be affected through “less favourable” treatment  of imports: ibid., at 98. 

24  Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 99. 
25  This reading of the Report is opposed by those who believe that governments have a right to discriminate 
between products on the basis of factors other than purely commercial ones, especially when they relate to physical 
characteristics. To hold otherwise, accordmg to these analysts, is to remove almost all of government policy-making 
(as it applies to products) into an exception to the GATT; not something its founders would have thought wise. 

THE ASBESTOS CASE 

381 

products under  consideration were  not  “like”; it  simply found  that  Canada had  not 
satisfied its burden of proving that those products were like-products under Article III:4. 

The  Report  includes  a  dissenting  opinion  from  one  of  the  Members  of  the 
Appellate  Body.  The  lssenting  Member  argued  that  in  the  specific  case,  and 
considering  the  undisputed  carcinogenic  nature  of  chrysotile  asbestos  fibres,  the 
Report could have clearly stated that chrysotile asbestos and PCG fibres were not like- 
products,  instead  of  limiting  itself  to  the  holding  that  Canada  failed  to  satis$  a 
complainant’s burden  of proving  that  the  two  products were  “like”.  Secondly, the 
dissenting  Member  questioned  the  appropriateness  of  adopting  a  “fundamentally” 
economic interpretation of the likeness of products under Article III:4.  Had the other 
Members of the Appellate Body agreed on these views-namely 
that a product whose 
use is associated with a clear and undisputed health risk is not  “like” a similar product 
which does not imply this kind of risk, and the the economic competitive relationship 
between  products  is  not  the  most  appropriate  tool  to  assess  their  likeness-the 
Appellate  Body  Report  would  have  indeed  had  groundbreaking  and  far-reaching 
implications for international trade. 

Iv.  THE RELEVANCE OF THE ASBESTOS JURISPRUDENCE FOR  INTERNATIONAL TRADE 

IN GMOS AND  PRODUCTS THEREOF 

This  Section  of  the  article  intends  to  explore  what  the  possible  operational 
significance of the Asbestos ruling could be in the future by focusing on the specific case 
of  trade-restrictive  measures  affecting  international  trade  in  genetically  modified 
organisms  (GMOS) and  products  thereof  The  issue  of  like-products  within  the 
framework of international trade in GMOS is highly controversial and multifaceted. The 
Section will thus illustrate the diverse interpretive problems that may arise when moving 
forward  along  the  line  of  reasoning  developed by  the  Appellate  Body  in  Asbestos. 
Investigating the likeness of GM and conventional products in the light of this reasoning 
can therefore help to clarify the potential implications of that decision with respect to 
international trade. 

We  are conscious that the forthcoming analysis may  incur some inaccuracies. In 
particular,  we  are  aware  that  drawing  similarities  between  the  Asbestos  case  and 
hypothetical lsputes involving GMOS may not be straightforward, due to certain factual 
asymmetries between  the  cases.  Asbestos  was  a  case  of certainty of  risk:  there  was  an 
undisputed, serious carcinogenic risk associated with the inhalation of chrysotile fibres. 
On  the  contrary,  risk,  in  a  GMo-related  case,  would  be  considered  from  the 
precautionary  perspective: to  date, evidence is  not  sufficient to  support a finding of 
health or environmental danger associated with  genetic manipulation, even if science 
cannot provide absolute certainty that the modfied substance will never have adverse 
health  or environmental effects. Accordingly, while  in  Asbestos  consumers’ concerns 

382 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

have hscernible factual foundations, in the case of GMOS, public perception would be 
not based  on reported and indsputable cases of health or environmental harm. 

Despite lack of scientific certainty, a growing number of consumers are u n d n g  
to purchase GMOS or foods containing transgenic crops. Evidence on the underlying 
causes  of  public  response,  including  human  health,  environmental  and  ethical 
concerns, is sparse. This trend is most apparent in many European countries, but also 
in Japan, in Brazil and in several other developing countries. It  is  not  clear whether 
U.S. consumers are following t h s  pattern.  Recent  surveys indicate a modest rise  in 
concern,  although  the  majority of U.S.  consumers is  still  not  troubled  about  foods 
made with  ingredients from transgenic crops.26 The question is,  therefore, whether 
public perceptions that are not based on reported cases of health/environmental  harm 
have the same standing in law as those arising from actual harm, irrespective of their 
market impacts. 

The  second  limitation  of  our  approach  is  disregardng  the  characterization of 
Article III:4  analysis as  a case-by-case  determination. Indeed, the inquiry under Article 
111  should proceed on a case-by-case  basis with  careful scrutiny of the factual and legal 
context  in  the  given  dispute.  Hence,  the  requirement  is  that  specifically  identified 
products-rather 
considered when addressing the issue of 
likeness. We acknowledge that the forthcoming analysis departs from this case-by-case 
approach. 

than classes of products-be 

Notwithstancbng these remarks, we intend to proceed by examining how the issue 
of likeness may  be construed, in light of the Asbestos ruling, as  far  as  GMOS and their 
conventional  counterparts  are  concerned.  Our  own  perspective  is  that  overall 
conceptual frameworks matter a great deal by contributing to give clarity and coherence 
to complex issues. 

Thus, the next part of the article will proceed along the following lines. First, it will 
address certain preliminary issues concerned with the regulatory Gamework for trade in 
GMOS and the categorization of GMo-related trade measures within the WTO and other 
multilateral and regional frameworks. Then, it will turn to explore how to construe, in 
light of the Asbestos ruling, the issue of like-products within the framework of trade in 
GM products. The determination of likeness plays a central role in making an actual or 
potential trade-restrictive measure on GMOS and GM products consistent or inconsistent 
with WTO rules. 

In order to set the stage for the following analysis, it is necessary to examine briefly 
the various WTO Agreements and the other multilateral and regional legal instruments 
that appear to have special relevance for international trade in GMOS. 

26  Transgenic Crops: An Enuironmenfal Assessment, Henry A. Wallace Center for Agricultural & Environmental 

Policy at Winrock International, November 2000, p. 7. 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

383 

A. 

T h e  Legal  WTO Framework for Trade in  GMOS and  GM Products and the Relevance of 
the Like-Products  Issue 

As a general matter, countries have a sovereign right to stop products at the border, 
qualified by the obligations of the WTO Agreements (a country has to satis@ all relevant 
WTO Agreements), which are themselves qualified by exceptions to these obligations. 

In  particular,  a  GM-related  restrictive-trade  measure  may  be  alleged to  violate 
relevant provisions of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
Measures  (SPS Agreement). In  this  case,  the  defendant  will  have  to  prove  that  the 
measure is necessary  to protect human, animal or plant life or health from food-borne 
risks  or f?om  pests  or diseases, is based  on scientific principles, and is  not  maintained 
without sufficient scientific evidence. More specifically, the measure could be regarded 
as falling under measures applied: 

“. . . to protect human or animal life or health from risks arising from additives, contaminants, 
toxins or disease-causing organisms in foods, beverages or feedstuffs;”27 

and/or measures applied 

“. . . to protect [a country from damage caused by the] entry, establishment or spread of pest.s.’’28 
If the measure is applied on a provisional basis, the country implementing it must 
seek to obtain the additional information necessary  for a more objective assessment of 
risk, and review the measure accordingly within a reasonable period of time. 

Alternatively, the claimant may  contend that the measure is inconsistent with the 
prescriptions  of  the  Agreement  on  Technical  Barriers  to  Trade  (TBT Agreement). 
Governments may  introduce  TBT regulations when  necessary  to  meet  a  number  of 
legitimate objectives, including the prevention of deceptive practices, the protection of 
human health or safety, animal or plant life or health, or the environment. According 
to the Asbestos jurisprudence, a measure which lays  down product characteristics-for 
instance  that  the  food  does  not  contain  any  material  or  ingredient  that  has  been 
subjected to genetic manipulation, includmg the applicable admmistrative provisions- 
is  a technical regulation.  There  are two  basic  issues  to  be  addressed under  the  TBT: 
whether the measure is more trade-restrictive than necessary to fGIfil a legitimate policy 
objective  (Article  2.2); and  whether  the  measure  discriminates  between  imported 
products and like-products of domestic or foreign origin (Article 2.1). 

It seems, therefore, that either the TBT or the SPS Agreement and GATT 1994 d 

apply concurrently to international trade in GMOS. As far as the relationship among the 
above-mentioned Agreements is concerned, once SPS applies, TBT cannot apply. In the 
event of conflict between SPS/TBT and GATT, the specific Agreement prevails over GATT, 
according to the General Interpretative Note to Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement. 

27  SPS Agreement, Annex A, l(b). 
2s  Ibid., I(d). 

384 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

From the perspective of the like-products  issue, it does matter which Agreement 
applies. In fact, if measures related to GMOS are found to fall within the scope of the SPS, 
the likeness of GM and conventional products would not be at issue; as we have seen, 
the basic requirement in the SPS is that the measure be based on scientific evidence, no 
matter whether  the measure involved is  discriminatory or not.  On the  contrary, the 
like-products  issue  would  be  a  matter  of  primary  concern  when  the  GMo-related 
measure is challenged under the TBT or GATT 1994. 

Article  2.1 of the  TBT re-states  the  principle  of non-dxrimination  set forth in 
Articles  1:1 and III:4 of GATT 1994. If the claimant contends that a technical regulation 
is incompatible with Article 2.1 of the TBT because it subjects imported GM products 
to less favourable treatment than conventional products of national or foreign origin, the 
panel, in order to determine incompatibility with Article 2.1 of the TBT, would have to 
establish, inter a h ,  that the GM and conventional products involved are like-products. 
Finally,  as  far  as  GATT is  concerned,  since  GATT Article  111:4  prohibits  only 
&scrimmatory measures,  the  issue  of whether  GM  products and  their  conventional 
counterparts are like-products within the meaning of that provision would stand at the 
heart  of  the  inquiry.  In  order  to  establish  inconsistency  with  Article  111:4,  the 
complaining party would have to prove that GM products are “like” their conventional 
counterparts. When the burden of proving consistency with that provision shifts to the 
defendant, the defending party would have to establish that  GM products on the one 
hand, and their  conventional counterparts on the  other hand,  are  not  like-products 
within the meaning of the triggered provision. 

The like-products  part  of the  Asbestos  case  can  provide  relevant jurisprudential 
material  when  examining likeness  under  GATT Article  III:4.  Indeed,  as  previously 
stressed, the term “like-products’’ appears in many other GATT provisions and in many 
different provisions of the  Covered  Agreements.  However,  it  would  be  difficult to 
construe  likeness  under  these  provisions  in  light  of  the  Asbestos  reasoning.  In  fact, 
according to consolidated practice, in each of the provisions where the term “like” is 
used, the term must be specifically interpreted in light of the object and purpose of the 
provision at issue and of the Agreement in which the provision appears and, of course, 
of the factual context in the given dispute. The Appellate Body clearly stated that: 

“The concept of ‘likeness’ is a relative one that evokes the image ofan accordion. The accordon 
of  ‘likeness’ stretches and  squeezes  in  Werent  places  as different provisions  of  the  WTO 
Agreement are  applied. The width  of the  accordion in  any  one  of those places  must  be 
determined by the particular provision in whch the term ‘like’ is encountered as well as by the 
context and circumstances that prevail in any given case to which that provision may apply.”29 
Accordmgly, we  intend  to  confine  our  analysis  to  GATT Article  III:4.  How  to 
construe the likeness of GMOS and conventional products under  other relevant WTO 
provisions is left open by our inquiry. 

2y  Japan-Alcoholic  Beverages, supra, footnote 2, at 43 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

385 

B.  Categorization (?f GMo-Related Measures 

Assuming  that  a  WTO Member  has  implemented  a  trade-restrictive  measure 
applying to trade in GMOS and GM products, the first question to clari@ under GATT is 
whether  the  measure  at  stake is  an import  ban  (Article XI)  or an  internal regulation 
enforced at the point and time of importation (Article III:4 and Note Ad Article 111). In 
most  cases,  in  fact,  domestic GMO regulatory schemes consist of  internal regulations 
enforced,  in  the  case  of  imported  products,  at  the  point  of  importation  through 
quantitative restrictions. 

The  categorization  of  internal  measures,  whch  are  externally  enforced-as 

“internal regulations” (Article 111)  or “quantitative restrictions” on importation (Article 
XI)-has 
important  regulatory  implications.  While  restrictions  on  importation  are 
prohibited by Article  XI:^, Members are permitted by Article III:4  to impose an internal 
regulation  on  products  imported  from  other  Members  provided  that  it  does  not 
discriminate between like-products.  The issue of likeness is not at stake in an inquiry 
under Article XI, whde it stands at the heart of the analysis under Article III:4. 

The language of the GATT seems to provide clear guidance when  addressing that 

definition issue. The relevant part of the Note Ad Article 111 provides that: 

“. . . any law, regulation or requirement  . . . which applies to an imported product and to the 
like domestic product and is . . . enforced in the case of the imported product at the time or 
point of importation, is nevertheless to be regarded as  . . . a law, regulation or requirement 
. . . subject to the provisions of Article 111.” 
The Note  Ad  Article  111 would  therefore reallocate border  measures adopted to 
enforce internal GMO regulatory schemes from the scope of Article XI to the scope of 
Article III. 

It may  be contended that  GMo-related  measures would fall outside the scope of 
Article 111, if classified as process and production measures (PPM). There is no consensus 
on  whether  genetic  manipulation refers primarily to  how  a  product  is  produced  or 
whether it is mainly concerned with the product per se.  Some have taken the position 
that genetic engineering is  a process that does not  affect  the product  as  such;30 others 
have  adopted the  opposite view,  stressing the  fact  that  genetic  techniques  forge the 
ultimate physical constitution of the product.31 The most sensible position seems to be 

30 The position that genetic engineering is a non-product-related  PPM seems to be endorsed by  the United 
States in the following statement: “The method by which food is produced  or developed may in some cases help 
to undentand the safety or nutritional characteristics of the finished food. However, the key factors in reviewing 
safety concerns should be the characteristics of the food product, rather than the fact that new methods are used.”: 
Food and Drug Administration, Statement of  Policy: Food Derivedjom  New Plant  Varieties, Fed. Keg. 22.984.22.985, 
1992. The concept of “substantial equivalence”, as promoted within the Codex Alimentarius  Commission (Food and 
Agriculture Organization/World  Health Organization) by a group of GMo-exporting countries, seems to imply a 
similar approach. 

31  The EU and several other countries, including developing countries, have taken the position that genetic 
engineering  &ects  the  DNA structure  of products  which  directly  reflects  their  ultimate  physical  constitution; 
accordmgly, GM products are to be regarded as physically different from the same non-GM product. 

386 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the one that tries to reconcile those two potentially conflicting stances, maintaining that 
genetic  manipulation  is  a  production  method  that  affects  the  inherent  product 
characteristics. However, there is no consensus on these issues.  Furthermore, it should 
be taken into account that perceptions vary according to whether we are speaking of 
genetically engineered products or genetically modlfied organisms. In the case of food 
containing or produced with material derived fiom genetically enpeered organisms, it 
may be conceivable to say that genetic manipulation is  primanly a  matter of how the 
food product has been produced; the altered molecular or cellular characteristics of the 
organisms may  be undetectable in the food containing the material derived fiom that 
genetically engineered organism. On the contrary, in the  case of genetically modified 
organisms, the genetic manipulation has shaped the ultimate physical constitution of the 
product, since the organism has been altered at the molecular or cellular level. The issue 
remains, however, open. 

The product/process distinction itself is  a highly controversial issue. The relevant 
jurisprudence is  not  conclusive and authoritative authors are  deeply divided on  that 
subject.32 On the one hand, it has been argued that there is no real support in the text 
and jurisprudence  of  the  GATT for  the  product/process  &stinction,33 and  that  the 
dlstinction is neither warranted nor useful in practice.34 On the other hand, it has been 
suggested that there is a textual basis in GATT Article 111 and the Note Ad Article 111 for 
the product/process dlstinction and that the distinction should be retained to prevent 
protectionist abuses.35 

The product/process dlstinction is, therefore, an open issue  which  stands at  the 
heart of the debate on whether health, safety or other concerns that lead regulators to 
apply  different  treatment  to  products  may  be  taken  into  account  when  examining 
likeness  under  Article  III:4.  Specifjring the  implications  of  the  Asbestos  decision  in 
relation to GMOS will most likely imply elaborating further on that issue. 

C.  The “Likeness”  of GMOS and  GM Products and their Conventional  Counterparts 

If  the  GMo-related  trade  measure  is  categorized  as  an  internal  regulation  and 
reviewed under Article III:4  of the GATT, it is legitimate under that provision unless it 
accords to the “like” imported products “less favourable treatment” than it accords to 
the  “like” domestic products. In  this  case, the  crucial question is  whether  imported 
GMOS and products thereof  are  “like” their  domestic conventional counterparts.  As 
already mentioned,  according to  established  GATT practice  the  four  general criteria 

32  However, it  has  been  stressed that  the  “trade policy  elite  has  simply accepted  the  notion  of  a  sharp 
divergence between measures on products and PPMS as if such a  dlstinction had been written into the GATT all 
along, and not  simply invented in the  Tuna/Dobhin  case.”: M.J.  Trebilcock and R. Howse,  The Regulation  .f 
International Trade, Routledge, London and New York, 1999, at 413. 

33  Howse and Regan, supra, footnote 13, pp. 249-289. 
34  A. Cosbey, The  W T O  and P P M ~ :  Time to Drop a Taboo, Bridges 5, Nos. 1-3,2001.  at 11-12. 
35 J.H. Jackson, Comments on Shrimp/TurtZe and the Product/Process Distinction, European Journal of International 

Law 11, 2000, at 303-307. 

THE ASBESTOS CASE 

387 

whch provide a framework for analysing the likeness of particular products are: physical 
properties; end-uses; consumers’ tastes and habits; and tariff classification. 

We  now  turn  to  investigate  the  likeness  of  genetically  engineered  and 
conventional organisms and products in light of the traditional approach as revised in 
the Asbestos  case. 

Considering the different actual or potential impact on health and safety and on 
the environment that GMOS and GM products may  have, consumers’ perceptions and 
behaviour in respect of these products may  dffer and  variously affect the  degree  of 
competitiveness  in  the  market-place  of  these  two  sets  of  products  with  their 
conventional counterparts. Therefore,  it may  be  appropriate to  suggest  a  distinction 
between  GMOS and  products containing GMOS. But  again,  conclusions can  only be 
made  reasonably  in  relation  to  specific  examples.  GMOS can  be  released  into  the 
environment (e.g. seeds for planting) or can be used for food or feed (e.g. crops). 

As  far  as  GMOS (seeds and  crops)  are  concerned,  with  regard  to  the  physical 
qualities and characteristics of the products, it may be possible to maintain that the GM 
crops/seeds  are  not  like  conventional cropdseeds,  since the  intervention  of genetic 
manipulation is detectable in the molecular and cellular structure of the seed/crop-it 
is  reflected  in  the  ultimate physical characteristics of the  product-and 
the  GMO is 
active and can transmit its genetic characteristics. While from a scientific point of view 
this  holds  true  of  conventional  plant  breeding,  biotechnology  offers  solutions  that 
cannot be achieved through  the traditional selection and improvement  of cultivated 
crops.  Biotechnology  identifies  desirable  traits  more  quickly  and  accurately  than 
conventional  plant  breeding  and  allows  gene  transfers  which  are  impossible with 
traditional breeding. At the same time,  GM plants may  transfer genetic material and 
associated  traits  to  conventional  varieties,  developing  more  aggressive  weeds, 
threatening ecosystems and harming biological dwersity. In fact, these are the risks and 
the  benefits  of  biotechnology.  Regarding  consumer  attitudes  about  the  products, 
consumers  may  perceive  GM  crops  and  seeds  and  conventional crops  and  seeds  as 
different because of the health and environmental risks associated to GMOS. It follows 
that,  although  not  decisive,  the  evaluation  under  the  first  two  criteria  (physical 
properties, and consumers’ perceptions and behaviour) may support a finding that the 
two  sets  of items are  not  “like”. Turning to  the  examination of end-uses  and tariff 
classification, GM and conventional seeds and crops are functionally interchangeable 
and  share a  common  tariff  classification. It  should be  noted,  however,  that  in  the 
Japan-Alcoholic  Beverages case, the Appellate Body expressed some doubts regarding the 
use of tariff classification as a reliable criterion for determining or confirming product 
likeness under Article 1 1 1 2 .  

In  the  case  of  GMOS and  their  conventional  substitutes, therefore,  two  of  the 
tradtional  criteria (end-use and tariff classification) would point  to likeness, and two 

388 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

(consumers’ perceptions and properties of the products) would point to non-likeness. 
Having adopted an approach based on the four criteria, it would be hfficult to draw the 
appropriate conclusions on whether the products at issue can be characterized as “like”. 
The Asbestos case may provide some overall guidance when addressing this controversial 
issue. According to the Asbestos jurisprudence what, in fact, is of paramount importance 
for assessing likeness under Article III:4 of GATT  is the competitive relationship between 
products in the market-place. In this case it may be argued that consumers regard GM 
crops and seeds and their conventional counterparts in a different way  (because of the 
perceived negative health and environmental impacts), and that consumers’ perceptions 
and  behaviour in  respect  of  the  two  sets  of  items  ultimately  affect  their  degree  of 
competitiveness  or  substitutability  in  the  market-place.  In  the  light  of  these 
considerations,  it  may  be  hfficult  to  establish  that  GMOS and  their  conventional 
substitutes are “like-products”. 

In  the  case  of processed foods containing GM  materials and  their  conventional 
counterparts, likeness seems to be confirmed by the application of at least three of the 
traditional criteria currently applied to determine whether products are “like”, namely, 
product characteristics, end-use, and tariff classification. In particular, there is a strong 
physical  similarity  between  processed  foods  containing  GMOS and  GMO-free  food 
products, to the extent that the altered molecular or cellular characteristics of the GMO 
contained in  the  product  is  usually  no  longer  detectable in  the  ultimate  product.  It 
follows that evidence relating to properties, end-uses,  and tariff classification indcates 
that foods containing GM materials and their conventional counterparts are “like”. In 
such cases, in  order to  overcome this indication, the  defending party will have more 
difficulty to establish  that consumers’ perceptions and behaviour in respect of the two 
sets of products affect the degree of substitutability and competitiveness in the market- 
place. However, some further distinctions may  be drawn according to the percentage 
of GMO content. In some cases, the product may be almost entirely comprised of GM 
material; in other cases, it may have only a small, if not negligible, percentage of genetic 
materials. Different  factual situations may  lead  to  hfferent  consumer bchaviour  and, 
then, to different legal conclusions. 

In conclusion, and according to the Asbestos jurisprudence,  particular emphasis 
should be put on how the particular domestic market treats the specifically identified 
GM and  conventional  products  and  what  their  competitive  relationship  is  in  the 
market-place.  Market  studies  on  cross-price  elasticity of  demand,  and  any  other 
evidence  indicating  to what  extent the  products  involved  are-or 
a 
competitive  relationship  in  the  market-place,  would  be  among  the  evidence 
relevant  for  determining  likeness  under  GATT Article  III:4  of  individual  such 
products. 

could be-in 

Assuming that, after carehl scrutiny of the factual and legal  context in the given 
dispute, the individual GM products and conventional products are found to be like- 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

389 

products, there is  a second element that must be established before a measure can be 
held  to be  inconsistent with  Article  111:4:  “like” imported  products are  accorded less 
favourable  treatment  than  “like”  domestic  products.  Only  if  a  “less  favourable 
treatment” is detected-meaning 
a certain asymmetry between the group of imports as 
opposed to the group of domestics-can 
the restrictive-trade measure be considered to 
be in violation of Article lK4: 

“The term, ‘less favourable treatment’ expresses the general principle,  in Article  111: 1, that 
internal  regulations  ‘should  not  be  applied  ...  so  as  to  afford  protection  to  domestic 
prod~ction’.”~~ 
If  the  measure  at stake is  found  to  violate Article XI  or Article IK4,  it  requires 
justification under Article XX@)  and the chapeau of Article XX.  It is difficult to assess 
whether  or not the measure would be found to come within the scope of the Article 
xx@) exception.  In  fact,  that  provision  requires,  inter  alia,  that  the  measure  be 
“necessary” to protect human, animal or plant life/health. Whde GATT jurisprudence 
has  interpreted  “necessary”  as  implying  a  “least-trade-restrictive  test”,  subsequent 
jurisprudence has not explicitly endorsed it.37 It appears very difficult then, to assess how 
a panel or the Appellate Body would interpret the term “necessary”, should a dispute 
related to a restrictive-trade measure affecting GMOS and GM products arise. Again, it 
d depend very much on the specific facts of each case. 

D.  Other Multilateral  and Regional  Legal  Frameworks 

Our  analysis  would  be  defective  if  we  did  not  consider  relevant  patterns  of 
hscipline  set  forth  in  specific  multilateral  agreements  negotiated  outside  the  WTO 
context  and prominent  regulations developed  at  the  regional level. In particular, an 
exhaustive  approach  would  require  that  the  Cartagena  Protocol  on  Biosafety  and 
relevant European Community (EC) legislation be taken into account when addressing 
the  issue  of likeness in  relation  to  GMOS. Indeed, it seems  that these two  regulatory 
instruments have  settled the likeness issue by  treating genetically engineered items as 
very different fiom their conventional counterparts. In fact, we  can say that the raison 
d’9tre of the EC biotech legislation and of the Cartagena Protocol is the recognition that 
bio-engineered products are so “unlike” their conventional counterpart as to deserve a 
completely separate legal framework. 

36  Asbestos, supra, footnote 1, at 100. 
37  In the Korea-Beefcase, the Appellate Body held that “. . . determination of whether a measure, which is not 
‘indispensable’ may nevertheless be ‘necessary’ within the contemplation of Article XX(D),  involves in every case a 
process  of weighing  and balancing a series of factors which prominently  include  the contribution made by  the 
compliance measure to the enforcement of the law OK regulation at issue, the importance of the common interests 
or values protected hy that law or regulation, and the accompanying impact of the law or regulation on imports or 
exports.”: Korea-Measures Afecting Imporfs $Fresh,  Chilled and Frozen Be&  WT/DS161,169/AB/R,  11 December 
2000. 

390 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

In this part of the article we intend to explore whether the like-product part of the 
Asbestos ruling can be used to endorse the concept of likeness as construed under these 
relevant patterns of regulation. 

As  early as the begmning of the  1990s, the EC introduced  an approval system 
for  the  deliberate  release  into  the  environment  of  GMOS (“live  GMOS”) for 
experimental purposes or as commercial products,  with  the aim of ensuring a high 
and  uniform  level  of  protection  of  health  and  the  environment  throughout  the 
Community and the  efficient functioning of the internal market. This  “horizontal” 
legislation is  based  on a process-oriented  approach  which pays  special attention to 
genetic modification. 

Council Directive  9 0 / 2 2 0 / E ~ C  of 23 April  1990 on the  deliberate release into 
the  environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms,38  revised  as  Directive 
2001/18/EC,39 is the main European legislation in force on G M O S . ~ ~  Among its basic 
provisions stands  the  requirement  that  a  notification  be  submitted  to  the  national 
competent authority before undertaking a deliberate release into the environment of 
a GMO, or before the placing on the market of GMOS, where the intended use of the 
product involves its deliberate release into the environment. No deliberate release of 
GMOS should be carried out unless  the consent of the competent authority has been 
obtained. 

On 25 July  2001,  the  European  Commission adopted  a  legislative package  on 
GMOS, consisting of  a  proposal for  traceability and  labelling of  GMOS and  products 
produced  therefrom,41 as  well as a  proposal on regulating GM food and feed.42 The 
former concerns the traceability and labelling of G ~ o s ,  as well as the traceability of food 
and feed products that are produced from, but do not contain, GMOS. The proposal lays 
down  traceability  requirements  based  on  transmission  and  retention  of  relevant 
information for such products at all stages of their placing on the market and throughout 
the production and distribution chains. The proposal on GM food and feed covers food 
and feed containing, consisting of, or produced from, GMOS. It lays down Community 

38  OJ. L  117, 8 May 1990, p.  15. 
39  Directive 2001/18/EC  ofthe European Parliament and ofthe Council of 12 March 2001, on the deliberate 
release into the  environment  of GMOS and  repealing Council Directive  90/220/EEC  Commission  Declaration, 
OJ. L 106, 17 April 2001, pp. 0001-0039. 

40  Additional provisions on GM food have been  set down by  Regulation (EC) 258/97  on novel foods and 
novel foods ingredients; Regulation (EC) 1139/98 concerning the compulsory indication of the labelling of certain 
foodstuffs produced  &om GMOS; and Regulations  (EC) 4912000 and (EC) 50/2000 on the labelling of foodstuffs 
and food ingredients containing addltives and flavourings. A total of eighteen  authorizations of GMOS have been 
granted for the placing on the market in the EU, two of which cover use as food (one maize, one soya), and eight 
cover use in feeding stuffs (one for soya, four for maize and three for rape). Eleven food products produced  &om 
GMOS have been notified to the Commission as being substantially equivalent. 

4’  Proposal for  a Regulation of the  European  Parliament  and  of the  Council concerning traceability and 
labelling of genetically mod&ed  organisms and traceability of food and feed products produced &om genetically 
modified organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC. 

42  Proposal for a Regulation ofthe European Parliament and of the Council on genetically modifled food and feed. 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

391 

procedures for the assessment, authorization and supervision of GM food and feed43 and 
extends the current labelling provisions to all  GM foods and feeds, irrespective of the 
detectability of D N A  or protein.44 

Negotiated under the auspices of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio de 
Janeiro, 1992) and adopted on 29 January 2000, the Cartagena Protocol provides rules 
for the safe transfer, handling, use and disposal of “living modified organisms” (LMos), 
defined by  the Protocol as  “any living organism that possesses a novel combination of 
genetic material  obtained through  the use  of modem  biotechnology.”45 Its  aim is to 
address the threats posed by LMOS to biological dwersity, also taking into account risks 
to  human  health.  The  Protocol  will  enter  into  force  ninety  days  after  the  fiftieth 
instrument of ratification is received.46 

One  of  the  main  features  of  the  Protocol  is  the  system  of Advance  Informed 
Agreement, which covers seeds for planting, live fish for release, micro-organisms for 
bio-remediation,  and  other  LMOS which  are  “intentionally  introduced”  into  the 
environment.47 It provides that the exporter must give, through notification, detailed 
information on the product exported to the competent national authority of the country 
of import in advance of the first shipment. The country of import must base its decisions 
regarding LMO imports on available scientific evidence and on risk assessment. LMOS for 
direct  use  as  food  or feed  or for processing are  subject to  a  different and  less  strict 
notification  procedure.  As  well  in  this  case,  decisions  regardmg  domestic  use  and 
imports should be based on a risk assessment.48 Consumer products derived from LMOS 
are not covered by the Protocol. 

The Protocol permits the countries ofimport to take a precautionary approach; this 
means that lack of scientific certainty due to insufficient information on the potential 

43  The Proposal foresees that Community authorization shall be issued in a transparent and centrahzed way on 
the basis of the sciennfic opinion  of the European  Food Authority provided that the criteria for authorization are 
fulfilled. Products authorized under the proposed Regulation shall be entered into a Register of GM food and feed 
along  with  studies, including  product-specific  information,  which  demonstrate  the  safety  of  the  product  and 
detection methods which have to be provided by the applicant in order to facihtate control. All non-confidential 
data should be made available to the public. The initial authorization should be granted for a period of ten years 
subject, where appropriate, to a post-market monitoring plan for the use of GM foods for human consumption and 
for the use of GM feed for animal consumption. The need for post-market monitoring for use as food or feed is to 
be assessed on a case-by-case  basis  during the risk  assessment. Authorizations are renewable for ten-year periods 
upon application to the Authority at least one year before the expiry date. 

44  The provision shall not apply to foods containing material which contains, consists of or is produced Gom 
GMOS in a proportion no higher than the thresholds established in accordance with the procedure  laid  down in 
Article 36(2), provided that this presence is adventitious or techcally unavoidable. 

Protocol and eight countries had ratified it. 

LMOS other than those intended for b e c t  use as food or feed, or for processing. 

45  Article 3(g). 
46  At  November  2001,  one  hundred  and  six  countries,  plus  the  European  Community, had  signed the 
4’  According to Article 7.2 of the Protocol,  LMOS for intentional introduction into the environment are all 
48  LMOS for direct use as food or feed or for processing (identified as  LMO-FFPS in the Protocol) include the 
large majority of traded LMOS, such as modified corn, soya, wheat, rapeseeds, tomatoes and cotton. Although the 
Protocol spells out two dtnerent procedures depending on the final use  of the LMOS (for voluntary introduction 
into the  environment;  or for food, feed or processing), it is  actually rather  difficult to separate them into two 
categories, considering that it may happen that grains imported as food or feed or for processing are used as seeds, 
being sigdcantly less expensive than proper seeds. 

392 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

negative effects of LMOS on biodiversity, taking also into account risks for human health, 
will not  prevent the  receiving country  fi-om taking decisions regarding shipments of 
LMOS.49  T h s   principle  applies  to  LMOS for  intentional  introduction  into  the 
environment, as well as to those for hrect use as food or feed or for processing.50 

Turning back  to  the  main  issue  in  our inquiry, it is  conceivable to say  that the 
Asbestos  approach  to  likeness  and  the  understanding  of  that  issue  is  substantially 
commercial, while  the  approach  of  the  EC Biotech  Regulation  and  the  Cartagena 
Protocol is mainly political. 

Indeed,  as  previously examined, the  concept  of like-products under  Asbestos  is 
primarily concerned with the nature and extent of a competitive relationship between 
and  among  products.  Non-commercial  factors,  such  as  environmental  and  health 
concerns, may be relevant in so far as they affect the market-competitive conditions of 
the product. 

Differently,  responsiveness  to  public  concerns  and  governmental  regulatory 
discretion are key to understanding how likeness is to be construed within the European 
and  Cartagena frameworks. A  precautionary approach to  health  and  environmental 
issues  is  invoked as justification for  regulatory  hstinctions.  Issues  of likeness should, 
therefore, be analysed primarily in terms of whether less favourable treatment was based 
on  regulatory  distinctions objectively  related  to  legitimate, non-protectionist  policy 
objectives. 

These two perspectives on likeness have different conceptual bases but may lead to 
the same practical implications; the political and commercial perspectives may well be 
reconciled. In most cases, in fact, regulatory distinctions will reflect public perceptions, 
and public perceptions will afCect market-competitive conhtions.  The European case 
may exemplify this statement. In Europe, the controversy around biotech food is mainly 
political, owing much  to public sensitivity; the European public is deeply concerned 
about the potential adverse risks  and  the  ethical implications associated with  genetic 
manipulation and these public perceptions are powerful drivers of precautionary biotech 
food regulations. At the same time, public concerns about innovative biotech food seem 
to adversely affect the market competitiveness of this set of products in favour of their 
conventional  counterparts.  An  approach  drawing  on  Asbestos  would  be  primarily 
concerned  with  assessing 
the  market  impact  of  public  apprehension  about 
biotechnology.  Hence,  the  core  issue  would  be  whether  public  bias  in  favour  of 

49  The precautionary approach is one of the main features of the Protocol and reference is made to it in the 
Preamble, in Article 1 (Objective), and in Articles  10 and 11. It allows importing countries to ban imports because 
of lack of sciennfic certainty. The ban may last until the importing country decides that it has arrived at scientlfic 
certainty about the effects ofthe produca on biodwenity and human health. However, since the importing country 
is not obliged to seek the information necessary for reachng scientific certainty, a trade-restrictive  measure may be 
in force without time-limits. 
50 The analysis of the Cartagena Protocol is based on S. Zarrilli,  Trade in  Genetically Modijed  Organisms and 

Multilateral  Negotiations: A New Dilemmafor Developing  Countries, UNCTAD/DITC/TNCD/~, 20 October 2000. 

THE ASBESTOS  CASE 

393 

conventional food,  to  the  detriment  of innovative biotech  food, reflects the  market 
competitiveness of the two sets of products. 

Our conclusion is that the Asbestos approach to likeness may be consistent with the 
understanding of  that  issue  as  underlined  in  the  Cartagena  Protocol  and  the  EU’s 
Biotech Regulation. 

Concluding, the significance of the Asbestos case to international trade in GMOS- 
within  the  WTO framework  and  outside  it-will 
possibly  rest  with  the  increased 
emphasis, when determining likeness of GMOS and their conventional counterparts, on 
the nature and extent of a competitive relationship between the two sets of products. 


